A SERMON Preached before the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor and Aldermen OF
THE City of London, AT Guild Hall Chapel, On Sunday, November. 13. 1692. By
RICHARD BOWCHIER, B. D. Fellow of St. John's College in Cambridge, and Chaplain
to the Right Reverend Father in God, Robert, Lord Bishop of Chichester.

LONDON, Printed for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishops-Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1692.

TO THE Right Honorable Sir John Fleet, Lord Mayor of London.
MY LORD,
WHen I was appointed to Preach before Your Lordship, I little imagined, That
what was then delivered, would have ever received Your Lordships Orders to be
made Public. I am, my Lord, truly conscious to my self of the meanness of this
Discourse; but, instead of making Apologies, I here entirely resign my self to
Your Lordship's Commands; which both shows my Obedience, and, at the same time,
furnishes me with an excellent opportunity of telling the World with what a
great Respect and Duty I am,

My Lord, Your Lordships most Humble, and most obedient Servant RICHARD
BOWCHIER.

Galatians, chap. 5. ver. 25. If we live in the Spirit, let us also walk in the
Spirit.


THE words seem to be an earnest and passionate Exhortation to the practice of
a Religious and a Christian Life, drawn from that particular and exact account
of the Works of the Flesh, and the Fruit of the Spirit, which the Apostle has
given us, from the 18th to the 24th verse of this Chapter; and the occasion of
them, in short, was this. As the Church of God has in all Ages been troubled
with Men of corrupt Morals, and pernicious Principles; so in the very first
beginnings of Christianity, there rose up a sort of Men, who, as they were the
first Heretics we ever read of, so for their damnable Opinions, and wicked
Lives, have much outdone all others of succeeding Times. They were Men in whom
there appeared wonderful Falseness and Design; and who taking always advantage
of the Apostle's Absence, had by their false and pleasing Doctrines, almost
every where corrupted that Faith which the other planted. Thus we find that
they immediately crept in amongst the Churches in the Upper Asia, where they
made such speedy work in perverting the Gospel; and had by new Scruples and
false Suggestions, so quickly shaken that Faith, which at first seemed so well
grounded in the Galatians, as occasioned that mighty surprise in St. Paul, to
find such a sudden change and alteration amongst them: I marvel (says he,
Galat. chap. 1. ver. 6.) that you are so soon removed from him, who called you
into the Grace of Christ unto another Gospel. These Deceivers designing nothing
but Ease and Interest, urged vehemently on the new Converted Christians
Circumcision, and other Mosaical Rites; not out of any Principle, or a real
Persuasion there was in them of the necessity of either, but from a base and
servile compliance to the humor of the Jews, hoping this way either to gain
their Favor, or escape their Fury: For they constrained others to be
Circumcised, Galat. 6.12, 13.
only least they themselves should suffer Persecution for the Cross of Christ;
for neither they themselves (says the Apostle) who were Circumcised kept the
Law, but desired to have others Circumcised, that they might glory in the
Flesh. And as it is easy and natural for Men, who can once force their
Consciences, either for fear or Interest, to stick at nothing afterward, how
black or desperate soever it may be, when they are pressed to it by the like
motives; so these Men having once Preached up Circumcision, for fear of the
Jews, made no scruple afterward to declare it lawful to deny even Christ
himself, to avoid Persecution for him: 2 Pet. 2.1.
Thus denying the Lord who bought them. These are the Men whom the Apostles
point at in almost all their Epistles; and on whom they bestow such black and
dismal Characters, as never could have been fastened but on the worst of Men:
Phil. 3.19.
Enemies (says St. Paul) to the Cross of Christ, whose God was their Belly,
whose Glory their shame, who minded Earthly things: Without natural Affection,
Truce Breakers, False Accusers, Incontinent, 2 Timothy 3, 4.
Fierce, Despisers of those that were Good. Traitors, heady, high-minded,
lovers of Pleasures, more than lovers of God, having a form of Godliness, but
denying the Power thereof. St. Peter's Character is no less severe concerning
them, in his second Epistle, whom he styles, Chap. 2.
Natural brute Beasts, spots and blemishes, beguiling, unstable Soulss, Wells
without Water, Clouds (says he) that were carried with a Tempest, to whom the
Mist of Darkness was reserved for ever. Ungodly Men (says St. Ver. 4.
Jude, speaking of the same Persons) turning the Grace of God into
Lasciviousness, and denying the only Lord God, and our Lord Jesus Christ. These
are the colors in which they are set forth to us by the Apostles of our Lord;
and as these Characters to be sure were exactly drawn from their Carriages, so
then there is nothing can be thought so wicked and abominable, so contrary to
Reason, and so destructive to Religion, as that of which these Men were guilty,
and of which they stand recorded infamous to all succeeding Times. Pleasure and
Interest being that great principle that inspired all their Actions, they
followed that to the uttermost. And as Men's Inclinations and Desires commonly
give a huge bias to their Understandings, so they falsely interpreted and used
that liberty which the Gospel had given them, as an occasion to the Flesh;
pretending that Christ, in effect, had set them free from that strict and
Religious course of Virtue and Goodness which he came on purpose to establish:
And thus indulging themselves in the most vicious practices, and justifying
what they did by high pretenses of knowledge, they were too far gone in conceit
to be reclaimed themselves, and too busy and malicious not to corrupt others
by their Examples. The Infection of these Men's Principles had, like a strong
Poison, diffused it self through the Body of all the Churches; for the greatest
part of Mankind being naturally unstable, and not being able so easily to
penetrate into the Designs and Artifices of false Teachers; The greatest and
most corrupt part of any Communion will commonly embrace and follow those
Doctrines which suit best with their Pleasures and Interests: And thus the case
was now particularly in the Churches of the Galatians, whose Character indeed
is this, That they did run well, Gal. 5.7.
but were afterward so foolish and bewitched as not to obey the Truth, Chap.
3. v. 1
before whose Eyes Jesus Christ had been evidently set forth Crucified amongst
them: For at the time of St. Paul's Writing this Epistle, instead of adhering
to that Gospel which he had at first so successfully Preached unto them, and
which he tells them in his own defense, Chapter 1. v. 12.
Was that which he received not of Man, neither was taught it, but by the
Revelation of Jesus Christ: They were drawn off, it seems, by the Insinuations
of wicked and designing Men, desiring again to be under the Law, and to observe
Circumcision. As the general drift therefore of the Apostle in this Epistle is
to show them that this new dispensation of the Gospel, had freed them from the
rigor of the Law, that is, from the necessity of Mofaical Rights and
Observances, and from that exact and perfect Obedience required under the
Penalty of the Curse: So again, least under pretense of that freedom which the
Gospel had given them, they should be guilty of those vicious Practices, which
their false Teachers so industriously endeavored to infuse; He advises them
particularly in this Chapter, to order all their actions according to the
Spirit of that Gospel which they had received: and if they pretended to
Christianity, they should follow the Rules it prescribes. If we live in the
Spirit (says he) let us also walk in the Spirit.

Having spoken thus much concerning that which gave occasion to the Words; I
shall now proceed to tell you,

First, What it is to walk in the Spirit.

Secondly, How we shall know when we are in the Spirit.

Thirdly, I shall show the Obligations which lie on us all to walk in the
Spirit.

And Lastly, From what shall be thus said, I shall conclude all with some close
reflections on our own Lives and Practices.

1. Then, What it is to Walk in the Spirit. The word Spirit has many and very
different significations in the Holy Scriptures; and it would be no less
tedious than improper to reckon them all up in this place. Sometimes it is
taken for that supreme divine faculty that is in us, the Soul of Man, and for
the various Passions of Joy or Grief, which either please or disturb us.
Sometimes it is taken for a temper of Religion; for an economy or dispensation
which is settled and prescribed us by God. Thus the Law is called, Romans 8.15.
The Spirit of Bondage, which indeed was a severe and an harsh dispensation, so
opposite to that which in the same Verse is called, The Spirit of Adoption,
which is that tender and gentle way of God's proceeding with us now under the
Gospel. And in this sense of a temper of Religion, is to be taken, our
Savior's Answer to his Disciples, in his passage through Samaria, when some of
them were all transport and fury at the inhospitality of the Samaritans, Luke
9.53.
who would not receive our Lord, because his Face was as though he would go to
Jerusalem; and therefore they being impatient to show a Revenge proportionable
to the Affront they thought our Lord had received, waited only for a Commission
from him of Commanding Fire to come down from Heaven. Lord (said they) will thou that we command Fire to come down from Heaven and consume them, as Elias
did. But the blessed Jesus turned and rebuked them, Ver. 55.
and said, Ye know not what manner of Spirit ye are of; that is, ye know not
that that economy or dispensation, which I intend to establish by the Gospel,
inspires Men with easy and with forbearing Tempers; and with a higher degree
of Charity than was ever yet required or practiced by the Prophets under the
Law: For these Men were often moved and empowered with an inward Zeal to
destroy, without any more ado the Enemies of God. But the temper of the Gospel
is to be otherwise; for The Son of Man (says he) came not to destroy Men's
Lives but to save them. Ver. 56.
Sometimes the word Spirit is taken for those supernatural and extraordinary
Gifts of the Holy Ghost, which were so very common in the first Ages of the
Church: Thus St. Paul arguing in this Epistle with the Galatians, about the
wonderful Advantages they had received upon their embracing the Gospel, says,
Gal. 3.2.
This only would I learn of you, Received you the Spirit by the Works of the
Law, or by the hearing of Faith? where by the Spirit is to be understood the
several Gifts of it, and the diversities of Operations, of which we have a
particular account given in the 12. Chapter of the 1st of the Corinthians, Ver. 7.
And which were given to every Man to prosit withal. But not to run on in many
and foreign significations of the Word; by the Spirit in the Text, is only and
properly (as I judge) to be understood the Gospel it self; in which sense, both
in this and in other places of St. Paul's Epistles, it is taken as opposed to
the Law set forth under the Title of the Flesh. So then by walking in the
Spirit is here to be meant, the governing ones self according to the Rules and
Precepts of the Gospel: The imitating that sacred Temper of which we have the
Commands and Pattern in Christ: And instead of following the Lusts and Desires
of the Flesh, the secular and sensual Ends to which this World naturally
carries Men; and which are so eagerly pursued by the greatest part of Mankind;
We should strictly live up to the Religion we profess, by ordering our
Conversation according to the Gospel of Christ.

And this will, 2dly, inform us how We shall know when we are in the Spirit.
There have been in all Ages of the Church strange Pretenders to the Spirit, and
to the immediate Inspirations of it; which is a thing no less vain in it self,
than pernicious in its Consequences. Men of dark and melancholy Tempers are
those who most commonly run this way; for they being the Persons who generally
Think most, and in whom impressions being once made, stick the longest; when
ever it happens that they entertain any false Opinions in Religion, they are
always defended by them with that Obstinacy and inward Pride, as will not admit
the least contradiction. So that the most convincing Reasons and powerful
Arguments, which commonly have a happy and good effect on free and ingenuous
Minds, do but make these Men the worse: and the greater opposition they at any
time find from Reason or public Authority, the more they value themselves upon
their opposition to both. And thus the violent working of Conceit, and a
spiritual Pride raises within them an odd heat and Zeal, which at last turns it
self into downright Enthusiasm; and thus these Men unhappily mistaking a
warmth and transport within them for Divine Inspiration, and looking on that as
a supernatural effect, which really, after all, is but the pure notions of
Blood and Spirits, They are from hence often guilty of those extravagancies, in
which neither Reason nor Religion can justify them; and of which ours, as well
as other Neighboring Countries, have often felt the sad and lamentable
Effects. But after all, let some Men's pretenses be what they please to inward
Motions and immediate Inspirations of the Spirit, this is certain and
infallible, That as God has only left us his Word in the Scriptures as the sole
Rule and Measure of our Obedience, and according to which we are to direct and
govern our Lives and Actions; so he that performs the things which the Revealed
Will of God requires of us may rest assured, that he is in the Spirit; For he
(says St. John in his first Epistle, chap. 3. ver. 24.) that keeps God's
Commandments dwells in him, and he in him. The Scriptures (I say) being the
only Rule now left us, by which we can judge of the goodness or pravity of our
Actions, every one may hence easily know and conclude in himself, whether he is
in the Spirit, by being conscious to himself, whether he forms his Life and
Actions according to the Precepts laid down in the Gospel, as the only measure
of his Obedience: And this I dare say, that each particular Man, or public
Communion of Christians, of what denomination or Country soever it may be, has
most of the Spirit, that comes the nearest to this Rule. Christianity requires
of us all a firm Faith and a sincere Obedience to the things it enjoins; and he
that has the first, and faithfully discharges the latter, that is, he who
has a Faith to believe what is required, and lives exactly according to his
belief, may be assured that he is in the Spirit, because he does that which God
requires of him; and for which he shall hereafter receive that exceeding great
Reward which God has promised in his Word. That the governing ones Life and
Actions according to the rules and temper of the Gospel, is the being in the
Spirit, is a truth besides as safe as it is certain; for he who orders himself
this way, will be sure never to do amiss, because he will always modestly keep
within the bounds which his duty prescribes him: Whereas he who is led by other
notions of being in the Spirit, and has no other rule for his Actions but that
motion and warmth he feels within him, may easily, by mistaking a hot and
extravagant Fancy for the sacred impulse of the Holy Spirit, be guilty of very
bad things, and thus too often be unluckily found a Fighter against God, at
that very time he thinks himself immediately Inspired by Him. From what
therefore has been said, every sober and serious Man may easily know and
conclude when he is in the Spirit; if he shows in every thing he does that
Temper which the Gospel requires of us; if in a steady and regular Conversation
of Life, he expresses that Love, Joy, Peace, Long-suffering, that Gentleness,
Goodness, Faith, that Meekness and Temperance, Virtues against which there is
no Law, and that are all of them so eminently required in Christians; let such
a one go on as he has begun, and never doubt of his being in the Spirit,
because he shows so much of that which St. Paul calls the Fruit of it. On the
other hand, Gal. 5.^2.
let Men fancy what they please of their being in the Spirit, if their Lives
and Actions are not conformable to the Temper of that Gospel which is to be
their Rule; If their stiffness to their own Sentiments makes them value and
consider none but themselves; If their Zeal for their own Sect or Opinion makes
them exclude all others from their Charity, who are not of their own Communion
and Party: If that Love which is such a peculiar Mark and Character of a
Christian, is not extended even to those who perhaps may little deserve it at
their hands; If instead of that Joy, Peace, Long-suffering, Gentleness,
Goodness, Faith, which are all the beauties and excellencies of a Christian
Life, they are full of Hatreds, Variances, Emulations, Strifes; If instead of
that Meekness and Temperance, which are Virtues that make us easy both to our
selves and others, they are guilty of Envyings, Murders, Drunkenness,
Revellings, and such like: In a word, if Men's inward Temper or outward
Deportment be such as carries them to such extremes as are inconsistent with
the Duties which the revealed Will of God has enjoined us, let such, of what
Church, Sect, or Opinion soever they may be, pretend to what they please, and
gild over their Actions with fine and godly Words, they are such, Ver. 19.
however, to whom we may justly apply that of St. Jude, These be they who
separate themselves, being Sensual, not having the Spirit.

And now I come, 3dly, to show the Obligations which lie on us all of walking
in the Spirit: The walking in the Spirit being, as I have already shown, the
conforming our selves to the Rules and Precepts of the Gospel, Our Obligations
of doing this, will appear,

1st, From the reasonableness that there is of living according to what we
believe.

2dly, From the easiness of the Things enjoined us.

And lastly, Because this wholly tends to our own Interest and Advantage.

1. Then I shall show the Obligations of walking in the Spirit, from the
reasonableness of living according to what we believe. The firm adhering to
what a Man believes, and the ordering his Life according to his Belief, is a
thing so very decent and pleasing in the Eyes of all Mankind, that it is
natural for one to commend such a practice even in that very Man whose Opinion
we may otherwise condemn. On the other side, let a Man be never so Orthodox in
his Faith, if he is scandalous and irregular in his Life, this raises such an
inward scorn and disesteem in the Breast of all good and understanding Men, as
is sufficient to testisie what a low and mean Opinion the World generally has
of such a Person: For when there is not that harmony which there should be
betwixt ones belief and practice; when the Holiness of Men's Lives does not
answer the purity of that Religion they profess; it either argues a wonderful
falseness and design in desiring to appear otherwise than they really are; or a
strange insensibility and neglect not to mind that which of all other things is
their greatest concern. It Is mean and pitiful to be a bare Pretender in any
thing; but it is really wicked and unaccountable to be so in matters of
Religion, where the greatest sincerity of Mind is required; and believe me, all
is but Hypocrisy and folly without it. All Religion naturally supposes an
Obedience to the Things it enjoins; and Christianity is so very exact in this,
above all others, that whosoever shall keep the whole Law of it, and yet ossend
in one point, he is guilty of all. If those therefore who call themselves
Christians, are really persuaded of the truth of the Gospel, is it not most
reasonable they should be of that temper it requires? If Men are convinced of
the excellency of the Precepts which Christ has commanded, is it any thing less
than Madness not to follow them to the uttermost? And what a strange degree of
folly is it in them not to make that the constant Rule of their Lives, which
they themselves confess to be the only means of their Happiness?

But 2dly, Our obligations of walking in the Spirit, will appear from the
easiness of the things enjoined us. Christianity is a thing so very plain and
simple, that never any Religion yet proposed so great Rewards, and yet
occasions fewer difficulties to obtain what is promised. Every thing it
commands is easy and natural, either what directly tends to the Peace of the
World, or the Reformation of our selves: And that which seems most harsh and
dissicult, is quickly overcome, when one sets heartily and sincerely about it.
Of the many Religions which have appeared in the several Ages of the World,
some of them have tied up their Votaries to such severe and hard performances,
whereof many have been so cruel and unaccountable, that Nature seems to shrink
even at the very thoughts of repeating them. As for the Religion of the Jews,
which of all others has the nearest relation to us Christians, there was even
in that such a multiplicity of Legal Rights and Observances, so many
attendances upon Feasts at Jerusalem, which was the only place of Worship, and
whither Men were bound to repair so many times a Year, as put them upon
Journies no less tedious than expensive; and from which nothing but an
invincible necessity could excuse them. But the Gospel, though it raises Men to a
more noble and excellent way of Devotion, yet requires none of those servile
and bodily Labors to perform it: for instead of the laying on us such things
as the weight of Legal Rights and Observances, it only requires an inward
disposition and a temper of Mind, the Worshipping God in Spirit and Truth, for
the Father seeks such to Worship him. John 4.23.
Instead of forcing us to take long Journies through the whole Kingdom to a fixed
place of Worship (which was exactly the case of the Jews) we may now serve God
at home here in our Chapels, and in our Churches. Instead of the Blood of Bulls
and Goats, as an atonement for Sin, God only requires now of us a Broken and a
Contrite heart; And the most acceptable Offerings and Oblations we can make
him, are the Sacrifices of Prayers and Thanksgivings. In a word, the things
expected of us under the Gospel being purely Spiritual, the forming within us a
new Creature, by Crucifying the Flesh, with the affections and Lusts; This is a
work which may be done in all times and Places; and the difficulty of it is
easily removed, when we our selves are pleased but to use the means which are
prescribed.

But lastly, our Obligations of walking in the Spirit, will farther appear,
when, beside the easiness of the things enjoined us, it wholly tends to our own
Interest and Advantage. As God in his Wisdom endued Man above all other
Creatures with a power of knowing and performing his Will; so again, by a
Goodness as great as his Wisdom, he has made him the promise of eternal
Felicity, to encourage him in the performance of his Duty: we therefore see the
end of all our just and good actions seem chiefly designed by God to our own
Interest and Advantage. For though God, who is the Fountain of all Goodness, has
declared himself to be pleased with the justice and uprightness of our Actions;
yet, as he is a Being infinitely happy in himself, he cannot any ways be
supposed to stand in need of the Services of his Creatures: His Glory is not
augmented by our poor Prayers and Thanksgivings; nor is his Greatness
diminished by any neglect of our Duties. Can a Man (Job 22.2, 3.) be prositable
to God, as he that is Wise may be prositable to himself? Is it any pleasure to
the Almighty that thou art Righteous? Chap. 35.6, 7.
Or is it gain to him that thou make thy way perfect? If thou Sinnest, what
do thou against him? And if thy Transgressions be multiplied, what do thou
unto him? If thou art Righteous, what give thou him, or what receives he at
thy hands? So then we see that the performance of the things which the Gospel
requires of us, tends wholly to our own advantage: Which consideration alone
should be sufficient powerfully to engage us to do the things that are
requisite to obtain it: For though Arguments drawn from ones Interest are not
always good and proper to be urged in things relating to this World; yet they
are some of the best which can be used in respect of the happiness of the next.
Since God therefore has created us all with the design of making us eternally
happy with him on the conditions required at our hands, this should stir us up
to such suitable and grateful returns of governing our Lives and Actions,
according to the Rules he has prescribed us, that we may all at last be
partakers of those endless Blessings and Joys he intends us. If the walking in
the Spirit is the only way of conducting us to Glory, this should make us all
become the Servants of God, that having our Fruit unto Holiness, Romans 6.22.
we may have our end everlasting Life.

What is said to all at large, is applied but by few to themselves; so that
though a general Discourse, like this, may be most pleasing to Men, because it
touches them least, yet it is only a particular and an affectionate application
of things to our own Persons and Circumstances, which leaves the most sensible
and lasting Impressions upon us: Having therefore shown what is meant by the
Spirit, and set forth the several Obligations which lie on us all to walk in
the Spirit, I shall now conclude this Discourse with some close reflections on
our own Lives and Practices.

It Is the peculiar Blessing of us who are now met together in this place, that
as we are all Professors of Christianity, so we declare our selves likewise
Members of that Reformed part of it, which is established in this Nation, and
which is both the strength and glory of the Reformation: But now let us examine
our selves a little in that double relation we have both as we are Christians
and Members of this particular Church. The things to which the Gospel obliges
us are as plain in themselves as they are easy in the performance of them: The
assistances of Grace which we receive are many, and the promises of Reward are
unspeakable: We pretend all to be so far from disbelieving the Gospel, that
there is not a Man amongst us, but would think it the highest affront not to be
thought a good Christian: But now after all, If we live in the Spirit, do we
also walk in the Spirit? Does the sense of our Duty stir us up to the
performance of it? and does the Holiness of our Lives answer the purity of that
Religion we profess? Has Christianity, I ask you, that happy and blessed effect
upon us as to make us every way better than those who either never heard or
believed it? and is the distinction as plain and as visible as it ought to be
betwixt us and the rest of the World, for Piety and Virtue, as much as our
advantages to Godliness are greater and more excellent than theirs? Have we
that true sense of God and Religion which becomes the Greatness and Majesty of
the one? and do we order our Lives with that circumspection and care, as we may
not bring the least reproach or dishonor on the other? Have we God always in
our thoughts, and do we daily offer up unto him our Sacrifices of Prayers and
Thanksgivings? Do we in our Addresses to him heartily bewail our own Sins, and
the many occasions we may have given others of offending him? Do we intercede
with God for others as well as for our selves? and does the sense of the
Miseries and Wants to which Mankind is subject, kindle in us that universal and
Christian Charity, as to beg his blessing on all Men, of what Nation, Country,
Religion, Sect, Principle, or Opinion they may be? Are we thankful to God for
the least Mercy we receive? and are we resigned and easy in the meanest
condition we may be in? Do we study to glorify God by all means? and do we
employ our whole time for the Salvation of our Souls? Do we live and act as
becomes those who really think there are Rewards and Punishments for Men in the
next Life, and that we must all be for ever happy or for ever miserable in
another World, as we behave our selves here in this? Do the Thoughts and
Consideration of this work in us that serious care and concern as to be always
earnest about our own happiness, and not to do any thing by which we may miss
that Glory which we hope to possess? Do we mind that great and excellent Rule
of Christianity, Mat. 7.12.
of doing to others as we would they should do unto us? and do we make a
Conscience of not promoting our Honor, Riches, Reputation, or Interest, by any
other means than what Religion prescribes and justifies? Do we make the
Commands of the Gospel the Rule of our Lives? and in all our Actions have we a
respect to the Precepts and Example of Christ? Phil. 2.5.
Is that mind in us which was also in Christ Jesus? and do we imitate that
Humility of which he made himself such a wonderful Pattern and Example to the
World? Is that Love, by which all Men shall know that we are his Disciples, so
firm and universal in us, that it goes much beyond that of the Publicans, by
being extended to Enemies as well as Friends? Does that Joy, Peace,
Long-suffering, that Gentleness, Goodness, Faith, that Meekness and Temperance,
which are all the Fruits of the Spirit; do they, I say, appear as eminently in
our Lives, as they are all really necessary to our happiness? Are we Merciful,
and are we Forgiving, and do we cheerfully relieve the necessities of those who
stand in need of our Charity, considering, That we our selves are also in the
Body? Are we moderate in our Desires, Modest in our Behaviors, Peaceful in our
Tempers, Just to our Promises, and exemplary in our Lives? These are the
general Duties of Christians, and it will be well if our Hearts condemn us not,
when with a severe and searching care we examine our selves, how conformable
our Lives have been to these Rules.

Let us now pass on from that general notion of our being Christians, to see
how we live and act as we are Members of this particular Church. We all value
our selves, I suppose, upon our being of the Church of England, (and it is a
blessing for which next to the Redemption of the World, we stand most indebted
to Heaven) but are we as Holy in our Lives as we are Orthodox in our Faith? And
are we as like the Primitive Christians for Piety and Zeal, as much as our
Religion and Worship, of any other in the World, comes the nearest to theirs?
We come once a Week at least into this, or some other House of God, and we do
well in it; but do not many of us by our heedlesness and unconcernedness too
often Offer up the Sacrifices of Fools, not considering that they do Evil? Do
we mind the business we are here about, and the greatness of that Majesty,
before which we are now in a more particular manner present? Do we think that
God is in this place, and do we bring with us such thoughts as suit with the
Holiness of his House? Do we draw near to God with our Hearts, as well as with
our Lips? And have we upon our Minds and Consciences that true sense of his
Goodness, Justice, Power, and Mercy, as may at the same time raise in us both a
Love and a Fear of his Name? We fall down formally here upon our Knees, and, in
our Confession, we tell God roundly to his Face, That we have erred and strayed
from his ways like lost Sheep; That we have left undone the things which we
ought to have done; and that we have done the things which we ought not to have
done; and that there is no health in us; nay, we go higher yet, Communion
Service.
and tell him, that we earnestly repent, and are heartily sorry for our
misdoings; that the remembrance of them is grievous unto us, and that the
burden of them is intolerable: But have we now all this while that hearty
contrition and inward sorrow, that uneasiness and dissatisfaction in our selves
which becomes those who are truly Penitent for their Offenses? After these
large Confessions of our Follies and Sins, do we show a hatred of them by the
Reformation of our Lives? And are we as careful to amend as we are always ready
to confess our Misdoings? Do we consider that God is not to be mocked, and that
when we come here into his presence, and pretend to confess our Sins to him,
without any thoughts of amending them, that then we offer up the highest
Affront to Heaven, and justly provoke God's Vengeance against us, for adding
Hypocrisy to our other Transgressions?

As for Baptism and the Supper of the Lord, how little do we mind the Vows and
Promises which we have made in the one, and with what a coldness and
unconcernedness do too many of us come to the other? we promise in our Baptism
to Renounce the Devil and all his Works, the vain Pomp and Glory of the World,
weth all Covetous desires of the same: But now where are the Men amongst us who
are not lead away Captive by them all? Where is that resignation we pretended
when we were admitted Members of Christ's Flock? and to whom does the Humility
of the Cross appear more glorious than all the Vanities of the World? Where is
the dying to Sin and the living to Righteousness? And how few are there,
notwithstanding all their Promises, who Manfully fight under Christ's Banner,
and continue his faithful Soldiers and Servants to their lives end?

As for the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, this Church invites us to it by its
Ministers in the name of God, calls us in Christ's behalf, Communion Service.
exhorts us, as we love our own Salvation, that we will be Partakers of this
Holy Communion. Now we, who pretend to be of this Church, do we mind the
earnest and godly desires of it? Do we take all opportunities of coming to that
Holy Table, 1 Cor. 11.24, 26.
and thus set forth the Lord's Death till he comes? Do not many of us seldom or
never appear there? and instead of Doing this often in remembrance of him, by
reason of an extraordinary Coldness and some idle excuses, communicate but once
or twice in our Lives? As for the others again of us who are often present at
those Holy Mysteries, do we with a true penitent Heart, and a lively Faith,
receive that Holy Sacrament? Do we come with that seriousness and due
preparation of Soul, which becomes the most high and solemn part of our
Religion? Do we judge our selves that we be not judged of the Lord? Have we a
detestation of Sin, and a hearty Repentance for the Follies of our Lives? Have
we a flaming desire after God and Heaven in our selves? and have we a perfect
Love and Charity for others?

In all the other acts and duties of our Religion, have we that tenderness and
concern for it, as really becomes those who pretend so much the Honor of God,
and the prosperity of this Church? We say indeed (and it is most true) that this
Church, for its constitution and Doctrine, is the Joy of the whole Earth, but
do we endeavor to give it a farther luster and beauty by the excellency of our
Lives, and to raise it from that degree of scorn and contempt, which the
looseness and scandals of too many of its Members have brought on it? There is
indeed every where such a wonderful coldness in Religion, and such a corruption
of manners in the World; so much pretense to Honor and Conscience, and so
little regard to either; such a general Infection, and such a decay of Piety in
all sorts of Men, that I cannot indeed say, That those of our Communion are the
worst, because all Parties are so extremely bad amongst us: But however, do not
we lie too much open to censure; and have not many of us given the World too
great reason to think that some of us are arrived to that degree of hardness
and Impiety, that we can now go on and Sin without either fear or shame. Do we
consider therefore what Reproaches we bring upon Religion and our selves, what
dishonor to God, and what particular disservice to this Church, by thus
exposing it to the laughter and obloquy of its Enemies on all sides, who can
never get any advantage over it, but what springs from our own Indiscretion and
Follies?

This is a thing, which as it is apt to beget in one very melancholy thoughts,
so it would now furnish me with vast variety of Discourse; but instead of
asking any more searching Questions (which may look like so many Reproaches on
our Lives and Practices) I shall conclude all with my hearty Prayers to God;
That it would please him to give us his Grace for the good Conduct and
Government of our selves, both as we are Christians, and Members of this
particular Church.

That it would please him, that as we live in the Spirit, we may also all of us
walk in the Spirit; And that having so many helps and assistances for the
performance of our Duties, we may ever make such returns of Virtue and
Godliness as become us; so that they who are bad may grow better, and that
those who are already Good, may go on to that Perfection to which they aspire.
Lastly, that all of us being made perfect by the Spirit here, may reign with
God eternally in Heaven hereafter.

Jude 24, 25. Now unto him who is able to keep you from falling, and to present
you faultless before the Presence of his Glory with exceeding Joy.

To the only Wise God our Savior, be Glory and Majesty, Dominion and Power,
both now and ever. Amen.


FINIS.

