THE Quakers Cruelty, Deceit and Wickedness, Presented to the KING and
PARLIAMENT By Thomas Boyce.

With a Copy of the PAPER the QUAKERS put forth against me. Also my Neighbors
Testimony, and Sir Richard Ingoldesby's Certificate concerning me.

The Bees may gather Honey out of a seeming Weed. London, Printed in the year,
1675.

To the King's Excellent Majesty.
Most Noble Worthy,
BE pleased to hear the Complaint of a poor man, whose name is Thomas Boyce,
dwelling at Horsly-Down in Southwark, having complained to some of your
Majesty's Justices of the Peace concerning some wrong which I have received by
some of the People called Quakers. Whereupon some of the Chiefest of them have,
as I understand, secretly signified to the Justices, as well as to others, That
I am infected with the distemper of Madness and Distraction, but have left out
the cause; and by reason thereof have stopped, as much as in them lies, the
very current and stream of Justice. Now forasmuch as they have told the
Distemper, be pleased to give me the liberty to tell your Majesty something of
the Cause. For it is possible that it may be an infectious Distemper, and if I
should conceal it, I may conceal Treason unawares. I having heretofore exposed
my self to the displeasure of my former Acquaintance and Relations to be a
Quaker, and was one of them above ten years, then believing their ways to be
the best; during which time I was true to what I professed. But finding some of
the Heads, as well as others of them, contrary to their Principles, I was
willing to tell them of their Error: who fell upon me by way of threatening,
with great and terrible words; which caused a trouble upon my mind: and about
June last was twelvemonth I was taken in a strange manner, to the amazement of
them that saw me, it being amongst several hundreds of the people called
Quakers: Whereupon some of them cried out, Deceit, and it was said that I was
made a public sign for my wickedness. After which time my speech was taken
from me, and I continued speechless 33 weeks together; only some few words I
might speak for a week or two, which they that were with me, could not tell
what I meant; and for five weeks together I could eat no food at all, only
drank Water; neither was it perceived that I had any sleep during that time;
neither do I know all the 33 weeks I was at all sick. The cause of which I
humbly conceive is your Majesty's conern to inquire into. Wherefore I am
willing to lay this before you, and it is without the advice of any, to
signify my duty toward God, my obedience to your Majesty, and my love to my
Neighbor: which duty is faithfulness that the Lord requires. He that is not
faithful to his God, cannot be faithful to his King, nor true to his Neighbor.
And if I should prove some of the Heads of the Quakers to be guilty of
Unfaithfulness in the matter aforesaid, then I hope your Majesty will not blame
me.

Now as concerning my own Distemper, it is Poverty, which they have brought
upon me, by taking away my good name, who before did help relieve them, but now
I am not able to help my self. Concerning which distemper one William Pen,
George Whitehead, and Thomas Rudyard did promise upon Condition to cure, which
Condition I am not willing to perform: but if I do, I believe I should be an
undone man for ever. And therefore I had rather be as I am, than betray my
trust. Now I do beseech your Majesty would be pleased to grant, That those
persons called Quakers, or such of them as are chiefly concerned either in
violating your Laws by Threatening, or otherwise broak the Commands of God,
(whose Minister I am satisfied you are) and have or shall pretend in the Name
and Authority of Him who is God and Lord over all the whole World, contrary to
your knowledge, privity or consent, take upon them to give Judgment in any
cause, matter or thing whatsoever, may come before such as your Majesty shall
think fit and allow of to answer the same, and I with them may be face to face,
and be permitted to declare my knowledge without any interruption; and what
Evidence concerning the same, may be brought also: and then your Majesty may
know whether these high-talking Quakers are in the Error or not; and then you
may have an understanding who is the Seer, and who is the Blind, and so it may
be known who is most mad, my Accusers the Rich, called Quakers, or the Poor man
by name, and your Majesty's poor Subject,

Thomas Boyce.
The Copy of the abovesaid was delivered by me into the King's own hand the
25th of April 1675.
To the Honorable, The Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament.
IN Obedience to his Majesty, I did signify to him my Duty toward God, whose
Minister I am satisfied he is; a Title indeed worthy of double honor: I mean
no other God than he who is GOD AND LORD OVER ALL THE WHOLE WORLD. The reason
why I use such expressions is, because there is a people called Quakers, some
of the heads of them have got an Imaginary God in their own Comprehension,
which goes about to dethrone him the true God, before mentioned, if it were
possible so to do; and thereby may deceive the whole World. Now I am both
willing to signify my Love to my Neighbors, and lay it before you who are
chiefly concerned therein in their behalf; which Love, as aforesaid, is the
Command of God. NOBLE WORTHIES, be pleased to hear and take notice of the words
of a poor Man. I speak not in flattery, nor by way of insinuation, but the
plain and naked truth of my heart; I have been under great Affliction for some
years past, and not freed yet; the reason whereof is best known to the Lord: by
which Affliction I have gained some understanding of his ways that I was
ignorant of before, which understanding I would not willingly lose, neither
would I hide any thing from you which I apprehend is my Duty to make known.
These people, called Quakers, who pretend themselves to be the SEERS, and all
others that are out of their form and manner of dress, to be Blind; I would
willingly prove them liars out of their own mouths, who tell people, they must
be perfect, as God is perfect; which State of Perfection, (say they) must be
witnessed, before they go out of this World. And all that preach against this
Doctrine of Perfection (they say) are the Devils Ministers. Now be pleased to
inquire whether or not these men, or any of them which preach this Lesson to
others, have such Perfection, and whose Ministers they are; for say they, the
Tree is know by its Fruit. Now such as are esteemed the best of these (called
Quakers) some particular of them have threatened to vex me, and called me Knave,
Traitor, and Judas, and would have had me turned headlong down Stairs: and at
another time some of them took me by the Legs and dragged me down Stairs with
my head on the ground, and had me toward the Street where some rude Boys were,
then set me upon my Legs: and I being scarce able to stand by reason of their
abuses; to excuse themselves, they gave out I was drunk, and sent for a
Counstable to fetch me away, and would not give me a little water to wash off
the Blood which they had drawn from me. So if these be the practices of those
called the best, then will I leave it to your Honors to Judge what the worst of
these (called Quakers) are. Some of them have presented a Paper to the King and
Parliament in the behalf of the people of God (as they call themselves): it is
said, in the said Paper, they cannot take an Oath for Conscience Sake, as they
pretend, nor Swear at all in any ease. One of their Preachers, viz. Solomon
Eccles, said, Our Yea and Nay is more then Swearing in a Court of Judicature:
and if so, be pleased to inquire why they do not take one another Yea and Nay,
without subscribing to their form, and acknowledging them to be the people of
God, and that which they declare to be the truth and no other, their form is
this, I A. B. do declare in the truth of my heart, in the fear of God, and
before these (meaning the heads of the Quakers) his Faithful Witnesses, or
otherwise, in the presence of God, or him that knows all things: and without
such or such like declaration they will not permit any one to marry (as they
call it) amongst them, nor in some case will not lend Money without such a
subscription. Now I will leave it to your consideration whether this their Form
be not an absolute OATH. I speak not this out of envy or prejudice to any, but
only to discharge my own conscience; for I do believe these People (what ever
they may pretend) set as little by the Law as they do by the Gospel, or
Gospel Order; yet now they can cry up the Scriptures in words the most of all
people, and can make use of the Law upon occasion; for they told me (by their
mouth George Whitehead) they would answer the Law, but have not yet answered me
therein: he pretended in the Name of God to cut me down, and told me a few days
before that a man ought to be heard before Judgment or Condemnation passed upon
him in any Case whatever; and the said George Whitehead said, he must be true
to his principles therein: yet nevertheless he would have me cut down without
my being heard. So that he has not only proved himself a Liar, but also a
Blasphemer, if he cannot prove his Authority for so doing from God. Also be
pleased to take notice of John Boulton, one of the called Faithful Witnesses
before mentioned, who pretends to be a Seer, and the mouth of the eternal God,
for that he the said John Boulton did cause to be brought before him (and some
others who pretended themselves to be Judges) a Woman and her Son, being of
their own Society, and accused them of lying together and being unclean; what
proof they had for their uncleanness I know not; nevertheless John Boulton, did
pass Judgment that they were unclean, and one of his Brethren Thomas Padley
said, If the World should know of it, they would be both hanged. I
understanding thereof went to the said John Boulton to desire him to hear what
I could say in the matter, being fully satisfied that he had given wrong
Judgment, but instead of regarding me therein, he the said John Boulton Judged
me unclean also: Afterward the Quakers preferred a Lass to this Young Man (who
was so judged unclean) and joined them together as Man and Wife, according to
their form above expressed. As to the particular of marrying, she proving her
self not like a Wife; I acquainted some of the heads of the Quakers therewith,
one of them, viz. Walter Miers, who was chiefly concerned in the putting them
together, did acknowledge he had known her long to be a wild Lass; and one
Thomas Biddle, said she was of a bewitching Spirit, and a depth of deceit, and
that she had deceived a Servant of his (which Servant (he said) cried out she
had undone him, and soon after he died); and further T. B. said, he feared she
would prove a Whore; so they were willing to let her have a Husband, fearing
lest she should bring a dishonor upon the Truth, as they called it. Upon
occasion afterward, being urged thereto by the said Walter Mires and the said
Thomas Biddle and some others, I said she was not his Wife (meaning no
otherwise than that she was not a good Wife, as I did then and there express my
self;) notwithstanding the Quakers seemed to make a wilful mistake of those my
words, as if thereby I would have had them parted, which the Lord can witness
for me I had no such thought. All which I leave to your Honors to judge of, and
by this and the two Mouths, to wit, George Whitehead and John Boulton, you may
understand what I mean by their Imaginary God, and the Seer, and the Blind
before mentioned. And you may also understand that the Quakers have put forth a
Paper against me, which I desire may be called in, for they can prove nothing
true of what they have therein asserted against me. It is granted, after I had
been at their private-houses and their private-meetings, I did go to their
public Assemblies, whereby they pretended I disturbed them: the reason of my
going was to know what was the deceit and wickedness they had accused me of,
and wherein I was unclean. But instead of giving me Satisfaction therein, some
of the Quakers there met, laid violent hands upon me to force me out of their
Meeting, some taking me by the Throat, others thrusting their Elboes on my
breast, and some thrusting me upon my Belly even ready to take away my Breath,
so that I could have no Right done me, neither in private nor in public. After
a year and half's Suffering in this nature, I went to William Penn to ask him
what was the reason why he concerned himself to tell the People in a Public
Auditory as he had several times done, biding them heed not what I said, for I
was distracted: but left out the Cause. He told me he did not know the Cause;
and after he had by me understood the cause, did grant I had wrong, whereupon
he set a time apart on purpose to do me Right, and did come to me, and desired
me to conceal the wrongs I received from Friends (meaning the Quakers) and let
all die, because, said he, if the World should know thereof, our enemies may
take advantage against us, naming one Hicks, who he feared most, as I suppose:
which I should willingly have done, and embraced his and George Whithead's
reward (which was that they would take Care that I should be provided for) if
it had not been for wronging of my own Conscience. But if I had so done, Tho.
Padleys words would have proved true, and I should have been as he said of me,
viz. a Knave, a Traitor, and a Judas: and that might have vexed me for ever,
and for ever. But I not answering William Penns desire therein, the Quakers
dealings to me have been worse then before, which may appear, if permitted by
your Honors to have a hearing thereof, in the behalf of him, who is not only
his Majesty's poor Subject, but his and your Honors faithful Servant to the
utmost of my Power to serve my Generation till Death,

Thomas Boyce.

This following is the Copy of the Paper the Quakers put forth against me, and
dispersed several of them to the Worlds People, as they call them.
Whereas Thomas Boyce, by Trade a Tailor, dwelling in Horsy-Down-street, has
for some time past come to the Meetings and Assemblies of the People of God
called Quakers, whereby his resorting to the said Peoples Meetings has given
occasion to some to judge and believe that he is in Fellowship and Unity with
them.

But for the Information of all people by whom he may be so thought and judged,
We the People aforesaid having had a good sense and discerning of the
Conversation and Spirit whereby he is guided, that it is not according to the
Spirit of Truth and Righteousness, but rather of an unsettled envious Ranting
Spirit, Do therefore give forth this our Testimony, that we have not, nor never
had Unity with that Spirit by which he is led and acted; but do now, and ever
shall declare, That we have no more Fellowship with him and such as he is, than
Light has with Darkness, or Truth with Error, unless true and unfeigned
Repentance be witnessed; which is our desire he may be found in, before he goes
hence, and be no more seen.

Given forth by the People called Quakers, at their Meeting at Horsie-Down, the
fifth day of the sixth month, called August, 1674.
Some of my Neighbors being sensible the Quakers had abused and wronged me,
gave forth this following Certificate concerning me.
THese are to certify all whom it may concern, that Thomas Boyce is an
Inhabitant of the Parish of St. Olave in Southwark in the County of Surry, and
by Trade a Tailor, living on the place known by the name of Horsly-Down, near
the Alley called by the name of Prichets-Alley, above the term often years.
Concerning which foresaid Thomas Boyce, we whose names are here underwritten
do testify, That he is both an honest Man, and a peaceable Liver in the place
where he dwells, and always, when able, was a laborious man in his Calling,
taking care to maintain his Family decently, according to the best of our
observations; and makes conscience of what he does and says, so far as we
know. Further, we the said underwritten Witnesses, do testify that the said
Thomas Boyce was lately under the afflicting hand of God in a strange manner,
being taken dumb, and could not speak; and so continued in a weak distracted
condition for some months, and all that while incapable of working; whom now
the Lord has been graciously pleased to restore again; to him alone be the
glory. And and all this we testify by knowledge of the truth hereof upon our
words, as we are honest men. In witness whereof we have hereunto subscribed our
names July 1. 1674.

Luke Talbut, Bartholomew Collingwood, John Stacy, John Johnson, Joseph Mewse,
Francis Aldwin, John Bembridge, Samuel Wier, William Richardson, Richard Tuder,
Leonard Hoare, William Wickins, George Hamton.


Here follows Sir Richard Ingoldesby's Certificate.
THese are to certify all whom it may concern, that the bearer hereof Thomas
Boyce was heretofore a Servant to my Father Sir Richard Ingoldesby, Knight, so
long as my said Father lived, and afterward to my Mother, in all about twelve
or fourteen years: all which time he was honest and faithful, so far as I know
or believe, in the Trust reposed in him; which Trust was very great. In
Testimony whereof I have hereunto set my hand this 26th of April 1675.

Ri. Ingoldesby.

What has been done by me in publishing these things, I was constrained
thereto without the advice or counsel of any: for none can give me a better
understanding in this my concern than I have in my self. The chiefest of all
the Quakers, viz. George Fox, was with me twice in my Affliction, who said both
then and since, he did believe I would have spoke to him if I could; and though
he had formerly declared he had power to bind and to loose whom he pleased, yet
could not, or at least did not unloose my tongue, or help me out of my
Affliction. Others of their Ministers said, I might have spoke if I would, (in
the said time of my being speechless) which was not only an absolute untruth,
but also a contradiction to George Fox aforesaid. And since my speech was
restored me, I complained to some of the Magistrates of the wrong and Injury I
had received from some of the said people: whereupon Thomas Rudyard told one of
the said Magistrates, that he believed that I was a Dissembler, and pretended
my self to be Madd and Dumb, and might have spoke if I would, and told me since
that the Magistrate believed what he said; and William Meade also informed
them, that I was a distracted man, and also produced a Letter from one of the
said Magistrates to the other, which James Parkes (one of their Ministers) told
me he saw, which I apprehend was the cause of my then proceedings being stopped.
Time would fail to relate what I have undergone concerning the things herein
contained, and I am satisfied, whatever these people may pretend against me to
cover themselves, they know they have done me much wrong, and that by these
their dealings they have given occasion to other sorts of people (as well as
their own) to believe that I am not only a distracted man, but likewise guilty
of great wickedness: by which false suggestions they have shut up the hearts of
most against me, and thereby endeavored, and do still what in them lies, to
hinder me from having any Food to eat, or Clothes to put on, or to provide for
my Family: and one of them lately pronounced the curse of God upon me, my Wife
and Children, as others of them had done to me before. However I have been made
able to bear it all, neither have I fainted yet, and doubt not but a time will
come when it will be known to all people What, and for What, and whose
wickedness I was made a sign of: which is already known to the Judge of all the
whole World, who is the Right Honorable and ever Renowned Worthy, worthy of all
praise for ever.

By me T. B.
How I became Dumb, or how my Tongue became to be bound, that is the Question:
but how it was unloosed is without Question, for I am satisfied it was the
Lords doing alone. Shall not the Judge of all the Earth do Right?
THE END.

