DEGRADATION OF GOLD Made by an ANTI-ELIXIR A STRANGE Chemical Narative

LONDON, Printed by T. N. for Henry Herringman, at (...) in the Lower Walk of
the New Exch(...)

THE PUBLISHER To the Reader.
HAving been allowed the Liberty of Perusing the following Paper at my own
Lodging; I found my self strongly tempted, by the Strangeness of the things
mentioned in it, to venture to Release it: The knowledge I had of the Author's
Inclination to Gratify the Virtuosi, forbidding me to despair of his pardon,
if the same disposition prevailed with me, to make the Curious Partakers with
me of so Surprising a Piece of Philosophical News. And, though it sufficiently
appeared, that the ensuing Conference was but a Continuation of a larger
Discourse; yet, considering, that this Part consists chiefly, not to say only,
of a Narrative; which (if I may so speak) stands upon its own legs, without any
need of depending upon any thing that was delivered before; I thought it was no
great Venture, nor Incongruity, to let it come abroad by it self. And, I the
less scrupled to make this Publication, because I found, that the Honorable Mr.
Boil confesses himfelf to be Fully Satisfied of the Truth, of as much of the
Matter of Fact, as delivers the Phoenomena of the Trial; the Truth whereof was
further Confirmed to me, by the Testimony, and Particular Account, which that
most Learned and Experienced Physician, who was Assistant to Pyrophilus in
making the Experiment, and with whom I have the honor to be Acquainted (being
now in London) gave me with his own Mouth, of all the Circumstances of the
Trial. And, where the Truth of that shall be once Granted, there is little
cause to doubt, that the Novelty of the thing will sufficiently Indear the
Relation: especially to those that are studious of the Higher Arcana of the
Hermetick Philosophy. For, most of the Phoenomena here mentioned, will probably
seem wholly new, not only to vulgar Chemists, but also to the greatest part of
the more knowing Spagyrists, and Natural Philosophers themselves: none of the
Orthodox Authors, as far as I can remember, having taken notice of such an
Anti-Elixir. And, though Pyrophilus's Scrupulousness (which makes him very
unwilling to speak the utmost of a thing) allows it to be a Deterioration into
an Imperfect Metal only; yet, to tell the truth, I think it was more Imbas'd
than so; for the part left of it (and kept for some farther Discoveries) which
I once got a sight of, looks more like a Mineral, or Marchasite, then like any
Imperfect Metal: and therefore this Degradation is not the same, but much
greater, than that which Lullius does intimate in some places. These
Considerations make me presume it will easily be granted, That the Effects of
this Anti-Philosophers Stone, as I think it may not unfitly be called., will
not only seem very strange to Hermetick, as well as other Philosophers, but may
prove very Instructive to Speculative Wits; especially if Pyrophilus shall
please to acquaint them with that more odd Phoenomenon, which he Mentions
darkly in the Close of his Discourse.

AN Historical Account OF THE DEGRADATION OF GOLD BY AN Anti-Elixir.
AFter the whole Company had, as it were by Common Consent, continued silent
for some time, which others spent in Reflections upon the Preceding Conference,
and Pyrophylus, in the Consideration of what he was about to Deliver; this
Virtuoso at length stood up, and Addressing himself to the rest, I hope,
Gentlemen, says he, that what has been already Discoursed, has Inclined, if
not Persuaded you to Think, That the Exaltation, or Change of other Metals into
Gold, is not a thing Absolutely Impossible; and, though I confess, I cannot
remove all your Doubts, and Objections, or my own, by being able to Affirm to
you, That I have with my own hands made Projection (as Chemists are wont to
call the Sudden Transmutation made by a small quantity of their Admirable
Elixir) yet I can Confirm much of what has been Argued for the Possibility of
such a sudden Change of a Metalline Body, by a Way, which, I presume, will
surprise you. For, to make it more credible, that other Metals are capable of
being Graduated, or Exalted into Gold by way of Projection; I will Relate to
you, that by the like way, Gold has been Degraded, or Imbased.

The Novelty of this Preamble having much surprised the Auditory, at length,
Simplicius, with a disdainful Smile, told Pyrophilus, That the Company would
have much thanked him, if he could have assured them, That he had seen another
Metal Exalted into Gold; but, that to find a way of spoiling Gold, was not
only an Useless Discovery, but a Prejudicial Practice.

Pyrophilus was going to make some Return to this Animadversion, when he was
prevented by Aristander; who, turning himself to Simplicius, told him, with a
Countenance and Tone that argued some displeasure; If Pyrophilus had been
Discoursing to a Company of Goldsmiths, or of Merchants, your severe Reflection
upon what he said would have been proper: but, you might well have forborne it,
if you had considered, as I suppose he did, that he was speaking to an Assembly
of Philosophers and Virtuosi, who are wont to estimate Experiments, not as they
enrich Men's Purses, but their Brains, and think Knowledge especially of
uncommon things very desirable, even when it is not accompanied with any other
thing, than the Light that still attends it, and indears it. It has been
thought an Useful Secret, by a kind of Retrogradation to turn Tin and Lead into
brittle Bodies, like the Ores of those Metals. And if I thought it proper, I
could show, that such a change might be of use in the Investigation of the
Nature of those Metals, besides the practical use that I know may be made of
it. To find the Nature of Wine, we are assisted, not only by the methods of
obtaining from it a Spirit; but by the ways of readily turning it into Vinegar:
the knowledge of which ways has not been despised by Chemists or Physicians,
and has at Paris, and diverse other places, set up a profitable Trade. It Is
well known that diverse eminent Spagyrists have reckoned amongst their highest
Arcana the ways by which they pretended, (and I fear did but pretend) to
Extract the Mercury of Gold, and consequently destroy that Metal; and 'twere
not hard to show by particular instances, that all the Experiments wherein
Bodies are in some respects deteriorated, are not without distinction to be
rejected or despised; since in some of them, the Light they may afford may more
than countervail the Degradation of a small quantity of matter, though it be
Gold it self. And indeed, (continues he) if we will consider things as
Philosophers, and look upon them as Nature has made them, not as Opinion has
disguised them; the Prerogatives and usefulness of Gold, in comparison of other
Metals, is nothing near so great as Alchymists and Usurers imagine. For, as it
is true, that Gold is more ponderous, and more fixed, and perhaps more
difficult to be spoiled, than Iron; yet these qualities (whereof the first
makes it burthensom, and the two others serve chiefly but to distinguish the
true from counterfeit) are so balanced by the hardness, stiffness, springiness,
and other useful qualities of Iron; that if those two Metals I speak of, (Gold
and Iron) were equally plentiful in the World, it is scarce to be doubted, but
that Men would prefer the more useful before the more splendid, considering how
much worse it were for Mankind to want Hatchets, and Knives and Swords, than
Coin and Plate? Wherefore, (concludes he) I think Pyrophilus ought to be both
desired and encouraged to go on with his intended Discourse, since whether Gold
be or not be the Best of Metals; an assurance that it may be degraded, may
prove a Novelty very Instructive, and perhaps more so than the Transmutation of
a baser Metal into a Nobler. For I remember it has long passed for a Maxim
among Chemical Philosophers, That Facilius est aurum construere quam destruere:
And whatever becomes of that, it is certain that Gold being the closest, the
constantest, and the least destructible of Metals, to be able to work a notable
and almost Essential change in such a Body, (though, by detereorating it) is
more than to work a like change, (though in popular estimation for the better)
in any Metal less indisposed to admit alterations, especially in such an one as
Pyrophilus intimates, by telling us, that 'twas made by Way of Projection, and
consequently by a very small proportion of active matter; whereas the
destructions that vulgar Chemists pretend to make of Gold, are wont to be
attempted to be made by considerable proportions of Corrosive Menstruums, or
other fretting Bodies; and even these, Experience shows to be usually too weak
to ruin, though sometimes they may much disguise the most Stable Texture of
Gold. Cuncta adeo miris illic complexibus haerent.

Pyrophilus perceiving by several signs that he needed not add any thing of
Apologetical to what Arristander had already said for him, resumed his
Discourse, by saying, I was going, Gentlemen, when Simplicius diverted me, to
tell you That looking upon the Vulgar Objections that have been wont to be
framed against the possibility of Metalline Transmutations, from the Authority
and Prejudices of Aristotle, and the School-Philosophers, as Arguments that in
such an Assembly as this need not now be solemnly discussed; I consider that
the difficulties that really deserve to be called so, and are of weight even
with Mechanical Philosophers, and Judicious Naturalists, are principally these.
First, That the great change that must be wrought by the Elixir, (if there be
such an Agent) is effected upon Bodies of so stable and almost immutable a
Nature as Metals. Next, That this great change is said to be brought to pass in
a very short time. And thirdly, (which is yet more strange) That this great and
sudden alteration is said to be effected by a very small, and perhaps
inconsiderable, proportion of the transmuting Powder. To which three grand
difficulties, I shall add another that to me appears, and perhaps will seem to
diverse of the new Philosophers, worthy to be looked upon as a fourth, namely,
The notable change that must by a real transmutation be made in the Specific
Gravity of the matter wrought upon: which difficulty I therefore think not
unworthy to be added to the rest, because upon several trials of my own and
other men, I have found no known quality of Gold, (as its color,
malleableness, fixity, or the like) so difficult, if not so impossible, to be
introduced into any other Metalline Matter, as the great Specific Gravity that
is peculiar to Gold. So that, Gentlemen, (concludes Pyrophilus) if it can be
made appear that Art has produced an Anti-Elixir, (if I may so call it) or
Agent that is able in a very short time, to work a very notable, though
deteriorating, change upon a Metal; in proportion to which, its quantity is
very inconsiderable; I see not why it should be thought impossible that Art may
also make a true Elixir, or Powder capable of speedily Transmuting a great
proportion of a baser Metal into Silver or Gold: especially if it be
considered, that those that treat of these Arcana, confess that it is not every
matter which may be justly called the Philosophers Stone, that is able to
transmute other Metals in vast quantities; since several of these Writers, (and
even Lully himself) make differing orders or degrees of the Elixir, and
acknowledge, that a Medicine or Tincture of the first or lowest order will not
transmute above ten times its weight of an Inferior Metal.

Pyrophilus having at this part of his Discourse made a short pawse to take
breath, Crattippus took occasion from his silence to say to him, I presume,
Pyrophilus, I shall be disavowed by very few of these Gentlemen, if I tell you
that the company is impatient to hear the Narrative of your Experiment, and
that if it do so much as probably make out the particulars you have been
mentioning, you will in likelihood persuade most of them, and will certainly
oblige them all. I shall therefore on their behalf as well as my own, solicit
you to hasten to the Historical part of a Discourse that is so like to gratify
our Curiosity.

The Company having by their unanimous silence, testified their approbation of
what Crattippus had said; and appearing more than ordinarily attentive,

As I was one day abroad; says Pyrophilus, to return visits to my Friends, I
was by a happy Providence (for it was beside my first Intention) directed to
make one to an Ingenious Foreigner, with whom a few that I had received from
him, had given me some little acquaintance.

Whilst this Gentleman and I were discoursing together of several matters,
there came in to visit him a stranger, whom I had but once seen before; and
though that were in a promiscuous company, yet he addressed himself to me in a
way that quickly satisfied me of the greatness of his Civility; which he soon
after also did of that of his Curiosity. For the Virtuoso, in whose Lodgings we
met, having (to gratify me) put him upon the discourse of his Voyages; the
curious stranger entertained us an hour or two with pertinent and judicious
Answers to the Questions I asked him-about places so remote, or so much within
Land, that I had not met with any of our English Navigators or Travelers that
had penetrated so far as to visit them. And because I found by his discourse
that I was like to enjoy such good company but a very little while, (since he
told me that he came the other day into England but to dispatch a business
which he had already done as far as he could do it, after which he was with
speed to return, as (to my trouble) he did to his Patron that sent him) I made
the more haste to propose such Questions to him, as I most desired to be
satisfied about; and among other things, enquiring whether in the Eastern parts
he had traversed, he had met with any Chemists; he answered me that he had; and
that though they were fewer, and more reserved than ours, yet he did not find
them all less skilful. And on this occasion, before he left the Town to go
aboard the Ship he was to overtake; he in a very obliging way put into my hands
at parting a little piece of Paper, folded up; which he said contained all that
he had left of a rarity he had received from an Eastern Virtuoso, and which he
intimated would give me occasion both to Remember him, and to exercise my
thoughts in uncommon Speculations.

The great delight I took in conversing with a Person that had traveled so
far, and could give me so good an account of what he had seen, made me so much
resent the being so soon deprived of it, that though I judged such a Vertuoso
would not, as a great token of his kindness, have presented me a trifle, yet
the Present did but very imperfectly consoal me for the loss of so pleasing and
instructive a Conversation.

Nevertheless, that I might comply with the curiosity he himself had excited in
me, and know how much I was his Debtor, I resolved to see what it was he had
given me, and try whether I could make it do what I thought he Intimated, by
the help of those few hints rather than directions how to use it, which the
parting haste he was in (or perhaps some other reason best known to himself)
confined him to give me. But in regard that I could not but think the
Experiment would one way or other prove Extraordinary, I thought fit to take a
Witness or two and an Assistant in the trying of it; and for that purpose made
choice of an experienced Doctor of Physic, very well versed in the separating
and copelling of Metals.

Though the Company (says Heliodorus) be so confident of your sincerity and
wariness, that they would give credit even to unlikely Experiments, upon your
single testimony; yet we cannot but approve your discretion in taking an
Assistant and a Witness, because in nice and uncommon Experiments we can scarce
use too much circumspection, especially when we have not the means of
reiterating the trial: for in such new, as well as difficult cases, it is easy
even for a clear-sighted Experimenter to overlook some important circumstance,
that a far less skilful by-stander may take notice of.

As I have ever judged, (says Pyrophilus) that cautiousness is a very
requisite qualification for him that would satisfactorily make curious
Experiments; so I thought fit to employ a more than ordinary measure of it, in
making a trial, whose event I imagined might prove odd enough. And therefore
having several times observed that some men are prepossessed, by having a
particular Expectation raised in them, and are inclined to think that they do
see that happen which they think they should see happen; I resolved to obviate
this prejudication as much as innocently I could, and (without telling him any
thing but the truth, to which Philosophy as well as Religion obliges us to be
strictly loyal) I told him but thus much of the truth, that I expected that a
small proportion of a Powder presented me by a Foreign Virtuoso, would give a
Brittleness to the most flexible and malleable of Metals, Gold it self. Which
change I perceived he judged so considerable and unlikely to be effected, that
he was greedy of seeing it severely tried.

Having thus prepared him not to look for all that I my self expected, I
cautiously opened the Paper I lately mentioned, but was both surprised and
troubled, (as he also was) to find in it so very little Powder, that in stead
of two differing trials that I designed to make with it, there seemed very
small hope left that it would serve for one, (and that but an imperfect one
neither.) For there was so very little Powder, that we could scarce see the
color of it, (save that as far as I could judge it was of a darkish Red) and
we thought it not only dangerous, but useless to attempt to weigh it, in regard
we might easily lose it by putting it into, and out of the Balance; and the
Weights we had were not small enough for so despicable a quantity of matter,
which in words I estimated at an eighth part of a Grain: but my Assistant,
(whose conjecture I confess my thoughts inclined to prefer) would allow it to
be at most but a tenth part of a Grain. Wherefore seeing the utmost we could
reasonably hope to do with so very little Powder, was to make one trial with
it, we weighed out in differing Balances two Drams of Gold that had been
formerly English Coin, and that I caused by one that I usually employ to be
cupell'd with a sufficient quantity of Lead, and quarted, as they speak, with
refined Silver, and purged Aqua fortis, to be sure of the goodness of the Gold:
these two Drams I put into a new Crucible, first carefully neal'd, and having
brought them to fusion by the mere action of the fire, without the help of
Borax, or any other Additament, (which course, though somewhat more laborious,
than the most usual we took to obviate scruples) I put into the well-melted
Metal with my own hand the little parcel of Powder lately mentioned, and
continuing the Vessel in the fire for about a quarter of an hour, that the
Powder might have time to defuse it self every way into the Metal, we poured
out the well-melted Gold into another Crucible that I had brought with me, and
that had been gradually heated before, to prevent cracking. But though from the
first fusion of the Metal, to the pouring out, it had turned in the Crucible
like ordinary Gold, save that once my Assistant told me he saw that for two or
three moments it looked almost like an Opale; yet I was somewhat surpised to
find when the matter was grown cold, that though it appeared upon the Balance
that we had not lost any thing of the weight we put in, yet in stead of fine
Gold, we had a lump of Metal of a dirty color, and as it were overcast with a
thin coat, almost like half vitrified Litharge; and somewhat to increase the
wonder, we perceived that there stuck to one side of the Crucible a little
Globule of Metal that looked not at all yellowish, but like course Silver, and
the bottom of the Crucible was overlaid with a vitrified substance, whereof one
part was of a transparent yellow, and the other of a deep brown, inclining to
red; and in this vitrified substance I could plainly perceive sticking at least
five or six little Globules that looked more like impure Silver than pure Gold.
In short, this stuff look so little like refined, or so much as ordinary, Gold,
that though my Friend did much more than I marvel at this change, yet I confess
I was surpised at it my self. For though in some particulars it answered what
I looked for, yet in others, it was very differing from that which the Donor of
the Powder had, as I thought, given me ground to expect. Whether the cause of
my disappointment were that (as I formerly intimated) this Virtuoso's haste or
design made him leave me in the dark; or whether it were that finding my self
in want of sufficient directions, I happily pitched upon such a proportion of
Materials, and way of operating, as were proper to make a new Discovery, which
the excellent Giver of the Powder had not Designed, or perhaps thought of.

I shall not at all wonder, says Cratippus, either at your Friends amazement,
or at your surprise, if your further trials did in any measure confirm what the
superficial change that appeared in your Metal could not but incline you to
conjecture.

You will best judge of that (replies Pyrophilus) by the account I was going to
give you of what we did with our odd Metal. And First, having rubbed it upon a
good Touchstone, whereon we had likewise rubbed a piece of Coined Silver, and a
piece of Coined Gold, we manifestly found that the mark left upon the Stone by
our Mass between the marks of the two other Metals, was notoriously more like
the Touch of the Silver than to that of the Gold. Next, having knocked our
little lump with a Hammer, it was, (according to my prediction) found brittle,
and flew into several pieces. Thirdly, (which is more) even the insides of
those pieces looked of a base dirty color, like that of Brass or worse, for the
fragments had a far greater resemblance to Bell-Metal, than either to Gold or
to Silver. To which we added this fourth, and more considerable, Examen; that
having carefully weighed out one dram of our stuff, (reserving the rest for
trials to be suggested by second thoughts) and put it upon an excellent now and
well-neal'd Cupel, with about half a dozen times its weight of Lead, we found,
somewhat to our wonder, that though it turned very well like good Gold, yet it
continued in the fire above an hour and an half, (which was twice as long as we
expected) and yet almost to the very last the fumes copiously ascended, which
sufficiently argued the operation to have been well carried on; and when at
last it was quite ended, we found the Cupel very smooth and entire, but tinged
with a fine Purplish Red, (which did somewhat surprise us) and besides, the
refined Gold, there lay upon the cavity of the Cupel some dark-colored
recrements, which we concluded to have proceeded from the deteriorated Metal,
not from the Lead. But when we came to put our Gold again into the Balance, we
found it to weigh only about fifty three Grains, and consequently to have lost
seven; which yet we found to be fully made up by that little quantity of
recrements that I have lately mentioned, whose Weight and Fixity, compared with
their unpromising Color, did not a little puzzle us, especially because we had
not enough either of Them, or of leisure, to examine their nature. To all which
circumstances, I shall subjoin this, that to prevent any scruples that might
arise touching the Gold we employed, I caused a dram and a half that had been
purposely reserved out of the same portion with that that had been debased; I
caused this (I say) to be in my Assistants presence melted by it self, and
found it (as I doubted not but I should do) fine and well-colored Gold.

I hope you will pardon my curiosity, says Arristander to the Gentleman that
spoke last, if I ask why you take no notice of the effect of Aqua fortis upon
your imbased Metal? Your Question, replies Pyrophilus, I confess to be very
reasonable, and I am somewhat troubled that I can answer it but by telling you
that we had not at hand any Aqua fortis we durst rely on; which yet I was the
less troubled at, because heretofore some trials purposely made had informed
me, that in some Metalline Mixtures the Gold if it were much predominant in
quantity, may protect another Metal; (for instance Silver) from being dissolved
by that Menstruum, though not from being at all invaded by it.

There yet remained, says Heliodorus, one examen more of your odd Metal, which
would have satisfied me, at least as much as any of the rest, of its having
been notably imbas'd: for if it were altered in its specific gravity, that
quality I have always observed (as I lately perceived you also have done) to
stick so close to Gold, that it could not by an additament so inconsiderable in
point of bulk, be considerably altered without a notable and almost Essential
change in the texture of the Metal.

To this pertinent discourse, Pyrophilus, with the respect due to a person that
so worthily sustained the dignity he had of presiding in that choice company,
made this return: I owe you, Sir, my humble thanks for calling upon me to give
you an account I might have forgotten, and which is yet of so important a
thing, that none of the other Phenomenon of our Experiment seemed to me to
deserve so much notice. Wherefore I shall now inform you, that having provided
my self of all the requisites to make Hydrostatical Trials, (to which perhaps I
am not altogether a stranger) I carefully weighed in water the ill-lookt Mass,
(before it was divided for the coupelling of the abovementioned dram) and
found, to the great confirmation of my former wonder and conjectures, that in
stead of weighing about nineteen times as much as a bulk of water, equal to it,
its proportion to that liquor was but that of fifteen, and about two thirds to
one: so that its specific gravity was less by about 31/^3 than if it had been
pure Gold it would have been.

At the recital of this notable circumstance, superadded to the rest, the
generality of the Company, and the President too, by looking and smiling upon
one another, expressed themselves to be as well delighted as surpised; and
after the murmuring occasioned by the various whispers that passed amongst
them, was a little over, Heliodorus addressed himself to Pyrophilus, and told
him, I need not, and therefore shall not, stay for an express order from the
Company to give you their hearty thanks: for as the Obliging Stranger did very
much gratify you by the Present of his Wonderful Powder, so you have not a
little gratified us by so candid and particular a Narrative of the effects of
it; and I hope (continues he) that if you have not yet otherwise disposed of
that part of your deteriorated Gold that you did not cupel, you will sometime
or other favor us with a sight of it.

I join in this request, said Crattippus, as soon as he perceived the President
had done speaking, and to facilitate the grant of it, I shall not scruple to
tell Pyrophilus he may be confident that the Degradation of his Gold will not
depreciate it amongst Us: since if it be allowable for Opinion to stamp such a
value upon Old Coyns and Medals, that in the Judgment of good Antiquaries, a
rusty piece of Brass or Copper, with a half defaced Image or Inscription on it,
is to be highlier valued than as big a piece of well-stampt Gold; I see not why
it should not be lawful for Philosophers to prize such a lump of depraved Gold
as yours, before the finest Gold the Chemists or Mintmasters are wont to afford
us. And though I freely grant that some old Copper Medals are of good use in
History, to keep alive by their Inscriptions the memory of the taking of a
Town, or the winning of a Battle; though these be but things that almost every
day are some where or other done, yet I think Pyrophilus's imbas'd Metal is
much to be preferred, as not only preserving the memory, but being an effect of
such a Victory of Art over Nature, and the conquering of such generally
believed insuperable difficulties, as no Story that I know of gives us an
example of.

As soon as ever Crattippus had made a pawse, Pyrophilus to prevent
complimental discourse, did in few words tell the President, That his part had
been but that of a Relator of matter of Fact, and that therefore he could
deserve but little thanks and no praise at all; though a good measure of both
of them were due to the Obliging Virtuoso that had given him the Powder; and in
that, the opportunity of complying with his duty, and his inclination, to serve
that learned Company.

These Gentlemen (says Arristander) are not persons among whom modesty is
either restrained from expressing it self, or construed according to the
Letter; and therefore whatever you have been pleased to say, the Company cannot
but think its self much obliged to you; and I know the obligation would be much
increased, if you would favor us with your reflections upon the extraordinary
Experiment you have been pleased to relate to us.

If, replies Pyrophilus, I had had wherewithal to repeat the Experiment, and
vary it according to the hints afforded me by the first trial, I should be less
unfit to comply with Arristander's motion: but the Phenomenon are too new and
too difficult for me to attempt to unriddle them by the help of so slender an
information as a person so little sagacious as I could get by a single trial;
and though I will not deny that I have had some ^aving thoughts about this
puzzling subject, yet I hope I shall easily be pardoned, if I decline to
present crude and immature thoughts to a Company that so well deserves the most
ripe ones, and can so skilfully discover those that are not so.

I confess, says Heliodorus, that I think Pyrophilus's wariness deserves not
only to be allowed, but imitated; and therefore by my consent the further
discourse of so abstruse a subject, shall be deferred till we shall have had
time to consider seriously of Phenomenon that will be sure to employ our most
speculative thoughts, and I fear to pose them too: only we must not forget that
Pyrophilus himself ought to be not barely allowed, but invited to draw before
we rise, what Corrollaries he thinks fit to propose from what he has already
delivered.

The inference, says Pyrophilus, I meant to make, will not detain you long;
having for the main been already intimated in what you may remember I told you
I designed in the mention I was about to make of the now-recited Experiment.
For without launching into difficult Speculations, or making use of disputable
Hypotheses, it seems evident enough from the matter of Fact faithfully laid
before you, that an Operation very near, if not altogether as strange as that
which is called Projection, and in the difficultest points much of the same
nature with it, may safely be admitted. For our Experiment plainly shows that
Gold, though confessedly the most homogeneous, and the least mutable of Metals,
may be in a very short time (perhaps not amounting to many minutes) exceedingly
changed, both as to malleableness, color, homogeniety, and (which is more)
specific gravity; and all this by so very inconsiderable a proportion of
injected Powder, that since the Gold that was wrought on weighed two of our
English drams, and consequently an hundred and twenty grains, an easy
computation will assure us that the Medicine did thus powerfully act, according
to my estimate, (which was the modestest) upon near a thousand times, (for
'twas above nine hundred and fifty times) its weight of Gold, and according to
my Assistants estimate, did (as they speak) go on upon twelve hundred; so that
if it were fit to apply to this Anti-Elixir, (as I formerly ventured to call
it) what is said of the true Elixir by diverse of the Chemical Philosophers, who
will have the virtue of their Stone increased in such a proportion, as that at
first 'twill transmute but ten times its weight; after the next rotation an
hundred times, and after the next to that a thousand times, our Powder may in
their language be styled a Medicine of the third order.

The Computation, says Arristander, is very obvious, but the change of so
great a proportion of Metal is so wonderful and unexampled, that I hope we
shall among other things learn from it this lesson, That we ought not to be so
forward as many men otherwise of great parts are wont to be, in prescribing
narrow limits to the power of Nature and Art, and in condemning and deriding
all those that pretend to, or believe, uncommon things in Chemistry, as either
(heats or Credulous. And therefore I hope, that though (at least in my opinion)
it be very allowable to call Fables, Fables, and to detect and expose the
Impostures or Deceits of ignorant or vainglorious Pretenders to Chemical
Mysteries, yet we shall not by too hasty and general censures of the sober and
diligent Indigators of the Arcana of Chemistry, blemish (as much as in us lies)
that excellent Art it self, and thereby disoblige the genuine Sons of it, and
divert those that are indeed Possessors of Noble Secrets, from vouchsafing to
gratify our Curiosity, as we see that one of them did Pyrophilus's, with the
sight at least, of some of their highly Instructive Rarities.

I wholly approve, says Heliodorus rising from his seat, the discreet and
seasonable motion made by Arristander.

And I presume, subjoins Pyrophilus, that it will not be the less liked, if I
add, That I will allow the Company to believe that as extraordinary, as I
perceive most of you think the Phenomenon of the lately recited Experiment; yet
I have not (because I must not do it) as yet acquainted you with the Strangest
effect of our Admirable Powder.


