A DEFENSE Of the Doctrine touching the Spring and Weight Of the AIR, Proposed
by Mr. R. BOIL in his New Physico-Mechanical Experiments; Against the
Objections of FRANCISCVS LINVS.

Wherewith the Objector's FUNICULAR HYPOTHESIS is also examined.

By the Author of those Experiments.

LONDON: Printed by J. G. for Thomas Robinson Bookseller in Oxon, 1662.

The Publisher to the Reader.
Friendly Reader,
YOu may possibly in this Volume have expected the Appendix which the Author
heretofore promised, and has intended shall contain some additional Experiments
to those which were formerly published, and are here now reprinted in this
Second Edition. These following Answers to Franciscus Linus and Mr. Hobbes are
presented in compensation of the delay, and for your forbearance of that
Appendix, which ere long you may expect in kind. For the Author having hinted
the Promise seems thereby to acknowledge the Debt, and to be content to
continue the Obligation to see it performed. And these ought the rather to be
his excuse, because the writing these Answers, and publishing the Skeptical
Chemist, and some other Discourses, have been the principal hindrances to that
Piece; which is really so near a readiness, that part of it has lain at the
Press these six Months: But yet it being not all perfected, the Stationer was
loath to delay any longer the Publication of these, for which he has been so
frequently called upon. And they (though a Latin Edition is intended) appear
now the rather in English, that they may accompany the Second Edition of the
Original Experiments, which were printed first in that Language in Octavo; and
that instead of the promised Appendix they may complete the bulk of the Quarto
Volume.

As for that part of this Piece that concerns Mr. Hobbes, it might have been
larger: but the information that the Author had that the learned Dr. Wallis was
writing against some passages in Mr. Hobbes his Dialogues (as well that
concerning the Air as the rest) was the occasion why his H. would make no
animadversion on some passages therein, and thought it not fit to enlarge upon
others. And for the Errata of the Press I hope they will not be many: however
the Author as to these is to be excused, who never (in regard to his Eyes and
Impediments on other occasions) gives himself the trouble of Corrections and
Revises; neither could the Publisher much attend the Press, it being printed in
a distant place from his usual abode. If, as I wish, you shall find this
jealousy of mine to have been causless, you will have reason to give the Piece
that is so kindly offered, and leads you such rare and untrodden paths in the
best way of Natural Philosophy, the fairer entertainment and acceptance.
Farewell.

To. Sh.

THE AVTHOR's PREFACE AND DECLARATION.
THey that know how indisposed I naturally am to Contentiousness, will, I
presume, wonder to see me publicly engaged in two Controversies at once. But
that I am still as averse as ever from entering into Disputes that may
handsomely be declined, the way wherein I have managed the following
Controversies will, I hope, evince. And the Inducements I now have to appear in
public are such, that it would be hard for me to resist the being prevailed on
by them.

For, in the first place, I was (by Name, as it were) challenged by a person,
who undertook to disprove not one or two of my Conjectures, but as much of the
whole Body of my Treatise as concerned the Spring of the Air, which most of my
Explications suppose. And this being done by a Learned Man, who writes very
confidently of the goodness of his Hypothesis and Arguments, and his Book being
soon after followed by another written by Mr. Hobbs, a man of Name in the
World; there seemed to be some danger that so early an Opposition might oppress
the Doctrine I had proposed, before it was well understood and duly pondered.
Wherefore I feared I might be wanting to the Truth and my self, if I should at
such a time be altogether silent; especially since I might probably divert many
who would otherwise be forward to appear against us, by letting them see how
defensible our Doctrine is even against such Adversaries as hose I have replied
to. And this course I the rather chose, that in case I should henceforward
comply with those who would have me forbear to write any further of these
Controversies, it might not be presently inferred from my silence, that a good
Cause cannot enable a Pen no better then mine to defend it.

But I scarce doubt but that intelligent Readers, especially those that are
imbued with the Principles of the Corpuscularian Philosophy, will be much more
apt to think that I had reason to write the following Discourses, then to think
that I had any to make them so prolix: And especially ingenious men, that are
accustomed to admit nothing that either is not intelligible, or is precarious,
will think diverse of the Objections I reply to needed no Answers, or at least
no solemn ones. But to these I have four things to represent.

And First, That which not a little swells the bulk of the following Treatises,
is the inserting those passages of my Adversaries that I examine in their own
words: which being a Practice that I expect from any that shall think fit to
animadvert upon any Opinion or Argument of mine; I thought it but equitable to
do what I desired to have done to me, though oftentimes I could not do it in a
little room.

Next, I was the more willing to prosecute some of Franciscus Linus his
Objections, because the fear of being reduced to grant a Vacuum has so
prevailed with many eminent persons bred up in the received Philosophy of the
Schools, that though they disagree both with him and among themselves about the
particular manner of solving the Phenomenon of the Torricellian Experiment; yet
they agree in ascribing them to some extremely-rarefi'd substance that fills up
the space deserted by the Quicksilver. So that this Opinion, as to the main,
being approved by many eminent Schoalrs, especially of that most learned Order
of the Jesuits, (to whom perhaps its Congruity to some Articles of their
Religion chiefly recommends it) I was willing to pay them that respect, as not
to dissent from persons, diverse of whom for their eminence in Mathematics and
other Learning I much esteem, without showing that I do it not but upon
Considerations that I think weighty.

Thirdly, though the Examiners Hypothesis have but few, and not very
considerable, Arguments to countenance it; yet his Objections against our
Doctrine (the Reply to which takes up the first Part of the following Treatise)
are such, as though they may be solidly answered by any that thoroughly
understands our Hypothesis, yet they may chance puzzle such Readers as do not,
and these possiblywill prove more then a few.

And, Lastly, because that sometimes when the Argument objected did not perhaps
deserve to be much insisted on, the Argument treated of deserved to be
considered; I thought it not amiss to make use now and then of some such
opportunities to illustrate the matter it self under consideration: Which I the
rather did for these two Reasons;

First, because I find that, except by some able Mathematicians and very few
other contemplative men, the Doctrine of the Spring of the Air, at least as I
have proposed it, is not yet sufficiently apprehended, (and therefore needs to
be inclucated.) Insomuch that through a great part of some late Discourses of
men otherwise eminently learned, (written against other Elaterists, not me)
there seems to run so great and clear a mistake, perhaps for want of skill in
the Hydrostaticks, that I can scarce impute it to any thing, but to their not
thoroughly understanding the Hypothesis they would confute.

And, next, because I was willing to lay down in my Answer to the Objections I
examined, the grounds of answering such other Arguments as may be built upon
the same or the like Principles. And perhaps I may truly enough say, that in
the following Treatise I have already in effect answered several Discourses,
written some before and some since mine, by learned men, about the Torricellian
and other new Experiments relating to a Vacuum, though I forbore to mention the
names or words of the Authors, because I found not that my Writings or
Experiments were as yet known to them. To these things I may add, that I
thought the Discourses of Linus the fitter to be insisted on, because he seems
to have more diligently then some others, (who yet venture to dispute against
it) enquired into our Doctrine. And I shall not scruple to say thus much of an
Adversary, (and one to whom I gave no provocation to be so) that though I dare
not speak in general of those that have written either about the Weight of the
Air, or else For or Against a Vacuum, because (as I acknowledge in the first
Chapter following) I cannot yet procure the Books of diverse learned men,
especially of those great Personages, Robervall, Balianus and Casatus; yet
among the Writers I have hitherto met with, who have recourse to the
Aristotelean Rarefaction and Condensation in the Controversies under debate,
scarce any seems to have contrived his Hypothesis better then our Linus. Not
that I think his Principle is either true, or (at least to such as I)
intelligible; but that the Funiculus he assumes being allowed him, he may, for
a Reason to be touched a little below, make out, though not all the Phenomenon
of my Experiments, yet many more of them then most other Plenists, that deny
the Spring of the Air, can deduce from their Hypotheses if granted. And in
regard that, whereas we ascribe to the Air a Motion of Restitution outward, he
attributes to it the like Motion inwards, it cannot but happen that, though the
Principles cannot both be true, yet many of the Phenomenon may be explicable by
which of them soever is granted: because of this, I say, it is not so easy as
many ingenious Readers may be apt to think, to draw pertinent Objections from
Experience against the Adversary I have to deal with. Which Irepresent, lest,
as some may think I have employed more Arguments then I needed, so others
should think I have omitted many; as indeed I have omitted some, that I might
pertinently have employed.

But there is another sort of Persons besides those I mentioned at the
beginning of this Preface, to whom I must address the remaining part of it;
namely, to those who seem troubled, that I suffer my self to be diverted either
by Linus or Mr. Hobbs from perfecting those Experimental About the History of
Flame, of Heat, of Colors, of the Origin of Qualities and Forms, etc.
Treatises that are lying by me, almost promised by the learned Publisher of
the Latin Edition of my Essays; and from prosecuting those ways of enquiry
into the Nature of things, wherein they are pleased to think I may be more
serviceable to real Learning and the Lovers of it. And I confess that these
Men's Reasons and Persuasions have so far prevailed with me, that after what I
have done in the two following Treatises, to Vindicate my Writings from the
Objections made against them by two Learned men of very differing Hypotheses,
and thereby to show in some measure that I am not altogether unacquainted with
the way of defending opposed Truths, I have laid aside the thoughts of writing
any more distinct or entire Polemicall Treatises about the Subjects already
disputed of. And to this I am invited by several other Reasons (besides what I
have newly intimated.)

For first, as I elsewhere declare, it was not my chief Design to establish
Theories and Principles, but to devise Experiments, and to enrich the History
of Nature with Observations faithfully made and delivered; that by these, and
the like Contributions made by others, men may in time be furnished with a
sufficient stock of Experiments to ground Hypotheses and Theorys on. And though
in my Physico-Mechanicall Epistle and my Specimens I have ventured some
Conjectures also at the Causes of the Phenomenon I relate, lest the Discourse
should appear to inquisitive Readers too jejune; yet (as I formerly said) I
proposed my Thoughts but as Conjectures designed (though not only, yet chiefly)
to excite the Curiosity of the Ingenious, and afford some hints and assistance
to the Disquisitions of the Speculative. And accordingly I have not forborne to
mention diverse things, which judicious Readers may easily perceive I foresaw
that many, would think unfavourable to the Opinions I inclined to. So that for
me to leave Experimental for Controversial Studies, were a course unsuitable to
the principal scope of my Writings.

Next, though I have adventured to improve the Doctrine of the Spring and
Weight of the Air by some Supplements where I found it deficient, and to
recommend it by some new Illustrations and Arguments deduced from my
Experiments: yet the Hypotheses themselves (for the main) being the Opinions
also of far learneder Men then I, it might be thought injurious both to them
and to our common Cause, if I should needlessly go about to hinder them from the
Honor of Vindicating the Truths we agree in; especially, some of them being
Excellent Mathematicians, and others Eminent Naturalists, whose Concern to
maintain the Hypotheses against Objections, if any shall arise, is equal to
mine, and whose leisure and abilities far exceed those of a Person who both is
sickly, and has other employments enough, and who (if he were far better
skilled in Geometry then he pretends to be) has such a weakness in his Eyes, as
makes him both unwilling and unfit to engage in any Study where the conversing
with Mathematical Schemes is necessary.

Thirdly, nor do I see much cause to doubt that the things I have delivered
will notwithstanding my silence be left undefended: The forwardness I have
already observed in diverse Virtuosi to Vindicate those Writings, which they are
pleased to say have convinced them, and to save me the labor of penning the
following Treatises, scarce permitting me such an Apprehension. Especially
since there are some things that will much facilitate their Task, if not keep
men from putting them upon it. For though Mr. Hobbs and Linus have examined my
Writings upon Principles wherein they differ as much from each other as from
me; yet neither have they seen cause to deny any thing that I deliver as
Experiment, nor have their Objections been considerable, whether as to Number
or to Weight, against the Applications I have made of my Principles to solve
the Phenomenon. So that usually without objecting any Incongruity to my
particular Explications, they are fain to fall upon the Hypotheses themselves:
in whose Defense I think I may with the more Reason expect to be seconded,
because not only I have endeavored, as I formerly noted, to lay the grounds of
answering such Objections as I foresaw might arise; but I have also, to prevent
or ease their labor, written the two first Parts of my Defense against Linus,
without being obliged to do so for the Vindicating of my Explications, which
are particularly maintained in the third Part.

I know not whether I may venture to add on this Occasion, That those who have
taken notice of the usefulness of Experiments to true Philosophy, and have
observed that nevertheless the Difficulty, Trouble, and Charge of making them
is such, that even in this Learned Age of ours there are very few Bacon's or
Mersennus's to be met with, and those who have either made themselves, or at
least seen others make Experiments, even such as those I have published, with
the care I am wont to think my self obliged to employ on such Occasions; will
perhaps not only believe that they cost me far more time and pains then they
that have not made or seen such trials are apt to imagine, but will possibly
think it enough for a Person that is not by Profession a Scholar, to make them
carefully, and set them down faithfully, and will allow him to let others
Vindicate the Truths he may have the good fortune to discover, especially, when
there are so many fitter for it then he, who have (as well as his Adversaries)
more leisure to write Disputations then opportunity to prosecute Experiments;
the latter of which to be performed as it ought to be, does in many cases,
besides some Dexterity scarce to be gained but by Practice, require sometimes
more Diligence, and oftentimes too more Cost, then most are willing, or then
many are able, to bestow upon them.

To be short, though if any thing very worthy to be taken notice of by me be
suggested against any of my chief Opinions or Explications, I may either take
an occasion to say somewhat to it elsewhere, or at least have an opportunity to
consider it in a Review, wherein I may alter, mend, supply, vindicate or
retract diverse Passages of my other Writings: yet I would not have it expected
that I should exchange a Book with every one that is at leisure to write one
against a Vacuum, or about the Air. Which Declaration I make, not that I think
it will or ought to hinder any man from making use of his liberty to express a
dissent, if he sees cause; but for these two Reasons.

The one, That my silence might not injure either the Truth or my self, by
tempting men to think, that whatever I do not answer, I cannot; but might give
unbiased and judicious Readers a Caution to allow as little of Advantage to
the Writings of my adversaries upon the account of their being unanswered by
me, as if I were no longer in the World. And the other, That I may not hinder
those who would reply to such Adversaries, by leaveing them an apprehension
that either I may prevent them, or they me. To conclude, I see no cause to
despair, that whether or no my Writings be protected, the Truths they hold
forth will in time in spite of opposition establish themselves in the Minds of
men, as the Circulation of the Blood, and other formerly much contested Truths
have already done. My Humor has naturally made me too careful not to offend
those I dissent from, to make it necessary for any man to be my Adversary upon
the account of Personal Injuries or Provocations. And as for any whom either
Judgment or Envy may invite to contend, that the things I have communicated to
the World deserved not so much Applause as they have had the luck to be
entertained with; that shall make no Quarrel betwixt us: For perhaps I am my
self as much of that mind as he; and however I shall not scruple to prosess my
self one of those who is more desirous to spend his time usefully, then to have
the Glory of leaving nothing that was ever written against him unanswered; and
who is more sollicitous to pursue the ways of discovering Truth, then to have
it thought that he never was so much subject to Humane Frailties as to miss it.

A DEFENSE Of Mr. R. BOYLE's EXPLICATIONS of his Physico-mechanical
EXPERIMENTS, against FRANCISCUS LINUS.
The I. Part.
Wherein the Adversaries Objections against the Elaterists are examined.

CHAP. I.
A Newly published Treatise, De Corporum inseparabilitate, being brought to my
Hands, I find several Chapters of it employed to oppose the Explications I
ventured to give of some of my new Experiments touching the Spring of the Air.
Wherefore though I am very little delighted to be engaged in Controversies, and
though I be not at present without Employments enough (of a private, and of a
public Nature) to make it unseasonable for me, to be by a Work of this sort
diverted from them; yet for the Reasons specified in the Preface, I hold it not
amiss to examine briefly what is objected against the thing I have delivered:
and the rather, partly, because the Learned Author, whoever he be (for it is the
Title Page of his Book that first acquainted me with the name of Franciscus
Linus) having forborne provoking Language in his Objections, allows me in
answering them to comply with my Inclinations and Custom of exercising
Civility, even where I most dissent in point of Judgment. Besides, the Author
himself has somewhat facilitated my Reply to him, by directing me in the ninth
Page to some Books and Passages that I had not, when I published my Epistle,
either seen or taken notice of. As indeed there are besides some of these
several other Discourses that treat of the Torrecellian Experiments, which
though by the names of their Authors I guess to be learnedly written, I have
not to this day had opportunity to peruse, my stay in the remoter parts of
Ireland (whither Philosophical Books were not, in that time of public
Confusion, brought) having kept me from hearing of diverse of them, till they
were all bought up. Which I here mention, to excuse my self if I have not taken
notice of some things or passages to be met with in these Writings, which their
Learned Authors or Inquisitive Readers might justly perhaps expect I should
take some notice of, in case those Writings had fallen into my hands. But to
digress no further.

It Is true indeed, and it somewhat troubles me that it is so, that I can scarce
promise my self to make my Adversary a Proselyte, since he without scruple
assumes those very things as Principles, that to me seem almost as great
Inconveniences as I would desire to show any Opinion I dislike, to be liable
unto. But since whatever Operation the following Discourse may have upon the
Person that occasioned it, I hope it may bring some satisfaction to those
Philosophers who can as little as I understand the Aristotelean Rarefaction,
and who will as well as I be backward to admit what they cannot understand; it
shall suffice me to defend the Truths I have delivered, if I cannot be so happy
as to convince my acute Adversary of them; and I shall not believe my labor
lost, if this Discourse can contribute to the Establishment of some Notions in
Philosophy that I think not inconsiderable, in the minds of those whose clear
Principles make me the most respect their Judgments, and for whose sakes I
principally write.

Now though I be not in strictness obliged to defend any more then such of my
own Explications as the Examiner has thought fit to question, and those
Particulars which I have added by way of Improvement to the two Hypotheses of
the Spring and Weight of the Air: yet that I may the more effectually prosecute
what I lately intimated I aim at in this Writing, and may as well illustrate my
Doctrine as defend it, I shall divide the ensuing Treatise into three Parts;
whereof the first is designed to answer my Adversaries Objections against our
Principles; the second shall examine the Funicular Hypothesis he would
substitute in their stead; and the third shall contain particular Replies to
what he alleges against some of my particular Explications.

CHAP. II.
ALthough our Author confesses in his second Chapter, that the Air has a Spring
as well as a Weight, yet he resolutely denies that Spring to be near great
enough to perform those things which his Adversaries (whom for brevities sake
we will venture to call Elaterists) ascribe to it. And his whole fourth
Chapter, as the Title declares, is employed to prove that the Spring of the Air
is unable in a close place to keep the Mercury suspended in the Torrecellian
Experiment. The proof of this Assertion he says is easy: But alleges two or
three Arguments for it, which I think will be more easily answered then his
Assertion evinced.

In the First he says that those Experiments concerning the Adhesion of ones
finger, etc. which he had mentioned in the foregoing Chapter, eodem modo se
habent in loco clauso ac in aperto. But the answering of this we shall suspend
till anon; partly, because it may then be more conveniently examined, and
partly, because our Author seems not to build much upon it, his chief Argument
being that which he proposes in these words, Cum tota vis hujus Elaterii
pendeat a refutato jam aeris aequipondio cum digitis 29 argenti vivi, ita ut
nec plus, nec Page 20.
minus faciat hoc elaterium in loco occluso, quam fit per illud aequipondium in
loco aperto; manifestum est, cum jam ostensum sit fictitium plane esse
hujusmodi aequipondium, fictitium quoque esse tale elaterium. Wherefore since
all the validity of his Objection against the Spring of the Air depends upon
his former Chapter, wherein he thinks he has disproved the Weight of the Air;
it will behove us to look back into the former Chapter, and examine the four
Arguments which he there proposes. But I must crave leave to vary from his
method, and consider the third in the first place, because the removal of that
Objection will facilitate and shorten the answer to the rest. His Third
Argument therefore is thus set down. Nam si Tubus viginti tantum digitorum (quo
usi sumus in primo Argumento) non Page 16.
totus impleatur argento, ut prius, sed spatium aliquod inter digitum
superiorem and argentum relinquatur in quo fit solus aer; videbimus substracto
inferiore digito superiorem non solum deorsum trahi; ut prius, sed etiam
argentum jam descendere, idque notabiliter, quantum nimirum extendi potest
exigua illa aeris particula a tali pondere descendente. Unde si loco illius
aeris ponatur aqua, aliusve liquor qui non tam facile extenditur, descensus
nullus erit.

Hinc, inquam, contra hanc sententiam formatur argumentum: nam si externus ille
aer neque at velhos viginti digitos argenti a lapsu sustentare, uti jam
vidimus, quomodo quaeso sustentabit 29? Certe haec nullatenus reconciliari
possunt.

But to this Argument, which he thinks so irreconcilable with his Adversaries
Hypothesis, he has himself furnished them with an Answer in these words, Dices
forte ideo argentum in hoc casu descendere, quia deorsum truditur ab aere illo
sese per suum Elaterium dilatante. Which Answer I think sufficient for the
Objection, notwithstanding the two exceptions he takes at it.

For first, whereas he says, that sic deberet digitus potius a tubo repelli,
quam eidem affigi, cum non minus sursum quam deorsum fiat hujusmodi dilatatio:
He considers not, that though the endeavor of the included Air to expand it
self be at first every way alike, yet the expansion it self in our case must
necessarily be made downward, and not upward; because the Finger that stops the
Tube being exposed on the upper parts and the sides to the external Air, has
the whole Weight and pressure of the Atmosphere upon it; and consequently
cannot be thrust away but by a force capable to surmount that pressure: whereas
on the lower side of the Included Air there is the Weight of the whole
Mercurial Cylinder to assist the Spring of the Air, to surmount the Weight of
the Atmosphere that gravitates upon the restagnant Mercury. So that the Air
included and endeavoring to expand it self, finding no assistance to expand
it self upward, and a considerable one to expand it self downward, it is very
natural that it should expand it self that way whence it finds less
resistance. As accordingly it will happen, till the Spring of the Air be so far
debilitated by its Expansion, that its pressure, together with the weight of
the Mercury that remains suspended, will but counter-balance, not overcome, the
pressure of the outward Air upon the restagnant Mercury. And this Explication
may be confirmed by this trial that I have purposely made, namely, that if in
stead of Quicksilver you employ Water, and leave as before in the Tube an Inch
of Air, and then inverting it, open it under Water, you will perceive the
included Inch of Air not to dilate it self any thing near (for I need not here
define the Proportion) half so far as it did when the Tube was almost filled
with Mercury; because the Weight of so short a Cylinder of Water does but equal
that of between an Inch and an Inch and an half only of Quicksilver, and
consequently the inward Air is far less assisted to dilate it self and surmount
the pressure of the outward Air by the Cylinder of Water then by that of
Mercury. And as for what our Author says, that if instead of Air, Water or
some other Liquor be left at the top of the Tube, the Quicksilver will not
descend: the Elaterists can readily solve that Phenomenon, by saying that
Water has either no Spring at all, or but an exceeding weak one; and so scarce
presses but by its Weight, which in so short a Cylinder is inconsiderable. Now
the same solution we have given of our Examiners Objection, gives us also an
account why the Finger is so strongly fastened to the upper part of the Orifice
of the Tube it stops; for the included Air being so far dilated that an Inch,
for example, left at first in the upper Part of the Tube, reaches twice or
thrice as far as it did before the descent of the Quicksilver, its spring must
be proportionably weakened. And consequently that part of the Finger that is
within the Tube will have much less pressure against it from the dilated Air
within, then the upper part of the same Finger will have from the unrarefi'd
Air without. By which means the Pulp of the Finger will be thrust in (which our
Author is pleased to call sucked in) as we shall ere long have occasion to
declare in our Answer to his second Argument.

And having said thus much to our Authors first exception against the solution
he foresaw we would give of his third Argument; we have not much to say at
present to his second. For whereas he says, Concipi non posse quomodo aer ille
sic se dilatet, argentumque deorsum trudat, nisi occupando Page 17.
majorem locum: Quod tamen hi Autores quam maxim refugiunt, asserentes
rarefactionem non aliter fieri, quam per corpuscula aut vacuitates: I wish he
had more clearly expressed himself, since as his words are couched I cannot
easily guess what he means, and much less easily discern how they make an
Argument against his Adversaries. For, sure he thinks them not so absurd, as to
imagine that the Air can dilate it self, and thrust down the Mercury, without
in some sense taking up more room then it did before: For the very word
Dilatation, and the effect they ascribe to the included Air, clearly imply as
much; so that I see not why he should say that they are so averse from granting
the Air to take up more Place then before, especially since he takes notice in
the former Chapter, that we compare the Expansion of the Air to that of
compressed Wool; and since he here also annexes that we explicate Rarefaction
either by Corpuscles or Vacuities. But this later Clause makes me suspect his
meaning to be, that the Elaterists do not admit that the same Air may
adequately fill more of Place at one time then at another; which I believe to be
as true as that the self-same lock of compressed Wool has no more Hairs in it,
nor does adequately fill more Place with them, when it is permitted to expand
it self, then whilst it remained compressed. But against this way of
Rarefaction our Author here has not any Objection, unless it be intimated in
these words, Concipi non potest: Which if it be, I shall need only to mind him
in this place, that whereas many of the chiefest Philosophers, both of Ancient
and our own times, have professed they thought not the Aristotelean way of
Rarefaction conceivable; and he acknowledges (as we shall see anon) that it is
not clear; what the ablest of his Party (the modern Plenists) are wont to
object against the way of Rarefaction he dislikes, is, that it is not true, not
that it is not intelligible.

CHAP. III.
OUr Authors Second Objection (for so I reckon it) is thus proposed by him. Si
sumatur tubus utrinque apertus, sed longior, put a digitorum 40. Argentoque
impleatur, eique Page 15.
digitus superne applicetur ut prius, videbimus subtracto inferiore digito,
argentum quidem descendere usque ad consuetam suam stationem; Digitum autem
superiorem fortiter intra tubum trahi, eique firmissime, ut prius, adhaerere.
Ex quo rursum evidenter concluditur, argentum, in sua statione constitutum, non
ibidem sustentari ab externo aere, sed a funiculo quodam interno suspendi,
cujus superior extremitas, digito affixa, eum sic intra tubum trahit, eique
affigit. But this Argument being much of the same nature with that drawn from
his third Experiment, the Answer made to that and to his first may be easily
applied, and will be sufficient for this also; especially because in our
present case there is less Pressure against the Pulp of the Finger in the
inside of the Tube then in the third Experiment (where some air is included,
though much expanded and weakened;) the Pressure of the Atmosphere being in the
present case kept off from it by the subjacent Mercury, whereas there is
nothing of that Pressure abated against the other parts of the Finger that keep
it off from the deserted Cavity of the Tube, save only that from the Pulp that
is contiguous to the Tube, there may be somewhat of that Pressure taken off by
the Weight of the Glass it self. But as for that Part of the Finger which
immediately covers the hole, whether or no there be any Spring in its own
fibers, or other constituent substances, which finding no resistance in the
place deserted by the Quick silver, may contribute to its swelling (for that we
will not now examine) he that has duly considered the account already given of
this Intrusion of the Pulp into the Glass, will find no need of our Authors
internal Funiculus, which to some seems more difficult to conceive, then any of
the Phenomenon in Controversy is to be explained without it.

CHAP. IV.
BY what we have already said against our Examiners Third Argument, we may be
assisted to answer his First, though he propose it as a very clear
Demonstration; and though it be indeed the principal thing in his Book. Sumatur
(says he) tubus brevior digit is 29 puta digitorum 20. non tamen Page 12.
clausus altero extremo, (ut hactenus) sed utrinque apertus: Eic Tubus, immerso
ejus orificio Argento restagnanti, suppes^oque digito, n^effluat Argentum Tubo
infundendum, impleatur argento vivo: aliusque deinde digitus orificio quoque
applicetur, illudque been claudat. Quo facto, si subtrahatur inferior digitus,
sentietur superior vehementer trahi, ac sugi intra tubum, tamque pertinaciter
ei (vel argento potius, ut postea) adhaerere, ut ipsum tubum cum toto argento
incluso facile elevet teneatque in vase pendulum.

Ex quo sane experimento clarissime refellitur haec sententia: Cum enim, juxta
eam, Argentum in tubo hujusmodi 20. tantum digitorum, sursum trudatur a
praeponderante ante aere externo: nunquam profecto per eam explicabitur,
quomodo digitus ille sic trahatur deorsum, tuboque tam vehementer adhareat; non
enim a trudente sursum potest sic deorsum trahi.

Thus far our Authors objection, in answer whereunto I have diverse things to
represent, to show, that a good account may be given of this Experiment in the
Hypothesis of the Elaterists, which is sufficient to manifest how far the
argument is from being so unanswerable as the proposer of it would persuade his
Reader.

I deny then that the Finger is drawn downward, or made by suction to adhere to
the Tube; but I explicate that which he calls the suction of the Finger, as I
lately did in answer to his third Argument, as we shall more particularly see
anon.

He says indeed, that the Air which thrust up the Quicksilver cannot so
strongly draw down the Finger. As if the Air were not a fluid body, but a
single and entire pillar of some solid matter. But to shorten our reply to his
objections, the best way perhaps will be briefly to explicate the Phenomenon
thus:

When the Tube is filled with Quicksilver, the Finger that stops the upper
Orifice is almost equally pressed above and at the sides by the contiguous Air;
but when the lower Finger is removed, then the Cylinder of Mercury, which
before gravitated upon the Finger, comes to gravitate upon the restagnant
Mercury, and by its intervention to press against the outward Air: so that
against those parts of the Finger that are contiguous to the Air there is all
the wonted pressure of the outward Air; whereas against that pulp that is
contiguous to the Mercury there is not so much pressure as against the other
parts of the Finger by two thirds. I say by two thirds, or thereabout, because
the Mercurial Cylinder in this Experiment is supposed to be twenty Inches high;
and if it were but a little more then thirty Inches high, (which is a third
more) then the weight of the Quicksilver would take off not two thirds only,
but the whole pressure of the outward Air, from the abovementioned pulp of the
Finger. For in that case the Quicksilver would quite desert it, and settle
beneath it. Wherefore since it has appeared by our Answer to the Examiners
third Argument, That the pressure of the outward Air is taken off from the body
that remains in the upper part of the Tube, according to the weight of the
liquor suspended in the Tube; and since in our Hypothesis the pressure of the
outward Air is able to keep thirty Inches of Quicksilver, or two or three and
thirty foot of Water, suspended in a Tube; it need be no great wonder, if a
pressure of the ambient Air, equal to the weight of a Cylinder of Water of near
twenty two foot long, should be able to thrust in the pulp of the Finger at the
upper Orifice of the Tube, and make it stick closely enough to the lip of it.

I know the Examiner affirms, That no thrusting or pressure from without can
ever effect such an adhesion of the Finger to the Tube. But this should be as
well proved as said. But, first, though I am willing to think the Examiner
would not knowingly relate any thing he is not persuaded of; yet as far as I
and another person very well versed in these Experiments have purposely tried,
I could not find the Adhesion of the Finger to the Tube to be near so strong as
our Author has related. Secondly, if you carefully endeavor by pressure and
otherwise to thrust the pulp of your Finger into the Orifice of the Tube, you
may through the Glass perceive it to be manifestly tumid in the cavity of the
Pipe. And if by pressing your Finger against the Orifice of the Tube, you
should not make the pulp adhere quite so strongly to the Tube, nor swell quite
so much within it, as may happen in some Mercurial Experiments; it is to be
considered, that the Air being a fluid as well as a heavy body, it does not (as
grosser Weights would) press only against the upper part of the Finger, but
pressing as much of the finger as is exposed to it almost every where, and
almost uniformly, as well as strongly, it does by its lateral pressure on every
side thrust in the Pulp of the Finger into the hole where there is not any
resistance at all, or at least near so much pressure against the Pulp as that
of the ambient Air against the parts of the Finger contiguous to it.

By this it may appear that we need not borrow the Objection our Author offers
to lend us; namely, that in the Experiment under consideration the Quicksilver
is pressed downward by the Spring of some Air lurking betwixt it and the
Finger. (Though I am prone to think that unless the Experiment be made with a
great deal of care, such a thing may easily happen, and contribute to the
stronger Adhesion of the Finger to the Tube.) This I say may appear
notwithstanding what our Author Objects, that the Air expanding it self will
thrust away the Finger upwards, since the contrary of that pretense we have
lately manifested in the Answer to his Third Argument. And as for what he adds
to confirm his Argumentation in these Words, Quod vel inde confirmatur, Quia
cum praponderans ille aer succedat Page 14.
(uti asseritur) loco sublati inferioris digiti, id est, eodem modo nunc
sustentet Argentum quo ante ab applicato digito inferiore sustentabatur;
manifestum est, non debere, juxta hanc sententiam, magis deorsum trahi digitum
superiorem post sublata^ inferiorem quam ante. Cum it aque contrarium plane
doceat experientia, satis liquet sententiam illam esse falsam. We must consider
that the Tube being supposed perfectly full of Mercury, the Finger that stops
the lower Orifice is wont to be kept strongly pressed against it, lest any of
that ponderous Liquor should get out between the Tube and the Finger. So that
although both the lower Finger do indeed keep up the Mercury in the Tube, and
the pressure of the outward Air would do so too; yet there is this difference,
that the pressure of the Atmosphere depending upon its Weight, cannot be
intended and weakened as we please, as can that of the undermost Finger. And
therefore whereas the Atmospherical Cylinder will not keep up a Cylinder of
Quicksilver of above thirty Inches high, those that make the Torricellian
Experiment do often, upon one occasion or other, keep up with the, Finger a
Mercurial Cylinder of perhaps forty or fifty Inches or far more: so that
whereas in our Case, before the removal of the undermost Finger, the Pulp of
the uppermost must have about the same Pressure against it where it is
contiguous to the Mercury, as there is against the other part of the same
Finger; after the removal of the undermost Finger, there is as much of the
Atmospherical Pressure, if I may so speak, taken off from the newly-mention'd
Pulp as counter-balances a Cylinder of Quicksilver of twenty Inches long.

CHAP. V.
THe Examiners Fourth and last Experiment is thus proposed. Quarto denique
(says he) impugnatur: Quia ex eo sequeretur, Argentum vivum per similem Tubum
e vasculo exsugi posse eadem prorsus facilitate qua ex eodem exsugeretur Page 8.
aqua: quod tamen experientiae repugnat, qua docemur aquam in ^s sugentis
facillime attrahi; quo tamen Argentum vivum ne toto quidem adhibito conatu
perduci queat, imo vix ad Tubi medietatem.

Sequelam autem sic ostendo: Quia cum in hac sententia nihil aliud agendum sit
quam hoc, ut per Tubum sic ascendat subjectus Liquor, sive Aqua fuerit, sive
Argentum, nisi ut sugendo sursum trahatur aer Tubo inclus s, quo sic attracto
ascendit illico subjectus Liquor, protrusus nimirum ab externo aere jam
praeponderante (uti docet Pecquetius in Dissertatione Anatomica page 63.)
manifestum est, eadem plane facilitate exsugendum sic Argentum vivum qua
exsugitur Aqua: Quod quum Experientiae tam aperte repugnat, necesse est
sententiam ex qua sequitur falsam esse.

This Experiment I remember I made some years ago, accordingly it is alleged in
the Fourth Essay of the Treatise (I was then writing) to prove against the
Vulgar Opinion, that Liquors do not to prevent a Vacuum spontaneously ascend,
which I presume will be so far allowed of by our Author, who would have Liquors
supposed to be raised by Suction violently drawn up by the contraction of his
Funiculus. But to examine this Experiment, as it concerns the present
Controversy, we may recall to mind that we formerly showed in the Answer to our
Authors Third Argument, That when the Mercurial Cylinder that leans upon the
restagnant Mercury has at the other end of it Air, kept from any intercourse
with the Atmosphere, that included Air has so much of the Pressure of the
external Air taken off from it as counterpoises the Mercurial Cylinder. And the
Finger that is exposed to the whole Pressure of the ambient Air in some of its
Parts, and in others but to the much fainter Pressure of the included Air,
endures an unusual Pressure from the preponderating Power of the Atmosphere.

We may consider also that there is against the Thorax and those Muscles of the
Abdomen that are subservient to Respiration the Pressure of the whole ambient
Air. Which Pressure, notwithstanding the Muscles designed for the use of
Respiration, are able without any considerable resistance to dilate the Thorax
at pleasure; because, as fast as they open the Chest, and by dilating it weaken
the Spring of that Air which is then within the Body, the external Air by
flowing in, for want of finding the usual resistance there, keeps that within
the Thorax in an Aequilibrium of force with that without. These things
premised, it is not difficult in our Hypothesis to give an Answer to the
Examiners Experiment. For we say when a Cylinder of Mercury is raised in the
Tube to any considerable height, the Pressure of the Air in the Thorax is
lessened by the whole weight of that Mercurial Cylinder, and consequently the
Respiratory Muscles are thereby disabled to dilate the Chest as freely as they
were wont, by reason of the Prevalency of the undiminish'd Pressure of the
external Air against the weakened Pressure of the internal: But if in stead of
Mercury, you substitute Water, so short a Cylinder of that comparatively light
Liquor takes off so little of the Pressure of the included Air, that it comes
into the Lungs with almost its usual Strength, and consequently with almost as
much Force as the outward Air presses with against the Thorax.

And on this occasion there occurrs to my thoughts a noble Experiment of the
most Ingenious Monsieur Paschal, which clearly shows, that if we could free the
upper Part of such a Tube as we are now considering from the Pressure of all
internal Air, it would follow, as the Examiner says it should, that the
Quicksilver would by the Pressure of the outward Air be impelled up into the
Tube as well as Water, till it had attained a height great enough to make its
Weight not inferior but equal to that of the Atmosphere. The Experiment it
self being so pertinent and considerable, we shall annex it in the same words
wherein it is related by his Countryman and Acquaintance, the Learned and
Candid Gassendus. Neque hoc vero solum, sed insuper vitreo Diabete Clystereve
ea qua Gass. Phys. Sect. 1. Lib. 2. Page 204. De nupero Inanis Experimento.
par fuerit longitudine confecto, and post embolum ad orificium usque
compulsum, immisso ad normam in subjectum Hydrargyrum deprehendit, ubi embolum
sensim deinde educitur, consequi Hydrargyrum ascendereque ad eandem usque
duorum pedum and digitorum trium cum semisse altitudinem. To which he
immediately subjoynes a Circumstance very considerable to the present
Controversy in the following Clause. Ac ubi deinceps, adhibita licet non
majore vi, Embolum altius educitur, consistere Hydrargyrum, neque amplius
consequi, ac fieri interim Inane quod spatium intercipitur ab ipso ad Embolum
usque. Thus far he. So that as to the Examiners Experiment, we may well
explicate it in our Hypothesis, by saying, that agreeably to it it happens,
that in a more forcible Respiration the Mercurial Cylinder is raised higher
then in a more languid; because, in the former Case, the Chest being more
dilated, the included Air is also more expanded; whereby its debilitated Spring
cannot as before enable the Mercurial Cylinder to counterpoise altogether the
Pressure of the ambient Air. And that the Reason why the Quicksilver is not by
Respiration raised as high as it is kept suspended in the Torricellian
Experiment, is not, that the Pressure of the outward Air is unable to raise it
so high, but because, as we have already declared, the free Dilatation of the
Thorax is opposed by the Pressure of the ambient Air; which Pressure being
against so great a Superficies, and being but imperfectly resisted by the
debilitated Pressure of the Air within the Thorax, will be easily imagined to
be very considerable by him who considers that in our Engine, the Pressure of
the external Air against the Sucker of less then three Inches Diameter was, as
we relate in the 33. Experiment, able to thrust up a Weight of above a hundred
pound. And here we may observe upon the By in Confirmation of our former
Doctrine, that when we strongly suck up Quicksilver in a Glass Tube, though the
Elevation of the Quicksilver be according to our Author performed likewise by
his Funiculus contracting it self every way, and though there be a
Communication betwixt the internal Surface of the Lungs, and the Cavity of the
Tube; yet we feel not in our Lungs any endeavor of the shrinking Funiculus to
tear off that Membrane they are lined with.

And thus we have examined our Authors four Arguments, to prove that in the
Torricellian Experiment the Quicksilver cannot be kept suspended by the
counterpoise of the external Air: Against which Opinion he tells us indeed,
that other Arguments might be alleged, but as it is not probable that if he
had thought them better then those he has Page 19.
elected to insist on, he would have omitted them; so it is not unlikely that
Answers might be as well found for them as for the others; especially since
that which he singles out for a Specimen is, that from his Adversaries
Hypothesis it would follow, that the Quicksilver would descend much more (I
suppose it is a mistake of the Press, for much less) in cold Weather then in
hot, because the Air is then thicker and heavier, and therefore ought to impel
up the Quicksilver higher. For besides that we shall in its due place question
the validity of our Authors Consequence; it will be here sufficient to Reply,
that the Observation on which he grounds it does not constantly hold, as his
Objection supposes: which may appear by that part of our 18. Experiment whence
the matter of Fact is desum'd, as we shall have occasion-to take further notice
of when we shall come to the Defense of that Experiment. So that what has been
hitherto Discoursed on both sides being duly considered, the Reader is left to
judge what ground the Examiner had for the (...) wherewith he is pleased to
conclude his Third Chapter, Maneat igitur tot Argumentis comprobatum, quorum
quodlibet se solo suf ficit, Argentum (facto Experimento in loco aperto) Page
19. 20.
per externi aeris gravitatem a lapsu minime sustentari.

CHAP. VI.
HIs fourth Chapter, wherein the Title promises that he will prove, Argentum in
loco occluso non sustentari a lapsu per ipsum aeris Elaterium, is very short,
and does not require that we should dwell long upon it. For the proof he brings
of his Assertion being this, Cum tota vis hujus Elaterii pendeat a refutato jam
aeris aequipondio cum digitis 29 Argenti vivi, Page 20.
ita ut nec plus net minus faciat hoe elaterium in loco occluso quam fit-per
illud aequipondium in loco aperto; manifestum est, cum jam oftensum sit
fictitium plane esse hujusmodi aequipondium, fictitium quoque esse tale
elaterium: This being no new Argument, but an Inference from those he had set
down in the former Chapter, by our Answers to them it is become needless for us
to make any distinct Reply to this. We shall rather desire the Reader to take
notice, that whereas our Author says that according to his Adversaries, Ncc
plus nec minus faciat hoc Elaterium in loco occluso quam fit per illud
Aequipondium in loco aperto; whatever others may have written, we for our part
allow of this Opinion but in some Cases; for in others we have performed much
more by the Spring of the Air, which we can within certain limits increase at
pleasure, then can be performed by the bare weight, which for ought we know
remains always somewhat near the same. And of this advantage that the Spring
of the Air may have in point of force above the weight of it, we have formerly
given an Instance in our 17. Experiment, (where, by compressing the Air in the
Receiver, we impelled the Mercurial Cylinder higher then the station at which
the Counterpoise of the Air is wont to sustain it) and shall hereafter have
occasion to give yet more considerable proofs. To the lately recited words our
Examiner subjoyns these; Add, cum allata jam capite praecedente experimenta de
adhaesione digiti, etc. eodem modo se habent in Page 21.
loco clauso ac in aperto, necessarium esse facta ex eis argumenta contra
aquipondium, eadem quoque contra elaterium vim habere. But though he propose
this as a new Argument, yet since it is built but upon the adhesion of the
Finger (of which we have already given an account in our Hypothesis) I see not
how it requires any new and particular Answer. And whereas he says, that the
Experiments he had mentioned concerning the adhesion of ones Finger, etc. eodem
modo se habent in loco clauso ac in aperto; I could wish he had added what way
he took to make the Trials. For he gives no intimation that he did them any
other ways then in ordinary rooms. And in such there scarce ever wants a
communication betwixt the inward and outward Air, either at the Chimney, or
Window, or Door not exactly shut, or at some hole or crevice or other, by means
of which the weight of the Atmosphere has its operation within the room.

To his second Argument our Author adds not a third, unless we take that for an
Argument which he immediately annexes to his last recited words: Et profecto
(says he) si secum expenderent hi Authors, quanta sit difficultas explicandi
hujusmodi Page 21.
aeris elaterium, nisi idem aer se solo occupet majorem locum (ut paulo ante)
credo eos sententiam facile mutaturos. But this being said gratis, does not
exact an Answer; and he must make it more intelligible then any man that I know
of has yet done, how the same Air can adequately fill more space at one time
then at another, before he persuade me to change my opinion about the Spring of
the Air: Especially since he himself allows that the Air has a Spring, whereby
it Page 11.
is able, when it has been violently compressed, to recover its due extension;
the manner whereof if he will intelligibly explicate, his Adversaries will have
no great difficulty to make out the Spring of the Air. But whether his
Hypothesis, or ours, be the more intelligible, will be more properly considered
in the second part of our Discourse, to which we will therefore now proceed.

The II. Part.
Wherein the Adversaries Funicular Hypothesis is examined.

CHAP. I.
What is alleged to prove the Funiculus is considered; and some Difficulties
are proposed against the Hypothesis.

THe Hypothesis that the Examiner would, as a better, substitute in the place
of ours, is, if I mistake it not, briefly this; That the things we ascribe to
the weight or spring of the Air are really performed by neither, but by a
certain Funiculus, or extremely thin substance, provided in such cases by
Nature, ne detur vacuum, which being exceedingly rarefied by a forcible
distension, does perpetually and strongly endeavor to contract it self into
dimensions more agreeable to the nature of the distended body; and consequently
does violently attract all the bodies whereunto it is contiguous, if they be
not too heavy to be removed by it.

But this Hypothesis of our Authors does to me, I confess, appear liable to
such Exceptions, that though I disliked that of his Adversaries, yet I should
not embrace his, but rather wait till time and further Speculations or trials
should suggest some other Theory, fitter to be acquiesc'd in then this; which
seems to be partly precarious, partly unintelligible, and partly insufficient,
and besides needless: though it will not be so convenient to prove each of
these apart, because diverse of my Objections tend to prove the Doctrine,
against which they are alleged, obnoxious to more then one of the imputed
Imperfections.

First, then, the Arguments by which our Author endeavors to evince his
Funiculus, are incompetent for that end. The Arguments which he proposes in his
sixth Chapter (where he undertakes to make good his Assertion) I there find to
be three.

The first he sets down in these words, Constat hoc primo ex jam dictis Capite
praecedente: nequit enim argentum descendens sic digitum deorsum trahere,
tuboque affigere, nisi a tali Page 24.
Funiculo suspendatur, eumque suo pondere vehementer extendat, ut per se patet.
But to this proof answer has been made already in the former Part of this
Discourse: only whereas the Author seems to refer us to the foregoing Chapter,
we will look back to it, and take notice of what I find there against the
Vacuists. For though I neither am bound, nor intend, in this Discourse to
declare my self for, or against, a Vacuum; yet since I am now writing against
the Funicular Hypothesis. it will much conduce to show that it is not firmly
grounded, if I examine what he here alleges against the Assertors of a Vacuum.

In the next place therefore I consider that, according to the Examiner, there
can be no Vacuum; and that he makes to be the main reason why Nature in the
Torricellian and our Experiments does act after so extraordinary a manner, as
is requisite to the production of his Funiculus. For in the 47. Page, having in
his Adversaries name demanded what need there is at the descent of the
Quicksilver, that before it falls a superficies should be separated from it,
and extended; Respondeo (says he) ideo hoc fieri, ne detur vacuum; cum nihil
aliud ibi adsit quod loco argenti descendentis possit succedere. To which he
immediately subjoyns, (with what cogency I will not now examine:) Atque hinc
plane confirmatur commune. illud per tot jam elapsa secula usurpalum in Scholis
axi^^^a viz. Naturam a vacuo, abhorrere. And though he seem to make his
Funiculus the immediate cause of the Phenomenon occurring in the Torricellian
and our Experiments: yet that, if you pursue the inquiry a little higher; he
resolves them into Natures abhorrency of a Vacuum, himself plainly informs us
in the next page; Namlicet (says he) immediata ratiocur aqua v. g. ex hydria
hortulana superne clausa (quo exemplo. Page 48.
utuntun) non descendat, non sit metus vacui, sed ea quam modo diximus, nempe
quod non detur sufficiens pondus ad solvendum illum nexum quo adhaer eat aqua
clausae hydriae summitati; ad eam tamen rationem tandem necessario
veniendumest. But, though as well our Author's Fumiculus, as the other scarce
conceivable Hypotheses that learned men have devised, to account for the
suspension of the Quicksilver otherwise then by the resistance of the external
Air, seem to have been excogitated only to shun the necessity of admitting a
Vacuum: yet I see not how our Examiner cogently proves, either that there can
be none in rerum natura, or that Defacto there is none produced in these
Experiments. For in his fifth Chapter (where he professedly undertakes that
task) he has but these two incompetent Arguments. The first is drawn from the
attraction, as he supposes, of the Finger into the deserted cavity of the Tube
in the Torricellian Experiment: Quaequidem (says he) tam vehemens tractio and
adhaesio, cum non nisi a reali aliquo corpore inter digitum Page 22.
and argentum constitutum queat provenire, manifestum est spatium illud vacuum
non esse, sed vera aliqua substantia repletum. But to this Argument having
already given an Answer, let us (without staying to urge, that the Vacuists
will perhaps object, that they see not a Necessity, though they should admit of
Traction in the case, that the internal substance must therefore perfectly
replenish the deserted Cavity; without pressing this, I say, let us) consider
his other, which he draws from the Diaphaneity of the deserted part of the
Tube, which space (he says) were it empty, would appear like a little black
Pillar, Eo quod nullaespecies visuales neque ab eo neque per illud possunt ad
oculum perventre. But (not to engage our selves in Optical Speculations and
Controversies) if we grant him some what more then perhaps he can prove; yet as
the Experiment will not demonstrate that there is nothing of body in any part
of the space deserted by the Mercury, so neither will the Argument conclude (as
the Proposer of it does twice in this Chapter) That space vera aliqua
substantia repleri. For according to the Hypothesis of the Epicureans and other
Atomists, who make Light to be a corporeal Effluvium from lucid bodies, and to
consist of Atoms so minute, as freely to get in at the narrow Pores of Glass,
there will be no cause to deny interspersed Vacuities in the upper part of the
Tube. For the Corpuscles of Light that permeate that space may be so numerous,
as to leave no sensible part of it un-inlightned; and yet may have so many
little empty Intervals betwixt them, that, if all that is corporeal in the
space we speak of were united into one lump, it would not perhaps adequately
fill the one half (not to say the tenth, or even the hundredth part) of the
whole space: According to what we have noted in the 17. Experiment, that a Room
may appear full of the smoke of a Perfume, though if all the Corpuscles that
compose that smoke were reunited, they would again make up but a small Pastil.
To which purpose I remember I have taken Camphire, of which a little will fill
a Room with its odor, and having in well-clos'd distillatory Glasses caught
the sumes driven over by hear, I thereby reduced them to re conjoyn into true
Camphire, whose bulk is very inconsiderable in comparison of the space it fills
as to sense, when the odorous Corpuscles are scattered through the free Air.

To which I might add, that the Torricellian Experiment being made in a dark
night, or in a Room perfectly darkened, if it succeed (as there is little cause
to suspect it will not) it may well be doubted whether our Authors Argument
will there take place. For if he endeavor to prove that the place in question
was full in the dark, because upon the letting in of the Day, or the bringing
in of a Candle, the light appears within it; the Vacuists may reply according
to their Hypothesis, That that light is a new one, flowing from the lucid body
that darts its corporeal beams quite through the Glass and Space we dispute
about, which for want of such Corpuscles were not just before visible.

And supposing light not to be made by a trajection of Atoms through Diaphanous
bodies, but a propagation of the impulse of lucid bodies through them; yet it
will not thence necessarily follow, that the deserted part of the Tube must be
full: As in our 27. Experiment (though many of those gross Aerial Particles
that appeared necessary to convey a languid sound were drawn out of our
Receiver at the first and second Exsuction; yet there remained so many of the
like Corpuscles, that those that were wanting were not missed by the sense,
though afterward, when a far greater number was drawn out, they were) so there
may be matter enough remaining to transmit the impulse of light; though betwixt
the Particles of that matter there should be store of vacuities intercepted.
Whereas our Author pretends to prove, not only that there is no coacervate
Vacuity in the space so often mentioned, but absolutely that there is none. For
it is in this last sense, as well as the other, that the Schools and our Author,
who defends their Opinion, deny a Vacuum.

But notwithstanding what we have now discoursed, as in our 17. Experiment we
declined determining whether there be a Vacuum or no; so now what we have said
to the Examiners Argument, has not been to declare our whole sense of the
Controversy, but only to show, that though his Hypothesis supposes there is
no Vacuum, yet his Arguments do not sufficiently prove it: which may help to
show his Doctrine to be precarious; for otherwise the Cartesians, though
Plenists, may plausibly enough (whether truly or no I now dispute not) decline
the necessity of admitting a Vacuum in the deserted space of the Tube, by
supposing it filled with their second and first Element, whose Particles they
imagine to be minute enough freely to pass in and out through the Pores of
Glass. But then they must allow the pressure of the outward Air to be the cause
of the suspension of the Quicksilver: for though the materia coelestis may
readily fill the spaces the Mercury deserts; yet that within the Tube cannot
binder so ponderous a liquor from subsiding as low as the restagnant Mercury;
since all the parts of the Tube, as well the lowermost as the uppermost, being
pervious to that subtle matter, it may with like facility succeed in whatever
part of the Tube shall be for saken by the Quicksilver.

The Examiners second Argument in the same place is, That since the Mercurial
Cylinder is not sustained by the outward Air, it must necessarily be, that it
be kept suspended by his internal string. But since for the proof of this he is
content to refer us to the third Chapter; our having already examined that,
allows us to proceed to his third Argument, which is, That the Mercurial
Cylinder, resting in its wonted station, does not gravitate: as may appear by
applying the Finger to the immersed or lower Orifice of the Tube. Whence he
infers, that it must of necessity be suspended from within the Tube. And indeed
if you dexterously apply your Finger to the open end of the Tube, when you have
almost, but not quite, lifted it out of the restagnant Mercury, (which
circumstance must not be neglected, though our Author have omitted it) that so
you may shut up no more Quicksilver then the Mercurial Cylinder is wont to
consist of, you will find the Experiment to succeed well enough: (Which makes
me somewhat wonder to find it affirmed, that the learned Maignan denies it) not
but that you will feel upon your Finger a gravitation or pressure of the
Glass-Tube, and the contained Mercury, as of one body; but that you will not
feel any sensible pressure of the Mercury apart, as if it endeavored to thrust
away your Finger from the Tube. But the reason of this is not hard to give in
our Hypothesis; for according to that, the Mercurial Cylinder and the Air
counterpoising one another, the Finger sustains not any sensibly-differing
pressure from the ambient Air that presses against the Nail and sides of it,
and from the included Quicksilver that presses against the Pulp. But if the
Mercurial Cylinder should exceed the usual length, then the Finger would feel
some pressure from that surplusage of Quicksilver, which the Air does not
assist the Finger to sustain. So that this pleasant Phenomenon may be as well
solved in our Hypothesis, as in the Examiners: in which if we had time to clear
an Objection, which we foresee might be made, but might be answered too; we
would demand why, when the Mercury included in the Tube is but of a due
altitude, it should run out upon the removal of the Finger that stops it
beneath, in case it be sustained only by the internal Funiculus, and do,
according to his Doctrine, when the Funiculus sustains it, emulate a solid
body, if the pressure of the external Air has not (as our Author teaches it not
to have) any thing to do in this matter.

And if some inquisitive person shall here object, That certainly the Finger
must feel much pain by being squeezed betwixt two such pressures, as that of a
Pillar of thirty Inches of Quicksilver on the one side, and an equivalent
pressure from the Atmospherical Pillar on the other, it may readily be
represented, that in fluid bodies (such as are those concerned in our
Difficulty) a solid body has no such sense of pressure from the ambient bodies
as (unless Experience had otherwise instructed us) we should perhaps imagine.
For, not to mention that having inquired of a famous Diver, whether he found
himself sensibly compressed by the water at the bottom of the Sea; he agreed
with the generality of Diverse in the Negative: I am informed that the learned
Maignan did purposely try, that his hand being thrust three or four Palms deep
into Quicksilver, his fingers were not sensible, either of any weight from the
incumbent, or of any pressure from the ambient, Quicksilver. The reason of
which (whether that inquisitive man have given it or no) is not necessary in
our present Controversy to be looked after.

To these three Arguments the Examiner adds not a fourth, unless he design to
present it us in this concluding passage: Huc etiam faciunt insignes
librationes quibus argentum subito descendens agitatur: Idem enim hic fit quod
in aliis Pendulis Page 25.
and ab alto demissis fieri solet. But of this Phenomenon also it is easy to
give an account in our Hypothesis by two several ways; whereof the First
(which is proper chiefly when the Experiment is made in a close place, as our
Receiver) is, That the Quicksilver by its sudden descent acquires an impetus
superadded to the pressure it has upon the score of its wonted gravity; whereby
it for a while falls below its station, and thereby compresses the Air that
leans upon the restagnant Mercury. Which Air by its own Spring again forcibly
dilating it self to recover its former extension, and (as is usual in Springs)
hastily flying open, expands it self beyond it, and thereby impells up the
Quicksilver somewhat above its wonted station, in its fall from whence it again
acquires somewhat (though not so much as before) of impetus or power, to force
the Corpuscles of the Air to a Sub-ingression; and this reciprocation of
pressure betwixt the Quicksilver and the outward Air decreasing by degrees,
does at length wholly cease, when the Mercury has lost that superadded
pressure, which it acquired by its falling from parts of the Tube higher then
its due station. But this first way of explicating these Vibrations is not
necessary in the free Air: for if we consider the ambient Air only as a
weight, and remember what we have newly said of the impetus acquired by
descent; this Phenomenon may be easily enough explained, by taking notice of
what happens in a Balance, when one of the equiponderant Scales chancing to be
depressed, they do not till after many Vibrations settle in aequilibrio.

And on this occasion I shall add this Experiment: I took a Glass Pipe, whose
two legs (very unequal in length) were parallel enough, and both perpendicular
to that part of the Pipe that connected them, (such a Siphon is described in
our 36. Experiment, to find the proportion of the gravity of Mercury and Water)
into this Quicksilver was poured till 'twas some Inches high, and equally high
in both legs: then the Pipe being inclined till the most part of the
Quicksilver was fallen into one of the legs, I stopped the Orifice of the other
leg with my Finger, and erecting again the Pipe, though the Quicksilver were
forced to ascend a little in that stopped leg; yet by reason my Finger kept the
Air from getting away, the Quicksilver was kept lower by a good deal in that
stopped leg then in the other; but if by suddenly removing my Finger I gave
passage to the included and somewhat comprest Air, the preponderant Quicksilver
in the other leg would with the Mercury in this unstopt leg, make diverse
undulations before that liquor did in both legs come to rest in an
aequilibrium. Of which the Reason may be easily deduced from what has been
newly delivered; and yet in this case there is no pretense to be made of a
Funiculus of violently distended Air to effect the Vibrations of the Mercury.

CHAP. II.
Diverse other Difficulties are objected against the Funicular Hypothesis.

THirdly, But though our Examiner have not sufficiently proved his Hypothesis,
yet perhaps it may be in its own nature so like to be true, as to deserve to be
embraced as such. Wherefore we will now take notice of some of those many
things that to our apprehension render it very improbable.

And first, whereas our Author acknowledges that Quicksilver, Water, Wine, and
other liquors, will, as well one as another, descend in Tubes exactly sealed at
the top, in case the Cylinder of liquor exceed the weight of a Mercurial
Cylinder of 29. Inches; and will subside no longer then till it is come to
equiponderate a Cylinder of Quicksilver of that height; whereas, I say, the
Examiner is by the ingenious Monsieur Paschall's, and other Experiments,
induced to admit this; it cannot but seem strange that, whatever the liquor be,
there should be just the same weight or strength to extend them into a
Funiculus: though Water, for instance, and Quicksilver be near fourteen times
as heavy one as the other, and be otherwise of very distant natures; and though
diverse other liquors, as Oil and Water, be likewise of Textures very
differing. And this may somewhat the more be wondered at, because our Author (in
his Animadversions upon our 31. Experiment) is pleased to make so great a
difference betwixt the disposition of bodies of various consistences, as fluid
and firm, to be extenuated into a Funiculus, that he will not allow any humane
force to be able to produce one, by the divulsion of two flat Marbles, in case
the contact of their Surfaces were so exquisite as quite to exclude all Air;
though in the same place his Ratiocination plainly enough teaches (which
Experience however does) that adhering Marbles, though with extraordinary
difficulty, may be forcibly severed, and according to him the superficial parts
may be distended into a Funiculus, that prevents a Vacuum.

But now the Hypothesis of his Adversaries is not at all encumbered with this
difficulty. For the weight of the outward Air being that which keeps liquors
suspended in Tubes sealed at the top; it matters not of what nature or texture
the suspended liquor is, provided its weight be the same with that of a
Mercurial Cylinder equiponderant to the Aerial one: As if there be a pound of
Lead in one Scale, it will not destroy the aequilibrium, whether what be put in
the other be Gold, or Quicksilver, or Wool, or Feathers, provided its weight
be just a pound.

In the next place we may take notice, That the account our Examiner gives us
of his Funiculus in the tenth Chapter, (where he takes upon him to explicate
it) is much more strange then satisfactory, and not made out by any such
parallel operations of Nature, as his Adversaries will not (and may not well do
it) dispute the truth of. Whereas the Weight and Spring of the Air may be
inferred from such unquestioned Experiments as are not concerned in our present
Controversy. For the gravity of the Air may be manifested by a pair of Scales,
and the Spring of it discloses it self so clearly in wind-guns and other
Instruments, that our Adversary (as we have already had occasion to inculcate)
does not deny it. But to consider his Explication of his Funiculus, he would
have us note two things: First, Argentum dum replet totum tubum, non mere
tangere ejus summitatem (ut Page 38.
primo aspectu videtur) sed eidem quoque firmiter adhaerere. Patet hoc
(subjoyns he) experimento illo in primo argumento capit is tertii de tubo
utrinque aperto. But what is to be answered to this proof may be easily
gathered from what we have replied to that Argument. And to what our Author
adds to prove, That the adhesion of the Finger is to the subjacent Mercury,
not to the Tube; namely, That Licet illud tubi orificium oleo, aliave materia
adhaesionem impediente, inungatur, non minus tamen firmiter Page 38.
adhaerebit digitus quam prius; an Answer may be drawn from the same place; nor
perhaps will his reasoning much satisfy those who consider that bodies by
trusion may easily enough be made stick together, as much as in our case the
Tube and Finger do, notwithstanding one of them is anointed with Oil, and that
this Adhesion of the Finger to the Tube is to be met with in cases where the
Surface of the included Quicksilver is not contiguous to the Finger, but many
Inches below. As for what he adds concerning the reason why Water, and
Quicksilver ascend by suction, we have already taught what is to be answered to
it, by ascribing that ascension to the pressure of the external Air: without
any need of having recourse to a Funiculus; or imagining with him in this
place, That because nothing besides the Water or Quicksilver can in such cases
succeed, the Air, (which yet is not easy to be proved in reference to a thin
Ethereal substance) therefore, Parts ipsius aeris (to use his expression) sic
tubo inclusae (quae alias tam facile separantur) Page 40.
nunc tam fortiter sibi invicem agglutinentur, ut validissimum (uti videmus)
conficiunt catenam, qua non solum aqua, sed ponderosum illud argentum sic in
altum trahatur. Which way of wreathing a little rarefied Air into so strong a
rope, how probable it is, I will for a while leave the Reader to judge, and
advance to our Author's second Notandum, which he thus proposes:

Rarefactionem sive extensionem corporis ad occupandum majorem locum fieri non
solo calore, sed etiam distensione Page 40, 41.
seu vi divulsiva: sicut e contra condensatio non solo frigore perficitur, sed
etiam compressione, uti innumera passim docent exempla. And it is true and
obvious, that the Condensation of bodies, taking that word in a large sense,
may be made as well by compression as cold. But I wish he had more clearly
expressed what he means in this place by that Rarefaction, which he says is to
be made by distension, or a vis divulsiva, whereof he tells us there are
innumerable instances. For, as far as may be gathered from the three Examples
he subjoyns, it is only the Air that is capable of being so extended as his
Hypothesis requires Quicksilver and even Stones must be. And I know not how it
will be proved, that even Air may be thus extended so far, as in the Magdeburg
Experiment, to fill a place more then two thousand times as big as that it
filled before. For that the same Air in this and his two foregoing Instances
does adequately fill more space at one time then another, he proves but by the
rushing in of water into the evacuated Glass, and filling it within a little
quite full, which, he says, is done by the distended Air that contracting it
self draws up the water with it. Which Explication how much less likely it is,
then that the water is in such cases impelled up by the pressure of the
Atmosphere, we shall anon (when we come to discuss his way of Rarefaction and
Condensation) have occasion to examine. In the mean time let us consider with
him the Explication which, after having premised the two above recited
Observations, he gives us of his Funiculus; Cum per primum Notandum argentum
ita adhaereat tubi vertici, and per secundum, rarefactio fiat per meram Page 41.
corporis distensionem, ita rem se habere, ut argentum descendens a vertice
tubi affixam ei relinquat superficiem suam extimam sive supremam, eamque
eousque suo pondere extendat extenuetque, donec facilius sit aliam superficiem
similiter relinquere quam priorem illam ulterius extendere: Secundam igitur
relinquit, eamque eodem modo descendendo extendit, donec facilius sit tertiam
adhuc separari quam illam secundam extendere ulterius: and sic deinceps, donec
tandem vires amplius non habeat superficies sic separandi and extendendi; nempe
donec perveniat ad altitudinem digitorum duntaxat 29, ubi quiescit, ut capite
primo dictum est. Thus far our Examiners Explication: By which it is easy to
discern, that he is fain to assign his Funiculus a way of being produced
strange and unparalleled enough. For, not to repeat our Animadversions upon
the first of the two Notandum's, on which the Explication is grounded, I must
demand by what force, upon the bare separation of the Quicksilver and the top
of the Tube, the new body he mentions comes to be produced; or at least how it
appears that the Mercury leaves any such thing as he speaks of behind it. For
the sense perceives no such matter at the top of the Tube, nor is it necessary
to explicate the Phenomenon as we have formerly seen. It may also be marvell'd
at, that the bare weight of the descending Mercury should be able to extend a
Surface into a Body. And besides, it seems precariously affirmed, that there is
such a successive leaving behind of one Surface after another as is here
imagined: Nor does it at all appear how, though some of the Quicksilver were
turned into a thin subtle substance, yet that substance comes to be contrived
into a Funiculus of so strange a nature, that scarce any weight (for ought
appears by his Doctrine) can be able to break it; that contrary to all other
strings it may be str^^^^ed without being made more slender; and that it has
other very odd properties, some of which we shall anon have occasion to
mention. As for what our Author subjoynes in these words, Eodem itaque fere
modo separari videntur hae superficies ab argento descendente, and Page 43, 44.
in tenuissimum quendam per descendens pondus extendi, quo per calorem in
accensa candela separantur hujusmodi superficies a subjecta cera aut sevo, and
in subtilissimam flammam extenuantur. Ubi not atu dignum, quemadmodum flamma
illa plusquam millies sine dubio majus spatium occupat, quam antea occupaverat
pars illa cerae ex qua conficitur; ita prorsus and his existimandum Funiculum
illum plusquam millies majus spatium occupare quam prius occupaverat illa
argenti particula ex qua sit exortus: Uti etiam sine dubio contingit, quando
talis particula a subjecto igne in vaporem convertitur. Though it be the only
Example whereby he endeavors to illustrate the generation of his Funiculus,
yet (I presume) he scarce expects we should think it an apposite one. For,
besides that there here intervenes a conspicuous and powerful Agent, namely, an
actual Fire to sever and agitate the parts of the Candle; and besides that
there is a manifest wasting of the Wax or Tallow turned into flame; besides
these things, I say, we must not admit, that the Fuel when turned into a flame
does really fill (I say not, with our Author) more then a thousand times, but
so much as twice more of genuine space then the Wax 'twas made of. For it may
be said that the flame is little or nothing else then an aggregate of those
Corpuscles which before lay upon the upper superficies of the Candle, and by
the violent heat were divided into minuter particles, vehemently agitated and
brought from lying as it were upon a flat to beat off one another, and make up
about the Wiek such a figure as is usual in the flame of Candles burning in the
free Air. Nor will it necessarily follow, that the space which the flame seems
to take up should contain neither Air nor Ether, nor any thing else, save the
parts of that flame, because the eye cannot discern any other body there: For
even the smoke ascending from the snuff of a newly-extinguish'd Candle appears
a dark pillar, which to the eye at some distance seems to consist of smoke;
whenas yet there are so many Aerial and other invisible Corpuscles mingled with
it, as if all those parts of smoke that make a great show in the Air were
collected and contiguous, they would not perhaps amount to the bigness of a
Pins head: as may appear by the great quantity of steams that in Chemical
Vessels are wont to go to the making up of one drop of Spirit. And therefore it
does not ill fall out for our turn, that the Examiner, to enforce his former
Example, alleges the turning of a particle of Quicksilver into vapor, by
putting fire under it: for if such be the Rarefaction of Mercury, it is not at
all like to make such a Funiculus as he talks of, since those Mercurial Fumes
appear by diverse Experiments, to be Mercury divided and thrown abroad into
minute parts, whereby though the body obtain more of Surface then it had
before, yet it really fills no more of true and genuine space, since if all the
particular little spaces filled by these scattered Corpuscles were reduced into
one, (as the Corpuscles themselves often are in Chemical Operations) they would
amount but to one total space, equal to that of the whole Mercury before
rarefaction. But these Objections against this Explication are not all that I
have to say against our Adversaries Funiculus it self.

For I farther demand how the Funiculus comes by such hooks or graple-irons, or
parts of the like shape, to take fast hold of all contiguous bodies, and even
the smoothest, such as Glass, and the calm surfaces of Quicksilver, Water,
Oil, and other fluids: And how these slender and invisible hooks cannot only
in the tersest bodies find an innumerable company of ears or loops to take hold
on, but hold so strongly that they are able not alone to lift up a tall
Cylinder of that very ponderous metal of Quicksilver, but to draw inwards the
sides of strong Glasses so forcibly, as to break them all to pieces. And it is
also somewhat strange, that Water and other fluid bodies (whose parts are wont
to be so easily separable) should, when the Funiculus once lays hold on the
superficial Corpuscles, presently emulate the nature of consistent bodies, and
be drawn up like Masses each of them of an entire piece; though even in the
exhausted Receiver they appear by their undulation (when they are stirred by
Bubbles that pass freely through them) and many other signs to continue fluid
bodies.

It seems also very difficult to conceive how this extenuated substance should
acquire so strong a spring inward as the Examiner all along his book ascribes
to it. Nor will it serve his turn to require of us in exchange an Explication
of the Airs spring outward, since he acknowledges, as well as we, that it has
such a spring. I know, that by calling this extenuated substance a Funiculus,
he seems plainly to intimate that it has its spring inward, upon the same
account that Lute-strings and Ropes forcibly stretched have theirs. But there
is no small disparity betwixt them: for whereas in strings there is required
either wreathing, or some peculiar and artificial texture of the component
parts; a rarefaction of Air (were it granted) does not include or infer any
such contrivance of parts as is requisite to make bodies Elastical. And if the
Cartesian Notion of the cause of Springiness be admitted, then our extenuated
substance having no Pores to be pervaded by the materia subtilis (to which
besides our Author also makes Glass impervious) will be destitute of
Springiness. And however, since Lute-strings, Ropes, etc. must, when they
shrink inwards, either fill up or lessen their Pores, and increase in thickness
as they diminish in length; our Examiners Funiculus must differ very much from
them, since it has no Pores to receive the shrinking parts, and contracts it
self as to length, without increasing its thickness. Nor can it well be
pretended that this self-contraction is done ob fugam vacui, since though it
should not be made, a Vacuum would not ensue. And if it be said that it is made
that the preternaturally stretched body might restore it self to its natural
dimensions: I answer, That I am not very forward to allow acting for ends to
bodies inanimate, and consequently devoid of knowledge; and therefore should
gladly see some unquestionable Examples produced of Operations of that nature.
And however to me, who in Physical enquiries of this nature look for efficient
rather then final causes, it is not easy to conceive how Air by being expanded
(in which case its force (like that of other rarified bodies) seems principally
to tend outward, as we see in fired Gunpowder, in Aeolipiles, in warmed
Weather-glasses, etc.) should acquire so prodigious a force of moving
contiguous bodies inwards. Nor does it to me seem very probable, that, when for
instance part of a polished Marble is extended into a Funiculus, that Funiculus
does so strongly aspire to turn into Marble again. I might likewise wish our
Author had more clearly explicated, how it comes to pass (which he all along
takes for granted) that the access of the outward Air does so much and so
suddenly relax the tension of his Funiculus; since that being (according to
him) a real and Poreless body, it is not so obvious how the presence of another
can so easily and to so strange a degree make it shrink. But I will rather
observe, that it is very unlikely that the space which our Adversary would have
replenished with his Funicular substance, should be full of little
highly-stretcht strings, that lay fast hold of the Surfaces of all contiguous
bodies, and always violently endeavor to pull them inwards. For we have
related in our 26. Experiment, that a Pendulum being set a moving in our
exhausted Receiver, did swing to and fro as freely, and with the string
stretched as straight, as for ought we could perceive it would have done in the
common Air. Nay, the Balance of a Watch did there move freely and nimbly to and
fro; which it is hard to conceive those bodies could do, if they were to break
through a medium consisting of innumerable exceedinglystretch'd strings. On
which occasion we might add, that it is somewhat strange that these strings,
thus cut or broken by the passage of these bodies through them, could so
readily have their parts reunited, and without any more ado be made entire
again. And we might also take notice of this as another strange peculiarity in
our Authors Funiculus, That in this case the two divided parts of each small
string that is broken do not, like those of other broken strings, shrink and
fly back from one another; but (as we just now said) immediately redintegrate
themselves: Whereas, when in the Torricellian Experiment the Tube and contained
Mercury is suddenly lifted up out of the restagnant Quicksilver into the Air,
the Funiculus does so strangely contract it self, that it quite vanishes;
insomuch that the ascending Mercury may rise to the very top of the Tube.
These, I say, and diverse other difficulties might on this occasion be insisted
on; but that, supposing our selves to have mentioned enough of them for once,
we think it now more seasonable to proceed to the remaining Part of our
Discourse.

CHAP. III.
The Aristotelean Rarefaction (proposed by the Adversary) examined.

BUt this is not all that renders the Examiners Hypothesis improbable: For,
besides those already mentioned particulars, upon whose score it is very
difficult to be understood; it necessarily supposes such a Rarefaction and
Condensation, as is, I confess, to me, as well as to many other considering
persons, unintelligible.

For the better discernment of the force of this Objection we must briefly
premise, That a body is commonly said to be rarefi'd or dilated, (for I take
the word in a larger sense then, I know, many others do, for a reason that will
quickly appear) when it acquires greater dimensions then the same body had
before; and to be condensed, when it is reduced into less dimensions, that is,
into a lesser space then it contained before: (as when a dry Sponge being first
dipped in water swells to a far greater bulk, and then being strongly squeezed
and held compressed, is not only reduced into less room then it had before it
was squeezed, but into less then it had even before it was wetted.) And I must
further premise, That Rarefaction (as also Condensation) being amongst the most
obvious Phenomenon of Nature, there are three (and for ought we know but three)
ways of explicating it: For, either we must say with the Atomists and
Vacuists, that the Corpuscles whereof the rarefied body consists do so depart
from each other, that no other substance comes in between them to fill up the
deserted spaces that come to be left betwixt the incontiguous Corpuscles; or
else we must say with diverse of the ancient Philosophers, and many of the
moderns, especially the Cartesians, that these new Intervals produced betwixt
the Particles of the rarefied body are but dilated Pores, replenished, in like
manner as those of the tumid Sponge are by the imbibed water, by some subtle
Ethereal substance, that insinuates it self betwixt the disjoined Particles:
or, lastly, we must imagine with Aristotle and most of his followers, that the
self-same body does not only obtain a greater space in Rarefaction, and a
lesser in Condensation, but adequately and exactly fill it, and so when
rarefied acquires larger dimensions without either leaving any vacuities
betwixt its component Corpuscles, or admitting between them any new or
extraneous substance whatsoever.

Now it is to this last (and, as some call it, rigorous) way of Rarefaction that
our Adversary has recourse in his Hypothesis: Though this, I confess, appear to
me so difficult to be conceived, that I make a doubt whether any Phenomenon
can be explained by it; since to explain a thing is to deduce it from something
or other in Nature more known then it self.

He that would meet with full Discussions of this Aristotelean Rarefaction, may
resort to the learned writings of Gassendus, Cartesius and Maignan, who have
accused it of diverse great absurdities: But for my part, I shall at present
content my self to make use to my purpose of two or three passages that I meet
with (though not together) in our Author himself.

Let us then suppose, that in the Magdeburg Experiment he so often (though I
think causlesly enough) urges to prove his Hypothesis; let us (I say) for
easier considerations sake suppose, that the undilated Air, which (as he tells
us) possessed about half an Inch of space, consisted of a hundred Corpuscles,
Page 42.
or (if that name be in this case disliked) a hundred parts; (for it matters
not what number we pitch upon) and 'twill not be denied, but that as the whole
parcel of Air, or the Aggregate of this hundred Corpuscles, is adequate to the
whole space it fills, so each of the hundred parts, that make it up, is
likewise adequately commensurate to its peculiar space, which we here suppose
to be a hundredth part of the whole space. This premised, our Author having
elsewhere this passage, Corpore occupante locum verbi gratia duplo majorem,
necesse est Page 160.
ut quaelibet ejus pars locum quoque duplo majorem occupet; prompts us to
subjoyn, that in the whole capacity of the Globe (which according to him was
two thousand times as great as the room possessed by the unexpanded Air) there
must likewise be two hundred thousand parts of space commensurate each of them
to one of the forementioned hundredth parts of Air; and consequently, when he
affirms that that half Inch of Air possessed the whole cavity of the Globe, if
we will not admit (as he does not) either Vacuities or some intervening subtle
substance in the Interval of the Aeriall parts, he must give us leave to
conclude, that each part of Air does adequately fill two thousand parts of
space. Now that this should be resolutely taught to be not only naturally
possible, (for we dispute not here of what the Divine Omnipotence can do) but
to be really and regularly done in this Magdeburg Experiment, will questionless
appear very absurd to the Cartesians and those other Philosophers, who take
Extension to be but notionally different from Body, and consequently impossible
to be acquired or lost without the addition or detraction of Matter; and will,
I doubt not, appear strange to those other Readers, who consider how generally
Naturalists have looked upon Extension as inseparable, and as immediately
flowing from matter; and upon Bodies, as having necessary relation to a
commensurate space. Nor do I see, if one portion of Air may so easily be
brought exactly to fill up a space two thousand times as big as that which it
did but fill before without the addition of any new substance; I see not (I
say) why the matter contained in every of these two thousand parts of space may
not be further brought to fill two thousand more, and so onwards, since each of
these newly-replen shed spaces is presumed to be exactly filled with Body, and
no space, nor consequently that which the unrarefied Air replenished, can be
more then adequately full. And since, according to our Adversary, not only
fluid bodies, as Air and Quicksilver, but even solid and hard ones, as Marble,
are capable of such a Distension as we speak of, why may not the World be made
I know not how many thousand times bigger then it is, without either admitting
any thing of Vacuity betwixt its parts, or being increased with the addition of
one Atome of new matter? Which to me is so difficult to conceive, that I have
sometimes doubted, whether in case it could be proved, that in the exhausted
Globe we speak of there were no Vacuities within, nor any subtle matter
permitted to enter from without, it were not more intelligible to suppose that
God had created a new matter to join with the Air in filling up the Cavity,
then that the self-same Air should adequately fill two thousand spaces, whereof
one was exactly commensurate to it even when it was uncompressed. For diverse
eminent Naturalists, both ancient and modern, believing upon a Physical account
the Souls of men to be created and infused, will admit it as intelligible that
God does frequently create substances on certain emergent occasions. But I know
that many of them will not likewise think it conceivable, that without his
immediate interposition an accession of new, real Dimensions should be had
without either vacuities or accession of matter.

And indeed when I considered these difficulties and others, that attend the
Rarefaction our Examiner throughout his whole book supposes, and when I found
that ever and anon he remits us to what he teaches concerning Rarefaction; I
could not but with some greediness resort to the Chapters he addressed me to.
But when I had perused them, I found the Difficulties remained such still, and
that 'twas very hard even for a witty man to make more of a subject then the
nature of it does bear. Which I say, that by professing my self unsatisfied
with what he writes, I may not be thought to find fault with a man for not
doing what perhaps is not to be done, and for not making such abstruse Notions
plain, as are scarcely (if at all) so much as intelligible. And indeed as he
has handled this subject modestly enough, so in some places his Expressions are
to me somewhat dark; which I mention, not to impute it as a Crime in him, that
he wrote in a diffident and doubtful strain of so difficult a matter, but to
excuse my self if I have not always guessed aright at his meaning.

The things he alleges in favor of the Rarefaction he would persuade are two:
The one, That the Phenomenon of Rarefaction cannot be explicated either by
Vacuities or the subingression of an Ethereal substance; and the other, That
there are two ways of explicating the rigorous Rarefaction he contends for.

His Objections against the Epicurean and Cartesian ways of making out
Rarefaction are some of them more plausible then most of those that are wont to
be urged against them; yet not such as are not capable enough of Answers. But
whilst some of the passages appeared easy to be replied to by the Favorers
of the Hypothesis they oppose, before I had fully examined the rest, chancing
to mention these Chapters to an ingenious Man, hereafter to be further
mentioned in this Treatise; he told me he had so far considered them more then
the rest of the book, that he had thought upon some Hypotheses, whereby the
Phenomenon of Rarefaction might be made out either according to the Vacuists,
or according to the Cartesians, adding, that he had also examined the Instance
our Adversary pretends to be afforded him of his Rarefaction by what happens in
the Rota Aristotelica. Wherefore being sufficiently distressed by Avocations of
several sorts, and being willing to reserve the Declaration of my own thoughts
concerning the manner of Rarefaction and Condensation for another Treatise, I
shall refer the Reader to the ingenious Conjectures about this subject, which
the writer of them intends to annex to the present Discourse; and only add in
general, That whereas the Examiners Argument on this occasion is, That his way
of Rarefaction must be admitted, because neither of the other two can be well
made out, his Adversaries may with the same reason argue that one of theirs is
to be allowed, since his is encumbered with such manifest difficulties. And they
may enforce what they say by representing, that the inconveniences that attend
his Hypothesis about Rarefaction are insuperable, arising from the
unintelligible nature of the thing itself; whereas those to which the other
ways are obnoxious, may seem to spring but from men's not having yet discovered
what kind of Figures and Motions of the small Particles may best qualify them
to make the body that consists of them capable of a competent expansion.

After our Authors Objections against the two ways of Rarefaction proposed,
the one by the Vacuists, and the other by the Cartesians and others, that admit
the solidest bodies, and even Glass itself, to be pervious to an Ethereal or
subtle matter; he attempts to explicate the manner by which that rigorous
Rarefaction he teaches is performed: and having premised, that the Explication
of the way how each part of the rarefy'd body becomes extended, depends upon
the quality of the parts into which the body is ultimately resolved; and having
truly observed, that they must necessarily be either really indivisible, or
still endlesly divisible; he endeavors to explicate the Aristotelean
Rarefaction according to those two Hypotheses. But, though he thus propose two
ways of making out his Rarefaction; yet besides that they are irreconcilable,
he speaks of them so darkly and doubtfully, that it seems less easy to discern
which of the two he would be content to stick to, then that he himself scarce
acquiesces in either of them.

And, first, having told us how Rarefaction may be explained, in case we admit
bodies to be divisible in infinitum, he does himself make such an Objection
against the infinity of parts in a continuum, as he is fain to give so obscure
an Answer to, that I confess I do not understand it; and presume, that not
only the most part of unprejudiced Readers will as little acquiesce in the
Answer as I do; but even the Author himself will not marvel at my confession,
since in the same place he acknowledges the Answer to be somewhat obscure, and
endeavors to excuse its being so, because in that Hypothesis it can scarce be
otherwise.

Wherefore I shall only add on this occasion, that it is not clear to me, that
even such a divisibility of a continuum as is here supposed would make out the
Rarefaction he contends for. For, let the integrant parts of a continuum be
more or less finite or infinite in number, yet still each part, being a
corporeal substance, must have some Particle of space commensurate to it; and
if the whole body be rarefied, for instance, to twice its former bigness, then
will each part be likewise extended to double its former dimensions, and fill
both the place it took up before, and another equal to it, and so two places.

The second Argument alleged to recommend the hithertomentioned way of
explicating Rarefaction is, That many learned men, amongst whom he names two,
Aquinas and Suarez, have taught that the same corporeal thing may naturally be,
and de facto often is, in the souls of Brutes really indivisible and virtually
extended. But, though I pay those two Authors a just respect for their great
skill in Scholastical and Metaphysical learning; yet the Examiner cannot
ignore, that I could make a long Catalogue of Writers, both ancient and modern,
at least as well versed in natural Philosophy as St. Thomas and Suarez, who
have some of them in express words denied this to be naturally possible; and
others have declared themselves of the same judgment by establishing
principles, with which this Conceit of the virtual extension of the indivisible
Corpuscles is absolutely inconsistent. And though no Author had hitherto
opposed it, yet I, that dispute not what this or that man thought, but what
it is rational to think, should nevertheless not scruple to reject it now; and
should not doubt to find store of the best Naturalists of the same opinion with
me, and perhaps among them the Examiner himself, who (however this
acknowledgment may agree with the three following Chapters of his book) tells
us, (page 160.) that Juxia probabiliorem sententiam hujusmodi virtualis
extensio rei corporea concedenda non est, ut pote soli rei spirituali propria.

But to conclude at length this tedious Enquiry into the Aristotelean way of
Rarefaction, (which is of so obscure a nature that it can scarce be either
proposed or examined in few words) I will not take upon me resolutely to affirm
which of the two ways of explicating it (by Atoms or by Parts infinitely
divisible) our Author declares himself for. But which of them soever it be, I
think I have shown that he has not intelligibly made it out: And I make the
less scruple to do so, because he himself is so ingenuous as (at the close of
his discourse of the two ways) to speak thus of the Opinion he prefers;
Praestat communi and receptae hactenus in Scholis sententiae insistere, quae
licet Page 169.
difficultates quidem non clare solvat, its tamen aperte non succumbit. So that
in this discourse of Rarefaction, to which our Author has so often in the
foregoing part of the Book referred us, as that which should make good what
there seemed the most improbable; he has but instead of a probable Hypothesis
needlessly rejected, substituted a Doctrine which himself dares not pretend
capable of being well freed from the difficulties with which it may be charged;
though I doubt not but other Readers, especially Naturalists, will think he has
been very civil to this obscure Doctrine, in saying that Difficultatibus non
aperte succumbit.

As for the other way of explicating Rarefaction, namely, by supposing that a
body is made up of parts indivisible; he will not, I presume, deny, but that
the Objections we formerly made against it are weighty. For according to this
Hypothesis (which one would think he prefers, since he makes use of it in the
three or four last Chapters of his Book) Necessario fatendum est (says he)
unam eandemque partem poni in duplici Page 163.
loco adaequate: Cum enim indivisibilis sit, locumque occupet majorem quam
prius, necesse est ut tota sit in quolibet puncto totius loci, sive ut per
totum illud spatium virtualiter extendatur. So that when he in the very next
page affirms, that by this virtual extension of the parts, the Difficulties
that have for so many Ages troubled Philosophers may be easily solved, he must
give me leave (who love to speak intelligibly, and not to admit what I cannot
understand) to desire he would explain to me what this extensio virtualis is,
and how it will remove the Difficulties that I formerly charged upon the
Aristotelean Rarefaction. For the easier consideration of this matter, let us
resume what we lately supposed, namely, that in the Magdeburgick Experiment the
half Inch of undilated Air consisted of a hundred Corpuscles; I demand how the
indivisibility of these Corpuscles will qualify them to make out such a
Rarefaction as the Author imagines. For what does their being indivisible do in
this case, but make it the less intelligible how they can fill above a hundred
parts of space? It Is easy to foresee he will answer, That they are virtually
extended. But not here to question how their indivisibility makes them capable
of being so; I demand, whether by an Atoms being virtually extended, its
corporeal substance do really (I mean adequately) fill more space then it did
before, or whether it do not: (for one of the two is necessary.) If it do, then
it is a true and real, and not barely a virtual extension. And that such an
extension will not serve the turn, what we have formerly argued against the
Peripatetick Rarefaction will evince; and our Adversary seems to confess as
much, by devising this virtual extension to avoid the inconveniences to which
he saw his Doctrine of Rarefaction would otherwise plainly appear exposed. But
if it be said, That when an Atome is virtually extended, its corporeal
substance fills no more space then before: This is but a Verbal shift, that may
perhaps amuse an unwary Reader, but it will scarce satisfy a considering one.
For I demand how that which is not a substance can fill place; and how this
improper and but Metaphorical Extension will salve the Phenomenon of
Rarefaction: as how the half Inch of Air at the top of the forementioned Globe
shall without a corporeal extension fill the whole Globe of two thousand times
its bigness when the water is sucked out of it, and act at the lower part of
the Globe. Which last Clause I therefore add, because not only our Author
teaches (page 91. and 92.) that the whole Globe was filled with a certain thin
substance, which by its contraction violently snatched up the water into which
the neck of the Glass was immersed; but in a parallel case he makes it his
grand Argument to prove, that there is no Vacuum in the deserted part of the
Tube in the Torricellian Experiment, That the attraction of the Finger cannot
be performed but by some Chap. 5.
real body. Wherefore till the Examiner do intelligibly explain how a virtual
Extension, as it is opposed to a corporeal, can make an Atome fill twice, nay,
two thousand times more space then it did before; I suppose this device of
virtual Extension will appear to unbiased Naturalists but a very
unsatisfactory evasion.

Two Arguments indeed there are which our Adversary offers as proofs of what he
teaches. The first is, That they commonly teach in the Schools, that at least
divinitus (as he speaks) such a thing as is pleaded for may be done, and that
consequently it is not repugnant to the nature of a body. But, though they that
either know me, or have read what I have written about matters Theological,
will, I hope, readily believe, that none is more willing to acknowledge and
venerate Divine Omnipotence; yet in some famous Schools they teach, that it is
contrary to the nature of the thing. And that men who think so, and
consequently look not upon it as an object of Divine Omnipotence, may (whatever
he here say) without impiety be of a differing mind from him about the
possibility of such a Rarefaction as he would here have, our Author may
perchance think fit to grant, if he remember that he himself says a few Pages
after, Cum tempus sit Ens essentialiter successivum, it a ut ne divinitus Page
175^.
quidem possint duae ejus parts simul existere, etc. But, not now to dispute
of a power that I am more willing to adore then question, I say, that our
Controversy is not what God can do, but about what can be done by Natural
Agents, not elevated above the sphere of Nature. For though God can both create
and annihilate, yet Nature can do neither: and in the judgment of true
Philosophers I suppose our Hypothesis would need no other advantage to make it
be preferred before our Adversaries, then that in ours things are explicated by
the ordinary course of Nature, whereas in the other recourse must be had to
miracles.

But though our Authors way of explicating Rarefaction be thus improbable, yet
I must not here omit to take notice, that his Funiculus supposes a Condensation
that to me appears encumbered with no less manifest difficulties. For, since he
teaches that a body may be condensed without either having any vacuities for
the comprest parts to retire into, or having Pores filled with any subtle and
yielding matter that may be squeezed out of them; it will follow, that the
parts of the body to be condensed do immediately touch each other: which
supposed, I demand how bodies that are already contiguous can be brought to
farther Approximations without penetrating each other, at least in some of
their parts. So that I see not how the Examiners Condensation can be performed
without penetration of dimensions. A thing that Philosophers of all Ages have
looked upon as by no means to be admitted in Nature. And our Author himself
speaks somewhere at the same rate, where to the Question, Why the walls that
enclose fired Gunpowder must be blown asunder? Respondeo (says he) haec omnia
inde accidere, quod pulvis ille sic accensus and in flammam conversus, Page 159.
long majus spatium nunc occupet quam prius. Unde fit, ut cum totum cubiculum
antea fuerit plenissimum, disrumpantur sic parietes, ne detur corporum
penetratio. In the Magdeburgick Experiment he tells us (as we have heard
already) that the whole capacity of the Globe is filled with an extremely thin
body. But not now to examine how properly he calls that a rare body, which
according to him intercepts neither Pores nor any heterogeneous substance, the
greater or lesser absence of which makes men call a body more or less dense;
not to insist on this, I say, let us consider, that before the admission of
water into the exhausted Globe there was, according to him, two thousand half
Inches of a substance, which, however it was produced or got thither, was a
true and real body; and that after the admission of the water there remained in
the same Globe, besides the water that came in, no more then one half Inch of
body. Since then our Author does not pretend (which if he did, might be easily
disproved) that the one thousand nine hundred ninety nine half Inches of
Matter, that now appear no more, traversed the body of Water; since he will not
allow that it gets away through the Pores of the Glass, I demand, what becomes
of so great a quantity of Matter? For that it is annihilated I suppose he is too
rational a man to pretend, (nor, if he should, would it be at all believed) and
to say, that a thousand and so many hundred parts of Matter should be retired
into that one part of space that contains the one half Inch of Air, is little
less incredible: For that space was supposed perfectly full of body before, and
how a thing can be more then perfectly full, who can conceive? To dispatch:
According to our Authors way of Condensation, two, or perhaps two thousand,
bodles may be crowded into a space that is adequately filled by one of them
apart. And if this be not Penetration of Dimensions, I desire to be informed
what is so; and till then I shall leave it to any unprepossess'd Naturalist to
judge, whether an Hypothesis that needs suppose a thing so generally concluded
to be impossible to Nature, be probable or not; and whether to tell us that the
very same parcel of Air, that is now without violence contained in half an Inch
of space, shall by and by fill two thousand times as much room, and presently
after shrink again into the two thousandth part of the space it hewly
possessed, be not to turn a Body into a Spirit, and, confounding their Notions,
attribute to the former the discriminating and least easily conceivable
properties of the later. And this Argument is, I confess, with me of that
weight, that this alone would keep me from admitting the Examiners Hypothesis:
yet if any happier Contemplator shall prove so sharp-sighted, as to devise and
clearly propose a way of making the Rarefaction and Condensation hither to
argued against, intelligible to me, he is not like to find me obstinate. Nor
indeed is there sufficient cause why his succeeding in that attempt should make
our Adversaries Hypothesis preferrable to ours, since that would not prove it
either necessary, or so much as sufficient, but only answer some of the
Arguments that tend to prove it is not intelligible. And that we have other
Arguments on our side then those that relate to Rarefaction and Condensation,
may appear partly by what has been discoursed already, and partly by what we
have now to subjoyn.

CHAP. IV.
A Consideration (pertinent to the present Controversy) of what happens in
trying the Torricellian and other Experiments, at the tops and feet of Hills.

THere remain then yet a couple of Considerations to be opposed against the
Examiners Hypothesis, which, though the past Discourse may make them be looked
upon as needless, we must not pretermit, because they contain such Arguments as
may not only be employed against our Adversaries Doctrine, but will very much
tend to the confirmation of ours.

I consider then further, that the Hypothesis I am opposing, being but a kind
of Inversion of ours, and supposing the spring or motion of Restitution in the
Air to tend inwards, as according to us it tends outward; it cannot be, that
if the supposition it self were (what I think I have proved it is not) true,
many of the Phenomenon would be plausibly enough explicable by it: the same
motions in an intermediate body being in many cases producible alike, whether
we suppose it to be thrust or drawn; provided both the endeavors tend the same
way. But then we may be satisfied whether the effect be to be ascribed to
Pulsion or to Traction, (as they commonly speak, though indeed the later seems
reducible to the former) if we can find out an Experiment wherein there is
reason such an effect should follow, in case Pulsion be the cause inquired
after, and not in case it be Traction. And such an Experimentum Crucis (to
speak with our Illustrious Verulam) is afforded us by that noble Observation of
Monsieur Paschall, mentioned by the famous Pecquet, and out of him by our
Author: namely, that the Torricellian Page 66.
Experiment being made at the foot and in diverse places of a very high
Mountain, (of the altitude of five hundred fathom or three thousand foot) he
found, that after he had ascended a hundred and fifty Fathom, the Quicksilver
was fallen two Inches and a quarter below its station at the Mountains foot;
and that at the very top of the Hill it had descended above three Inches below
the same wonted station. Whence it appears that the Quicksilver being carried
up toward the top of the Atmosphere, falls down the lower, the higher the
place is wherein the observation is made: of which the reason is plain in our
Hypothesis, namely, that the nearer we come to the top of the Atmosphere, the
shorter and lighter is the Cylinder of Air incumbent upon the restagnant
Mercury; and consequently the less weight of Cylindrical Mercury will that Air
be able to counter-poise and keep suspended. And since this notable Phenomenon
does thus clearly follow upon ours, and not upon our Adversaries Hypothesis;
this Experiment seems to determine the Controversy betwixt them: because in
this case the Examiner cannot pretend, as he does in the seventeenth and diverse
other of our Experiments, that the Descent of the Quicksilver in the Tube is
caused, not by the Diminution of the external Airs pressure, but from the
preternatural Rarefaction or Distension of that external Air (in the Receiver)
when by seeking to restore it self, it endeavors to draw up the restagnant
Mercury: For in our present case there appears no such forcible Dilatation of
that Air, as in many of the Phenomenon of our Engine he is pleased to imagine.

It need therefore be no great wonder, if his Adversaries do, as he observes,
make a great account of this Experiment, to prove that the Mercury is kept up
in the Tube by the resistance of the external Air. Nor do I think his Answers
to the Argument drawn from hence will keep them from thinking it cogent. For to
an Objection upon which he takes notice that they lay so much stress, he
replies but two things; which neither singly nor together will near amount to a
satisfactory Answer.

And, First, he questions the truth of the Observation it self; because having
made trial in a low Hill, the event did no ways answer his Expectation. But
though, in stead of disapproving, I am willing to commend his Curiosity, to
make the Experiment himself, and especially since 'twas both new and important;
and though also I like his Modesty, in rather suspecting some mistake in the
manner of the Observation, then that the Experimenters did not sincerely
deliver it: yet, since there must be an Error somewhere, I must rather charge
it upon the Examiners observation (I say his Observation, not his want of
sincerity) then upon Monsieur Paschals. For besides the commendations that the
learned Gassendus, who relates the Experiment, gives to that ingenious
Gentleman (Monsieur Paschal) by whose direction he supposes it to have been
tried: the same Gassendus relates, that the like Observation was five times
repeated, partim intra sacellum, partim aere libero, and Gassendus Tomo 1. page
211.
nunc quidem flante, nunc silente vento. Which circumstances sufficiently argue
the Diligence wherewith the Experiment was tried in Auvergne. Especially since
I can confirm these Observations by two more made on distant Hills in England:
the one of which I procured from that known Virtuoso Mr. J. Ball, whom I
desired to make the Experiment at a Mountain in Devonshire, on the side whereof
he dwelt; and the other made in Lancashire by that ingenious Gentleman Mr.
Rich. Townley. Both which Observations, since I have mentioned them at large in
the Appendix to the Physico Mechanical Treatise, shall not now repeat;
contenting my self to observe to our present purpose, that however the
proportion of the Descent of the Quicksilver may vary, according to the
differing consistence and other Accidents of the neighboring Air, in the
particular places and times of the Experiments being made, yet all Observations
agree in this, That nearer the top of the Atmosphere the Quicksilver falls
lower then it does further from it. To all this I shall add two things that
will very much confirm our Hypothesis. The one is, that the freshly-nam'd Mr.
Townley, and diverse ingenious Persons that assisted at the Trial, bethought
themselves of so making the Torricellian Experiment at the top of the Hill, as
to leave a determinate quantity of Air in the Tube, before the mouth of it was
opened under the vessell'd Mercury; and taking notice how low such a quantity
of that Air depressed the Mercurial Cylinder, they likewise observed, that at
the Mountains foot the included Air was not able to depress the Quicksilver so
much. Whence we infer, that the Cylinder of Air at the top of the Hill being
shorter and lighter, did not so strongly press against the included Air, as did
the ambient Air at the bottom of the Hill, where the Aereal Cylinder was longer
and heavier.

But because that though Experiments made in very elevated places are noble
ones, and of great importance in the Controversies about the Air, yet there are
but very few of those that are qualified to make Experiments of that Nature,
who have the opportunity of making them upon high Mountains; we did with the
assistance of an ingenious man attempt a Trial, wherein we hoped to find a
sensibly-differing Weight of the Atmospere, in a far less height then that of
an ordinary Hill. But in stead of a common Tube we made use of a kind of
Weather-glass, that the included Air might help to make the event notable, for
a reason to be mentioned ere long; and in stead of Quicksilver we employed
common Water in the Pipe belonging to the Weather-glass, that small changes in
the Weight or resistance of the Atmosphere in opposite on of the included Air
might be the more discernable. The Instrument we made use of consisted only of
a Glass with a broad Foot and a narrow Neck (A B) and a slender Glass-Pipe (C
D) open at both ends: which Pipe was so placed, that the bottom of it did
almost, but not quite, reach to the bottom of the bigger Glass (A B) within
whose Neck (A) it was fastened with a close cement, that both kept the Pipe in
its place, and hindered all communication betwixt the inward (I I) and outward
(K K) Air, save by the cavity of the Pipe (C D). Now we chose this Glass (A B)
more then ordinarily capacious, that the effect of the dilatation of the
included Air (I I) might be the more conspicuous. Then conveying a convenient
quantity of Water (H H) into this Glass, we carried it to the Leads of the
lofty Abby-Church at Westminster, and there blew in a little Air to raise the
Water to the upper part of the Pipe, that being above the Vessel (A B) we might
more precisely mark the several stations of the Water then otherwise we could.
Afterward having suffered the Glass to rest a pretty while upon the Lead, that
the Air (I I) within might be reduced to the same state, both as to coldness
and as to pressure, with (K K) that without, having marked the station of the
Water (F), we gently let down the Vessel by a long string to the foot of the
Wall, where one attended to receive it; who having suffered it to rest upon the
ground, cried to us that it was subsided about an Inch below the mark (F) we
had put: whereupon having ordered him to put a mark at this second station of
it (E), we drew up the Vessel again; and suffering it to rest a while, we
observed the Water to be re-ascended to or near the first mark (F), which was
indeed about an Inch above (E) the other. And this we did that Evening a second
time with almost a like success: though two or three days after, the wind
blowing strongly upon the Leads, we found not the Experiment to succeed quite
so regularly as before; yet the Water always manifestly fell lower at the foot
of the Wall then it was at the top: which I see no cause to ascribe barely to
the differing temperature of the Air above and below, as to Heat and Cold,
since according to the general estimate, the more elevated Region of the Air
is, caeteris paribus, colder then that below, which would rather check the
greater expansion of the included Air at the top of the Leads then promote it.
But the better to avoid mistakes and prevent Objections, we thought fit to try
the Experiment within the Church, and got into a Gallery of the same height
with the Leads: but the upper part of the Pipe being casually broken off, we
thought fit to order the matter so, that the surface (G) of the remaining Water
in the Pipe should be about an Inch higher then the surface of the Water in the
Vessel. And then my abovementioned Correspondent letting down the Glass,
almost as soon as it was settled upon the pavement, kneeling down to see how far
it was subsided, I found that not only it was fallen as low as the other Water,
but that the outward Air deprest it so far, as whilst I was looking on, to
break in beneath the bottom of the Pipe, and ascend through the Water in
bubbles: after which the Glass being drawn up again, my Correspondent affirmed,
that the Water was very manifestly re-ascended. But because by the unlucky
breaking of a Glass, we were hindered to observe, as we designed, what would
happen as well in a Weather-glass, so contrived that the weight or pressure of
the Atmosphere should make no change in it, as in another whose included Air
was at the top, (whereas in that we employed the included Air was in the lower
part,) and because there happened in our Trials a Circumstance or two that
seemed not so devoid of difficulties, but that we think it may require further
examination, we design to set down a more particular account of this
Experiment, (as how it succeeds with Quicksilver instead of Water, together
with the capacity of the Vessel (A B) and the bore of the Pipe (C D) with some
other variety of Circumstances) together with the event of the curiosity we had
(which seemed very successful) to try the Torricellian Experiment upon the
abovementioned Leads, and then let down the Tube together with the restagnant
Mercury to the ground, to observe the increasing altitude of the Quicksilver,
in the formerly-mentioned Appendix to the Epistle we have been defending. And
it shall suffice us in the mean time that the Trials already mentioned seem to
make it evident enough that the Atmosphere gravitates more, caeteris paribus,
near the surface of the Earth, then in the more elevated parts of the Air. For
the Leads on which we made our Trials were found by measure to be in
perpendicular height but threescore and fifteen Foot from the ground. To which
we shall only add this at present, that once being desirous to observe what we
could touching the proportions of the subsidence of the Water to the height of
its several stations from the ground, purposely carrying down the Vessel so as
not considerably to heat it, from the Leads down the stairs to a little window
that we guest to be almost half way to the bottom, we there perceived the water
to have already subsided about a Barley-Corns length, notwithstanding that
probably in spite of our care, the vessel were a little warmed by the heat of
his body that carried it, since by that time we were come to the foot of the
Wall, the Water stood almost at the highest mark; but after the Vessel was
suffered to rest a while, it relapsed by degrees to the lowest. And thus much
for the first of the things I had to represent in favor of our Doctrine.

The other Particular I shall mention for confirmation of our Hypothesis, is
that Experiment (which, though it be needless, seems yet more cogent and proper
to prevent Evasions) made by the same Monsieur Paschal, of carrying a
weakly-blown Football from the bottom to the top of an high Mountain. For that
Football swelled more and more, the higher it was carried, so that it appeared
as if it were full blown at the top of the Mountain, and gradually growing lank
again, as it was carried; downwards; so that at the foot of the Hill it was
flaccid as before. This, I say, having thus happened, we have here an
Experiment to prove our Hypothesis, wherein recourse cannot be had to any
forcibly and preternaturally distended Body, such as that is pretended to be
which remains in the deserted space of the Tube in the Torricellian Experiment.

The other thing which the Examiner alleges against our Argument from Monsieur
Paschals Trials, is, that supposing it to be true, yet it cannot thence be
inferred, that the subsidence of the Mercury at the top of the Hill proceeded
from the Atmospherical Cylinder's being there lighter and less able to sustain
the Quicksilver. Sed dici potest (says he) ideo sic in vertice Montis magis
descendisse, quod ibidem esset Page 68.
Aura frigidior, aut ex alio Temperamento hujusmodi descensum causante. But
this solution will not serve the turn: For the coldness of the ambient Air
(which yet the Experimenters take not notice of) would rather contract the
rarefied substance within the Tube, and so draw up the Mercury higher, as our
Author himself teaches us, that it is from the shrinking of the Funiculus
occasioned by the cold that the Water in Thermometers Page 50.
ascends in cold weather. And whereas the only proof he adds of so improbable
an Explication is taken from our eighteenth Experiment, wherein we relate, that
sometimes the Quicksilver did sensibly fall lower in colder then in far less
cold weather: I answer, that this eighteenth Experiment will scarce make more
for him then against him: For, as I there take notice that the Quicksilver
descended in cold weather, so it sometimes descended likewise in hot weather,
and rose in cold. And it is very strange, that in all the Observations made, in
differing Countries and at differing times, it should still so happen that the
Mercurial Cylinder should be shorter near the top of the Atmosphere then
further from it; if the resistance of the outward Air have nothing to do with
the keeping it suspended. And it is yet more strange, that the Football should
in like manner grow turgid and flaccid, according as it is carried into places
where it has a shorter or longer Pillar of Air incumbent on it.

I was going to proceed to what remains of this Second Part of our Treatise,
but that since I begun this Chapter casually meeting with an Experiment lately
sent in a Letter to a very Ingenious Mr. Croon one of the learned Professors of
Gresham College.
Acquaintance of his and mine by a very Industrious Physician Dr. Hen. Power.
(who is said to have had the curiosity to try over again many of the
Experiments of our Engine) and finding it very proper to confirm our newly
related Experiment made at Westminster, and to be of such a nature as we have
not in this part of England the opportunity to try the like, for want of Hills
high enough, I shall (according to the permission given me) insert it in this
place. And the rather, that as the Mountains have by the Trials made on them of
the Torricellian Experiment, afforded us a noble proof of the weight of the
Air; so they may afford us one of its Spring: wherein I hope the Phenomenon of
the Waters descent will not be ascribed to any attraction made of the Water by
the violently-distended outward Air. And because the Experiment was not made by
us, but by another, we will set it down in his words, which are these: This
fifteenth of October 1661. we took a Weather-glass A B, of about two foot in
length, and carrying it See the second Figure.
to the bottom of Hallifax Hill, the Water stood in the shank at thirteen
Inches above the Water in the Vessel: Thence carrying it thus filled, with the
whole frame, immediately to the top of the said Hill, the Water fell down to
the point D, viz. an Inch and a quarter lower then it was at the bottom of the
said Hill; which (as he rightly inferrs) proves the Elasticity of the Air: for
the internal Air A C, which was of the same power and extension with the
external at the bottom of the Hill, did manifest a greater Elasticity then the
Mountain-Air there Probably these or the like words, did manifest Pressure, are
here omitted, for the Mountaine-Aire there seems to have acted rather by its
Weight then Elasticity.
, and so extended it self further by C D.

The like Experiment, I hear, the same Ingenious Doctor has very lately
repeated, and found the descent of the Water to be greater then before. And
though some Virtuosi have thought it strange, that in an Hill far inferior to
the Alps and Appennines, so short a Cylinder of so light al quor as Water
should fall so much; yet I see not any reason to distrust upon this ground
either His Experiment or Ours (lately mentioned to have been made at
Westminster;) but rather to wonder the Water fell not more (if the Hill be
considerably high:) for their suspicion seems grounded upon a mistake, as if
because the Quicksilver in the Torricellian Experiment made without purposely
leaving any Air in the Tube, would not, at the top of the mentioned Hill, have
subsided above an Inch, if so much, the Water, that is near fourteen times
lighter, should not fall above a fourteenth part of that space; whereas in the
Torricellian Experiment, the upper and deserted space of the Tube has little or
no Air left in it, but the Correspondent part of the Weather-glass was
furnished with Air, whose pressure was little less then that of the Atmosphere
at the bottom of the Hill; and consequently must be much greater then the
pressure of the same Atmosphere at the top of the Hill, where the Atmospherical
Cylinder's gravity (upon whose account it presses) must be much diminished by
its being made much shorter, and by its consisting of an Air less comprest. And
thus much for the first of the two Considerations wherewith I promised to
conclude this second part of the present Tract. Only before I proceed I must
in a word desire the Reader to take notice, that though I have here singled out
but one of the nine Experiments which the Examiner in the 11. and 12. Chapters
reckons up as urged by his Adversaries; yet I do not thereby declare my
acquiescing in his Explications of those Phenomenon, but only leave both them
and some other things he delivers about Siphons and the Magdeburg Experiments,
to be discoursed by those that are more concerned to examine them, contenting
my self to have sufficiently disproved the Funiculus which his Expositions
suppose, and cleared the grounds of explicating such Experiments aright.

CHAP. V.
Two new Experiments touching the measure of the Force of the Spring of Air
compressed and dilated.

THe other thing that I would have considered touching our Adversaries
Hypothesis is, That it is needless. For whereas he denies not that the Air has
some Weight and Spring, but affirms that it is very insufficient to perform
Page 11.
such great matters as the counterpoising of a Mercurial Cylinder of 29.
Inches, as we teach that it may: We shall now endeavor to manifest by
Experiments purposely made, that the Spring of the Air is capable of doing far
more then it is necessary for us to ascribe to it, to salve the Phenomenon of
the Torricellian Experiment.

We took then a long Glass-Tube, which by a dexterous hand and the help of Lamp
was in such a manner crooked at the bottom, that the part turned up was almost
parallel to the rest of the Tube, and the Orifice of this shorter leg of the
Siphon (if I may so call the whole Instrument) being Hermetically sealed, the
length of it was divided into Inches, (each of which was subdivided into eight
parts) by a straight list of paper, which containing those Divisions was
carefully pasted all along it: then putting in as much Quicksilver as served to
fill the Arch or bended part of the Siphon, that the Mercury standing in a
level might reach in the one leg to the bottom of the divided paper, and just
to the same height or Horizontal line in the other; we took care, by frequently
inclining the Tube, so that the Air might freely passfrom one leg into the
other by the sides of the Mercury, (we took (I say) care) that the Air at last
included in the shorter Cylinder should be of the same laxity with the rest of
the Air about it. This done, we began to pour Quicksilver into the longer leg
of the Siphon, which by its weight pressing up that in the shorter leg, did by
degrees streighten the included Air: and continuing this pouring in of
Quicksilver till the Air in the shorter leg was by condensation reduced to take
up but half the space it possessed (I say, possessed, not filled) before; we
cast our eyes upon the longer leg of the Glass, on which was likewise pasted a
list of Paper carefully divided into Inches and parts, and we observed, not
without delight and satisfaction, that the Quicksilver in that longer part of
the Tube was 29. Inches higher then the other. Now that this Observation does
both very well agree with and confirm our Hypothesis, will be easily discerned
by him that takes notice that we teach, and Monsieur Paschall and our English
friends Experiments prove, that the greater the weight is that leans upon the
Air, the more forcible is its endeavor of Dilatation, and consequently its
power of resistance, (as other Springs are stronger when bent by greater
weights.) For this being considered, it will appear to agree rarely-well with
the Hypothesis, that as according to it the Air in that degree of density and
correspondent measure of resistance to which the weight of the incumbent
Atmosphere had brought it, was able to counter-balance and resist the pressure
of a Mercurial Cylinder of about 29. Inches, as we are taught by the
Torricellian Experiment; so here the same Air being brought to a degree of
density about twice as great as that it had before, obtains a Spring twice as
strong as formerly. As may appear by its being able to sustain or resist a
Cylinder of 29. Inches in the longer Tube, together with the weight of the
Atmospherical Cylinder, that leaned upon those 29. Inches of Mercury; and, as
we just now inferred from the Torricellian Experiment, was equivalent to them.

We were hindered from prosecuting the trial at that time by the casual
breaking of the Tube. But because an accurate Experiment of this nature would
be of great importance to the Doctrine of the Spring of the Air, and has not
yet been made (that I know) by any man; and because also it is more uneasy to
be made then one would think, in regard of the difficulty as well of procuring
crooked Tubes fit for the purpose, as of making a just estimate of the true
place of the Protuberant Mercury's surface; I suppose it will not be unwelcome
to the Reader, to be informed that after some other trials, one of which we
made in a Tube whose longer leg was perpendicular, and the other, that
contained the Air, parallel to the Horizon, we at last procured a Tube of the
Figure expressed in the Scheme; which Tube, though of a pretty bigness, was so
long, that the Sea the 5. Figure.
Cylinder whereof the shorter leg of it consisted admitted a list of Paper,
which had before been divided into 12. Inches and their quarters, and the
longer leg admitted another list of Paper of diverse foot in length, and divided
after the same manner: then Quicksilver being poured in to fill up the bended
part of the Glass, that the surface of it in either leg might rest in the same
Horizontal line, as we lately taught, there was more and more Quicksilver
poured into the longer Tube; and notice being watchfully taken how far the
Mercury was risen in that longer Tube, when it appeared to have ascended to any
of the divisions in the shorter Tube, the several Observations that were thus
successively made, and as they were made set down, afforded us the ensuing
Table.

A Table of the Condensation of the Air.
A A B C D E 48 12 00 Added to 29 makes 29 2/16 29 2/16 46 11 01 7/16 30 9/16
30 6/16 44 11 02 13/16 31 15/16 31 12/16 42 10 04 6/16 33 8/16 33 1/7 40 10 06
3/16 35 5/16 35 -- 38 9 07 14/16 37 -- 36 15/19 36 9 10 2/16 39 4/16 38 34 8 12
8/16 41 10/16 41 2/17 32 8 15 1/16 44 3/16 43 11/16 30 7 17 15/16 47 1/16 46 28
7 21 2/16 50 5/16 50 -- 26 6 25 3/16 54 5/16 53 10/13 24 6 29 11/16 58 13/16 58
2/8 23 5 32 3/16 61 5/16 60 18/23 22 5 34 15/16 64 1/16 63 6/11 21 5 37 15/16
67 1/16 66 4/7 20 5 41 9/16 70 11/16 70 -- 19 4 3/4 45 -- 74 2/16 73 11/19 18 4
48 12/16 77 14/16 77 17 4 53 11/16 82 12/16 82 4/17 16 4 58 2/16 87 14/16 87 15
3 63 15/16 93 2/16 93 14 3 71 5/16 100 7/16 99 6/7 13 3 78 11/16 107 12/16 107
7/13 12 3 88 7/16 117 9/16 116 4/8

A A. The number of equal spaces in the shorter leg, that contained the same
parcel of Air diversely extended.

B. The height of the Mercurial Cylinder in the longer leg, that compressed the
Air into those dimensions.

C. The height of a Mercurial Cylinder that counterbalanc'd the pressure of the
Atmosphere.

D. The Aggregate of the two last Columns B and C, exhibiting the pressure
sustained by the included Air.

E. What that pressure should be according to the Hypothesis, that supposes the
pressures and expansions to be in reciprocal proportion.

For the better understanding of this Experiment it may not be amiss to take
notice of the following particulars:

1. That the Tube being so tall that we could not conveniently make use of it
in a Chamber, we were fain to use it on a pair of Stairs, which yet were very
lightsom, the Tube being for preservations sake by strings so suspended, that
it did scarce touch the Box presently to be mentioned.

2. The lower and crooked part of the Pipe was placed in a square wooden Box,
of a good largness and depth, to prevent the loss of the Quicksilver that might
fall aside in the transfusion from the Vessel into the Pipe, and to receive the
whole Quicksilver in case the Tube should break.

3. That we were two to make the observation together, the one to take notice
at the bottom how the Quicksilver rose in the shorter Cylinder, and the other
to pour in at the top of the longer, it being very hard and troublesome for one
man alone to do both accurately.

4. That the Quicksilver was poured in but by little and little, according to
the direction of him that observed below, it being far easier to pour in more,
then to take out any in case too much at once had been poured in.

5. That at the beginning of the Operation, that we might the more truly
discern where the Quicksilver rested from time to time, we made use of a small
Looking-glass, held in a convenient posture to reflect to the eye what we
desired to discern.

6. That when the Air was so compressed, as to be crowded into less then a
quarter of the space it possessed before, we tried whether the cold of a Linen
Cloth dipped in water would then condense it. And it sometimes seemed a little
to shrink, but not so manifestly as that we dare build any thing upon it. We
then tried likewise whether heat would notwithstanding so forcible a
compressure dilate it, and approaching the flame of a Candle to that part where
the Air was pent up, the heat had a more sensible operation then the cold had
before; so that we scarce doubted but that the expansion of the Air would
notwithstanding the weight that oppressed it have been made conspicuous, if the
fear of unseasonably breaking the Glass had not kept us from increasing the
heat.

Now although we deny not but that in our Table some particulars do not so
exactly answer to what our formerly intimated Hypothesis might perchance invite
the Reader to expect; yet the Variations are not so considerable, but that they
may probably enough be ascribed to some such want of exactness as in such nice
Experiments is scarce avoidable. But for all that, till further trial has more
clearly informed me, I shall not venture to determine whether or no the
intimated Theory will hold universally and precisely, either in Condensation of
Air, or Rarefaction: all that I shall now urge being, That however, the trial
already made sufficiently proves the main thing for which I here allege it;
since by it it is evident, that as common Air when reduced to half its wonted
extent, obtained near about twice as forcible a Spring as it had before; so
this thus-comprest Air being further thrust into half this narrow room,
obtained thereby a Spring about as strong again as that it last had, and
consequently four times as strong as that of the common Air. And there is no
cause to doubt, that if we had been here furnished with a greater quantity of
Quicksilver and a very strong Tube, we might by a further compression of the
included Air have made it counter-balance the pressure of a far taller and
heavier Cylinder of Mercury. For no man perhaps yet knows how near to an
infinite compression the Air may be capable of, if the compressing force be
competently increast. So that here our Adversary may plainly see that the
Spring of the Air, which he makes so light of, may not only be able to resist
the weight of 29. Inches, but in some cases of above an hundred Inches of
Quicksilver, and that without the assistance of his Funiculus, which in our
present case has nothing to do. And to let you see that we did not (a little
above) inconsiderately mention the weight of the incumbent Atmospherical
Cylinder as a part of the weight resisted by the imprisoned Air, we will here
annex, that we took care, when the Mercurial Cylinder in the longer leg of the
Pipe was about an hundred Inches high, to cause one to suck at the open
Orifice; whereupon (as we expected) the Mercury in the Tube did notably ascend.
Which considerable Phenomenon cannot be ascribed to our Examiners Funiculus,
since by his own confession that cannot pull up the Mercury, if the Mercurial
Cylinder be above 29. or 30. Inches of Mercury. And therefore we shall render
this reason of it, That the pressure of the incumbent Air being in part taken
off by its expanding it self into the Suckers dilated chest; the imprisoned Air
was thereby enabled to dilate it self manifestly, and repel the Mercury that
comprest it, till there was an equality of force betwixt the strong Spring of
that comprest Air on the one part, and the tall Mercurial Cylinder, together
with the contiguous dilated Air, on the other part.

Now, if to what we have thus delivered concerning the compression of Air we
add some Observations concerning its spontaneous Expansion, it will the better
appear how much the Phenomenon of these Mercurial Experiments depend upon the
differing measures of strength to be met with in the Airs Spring, according to
its various degrees of Compression and Laxity. But, before I enter upon this
subject, I shall readily acknowledge that I had not reduced the trials I had
made about measuring the Expansion of the Air to any certain Hypothesis, when
that ingenious Gentleman Mr. Richard Townely was pleased to inform me, that
having by the perusal of my Physico-Mechanical Experiments been satisfied that
the Spring of the Air was the cause of it, he had endeavored (and I wish in
such attempts other ingenious men would follow his example) to supply what I
had omitted concerning the reducing to a precise estimate how much Air dilated
of it self loses of its Elastical force, according to the measures of its
Dilatation. He added, that he had begun to set down what occurred to him to
this purpose in a short Discourse, whereof he afterward did me the favor to
show me the beginning, which gives me a just Curiosity to see it perfected.
But, because I neither know, nor (by reason of the great distance betwixt our
places of residence) have at present the opportunity to enquire, whether he
will think fit to annex his Discourse to our Appendix, or to publish it by it
self, or at all; and because he has not yet, for ought I know, met with fit
Glasses to make an any-thing-accurate Table of the Decrement of the force of
dilated Air; our present design invites us to present the Reader with that
which follows, wherein I had the assistance of the same person that I took
notice of in the former Chapter, as having written something about Rarefaction:
whom I the rather make mention of on this occasion, because when he first heard
me speak of Mr. Townley's suppositions about the proportion wherein Air loses
of its Spring by Dilatation, he told me he had the year before (and not long
after the publication of my Pneumatical Treatise) made Observations to the same
purpose, which he acknowledged to agree well enough with Mr. Townley's Theory:
And so did (as their Author was pleased to tell me) some Trials made about the
same time by that Noble Virtuoso and eminent Mathematician the Lord Brouncker,
from whose further Enquiries into this matter, if his occasions will allow him
to make them, the Curious may well hope for something very accurate.

A Table of the Rarefaction of the Air.
A B C D E 1 00 0/0 Subttracted from 29 leaves 29 29 1 1/2 10 19 19 2 15 14 14
3 20 2/8 9 4/8 9 15/12 4 22 7 7 7/16 5 24 5 5 19/20 6 24 4 4 23/24 7 25 4/8 4
2/8 4 8 26 0/0 3 6/8 3 23/32 9 26 3 1/8 3 11/36 10 26 6/8 3 0/0 2 39/40 12 27 2
2 23/48 14 27 4/8 2 2/8 2 16 27 6/8 2 0/0 1 5^/64 18 27 1 1 47/72 20 28 ^/^ 1
6/8 18 9/0 24 28 2/8 1 4/8 1 23/96 28 28 1 1 1/16 32 28 4/8 1 2/8 0 119/128

A. The number of equal spaces at the top of the Tube, that contained the same
parcel of Air.

B. The height of the Mercurial Cylinder, that together with the Spring of the
included Air counterbalanced the pressure of the Atmosphere.

C. The pressure of the Atmosphere.

D. The Complement of B to C, exhibiting the pressure sustained by the included
Air.

E. What that pressure should be according to the Hypothesis.

To make the Experiment of the debilitated force of expanded Air the plainer,
'twill not be amiss to note some particulars, especially touching the manner of
making the Trial; which (for the reasons lately mentioned) we made on a
lightsome pair of stairs, and with a Box also lined with Paper to receive the
Mercury that might be spilt. And in regard it would require a vast and in few
places procurable quantity of Quicksilver, to employ vessels of such kind as
are ordinary in the Torriccllian Experiment, we made use of a Glass-Tube of
about six foot long, for that being Hermetically sealed at one end, served our
turn as well as if we could have made the Experiment in a Tub or Pond of
seventy Inches deep.

Secondly, We also provided a slender Glass-Pipe of about the bigness of a
Swans Quill, and open at both ends: all along which was pasted a narrow list of
Paper divided into Inches and half quarters.

Thirdly, This slender Pipe being thrust down into the greater Tube almost
filled with Quicksilver, the Glass helped to make it swell to the top of the
Tube, and the Quicksilver getting in at the lower orifice of the Pipe, filled
it up till the Mercury included in that was near about a level with the surface
of the surrounding Mercury in the Tube.

Fourthly, There being, as near as we could guess, little more then an Inch of
the slender Pipe left above the surface of the restagnant Mercury, and
consequently unfill'd therewith, the prominent orifice was carefully closed
with sealing Wax melted; after which the Pipe was let alone for a while, that
the Air dilated a little by the heat of the Wax, might upon refrigeration be
reduced to its wonted density. And then we observed by the help of the
abovementioned list of Paper, whether we had not included somewhat more or
somewhat less then an Inch of Air, and in either case we were fain to rectify
the error by a small hole made (with an heated Pin) in the Wax, and afterward
closed up again.

Fifthly, Having thus included a just Inch of Air, we listed up the slender
Pipe by degrees, till the Air was dilated to an Inch, an Inch and an half, two
Inches, etc. and observed in Inches and Eighths, the length of the Mercurial
Cylinder, which at each degree of the Airs expansion was impelled above the
surface of the restagnant Mercury in the Tube.

Sixthly, The Observations being ended, we presently made the Torricellian
Experiment with the abovementioned great Tube of six foot long, that we might
know the height of the Mercurial Cylinder, for that particular day and hour;
which height we found to be 29 Inches.

Seventhly, Our Observations made after this manner furnished us with the
preceding Table, in which there would not probably have been found the
difference here set down betwixt the force of the Air when expanded to double
its former dimensions, and what that force should have been precisely according
to the Theory, but that the included Inch of Air received some little accession
during the Trial; which this newly-mention'd difference making us suspect, we
found by replunging the Pipe into the Quicksilver, that the included Air had
gained about half an eighth, which we guest to have come from some little
aerial bubbles in the Quicksilver, contained in the Pipe (so easy is it in
such nice Experiments to miss of exactness.) We tried also with 12. Inches of
Air shut up to be dilated; but being then hindered by some unwelcome avocations
to prosecure those Experiments, we shall elsewhere, out of other Notes and
Trials (God permitting) set down some other accurate Tables concerning this
matter. By which possibly we may be assisted to resolve whether the Atmosphere
should be looked upon (as it usually is) as a limited and bounded Portion of
the Air; or whether we should in a stricter sense then we did before, use the
Atmosphere and Aereal part of the World for almost equivalent terms; or else
whether we should allow the word Atmosphere some other notion in relation to
its Extent and Limits; (for as to its Spring and Weight, these Experiments do
not question, but evince them.) But we are willing, as we said, to refer
these matters to our Appendix, and till then to retain our wonted manner of
speaking of the Air and Atmosphere. In the mean time (to return to our
last-mention'd Experiments) besides that so little a variation may be in great
part imputed to the difficulty of making Experiments of this nature exactly,
and perhaps a good part of it to something of inequality in the Cavity of the
Pipe, or even in the thickness of the Glass; besides this, I say, the
proportion betwixt the several pressures of the included Air undilated and
expanded, especially when the Dilatation was great (for when the Air swelled
but to four times its first extent, the Mercurial Cylinder, though of near 23.
Inches, differed not a quarter of an Inch from what it should have been
according to Mathematical exactness) the proportion, I say, was suitable enough
to what might be expected, to allow us to make this reflection upon the whole,
That whether or no the intimated Theory will hold exactly, (for about that, as
I said above, I dare determine nothing resolutely till I have further
considered the matter) yet since the Inch of Air when it was first included was
shut up with no other pressure then that which it had from the weight of the
incumbent Air, and was no more comprest then the rest of the Air we breathed
and moved in; and since also this Inch of Air, when expanded to twice its
former dimensions, was able with the help of a Mercurial Cylinder of about 15.
Inches to counterpoise the weight of the Atmosphere, which the weight of the
external Air gravitating upon the restagnant Mercury was able to impell up into
the Pipe, and sustain above twenty eight Inches of Mercury when the internal
Air by its great expansion had its Spring too far debilitated to make any
considerable (I say considerable, for it was not yet so dilated as not to make
some) resistance: since, I say, these things are so, the free Air here below
appears to be almost as strongly comprest by the weight of the incumbent Air as
it would be by the Weight of a Mercurial Cylinder of twenty eight or thirty
Inches; and consequently is not in such a state of laxity and freedom as men
are wont to imagine; and acts like some mechanical Agent, the decreement of
whose force holds a stricter proportion to its increase of dimension, then has
been hitherto taken notice of.

I must not now stand to propose the several reflections that may be made upon
the foregoing Observations touching the Compression and Expansion of Air;
partly because we could scarce avoid making the Historical part somewhat
prolix; and partly because I suppose we have already said enough to show what
was intended, namely, that to solve the Phenomenon there is not of our
Adversaries Hypothesis any need: the evincing of which will appear to be of no
small moment in our present Controversy, to him that considers, that the two
maine things that induced the Learned Examiner to reject our Hypothesis are,
that Nature abhors a Vacuum, and that though the Air have some Weight and
Spring, yet these are insufficient to make out the known Phenomenon; for which
we must therefore have recourse to his Funiculus. Now as we have formerly seen,
that he has not so satisfactorily disproved as resolutely rejected a Vacuum, so
we have now manifested that the Spring of the Air may suffice to perform
greater things then what our Explication of the Torricellian Experiments and
those of our Engine obliges us to ascribe to it. Wherefore since besides the
several difficulties that incumber the Hypothesis we oppose, and especially its
being scarce, if at all, intelligible, we can add that it is unnecessary; we
dare expect that such Readers as are not biased by their reverence for
Aristotle or the Peripatetick Schools, will hardly reject an Hypothesis which,
besides that it is very intelligible, is now proved to be sufficient, only to
embrace a Doctrine that supposes such a rarefaction and condensation, as many
famous Naturalists rejected for its not being comprehensible, even when they
knew of no other way (that was probable) of solving the Phenomenon wont to be
explicated by it.

The III. Part.
Wherein what is objected against Mr. Boyle's Explications of particular
Experiments, is answered.

AND now we are come to the third and last Part of our Defense; wherein we are
to consider what our Examiner is pleased to object against some passages of our
Physicho-Mechanical Treatise. But though this may seem the only part wherein I
am particularly concerned; yet perhaps we shall find it, if not the shortest,
at least the easiest, part of our Task. Partly, because our Author takes no
exceptions at the Experiments themselves, as we have recorded them (which from
an Adversary, who in some places speaks of them as an eyewitness, is no
contemptible testimony that the matters of fact have been rightly delivered:)
and partly, because there are diverse Experiments which, together with their
Explications, the Examiner has thought fit to leave untoucht, and thereby
allows us to do so too: and partly also, because that (as to diverse of those
Experiments upon which he animadverts) he does not pretend to show that our
Explications are ill deduced or incongruous to our principles; but only that
the Phenomenon may be explained either better or as well by his Hypothesis,
whereof he supposes himself to have demonstrated the truth, together with the
erroneousness of ours, in the other parts of his book, especially the third,
fourth and fifth Chapters. So that after what we have said to vindicate the
Hypothesis we maintain, and take away our Authors imaginary Funiculus; it will
not be requisite for us on such occasions to examine his particular Assertions
and Explications. Which Advertisement we hope the Reader will be pleased to
bear in mind, and thereby save himself and us the trouble of a great deal of
unnecessary repetition. Wherefore presuming he will do so, we shall not stay to
examine the first and second Corollaries, which in his 17. Chapter he annexes
to the manner of emptying our Receiver by our Pump. Neither should we say any
thing as to his third and last Corollary, but that we think fit to desire the
Reader to take notice, that according to what he teaches in that place, the
more the Air is rarefied, the more forcibly it is able to contract it self.

A defense of our 1. and 2. Experiments.
And to proceed now to his 18 Chapter, which he intitles De Experiment is
Boyleanis, we shall find according to what we lately noted, that against the
First Experiment he objects nothing save that, if one of the Fingers be applied
to the Orifice of the Valve when the Pump is freed from Air, the Experimenter
shall feel to his pain that the Sucker is not thrust inward by the external
Air, but, as the Finger, drawn inward by the internal. But this Phenomenon of
the intrusion of the Finger into a Cavity, where it finds no resistance, having
been formerly accounted for according to our Hypothesis, we shall not need to
repeat our Explication of it; though this mistaken Phenomenon supplies our
Adversary with diverse of his following Animadversions, and indeed with a great
part of his book. And accordingly his Objection against our Second Experiment
being of the same nature with that against the first, requires but the same
Answer: For it will not alter the case that he adds upon this Experiment, Hoc
esse discrimen manifestum inter pressionem and suctionem, quod suctio efficiat
hujusmodi adhaesionem, pressio autem minime; since to say so is but to affirm,
not to prove.

The 3. Experiment.
What our Author would except against the 3. Experiment he ought to have more
intelligibly expressed: For whereas of a Discourse wherein I deliver several
particulars, he only says that Nullatenus satisfacit, ut legenti constabit; I
would not do the Reader the injury to suspect him of taking this proofless
Assertion for a rational Confutation; especially since upon the review of that
third Experiment I find nothing that agrees not with my Hypothesis, however it
may disagree with the Examiners. But, to consider the Explication he
substitutes in the room of our Doctrine, which he rejects, he gives it us in
these words; Hoc quoque Experimentum principiis nostris optime convenit: Cum
enim per illam Emboli depressionem aer in cavitate brachii inclusus separetur
ab eodem brachio, descendatque simul cum Embolo (uti de aqua simul cum argento
vivo descendente capite decimo tertio vidimus) fit ut in tota illa depressione,
novae semper ab aere illo desoendente supersicies diripiantur simul and
extendantur, ut ibidem de aqua est explicatum: cum itaque aeque facile
diripiantur and extendantur hujusmodi superficies in fine depressionis ac
initio, mirum non est quod eadem utrobique sentiatur deprimendi difficultas.

By which though he seems to intend an Opposition to that part of the third
Experiment which I opposed not against his Opinion, but that of some learned
Vacuists: yet (not to mention that he seems to have somewhat mistaken my sense)
he offers nothing at all to invalidate my inference against them; but instead
of that proposes a defense of his own Opinion, which supposes the truth of his
disproved Hypothesis, and is either unsatisfactory even according to that, or
else disagrees with what himself has taught us but a little before. For it is
evident that the more the Sucker is depressed, the more the Cylinder is
exhausted of Air. And in his third Corollary (which we lately desired the
Reader to observe) speaking of the Air in the Receiver (and the case is the
same with the Air in the Cylinder) he affirms more then once, Eo magis extendi
ac rarefieri aerem relictum, quo plus inde exhauritur, majoremque proinde
acquirere vim sese contrahendi. Whereas here he would have us believe, that the
little internal Air that was in the Cavity of the shank of the Stop cock, does
as strongly retract the Sucker, or, which in our case is all one, refist its
depression, when the Sucker is yet near the top of the Cylinder, (and
consequently when the included Air is but a little dilated) as when the same
Sucker being forced down to the lower part of the Cylinder, the same portion of
remaining Air must be exceedingly more distended.

The 4. Experiment.
In the Fourth Experiment, touching the swelling of a Bladder upon the removal
of the ambient Air; and proportionably to that removal our Author objects
nothing against the Explication we give of it by the Spring of the Air included
in the Bladder, and distending it according as the pressure of the ambient Air
is weakened. But he endeavors also to explicate it his way, to which he says
this circumstance does excellently agree, that upon the regress of the external
Air into the Receiver, the tumid Bladder immediately shrinks, because (says
he) by such ingress of the external Air, the Air in the Receiver, which drew
the sides of the Bladder outward from the middle of it, is relaxed. Which
Explication whether it be more natural then ours (that ascribes the shrinking
of the Bladder to the pressure of the Air that is let into the Receiver) let
the Reader judge, who has considered what we have formerly objected against the
Examiners Funiculus, and the Relaxation of it upon the admission of Air.

As for the reason likewise he adds, why a perforated Bladder does not also
swell, namely, that by the hole, how little soever, the included Air is sucked
out by the rarefi'd ambient, we leave it to the impartial Reader to consider
whether is the more genuine Explication, either ours (against which he has
nothing to object) or his, which to make clearly out he ought (according to
what we formerly noted disputing against his Funiculus) to show us what kind of
strings they are; which though, according to him, strongly fastened to the
inside of the Receiver and the superficies of the Bladder, must draw just as
forcibly one as another, how long soever they be without the Bladder in
comparison of those that within the Bladder draw so as to hinder the diduction
of its sides. For Experience shows, that in a perforated Bladder the wrinkles
continue as if there were no drawing at all.

And though he could describe how such a string may be context, yet our
Explication will have this advantage in point of probability above his, That
whereas he denies not that the Air has Spring and Weight, as we deny his
Funiculus to have any other then an imaginary existence; and whereas he
acknowledges that by the Instrument the Air about the Bladder is exhausted; to
show that there needs no more then that, and consequently no Funiculus, to draw
asunder the sides of the Bladder, we can confirm our Explication by the
formerly mentioned Experiment of the ingenious Paschall, who carrying a flaccid
Football from the bottom to the top of a high Mountain, found it to swell
proportionably as he ascended, and as the weight and pressure of the ambient
Air decreased, and likewise to shrink again as he descended. And yet in this
case there is no recourse to be had to a Funiculus of violently-rarefi'd Air to
draw asunder every way the sides of the Football. But however the Examiner
will be able to defend his Explication, it may suffice us that he has objected
nothing against ours.

The 5. Experiment.
Against the cause we assign of the fifth Experiment he likewise objects
nothing, but only ascribes the breaking of the Bladder to the self-contraction
of the rarefi'd Air in the Receiver. And therefore referring the Reader to what
we have newly said about the last Experiment, we will with our Author pass over
the sixth and seventh, to which he has no quarrel, and proceed to the eighth.

The 8. Experiment.
This is that wherein we mention our having broke a Glass-Receiver, which was
not globular, by the exhaustion of most of the inward Air, whereby its
debilitated pressure became unable to resist the unweakned pressure of the
outward Air. But this Explication the Examiner confidently rejects in these
words, At profecto non videtur credibile, mollissimum hunc aerem tam vehementer
vitrum (tantae praesertim crassitudin is quantae ibidem dicitur) undique sic
comprimere ut illud perfring at: as if it were more credible that the little
Air within (which, according to him, is so much thinner then common Air) should
be able to act more powerfully upon the Glass then the Air without, which
himself confesses to be a heavy body, and which not only reaches from the
surface of the Earth to the top of the highest Mountains, but which (as may not
improbably be argued from what we have elsewhere delivered) may, for ought we
know to the contrary, be heaped upon the Receiver to the height of some
hundreds of Miles, nay, to I know not how many thousands, in case the
Atmosphere be not a bounded port on of the Air, See Part 2. C 5.
but reach as high as It.

As for the Explication he substitutes in these words, Verius itaque
respondetur, ideo sic fractum esse illud vitrum, quia per exhaustionem illam
latera ejus vehementius introrsum sint attracta, quam ut ob figuram illam
resistendo minus idoneam resistere potuerunt. Cum enim inclusus aer lateribus
vitri firmissime adhaereat, nihil aliud erit aerem illum sic exhaurire, quam
satagere latera vitri introrsum flectere: By what we have already discoursed
about the Funiculus, the Reader may easily discern what is to be answered. Nor
does our Author here show us any way by which his imaginary strings should take
such fast hold of the sides of the Glass, as to be able to draw them together
notwithstanding the resistance they find from the close texture of the Body to
be broken.

The 9. Experiment.
Our Explication of the ninth Experiment he handles very severely: for having
briefly recited it, he proposes his Objection against it thus, Sed profecto
nimis long videtur hoc a veritate recedere: potestque vel inde solum satis
refutari; quia si tanta sit pressura aeris sic per tubum illum in phialam
descendent is, ut ipsam phialam perfringat, deberet profecto inclusam aquam,
cui immergitur ille tubus, valde quoque ante fractionem phialae commovere,
bullulasque in eadem excitaro, etc. ut constat, siquis, insufflando per illum
tubulum, aquam vel mediocriter sic premat. At certum est aquam, antequam
frangatur sit phiala, nec tantillum moveri: ut experienti constabit.

But, I do confess, I do for all this think our Explication more true, then
well considered by our Author. For the putting of water into the Vial that was
broken, was done (as is clearly intimated in the beginning of our Narrative)
upon a particular design (as indeed we tried diverse other things with our
Engine, not so much with immediate reference to the Spring of the Air, as to
make use of such Trials in some other of our Writings.) And accordingly in the
second Trial mentioned in the same Experiment the water was omitted. But,
notwithstanding this water, the sides of the Glass being exposed to the
pressure of the Atmosphere, had that whole pressure against them before the
exhaustion of the Receiver; so that there needed no such blowing in of the Air
afresh as our Author imagines, to effect the breaking of the Vial, it being
sufficient for that purpose, that the pressure against the unequal superficies
of it was taken off by the exhaustion of the Receiver, the pressure against the
concave superficies remaining as great as ever. And therefore we need not
altogether deny what the Examiner says, that Licet clausus superne fuisset
tubulus ille, codem tamen modo fracta sine dubio, fuisset phiala. For, since in
such cases the Air (as we have often taught) is shut up with the whole pressure
of the Atmosphere upon it, it may almost as easily break the Glass as if it
were unstopt. And accordingly we mention in the 36. Experiment the breaking of
a thin Glass Hermetically sealed upon the recess of the ambient Air. But, how
confidently soever our Author speaks, I thought fit to add the word almost,
because we observed in the 39. Experiment, that such thin Vials (and thick ones
will not break) are subject upon the withdrawing of the ambient Air to retch a
little, whereby the Spring of the Air within the Vial might in some cases (I
say, in some) be so far weakened as not to be able to break it, unless assisted
by the pressure of the Atmosphere wherewith it communicates, and which leans
upon it. And when the Vial does actually begin to break, then the pursuing
pressure of the outward Air upon the yielding Air within the Vial may help to
throw the parts of the Glass more forcibly asunder.

All the Experiments from the 9. to the 17. exclusively our Examiner leaving
uncensured, we may with him, advance to the consideration of the 17.

The 17. Experiment defended.
In this we relate how, when we made the Torricellian Experiment, we shut up
the restagnant Mercury together with the Tube and the suspended Mercurial
Cylinder (of about 29. Inches) in our Receiver, that by drawing off and letting
in the Air at pleasure upon the restagnant Mercury, and consequently weakening
and increasing its pressure, we might make it more clearly appear then hither
to had been done by Experiment, that the suspension of the Mercurial Cylinder,
and the height of it, depended upon the greater or lesser pressure of the Air.
But against our Explication of this Experiment (which has had the good fortune
to convince and satisfy many ingenious men) the Examiner objects nothing in
particular, contenting himself to have recourse here also to his Funiculus. Yet
two observations of ours he is pleased to take notice of.

The first is, that though the Quicksilver were exactly shut up into our
Receiver after the manner newly declared, yet the suspended Quicksilver did not
descend: whence having said that I argue, that it is now sustained not by the
Counterpoise of the Atmosphere, but by the Spring of the Air shut up in the
Receiver, he subjoyns only this, Sed rectius sane infertur, Cylindrum illum
nihil ibidem antea praestitisse. But whether this be not gratis dictum we leave
the Reader to collect from what we have formerly discourst in the second Part
of this Defense of the Spring of the Air; especially from that Experiment; by
which it appears, That Spring may sustain a far higher Cylinder of Quicksilver.

In the second Observation he mentions of ours, he summarily recites our
Explication of the descent and ascent of the Mercury in the Tube, by the
debilitated and strengthened Spring of the Air. But without finding fault with
our application of that principle to the Phenomenon, he says that he has
sufficiently refuted the principle it self in the fourth Chapter, (which how
well he has done we have already seen) and therefore explicates the matter
thus; Dico igitur (says he) argentum per illam exhaustionem sic in tubo
descendere, quod deorsum traha^ur ab aere qui incumbit argento restagnanti:
siquidem incumbens ille aer jam per exhaustionem valde rarefactus and extensus,
sese vehementer contrahit, and contrahendo conatur etiam subjectum sibi
argentum restagnans e suo vasculo elevare, unde fit ut (argento illo
restagnante minus jam gravitante in fundum sui vasculi) argentum quod est in
tubo descendat; ut per se patet. Adeoque mirum non est, quod, ingrediente
postea aere externo, rursum argentum ascendat, cum per illum ingressum vis illa
sic elevans argentum restagnans debilitetur. But this Explication supposing
such a Funiculus as we have already shown to be but fictitious, the Reader will
easily gather what is to be judged of it from what has been already delivered.
Wherefore I shall only subioyn, that by this Explication, were it admitted,
there is only an account given of that part of our seventeenth Experiment
which relates to the descent of the Mercury below its wonted height, and its
re-ascent to it. But as for our having, by the forcing in some more Air into
the Receiver, impelled the Quicksilver to a considerably-greater height then
it is wont to be sustained at in the Torricellian Experiment, I confess I
understand not how the Examiner gives an account of it in the following words,
(which are immediately annexed to those we last recited of his, and which are
all that he employes to explicate this notable Phenomenon) Atque hinc etiam
redditur ratio alterius quod ibidem quoque notaiur, nempe quod per violentam
intrusionem aeris externt in Recipientem, ascenderit argentum notabiliter supra
digitos 29. Nam sicut per extractionem aeris argentum infra stationem
detrahitur, sic etiam per intrusionem novi supra eandem elevabitur. For in this
passage I see not how he himself does not rather repeat the matter of fact,
then give any account how it is performed. And if it be alleged on his behalf,
That according to his principles it may be said that, upon the pressure of the
adventitious Air upon the restagnant Mercury, the Funiculus in the Tube, that
was not able before to draw it up above 29. Inches, is now enabled to draw it
up higher; I demand upon what account this new Air does thus press against the
restagnant Mercury, and impell up and sustain that in the Tube. It will not be
said that it is by its weight; for as much Mercury as may be thus impelled up
above the usual station will weigh a great many times more then the Air forced
into the Receiver. And therefore it remains that the additional Air
counterpoises the additional Mercury by its Spring. And if we consider withal,
that there is no reason to doubt, (especially considering what we have formerly
delivered upon trial touching the power of comprest Air to impell up
Quicksilver) but that, had we not been afraid of breaking our Vessel, we might
by forcing more Air into the Receiver have impelled it up to the top of the
Tube, and kept it there; we shall scarce deny but that, supposing there could
be no such Funiculus as our Examiner's in rerum natura, the pressure of the
incumbent Air alone might suffice to keep a correspondent Cylinder of Mercury
suspended: and that without any attraction of the restagnant Mercury by a
Funiculus of violently distended Air in the Receiver, the Quicksilver in the
Tube may be made to rest at any height greater or lesser, provided it exceed
30. Inches, only because its weight is just able to counterbalance the
pressure of the contiguous Air.

I know not whether I may not add (to express an unwillingness to omit what
some may think proper to do my Adversary right) that it may be said for the
Examiner, that he in the 11. page acknowledging with us a power in the Air to
recover its due extension if it be crowded into less room then its disposition
requires; a man may from that principle solve the Phenomenon in question by
saying, that the Air in the Receiver being forcibly comprest by the intrusion
of fresh Air into the same vessel, does by its endeavor to recover its due
expansion press upon the restagnant Mercury, and force up some of it into the
Tube. But this Explication, though it agree with what the Author teaches in a
place very distant from his Notes upon our 17. Experiment, now under debate;
yet still it is not clear to me how, by what he says in these Notes, the
Phenomenon is accounted for as the word Hinc imports it to be. But otherwise I
need not quarrel with the Explication, since without recurring to the Funiculus
for the sustaining of the additional Mercury, the solution of the Phenomenon
is given upon the same principle that I employ.

The 18. Experiment.
Our Examiner in his Animadversion upon the 18. Experiment, having recited my
Conjecture at the cause why a Cylinder of Mercury did in Winter rise and fall
in the Tube, sometimes as Water is wont to do in a Weather-glass, according to
the laws of heat and cold, and sometimes quite contrary thereunto; adds, that
this Experiment does strongly enough overthrow our Hypothesis of the
Atmospherical Cylinder, and clearly show that the Quicksilver is not sustained
by it: Nam (says he) si hic ab eo sustentatum fuisset, debuisset potius
frigidiore tempore ascendere quam descendere, eo quod aer tunc multo densior
esset and gravior. Itaque non sustentatur argentu^ ab aer is aequipondio, ut
asseritur. And by the same Argument he concludes against the Mercury's being
sustained by the Spring of the Air. But in his Animadversions upon this
Experiment he seems to have been too forward to reprehend; for he neither well
confutes my Conjecture, nor substitutes so much as a plausible one in the stead
of it. And as to his Objection I answer,

First, That it does not conclude: because that as sometimes the Quicksilver in
the Tube did rise in warmer, and fall in colder, weather; so at other times it
did rather emulate the ascent and descent of water in a Weather-glass.

Secondly, Though it be true, that Cold is wont to condense this or that parcel
of Air, and that a parcel of Air may be made heavier by Condensation; yet that
is in regard of the ambient Air that retains its wonted laxity, in which the
condensed Air is weighed. But our Author has not yet proved, that in case the
cold of the Winter should condense the whole incumbent Atmosphere, it would
then gravitate sensibly more upon the restagnant Quicksilver then before. As a
Pound of Wool will not sensibly vary its weight, though the hairs whereof it
is composed be made to lie sometimes in a looser, sometimes in a closer, order.

And, thirdly, this Objection does as little agree with his Doctrine as with my
Conjecture: For in the 50. page, where he gives us an account according to his
principles of the rising and falling of water in a Weather-glass, and compares
it with the suspension of Quicksilver, he tells us, Hinc fit quod, contracto
hoc funiculo per frigus, aqua illa tempore frigido ascendat, descendat autem
tempore calido, eo quod per calorem funiculus ille dilatetur. So that,
according to the Examiner himself, the Quicksilver ought to have ascended in
colder, and descended in warmer, weather. Now, although I proposed my thoughts
of the difficult Phenomenon under consideration but as a Conjecture, and
therefore shall be ready to alter them, either upon further discovery, or
better information; yet I see not why it should be post-posed to the
Examiner's, who, though he rejects our Explication, substitutes no other then
what may be gathered from these words, Ego certe non dubito quin dentur
hujusmodi occultae causae, quibus funiculus ille subtilis, quo in tubo
suspenditur argentum (ut dictum est capite decimo) modo producatur, modo
abbrevietur, etc. sicque argentum nunc demittat, nunc elevet. For, since we
have made it probable that the copious Fumes, sometimes suddenly ascending into
the Air, and rolling up and down in it, sometimes sensibly altering (if good
Authors may be credited) the refraction of it, and since some other causes,
mentioned in our eighteenth Experiment, may alter the density and gravity of
the Air that leans upon the restagnant Mercury; I suppose the Reader will think
it more intelligible and probable, that alterations, other then those produced
by heat and cold, may happen to the incumbent Atmosphere, which freely
communicates with the neighboring Air, and may thereby become sometimes more
stufft, and sometimes more destitute of adventitious Exhalations; then that
such changes should happen to a Funiculus included in Glass, which according to
our Author is impervious to the subtilest steams that are, and concerning which
he offers not so much as a Conjecture upon what other account it can happen to
be sometimes contracted, and sometimes stretched.

The 19. Experiment.
Upon this the Examiner has only this short Animadversion, In decimo nono
ostendit aquam eodem modo per exhaustionem Recipient is descendere, quo in
praecedente descendere ostender at argentum vivum; cujus cum eadem sit ratio,
non est cur amplius ei insistamus. In which words since he offers nothing new
or peculiar to show any incongruity in our Explication to our principles, which
agree very well with the new Phenomenon of the Experiment; we are content to
leave the Reader to judge of the Hypotheses themselves, which of the two is the
more probable, either ours, that only requires that the Air in the Receiver
should equally resist a Cylinder of Water and of Quicksilver, when their weight
is but the same, though their altitudes be not; or the Examiner's, which exacts
that (according to what we formerly elsewhere noted) Bodies of such differing
nature and texture as Quicksilver and Water should need but just the same
weight or strength to rarefie them into a Funiculus.

The 20. Experiment.
In his Examen of this Experiment our Author makes me infer from the Phenomenon
he repeats, that not only the Air, but the Water also has a Spring. But though
I suspect not that he does wilfully mistake my sense, yet by what I write in
this and the following Experiments the Reader may well enough perceive, that I
spoke but very doubtfully of a Spring in the water; nay, and that I did in the
154. page expressly teach, That the intumescence of it might (at least in great
part) proceed from that of the small parcels of Air, which I thought to be
usually harbored in the body of that liquor.

But whereas I ascribe the appearance of the Bubbles in the water to this, that
upon the exhaustion of some of the Air incumbent on the water, the pressure of
what remains is much debilitated, whereby the little Particles of Air lurking
in the Water are allowed to expand themselves into bubbles; he rejects this
Explication as manifestly false: Nam (says Sed contra manifest.
he) si it a sieret, deberent profecto hujusmodi bullulae non e fundo vasis sic
ascendere, (uti tam in hoc quam in sequentibus experiment is in quibus de istis
bullis agitur semper asseritur) sed e superiore part aquae, ubi minus
premuntur, ut per se est manifestum. But why he should be here so peremptory I
confess I do not, for all this Objection, yet see: For in the bottom of the
next page he says, he will not deny but that Aerial Particles latitant in the
other parts of the water (he had before spoken of the bottom of it) may be
extended into bubbles by his way of Rarefaction. And that we particularly
mentioned the rising of bubbles, even from the bottom of the water, was because
that circumstance seemed to deserve a peculiar note; and not (as he seems to
imagine) as if the bubbles did not also rise from the superior parts of the
liquor, since we did take notice of it about the middle of the 149 page. And we
often in this and See also in the 43. Experim. these passages, -- And this
Effervescence was so great in the upper part of the water, etc. As also, -- The
Effervescence was confined to the upper part of the water, unless, etc.
the following Experiments observed, that the ascending bubbles grew bigger the
nearer they came to the top. Which agrees more clearly with our Hypothesis,
wherein their conspicuous swelling as they ascend is attributed more to the
lessening of the pressure of the incumbent Air then to the decrement of the
weight of the incumbent water, (since when the surface of this liquor is leaned
upon by the Atmosphere, the ascending bubbles scarce sensibly increase in
Vessels no deeper then ours) then with the Explication which the Examiner gives
in these words, Respondeo, aquam per illam aeris exhaustionem non sponte sic
ascendere, sed sursum violenter trahi, ac elevari a rarefacto illo aere sese
contrahente. Quemadmodum enim aqua aliqualem patitur compressionem (ut
experientia constat) ita and aliqualem quoque hic patitur, distensionem. Atque
hinc clare patet, cur potius a fundo vasis quam a part aquae superiore
oriantur hujusmodi bullae. Cum enim vehemens illa suctio conetur aquam a fundo
phialae elevare, nascitur ibidem subtilis quaedam materia quae in bullas
conversa sic ascendit, uti capite decimo quinto in quarto Experimento dictum
est. For, whatever he may think, it does not hence so clearly appear how the
endeavor only of the Funiculus to draw up the water from the bottom of the
Vial, to which, that endeavor notwithstanding, it remains contiguous, should
generate in some parts of the bottom of the Glass, and not in others, such a
subtle matter as he tells us of. And I suppose the Reader will, as well as I,
wish he had more intelligibly declared how this strange generation of subtle
matter comes to be effected. And I presume it will likewise be exected that he
also declare, why both in our case and in the Torricellian Experiment the
bubbles grow so much larger by being nearer the top of the liquor; if, as he
rejects our Explication of this Circumstance, the effect of the fuction he
speaks of be greater upon the lower part of the liquor then the upper, to which
alone nevertheless his Funiculus, that is said so to draw the liquor, is
contiguous.

Our Author making no particular Objection against the 10. following
Experiments, we also shall pass them by, and fall with him upon the
consideration of the 31. Experiment.

The 31. Experiment.
Upon this our Author having recited our Conjecture at the cause why two very
flat and smooth Marbles stick so closely together, that by lifting up the
uppermost you may take up also the lowermost, approves my way of examining that
Conjecture. But whereas I say that the reason why, though the Marbles were kept
together by the pressure of the ambient Air, yet they did not fall asunder in
our exhausted Receiver, no not though a weight of 4. Ounces were hung at the
lower stone, might be, that by reason of some small leak in the Receiver the
Air could not be sufficiently drawn out: yet he tells us with his wonted
confidence, Certum esse, sententiam illam vel hoc solo Experimento satis
refelli. But possibly he would have spoken less resolutely, if he had made all
the trials about the adhesion of Marbles that we relate our selves to have made
in the short History we have published of Fluidity and Firmness. For our
Examiner speaks as if all that we ascribe to the Air in such Experiments were
to sustain the lower Marble with the weight perhaps of a few Ounces: Whereas in
case the Air be kept from getting in at all between the stones, it may
(according to our Hypothesis) sustain a Weight either altogether or well-nigh
equal to that of a pillar of Air as broad as the Basis of the lower Marble, and
as long as the Atmosphere is high, or to the weight of a pillar of Quicksilver
of the same thickness, and about 30. Inches long; these two pillars appearing
by the Torricellian Experiment to counterpoise each other. And therefore since
in the seventeenth Experiment, when we had exhausted our Receiver as far as we
could, there remained Air enough to keep up in the Tube a Cylinder of about an
Inch long of Quicksilver; and since the broader the contiguous Marbles are, the
greater weight fastened to the lowermost may be sustained by the resistance of
the Air, (as is obvious to him that considers the Hypothesis, and as we have
proved by Experiment in the forementioned Tract) it need be no wonder that the
Air remaining in the Receiver should be able to support the lowermost Marble,
whose Diameter was near two Inches, and a weight of four Ounces, those two
Weights being inferior to that of a Mercurial Cylinder of that Diameter and an
Inch in length. And though it were not, yet we are not sure that the Receiver
was as well emptied when we made the 31. Experiment, as when we made the 17.
And (if my Memory does not much mis-informe me) 'twas with the same pair of
Marbles that in the presence of an illustrious Assembly of Virtuosi (who were
Spectators of the Experiment) the uppermost Marble drew up the lowermost,
though that were clogged with a weight of above 430. Ounces.

As for the account the Examiner substitutes of our Phenomenon, I know not
whether many Readers will acquiesce in it: For, not to insist upon the
Objection which himself takes notice of, that according to him the distended
Air in the Receiver should draw asunder the adhering Marbles; his Explication
supposes that there cannot naturally be a Vacuum, whence he infers that,
Necesse er at ut lapis ille non aliter descenderet, quam relinquendo post se
tenuem hujusmodi substantiam, qualis ab argento vivo aut aqua sic
descendentibus relinqui solet. But whereas he adds, that the cause of the
obstinate adhesion we meet with in our case is, that such a substance is far
more difficult to be separated from Marble then from Quicksilver or any other
kind of body; that Assertion is precarious. And though I have tried Experiments
of this nature with stones of several sizes, perhaps an hundred times, yet I
never could find that by their cohesion they would sustain a weight greater
then that of a Pillar of the Atmosphere that pressed against the lowermost: Which
is a considerable Circumstance, that much better agrees with our Explication
then our Adversaries. And whereas he further says, Unde existimo plane, si
perfect complanata fuerint duo marmora sic conjuncta, it a ut nullus omnino
aer inter utrumque mediaret, non posse ea ullis humanis viribus ab invicem
divelli: I hope I need not tell the Reader, that whether or no this agree with
what he had immediately before taught of the separableness of a subtle
substance even from Marble, so bold and improbable an Assertion requires the
being countenanced with a much better proof then the only one he subjoyns in
these words, Uti etiam confirmat exemplum quod ibidem adducit Author de lamina
aenea, tabulae cuidam marmoreae ita adhaerente, ut a lacertoso juvene, de suis
viribus gloriante, non potuerit per annulum centro ejus affixum inde elevari.
For sure there is great odds betwixt the strength of a man unassisted by any
Engine, and the ut most extent of Humane Power. And indeed according to our
Hypothesis, and without having recourse to Natures dreading of a Vacuum, the
case is clear enough: For, supposing the Plate to be of any considerable
breadth, the Pillar of the Atmosphere that leaned upon it, and must at the
instant of its deserting the superficies of the Table all at once be lifted up
with it, may well exceed the force of a single man, especially in an
inconvenient posture; since by the cohesion of a pair of Marbles of about three
Inches Diameter, I did with my own hands take up above a thousand and three
hundred Ounces.

The 32, and 33. Experiments.
Against our Explication of these two, which our Author examines together, he
objects nothing peculiar, but contents himself to explicate them by his
Funiculus: Wherefore neither shall we need to frame any peculiar defense for
it, especially if the Reader will be pleased to refer hither as much of what we
opposed to his Animadversion on the third Experiment as is justly applicable to
our present Controversy. Our Author indeed endeavors to prove his Explication
by saying, that the distended Air in the exhausted Cylinder draws up the Sucker
with the annexed weight, Eodem fere modo quo videmus in cucurbitulis dorso
aegrotantis applicatis, in quibus, extincta jam flamma, rarefactus aer se
contrahens carnem tam vehementer, uti videmus, elevat attrahitque intra
cucurbitulam. But that Phenomenon is easily enough explicable in our
Hypothesis, by saying, that upon the vanishing of that heat which strengthened
the pressure of the included Air, the Spring of it grows too weak to resist any
longer the pressure of the ambient Air; which thereupon thrusts the flesh and
neighboring blood of the Patient into the Cupping-glass, almost after the same
manner as we formerly taught the Pulp of the Finger to be thrust into the
deserted Cavity of the Glass-Tube in the Torricellian Experiment.

The 34, 35, and 36. Experiments.
To these our Author saying nothing but this, In his tribus nihil peculiariter
occurrit hic explicandum, cujus ratio ex jam dictis non facile pateat; we also
may be allowed to pretermit them, and pass on to

The 37. Experiment.
Of the appearance of Light or Whiteness, mentioned in this Experiment, the
Examiner confesses that we have assigned a cause probable enough, by referring
it to the vehement and sudden commotion of the included Air. And indeed though
I do still look upon some of the things that I hesitantly proposed about this
difficult Phenomenon but as mere Conjectures, and though he annexes his
Explication of it; yet I see not but that it is coincident with ours, or not
better then it. For, to what I had said of the Commotion of the parts of the
Air, he adds only in two or three several places their being violently
distended; which how it improves the Explication of the Phenomenon I do not
readily see. And whereas he subjoyns, Existimo autem dicendum potius candorem
illum esse lumen quoddam reflexum, quam innatum, eo quod (ut testatur Author)
in tenebris non appareat, sed solum de die aut accensa candela: I presume the
attentive Reader will easily discern that his Opinion is much-what the same
that I proposed and grounded on the same reason. But the chief difficulty in
this abstruse Phenomenon, namely why we meet with it but sometimes, our
Examiner's Explication leaves untouched.

The 38. and 39. Experiments.
Against these our Author makes no peculiar Objections.

The 40. and 41. Experiments.
But in his Animadversions upon these, having told the Reader that I seem to
ascribe the sudden extinction of the included Animals to the excessive thinness
of the Air remaining in the Receiver, made by the recess of what was drawn out,
unfit for Respiration; he adds resolutely enough, Verum impossible videtur, ut
hujusmodi animalcula ob solum defectum crassioris aeris tam cito moriantur: but
gives no other reason then that they dye so soon, which is no more then what he
said in the newly-cited words, and besides is grounded upon something of
mistake. For the Creatures he mentions were a Be, a Fly, and a Caterpillar,
and those included too in a small Receiver, which could be suddenly exhausted:
and these indeed became moveless within a Minute of an Hour; but that Minute
was not (as the word is often used to signify in English) a Moment, but the
Sixtieth part of an Hour. And though these Insects did in so short a time grow
moveless, yet they were not so soon killed; as appears by the Narrative. The
sanguineous Animals that did indeed dye, were killed more slowly. And I
remember that having purposely inquired of a man (used to go under water by the
help of an Engine wherein he could carry Air with him to the bottom of the Sea)
how long he could endure, before he was accustomed to dive, without breathing
or the use See more concerning this Objection in the Answer to it as it is
proposed by Mr. Hobbes.
of a Sponge; he told me, that at first he could hold out about two or three
Minutes at a time: Which made me think that Diverse become able to continue
under water so long, either by a peculiarly-convenient Constitution of body, or
by a gradual exercise. And I am apt to think that he did, as men are wont to
do, when he said two or three Minutes, mean what is indeed a much shorter time
then that when exactly measured amounts to. For, having purposely made trial
upon a couple of Moles that were brought me together alive, one of them
included in a small, though not very small, Receiver was between two and three
Minutes in killing; whereas the other being immediately after detained under
water did not there continue full a Minute and a quarter, before it finally
ceased from giving any sign at all of life. By which trial it may appear, that
it is not impossible that the want of Respiration should dispatch an Animal in
as little time as is mentioned in the Experiment I am now defending. And indeed
our Author either should have proved that it is not possible for the want of Air
to destroy Animals so soon, or should have given us some better account of the
Phenomenon. For whereas he teaches us, that according to his Doctrine the
little Animals abovementioned were so soon killed, qui a per rarefactum illum
aerem sese contrahentem extractus sit eorum halitus: I see not that hereby, if
he explicate the Phenomenon otherwise then we, he explains it better; for he
seems to speak as if he thought this halitus to be some peculiar part of the
Animal in which his life resides. And besides he seems not to consider, that
whereas, according to me as well as according to him, the Air contained in the
Lungs (supposing these Animalcula have any) must in great part pass thence into
the Receiver, (for whether that be done by the Spring of the Air it self, that
was harbored in the Lungs, or the traction on of the more rarefi'd Air in the
Receiver, is not material in our present case) the Examiner must, as well as I,
render a reason why the extenuation or recess of the halitus should cause the
hasty death of the included Animals; and condemning my Conjecture he ought to
have substituted another reason: and though he subjoyns these words, and
concludes with them, Atque hinc quoque ortae sunt vehementes illae
convulsiones, quas ante mortem passas esse aviculas quasdam memorat ibidem
Author; yet I doubt not but the Reader will think it had not been amiss that
the Author had more intelligibly deduced these Tragic Symptoms from his
Assumption, for the sake of those that are not Anatomists and Physicians enough
to discern how his Funiculus could produce these effects.

For my part, as in the 41. Experiment I tendered my thoughts concerning
Respiration but doubtingly, so I am yet unwilling to determine resolvedly in a
matter of that difficulty.

The 42, and 43. Experiments.
In his Examen of these two last of our Physico-Mechanical Experiments, the
Author contents himself to endeavor to explicate the Phenomenon recited in
them by the contraction of the rarefi'd Air; which, according to him,
endeavors to draw up the subjacent water out of the Vial, whereby it
vehemently distends the parts of that water, as he taught in the like case upon
the 20. Experiment. But since we have already considered his Animadversion upon
that, although this presumed distension of the water is not visible that we
have observed, when cold water, that has been first freed from his interspersed
Air, is put into the Receiver, notwithstanding that the Funiculus should in
that case also distend it; we are so afraid of tiring out the Readers patience
by the frequent repetition of the same things, that we will leave it to him to
judge which of the two Explications, the Examiner's or ours, is to be
preferred, without troubling him and our selves with defense of Accounts
against which our Adversary does not here make any peculiar Objections.

And thus have we by Gods assistance considered what the Exam ner has been
pleased to oppose either against our particular Explications, or against the
Hypotheses that diverse of them suppose: Wherein I have been the more particular
and prolix, because I would willingly excuse my self and others from the
trouble of any more Disputes of this kind. I hope there is not in my Answers
any thing of Asperity to be met with; for I have no quarrel to the Person of
the Author, or his just reputation; nor did I intend to use any more freedom of
Speech in the answering his Objections, then his resolute way of proposing
diverse of them made it on those occasions needful for the Caution of those
Readers who are not acquainted with our differing ways of writing, and perhaps
have not observed that some men are wont to consider as much what they propose
but with a Perhaps, or some such expression of diffidence, as others do what
they deliver far more resolutely. And though being very far from being wedded
to my Opinions, I am still ready to exchange them for better, if they shall be
duly made out to me, (which I think it possible enough they may hereafter be;)
yet peradventure the Reader will think with me, that the Examiner has not given
me cause to renounce any of them, since the Objections he has proposed against
me have been sufficiently answered, and since the Hypothesis he would
substitute in the room of ours (besides that it is partly precarious) supposes
things which diverse of the eminentest Wits of our Age (otherwise of differing
Opinions) profess they cannot admit or so much as understand: whereas the
Weight and Spring of the Air are not denied by our Author himself, and are
demonstrable by Experiments that are not controverted betwixt us. Which things
I represent for the defense of what I think the Truth, and not to offend my
learned Adversary, who shall have my free consent to be thought to have failed
rather in the Choice then in the Management of the Controversy. Though since
This passes for his first Book, and since consequently he is not like to have
been provoked, or engaged in point of Reputation, to challenge me or any of
those far more eminent Persons he has named among his Adversaries, I am induced
by the severity wherewith I have known eminent Virtuosi speak of his Attempts,
and particularly of his Funiculus, to fear that some of those he has needlessly
opposed, will be apt to apply to him that of St. Austin against some of his
Adversaries, that had disputed against him with much more Subtilty then Reason,
In mala causa non possunt aliter, at malam causam quis eos coegit habere? But
this notwithstanding I am, as I was going to say, content my Adversary should
be thought to have said for his Principles as much as the Subject will bear;
nor would I have it made his Disparagement, that I have declared that his whole
Book has not made me depart from any of my Opinions or Explications, since his
Hypothesis and mine being inconsistent, it may be looked upon as a sign rather
that each of us have, then that either of us have not, reasoned closely to his
own Principles, that the things we infer from our contrary Suppositions do so
generally disagree.

FINIS.
AN EXPLICATION OF RAREFACTION.
THe chief Arguments of the Author of a certain Treatise De corporum
inseparabilitate, whereby he endeavors to invalidate the Hypothesis of the
Weight and Spring of the Air, and to set up and establish instead thereof an
unintelligible Hypothesis of Attraction, performed by I know not what strange
imaginary Funiculus, are only Five, two against the former, and three for the
later. The first of which is, That the Weight and Spring of the Air are not
sufficient to perform the Effects ascribed to them: The second, that could they
be performed by that Hypothesis granted, yet the way of this strange Spring it
self is not intelligibly explained or explicable by the Defenders of it. Now
the former of these being little else but a bare Affirmation, and the later
bearing some show of Demonstration, I shall endeavor to examine it as I find
it set down in his 20, 21, 22, 23, and 24. Chapters, to which (especially the
23.) he very often in his Book refers the Reader for satisfaction, pretending
there to evince that Rarefaction cannot be made out any otherwise then by
supposing a body to be in 2, 3, 4, 10, 100, 1000, 1000000 of places at the same
instant, and adequately to fill all and every one of those places.

First therefore, we will examine his Negative, and next his Affirmative,
Arguments for this strange Hypothesis.

His Negative I find in the 20. Chapter, where he endeavors to confute the two
ways of explicating the Rarefaction and Spring of the Air, namely, that of the
Vacuists and that of the Plenists.

Concerning the first of these we find him conclude it impossible, first,
because he had before proved that there can be no Vacuum, which being done by a
Circle (viz. There is no Vacuum in the Tube because Nature abhors a Vacuum, and
we see Nature abhors a Vacuum because she will not suffer a Vacuum in the Tube
above the Mercury, but to prevent it will continually spin the Quicksilver into
supe ficies, and never diminish the body of it) will suffer me to pass to his
next, which is, That this way is false, because in the Experiment of the Carps
Bladder the Air is rarefi'd a 1000. times bigger; nay, in respect of the body
of Gold it has 1000000. times less matter in equal spaces. And this, says he,
is a Phenomenon that is impossible ever to be made out by interspersed
Vacuities. Now that the Vacuists cannot presently, by so bold an assertion as
this, be made to forsake their Principles, he may perceive by these following
Solutions which I shall give of all the Phenomenon he recites, flowing
naturally from an Hypothesis that I shall for the present assume. Let us
suppose then the Particles of Bodies, at least those of the Air, to be of the
form of a piece of Riband, that is, to be very long, slender, thin and flexible
laminae, coyled or wound up together as a Cable, piece of Riband, Spring of a
Watch, Hoop, or the like, are: we will suppose these to have all of them the
same length, but some to have a stronger, others a weaker Spring: we will
further suppose each of these so coyled up to have such an innate circular
motion, as that thereby they may describe a Sphere equal in Diameter to their
own, much after the manner that a Meridian turned about the Poles of a Globe
will describe by its revolution a Sphere of the same Diameter with its own in
the Air. By this Circular motion the parts of the laminae endeavoring to
recede from the Center or Axis of their motion, acquire a Springiness outward
like that of a Watch-Spring, and would naturally fly abroad until they were
stretched out at length, but that being incompast with the like on every side,
they cannot do it without the removal of them, as not having room sufficient
for such a motion. And the faster this circular motion is, the more do the
parts endeavor to recede from the Axis, and consequently the stronger is their
Spring or endeavor outward. These springy bodies thus shaped and thus moved
are sufficient to produce all the Phenomenon he names as impossible to be
explicated. And, first, for the business of Expansion, it will very naturally
be explained by it: As let us suppose for instance the Diameter of these small
coyled Particles of the Air (which being next the Earth are pressed upon by all
those numerous incumbent Particles that make up the Atmosphere, and are thereby
so crowded that they can but very little untwist themselves; let us suppose, I
say, the Diameter of these Particles) to be 1/1000000000000 of an Inch; and
then to be much of the form of those represented in the 4. Figure by A B C D:
and that these Particles, when a considerable quantity of the pressure of the
ambient parts is taken away, will fly abroad into a Coil or Zone ten times as
big in Diameter as before; that is, they will now be 10/1000000000000 of an
Inch in Diameter, and appear in the form of those in the Figure expressed by E F
G H: these Zones whirled round as the former will describe a Sphere a 1000.
times as big in bulk, and thereby fence that space from being entered by any of
the like Zones: this it would do, supposing those Spheres did immediately
always touch each other; but because of their circular motion, whenever they
meet they must necessarily be beaten, and fly off from one another, and so
require a yet greater space to perform their motion in. This supposed, there
are no Phenomenon of Rarefaction (which is enough at present to answer what he
objects) but may be naturally and intelligibly made out. As first, for that of
the swelling of a Carps Bladder, if we suppose some small parcels of the former
comprest laminae to lie latitant within the folds of it, and being much coyled
up together scarce to take any sensible room, this Bladder in the Air will
appear to contain very little or nothing within it; whereas when the pressure
of the Air is taken off in good part from the outsides of it, then those
formerly latitant Particles disclose themselves by flying open into much bigger
Zones, so as perhaps to be able to defend a thousand times bigger space from
being entered into by their like or any other gross Particles, such as those of
the Bladder. Now because the Pores of a Bladder are such as are not easily
permeable by the Particles of Air, therefore these lurking Particles so
expanding themselves must necessarily plump out the sides of the Bladder, and
so keep them turgid until the pressure of the Air that at first coyled them be
readmitted to do the same thing for them again.

Next, as for Rarefaction by heat, that will as naturally follow as the former
from this Hypothesis. For the Atoms of fire flowing in in great numbers, and
passing through with a very rapid motion, must needs accelerate the motion of
these Particles, from which acceleration their Spring or endeavor outward will
be augmented, that is, those Zones will have a strong nitency to fly wider
open, (for we know that the swifter any body is moved circularly, the more do
the parts of it endeavor to recede from the Center of that motion) from whence
if it has room will follow a Rarefaction. As for the conveyance of Light, that
being according to Epicurus performed by the local motion of peculiar Atoms,
their motions to and fro through this medium will be less impeded by the
rarefi'd Air then by the condensed; as indeed upon Experiment we shall really
find them.

As for his third Objection drawn from his supposed attractive virtue of the
thus rarefi'd Air, that is quickly answered, by denying it to have any power at
all of attraction; and by showing (which is already done) that what effects he
would have to be performed by the attraction of the included, is really done by
the pressure of the ambient, Air.

And, lastly, the Phenomenon of my Lord Bacons Experiment are sufficiently
obvious and easy to be deduced.

So then, by granting Epicurus his Principles, that the Atoms or Particles of
bodies have an innate motion; and granting our Supposition of the determinate
motion and figure of the Aerial Particles, all the Phenomenon of Rarefaction
and Condensation, of Light, Sound, Heat, etc. will naturally and necessarily
follow: and the Authors Objections against this first way of Rarefaction will
signify very little.

As to the second way of Rarefaction, by the intrusion or intervention of some
subtle matter of Ether into the spaces deserted by the raresying Particles,
which is that proposed by the Assertors of a Plenum, this also is by the Author
condemned, and branded with Impossibility. And why? First, because it is (he
says) impossible that the abovementioned Phenomenon of the Carps Bladder can
be explained by it. Secondly, because it is impossible to give a reason from it
of the impetuous ascent of Water admitted into an exhausted Receiver. And,
Thirdly, because it is impossible to explicate the Phenomenon of Gunpowder. His
Reasons to confirm which three Impossibilities, because drawn from a mere
mistake, or ignorance of those Hypotheses which have been invented by the
Assertors of that Opinion, I shall pass over, and content my self to explain a
way how these Impossibilities may become Possibilities, if not Probabilities.

And the way that I shall take, shall be that of the most acute Modern
Philosopher Monsieur Des Carts, published in his Philosophical Works: Which is
this, That the Air is a Body consisting of long, slender, flexible particles,
agitated or whirled round by the rapid motion of the Globuli Coelestes, and the
subtle Matter of his first Element, whereby they are each of them enabled to
drive or force out of their Vortice all such other agitated particles. Now the
swifter these Bodies are whirled round, the more do their flexible parts fly
asunder and stretch themselves out; and the more forcibly do they resist the
ingresse of any other so agitated particles into their Vortice, and
consequently the slower their motion is, the less will be their resistance. And
because there is a vast number of these whirled particles lying one above
another, and each particle having its peculiar gravity; it will necessarily
follow that the undermost (which to maintain their Vortice must resist so great
a pressure) must very much be hindered from expanding themselves so far as
otherwise they would, were there none of those incompassing agitated Particles
that lay in their way: and that those being by any means removed, or they
themselves by a more rapid motion of the Particles of their Vehicles, the first
and second Element, (which is according to that Hypothesis an effect of Heat)
more swiftly and strongly whirled round, they presently begin to expand
themselves, and maintain a bigger Vortice then before. Now to perform what I
just now promised, I shall endeavor to give a possible, if not a probable,
cause of the objected Phenomenon. And, First, for that of the Carps Bladder,
where the Air is rarefi'd (says the Author) 1000. times, it will easily be
explained by supposing the few Particles of the Air, which (whilst they
sustain the pressure of all the incumbent Atmosphere) inconspicuously luck
within the Bladder, (each of them being able to maintain but a very small
Vortice) to be by the subsiding Mercury in the Torricellian Experiment freed
from the pressure of the Air, and their motion continuing the same (by reason
that the Transcursion of their Vehicles is not at all or very little hindered
either by the Glass or Bladder) their parts having room to expand themselves,
will fly abroad to such Extensions as may perhaps make a Vortice 1000. times
as big in bulk as what they were not able just before to exceed. Hence the
Particles of the Air (being so gross as not easily to pervade the Pores of the
Bladder) must necessarily drive out the fides of the Bladder to its utmost
extent, and serve to fill the Receiver in the Magdeburgick Experiment. Now,
whereas these Particles will by the same pressure of the Air be reduced to the
same state they were in at first, that is, to be thronged into a very little
room, and thereby be able to maintain a very small Vortice; the Air let in in
the Torrecellian Experiment reduces the Air in the Bladder to its former
inconspicuousness; as the admission of the Water in the Magdeburg Experiment
does that Receiver full of rarefi'd Air into the bigness of a Hazel Nut. Now
the Water in this last-mention'd Experiment enters with a great impetuosity,
because driven on with the whole pressure of the Atmosphere, and resisted only
by the small force of the so-far-rarefi'd Air.

As for the Authors Objection against this way of Rarefaction drawn from the
Phenomenon of Gun powder, I shall endeavor to answer it by showing them
possibly explicable by a Cartesian Hypothesis. For supposing those Terrestrial
parts of the Gun powder to be first at rest, and afterward agitated by the
rapid motion of his first Element, there will be sufficient difference of the
former and later condition in respect of Extension; and supposing the
particular constitution of Gunpowder (arising partly from the Specific forms
of the Particles of its ingredients; Nitre, Sulphur and Char-coal, and partly
from their proportionate commistion) to be such as will readily yield to the
motion of his Materia subtilis, so soon as an ingress is admitted to it by the
fireing of any particular parcel of it, the Expansion will be speedy enough.

So then let us suppose a Barrel of Gunpowder placed in some close room, to
some grains of which we will suppose some actual fire to be applied, by which
actual fire (the Texture of the Powder being such) those grains are suddenly
fired, that is, many Millions of parts, which before lay still and at rest, are
by the action of the burning Coals shattered, as it were, and put into a
posture ready to be agitated by the rapid motion of the Materia subtilis: into
which posture they are no sooner put, then agitated and whirled sufficiently by
it; whence follows a vast Expansion of that part of Gunpowder so fired. For
each of its parts being thus whirled and hurried round, expel and beat off
with great violence all the contiguous Particles, so as that each Particle
takes up now 1000. times as much Elbow-room (if I may so speak) as just before
served its turn, and consequently those that are outermost take every one their
way directly from the parcel or Corn they had lain quiet in, being hurried away
by the sudden Expansion of the Particles that lay next within them; so that
whatever grain or parcel of Gunpowder they chance to meet with, before they
have lost their motion, they presently shiver and put into such a motion as
makes them fit to receive the action of the Materia subtilis. Which subtle
Matter being every where present, and nothing slow in performing its office,
immediately agitates those also like the former; so that in a trice the
Particles of the whole Barrel of Gunpowder are thus disordered, and by the
motion the Materia subtilis must needs be hurried away with so great an
impetuosity on all sides, as not only to break in pieces its slight wooden
prison, and remove the lighter Particles of the ambient Air, but huge Beams,
nay, vast accumulated Masses of the most compacted Structures of Stone, and
even shake the very Earth it self, or whatever else stands in its way, whose
Texture is so close as not to give its Particles free passage through its
Pores. This understood, I see not, first, what the Authors three Arguments
brought to prove his Objection signify, for there are no more Corpuscles in
the room before the Gunpowder is fired then after, nor is there any more
matter or substance before the sides of the room by yielding give place for the
external fluid bodies to succeed, and the only change is this, that the
Globuli secundi Elementi (as he calls them) are expelled out of the room, and
the Materia primi Elementi succeeds in the place of it. Nor do I see, secondly,
what great reason he had for his grand Conclusion, Haec abunde demonstrant,
rarefactionem per hujusmodi corpuscula nullatenus posse explicari.

Having thus examined the Authors first Arguments, that Rarefaction cannot be
made out by any other way then his; we shall find his other, which he brings to
establish his own Hypothesis, much of the same kind. As, First, that his way of
Rarefaction implies no Contradiction: For if the affirming a body to be really
and totally in this place, and at the same time to be really and wholly in
another, that is, to be in this place, and not to be in this place, be not a
Contradiction, I know not what is. Next, that some learned Schoolmen have
thought so; to which I answer, more learned men have thought otherwise. And,
lastly, that there are very plain Examples of the like nature to be found in
other things; of which he only brings one, viz. that of the Rota Aristotelica,
which upon examination we shall find to make as little to the purpose as any of
the other.

An Explication of the Rota Aristotelica.
THe great Problem of the Rota Aristotelica, by his explication of which he
pretends not only to solve all the difficulties concerning Local motion, quae
Philosophoru^ ingenia hactenus valde exercuerant, but to give an instance for
the confirmation of his unintelligible Hypothesis of Rarefaction, wherein there
is extensio seu correspondentia ejusdem rei ad locum nunc majorem, nunc
minorem; we may upon examination find to be either a Paralogisme, or else
nothing but what those Philosophers said whom he accounts gravel'd with it. Of
this Subject he begins in his 25. Chapter, where after he has set down a
description of it, he makes an instance in a Cart-wheel; Rem ante oculos ponit
rota alicujus currus, ejusque umbo seu lignum illud crassum and rotundum cui
infiguntur radii; siquidem dum progrediente curru ipsa rota circumducta
describit in subjecta terra orbitam sibi aequalem, umbo ille describit in
subjecto aere orbitam. (I suppose both here and before he means Lineam) se
multo longiorem, utpote aequalem orbitae totius rotae, licet ipse non nisi
semel quoque fuerit circumvolutus. (As for what he says, that the Nave must be
supposed to pass through the Air, and not to touch a solid Plain, I do not yet
understand the force of his Reason, nor why he sets it down, making nothing to
his present purpose, unless it were because he did not well understand the
thing) In which, says he, the great difficulty is to explain how the Nave
should be so turned about its Axis, ut parts suas successive applicet lineae
duplo plures parts habenti, idque motu perpetuo ac uniformi ne vel ad oculum
instar interrupto. Which how true, and what great occasion he had to wonder at
the solution of that Problem by the Example of a man standing still and another
walking, we shall find by and by, when we come to explain the Problem: but
first I shall examine his Hypoth sis and Explication. And First, he supposes
Time to consist of a determinate number of Indivisibles, (that is, such as have
neither prius nor posterius included in them) which he calls Instants. And next
he supposes the praesentiam localem seu ubicationem cujuslibet part is
indivisibilis and virtualiter extensae esse quoque indivisibilem and
virtualiter extensam: Which supposition so strangely expressed is no more then
this, that the extension or space of his Indivisibles is also indivisible. But
as for his Virtual Extension, I consess I understand as little what it is as I
verily believe he did; and therefore I will proceed to his following
supposition. His Third therefore is, That by how much more rare a body is, by
so much the more are its Indivisibles virtually extended. Hence his Fourth is,
That though these Indivisibles be really indivisible, yet they are virtually in
quotvis parts divisibiles. Whence he deduces his Fifth Principle, That since
these Indivisibles are really indivisible and virtually extended, they must
necessarily be moved after the same manner that other indivisible and
virtually-extended things are. His Instances are in the motions of an Angel and
an indivisible piece of wood, which, he says, are both of the same kind. As
for that of Angels, having no immediate Revelation, and a Spirit and its
actions not falling under sense, and not having any third way by which to be
informed, I shall leave him there to enjoy his fancies. But as for that of his
piece of wood, we shall find it sufficiently full of absurdities and
contradictions. And first, he calls it indivisible, but why I know not, for
it is neither really nor yet mentally so: not mentally so by his fourth
Principle, where he says that it is virtualiter in quotvis parts divisibiles,
by which word virtualiter he means the same thing with mentaliter, or nothing.
Nor, secondly, is it really so: for then (according to the main business of his
Book, as may be gathered from the first words of his Title Page, Tractatus de
Corporum Inseparabilitate) it would be impossible that any thing in the world
should be divisible; for he making an inseparable continuity, and that bodies
will rather be (I cannot tell how) stretched beyond their own dimension in
infinitum, then part from one another; a body may as soon pass through the
dimensions of any one Indivisible, as pass between two. Next, he grants in the
strange stretching or rarefaction of these Indivisibles a temporary motion of
the condensed Dimension; whence there will follow that there must be distinct
places or Ubi's, it must be terminus a quo, terminus ad quem, and medium. And
next, it were impossible to divide a line into two parts, supposing it
consisted of an unequal number of Indivisibles; as if 101. Indivisibles of
exceedingly-rarefi'd Air should be extended in length an Inch, it were
impossible to divide that Inch into two equal parts. I might run over many
more, but it would be too tedious to be here recited. As for his indivisible
parts of Time, those also must necessarily be in quotvis parts divisibiles;
for else the same body or Indivisible must necessarily be in diverse places at
the same instant. But because he can swallow, nay confidently affirm, this and
many other such like contradictions and absurdities, I am not willing to
mention them; and I think it would have made more for the Authors reputation if
he had done so too. As for his last Chapter, where he applies these Principles
to the Explication of the Rota Aristotelica, I have not here time to set down
all the absurdities that any one that has but a smattering in the Mathematics
may observe: as, sometimes half an indivisible part of a Circumference may
touch an indivisible of a Line; sometimes one may touch half, a quarter, a
hundredth part, a whole one, two, ten, a hundred, etc. at the same instant;
nay, an indivisible of a Circle may be all of it in a thousand places together,
and the like. And this he brings as a great Argument to establish his
Hypothesis of Rarefaction, pretending it to comprise many Aenigma's and very
great difficulties; whereas the thing is very plain and easy, and contains no
such obscurities. For if, for example, we suppose a Wheel ABCD to be moved in a
direct motion from AIC to KLM, every point of it retaining the same position to
that line that they had at the beginning of their motion, each of the points
AEIGC will on a Plain, or in the Medium it pervades, pass through or describe a
line equal to the line IL, and not only all the points lying in the line AIC,
but all and every point of the whole Area of the Circle; this must necessarily
happen if the Diameter AIC be moved parallel to it self: But if whilst it be
thus moved with an equal progression, it be likewise moved with an equal
circulation, the case will be altered. For then, first, each point will by this
compound motion describe on the Plain or Medium either a perfect Cyclorid, as
when the Wheel makes one perfect revolution, whilst the whole is progressively
moved from I to L; or some Piece, as when the Wheel has not perfected its
revolution; or more then a whole one, as when the Circle has made more then one
whole revolution whilst it is moved in its determinate length. I shall here
only consider the first, as pertaining more especially to my present purpose,
and in regard the two later on occasion may be easily explicated by it. Next,
each point of this Circle acquires from its compounded motion various degrees
of Celerity as to its progression, according to its various position to a point
which is always found in some part of the line drawn through the Center of the
circular motion perpendicular to the progressive. And it is found thus, as the
Circumference to the Radius, so is the line of the progressive motion to the
distance of the point from the Center. And this happens because the line of
Progression is equal to the Circle described on that distance as Radius; each
point therefore of this smaller Circle, when it comes to touch the
Perpendicular, must, as to its progressive motion, stand still: This point
therefore will be the Center of this compounded motion. Now because for the
explication of the Rota Aristotelica we need not consider any other then those
Points which are transient through or cross the Perpendicular line, we shall
only examine them. Let then in our Example A be the Center or immovable
point, the Circumference therefore ABCD will be equal to IL or AK by our
Hypothesis. Now because the point I, which is the Center of the Rotation, has
only one motion, viz. that of Lation, its celerity will be equal to the single
celerity of the Lation; we will therefore put it to have one degree. C, because
it is moved with two motions, both tending the same way, and each equal to the
velocity of I, must needs have two degrees of velocity. The point F, because
moved with two motions, both tending the same way, the one (viz. its Lation)
being equal to that of I, and the other (because it is but half as far distant
from the Center of Rotation as C, and therefore is moved but with half the
celerity of C, which was equal to that of I) but half as quick, we will put to
have one degree and an half. By the like method we might find the velocity of
all the points in the Perpendicular, viz. such as we have there marked some of
them; but it would be too tedious, we needing not to consider more then the two
points A and E. The point at E being moved forward by its progression with the
same velocity that I, but by its rotation (which is but half as swift as that
of the Circle ABCD, that is double the Circle EFGH) being moved the contrary
way or backwards with half the velocity, loses half of its progression
forwards. The point in A being by its progression moved forwards equally swift
with I, and by its rotation (the Circle ABCD being equal to the line IL) being
carried backwards with equal velocity, must necessarily stand still as to its
progression. Now having shown that the point A (being by reason of its two
equal opposite motions at rest) does only touch a point of the line AK, and is
not at all moved on it; and that the point E (being carried forward twice as
fast by its progression as it is carried backward by its rotation, and thereby
moved half as fast as the point I) does not only touch the line EK, but
whilst it touches it is moved on it with a progressive motion half as swift as
that of I: It will necessarily follow, that each point situate in E must
necessarily describe a small line, which is a part of the whole EC. Now both
the contact of the former, and the contact and progression of the later, being
performed by an infinite succession of points in the space of an infinite
succession of Instants; I see not any one difficulty of this Problem but may
satisfactorily be given an account of by it, without having recourse to the
Hypothesis of the determinate number of indivisibles of space and time; which
at best will only come to this, that In such a determinate moment or minute
space of time, (which consists of an infinite consecution of Instants, and has
prius and posterius in it; though yet he will call it an Instant, and have it
to have the same proprieties with an Instant used in the common Philosophical
sense) such a determinate minute Corpuscle (which, though it have extension in
length, breadth and thickness, yet will he not admit it to be divisible or have
parts, no not though, according to his Hypothesis, the indivisible of one body
may be rarefied to be as big in bulk as a million of the indivisibles of
another, but will have it to be called and to be a real indivisible) will
successively pass over such a determinate space or length (which yet he will
not admit to be divisible, though according to his Principles it may equalize
the length of millions of his other Indivisibles, nor admit a successive
motion, but instantaneous, though that does necessarily put a body into two,
three, ten, a hundred, etc. places at once; but will have these also to be
indivisible.) Haste makes me pass over the absurdities about the contact of a
Circle and a Line, and to comprise in short all that great Explication he has
given of this and other intricate (as he calls them) Problems, which is this,
That the reason of the celerity of the motion of some one of these indivisibles
above another is, that it passes through a greater part of an indivisible in
the same instant then the slower; that is in plain sense no more then this, One
body is swifter then another because it is moved faster, From whence he draws
several Corollaries, as that Hence may be given a reason why an Eagle is
swifter then a Tortoise, viz. because it moves faster. I should have solved
several Objections which may be brought against the divisibility of Quantity in
infinitum; but that as all the Scholastic Writers are full of them, so it is a
Subject which we are least able to dispute of, having very little information
of the nature of Infinity from the Senses.

FINIS.
The Citations Englished.
CHap. 2. Page 4. Cum tota vis, etc. Being the whole power of the Spring of the
Air depends upon the Aequilibrium of its weight with twenty nine Inches and an
half of Quicksilver, so that this Spring does neither more nor less in a shut
place, then is done by that Aequilibrium in an open place: it is manifest,
seeing we have showed the Aequilibrium to be plainly fictitious and imaginary,
that the Spring ascribed to the Air is so likewise.

Ibid. Nam si Tubus, etc. For if a Tube but twenty Inches long (such as we used
in our first Argument) be not quite filled with Quicksilver, as before, but a
little space be left betwixt the Mercury and the Finger on the top of the Tube,
in which Air only may abide: We shall find that the Finger below being
removed, the Finger on the top will not only be drawn downwards, as before,
but the Quicksilver shall descend also, and that notably, viz. as much as so
small a parcel of Air can be extended by such a descending weight. So that if
instead of Air, Water or any other Liquor which is not so easily extended be
put in its place, there will be no descent at all.

Hence, I say, against this Opinion an Argument is framed: For if the external
Air cannot keep up those twenty Inches of Quicksilver from descending, as we
have proved; how shall it keep up twenty nine Inches and an half? Assuredly
these can no way be reconciled.

p. 5. Dices forte, etc. You will perchance say, that the Quicksilver therefore
does in the alleged case descend, because it is thrust down by that parcel of
Air which dilates it self by its own Spring.

Ibid. Sic deberet, etc. So should the Finger be rather thrust from the top of
the Tube, then thereby fastened to it; because this Dilatation must be made as
well upwards as downwards.

p. 6. Concipi, etc. It cannot be conceived how that Air should dilate it self,
or thrust down the Mercury, unless by taking up a greater place; which thing
these Authors are much against, asserting that Rarefaction can be made no other
ways then by Corpuscles or Vacuities.

Chap. 3. p. 7. Si, etc. If you take a Tube open at both ends of a good length,
suppose forty Inches long, and fill it with Mercury, and place your Finger on
the top as before, taking away your lower Finger you will find the Mercury to
descend even to its wonted station, and your Finger on the top to be strongly
drawn within the Tube, and to stick close unto it. Whence again it is evidently
concluded that the Mercury placed in its own station is not there upheld by the
external Air, but suspended by a certain internal Cord, whose upper end being
fastened to the Finger draws and fastens it after this manner into the Tube.

Chap. 4. p. 8, 9. Sumatur, etc. Take a Tube shorter then twenty nine Inches
and an half, for instance of twenty Digits, not shut, as hitherto, at one end,
but with both ends open: let this Tube, its Orifice being immersed in
restagnant Mercury, and one Finger being placed underneath, that the Mercury to
be poured in run not through, be filled with Mercury; and then another Finger
be applied to its Orifice, to close it well: Which being done, if you draw away
your lower Finger, the upper will be found to be strongly drawn and sucked into
the Tube, and so stiffly to adhere to it, (or rather to the Quicksilver, as I
shall hereafter show) that it will elevate the Tube it self with all the
Quicksilver, and make it continue to hang pendulous in the Vessel.

From which Experiment this Opinion is most clearly refuted: For, seeing
according to it the Quicksilver in such a Tube but twenty Inches long must be
thrust upwards by the preponderating Air; it will never by it be explained how
this Finger is so drawn downwards, and made so strongly to stick to the Tube.
For it cannot by the Air thrusting upwards be thus drawn downwards.

p. 11. Quod vel, etc. Which is thence confirmed, Because if that
preponderating Air succeeds, as is asserted, in the place of the lower Finger
which was withdrawn, that is, if it uphold the Quicksilver after the same
manner which it was upheld by the lower Finger applied under it; it is
manifest, according to this Opinion, that the Finger on the top ought not to be
more drawn downwards after the lower Finger is removed then before. Seeing then
that Experience teaches the contrary, it is manifest that Opinion must be
false.

Chap. 5. p. 12. Quarto, etc. In the fourth place it is impugn'd, Because
thence it would follow that Quicksilver through a like Tube might be sucked
with the same easiness out of a Vessel that Water is sucked out of the same.
Which not withstanding is contrary to Experience, by which we are taught that
Water is easily drawn into the mouth of him that sucks, whereas Quicksilver
cannot be drawn thither by his utmost endeavor, nay, scarce unto the middle of
the Tube.

The sequel I thus manifest: Because seeing, according to this Opinion, that
the Liquor underneath, whether it be Water or Mercury, may so ascend, no more
is required but that the Air shut in the Tube may be drawn upwards by sucking;
which being drawn up, the Liquor underneath will immediately ascend, being
thrust thither by the external Air now preponderating, (as Pecquet declares in
his Anatomical Discourse, p. 63.) It is manifest that the Mercury may be sucked
out with the same easiness that Water is sucked out with. Which being so
evidently against Experience, the Opinion from whence it is deduced must needs
be false.

p. 14. Neque hoc, etc. And not only this, but over and above, if a Glass
Diabetes or Syringe be made of a sufficient length, and after that the Sucker
is thrust into the utmost Orifice, it be placed according to use in the Mercury
underneath; he finds that as soon as the Sucker is drawn out, the Mercury
follows, and ascends to the same height of two Feet and three Inches and an
half. And when afterward, although no greater force be added, the Sucker is
drawn higher, he finds that the Mercury stands, and follows no further, and so
that space is made empty which remains between the Mercury and the Sucker.

p. 16. Maneat igitur, etc. Be it therefore confirmed by so many Arguments, of
which every one is sufficient in it self, that Quicksilver (the Experiment
being made in an open place) is not upheld from falling by the weight of the
external Air.

Cap. 6. p. 16. Argentum, etc. That Quicksilver in a close place is not upheld
from falling by the Elater or Spring of the Air.

Ibid. Cum tota, etc. Seeing the whole power of this Spring depends upon the
already-confured Aequilibrium of the Air with 29. Inches and an half of
Quicksilver, so that this Spring does neither more nor less in a close place
then is done by that Aequilibrium in an open place; it is manifest, seeing this
Aequilibrium is already shown to be plainly fictitious and imaginary, that the
Spring of the Air is so likewise.

Ibid. Nec plus, etc. And that this Spring does neither more nor less in a
close place, then is done by that Aequilibrium in an open place.

p. 17. Add, etc. Add, that seeing the Experiments brought in the Chapter
above of the adhesion of the Finger, etc. are alike in a close and an open
place; it is necessary and certain that the same Arguments made against the
Aequilibrium have force against the Spring of the Air.

Ibid. Et profecto, etc. And really if these Authors would consider how great a
difficulty there is in explaining this Spring of the Air, unles; the same Air
by it self alone may take up a greater place, I believe they would readily
alter their Opinion.

Part 2. Chap. 1. p. 20. Constat hoc, etc. This appears from what has been
already spoken in the preceding Chapter: For the Quicksilver descending cannot
so draw the Finger downwards, and fasten it unto the Tube, unless it be hung
upon the Finger by such a Cord, which by its weight it vehemently stretches, as
is manifest by it self.

Ibid. Respondeo, etc. I answer, That this comes to pass that there may be no
Vacuity, seeing there is nothing else there that can succeed into the place of
the descending Quicksilver.

p. 21. And hence is confirmed that common Axiom used in the Schools for so
many Ages past, that Nature does abhor a Vacuum.

Ibid. Nam licet, etc. For though the immediate cause why water (for instance)
does not descend from a Gardeners Watering-pot (for that Example they use)
stopped on the top, is not the fear of a Vacuum, but the reason now mentioned,
namely, That there is not weight sufficient to loose that conjuncture by which
the water does adhere to the top of the closed Water-pot: Nevertheless in the
end we must of necessity come to that Cause.

Ibid. Quae quidem, etc. Which traction and adhesion when it cannot proceed but
from some real body placed between the Finger and the Mercury, it is manifest
that that space is not empty, but filled with some true substance.

Ibid. Eo quod, etc. Because no visual species's could proceed either from it,
or through it, unto the eye.

p. 22. Vera, etc. To be filled with any true substance.

p. 25. Huc etiam, etc. And to this purpose make those considerable Vibrations
with which Quicksilver is stirred in its descent: For the same thing happens
here that befalls other Pendula in their fall from on high.

p. 29. Argentum dum, etc. Quicksilver while it fills the whole Tube does not
only touch its top, (as you would think at the first sight) but does firmly
stick unto it also; as it is manifest from the Experiment mentioned in the
first Argument of the third Chapter, concerning the Tube open at both ends.

Ibid. Licet illud, etc. Though that Orifice of the Tube be anointed with Oil,
or any other matter that will hinder adhesion, nevertheless the Finger will no
less firmly stick then before.

Ibid. Parts, etc. That the parts of Air it self so shut up in the Tube (which
otherwise are so easily severed) are now so firmly glued to one another, that
they make (as we see) a strong Chain, by which not only Water but even weighty
Quicksilver is drawn on high.

Ibid. Rarefactionem, etc. That the Rarefaction or Extension of a body so as to
make it take up more space is not only made by Heat, but by distension or a
certain disjoyning power; as on the contrary Condensation is not only made by
Cold, but also by Compression, as infinite Examples hear us witness.

p. 30. Cum per, etc. Seeing by the first Note it is manifest that the
Quicksilver does so stick to the top of the Tube, and by the second Note the
Rarefaction is made only by the mere distension of the body; it so comes to
pass that the descending Quicksilver leaves its external or upper superficies
fixed unto the top of the Tube, and by its weight does so stretch and extenuate
it, until it becomes easier to leave another superficies in like manner, then
to extend that any further. It leaves therefore a second, and does by its
descent extend that a little further, until it becomes easier to separate a
third then to extend that any further: And so forwards, until at length it
has no power to separate or extend any more superficies, namely, until it
comes unto the height of 29. Inches and an half; where it acquiesces, as we
have declared in the first Chapter.

p. 31. These Surfaces seem to be separated from the Quicksilver, and to be
extended into a most slender string by the weight that falls down, after the
same manner that in a lighted Candle surfaces of like sort are separated from
the Wax or Tallow underneath by the heat above, and are extenuated into a most
subtle flame. In which it is worth observation, that as that flame does
doubtless take up more then a thousand times a greater space then the part of
the Wax of which the flame was made took up: So is it here to be thought, that
that string does take up a space more then a thousand times as big as that
which the small particle of Mercury, from whence it arose, did before take up.
As also it doubtless happens when such a particle by a fire underneath is
turned into a vapor.

p. 37. Corpore, etc. A body taking up a place, for instance, twice as big as
it self; it is of necessity that every part of it must likewise take up a place
twice as big as it self.

p. 42. Juxta, etc. According to the more probable Opinion such a virtual
extension of a corporeal Being is not to be granted, as being only proper to
such as are Spiritual.

p. 43. Praestat, etc. It is better to continue in the common Opinion, which
has been hitherto received in the Schools: which although it does not clearly
resolve all difficulties, yet it does not openly lie under them.

Ibid. Necessario, etc. We must needs confess that one and the same part must
be in two places adequately. For seeing it is indivisible, and takes up a
greater place then before, it must of necessity be all in every point of that
place, or that be virtually extended through all that space.

p. 45. Cum tempus, etc. Seeing Time is a Being essentially successive, so that
neither by divine power can two of its parts exist together.

p. 46. Respondeo, etc. I answer, that all these things happen because the
Gunpowder so kindled and turned into flame takes up a much greater space then
before. Whence it comes to pass that seeing the Chamber was before quite full,
by this means the walls are broken that there may be no penetration of bodies.

p. 50. Partim, etc. Sometimes within the Chapel, sometimes in the open Air;
the wind sometimes blowing, and sometimes being still.

p. 54. Sed d'ci, etc. But it may be said, that on the top of the Mountain it
therefore descended after that manner, because the Air was more cold there, or
of some other temperature, such as might cause this descent.

p. 71. Hoc esse, etc. That this is the difference between Pression and
Suction, that Suction makes such an adhesion, and Pression does not.

Ibid. Hoc quoque, etc. And even this Experiment does very well agree with our
Principles: For seeing by this depression of the Sucker, the Air shut up in the
cavity of the Cylinder is separated from the Cylinder, and does descend
together with the Sucker, (as we have, Chap. 13. observed of water descending
together with Quicksilver) it comes to pass that in that whole depression new
surfaces are taken from that descending Air, and stretched out, as we have
there explained it in the case of descending water. Since therefore such
Sufaces are as easily slipped off and extended in the end of the depression as in
the beginning; it is no wonder that there is found the same difficulty of
depressing it at both times.

p. 72. Eo magis, etc. That the Air is so much the more extended and rarefied,
by how much the more is thence exhausted, and so does acquire a greater force
of contracting it self.

p. 74. At profecto, etc. But truly it seems not credible that this most soft
Air should so vehemently compress a Glass on all sides (especially one of that
thickness there mentioned) as to break it.

Ibid. Verius, etc. It is therefore more truly answered, that the Glass is
therefore so broken, because by that exsuction its sides are more vehemently
drawn inwards then (by reason of the figure unfit for resistency) they were
able to resist. For seeing the included Air does most firmly stick to the sides
of the Glass, to draw out the Air will be nothing else but to endeavor to bend
the sides of the Glass inwards.

p. 75. Sed profecto, etc. But truly this seems too far removed from Truth, and
may be by this alone sufficiently refuted. Because if the pressure of the Air
which descends by that Tube into the Vial be so great as to break the Vial it
self, it ought certainly, before the breaking of the Vial, very much to move
the water in which the Tube is immersed, and to excite bubbles in it, etc. as
appears, if any one blowing through that Tube does make but an ordinary
pressure upon the water. But it is sure that the water before the Vial is
broken does not move at all: as the Experimenter will find.

Ibid. Licet, etc. Though the Tube had been shut at the top, the Vial had
doubtless been broken after the same manner.

p. 77. Sed rectius, etc. But it is more rightly thence inferred, that that
Cylinder did nothing there before.

Ibid. Dico, etc. I say then that the Quicksilver does by that exhaustion so
descend in the Tube, because it is drawn downwards by the Air incumbent upon
the restagnant Quicksilver. For that incumbent Air, being by its exhaustion
greatly rarefied and extended, vehemently contracts it self, and by this
contraction does endeavor to lift the restagnant Mercury out of its Vessel;
whence it comes to pass that (the restagnant Mercury now less gravitating upon
the bottom of its Vessel) the Quicksilver in the Tube must descend, as is
manifest in it self: So that it is no wonder that, the external Air afterward
entering, the Quicksilver again ascends, seeing by that ingress the force which
elevates the restagnant Quicksilver is weakened.

p. 78. Atque hinc, etc. And hence is a reason also given of another thing
which is there noted, namely, that by the violent intrusion of the external Air
into the Receiver the Quicksilver ascended considerably above 29. Inches and an
half. For as by the extraction of the Air the Quicksilver is deprest below its
station, so by the intrusion of new Air it is elevated above it.

p. 80. Nam si, etc. For if it were kept up by that, it ought rather to ascend
then descend in colder weather, because the Air then would be more dense and
heavy. Therefore the Quicksilver is not upheld by the Aequilibrium of Air, as
is asserted.

Ibid. Hinc fit, etc. Hence it comes to pass, that this Funicle being
contracted by the cold, the water does ascend in cold weather; but does descend
in hot, because by heat the Funicle is dilated.

p. 81. Ego certe, etc. I truly do not doubt but there are some such occult
causes, by which the slender Eunicle that suspends (as we mentioned in the 10.
Chapter) the Quicksilver in the Tube is sometimes lengthned, sometimes
shortened, and so does sometimes let down, and sometimes lift up the Quicksilver.

Ibid. In decimo nono, etc. In the 19. he shows that water does in the same
manner descend upon the exhausting the Receiver, as he had shown Quicksilver in
the foregoing Chapter to descend. Of both which seeing there is the same cause,
there is no reason we should any longer insist on this.

p. 82. Nam si, etc. For if it were done so, these bubbles ought not so to have
ascended from the bottom of the Vessel, (as it is asserted they did, both in
this and the following Experiments that treat of bubbles) but from the upper
part of the water, where they are less comprest; as it is apparently manifest.

p. 83. Respondeo, etc. I answer that the water, upon that exhaustion of the
Air, does not so ascend of its own accord, but is violently drawn or lifted
upwards by that rarefied Air contracting it self. For as water does suffer some
compression (as appears by experience) so here also it suffers some distension.
And hence it is clearly manifest why these bubbles should arise rather from the
bottom of the Vessel, then from the upper part of the water. For when that
vehement suction does endeavor to elevate the water from the bottom of the
Vial, there arises there a certain subtle matter, which being turned into
bubbles does so ascend as is mentioned in the 15. Chapter and the 4. Experiment.

p. 84. Certum esse, etc. It is certain that that Opinion is sufficiently
refuted by this single Experiment.

p. 85. Necesse, etc. It must needs be that that stone could not otherwise
descend, then by leaving behind it such a thin substance as is left by
Quicksilver or Water descending in like manner.

p. 86. Unde, etc. Whence I plainly conceive that if two perfectlypolish'd
Marbles were so joined that no Air at all were left between them, they could
not be drawn asunder by all the power of Man.

Ibid. Uti etiam, etc. Which also is confirmed by the Example the Author there
brings of a Brass Plate sticking so close to a Marble Table, that by a lusty
Youth, who boasted of his own strength, it could not be lifted off by a Ring
fixed to its Center.

p. 87. Eodem, etc. Almost the same manner as we see in Cupping-glasses applied
to a Patients back, in which the flame being extinct, the rarefied Air
contracting it self does so vehemently (as we see) lift up, and draw the flesh
within the Glass.

Ibid. In his, etc. In these three there is nothing occurs to be peculiarly
here explicated, the account of which is not easy from what is already
delivered.

p. 88. Existimo, etc. But I think that Whiteness should be rather called a
reflex then an innate light, because, as the Author bears witness, it appears
not in the dark, but only in the day, or by Candlelight.

Ibid. Verum, etc. But it seems impossible that such Animals should dye so soon
only for want of a thicker Air.

p. 89. Quia per, etc. Because by the self-contraction of the rarefied Air
their breath is drawn out of their bodies.

p. 90. Atque hinc, etc. And thence also arose those vehement Convulsions,
which the Author there mentions certain small Birds to have endured before
their death.

p. 92. In mala, etc. In a bad Cause they can do no other; but who compelled
them to undertake a bad Cause?

A Summary of the Contents of the several Chapters.
PART I.
WHerein the Adversaries Objections against the Elaterists are examined. Chap.
1. The occasion of this Writing, page 1. Franciscus Linus his civility in
writing obliges the Author to the like, p. 2. Books concerning the Torrecellian
Experiment wherewith the Author was formerly unacquainted, ibid. The
Inconvenience of Linus's Principles, ibid. The division of the ensuing Treatise
into three Parts. Chap. 2. A repetition of the Adversary's Opinion and
Arguments. His Arguments against the Weight of the Air examined, p. 4. An
Experiment of his to prove that the external Air cannot keep up twenty Inches
of Quicksilver from descending in a Tube twenty Inches long, ibid. The Authors
answer and reconciliation of the Experiment to his own Hypothesis, p. 5. and
the relation of an Experiment of the Authors, wherein only water being
employed instead of Quicksilver, without other alteration of the Adversaries
Experiment, it agrees well with and confirms the Authors Hypothesis, and his
Explication of the mentioned Experiments, ibid. That Water has no Spring at
all, or a very weak one, p. 6. The second Argument examined, ibid. Whether the
same quantity of Air can adequately fill a greater space, p. 7. The
conceivableness of both Hypotheses compared, ibid. Chap. 3. Another Argument of
the Adversaries, from an Experiment wherein the Mercury sinking draws the
Finger into the Tube, examined. Q. Whether the Mercury placed in its own
station is upheld by the external Air, or suspended there by an internal Cord?
p. 7, 8. Chap. 4. A repetition of Franciscus Linus his principal Experiment,
wherein in a Tube of twenty Inches long the Finger on the top is supposed to be
strongly drawn and sucked into the Tube, p. 9. The Experiment explicated
without the assistance of Suction, by the pressure of the external Air upon the
outside of the Finger, thrust, not sucked in, p. 10. Franciscus Linus his
argumentation considered, p. 11. Chap. 5. The Examiners last Experiment
considered, in which he argues against the Authors Hypothesis, because Mercury
is not sucked out of a Vessel through a Tube so easily as Water is, p. 12, 13.
An Experiment of Monsieur Paschall showing, that if the upper part of a Tube
could be freed from the pressure of all internal Air, the Mercury would by the
pressure of the outward Air be carried up into the Tube as well as Water, till
it had attained a height great enough to make its weight equal to that of the
Atmosphere, p. 14. Why in a more forcible respiration the Mercurial Cylinder is
raised higher then in a more languid, p. 14, 15. A Remark by the bie, That the
contraction of the Adversaries supposed Funiculus is not felt upon the Lungs,
p. 15. Chap. 6. The examination of the Adversaries 4. Chapter, p. 16. That the
Spring of the Air may have some advantage in point of force above the Weight of
it, p. 17. That it is unintelligible how the same Air can adequately fill more
space at one time then at another, p. 18.
PART II.
Wherein the Adversaries Funicular Hypothesis is examined. Chap. 1. Wherein
what is alleged to prove the Funiculus is considered; and some Difficulties
are proposed against the Hypothesis. The nature of this supposed Funiculus
described, p. 19. That according to the Adversaries Opinion this Funiculus is
produced by Nature only to hinder a Vacuum, p. 20, 21. The Adversaries proofs
that there is no Vacuum examined, p. 21, 22. That where no sensible part is
un-enlightned, the place may not be full of light, p. 22. The same true in
Odours, ibid. That there may be matter enough to transmit the impulse of Light,
though betwixt the Particles of that matter there should be store of Vacuities
intercepted, p. 23. That a solid Body has no considerable sense of pressure
from fluid bodies, p. 25. Of the causes of the Vibrations of Quicksilver in its
descent, p. 26, 27. Chap. 2. Wherein diverse other Difficulties are objected
against the Funicular Hypothesis. As that in Liquors of diverse weights and
natures, as Water, Wine and Quicksilver, there should be just the same weight
or strength to extend them into a Funiculus, p. 27. That whereas the Weight and
Spring of the Air is inferred from unquestioned Experiments, the account of
that Hypothesis is strange and unsatisfactory. As that the Quicksilver does not
only touch the top of the Glass, but stick to it; That Nature wreaths a little
rarefied Air into a strong rope even able to draw up Quicksilver, p. 28, 29.
That Rarefaction is performed by a certain unknown force, or vis divulsiva, p.
30. That thin Surfaces are left successively one after another, that these
Surfaces are contrived into strings, that may be stretched without being made
more slender, etc. p. 31. The illustration of the manner how his Funiculus is
made, from the rarefaction of Wax or Tallow in a lighted Candle, is considered,
p. 32. and showed not to be apposite, ibid. Diverse other difficulties and
improbabilities manifested in the Funicular Hypothesis, p. 33. Of the inward
Spring necessary to the contraction of his Funiculus, p. 33, 34. An Argument
from a Pendulum's moving freely in an exhausted Receiver, that the medium it
moves in does not consist of an innumerable exceedinglystretch'd strings, p.
35. Chap. 3. The Aristotelean Rarefaction proposed by the Adversary examined.
What Rarefaction and Condensation is, p. 36. Three ways of explicating how
Rarefaction is made, p. 36, 37. Absurdities in resolving the Magdeburg
Experiment by the Aristotelean way of Rarefaction, p. 38. The inconveniences of
the several Hypotheses compared, p. 39. The difficulties in the Adversaries
explaining Rarefaction by Bodies infinitely divisible, p. 41. The difficulties
of explaining it by supposing Bodies made up of parts indivisible, p. 43, 44.
The difficulties wherewith his Condensation is encumbered, as that it infers
Penetration of Dimensions, etc. p. 46. Chap. 4. A Consideration pertinent to
the present Controversy, of what happens in trying the Torrecellian and other
Experiments at the top and feet of Hills. That the Funicular Hypothesis is but
an Inversion of the Elastical, one supposing a Spring inwards, the other
outward; one performing its effects by Pulsion, the other by Traction, p. 48.
That these trials on the tops and feet of Hills determine the case for the
Authors Hypothesis, p. 49. The truth of the Observation of Monsieur Paschall
confirmed, p. 50. and the several trials that have been made of it related,
ibid. A trial of the Authors from the Leads of the Abbey-Church at Westminster,
p. 51, 52, 53. That the subsidence of the Mercury at the top of a Hill proceeds
from the lightness of the Atmospherical Cylinder there, p. 54. The relation of
an Experiment lately made at Hallifax Hill in confirmation of the former, p.
56. Chap. 5. Two new Experiments touching the measure of the force of the
Spring of the Air compressed and dilated. That it is capable of doing far more
then the necessity of the Authors Hypothesis requires, p. 57. The first
Experiment, of compressing Air by pouring Mercury into a crooked Tube, related,
p. 58. Wherein the same Air being brought to a degree of density twice as
great, obtains a Spring twice as strong as before, p. 59. A Table of the
Condensation of the Air according to this Experiment, p. 60. Particular
Circumstances observed in the making the Experiment, p. 61. How far the Spring
of the Air may be increased, p. 62. Of the decrement of the force of dilated
Air, p. 63. A Table of the Rarefaction of the Air, p. 64. Particular
Circumstances in making the Experiment whence this Table was drawn, p. 65, 66.
That the free Air here below appears to be near as strongly comprest by the
weight of the incumbent Air as it would be by the weight of a Mercurial
Cylinder of 28. or 30. Inches, p. 67.
PART III.
Wherein what is objected against Mr. Boyle's Explications of particular
Experiments is answered. The entrance into this Part of the Discourse, with an
advertisement how far only it will be requisite to examine the Adversaries
assertions and explications, the Hypotheses on both sides being before
considered, p. 69, 70. A defense of the first and second Experiments,
concerning the intrusion of the Finger into the Orifice of the Valve of the
evacuated Receiver, p. 70. A defense of the third Experiment, why the Sucker
being drawn down there is no greater difficulty in the end then in the beginnin
of the gdepression, p. 71, 72. Of the fourth Experiment, touching the swelling
of a Bladder upon the exhaustion of the ambient Air, and proportionably to that
exhaustion, p. 72, 73. The Authors and the Funicular Hypothesis in the
explication of this Phenomenon compared, ibid. Of the fifth Experiment, p. 73.
Of the eighth Experiment, about the breaking of a Glass-Receiver which was not
globular upon the exhaustion of the inward Air, p. 74. Whether it were more
likely to be broken by the pressure of the Atmosphere without, or a contraction
of a string of Air within, ibid. Of the ninth Experiment, p. 75. Whether the
breaking of the Vial outward in the exhausted Receiver, was caused by the
pressure of the Atmosphere through the Tube which was open to the ambient Air,
ibid. Of the 17. Experiment, p. 76, 77, 78, 79. The Torrecellian Experiment
being made within the Receiver, whether the descent and ascent of the Mercury
in the Tube, under and above its wonted station, be caused by the debilitated
and strengthened Spring of the Air, ibid. Of the 18. Experiment, p. 79, 80.
Whether the Authors or the Funicular Hypothesis assign the more probable cause
why a Cylinder of Mercury did in Winter rise and fall in the Tube, sometimes as
water in a weather-glass according to the laws of Heat and Cold, and sometimes
contrary thereunto, ibid. Of the 19. Experiment, p. 81. Of the 20. Experiment,
p. 82, 83. Some mistakes in the Adversary of the Authors meaning about the
Spring of the Water, and the places whence the bubbles arose, ibid. The
Hypotheses compared, ibid. Of the 31. Experiment, p. 84, 85, 86. Of the cause
why the Marbles fell not asunder in the exhausted Receiver, though a weight of
four Ounces were hung at the lower stone, ibid. Whether the account of the
Author or Adversary be more satisfactory, ibid. Of the 32. and 33. Experiments,
of the re-ascent of the Sucker and its carrying up a great weight with it upon
the exhaustion of the Receiver, p. 86, 87. How the flesh and neighboring blood
of a Patient is thrust up into a Cupping-glass, ibid. Of the 37. Experiment,
and the cause of the appearance of light or whiteness therein, p. 87. Of the
40. and 41. Experiments, concerning the cause of the sudden death of Animals in
the exhausted Receiver, p. 88, 89. Of the 42. and 43. Experiments, p. 90. The
Conclusion, p. 91, 92.
FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 13. line 19. lege which pressure notwithstanding, The. p. 14. l. 21.
Hydrargyrum, deprehendit. p. 29. l. 29. ut validissimam conficiant cat. p. 31.
l. 27. quendam funiculum per. p 58. l. 2. alamp. p. 69. l. 9.
Physico-Mechanical. p. 70. l. 19. Boylianis. p. 72. l. 17. removal: Our. p. 74.
l. 29. quam ut (ob figuram illam resistendo minus idoneam) resistere potuerint.


