GENERAL HEADS FOR THE Natural History OF A COUNTRY, Great or Small; Drawn out
for the Use of TRAVELERS AND NAVIGATORS.

Imparted by the late Honorable ROBERT BOIL, Esquire Fellow of the Royal Society.
Ordered to be published in his Lifetime, at the Request of some Curious
Persons.

To which is added, other Directions for Navigators, etc. with particular
Observations of the most noted Countries in the World: By another Hand.

LONDON, Printed for John Tailor at the Ship in S. Paul' s Churchyard, and S.
Holford, at the (...) in the Pall Mall. 1692.

J. I. Lucas

TO THE READER.
I doubt not but it will be sufficient to recommend to you the ensuing
Treatise, to know that the first and most general part of it was designed for
thy Benefit, by the Honorable Mr. BOIL, some Months before his Death, in
compliance with the frequent Importunities of many curious Gentlemen,
Physicians, etc. that came to visit him, who were very desirous to have
Directions how they might improve themselves by their Travels to the best
Advantage. Since that Time Additions to it have been made, partly out of Mr.
Boyle's own, and partly out of other Men's Writings, brought together, to be,
as it were, under one View, for the further Satisfaction of the Ingenious;
though in doing of this the Compiler has left himself a Liberty to insert such
things as he thought might be either for the Delight or Profit of the Curious
Traveller, for whom the whole of this Treatise is designed. You have here, in
the First place the General Directions, divided into such as relate to the
whole Microcosme, page 1. II. To Navigation, page 12. III. To Mines, page 18.
IV. Vegetables, page 48.

As for particular Directions, we have begun first with Turkey, page 58. after
that Egypt, page 67. III. Guiny, page IV. Poland, page 75. V. Hungaria and
Transylvania, p. 80. VI. Suratte, p. 87. VII. Persia, 101. VIII. Virginia, page
102. IX. Guaiana and Brasil, page 106. X. The Antisles and Caribbe Islands,
109. In the End you have an Index, for the most Material Words and Things in
the Treatise.

If this Treatise meet with a favorable Acceptance, we purpose to give you
Useful and Pleasant Enlargments upon most of these Heads, with an Addition of
New Ones, not here mentioned. Adieu*

General Heads FOR The Natural History OF A COUNTRY,
COnsidering the great Improvements, that have of late been made of Natural
History (the only sure Foundation of Natural Philosophy,) by the Travels of
Gentlemen, Seamen, and others; And the gread Disadvantage many Ingenious Men
are at in their Travels, by reason they know not beforehand, what things they
are to inform themselves of in every Country they come to, or by what Method
they may make Enquiries about things to be known there, I thought it would not
be unacceptable to such, to have Directions in General, relating to all, and
also in Particular, relating to Particular Countries, in as little Bounds as
possible, presented to their View.

As for the General Heads, I shall offer them to your Consideration in such
Order, as they were some Years ago given to the Public by the worthy and
neverto be forgotten Mr. Boil; which are those that respect the Heavens, or
concern the Air, the Water, or the Earth.

First. Under the first kind may be reckoned the Longitude and Latitude of the
Place, and that in respect to the Changes made in the Air; the Climate,
together with the Length of the longest and shortest Days, and the Parallels
come here to be considered; the Retrogradation of the Sun upon Dials, within
the Tropicks, and that naturally; what fixed Stars, and what not seen there, etc.

Secondly, About the Air is to be considered, its Temperature as to Heat,
Dryness and Moisture, and the Measures of them, its Weight, Clearness,
Refractive Power, its Subtilty or Grosness, its abounding with or wanting an
Esurine Salt; its Variation according to the several Seasons of the Year, and
the Times of the Day: How long the several kinds of Weather continue, what sort
of Meteors it breeds most commonly; in what Order they are generated, and how
long they usually last: Especially what Winds it is liable to; whether any of
them be stated, and ordinary, etc. What Diseases are Epidemical* that are
supposed to flow from the Air: What other Diseases the Country is subject to,
wherein that had a share, e. g. the Plague and contagious Sicknesses. What is
the usual Salubrity or Insalubrity of the Air. And with what Constitutions it
agrees better or worse than others. As also the Specific Gravity of the Air,
compared with the other foregoing Qualities, for this Effect it will be
convenient the Traveller be provided with a Traveling Baroscope, having the
Divisions usual in the other Baroscopes, marked upon a sliding Ruler, which
being once exactly marked for London, may serve for other Places; and for
observing the Difference between the Air here and in other Places, and in most
differing Climates, as in the Torrid and Frigid Zone, it has another Ruler
coming out perpendicular from the lower End of the Sliding Ruler, that it may
mark the height of the Mercury, in the lower Leg of the Siphon; so the
Divisions in the upper end will tell you the Specific Gravity of the Air at
that Time. I am the shorter in describing this, because I have left with Mr.
Papin, lodging at Mr. Carpenters in Fridaystreet, over against the Bell Inn,
the whole Method of this Contrivance: Whether it will not be more serviceable
both at home and abroad than that with stagnant Mercury, I leave to the
Judgment of the Ingenious,

Thirdly. About the Water are to be considered, 1. The Sea, its Depth,
specific Gravity, Difference of Saltness in different Zones, the Plants,
Insects and Fishes to be found in it, Tides, with respect to the adjacent
Lands, Currents, Whirl-pools, etc. 2. Rivers, their Bigness, their Course,
their Inundations, their Saltish Taste, as they report observable in Jordan,
Subterraneous Passages, fruitfulness of their Waters, etc. Their Lakes, as that
of Schernitzer in Carniola, Ponds, Springs, and especially Mineral Waters, what
sorts of Earth they run through, their Kinds, Qualities and Virtues, and how
examined; the Sorts of Fishes, their Bigness and Goodness, compared with the
Ground at the Bottom, their Plenty, their Seasons, their ways of Breeding,
their Haunts, and the ways of Taking of them, especially those that are not
purely Mechanical.

Fourthly. In the Earth may be observed,

I. It self.

II. Its Inhabitants, and its Productions, and those internal or external.

I. As to it self: What are its Dimensions, Situation, East, West, South or
North, its Figure, its Plains, Hills or Valleys, their Extent, the highth of
the Hills, either in respect of the neighboring Valleys, or the Level of the
Sea; as also whether the Mountains lie scattered or in Ridges, and whether
those run North or South, East or West, etc. What Promontories, Fiery or
Smoking Hills, etc. the Country has or has not; whether subject to
Earthquakes or not. Whether the Country is coherent, or much broken into
Islands. What Declination the Magnet has in several Places at the same Time,
and how much it varies in different Times at the same Place: Whether before the
Turnados or Hurricanes, the Magnetical Needle loses its Direction toward the
North, and turns to all the Points of the Compass; and if this Declination is
influenced by Subterraneous Fire, destroying it within, or by Water overflowing
the Surface of it, or by its vicinity to Iron Mines. What kinds of Soyls are
there, whether of Clay, Sand, Gravel, etc. What are its Products as to
Minerals, Vegetables or Animals: And moreover how all these are or may be
further improved for the Benefit of Man; what are the Qualities of that Soil,
peculiar to it, e. g. that of Ireland's, contrariety to poisonous Beast.

II. The Inhabitants themselves are to be considered, both Natives and
Strangers, that have been long settled there; particularly their Stature,
Shape, Features, Strength, Ingenuity, Diet, Inclination, that seem not due to
Education. As to their Women, their Fruitfulness or Barrenness, their easy or
hard Labor, with their Exercises and Diet; the Diseases both Men and Women are
subject to, peculiar to themselves, compared with their Diet, Air, etc. that do
influence them.

The Products External are Plants, Trees, Fruits, etc. with the Peculiarities
observable in them ( e. g. that of the Poyson-wood, called Machenil in
New England, with its Cures) and what Soyls they thrive best in. What Animals,
Terrestrial or Volatile, or Insects of all sorts, they produce, and to what Use
applied by the Inhabitants, as to Meat, Physic, Surgery, or Dying, etc.

By the Internal Production of the Earth are to be understood here, things
procreated in the Bowels of the Earth, either for the Benefit or Hurt of Man;
where Notice is to be taken, what way the one may be best found out, and the
other most easily avoided or cured. Under these are comprehended Metals,
Minerals, Stones Precious or Common, and how these Beds lie in reference to
North or South, etc. What Clays and Earths it affords, e. g. Tobacco-pipe-Clay,
Marles, Boles, with their Physical or other Uses, Fullers Earth, Earth for
Potters Ware, Soap, Earths, Axungiae, etc. What Coals, Salts, or Salt-Mines, as
Allom, Vitriols, Sulphurs, etc. it yields. As for Mines, you are to consider
their Number, Situations, Depths, Signs, Waters, Damps, Quantities of Ore,
goodness of Ore, extraneous things, and ways of reducing their Ores into
Metals, etc. Where, by the way, you may inform your selves of the Truth of what
is reported by Agricola, Kircher, etc. of Apparitions, and their Operations
under Ground.

To these General Articles of Enquiries (says their Proposer) should be added
Enquiries about Traditions, concerning all particular things relating to that
Country, as either peculiar to it, or at least uncommon elsewhere.

II. Enquiries that require Learning or Skill in the Answerer, to which should
be subjoined, Proposals of ways to enable Men to give Answers to these more
difficult Enquiries.

After the General Heads now proposed, we shall mention those that concern
Navigators into Remote Places.

The first agrees with what has been said before, viz. the observing the
Declination of the Compass, in the different Longitudes and Latitudes the Ship
comes to, and setting down the Method by which the Observation was made.

2. To take notice of the Diping Needles, and their Observations in the like
manner.

3. To observe the Odors, Colors, Tastes in Seawater, and what are the
Particularities of that Sea Water, where Ships do soonest rot, as in the
Streights of California the Sea looks red, with innumerabl* Worms that are in
it.

4. To remark, if (as is re^orted by Kircher) there be near ^he South Pole a
constant Cur^ent, setting from the South, so ^rcibly, that Ships with a stiff
Gale are hardly carried up against ^t; and near the North a Cur^ent forcibly
carrying Ships toward the Pole, or if this Moti^n reciprocate once in half a
Year.

5. To observe what subterra^eous Passages there are, where^y Seas communicate
with one another, as the Caspian is sup^osed to do with the Black Sea; and the
Dead Sea with the Red Sea.

6. To examine the Map made ^f the Straits by Captain Boland, and the Account
of the Tides he there gives.

7. The effect the Winds have upon the Seas, and how far down from the Surface
they agitate the Waters.

8. To take notice of the Tide of the Ebbings and Flowings with the Age of the
Moon when the Neap and Spring Tides d^ happen, to what height it do Ebb and
Flow at these Times up on the Coast of the Terra Firma or upon the Islands far
off in the Sea, as at S. Helena; and if i^ flow there with difference from the
Tides near the main Lane and how much sooner it begins a^ one Side than another.

9. To take notice of the Coas^ and to make narrowly the way o^ coming into
particular Creek^ and Harbors, with their Bearings and Distances from the
neighouring Places, as you com^ in.

10. Not forgetting at the same Time to sound all a long a^ you come in, and to
mark the Depths and Shallows near the Shore, or further off from the Coast,
near Shelves or Banks, and whether it increases or decreases in any Order.

11. To mark in the Sounding all Grounds, whether Clayie, Sandy or Ousie, etc.

12. To take Notice of the Winds, their Changes, or set Times of Blowing, and
in what Longitude and Latitude, especially the Trade-Winds; upon what Coast the
Trade Winds are most frequent, and by what Signs they may be Foreseen.

13. To Observe and Record all extraordinary Meteors, Lightnings, Thunders, and
their Effects, Ignes Fatui, Comets, etc. marking the Places of their Appearing
and Disappearing.

14. To be provided with a Nice pair of Scales, and exact Weights, for
examining the Weights of the several Waters, that occur, which I think may be
most exactly done after the Method proposed by the Incomparable Mr. Boil, in
his Medicina Hydrostatica, viz. weighing a Vial close stopped with a
Glass-Stopper first in the Air, then in Liquor: If the Vial be about two Ounces
in the Air it will do the better; for the whole Method, because it is too long
to insert into the Tract, I refer you to the Book itself. This I propose as the
most Subtle and Accurate. If you like a plainer way, you may use the Method
practiced by the Noble Author elsewhere, viz. To fill a Glass Vial of four
Ounces or more, with a small Neck, full of the Water to be tried, and to
examine the Weight of it, which you may compare with another.

15. 'Twill be convenient both for the Navigator and Philosopher, to be
provided with an Instrument for fetching up Water from the Bottom of the Sea,
first published by the Ingenious Mr. Hook, and transferred hither for the
Benefit of the Curious Traveller; for by this he may know whether the Water at
the Bottom be Heavier; and Salter than at the Top; or whether there be fresh
Water at the Bottom, occasioned by Springs of Fresh Water there, as some
presume there are, having observed in some Places Springs of fresh Water, a
great way within the Sea-marks: The Contrivance is this, a Wooden Bucket is
fastened to an Iron rod, with a Weight to sink it; this Bucket is shut at Top
and Bottom with two Valves or Clacks, so contrived, that when in descends, it
may open and let the Water pass through; but when it is pulled up again from the
Bottom, it may shut so close as to keep in all the Water it has at that Time,
by the under Valve, and the ambient Water over it, from getting in by the upper
Valve. If any be desirous to have one of these, they may have them at Mr.
Papins in Frydaystreet, at Mr. Carpenter's, over against the Bell-Inn.

Having gone through the General Directions both for Sea and Land, we come to
more Particular ones, and shall begin first with those that concern Mines; the
Knowledge of which, tho it began very early, and has been continued to our
Times, yet is still found improveable by Human Industry, as Experience has
taught us, and therefore worthy to be considered in the next Place, especially
seeing the Arts and Inventions most useful for Man's Life, depend more upon
this than any other; and that without it the World should want little of
Returning to its former Barbarity. All shall be reduced to six General Heads,
as has been done by the worthy Patron of Ingenious Arts, the Honorable Robert
Boil, now in Glory.

The First. The neighboring Country about the Mines.

The Second. The Soil where the Mines are.

The Third. The Sign of Mines.

The Fourth. The Structure, and other Particulars relating to the Mines
themselves.

The Fifth. The Nature and Circumstances of the Ore.

The Sixth. The Reduction of the Ore into Metal.

QVERIES about the First Title.
I. Whether the Country be Mountainous, Plain, or distinguished with Valleys?
And in case it be Mountainous, what kind of Hills they are, whether High or
Low, or indifferently elevated; whether almost equal, or very unequal in
height? whether Fruitful or Barren, Cold or Temperate; Rocky or not; Hollow or
Solid? whether they run in Ridges, or seem confusedly placed; and if the
former, what Way the Ridges run, North or South, etc. And whether they run any
thing parallel to one another?

II. What the Country produces, and what is most plenty?

III. What Cattle it produces? whether they have any thing peculiar in point of
Bigness Color, Longevity, Fitness or Unfitness to make good Meat, and other
Things, which may rather be attributed to the peculiar Nature of the Place,
than the Barrenness of the Soil, or other manifest Causes?

IV. What Health the Inhabitants enjoy? what Diseases they are subject to, and
to what not? for it is said, that such as dwell near Quicksilver Mines are
seldom troubled with the Plague: And lastly, what Remedies are found for the
Epidemick Diseases of the Place?

V. What plenty of Rivers, Brooks, Lakes, Springs, etc. in these, and how these
are in Color, N. B. Mr. Boil says somewhere, that a reddish Mineral Water has
been drunk to satisfy Thirst, without any Hurt.
Taste, etc. and how they affect the Health of those that use them?

VI. How the Air is disposed, as to Heat or Cold, Calms or Winds, and whether
these Winds do proceed from, or are infected with Subterraneous Steams; whether
Clear or Foggy.

About the Second Title.
VII. Whether the Soil that is near the Surface of the Earth be stony? and if
so, what sort of Stones it abounds with, whether it be Claye, Marlie or Chalky?
and of how many kinds this is, and by what Properties they are distinguished?

About the Third Title.
VIII. By what Signs they conjecture a Mine to be in a Place?

IX. And seeing these Signs are either above or beneath the Surface of the
Earth, Quaer. Whether the Ground be barren where these Metal Mines are?

X. What Trees or Plants do most plentifully grow in these Places, and do
thrive well or ill in these Places? whether they be more dwarfish, more
discolored in the Leaves, or have any Preternatural Color in them?

XI. What Alteration is produced in the Waters that run from them, either as to
their Color, Taste, Smell, Ponderousness, or the Matter that they leave upon
the Stones they run over.

XII. Whether Snow or Ice continue as long in these Places as they do in the
Neighboring Places?

XIII. Whether the Dew that falls on the Ground will discolor a white Linen
Cloth, spread on the Surface of the Earth; and whether the Rain brought thither
from other Places will discolor such Clothes, or afford any Residence of a
Mineral Nature?

XIV. Whether Thunder, Lightnings and Storms do abound there, and if there be
any Fiery Meteors and Nocturnal Lights observed there?

XV. Whether Mists do arise from such Mineral Grounds; what is observable in
them; what Minerals they signify, and may be supposed to be produced by?

XVI. Whether the Virgula Divinatoria be used for the finding out the Mines,
and with what Success?

As for those Signs that are beneath the Surface.

XVII. Quaer. Whether there be any Clays, Marles, or other Mineral Earths, and
of what Consistence they are that give Notice of the Ores, and if they be more
than one, and at what Depth they lie, in respect of one another, and how thick
they are?

XVIII. What Stones, Marcasites, etc. there are to be found near or not far
from the Surface, which give Signs of those Mines, as it happens in the
Tin-Mines of Cornwall, where Marcasites are often found above the Ore; what is
the particular Shapes, Bigness, Color and Weight of such Stones, whereby they
are distinguishable from others.

XIX. Whether Heat or Damps are a Sign of a Mine.

XX. Whether Water found in Digging be a Sign of a Mine.

XXI. By what Signs the Nearness of a Mine is known, and whether by any Sign
one may know whether he is above, beneath, or at the Side of the Mine.

XXII. By what Signs the determinate Kinds of Metals are known, with their
Plenty or Goodness.

XXIII. What Signs there are of the Depth of the Mines; what Signs there are of
the Mines being hopeless, or at least unlikely, to find a Vein in the Place
where it is dug for; and what these are.

About the Fourth Title.
XXIV. What is the Depth of the Shaft or Groove, till you come at the Vein or
Ore. Whether the Vein run or lie horizontal or dip; and if it dip, what
Inclination it has, how deep the lowest part lies, and consequently how much
deeper than the uppermost.

XXV. As also what its flexures, if it have any, are; and whether it runs
directly North or South, East or West, or seem rather to have a casual Tendency
than any Determination by Nature, and how far it reaches in all.

XXVI. What is the wideness of the Groove at the Top and elsewhere; whether the
Groove be perpendicular or crooked, and if crooked, after what manner, and with
what Distance it winds.

XXVII. How the Groove is supported; what are the Kinds, Length, Bigness and
way of placing the Timber, Poles, etc. that are employed to support it; and how
long the Wood lasts, without being spoiled by the Subterraneous Fumes and
Waters, and what Wood lasts longest.

XXVIII. What Air-shaft belongs to the Mine; whether it be single or more than
one; of what Breadth the Air-shaft is at the Orifice; whether it be convenient
enough or not; how near it is placed to the Groove, and in what Position; if
there be several Air-shafts, what their Distances and Situation are, in
reference to the Grove, and to each other; and how Air is supplied, if there be
no Air-shafts.

XXIX. Whether they meet with Waters, and what plenty there is of them; at what
Depth they are found, and how qualified, and what way they spring, etc.

XXX. Whether they are constant or Temporary; whether they increase or diminish
notably in Summer, or at any Time of the Year; and what that Season is, how
long it lasts, and the Proportions of Increase and Decrease.

XXXI. What Engines or Contrivances are made use of for drawing up the Water,
and conveying it away, the Materials they are made of, the Parts, the Bigness,
the coaptation, and in short the whole Structure, number and way of applying
the Instruments, that are made use of to free the Mines from the Water.

XXXII. What are the Conditions, Number, etc. of the Adits.

XXXIII. Whether the Mines be troubled with Damps, and of what kind they are,
whether they come often or seldom at any Time of the Year, or altogether
irregularly.

XXXIV. What Signs forerun them; what Mischief they do; what Remedies are the
most successfully employed against them as well in referencce to the clearing
of the Mine, as to the Preservation and Recovery of the Men.

XXXV. What Methods the Mine-men use in following of the Vein, and tracing
their Passages under Ground (which they call Plumming and Dyalling) according
to the several exegencies; and whether they employ the Instruments made with
the Help of the Loadstone, the same way that is usual; and, if not, wherein
they differ in the Use of the same Instruments; and what Instruments they
substitute in their place.

XXXVI. What ways they secure themselves against the uncertainty that the
Magnetical Needle is subject to, when it comes near to Iron Ore (of which yet
perhaps there is not so great Danger as one may imagine, as far as I could find
by a Trial purposely made in a Groove, where I was sure there wanted not Iron
Ore;) and what other ways may be used, besides a Lodestone, to help a Miner.

XXXVII. How the Miners deal with the Rock and Spar they meet with before they
come at the Ore; and how they use Fire to soften, calcine or crack them; with
what Success they employ it.

XXXVIII. By what means they free the Mines and the workmen, from the
Inconveniences arising from the much use of the Fire.

XXXIX. With what Instruments they break the Rock, how they are used, and how
long they last.

XL. How the Miners work, whether clothed or naked, and what Lights they use
to work by; what Materials they are Made of, and what Light they give; how long
they last, and by what ways they are kept burning in that thick and foggy Air.

XLI. How Veins are followed, lost and recovered; and how several Miners work
on the same Vein, and what is the best way of getting all the Ore in a Vein,
and most conveniently.

XLII. How they convey out their Ore, and other Things that are to be carried
out of the Mine; whether they do it in Baskets, drawn up by Ropes, or upon Men's
Backs; and if this last kind of way, what kind of Vessels they use for Matter,
Shape and Capacity, and whether the Workmen deliver them one to another; or the
same Workmen carry them all the Way; and whether the Diggers descend and ascend
by Ladders of Wood or Ropes, etc.

About the Fifth Title.
XLIII. Whether the Ore runs in a Vein; or lie dispersed in Scattered Pieces,
or be divided partly into a Vein, partly into loose Masses, or like a Wall
between two Rocks, as it were in a Cleft, or be interspersed in the firm Rock,
like speckled Marble, or be found in Grains like Sand or Gravel, as store of
excellent Tin is said to be found in some Parts of Cornwall, at the Sides and in
the Channels of Running Waters, which they call -- or whether the Ore be in a
softer Consistence, like Earth or Lome, as there is Lead-Ore in Ireland,
holding store of Silver and Iron-Ore in the North Parts of Scotland and
elsewhere, and what is observeable in it, as to Weight, Color, Mixture, etc.

XLIV. Whether any part of the Metal be found in the Mine perfect and complete
(as I have had presented me good valuable Copper, and Pieces of perfect Lead,
that were taken up, the one at Jamaica, and the other by an Acquaintance of
mine, that took them out of the Ground himself in New England.)

XLV. Whether the Mine affords any parcels of Metal, that seem to grow like
Plants (as I have sometimes seen Silver grow, as it seemed, out of Stone or
Spar, almost like Blades of Grass, as also great Grains of Metal, which
appeared to me, and which those that tried some of it, affirmed to be Gold,
abounding in a stony Lump, that seemed chiefly to consist of a peculiar kind of
Spar.)

XLVI. Whether the Vein lie near the Surface of the Earth, and at what Depth;
whether the Vein have not any peculiar concomitant Coats (if I may so call
them) and if any, what they are, and in what Order they lie* as the Veins of
Lead-Ore, with us, have frequently annexed to them a Substance called Spar and
next to that another, called Caulk.

Whether (besides these coats) they have belonging to it any other
Heterogeneous Substance (as in Tin mines we often find that yellow Substance
they call Mundick).

XLVII. What are the principal Qualities of these extraneous Substances (as
that Spar is white, but almost transparent, like course Crystal, heavy,
brittle, easily divisible into Flakes, etc. Caulk is of a different Texture,
white, opacous, and like a Stone, but much more ponderous: Mundick I have had
of a fine golden Color, but tho it be affirmed to hold no Metal, yet I found
it in weight and otherwise to differ from Marcasites, and the Mine-men think it
of a poisonous Nature.)

XLVIII. Whether the Vein be enclosed every way in its Coats, or whether it lie
only between them.

XLIX. Whether the Vein be every way of an uniform Breadth and Thickness; and
if it be what these Dimensions are; and if not, in what Places it varies, and
in what measures (the like Questions are to be made concerning the Spar, Caulk,
and other Mixtures of the Ore).

L. Whether the Vein be uninterrupted, or in some Places broken off; and
whether it be abruptly or not; and whether it be by Vales, Brooks or Gullets,
etc.

LI. How wide the Interruptions are; by what Signs the Veins are to be found
again; whether the ulterior part or division of the Vein be of the same Nature
and hold on in the same Course, as to its tendency upwards and downwards, or
horizontally, Northward or Southward, etc. with the Vein from which it is cut
off.

LII. Whether in case the last end of the Vein be found, it terminate abruptly,
or elfe end in some kind of Rock or Earth, which does as it were close or seal
it up, without leaving any Crack or Cranny, or otherwise. and whether the
terminating part of the Vein tends either upward or downwards, or neither. Or
whether in the Places where the Vein is interrupted, there be any peculiar
Stone or Earth, that does, as it were, seal up the Extremity of it.

LIII. Whether it be observed that the Ore in Tract of Time may afford any Gold
or Silver, which it does not afford, or more than it would afford if it were
not so ripe; and whether or not it have been found that the metalline part of
the Vein grows so, that some part of the Ore will afford Ore or Metal in Tract
of Time, that did not so before; and whether to this Maturation of the Mine,
the being exposed to the free Air be necessary; or whether at least it conduce
to the acceleration of it, or otherwise.

LIVE. Whether all the Ore contained in the Mine be of the self-same Nature and
Goodness, and if not, what are the differing kinds, and how to be discriminated
and estimated.

LV. What is the Fineness and Goodness, by which the Mine is wont to be
estimated. And,

LVI. What are the Marks and Characters that distinguish one sort from another.

LVII. What Proportion of Metal it affords; (as in our Iron-mines is observed,
that about three Tons of Iron-stone will afford one Ton of Metal: And I have
had Lead-Ore, which an ingenious Man, to whom I recommended such Trials,
affirmed to me, to afford three parts in four of good Lead.)

LVIII. Whether the Ore be pure in its kind from other Metals, and, if not, of
what Metals it participates, and in what Proportion, which is especially to be
inquired into, especially if the Mine be of a base Metal, that holds a Noble
Metal (as I have known it observed, That Lead-Ore, that is poor in its own
Metal affords more Silver than other; and I remember that the Ore lately
mentioned, being Rich in Lead, scarce afforded us, being cupell'd) an Atome of
Silver. And Mathesius informs us, That a little Gold is not unfrequently found
in Iron-Ore: And I have by me some fine Gold, that never endured the Fire,
taken out of Tin-Ore.

About the Sixth Title.
LIX. What Preparations are used before the melting of the Ore, as Beating,
Grinding, Washing, Tosting or Parting, as is most frequently used in
Copper-Ore, and sometime in Iron-Ore; if they use this Burning more than once
how often they do it (for Copper-Ore is in some Places washed eight or ten
times, and in other twelve or fourteen) and with what Circumstances, as how
long the Ignition lasts at a Time; whether the Ore be suffered to cool of
itself; or be quenched; whether it be washed betwixt each Ignition; or whether
the Ore requires no such Preparations, as it often happens in Lead-Ore and
sometimes in Iron.

LX. Whether Mercury is made use of in separating the Nobler from the Baser
Metals (as in Peru, etc.)

LXI. Whether (as I have seen done in Iron-stone) the Ore be exposed to the
Air, as a Preparative.

LXII. What Flux-powders they use for reducing their Ores in small Quantities.

LXIII. Whether in reducing or melting great Quantities they use any Addition
of Flux-powder (or Fondant, as the French term it,) or only by the Force of the
Fire, or in any way between both (as throwing in of Charcoals when they melt
Iron-stone does not only serve to feed the Fire, but by the Alcali of the Ashes
to promote the Fusion: So Limestone, etc.) What is the Contrivance of the
Furnaces, and if they be all of one sort or bigness; or differing; what Tools
are used in Smelting, and how contrived.

LXIV. What Fuel they use, and how much is spent in a Day or Week, and what
Returns they have in Metal, in a proportionate Time.

LXV. Whether the Ore be melted in a Wind Furnace, made by the Fire's own
Motion, or by Bellows; what their Dimensions are, and what way used.

LXVI. What way they take or let out the Metal that is in fusion, to cast it
into Bars, Sows, Pigs; and what Clay, Sand or Mould they let it run, or pour it
through; and after what manner they refrigerate it.

LXVII. Whether or not, to facilitate the Fusion, they mix several Ores of the
same sort together (as in some Places it is usual to mix rich and poor Ore, and
at Mendip they mix two or more of these differing kinds of Lead-Ores, that they
call Firm Ore, Steel-Ore, Pottern-Ore, etc.)

LXVIII. Whether or not, after it is once melted, they melt it again, to make it
more pure; and if so, with what Circumstances they perform it.

LXIX. Whether they have Signs to know when the Fusion is well or ill
performed, and the Metal have obtained a Perfection requisite in such a Fusion,
and in such a Furnace.

LXX. Whether they observe any difference in the Goodness of the Metal that
comes first, from that which comes last; and whether the Rule holds constantly
(for though they observe in the Tin-mines, That the best Metal comes first, yet
an Industrious Friend of mine informs me, that the best Metal comes last.)

LXXI. Whether the produced Metal be all of the same Goodness; and if it be,
how good it is in reference to the Metals of other Mines, or other Parts of the
same Vein; and if it be not, what difference are between the produced Portions
of Metal, and what disparity that amounts to in the Price.

LXXII. What are the ways of distinguishing them, and estimating their Goodness.

LXXIII. Whether there be not elevated Flowers to the upper Parts of the
Chimney, and whether they are barely excrementitious, or Metalline (as in the
Cornish Tin mines, after some Years they pull down the thatched Houses, in
which the Ore has been melted, to get the Stuff that adheres to the insides of
the Roof, out of which they melt store of excellent Tin).

LXXIV. Whether when the Ores are brought to Fusion, they have any Recrements
(as Ironstone affords store of a dark Glass or Slag, the like does Tin, and if
it do, what these Recrements are, and how to be separated from the baser Metal.

LXXV. Whether after the Metal has been melted, the remaining part of the Ore
will in Tract of Time be impregnated with more Metal (for this is affirmed to
me of the Cornish Tin-Ore; and what remained after the Fusion of the Iron-Ore
in the Forest of Dean, is so rich in Metal, that a Tenant of mine in Ireland,
though he had on the Land he held from me an Iron-Mine, found it less profit to
work it, than to send to the Forest of Dean for this already used Ore, which
having layn for some Ages since it. was thrown aside, in great Heaps, exposed
to the Air, he affirmed to yield a very great store of Iron and very good;
though I some what doubt

LXXVI. Whether this be totally to be ascribed to the Air, and length or Time,
or to the leaving of Metal in the Slags in old Times, before great Furnaces
were in use.)

LXXVII. Whether the Air appears really to be cold in Summer and hot in Winter,
by more evident Truths than the Testimony of our Touch.

LXXVIII. Whether they find the Stones and Ground actually hot, so that
sometimes they can hardly stand upon the Place, as Glauber says, and from
whence that proceeds.

LXXIX. Whether there be Mineral Juices that harden into Stones or Metals, upon
the touch of the Air, called Gur; of this Helmont relates an Observation.

LXXX. What Laws, Constitutions and Economy is observed among the Miners.

LXXXI. What way the Trees and their Leaves are affected by the Mineral Fumes
and Juices, and if they be gilded or silvered as along the River Meine in
Germany is observed; and if these Trees be more ponderous than others; if they
have any Metals or Metaline Concretes lodged in their Pores.

LXXXII. Whether there be Waters and Springs observed to rise near the Mines,
and run their whole Course under the Ground, without ever appearing above it.

LXXXIII. Whether Subterraneous Springs do rise with any VVind, or determinate
Change of Weather.

LXXXIV. How much heavier the Atmosphere is at the Bottom than at the Top; and
whether damps considerably increase the weight of it.

LXXXV. Whether they find any strange Substances in the Mines as Vessels,
Anchors, Fishes enclosed in Spar or Metal.

Having gone through what belongs to the Mineral Kingdom, in as full a Method
as we could; the next Head of Enquiries shall be about the Vegetable Kingdom,
which though more proper for one that has his abode fixed, may yet be acceptable
and useful also to the curious Traveller.

I. What Vegetables there are which having the wrong End of them set down into
the Ground, will yet grow, as it is said Elders and Briars will.

II. Whether the Branch of a Plant (as of a Vine or Bramble) being laid into
the Ground, whilst yet growing on the Tree, and there taking Root, being cut
off from the Tree whilst so growing, will shoot out forward and backward.

III. In Tapping, Cutting or Boring of any Tree, whether the Juice that vents
at it comes from above or below.

IV. What part of the Juice ascends or descends by the Bark; whether what so
ascends, ascends by the outward or inward part of it.

V. Whether if a Zone of about two or three Inches be cut off about the Bottom
of a Branch, that Branch will die or cast its Leaves, or bleed out a Juice from
the upper or lower part of the Bark so cut, or be apt to shoot out Leaves or
Branches, or Knobs, either above or below that Boring.

VI. What the use of the Pith is; whether the Juice ascend or descend by it;
and what effects will follow if the Trunk be bored to the Pith, and a Peg
droven hard into the Hole of the Pith, both above and below; this to be tried
in the most pithy Plants.

VII. Whether the Points or Ends of the Roots being cut off, the Roots will
bleed as copiously as Branches of the Trunks do when bored.

VIII. What Side of the Tree affords most Sap.

IX. Of what Age Trees afford most Sap.

X. What are the best Seasons of the Air for taking the Sap o^ every kind of
Tree in greates^ Quantity, and how long that Season lasts.

XI. Whether the Sap comes more copiously at one Time of the Day or Night than
at another.

XII. Whether Trees afford any considerable Juice in the Fall.

XIII. What Effect, Copiousness, or Scarcity of Rain has upon the Saps of
Trees.

XIV. Whether or no the Nature of a Tree may be changed by Applications of
Juices or Liquors to the Roots, or other Parts.

XV. Whether a Tree, whose Root is covered from Rain, and not watered, if the
Branches of it be exposed to the Air, will grow.

XVI. Whether inoculated Roots of a Tree will grow.

XVII. How short the Arms of the Roots of a Tree may be cut, and the Tree still
grow.

XVIII. How deep the several kinds of Trees are to be set in the Ground to grow.

XIX. Wether, or no, a Seed being planted either way, it will grow equally.

XX. Wether the Stem of a Tree being set in the Earth, and the Root turned up
into the Air, the Tree will grow, etc.

Enquiries concerning the Use and Culture of the Kitchen-Garden and
Winter-Greens.
I. What Roots first Shoots Sprouts Stalks Buds Flowers Fruits Kernels Seeds
to Eat Raw Boil Roste Bake Picle Preserve Candy Dry whole dry to powder,
serving for Spice make Wine -- Cider, -- Perry -- Ale and other various Drinks
-- Vinegar and Verjuice -- Thick Juices like Honey -- Concrete Juices like
Sugar -- Bread -- Cakes, Puddings and baked Meats -- Broaths
give pleasant Colors to Meats and Drinks what Herbs are fit to make Sallets,
and how to be ordered for that purpose.


II. The best Season to sow every Sort of Seed.

III. How often every sort of Seed ought to be sown for the Use of the
Kitchen-Garden.

IV. How the Earth is compounded and ordered for several kinds of Seeds and
Plants.

V. What to be sowed on Cold Grounds.

VI. What to be sowed on Hot Beds.

VII. Several ways of making Hot Beds, and their Attendance.

VIII. How and what to be transplanted either into Cold Ground, or into New Hot
Beds, and how ordered after.

IX. What Observations on the Sun, Moon and Weather, for Sowing, Planting and
Transplanting.

X. How to Water and Shade Plants new planted, and Seeds Sowed.

XI. What thrives best in the Sun.

XII. What thrives best in the Shade.

XIII. What and how such as will not prosper in the Green-House, may be covered
and preserved abroad.

XIV. The several Names of Worms, Vermin and Insects that are noxious to the
Gardens.

XV. The Remedies.

XVI. The best Form and Dimension of the Green-House; as also of what to build
and cover it.

XVII. What to be housed in Winter.

XVIII. How to order the Pots or Tubs before they are used.

XIX. When and in what Weather to open and close the Green-House.

XX. What Observations at the first setting abroad of the Winter-Greens in the
Spring.

XXI. How to Prune and Dung the Winter-Greens.

XXII. What may be increased by the Root.

XXIII. What by Layers.

XXIV. What by Slips or Cuttings.

XXV. What grows best of Seeds that Shed and Sow themselves.

XXVI. What to be Grafted and Inoculated.

XXVII. The several ways of Ingrafting and Inoculating.

XXVIII. How to alter the Shape, Smell, Taste and Color of Vegetables, by
joining different Roots together.

XXIX. How and what may be changed by Grafting, Joining or Inoculating Shoots
or Buds on different Stocks or Cyons.

XXX. How to compound several Liquors to Water, and feed Vegetables, whereby
they may be much altered.

XXXI. Of what Roots, Stalks, Barks, Leaves, Flowers, Fruits, Seeds or Downs,
may be made either Cups, Boxes, Baskets, Mats, Callicoes, Clothes, (as Nettle
Cloth) and the like, all which will be most useful for the Life of Man, from
the Garden.

XXXII. How to prune Vines, how many Joints to leave, and of what Age the Vine
must be, that is cut away.

XXXIII. How to prune Standard-Trees.

XXXIV. How to prune Wall-Trees, and with what to be best fastened.

XXXV. The Places from whence the best of the Vegetables that are either
Winter-Greens, or fit for the Kitchen-Garden, may be had, and the Marks of
their Goodness.

XXXVI. How to discern good Seeds from bad.

XXXVII. The Times of Gathering, and the Ways of Preserving them.

Though we have by Journal-Books a fuller Account given us of Turkey than of
many other Countries, yet because there are in these but imperfect Relations of
many Things, which yet are needful to be known, it will not be amiss to make
known here the account of these Things, that the Curious Traveller may inform
himself of them, as he shall find convenience for it.

1. In what Part of Turkey the Rusma is to be found, and in what Quantities;
whether the Turks employ it to any other Uses besides that of taking off the
Hair: whether there be differing kinds of it; how it is used to take of Hair,
and how to get store of it.

2. Whether the Turks do not only take Opium themselves for Strength and
Courage, but also give it to their Horses, Camels and Dromedaries, for the same
purpose, when they find them tired and faint in their Traveling; what is the
greatest Dose any Men are known to have taken of Opium, and how prepared.

3. What Effects are observed from their Use of Opium, as also of Coffee,
Bathing, Shaving their Heads, using Rice, and why they prefer that which grows
not unless watered, before Wheat, etc.

4. How their Damasco Steel is made; and,

5. What is their way of Dressing Leather, which though thin and supple, will
hold out Water.

6. What is the way they breed those excellent Horses, they are so much famed
for.

7. Wether they be so skilful in poisoning as is said, and how their Poisons
are curable.

8. How the Armenians keep Meat Fresh and Sweet so long, as it is said they do.

9. What Arts or Trades they have worth Learning.

10. Whether there be such a Tree about Damascus called Mous^ac, which every
Year, about the Month of December, is cut down close by the Root, and within
four or five Months shoots up again apace, bringing forth Leaves, Flowers and
Fruit also, and bearing but one Apple, an excellent Fruit, at once.

11. Whether at Reame, in the South Parts of Arabia Foelix, there be Grapes
without any Grains; and whether the People of that Country live, many of them,
to an hundred and twenty Years in good Health.

12. Whether in Candia there be no poisonous Creatures; and whether those
Serpents that are there are without Poison.

13. Whether all Fruits, Herbs, Earths and Fountains are naturally saltish, in
the Island of Cyprus; and whether those Parts of this Isle, which abound
naturally in Cyprus-Trees, are more or less healthful than others.

14. What store of Amianthus there is in Cyprus, and how they work it.

15. Whether Mummies be found in the Sands of Arabia, that are the dried Flesh
of Men, buried in those Sandy Deserts in Traveling; and how they differ in
their Virtue from the embalmed ones.

16. Whether the Parts about the City of Constantinople or Asia Minor, be as
subject to Earthquakes no^ as they have been formerly; and whether the Eastern
Winds do not plague the said City with Mists* and cause that inconstancy of
Weather, it is said to be subject to.

17. Whether the Earthquakes in Zant and Cephalenia, be so frequent, as to
happen, now and then, nine or Ten Times in a Month; and whether these Isles be
not very Cavernous.

18. What is the height of Mount Cacasus, its Position, and Temper in several
Parts, etc.

19. With what declivity the Water runs out of the Euxin Sea into the
Propontis; with what Depth; and if the main Tides and Eddies, so famous by the
Name of Euripi, have any certain Period.

20. If in the Euxine Sea there can be found any Sign of the Caspian Sea's
emptying itself into it by a Passage under Ground; if there be any different
Color or Temper as to Heat or Cold, or any great Emotion in the Water, that
may give Light to it.

21. By what Inland Passages they go to China; there being now a Passage for
Caravans throughout those Places, that would formerly admit of no
Correspondence, by reason of the Barbarism of the Inhabitants.

22. Whether in the Aqueducts they make, they line the Inside with as good
Plaster as the Ancients did, and how theirs is made.

23. To enquire after the excellent Works of Antiquity, with which that Country
is full, and which by the Ignorant are not thought worth Notice or
Preservation; and particularly what is the Structure and Bigness of the
Aqueducts, made in several Places about Constantinople by Solomon the
Magnificent.

24. To enquire whether the Relations of a whole City's being turned into Stone
be true, and if not what gave the first Rise to it, and whether it lie so near
the Sea that these Bodies so metamophosed may be easily brought into Europe.
Here I beg the Reader's Leave to digress a little, and give him the Information
I had of it from one who was upon the Place, did see this strange
Metamorphosis, and had an account of it from one who lived near to it, which I
the rather adventure to do, because I have had good Proofs of his Veracity in
other Relations, and also because I had the same confirmed to me in great
measure, by a Gentleman, who had been long a Chaplain to the Factory at Smyrna,
who assured me, That there is no Doubt of it. It Is this: Being obliged to go
with the Army sent by the Bassa of Tripoly to reduce a City that had rebelled
against him, in the way, he and some others, after Leave got from their
Commander, did turn aside to see this so strange Metamorphosis; at his first
coming into the Place he saw a Sheep lying upon her Belly, as if it were
chewing the Cud, whose Head he broke off from her Neck, with a Stone, and in
the Gullet he could perceive some remainder of the chewed Grass all petrified,
which he took up, and sold afterward to one of his Fellow-Slaves, who, having
sent it to the Pope, had his Ransom returned for it: A little further they saw
a Woman sitting on her Knees, with her Hands in a Trough, as if she were
kneading Dough, her Mantle, that was clasped about her Neck being cast
backward, and all turned to Stone, so hard that they could lift her and the
Trough, in which the Hands were, without parting them or breaking any thing.
When he asked a Priest, that was sent from the City to treat with the
Commander, What way this did happen, he answered him, That all the Inhabitants
of that Place were Sodomites, and that God rained down Fire and Brimstone from
Heaven upon them; upon her which they were all turned to Stones: And for Proof
of this, he desired him to dig in the Sand, with his Hand, a Foot deep, which
he found like blue Ashes; which, said the Priests, were the remainders of that
Fire.

But to return to our Subject, the next Enquiries shall be for Egypt. And,

1. Whether it rain at any Time, and if so at what Time of the Year; and what
Influences that Rain has upon the Air, as to the making it Wholesome or
Pestilential, or otherwise unwholesome.

2. To consider the Nitre that is made there, to try what affinity there is
between the Nitre we have and theirs, whether it discover an Alcaly Nature by
its colluctation with Acids, as some report, and whether after dissolving in
Water, Filtration and Evaporation, it give Chrystals like to Nitre.

3. Whether the Earth of Egypt, adjoining to the River Nilus, preserved and
weighed, daily keeps the same Weight, till the seventeenth of June, and then
grows daily heavier, with the Increase of the River.

4. Whether if the Plague be never so great before, yet on the first Day of the
Nile's Increase, it not only not increases, but absolutely cease, not one
dying of it after; and whether this be justly attributed to the swelling of the
Nile, or the cool Winds that happen about that Time, and come from the
dissolving of the Snows on the Riphaean Hills, behind Greece, which being
impregnated with the Nitrous Particles of of the Snow, does both fan the Air of
Egypt, and communicate to it an Antipestilential Quality; which I the rather am
inclined to believe, because Judicious Men do attribute in part the swelling of
the Nile to these Etesiae, that blowing hard on the Mouth of the Nile force its
Waters back again into it is Channel, which meeting with the Land-flood, that is
at the same Time occasioned by the great Rains happening at that Time on the
Mountains of the Moon, do make the River overflow its Banks.

5. To enquire particularly into the manner of hatching Eggs in Egypt; how the
Carnels Dung is prepared, wherein they are laid; how often the Eggs are turned;
how covered; whether they hatch in one and twenty Days, as they do with us
under a Hen; whether the Chickens be as perfect as ours; if imperfect, whether
that may not happen to them with rough handling, while they are removed, being
very tender, out of the Place where they are hatched; to take the Design of the
manner, how by the Pipes the Heat is conveyed to several Rooms; how they treat
them betwixt the Time of their Hatching and Taking away by the Owners; whether
they do not also use to hatch Eggs under Hens.

6. To enquire if the Yellow-Amber that is sold in Egypt in great Quantity, be
the Gum of a Tree growing in Egypt, or Ethiopia, as Bellonius, after Diodorus
Siculus affirms; and whether, besides several Animals, that are found enclosed
in that Amber, there is frequently found some Part of the Bark of a Tree
sticking to it.

7. To enquire of a certain Tree, growing not far from Cairo, which bears a
Fruit stuffed with Wool, that is finer than Silk, of which the Arabs make
Linen, that is softer than Silk, and whiter then Cotton.

8. Whether Crocodiles that are found to be sometime thirty Foot long, are
hatched of an Egg no bigger than a Turkey's.

9. Whether the Ichneumon, or Egyptian-Water-Rat, can kill a Crocodile, by
skipping into his Mouth, and gnawing his Way out, as Old Writers affirm.

10. Whether it be true, That the Arabs can charm the Crocodiles, or whether
there be on the Nile's Side any Talismans, or Constellated Figures, beyond
which the Crocodiles cannot pass, as some would make us belive.

11. To enquire at Cairo for several Drugs, which are common there, and much in
use, yet not brought into Europe, as Acacia, Calamus Odoratus, Amomum, Costus,
Ben Album, and diverse such others.

12. Whether the Female Palm Tree be not Fruitful unless she be planted by the
Male, as Some would bear us in Hand.

13. To enquire whether the Appearance of Legs and Arms of Men, related to
stand out of the Ground, to a great Number, at five Miles from Cairo, on Good
Friday, do still continue, and how that Imposture is perfor'd.

14. Whether Children born in the eigth Month do usually live there, contrary
to what is believed to happen elsewhere.

15. To take an account of the Wooden Locks there, which are said to be made
with as great Art, there, as our Locks here.

16. To observe the Course of the Waters both in the Mediterranean and the Red
Sea.

Enquiries for Guiny.
1. Whether the River Niger overflows the Country yearly, like Nilus.

2. Whether the Rain, when it falls, be often very hot, roting the Clothes, if
not presently dried, and breeding Worms in them.

3. Whether the Gold there be of very different Fineness, and that which is
uppermost in the Mine be the finest.

4. Whether the Palm affords them Wine, Oil, Vinegar, Soap, and Bread; and
whether out of the Leaves they pick Threads, making thereof very curious Works.

5. Whether they have besides their Palm-wine, a Drink made of Grain, like our
Ale; what Grain that is, and how prepared.

6. Whether some People on the River Gambra be only Tawny, as others very Black.

7. Whether the Negroes have such sharp Sights, that they discover a Ship
further off at Sea than an European can.

8. What Reason there is to conclude, That the common People being accustomed
to drink Water, is the cause that they are troubled with Worms in their Bodies,
very painful to them, and difficult to get out.

Enquiries for Poland and the adjacent Countries, especially such as are more
Northerly.
1. What is the way of making Potashes in Poland.

2. What is to be observed about Succinum or Amber; whether it be an exudation
of the Sea; whether it be soft when it is first cast on Shore; at what Season of
the Year, and in what manner it is taken up, etc.

3. What is to be observed in the digging of Sal Gemmae in Poland; and what is
the Depth of the Mines, stored with the Salt; and what their Distance from the
Sea.

4. What Truth there is in that Relation, of Swallows being found under Waters,
congealed in Winter, and reviving if they be fished and held to the Fire.

5. Whether there be in the Bodnick Bay a Whirl-pool, a^ is related to be in
the Sea o^ Norway, which is commonly called the Maal-stroom; and whether there
be any Sign^ that relate the Communicatio^ of these Gulphs with the
Subterraneous Passages, as Kirche^ says in his Mundus Subter^ T. 1. p. 146.

6. To what Depth the Col^ in these Parts pierces the Eart^ and Water.

7. Whether their Watche^ go slower by the intens^ Cold.

8. Whether their Oil, i^ great Colds is turned into true^ that is to say, hard
and brittl^ Ice.

9. Whether they can freeze there a strong Brine of Bay Salt, a strong Solution
of Sal Gemmae, or Soot, or a strong Solution of Salt of Tartar, or Sugar of
Lead.

10. Wether they can Congeal mere Blood, all the serous Part thereof being
severed. Item, Canary Wine, Solutions of all Salts, and strong Solutions of
Metals.

11. Whether an intense and lasting Frost makes any Alteration in Quicksilver,
exposed very shallow, in a Flat Vessel.

12. Whether the Purgative Virtue of Catharticks be increased or diminished, or
even totally destroyed by a strong continual Cold.

13. Whether Harts-Horns thawed will give the same Quantity of Spirits, by the
same Method of Distilling, which they use to yield, when not frozen.

14. What Cold operates in the Fermentations of Liquors.

15. Whether Birds and wild Beasts grow white there in Wintertime, and recover
their Native Color in Summer.

16. Whether Colors may be concentred by Cold, e. g. a strong Decoction of
Cochineal in a fit Glass.

17. Whether the Electrical Virtue of Amber, and the Attractive Force of the
Magnet be changed by a vehement Cold.

18. Whether Pieces of Iron and Steel, even thick ones, be made brittle by
intense Frosts; and therefore Smiths are obliged, for prevention, to give their
Iron and Steel Tools a softer Temper.

19. Whether accurate Observations evince, That all Fishes dye in frozen
Waters, if the Ice be not broken; where it is diligently to be enquired into,
Whether the Cold itself or the want of Changing or Ventilating the Water, or
the privation of Air, be the cause of the Death of Fishes.

20. Whether any skilful Anatomist has enquired, by Freezing to Death some
Animals (as Rabbets, Pullets, Dogs, Cats, etc.) after what manner it is that
intense Cold kills Men; whether they have found Ice in the inward Parts, as the
Brain and Heart, and in the greater Vessels.

Enquiries into Hungary and Transylvania.
1. What is observable in Hungary, Transylvania, and the neighboring Parts, as
to Minerals, Springs, Warm Baths, Earths, Quarries, Metals, etc.

2. Particularly, to enquire into the several Sorts of Antimony, or Antimony
Ore, to be found in Hungary, and to inform us of the several Places, whence
they are dug, to the End they may be sent for.

3. To enquire where the best Hungarian Vitriol is to be found, and the
Cinnabaris Nativa.

4. To give us a right Account of the right Gold and Silver-Earth-Ore, said to
be found at Cranach in Hungary, whence the Gold is called Cranach Gold, first
lighted upon by the Care of the Emperor Rudolphus, and chymically wrought by
his Order and Inspection.

5. To enquire and send over some of that kind of Vitriol, which by credible
Persons is affirmed to be found Crystallized in Transylvania; as also after the
Vitriol, said to yield Gold.

6. To inform us of the Salt Pits in Transylvania, said to yield two Sorts of
perfect Salt, the one being a Sal Gemmae, the other a common Table-Salt; to
observe how deep these Salt-Mines lie from the Surface of the Ground; how deep
they are dug hitherto, and what Damps are met with in them.

7. To enquire after the Veins of Gold and Quicksilver at Cremnitz in Hungary;
and the Vein of Silver at Schemnitz in the same Kingdom.

8. To enquire whether the Waters of the Thermae that pass by Schemnitz, depose
a certain Sediment, which in Time turns into a Yellow Stone.

9. Whether in the Mines of Gold, Silver, Copper, Iron, Lead in Hungary, there
be generally found Quicksilver and Sulphur.

10. Whether it be true, That in the Copper-Mines of the Place called
Herren-Ground in Hungary, there be found no Quicksilver at all.

11. Whether it be true that in some Parts of the Vpper-Hungary the Ores of
Copper, Iron and Lead be sometimes so commixed, that there is often found in
the upper of the Concrete Matter of Iron, in the midst Matter of Copper, and in
the lowermost Lead; and that in other Parts of the Country, Copperish Fluors
are mixed with leaden ones.

12. Whether it be true what Athanasius Kircher writes from Relation, That the
Ductus of Metals do sometimes run North and South, and sometimes crossways.

13. Whether it is true what Busbequius reports, of a River in Hungary, whose
Water is so hot, and yet so full of Fish, that he says one would expect, that
all the Fish drawn thence would come out boiled.

14. Whether there be Springs about Buda or Alba Regalis, that rise at the
Bottom of the River, so hot, that those who go to bath, dare not put their Feet
so low as the Sand, for fear of having them Parboyl'd.

15. Whether there be in Hungary an Avernus, that exhaleth always such
poisonous Steams, that Birds flying over it do oftentime fall down,
ei-Stupifyed or quite Dead; what are the particulars of this as to Taste,
Smell, Color, Heat or Cold; whether any Waters run into it, and what Minerals
are found near about it, to which these Qualities can be mostly attributed.

16. Whether the Iron that is said to be turned to Copper, by the Vitriolate
Springs at Cremnitz or Smolnitz in Hungary, do after that Transmutation, or
Precipitation, contain a pretty deal of Gold.

17. Whether the depth of the Gold-Mines of Hungary be two thousand four
hundred Feet.

18. What Quantity of Gold is got out of an hundred weight of Ore, and whether
it be got alone or mixed with other Metals in the Ore.

19. Whether they find Trees or any other Salt, in the solid Salt of their
Salt-Mines.

20. Whether there be a great Lake in Moravia, whence the Waters at a certain
Time of the Year are all drawn away, by great Holes in the middle of it,
leading through subterraneous Passes, and that so suddenly, that the Fish are
left on the Ground, which afterward becomes good Pasture for another part of
the Year, the Waters then returning by the same Passages they went out, and
that with so much Force that it rises like a Jet of Water.

21. Whether it is true, That in some parts of Hungary, near the Gold-Mines,
the Leaves of their Trees have their lower Superficies, if not their upper
also, gilded over with yellowish Exhalations.

22. What is the way said to be used in Hungary and Austria of extracting the
Perfect Metals out of their Minera's without Lead, performed by casting a
Powder upon the Minera, which makes a quick and advantageous Separation,
Sulphur being supposed to be an Ingredient of it.

Enquiries for Suratte, etc.
1. Whether it be true that Diamonds and other Precious Stones, do grow again
after three Years, in the same Places where they have been dug out.

2. Whether the Quarries of Stone near Fettipore, not far from Agra, in the
Mogul's Dominions, may be cleft like Logs, and sawn like Planks to ciel
Chambers and cover Houses therewith; Likewise whether about Sadrapatan, on the
Coast of Cormandel, there be a Stone of the like Nature, so as seting a Wedge
upon it, one may cleave it with a Mallet, as thick or as thin as one pleases;
and whether it be of the Nature of our Fire-stone, that is prepared by the
Stone-Cutters for Ovens.

3. Whether upon the same Coast of Cormandel about Toutoucourin, and that of
Ceylan at Manar and Jafanapatan, they fish Pearls, as good as those about
Ormus; whether those Pearls are the better the deeper they lie; what is the
greatest depth they are known to have been taken at; and whether it be true
that some of the Natives there, can stay under Water half an Hour without any
Art.

4. Whether the Iron in Pegu and Japan be far better than ours; and if so, what
is to be observed in Melting, Forging and Tempering of it.

5. Whether in Sumatra there be a Fountain running a very Sanative Oil; and
whether the Ignivomous Mountain in the same Country do burn Continually, and
cast out Stones so eaten by the Fire that they Swim.

6. What is the Opinion of the more Inquisitive Men in these Parts of
Ambergris, and whether the greatest Quantities of it are found about the Isle
Mauritius.

7. Whether it be Winter on the East Side of the Mountain Gates, which comes
from the North Cape Comorin, whilst it is Summer on the West Side, and so vice
versa.

8. Whether it be true, That upon the Coast of Coromandel, sixteen Degrees
Northern Latitude, between Paeleacate and Maselupatan, fifty Leagues in length,
the Hot Winds blowing from the Landward from eight in the Morning till four in
the Afternoon, with such a suffocating Heat, that the Inhabitants are not able
to endure it without extraordinary Helps and Refreshment: Every one, for his
Provision of Drink, daily hangs his Bottle, made of common Pot-Earth, and
filled with Well water, or other potable Liquor, upon some Post, Tree or Wall,
in places where the Sun and Wind are most piercing, leaving it all the Day long
there, in the scorching Heat; and then taking it up abour four a Clock in the
Evening, the Drink is more cool than any Depth of Cellaridge can make it: And
whether, on the contrary, the Bottles being suffered to continue in the Air, as
before, during the Cool Sea-Gales, which come in after the said Hour, and
continue all Night, till eight in the Morning, to the Refreshment of all
Creatures, the Liquors grow hot, and unfit for Drink.

9. Whether the Tide, near Mindana, going from the Molucca's to the
Philippina's, are so swift, that neither contrary Winds nor Anchors, can save a
Ship from being carried away by it; and that it rises about three or four Feet;
and whether the like be observed in the Bay of Cambaia, and in that between
Martagan and Pegu: And particularly whether in the said Bays the Tides come in
with that Impetuosity and Swiftness about the Quarters of the Moon, that the
Watchmen from High-Towers must give Warning to the People, to retire, and that
a Horse, in his swiftest Course, when such a Tide comes upon it cannot out run
it, as Isaac Vossius observes, lib. de motu Marium and Ventorum, c. 15. And
what other Particulars are observable in all these Coasts about the Tides.

10. Whether there be any Discoveries newer than the newest Painted Maps of the
Parts of the World North-East of Japan; and whether Japan be truly an Island,
or no.

11. What is the true way of Making and Coloring China-Dishes, and how in
China and Japan they make the Black Varnish.

12. With what Materials, and how they paint on Cloth, commonly called
Pintados, and likewise upon Canvas, etc.

13. Whether Lignum Aloes be the Wood or Root of a Tree. In what Country it is
found; and how to know the best of the kind.

14. Whether the best Tea be that which comes forth at the first of the Spring,
and are the Top-Leaves; in what manner it is dried, and whether the too hasty
drying thereof hurts it.

15. Whether there grows a Wood in Java that naturally smells like Human
Excrements; and if so what kind of Ground it grows in.

16. Whether in the Malacca Islands there be a Red Wood, which Burns Sparkles
and Flames without being consumed, yet may be reduced to Powder, by rubbing
between ones Fingers.

17. Whether near the Fort of Ternate there be a Plant, called by the
Inhabitants Catopa, whence fall little Leaves, which are turned into
Butterflies.

18. Whether in Pegu and other Places they use a Poison, that kills by
smelling, and yet the Poisonous Smell is hardly perceived.

19. Whether it be true, That the only Antidote, hitherto known, against the
Famous and Fatal Macassar Poison, is Human Ordure, taken inwardly; and what
Substance that Poison is made of

20. Whether there be such a Vegetable in Java, called Mangas Bravas, that is
so poisonous, that it kills presently, and for which no Remedy has been yet
found.

21. Where the best Calumba-Wood, or Palo d'Aquila grows; whether the Palo
d'Aquila be much inferior to Calamba, and how they are distinguished; whether
the latter be the Pith of the former; whence the best Sort comes; whether it be
stored with a Rich and Cordial Balm, and that be the Cause of its great Rate,
being much used in the Decay of Spirits, and the Lameness and Impotency of
Nerves.

22. Whether they draw an Oil, resembling Oil of Camphire, from the Roots of
the Cinnamon-Tree, and how they draw it.

23. Whether the Camphire of Borneo be not the Exudation or Gum of a Tree.

24. Whether the Indians can so prepare that stupifying Herb, called Dutroa or
Datura, that they make it lie several Days, Months and Years, according as they
design it, in a Man's Body, without doing him any Hurt, and at the end kill
him, without missing an Hour's Time.

25. Whether the Betele has such a contrariety to the Durion, that a few
Leaves of that, put to a whole Shopful of Durions, will make them all rot
suddenly; and whether those that have surfeited on Durions, and thereby
overheated themselves, do, by laying a Leaf or two of Betele upon their
Breasts or Stomachs, immediately cure the Inflammations, and Recover.

26. Whether the Papayas, which bear Fruit like a Melon, do not bear unless
Male and Female (as the Vulgar distinguishes them) stand together.

27. Whether there be two Sorts of Trees called Arbor Triste, one by the Name
of Triste di Die, the other Triste di Notte, whereof the former sheds his
Flowers at the Rising, the other at the Setting of the Sun; and whether the
distilled Water thereof (called Aqua di Mogli by the Portugals) may not be
transported into these Parts.

28. Whether one of these Trees called Arbre de Rays, propagates itself into a
whole Forest, by shouting up and letting fall Roots from all its Branches into
the Ground, that spring up again, and so on; and whether there be any single
ones of these Trees, that are above fifty Feet in Diameter, as some affirm.

29. What Particulars are observable in any other Plants of those Parts.

30. Whether those Shel-fishes that are in those Parts Plump and in Season at
the full Moon, and Lean and out of Season at the New, are found to have
contrary Constitutions in the East Indies.

31. Whether the Animal that yields that true Musk, be like a Dear, horules,
found in the high Country between Pegu and China; and whether the Musk grows in
Bags, Blisters or Swellings, which the Beast rubs off against Trees, it being
affirmed to have been found in the Woods by the Scent; whether True Musk is
discerned from the False by its Yellowness, when rubbed upon ones Hand, and by
its keeping that Color and the Scent.

32. Whether there be two Sorts of Gum Lack, one produced by an Insect, a
certain winged Ant, the other the exsudation of a Tree.

33. To enquire after the Fish called Cabala, said to be very powerful in
staunching of Blood.

34. Whether at Java there be Oysters, or other Shell-fishes, of that bigness,
as to weigh 300 Pounds.

35. Whether in Malacca there grows sometime a Stone in the Stomach of a kind
of Porcupine, called Pedro Porco, esteemed for its Cordial Virtue above Bezoar.

36. Whether there be found in the Head of a certain Snake, a Stone, which laid
upon a Wound of any Venomous Creature, sticks fast to it, and draws away all
the Poison; then, being put into Milk, voids its Poison, and turns the Milk
Blue; and then applied again, draws the rest of the Poison that may be behind,
till the Wound be perfectly cured.

37. Whether the Rhinoceros have such an Antipathy against Elephants, as is
commonly reported.

38. Whether in the Island of S. Helena, the Tide be at the same Time round in
the several Coasts of it, and what is the Hour of full Sea, and what the Age of
the Moon at the Time of Observation.

Enquiries for Persia.
1. What are chiefly the present Studies of the Persians, and what kind of
Learning they now excel in.

2. What other Trades and Arts they are now skilled in, besides that of making
of Silk and Tapistry.

3. Whether, there being already good Descriptions in Words, of the excellent
Pictures, and Basse Relieves, that are about Persepolis at Chimilnar, yet none
very particular, some may not be found sufficiently skilled, in those Parts,
that might be engaged to make a Draught of the Place, and the Stories there
Pictured and Carved.

4. How they make that Plaster; wherewith in India and those Parts, they line
their Tanks or Cisterns, and which, when dry, shines like Marble, and is much
harder.

Enquiries for Virginia and Bermudas.
1. Concerning the Varieties of Earths; it is said, there is one kind of a Gummy
Clear Consistence, White and Clear; another White, and so Light, that it swims
upon Water; another Red, called Wapergh, like Terra Sigillata: Quaere, What
other considerable kinds are there; and to send over a Parcel of each.

2. What considerable Minerals, Stones, Bitumens, Tinctures and Drugs.

3. What Hot Baths, and of what Medicinal Use.

4. What is the Original of those large Navigable Rivers, which empty
themselves into the Bay Chesapeak; and whether on the other Side of that Ridge
of Mountains, from which they are supposed to proceed, there be not other
Rivers that flow into the South Sea.

5. How the Silk-Grass is prepared.

6. To give a full Account of that Vulnerary Root called Wichacan of Pocone, a
Root of a red Juice, a good Tincture: Of Musquaspem, a Root of a red Tincture:
Of the Plant Maricock, whose Fruit is said to be fashioned like a Lemon,
exceeding pleasant to the Taste, of a Blossom most beautiful: Of the
Chincomen-tree, whose Fruit is said to have a Husk like a Chestnut, Luscious and
Hearty Meat, both Raw and Boiled.

7. Whether there be in the Bermudas a Poison-Weed, like our Ivy, whose Leaves
do by the Touch cause Blisters; and a Reed whose Juice or Infusion causes
Vomit.

8. What kinds of Trees these Barks are taken from, that are used instead of
Tile or Slate, in the Covering of their Houses, being cooler in Summer and
warmer in Winter than Stone.

9. To give a particular Account of the Spider in the Bermudas, said to be
Large and Beautiful for its Colors, weaving a Web betwixt several Trees, which
is affirmed to be for Substance and Color like perfect raw Silk, so strong,
that Birds, like Snites, are snared therein.

10. Whether Dear have generally their three or four Fawns at a Brood; and
whether any of the Cattle, transported from hence, becomes there more Fruitful
than they were here.

11. Whether the Relation be true, of a Glue made of Hartshorn, that will not
dissolve in Water, and if so, how made.

12. Whether at the Bottom of the Bay of Cheasapeak, northward, the Natives be
still of such a Gigantick Stature, as has been reported; and whether there be
another not far from these, Easterly, of a Dwarfish Stature.

13. Whether round about the Coast of the Bermudas the Tides keep the same
Time, and at what a Clock, precisely, it is High Water on the Days of Full and
New Moon, and how high the Water rises then; and the like on the Coasts of
Virginia and Florida.

Enquiries for Guaiana and Brasil.
1. Whether about Orabba, near Oronoque, some eight Degrees Northern Latitude;
and about the Town Darien, Toads are presently produced, by throwing a kind of
Morish Water, found there, upon the Floors of their Houses. Linschotten.

2. Whether it be true that the Locust of Brasil, called, Caayra, changes in
the Springtime into a Plant, and withers away like a Plant; and whether, in
the same Country, that kind of Eruca, which is called by the Portugals Lagartas
des Verias, turns into a Bird, admirable for Color and swift Flying, the
Change thereof being made so leisurely, that one may for a while see half of
the Insect, and the other half of the Bird, which the Natives call Guianumbi,
the Portugals Pegafrel. Piso.

3. Whether upon the Leaves of that Brasilian-Tree, called Gereiba, there is,
in a Sunshiny Day, found a white Salt in that Quantity, that one may gather as
much from two or three Leaves as will salt a good Pot of Broth. Piso.

4. Whether there be found about the Mouth of the River of Amazones, a green
Argilla, which, though very soft under Water, yet, when exposed to the Air,
grows almost as hard as a Diamond, insomuch that the Natives make Hatchets of
them, strong and sharp enough to cleave Wood; for which purpose also those
Indians are said to have used it, before they got Iron ones; and whether this
Argilla, become Stone, have a peculiar Virtue against the Epilepsie, when
carried by the Patient. Pelleprat, in his Relation of the Islands, and Terra
Firma of the Southern America.

5. Whether the black Bees in Guaiana, about the River Orenoque, make black
Honey and Wax; and whether they have no Stings, as the same Pelleprat affirms.

Enquiries and Directions for the Antisles; or Caribe Islands.
I. Of Vegetables.
1. Whether the Juice of the Tree Jumpa, being as clear as any Rock-Water,
yields a Brown Violet Dye, and being put twice upon the same Place, makes it
look Black; and whether this Tincture cannot be got out with any Soap, yet
disappears of itself in nine or ten Days; and whether certain Animals,
particularly Hogs and Parrets, eating of this Fruit, have their Flesh and Fat
altogether tinged of a Violet Color.

2. Whether Ring-Doves, that feed upon the bitter Fruit of the Acomas-Tree,
have their Flesh bitter also?

3. Whether the Wood of the Acajou-Tree, being red, light and well-scented,
never rots in the Water, nor breeds any Worms when cut in due Season; and
whether the Chests and Trunks made thereof keep Clothes, placed therein from
being Worm-eaten.

4. Whether the Leaves of a certain Tree, peculiarly called Indian-Wood, give
such a haut-goust to Meats and Sauces, as if it were a Composition of several
Sorts of Spices.

5. Whether there be two such Sorts of the Wood, called Savomer or Soap-Wood,
of the one of which the Fruit, of the other the Root serves for Soap.

6. Whether the Bark of the Paretuvier Wood, tans as well as Oak-Bark.

7. Whether the Root of the Tree Laitus being brayed, and cast into Rivers,
makes Fishes drunk.

8. Whether the Root of the Manioc is so fertile, that one Acre planted
therewith, yields so plentiful a Crop, as shall feed more People than six Acres
of the best Wheat.

9. What Symptoms do usually follow upon the taking of the Juice of Manioc, or
upon eating the Juice with the Root, and what Effects are thereby produced upon
the Body, that infer it to be accounted rank Poison; whether worse Effects than
these may be caused by mere Crudity, as by Turnips or Carrets eaten Raw, and
much more by Raw Flesh, in those that are not used thereto, or at most some
such nauseous or noxious Quality, as might be corrected in the Taking or
Preparation, which Correction, if effected, might perhaps render the Bread much
heartier, the Juice being likely to carry off the Spirit and Strength, leaving
the Remainder Spiritless.

10. The Palmetto Royal being said by Ligon to be a very tall and straight
Tree, and so tough, that none of them have been seen blown down, and withal
hollow, in all which Respects they may serve for special Uses, and particularly
for long Optic Tubes.

11. Whether the Oil expressed out of Ricinus, or Palma Christi be used by the
Indians, to keep them from Vermin; to send over some of that Oil.

12. Whether in the Passage of the Isthmus, from Nombre de Dios to Panama,
there is a whole Wood full of Sensitive Trees, of which, as soon as they are
touched, the Leaves and Branches move with a rattling Noise, and wind themselves
together into a winding Figure.

13. Whether there be certain Kernels of a Fruit, like and white Pear-plum,
which are very Purgative and Emetick, but having the thin Film, which parts
them into halves, taken out, they have no such Operation at all, and are as
sweet as a Jordaine Almond.

14. To send over some of the Roots of the Herb, called by our Author L'herb
aux Fleshes (the Dart-Herb) which being stamped is said to have the Virtue of
Curing the VVounds made with poisoned Darts.

15. To send some of the Grain of the Herb Musk, putting it up carefully in a
Box, which being in it will keep its Musk-Scent.

16. To send over a Specimen of all Medicinal Herbs, together with their
respective Virtues, as they are reputed there. Item, Particularly the
Pricklewith at the Barbados; Macao, Mastick-Tree, Locust, Black-wood, Yellow
within, Five Sprig, Tidlewood, White Wood, Barbados Cedar.

17. Whether the Fruit Mancenille of the Mancenillier-Tree, though admirably
Fair and Fragrant, yet is fatal to the Eater, and falling into the Water kills
the Fishes that eat thereof, except Crabs, who yet are said to be dangerous to
eat, when they have fed upon this Fruit; whether under the Bark of this Tree is
contained a certain glutinous Liquor, as white as Milk, very dangerous, so that
if you chance to rub it, and this Juice spurt upon the Shirt like a Burning, if
upon the naked Flesh, it will cause a Swelling, if upon the Eye, Blindness for
several Days; and whether the Shadow of this Tree be so noxious, that the
Bodies of Men reposing, it will swell strangely; and whether the Meat itself
that is boiled with the Fire of this VVood, contracts a Malignity, burning the
Mouth and Throat: Further, whether the Natives use the Milky Juice of this
Tree, and the Dew falling from it, and the Juice of its Fruit, in the
Composition of the Poison they infect their Arrows with.

II. Of Animals and Insects.
18. Whether the Skin of the Tatou, and the little Bone of his Tail, do
indeed, as is related, cure Deafness, and Pains of the Ears; and whether this
Animal be Proof, not only against the Teeth of Dogs, but also against Bullets.

19. Whether the Birds called Canides, be so docile, that some of them learn
not only to speak Indian, but also Dutch and Spanish, singing also the Airs in
the Indian Tongue, as an Indian himself.

And whether the Bird Colibri have a Scent as sweet as the finest Amber and
Musk; both which is affirmed by our French Author.

20. To procure some of the Fat of the Birds called Fregats, reputed to be very
Antiparalytical and Antipodagrical.

21. To send over a Land-Pike, which is said to be like the VVater-Pike, but
that instead of Fins it has four Feet, on which it crawls.

22. Whether the Skin of the Sea-wolf, which they otherwise call the Requiem,
be so rude and Stiff, that they make Files of them, fit to file VVood; and
whether it be usually guided by another Fish, that is beautified with such a
Variety of lively Colors, that one would say, That such Fishes are girt with
Neck-Laces of Pearls, Corals, Emeralds, etc.

23. Whether the Skins of the Sea-Calfs, otherwise called Lamantins, be so
hard, when dried, that they serve the Indians for Shields.

24. Whether the Ashes of the Fresh-VVater Tortoises do hinder the falling off
the Hair, being powdered therewith.

25. Whether the Land-Crabs, of these Islands, do at certain Times hide
themselves all under Ground, for six VVecks, and during that Time Change and
Renew themselves; and whether in hiding themselves thus, they do so carefully
cover themselves all-about with Earth, that the opening thereof cannot be at
all perceived, thereby shutting out the Air, by which they might else be
annoyed, when they are quite naked, after they have shed their Shells, there
then remaining no other Cover on them, but a very thin and tender Skin, which,
by little, thickeneth and hardneth into a Crust, lide the old.

26. Whether the Serpents in these Parts, that have Black and White Spots on
their Backs, be not Venomous; to send over some of such Serpent's Skins.

27. To send over some of the Skins of those huge Lizzards, called Ovayamaca,
which, when come to their full Bigness, are said to be five Foot long, Tail and
all; and especially that are said to have the Scales of their Skins so Bright
and Curious, that they resemble Cloth of Gold and Silver.

28. Where the shining Flees, called Cucuyes, hide almost all their Light,
when taken, but when at Liberty afford it plentifully.

29. Whether there be a sort of Bees, Brown and Blue, who make a Black Wax,
but the Honey in it VVhiter and Sweeter than that of Europe.

30. Whether in those Parts the Indians do cure the Bitings of Serpents by
eating fresh Citron-Pills, and by applying the Unguent, made of the bruised
Head of the Wounding Serpent, and put hot upon the VVound.

31. Whether the VVood-Lice in those Countries, generated out of Rotten VVood,
are able, not only to eat through Trunks in a Day or two, and to spoil Linen,
Clothes and Books (of which last they are said only to spare what is written or
Printed) but also to support the Props, which Support the Cottages, that they
fall; and whether the Remedy against the latter Mischief is, To turn the Ends
of the Wood, that are fixed in the Ground, or to rub the VVood with the Oil of
that kind of Palma Christi (a Plant) wherewith the Natives rub their Heads, to
secure them from Vermin.

32. Whether that Sort of Vermin they meet with, commonly called Ravets, spare
nothing of what they meet with, (either of Paper, Clothes, Linen and Woollen)
but Silk and Cotton.

33. Whether the little Cirons called Chiques, bred out of Dust, when they
pierce once into the Feet and under the Nails of the Toes, do get ground of the
whole Body, unless they be drawn out by times; and whether at first they cause
but a little, but afterward having pierced the Skin, raise a great
Inflammation in the Part affected, and become in a small Time as big as a
Pease, producing innumerable Nits, that breed others.

Enquiries for Greenland.
1. What and how much is the Heat of the Sun there, in the midst of Summer,
compared with the Heat of it in England, to be observed with a Thermometer.

2. What is the most constant Weather there in Summer, whether Clear, Cloudy,
Rainy, Foggy, etc.

3. What Weather is most usual at such and such Times of the Year.

4. What Constancy or Unconstancy there is of the Wind, to this or that Quarter
of the Horizon, or to this or that Part of the Year.

5. What the Temperature o^ each particular Wind is observed to be, and
particularly whether the North Wind be the Coldest; if not, what Wind is,
whether is Colder, the East or the West, etc.

6. What Wind is observed to bring most Ice, and what to make a Clear Water at
Sea.

7. What Currents are there how fast and which Way they set; whether these
Currents are not stronger at one Time of the the Moon, than of another; whether
they always run one way.

8. What is observable about the Tides, High Spring or Neap; How high the
Water-Mark is above the Low Water; which way it Flows; which way it Ebbeth;
what Time of the ^oon the Spring-Tides fall ^^t.

9. Whether the Ice that ^^oats in the Sea, be of Salt Wa^er or Fresh.

10. What Rivers there are in the Summer, and what Fresh Waters can be had.

11. What Fowl are found so live there, and what Beasts; how they are thought
to subsist in Winter; how they Breed and Feed their Young.

12. What Vegetables grow there, and whether they yield any Flowers or Fruits,
etc.

13. Whether there have been any Thunder or Lightning observed in those Parts
as is observed in Norway.

14. How deep the Cold penetrates into the Earth, and whether there be any
Wells, Pits or Mines so deep that the Cold does not reach the Bottom thereof.

15. How the Land tends, and whether the Parts under or near the Pole, be by
those that have gone furthest that way, thought to be Sea or Land; and how near
any has been known to approach the Pole; whether the Cold increases with the
increase of Latitude.

16. To make, if possible, some Experiments and Observations about the Magnet
or Needle; and particularly how much the Declination is there, and whether they
exactly observe the Degrees of Declination in their Course; likewise to make
Observations about the Height of the Sun and other Celestial Bodies, and their
Diameter, Refractions, etc.

17. What is their Opinion concerning the North East Passage.

18. What Fish do most frequent those Seas besides Whales; what is observable
in their Fishing, as the usual or unusual Bigness and Strength, and the several
Sorts of Whales, and particularly to observe, Whether that kind of Whale they
call Trompa, have in their Heads the Sperma Coeti, and in their Entrals the
Ambergreese, looking like Cows Dung. Purchase.

19. What observable Difference there is of the Coldness of the VVind, when it
blows over great Boards of Ice that are seen in these Seas, and when not.

20. To give an exact account of the VVhale-fishing, throwing the
Harping-Irons, following the Fish.

21. To describe the whole manner of making the Oil of VVhale.

THE INDEX.
A.
AIR page 3, 21 Animals 8 Axungiae 10 Allom ibid. Apparitions 11 Air-Shafts 27
Armenians 60 Amianthus 61 Amber Yellow, of Egypt 70 Appearances of Legs and
Arms, reported to be near Cairo 72 Antimony Avernus 84 Ambergreeco 89 Arbor
Triste 97 Arbre de Rays ibid. Animal giving Musk 98 Argilla Green 108 Acajou
Tree 110
B.
Barascope, traveling 4 Boles 10 Brooks 21 Bodnick-Sea page 76 Betels 96 Barks
used for Tiles 104 Clays C 10, 24 Coals 10 Comets 15 Countries 19 -- Product 20
Copper complete in the Mine 33 Caulk 35 Candia 61 Cyprus ibid. Constantinople
ibid. Cephalenia ibid. Caucasus 62 Caspian Sea 63 China ibid. -- Dishes 92 City
petrified 64 Cotton-bearing-Tree 71 Crocodiles ibid. Children of the 8th Month
in Egypt 72 Concentration of Colors 78 Copper-Mines 82 Coast of Cormandel 89
Catopa 94 Calamba Wood 95 Cinnamon-Tree Root, yielding Oil of Camphire. ibid.
Cabala, a Fish page 99 Cereiba-Tree 107 Canides, a Bird 117 Colibri, a Bird
ibid. Crabs, Land 118 Cucuyes, a shining Flee 120 Citron-Pills ibid.
D.
Diseases 4 Damps, their Signs, Hurts and Preventions 16, 25, 29 Drugs from
Egypt 72 Diamonds growing after three Years 87 Dutroy 96 Dart-Herb 114
E
Earth 7, 24 -- of Egypt, 68. its Inhabitants 9 Earths Soap 10 Euxin Sea 62
Euripi 62 Eggs Hatching in Egypt 69 Gold and Silver Earth 81 Earths in
Bermudoes 102
F
Fishes 6 Fires Subterraneous 8 Fullers-Earth 10 Flux-Powders page 41 Furnaces
ibid. Fuel ibid. About Freezing 76, 77 -- Fishes under Ice 73 -- Freezing of
Animals ibid. Flux for Metals 86 Fishing of Pearls 88 Fountain of Oil in
Sumatra 89 Fregats, a Bird 117
G
Grooves, their Depth and Wideness 26, 27 -- Supporters 27 Gambra 74 Gold-Mines
in Hungary 85 Gum Lac 99 Glue of Hartshorn 105
H
Heavens 2 Hills 7, 20 Heats 25 Honey Black 109 Herb-Musk. 114
I.
Ignes Fatui 15 Iron-Ore 31 Inquiries about Vegetables 48 to 57 -- Turkey 58 --
Egypt 67 -- Guiny 73 -- Poland, etc. 75 -- Hungary and Transylvania 80 --
Suratte 87 -- Persia 101 -- Bermudas and Virginia 102 -- Antisles or Caribes
109 -- Animals or Insects 177 -- Ichneumen 71 Iron made Copper 84 Iron of Japan
and Pegu, 88 If Japan an Island 92 Junipa-Tree 109 Indian-Wood 110
L
Lakes 6, 21 Lightnings 23 Lights 24 Locks Wooden 72 Lake in Moravia 85 Lignum
Aloes 93 Lucust of Brasil 107 Laitus Tree 111 Land-Pike 117 Lamantins or
Sea-Calfs 118
M.
Meteors 3 Magnet 8 Minerals ibid. Machinel Tree 9 Marles 10, 24 Mines 11, 12
-- the Signs ib. 25 Mists 24 Marcasite 24, 25 Metals, their Kind and Depth
ibid. Miners Plumming and Dyalling 29 -- Work 31 -- Recovering Veins ibid.
Metals grow 33 Mundick 35, ibid. Mercury 40 Mines if afford Vessels, Anchors,
Ships, Fishes, etc. 48 Mouslac 60 Mummies 61 Mediterranean 73 Maal-stroome 76
The Lying of Metals 83 Mangas Bravas 94 Manioc 111 Mancenille 115
N
Needles dipping 12 Nitre, Egyptian 67 Negroes sharp Sight 74
O.
Ores, and how they run 11, 32 -- like Lome 33 -- Weight, Color, Mixture ibid.
-- if meliorated by Time 37 -- Signs of the Good and Bad 38 -- Proportion of
Metals ibid. -- distinguishing Marks ibid. -- if Pure 39 -- Beating 40 --
Grinding ibid. -- Washing ibid. -- Tosting ibid. -- if exposed to the Air ibid.
-- How Melted and facilitated 12, 42. -- How taken out ibid. -- if often-melted
43 -- if the Best comes first or last in Melting 43 -- What its Flowers are 44
Opium 59 Mixture of Ores 83 Oysters at Java 99 Ovayamaca 120
P.
Propontis 26 Plauge in Egypt 68 Palm Tree, female 72 Palm page 73 Poison that
Works by Smelling 94 Poison Macassrr ibid. Papayas 97 Pedro Porco 99 Plaster
for Tanks 102 Poyson-Weed 104 Paretuvier-Wood 111 Palmetto Royal 112 Palma
Christi 113 Purgative Kernel, or rather Film of a Kernel ibid.
Q.
Quicksilver in other Mines 82
R.
Rivers 6. one not in Hungary 83 Rusma 58 Reame in Arabia 60 Rain in Egypt, 67
-- breeding Worms in Guiny 73 Red Sea 73 Rhinoceros 100 Ring-Doves 110 Ricinus
113
S.
Suns Retrogradation Salubrity or insalubrity of the Air 4 Sea 6 Salts 10
Sulphurs ibid. Sea-waters, Odor, Taste, Colors 12 -- Currents 13 -- Passages
subterraneous ibid. Straits, Map and Tides ibid. Seacoasts 14 -- Depths and
Shallows ibid. Scales, nice 15 Sea's Saltness at the Bottom 17 Springs 21
Steams, subterraneous 22 Soil 22 Storms 23 Stones 24 Spar 30, 35 Slag 45 Steell
Damasco 59 Succinum 75 Sal Gemmae ibid. Swallows in Poland ibid. Salt Pits 81
Springs at Buda 84 Stones to be cleft and sawn like Planks 87 S. Helena 100
Silk-Grass 103 Spider in Bermudas 104 Soap-Wood 111
T.
Turdados Tides, Height, Ebbings, Flowings 14 -- at Helena 100 Thunders 15, 23
Trees 22 Talismans 71 Thermae near Schemnitz 82 Tides near Mindan^a 91 -- at
Bermudas and Virginia 106 Toades at Oronoque ibid. Tatou 116 Tortoise, fresh
Water 118
V.
Vegetables 8 Vitriols 10 Virgula divinatoria 24 Veins their concomitants 34 --
how enclosed 34 -- if uniform 35 -- how terminate 37 Vitriol 80 Veins of Gold
and Quicksilver 82
W.
Weather 3 Winds 4 -- effects on the Sea 13 -- Times 15 -- Trade ibid. Waters
23 -- in Mines 28 Water-engines ib. Wood, smelling like human Excrements 93 Red
Wood, burning without wasting 93 Wax black 120
Z.
Zante 62
Advertisement.
IF any be desirous to have the Engines or Contrivances named in this Treatise,
he may be furnished with them (upon due notice given) by Mr. Papin, who is very
ingenious both in Contriving and Making any Thing relating to Air-Pumps, New
Digestors; in a Word, any thing relating to Hydrostaticks or Hydraulicks, for
which he was always employed by the Honorable Mr. Robert Boil. He may be
spoke with at the Place mentioned, page 5, 18. or rather at Mr. Blakies, a
Black Smith, in the Court over against the Crown and Thistle in Black-Fryars.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of Books Printed for John Tailor at the Ship in S. Paul's
Churchyard.
MR. Boyle's Free Enquiry into Nature. -- His Disquisition about the Final
Causes of Natural Things; to which is added, Observations about vitiated Sight.

-- His Martyrdom of Theodora and Dydimus.

-- His Christian Virtuoso; to which is added, a Discourse of some things above
Reason, but not contrary to Reason, with a Discourse, entitled, Greatness of
Mind Promoted by Christianity.

-- His Experimenta and Observationes Physicae; wherein are treated of several
Subjects, relating to Natural Philosophy in an Experimental way. To which is
added, A small Collection of Strange Reports, in two Parts.

-- His Seraphick Love, newly reprinted.

-- His Funeral Sermon, by the Bishop of Sarum; With several others of Mr.
Boyle's Works, in English.

Moral Essays and Discourses upon several Subjects, relating to the present
Times, by the Right Honorable the Lord Vicount Shannon.

Dr. Salmon's Practical Physic, showing the Method of Curing the most usual
Diseases happening to Human Bodies, etc.

Mr. Evelyn's French Gardener.

Osborn's Works, Divine, Moral, Historical and Political.

Mr. Love's Complete Surveyor.

The New and True Art of Brewing, Beer, Ale and other Liquors, so that they may
be rendered most Wholesome and Fragrant.


