A METHOD OF Conversing WITH GOD.

Translated out of French by J. W. of the Society of Jesus.

^on habet amaritudinem conversatio illius, nec taedium convictus illius.
Sapien. c. 8. v. 16.

London, Printed by Mary Thompson Anno Dom. MDCLXXXVIII.

To Her Majesty THE Queen Dowager OF ENGLAND.
Madam,
THough I have put the ensuing Treatise into English, yet it speaks still a
Language few understand, and therefore wants so powerful a Patroness as your
Majesty; who both Understands it, and can Vindicate it from those Censures that
may be cast upon it, by such as do not. Wherefore vouchsafe to give me leave to
publish it under Your Majesty's Gracious Patronage; and to take this
opportunity of giving our Nation an Idea of the Devotions Your Majesty
exercises in Your frequent Retirements, which many Admire, but few Imitate:
Falsely judging that Prayer and Conversation with God is a tedious and irksome
Employment, whilst a Pious Soul finds the contrary, and Experiences it to be
the only true Comfort upon Earth, and a Foretast and Pledge of that everlasting
Happiness it hopes for in Heaven. Other seeming Comforts may allure our Hearts
to a search after them, but when with much labor they are obtained, they
manifest then emptiness and their inability to give the content they Promised,
leaving the Soul in a more languishing and sad condition than they found it,
and only satisfying it of this Truth, that God created our Heart for the
enjoyment of himself, and that nothing less than Him can satisfy it. Vouchsafe;
Madam, to pardon my Confidence, in presenting a bare Translation of so small a
Treatise to so great a Person. The Widows Mite was not unacceptable to the
King of Heaven, because it was all she had, and because she gave it with a very
good will, which is the most valuable thing in all Presents; and I can assure
Your Majesty, that both these Reasons do plead for this little Offering. Your
Majesty's acceptance will, I hope, persuade the World to turn over these few
Leafes; and if your Example likewise can prevail with them, to practice what
they Read, I question not but they will soon cease to wonder that Your Majesty
so often leaves the Entertainments of the Court, for the Solitude of Your
Closet; when they perceive that the greatest Honors, Riches, and Pleasures of
the Earth, are (what the wisest of Men styled them) mere Vanities; nay, even
Vexations, in respect of those Substantial and Satisfactory Delights, which are
enjoyed by Conversing with God. Which indeed are such, that none but those who
with Your Majesty have Experienced them, are able to conceive them. That Your
Majesty may proceed in Your pious Exercises, till at length you come to receive
the Reward of them in an everlasting Joy, is the constant Prayer of

Madam, Your Majesty's most Obliged and most Devoted Servant J. W.

A METHOD OF Conversing with GOD.
Non habet amaritudinem conversatio illius, nec taedium convictus illius.

His Conversation has no Bitterness, nor his Company any Tediousness.

Sapien. c. 8. v. 16 Introduction.
OUR Conversations with one another, though necessary for the Entertainment of
our Mind, yet have often Inconveniences, Disgraces, and Discontents that
accompany them; or, at least are subject to two troublesome Accidents, the one,
that ordinarily they displease us, and become painful and insupportable, there
being nothing that wearies us sooner, or becomes more tedious, then to be
obliged to harken to, and to entertain others: The other is still worse, that
when these Conversations please us, they are generally Criminal, and most
commonly we return with wounded Consciences, and such Imperfections as we
carried not with us.

Conversation with God is free from these two dangers, neither sin nor
wearisomness accompany it; Innocence and Joy are the constant Companions of
this Spiritual Happiness.

If you desire to know it by your own Experience, do what the Holy Ghost and
the Divine Wisdom Inspire in their own words, which I am about to propose to
you, and regulate your self according to the Examples they invite you to
imitate.

CHAP. I.
In what this Conversation consists.
GOD loves you, love Him; His delight is to converse with you, let yours be to
converse with, and to spend your Time, as you will spend your Eternity, in his
amiable Company.

Accustom your self to speak familiarly and confidently to him as to a Friend,
and reflect that it is an error and weakness of our blinded Nature, not to be
free in his Presence, and not to appear before him, but as Slaves trembling
with Shame and Fear before a Prince, thinking of nothing else, but searching
Comfort, and Liberty elsewhere.

You are not desired by an Extatick Prayer, or a violent Application of your
Imagination, that you form to your self a Figure of his Adorable Person, and
that Prostrate in Spirit before this imaginary Figure, you forget your Self and
your Domestic Affairs, and that you spend the day in Contemplating and
Praising his Greatness.

No, we speak here only of a familiar Entertainment, and desire nothing else,
but that without quitting your ordinary Employments, you carry your self after
the same manner toward God, as in the like occasions you are wont to do, to
those that love you, and that you love. He is present by you as they are; speak
to him as you would to them, entertain him about your Concerns, about your
Designs, propose your Hopes and Fears to him, and do this with Confidence and
an open Heart; for Reservedness and Silence is very displeasing to him in his
Saints: The Soul that has nothing thing to say to him, is like the little
Sister of the Sunamite, which is not yet of Age to be one of the number of his
Spouses, and to be tenderly loved by him.

One of the first Lessons of a Spiritual Life is, that God who is the most
Powerful and Formidable of all Masters, when he commands, desires to be Treated
as the most Familiar Friend when he loves; and that during these solitary
Conversations with the Persons he chooses, the least of all Creatures, is not
too little, or too contemptible in his sight, unless that she has not yet
learned the manner of Conversing with him, heart to heart, and amourously
discovering to him her most hidden thoughts.

True it is, that he ought always to be Sovereignly respected; but when he does
you the favor to Visit you, and by an Interior motion of your Soul, makes you
sensible of his Presence; the greatest Honor he requires from you, is to
Entertain and Discourse with him, as with one you love, with all Liberty,
Confidence, and Tenderness.

CHAP. II.
That GOD is every where.
It Is to receive this Honor, says the Prophet, that without expecting your
coming to him, as soon as he perceives that you desire to call him, he prevents
you and presents himself to you, with his Hands full of Grace, and Remedies
proper for all the ailments you are wont to complain of; He attends only till
you speak to him to make you sensible that he is always near you, and ready to
hear and comfort you.

Whereupon take notice that though God is every where, and in all Persons
throughout the World by the Extent of his Immensity, and by the Operations of
his Power as Creator; yet there are two places in which he inhabits as in his
own House, which he designs and makes choice of for his chief Abode. The One is
the Imperial Heaven, where he is present by the Emanations of his Glory,
Communicated to the Angels and Saints; The Other upon Earth, in the Souls of the
Humble and Predestinate, where he is present by his Grace and the most Divine
Operations of the Holy Ghost, who restores to them the Ancient Paradise in
their Deserts. Dwelling in Eternity, says one Prophet, and Inhabiting in a
Hmmble and Contrite Heart, says another. It Is God that dwells on high in the
Sublimity of Eternity, and at the same time so low, as in the Solitude of
Saints, in their Grots, Tabernacles, and Cells; where he passes the whole day,
Entertaining himself with them. Alas, what Joys! What Heavenly Consolations!
says Job, reflecting upon these Ancient and Happy years of his Conversation
with God, When God was secretly in my Tabernacle, when the Omnipotent was with
me: In a word, he is with thee, O Devout Soul, an inseparable, and the only
Faithful Companion amongst Friends.

CHAP. III.
God is at all times Present.
OThers have Hours of Separation, there is no separation from God, all times
are proper to make Holy Love to him, When the Sun retires, says Solomon, he
retires not; in the Night he remains by your Pillow, to entertain you in the
silence of the Night by his secret Inspirations, and to help you to make a Holy
and Sweet Repose amidst the Sweetnesses and Celestial Pleasures of this
Interior Conversation.

He is present also when you wake in the Morning, to hear from your Mouth a
word of Confidence, and to become the Depository of your first Cares each day;
but since he fails not to be present when you wake, fail not on your part, to
behold him, and to stretch out your Arms to Embrace him, tell him with his
beloved Spouse in the CANTICLES, how your thoughts have been taken up with him
in the Night; in what pain you have been for his absence, what Tears you have
shed when you thought of your ingratitudes, that constrained him to give ear to
his Justice, and to leave you, say with her, I desired you, I ran after you in
the Deserts, where I saw nothing but Darkness, but in my Spirit, and from the
bottom of my Heart, I will rejoice in the Morning to find you. Doubt not O
Divine Savior, but that I am yours since that you see the first motion of my
heart after my being my self, is to rejoice at the happy News that you still
love me, and that you are not so far from me as my faults have merited, and my
fears have imagined.

CHAP. IV.
That God is most particularly present to us when we are so to him.
NO certainly Devout Soul, he is not far off, he is where you are, and there is
nothing in this World so near you as this inseparable lover of yours. But take
care you forget not he is so, as the greatest part of the World do, and let no
day or hour pass without beholding, thinking of him, or speaking to him.
Entertain him with some discourse, if you have any Devotion, neither matter nor
words will be wanting; tell him what you know of your self and your Family, and
what you would tell a Friend that came to visit you. As Great a God as he is,
he looks upon what you tell him as a thing of importance, because he loves you,
and because there is nothing concerns you which Love makes not his Interest.

Look not upon him as a King that contemns a Soul that has not Kingly thoughts,
and is not able to entertain him with great Matters, or as one that is afraid
to abase himself by harkening to your little Household Affairs, or to what
passes in the Conscience of a poor petty Creature.

It Is true as St. Chrysostom says, That the care of God in Heaven, and upon the
Throne of his Empire, is to think on the Angels and Saints, and upon the great
Design of his Heavenly Wisdom. But when he is with you, when he is in your
Closet, his only care is to think on you, all the Application of his Providence
and Love, regards your particular Interest: When he is with you, and in such
places where you are alone with him. He is God as I may say, for you alone, he
is there Omnipotent only to help you, he is all Goodness and Beauty only to be
loved by you, and to draw you to a Confidence in him, and love of him, and to
present you an occasion of telling him what afflicts you, and in what State or
Condition your Family is, and to inform him how things go in your Charge or
employment, as also to manifest the Interior of your Soul to him; Tell him
then, with Love and Sincerity, all that you know: Reveal your ways unto our
Lord, and beg his direction in them, and make known all your Counsels to him.

CHAP. V.
That God makes himself Ignorant of what we do not impart to Him.
TEll me not that he already knows all you can say, because he is God, and
knows all things; But take notice, that by the Law of his Divine Wisdom, he
will have all things he knows pass as unknown to him, without approving them,
pleasing himself in them, cooperating with them, or taking care of bringing
them to an Happy issue, unless you your self make them known to him.

There are Tears poured forth in abundance in his Presence, yet he sees them
not; such are the Tears of Hypocritical Penitents: There are Persons also that
he Swears he knows not; Verily, I say unto you, I know you not: There are
Affairs also he knows nothing of, and these are even your own, when you say
nothing to him of them, your Silence which hides them from him, makes them as
unknown to him, and that he has no design by the blessing of his Providence, to
give a good success to them. Whilst you relate your dissatisfactions and
troubles to Men, and say nothing to God, they know what you say, but God knows
nothing of it.

God as Great and Omniscient as he was, he knew not, that is, he would not
know, that Lazarus was sick, till St. Mary Magdalen gave him notice of it: You
are Indisposed, you are Afflicted, and Pursued by your Creditors, you follow a
business of Importance, you want good Council and the assistance of a powerful
Friend; our Savior knows nothing of all this; if you would have it come to his
knowledge, he must know it from your self; it is a secret Law his Love
prescribes him which he will not fail to observe.

For as much also as concerns other Afflictions, God knows them not so long as
you say nothing of them; wherefore Devout Soul, keep no longer silence in his
presence; as soon as any Disgrace, or cross Accident arrives, with humility and
respect make your Complaint to him; if your Confidence be great, it is not
necessary to beg his Assistance in express terms, it suffices with St. Mary
Magdalen to present your Affliction before his Eyes so that he has notice of
it, Behold O Lord, how I am Afflicted. He takes pleasure to behold an afflicted
heart, and to comfort it. Discover yours to him, and let him see all the
disquiet and bitterness within it; discover all the motions of your disturbed
Thoughts from fear or sadness. I am full of Bitterness, my heart is even
drowned with sadness; behold me lost and overwhelmed in an Abyss of Misery;
Dangers and Darkness have surrounded me, I have nothing else to say to you,
since your Mercy sees my Grief and my Tears; and that all my Hope is in you
alone: Ask your Mercy O God, what it ought to do, ask your Love the same
question, and then do what you please.

CHAP. VI.
That God condescends to our weakness, in permitting us to seek Comfort from
Creatures, that finding none in them, we may more earnestly return to Him.
HE is not angry, as I have said elsewhere; That during these troubles, you
Address your self to Creatures to be comforted by them, but when they have
neither Power nor Will to assist you, it is his Pleasure that you come and make
your complaint to him of it, and in his Arms blame their weakness or
ingratitude: My Friends have nothing but words, it is to you therefore, O Divine
Savior, that I come to manifest my pain, and to address my Tears. And do not
only make complaint of the things that trouble you, but as soon as you have
received any News that pleases you, comforts you, and causes Hope and Joy to
spring up in your Heart, do what Fidelity and Friendship requires; run
presently to him you love, who expects you, tell him the News, and add that it
is your greatest comfort, that this Charitable Care and Fatherly Bounty of his,
is a Mark that he is pleased with you. For this reason my Heart rejoices, and
my Tongue exults; I will rejoice in God my Savior, and sing to him because he
has bestowed Good things upon me.

CHAP. VII.
It Is not displeasing to God, to relate our Imperfections to Him.
IT IS another Mark of Confidence that pleases Extremely this Dear and Devout
Spouse, to trust him with the knowledge of your Faults, even before you make
your appearance before your Confessors Tribunal, and acquit your self of your
Duty of Penance. Come and declare to this Aimable Confident, what has hapened
to you, and say with David, I have sinned very much in this Action, and have
done very foolishly; My God I have just now spoke an undiscreet word, I have
done a most unworthy Action, and such a one, as may be the occasion of great
Disorder; I know not what blindness shut my Eyes and caused me to fall into
this sin; in truth I am very much ashamed of it, and afflicted for it, but that
which troubles me most, and renders me comfortless, is, that you are offended.
Nevertheless, if I have been less Prudent, you are not the less Merciful, or
less sensible of my Tears; I behold a tender compassion, in your Eyes, where I
see your wonted Bounty; Methinks I feel that Love in your Heart, which is the
Joy and Comfort of my Life; Look and make Experiment of it your self, and you
will find, that notwithstanding my ingratitude, the flames of your Charity are
not yet extinguished, and that you are the same to day, you were from all
Eternity; Sweet, Meek, and abounding in Mercy.

CHAP. VIII.
How we are to lay open our Daily Infirmities before Almighty GOD.
UPon occasion of these light and ordinary faults that often happen, and almost
every hour, beg of him, that he would not forget what he knows better than you,
to wit, that you are an infamous sinner, and like an infant, subject to
continual falls, though his Fatherly goodness seem not to permit him to be angry
at you.

Represent before him, that a Son and Heir of two years old, the Hopes and
Darling of the Family, is not less pleasing to his Mother when he falls, than
when he stands on his feet, but the contrary; for then it is that she takes him
up, and more tenderly cherishes him. Tell him that it is the Nature of
Step-Mothers to be angry, or correct their little Children, because they fall,
a true compassionate Mother, of which he will bear the Name, as soon as she
sees her Child fallen, runs to help him up with a Motherly affection, and
instead of Rigor and Threats, hides him in her Bosom, Flatters, and Embraces
him; and endeavors by her Kisses and Caresses, to assuage his Pain, and to
hinder him from crying and afflicting himself.

Great God, you give me the Name of your little One, which you hold on your
Knees, or lead by the Hand to teach me to go. Behold what I am, and when I
Fall; see what you ought to be, and what your Goodness requires of you.

It Is true my most dear Father, and even this very day in your Presence,
notwithstanding my many Resolutions and Promises, I am fallen into my daily and
wonted Imperfections. Yet be not angry with me, I have reason indeed to cry and
be afflicted; this belongs to me, but it belongs to you my Beloved to give me
your Hand to help me up, to take me into your Arms, to dry up my Tears to
dissipate my Disquiets and Fears, and to assure me that you still Love me, and
cease not to be my God.

I do not deny, but you have a great deal of reason to complain, that after so
many Confessions made, so many Pardons and Favors received, you see me fall
into such frequent Relapses: Yet methinks, you have a great deal of reason to
excuse in me these unavoidable Weaknesses; or at least, if you are angry, or
displeased with them, to let your anger fall upon my Parents, who conceived me
in Ignorance, and gave me their Sin in part of my Being,

Alas, Divine Savior, vouchsafe but a little to regard what is in me, and what
I am, what an Heart has been bestowed on me; and what Blood has been made use
of to form a Creature, that ought to be as pure and impeccable, as the Angels:
As soon as I sprung out of nothing, you refused me, what is most Holy, your
Grace, without which I was born. My Parents gave me only of their own, what was
most impure.

I received of you a Soul, which immediately was infected with Sin, before it
was at my Disposal, and of them a Body, already tainted with Corruption and bad
Inclinations: And since I became so miserable without my actual Concurrence,
there seems to be some little reason, why you should grant Pardon for those
Imperfections which naturally flow from so bad a Source.

I should be to blame notwithstanding, should I demand, that your infinite
Sanctity should not regard my Failings with displeasure: I am displeased with
them my self, and suffer most sorrowful Regrets and Remorses for them. I tell
you however, what I do to comfort my self, and what in my opinion you should
do, to appease your anger, and to have toward me no other Sentiments but of
Compassion, and no other designs but of Mercy.

For my part, O my God, at the very moment I have Sinned, I look upon you in
the same State and Condition, you were in on Mount Calvary, where you thought
of nothing but of Pardoning, and blotting out of Sins, and searching out
Sinners throughout the whole World, to wash them in your most precious Blood.
This is that, which I behold, and this makes me run to you: O adorable Mercy,
behold here the Sinner, you seek after.

For your part, O my God, in the same moment you see me fallen, behold me in
the same state, in which by your Mercy I hope to be one day in Heaven, where I
shall think of nothing else, but loving you: When you behold me here below, you
see a Person, who, during thirty or forty years of his Life, passes not one
day, nay perhaps not one hour, without Offending you by some Fault or other.
But when you behold me in Paradise, you behold a Saint, that passes millions of
Years and Ages; nay an entire Eternity, without offending you so much as once,
and that ceases not each moment of this long Eternity, to Glorify, and Love
you: Look upon me then in this state, and be not angry, to see me upon Earth
for fifty or sixty years, that is, two or three Minutes in respect of Eternity,
to be the subject of frailty and frequent failings.

CHAP. IX.
How to make your Applications to God in ordinary Doubts and Difficulties.
REmember to acquit your self of this Duty of Confidence, of which I speak, in
the occasions, where you ought to deliberate upon some unforeseen event, or of
some difficulty, that troubles you; where you cannot well perceive, what you
are to do, nor what Resolutions you are to take. Give, O Lord, a word in my
Mouth and counsel in my Heart. Send forth, O my God, your light, to direct me.
By some mark of your Wisdom teach my Soul, what to Answer, what it is to do in
this conjuncture, and which is the best means of those, that occur to me; or,
that my Friends propose, direct my Path, and permit me not to go astray. I see
a great many Advises, but I desire to know, which is yours, give me a knowledge
of it, and with your Hand direct, and guide my Inclinations to bend that way,
you direct, and to pitch upon the choice, you inspire, I cannot but act
prudently, and prosperously, whilst the splendor of your Wisdom shines upon
me, to direct me in the Darkness I am in, when your Light shines upon my Head,
by it I shall walk securely, in the midst of Darkness.

In a word, Live in a continual exercise and communication with God: Look upon
him no otherwise, than a powerful and faithful Friend, who is night and day by
your fide. Have with him, as I have said, the most free and amorous Familiarity
you can, confiding even your Diffidences and Fears to him; as also your most
hidden Weaknesses, all your Thoughts, and Desires; and the different Motions of
your irresolute Prudence, or your secret Disquiets. Before thee, O God, is all
my Desire, and my Groans are not hid from thee.

CHAP. X.
He is not displeased with every Complaint to him of himself; and in what
manner we may do it.
GOd is so well pleased that you should speak to him in a Familiar and Friendly
manner, that though you should have a mind now and then, even to complain of
his own Providence, and of that Severity wherewith he seems to treat you, he
will not be angry at it; provided it be done in an Amorous and Respectful way.
When you are overwhelmed with Grief, and can receive no Answer to your Prayers;
you may imitate our Blessed Savior on the Cross, and lovingly Cry out unto
him, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? You may say with David, Why, O
Lord, have you gone from me, and do despise me in the occasion? What is this, O
my God, that you know me not, when I weep, and withdraw your self from me,
whilst I am bathed in Tears, and have most need of your Comfort, and your
helping hand, etc.

I cry unto you, and you hear me not; I stand before you, and you behold me
not; you are changed and become cruel toward me. Where are you, O my Divine
Savior? Where is your Mercy? Where is your Love? I call you, and you answer me
not; I cry out as loud, as I am able, and you do not hear me: I make known the
grief that oppresses me, and the deplorable condition I am in, and you turn
your face from me, and will not behold me.

But after these pious Complaints, fail not to return to your Sentiments of
Confidence, and Humility: Yet, O Lord, you do not stretch out your Hand to
consume me. Though, great God, you are angry, yet I perceive, your design is not
to destroy me; all these blows from your Hands are favorable strokes, and
presage my Happiness. It Is your Goodness, is the cause of my Suffering; the
more I suffer, the more I am assured of your Love, and that your Providence
has secret Thoughts, and designs of Love toward me; which, when I least hope
for them, will comfort me and surpass my desires. Behold thou art our God, we
expected thee, and thou shall save us, we waited, and we shall exult, and
rejoice in thy Salvation.

CHAP. XI.
We are to represent the Afflictions of others unto God, as well as our own.
YOu do well to think of your Troubles and Pains, when you are in his presence;
but think also of those, that others suffer. Tell him the News of those, you
know, and endeavor to draw some Grace and Mercy from his Heart for the Comfort
of such, as according to the Prophet, are nourished upon Earth with the Bread
of Tears, their Misery is the ordinary subject of discourse; they Talk and make
Complaint of it in all Companies; but the Complaints, they make, profit them
very little. They will do them service, Devout Soul, when in your familiar
Entertainments you make them, and recount them to God; telling him the Poverty
and Miseries, you know are in several Families. In Truth, my dear Master, I can
go no where, but I find some Tears, and I may say with Truth, that from the
time, I knew, and began to converse with Men, I have scarce known one without a
Complaint, and whom I have not beheld to shed just Tears of grief. It seems to
me, I am born only to behold Afflictions, and afflicted People, and to behold
them with a seeming Cruelty, not being able to help them.

This want of Power, O my God, is in effect one of the saddest Afflictions, I
suffer in this miserable Life, as often as I see such Creatures, as belong to
you, and are dear to you, to come, and with Tears to bewail their miseries
before my eyes; and that I am forced to abandon them as others do, and to tell
them, expect nothing from me, it is impossible for me to help you.

I speak sincerely, that for these thirty or forty years, that every day I have
beheld sad objects of compassion I remember not to have been able to make one
of them happy, nor to send him away with that comfort, he desired.

It would be, my dear Spouse, an enormous crime, and a detestable hardness of
heart to be insensible of their pains; but it is a great misery to feel them,
and not be able at all to help them, or comfort them.

Many Holy Persons go to the Rich and Happy in the World, to beg Charities, and
to gather Alms, to carry to the Sick and Shame-fac'd Poor, whom they know. I do
the same, and at present I, who speak to you, seek help and comfort for them;
but it is to you, my beloved, I address my self, you have your hands full of
Comforts, and Benedictions, necessary for them. I offer up my hands to receive
them in Adoration of you, casting my self at your feet. Suffer me not, O God,
to rise without obtaining some Grace in their favor. Send your Elect to them,
to carry your Charities, or to tell them some welcome News, that may draw them
out of the Abyss of Sadness, in which they are, and may unexpectedly make them
revive.

I have, O my God, everlasting infinite Obligations to you. You know, every
hour my heart is in pain, how it may make thankful Returns for your Favors,
using the words of the Royal Prophet, What shall I return unto the Lord, for
all his Benefits bestowed upon me? And your ordinary answer to me, is, That
whatsoever I do to any, that is in sufferance, you take it as done to your
self; and retain as grateful a resentment of it, as if the Afflictions were
your own, as if you alone received the Comfort. Bestow upon me therefore, what
you would have me give them, and permit me not to be any longer so unhappy, as
to behold my God in Afflictions and suffering all the Miseries, the Necessitous
undergo, as well as the Sick, and Prisoners, and not to be able to help him.

My dear Creator, you say unto me, behold your Brother, your Sister, that
languish upon Straw, and want assistance. Behold other Souls, suffering
Sadness, and Despair, who call you to help them; and I answer you, O my God, in
tears, give what you command me to do, and command what you please.

CHAP. XII.
We are to have recourse to God, no less in Prosperity, than in Adversity.
It Is ordinary enough for Devout Souls, nay almost all Christians, to have
Recourse, and speak to God in their Afflictions, and to pass whole hours with
him in time of trouble; but it is as ordinary, that they forget their Duty in
time of Prosperity. Forget not yours, O Faithful Sunamite, says St. Bernard,
and do not imitate the Examples of ingratitude, which appear in the lives of
most Men; nay, even in some of your Companions, how spiritual and scrupulous
soever they may seem to be in other occasions.

It Is a strange thing, that, when our Designs prosper, and that we are happy,
one of our most sensible Joys is to acquaint our Friend with it; and yet
notwithstanding, as Devout as we are, we neglect to tell God, and thereby to
receive the most sweet and holy Comfort, that can be drawn out of the happiness
of this miserable life. That is, to enterain our selves with our amiable
Benefactor, and to testify to him our sense, and grateful acknowledgment for
his Favors.

You, who love your Duty, testify yours after the most faithful and sincere
manner you are able, give him an account of the happy state of your Affairs, of
the success of your Labor, and of your Conduct, being enlightened by his
Charity.

Speak to him each thing, as the Sunamite did, lead him amongst your Treasures,
show him all, you possess through the greatness of his Liberality and Favor
toward you. My Beloved says she, Behold here the Fruits at our Gates and
within our Enclosures; wheresoever I cast my eyes, I see nothing but Abundance
and Fruitfulness, and the Branches charged with your Benedictions and Presents.
What a Sweetness my dear Spouse, what a Plenty have you poured down upon our
Fruit Trees! What Riches are heaped together by your Providence and Love! It Is
you, that made the Corn and Fruit to grow, and are cause of that plentiful
Harvest of our Neighboring Fields. You are the Inventor and Origin of this
multitude of Conveniences, that sustain our Life, and comfort us here below.

I receive them only, to return them to you. For by receiving Temporal
Benefits, we ought to perform two things, to wit, Praise you, and Love you.

The use, because you will have it so, shall be for us, but the Honor and Love
for you alone. I will therefore say, Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us; but unto
thy Name be all Honor and Glory. The Glory of so great prosperity is only due
to God: Neither my hands, nor the hands of any Creature have produced it, and
therefore none shall share in his Praise or Love: I owe nothing to any, but
himself; nay, I will not so much as love his Gifts or Liberalities, as precious
as they are: I ought to receive and possess the Gifts, but I ought to Love
nothing but the Giver.

You, my God, who know all things; know, that they are not your Presents, which
make me Happy. I have a thousand times told you, what I now repeat, that amidst
all the Riches, and all the Felicities; and amidst all the Worlds, you can
Create; there is nothing, that I can or will Love, but you. My Love is only
yours, and you alone shall be eternally the God of my Heart, and my everlasting
Inheritance.

CHAP. XIII.
Our Imperfections in our Devotions ought not to hinder a confident recourse to
him.
APply your self with particular care to speak to him most familiarly, and
freely, when that happens to you, which is but too ordinary in the exercises of
a devout Life, to wit, when you find in your Soul certain negligences, and
discouragements, as Spiritual tediousness, wearisomness, and disgust, of which
you know not any cause, such as David complained of, saying, My Soul is dried
up within me. I cannot tell you, O my God, how I am, nor in what condition I
find my self; My Soul is much out of order: Nothing relishes with it, nothing
can please it: Nay, it is as displeasing to it self, as other things are: Nay,
it seems, as if you were no longer pleasing to it, or at least I cannot bring
it at present, to make so much as one act of Love or Adoration. I say my
Prayers without any Devotion, and with a shameful Negligence. It is not
possible for me in your Presence to keep my self with that Duty, and Respect, I
ought; nor to free my self from that Drowsiness and Lasiness, that even makes
me sleep at your feet, instead of hearkening to you; as David said, My Soul out
of Tediousness, even slept within me.

I know not, whence this humor proceeds; yet I know, it is displeasing to you,
and that it offends you: And you know, it is displeasing to me also, and that
it is a great pain and confusion to me, to find my self in this condition. But
that, which comforts me, is, that in your words you carry my Cure. If you have
compassion of my infirmity, speak, and Cure me: Confirm me in your Words.
Remember, O admirable Omnipotence, that of my self I am nothing but Weakness
and Misery; all my force depends on your Lips, and proceeds from your Eyes.
Look upon me, O Divine Savior, and speak but a word: Life, Courage, and Grace
will enter with your Words, and will give a new Birth to my Soul; which is
truly entombed, whilst it is thus a sleep, and in a manner buried in its Body by
Sloth. My Soul slept out of Sloth, confirm me in your Words, said the Royal
Prophet.

CHAP. XIV.
How multiplicity of Business is no hindrance to this Conversation.
OTher times happen, very different from these, but no less troublesome, and as
contrary to the design, you ought to have of keeping your Soul always in Peace,
and present to God, and not permitting it to be carry^d away from him, either
by disquiet or distraction. It Is, when the multitude of Affairs oblige us, as
they did St. Martha, to deprive our selves of St. Mary Magdalens Happiness, and
to run to and fro, and to cast our Eyes and Thoughts in every corner of the
House, to take care of an infinite number of Things. For how is it possible at
such a time, whilst our minds are taken up with so many Affairs; and about the
conduct of so many Persons, to remain at the Feet of our Savior, and to
possess with repose the comfort of his Entertainments?

Yes, devout Soul, it is possible. Without doubt you may do it as easily, as the
Sunamite, who gives an example very sweet, and easy to follow, during the heat
of your Affairs, and the multitude of your Domestic Employments.

See what she does, and you will confess, it is an inexcusable error to believe,
that the business you are employed in by Duty, and by Gods command, should
constrain you to forget your self, or God. For if, whilst you are acting, your
actions do not hinder you from speaking about your business, to the Persons you
deal withal; why should they hinder you from speaking to him you love, or from
doing, as the Laborious Spouse did, even upon the day of her greatest
Employment, when she was obliged to give orders to the great number of her
Domestics, and by her vigilance to keep them assiduous to their works. Behold
her, I say, and Judge, whether the repose of a contemplative, be more agreeable
than this her holy and active Life? Let us rise this Morning, says she, getting
up, let us rise, and go to the Vineyards, let us see, whether the Vines have
Flowered, and if the Flowers bring forth Fruit, whether the Peaches have
budded. My dear Master, it is time to go to work, and to think of our business,
but do not leave me alone, amidst the labors. I fear them not, how great
soever they are, so they separate me not from you, and that, so long as I work,
you keep my eyes and my thoughts inseparably fixed upon your presence, and fast
tied to your heart. Let us go together, and take a walk about our Close; let us
behold the Vineyards, in what condition they are, and whether they are
advanced, as they ought to be, in so favorable a season. Let us visit our
Nursery, and see, whether the Trees prosper, and whether our Plants thrive; let
us visit our Farm, and see whether the Laborers mind their Work; whether the
Shepherds are vigilant, and whether the Servants and other Officers do their
Duty: Let us go and give Order, that each one take care of his work, and be
employed, as he ought.

But one thing more yet my Beloved, do not leave me, for nothing can be
troublesome, or incommode me, whilst you are present to my mind, and whilst I
hearken to your Voice. Speak to my Soul, whilst my Body is employed in your
Service, and in regulating the Family, which you are pleased to confide to my
Care, and Conduct.

When being at work, we speak to God of what we are about, the work is no more
a distraction, but a Devotion of great merit. Devout Martha, who thinks of
Temporal Affairs, and has all the cares of the House upon her, is not
disturbed, but rather comforted, by complaining to her Savior, and making
every thing that happens, an occasion of speaking to him: telling him ever,
that it is for him, she labors, and that she is happy to labor, and tire out
her self, whilst he beholds her.

Do not doubt, when in the midst of a multitude of Employments, you're remember
to say to our Lord, what you say to others, to wit, that you are even
overwhelmed with them, and that you Communicate to him, with Confidence such
thoughts, as this Turmoil occasions, but that all your Distractions will
immediately change into so many Acts of Divine Love. The contemplative
Magdalens may perhaps have more sweetness, but they cannot have more Merit. A
Soul, that withdraws not her self from God, whilst she walks or runs about the
streets, is far better, than she, that lets, her Thoughts wander whilst she is
at her Prayers.

CHAP. XV.
The greater familiarity you use with God, the more pleasing it is to him.
IN fine, speak to him of all things, which you speak of to your self; and do
it after all such manners, as Love shall suggest.

At least imprint this maxim deeply in your Heart, that as you have not a
Master, whom you ought to Fear and Respect as God: So you have not a Friend, be
it Brother or Sister, to whom you may speak with that Liberty and Confidence,
as to him.

They, that imagine freedom of Speech with him to be against the Law of Worship
and Submission, due to his Presence, and his Divine Majesty are much deceived.

Many are apt to believe, that, what Ghostly Fathers say in this particular,
are only thoughts of their Simplicity, contrary to serious and solid Devotion,
and to that Holy Doctrine, which condemns as Illusion and Irreverence, all these
pretended Confidences, and seeming bold and Presumptuous Conversations with
God, affirming, that we are in his sight but Dust and Ashes, and that in his
Presence only Thoughts of profound Humility, and Annihilation, and Devotions,
tending thereunto, are to take place,

But alas! How feeble and weak do these pretended Devotes show themselves,
whilst they think, they speak very solidly. They understand very little, in
what the greatness of God consists, and are far from conceiving, that mortal
and earthly Greatness is very small and inconsiderable, and infinitely less
than that of GOD, because it cannot suit, or equal it self to little things,
when Wisdom and Love obliges it so to do.

Take notice, if you please, that the Immensity of God, infinitely surpasses
other Immensities, and that it alone is Divine and Sovereign, because at the
same time it is of greater extent then the World; it is also as little, as the
least Creature, and that it is as entirely in a little Flower, as in the whole
Universe, and in the Imperial Heaven, (...), says a Holy Father of him, God is
greater than all, and equal to all.

Meditate but a little, Devout Soul, on this Truth, and by it you will clearly
discern that God is the most amiable and lovely of all those whom you Love, and
which also Love you; and that he is the true and only object of Love, because
in him alone you will find the two most necessary things to be Loved; to wit,
Superiority and Equality, that is, a great Infinity, which Infinity elevates
him above you, and an infinite Goodness, that (as I may say) lessens him so
far, as to be equal with you; thereby to bring to pass, that all his
Perfections and Power; may, as it were, be able to enter into your heart, and
thereby render you infinitely and eternally Happy. He alone is your Master and
equal: And therefore it is of him, you may say with Truth, My beloved to me, and
I to him. Notwithstand he is God, and I am nothing, by an ineffable Mystery, he
is fit for me, and I for him. His Wisdom has taken my measure upon him, and
rendered my littleness capable after some manner of containing his Immensity.

CHAP. XVI.
When particular Reverence is to be shown.
WHerefore O holy Sunamite, in the Church, and at times of Adoration and Divine
Mysteries, appear not in his Presence, but as an annihilated Shadow, by a
profound Humility: But in the places, and at the times, I have before spoken
of, and during your Solitary and Domestic Conversations, you are both to
blame, and ungrateful, if you have not all the liberty, familiarity, and
tenderness that one ought to have for a Spouse, he tenderly Loves; and at such
times speak no other Language, but that of Tenderness and Love.

It Is there he styles you his Beloved, his unspoted Dove, and even forbids you
to call him Lord and Master. Call me, says he, the God of your Heart, the God
of your Comfort, the Father of the Mercies you expect, the Beloved of your
Hopes and Desires, the most Lovely, the most Perfect, your All and your only
One, whose Heart is but one with yours, and whose Grace enters into your Soul,
to be its Life, never to be separated from it: commanding you not to call him
hereafter Baalim, that is, Lord, but to call him the Spouse.

CHAP. XVII.
How to Discourse with God concerning Himself.
MOreover, during these Colloquies, do not always speak of thy self, nor of thy
own Affair, nor of thy own Comfort, or Afflictions, but Change thy Discourse,
and after thou have made thy complaints or entertained him with what happens in
thy Household Affairs, Elevate thy Mind, and Entertain him, with what belongs to
himself.

Speak to him of his Happiness and Greatness, of his Divine Attributes and
Operations, of the power of his Word, when by it he gave a Being to all
Creatures, and drew them out of their eternal nothing; speak to him in the
Language of the Saints, who by Sighs and devout Exclamations showed their
Eloquence, whilst they praised his Works: How admirable is thy Name! How
magnificent are thy Works! And how profound thy Thoughts! O Wisdom, that have
formed this great World. How Sublime art thou, and how incomprehensible in thy
Thoughts, how profound art thou in thy Designs! How magnificent and admirable
in thy Works! What a vast Immensity do the Heavens contain, what a Luster and
Brightness do those uncorruptible Lights, ranged in so Beautiful an Order, send
forth; what a variety of Goods does the Earth produce, and the Sea, and other
Elements bring forth? How great a magnificence and Beauty have all these
Creatures, and how pleasing a thing it is to Contemplate them in Silence, and
to let our Soul be filled with Admiration, and Heavenly Thoughts, whilst it
considers them! Thy Power and Justice reaches to the highest, how great things
have thou made! O God, who is like unto thee?

CHAP. XVIII.
How to Treat with Him of his Birth and Passion.
BE not forgetful also of the greatest of all his Miracles, the Incarnation of
the Word, and the Redemption of Mankind. Tell him, this is the ordinary subject
of your Meditation every day, as it is the subject of the Meditation of the
Angels in Paradise for Eternity. O Redeemer of my Life, how often do I think of
them, and how sweet a repose does the Contemplation of your Crib, and Cross,
your Glorious Annihilations bring along with them.

Hereupon call to mind such Thoughts, as occurred, during your Meditations, or
those, you have read in Books, or heard in Sermons. Recount them, as things,
you cannot forbear Speaking or Meditating of, and mingle with them Acts of
Love, Thanksgiving, Admiration, and Faith: I believe those inestimmable
Mysteries, what your Church and Gospel Teaches; I have believed them ever since
my Birth; and I say every day, and will say to the hour of my Death, that Jesus
Christ Crucified is my Lord and my God. This is the first Word, they taught me
in my Cradle, and I hope it will be the last, I shall pronounce, going out of
the World; and that I shall bear Engraven upon my Heart, going to appear in
Judgment: My Lord and my God.

CHAP. XIX.
How to Converse with God concerning the Sins of our past Life.
TEll him with Devotion, that upon the Cross you do no less clearly behold your
own Humiliations and the Disgraces of your Life, then the Exaltations of the
Justice and Goodness of God.

What I would say, is, that during these sorts of Conversations with our
Savior, you ought not to fail Entertaining him with the sins and miseries of
your Youth. Speak of them to this dear Spouse; and though in your former days
of Penance you forgot not to tell him all you knew; yet be not afraid to
importune him, by humbling your self in repeating the same things.

Tell him the whole Story of those miserable years, and all those sad occasions
of offending him, into which your Companions brought you. Remember each fault,
Sigh and Lament it with Tears, and exercise Acts of Contrition, worthy of those
Graces which the Death of your Spouse has merited, and which have drawn you
out of Hell.

That which displeases me, my Beloved, and above all afflicts me in these my
enormous Sins, is, that my Heart is too weak to have hatred for them. Alas it
is very little that mine alone, and the heart of my Confessor, who has known
and deplored them, should be touched with them, I wish I had the heart of all
Men and Angels, and with this multitude of Hearts, that I were able to form
such a violent hatred, and detestation, as might equal my Sadness and Misery. O
Lord employ your Power and Mercy: Create in me a new heart, and give it me to
no other end, but to Love you.

This desire pleases our Savior, as did the desire of David, St. Peter, and
many other Penitent Sinners; who, after they had employed many years in sighing
and bewailing their Sins, having exhausted their Tears, asked for those who
might raise in their Soul such a source of bitter Waters, that might not be
exhausted, but might endure their whole Life. Who will give water to my Head,
and a Fountain of Tears to my Eyes, that I may Weep day and night? says the
Royal Prophet.

Contemplating the open Veins of your Crucified Spouse; O Devout Soul, repeat
the same Words, but say them sincerely and from your Heart, and rather Sighs of
Love, then Words; Who will give Water to my Head, etc. O my dear Master, how
happy should I be, to see Torrents of Tears flow from my Eyes, which might join
themselves to the torrent of your Blood, and run together with it in each
Corner, where my Sins have been committed, to the end that those, who have
known me a Sinner, may know me also a Penitent, and see eternal marks of my
Sorrow! O all of you, who have heard of the scandal of my Life, come and
hearken to my Cries and Lamentations, and behold my Sorrow! Behold it, O my
God, and consider, what passes in my Soul. I hope in you, in the state I am
in; have the goodness not to refuse to Love me in it: At least, refuse not to
behold me, and to let that virtue pass from your Eyes to my Soul, which gives
Grace and Life. Behold me, O God, and consider me.

God beholds thee, O Sunamite; and during these holy Hours, in which thou
find thy grief and the convulsions of thy afflicted Conscience to return, he
fails not to comfort thee, repeating by himself Interiorly, what he has caused
the Prophets and Evangelists to tell thee, that thy Sins are pardoned and
blotted out, and that the least stain of them remains not in thy Heart. This I
know, O Divine Savior, but there remains still a memory of them in thy mind.

Alas, great God, it seems little comfort to tell me I pardon you. It seems to
me, that to make this comfort perfect; you should find some invention to be
ignorant of what I have done, and to forget, whatever happened to me during the
years of my criminal and scandalous Life.

For how is it possible to live in the presence of God, who has beheld all my
Infidelities, and still remembers them? And how is it possible to be comforted
by the news, they daily tell me from you, that my Sins are washed in the Blood
you spilt for me, so long as I also know that they appear yet in your sight,
and will do so for an Eternity; and that amidst the Splendours of Paradise, the
Age of my Ingratitudes will be an Eternal object. Thou have put our Sins in thy
sight, our Age in the light of thy Countenance.

God, who beholds with pleasure this kind of holy Fears and Anxieties in your
Mind, is ready to give you an entire Consolation. And when, during these
familiar Entainmens, he Comforts you about them; he speaks as One, who by an
ineffable Miracle has extended his Power so far, as to put all in Oblivion, and
buried the memory of your Sins in such an Abyss, as they shall never be able to
get out of: He will dispose our Iniquities, and cast our Sins into the depth of
the Sea, because he will have Mercy.

CHAP. XX.
In what manner we are to Treat with God in Scruples, and Fears of our
Salvation, or any thing else.
BUt if peradventure that should happen to you, which often does even to most
innocent Souls; to be troubled out of Fear, that some hidden Sin lurks still in
your Conscience, or that God has a design of anger and Reprobation against you;
as soon as you perceive this thought, fail not to enter into your self, and to
be angry, and blame your self for this disquiet, as a fault perhaps more
hateful to his Wisdom and Mercy, than all the Sins you have Committed: Be
ashamed of it, and resist it, as a blast from Hell, and speak of it to your
Spouse with abomination and horror, detesting such a blind and criminal
diffidence.

In regard also of those weaknesses, which make fear the Power of Men or
Devils, forming in your imagination scruples and Chimerical ideas, which
prosecute you very importunely, and excite in your Soul inclinations to
Despair, take care, you permit your self not to be dejected by this importunity
of the enemy. Open your Eyes, and behold, how unworthy you are, that God should
Love you, whilst you let your self to be frighted in this manner, and permit
these fumes and shaddows to have so much force, as to trouble you, who art
beloved by God and sustained by his Grace, and therefore tell him.

O my beloved, what blindness and what unworthiness is this? From whence
proceeds this Fear; and how can it enter into my heart to distrust you amidst
those many Miracles of your Mercy and Love toward me.

It Is true, I have been a sinner, I came from nothing, and am Dust and Ashes; a
Worm generated of Filth; But you are a God, an eternal Comforter, an invincible
Protector of the miserable; and it is you, that say to me: My dear Creature, as
nothing as thou art, and as small a worm worthy to be trampled underfoot, take
comfort, fear nothing, because I am thy Savior, thy Beloved, thy Faithful
Friend; and because it is I, that have Sworn, That the World shall sooner
perish, then that I should permit thee to do so; or, that the Devils should
take thee out of my hand, or the least evil arrive to thee, so long as thou
continuest in my Love.

You tell me this, O most powerfully Merciful, and yet I cease not to tremble:
Mad and Senseless that I am, your Prophet assures me, that you keep me on your
Knee, as a tender Mother does her only Infant, and tenderly embrace me with the
like transports of Love, hiding me in your Breast, as she does her Beloved,
carrying me also so in your Arms, as a Father does his Son, not able yet to go
alone; and that you will, if I hinder it not, in this manner support me to the
end of my Life, though I should arrive to never so great an Age. You tell me
this, my God; I hear it, I know, it is you, that speak, and yet I ask you, if
you Love me, if you think of me, if you take notice of my Tears, and if you
hear my Voice: And after the many Promises, which you have made me, as if they
were made by a feeble and faithless Man, I continue to fear; and so to offend
the adorable Truth of your Word, and of your Love by my inconsiderate
disquiets. Ah, my God, I detest them from hence forward, and will use my utmost
endeavors to force them out of my Heart, and not to let any thing remain
within me, that carries with it such an unworthy and criminal diffidence. Ah my
God, let me sooner perish, than offend you by fearing, and trembling under the
shadow of your protection. Sustained by you, and elevated above all, that is
mortal or created; I fear nothing, I hope in none, nor love any thing, but you.

To assist you the better to confirm this comfort and confidence in your Heart,
recount often the most remarkable Benefits, you have received from God, and the
occasions you are conscious of wherein he has expressed his particular goodness
toward you. Repeat all these to him, and remember, there are three Histories,
which your Spouse hears very willingly, and that you need not fear to repeat
them too often; wherefore make them the ordinary subject of your Domestic
Entertainments; the History of your sinful Life, the History of your
Redemption, and his Death upon Mount Calvary; and in fine, the History of all
his Conduct toward you, and the miraculous Succors you have received from his
Providence in all those occasions, wherein you were in danger to perish, and at
this very hour, in which you speak to him, if he had not had pity of you, and
heard your Voice in those miserable occasions you know of, you had been lost to
all Eternity. It Is you, my God, who reached out your Hand and drew me out of
the Death of Sin and Misery. It Is you, have dried up my Tears, and broken my
Chains. Pardon my Ingratitude, and heal my Infirmity, and Diseases, who have
given me Health, Hope, and Grace, have Crowned me with Benedictions and heaped
thy Benefits upon me, and have revealed to me the secrets of thy Wisdom, and
most sublime Truths of thy Gospel, and from that miserable state, I was in,
which had brought me to the Gates of Hell, and even into the Hands of Devils,
have elevated me to the rank and condition of Angels. bless the Lord, O my
Soul, and forget not his Benefits.

In fine, speak to him of all things, and endeavor the most intimate
familiarity, and secret Communications, which one Friend can have with another,
Exercise them boldly, O Devout Soul, and fear nothing more, than to be afraid,
or tremble in his presence, whom nothing so displeases in his Saints, as the
fears of diffierence, and the disquiets of a fearful and Pusillanimous Soul.

CHAP. XXI.
How, God whilst we speak to him, does silently speak to our Heart.
THat, which is most advantageous in these sorts of Conversations with God; is
that, though it seems, that so long as you entertain him, he lets you speak
without speaking himself, or answering you, yet nevertheless it is not so.

There is a certain voice, which is proper only to himself, and without the
knowledge of your interior Faculties, even whilst your imagination understands
nothing, Prints in your Soul such Verities, as his Love would have you know.
You feel imperceptibly to rise in your mind such Thoughts, as comfort you, and
extinguish your Fears, Lights, that dissipate your Doubts and Apprehensions,
Reflections, which discover to you, what you are to do, and which teach you the
certain means, how you may happily conduct all your Designs.

It is much, that he hears you: But when you speak to him with this respectful
confidence, he cannot forbear answering, and comforting you: He does it not by
forming words in the Air, but by applying his Lights, his Thoughts and his
Sweetnesses to your Heart: It is his Heart which speaks to his Spouses, and it
is a Language, they understand.

FINIS.

