CERTAIN PHYSIOLOGICAL ESSAYS And other TRACTS; Written at distant Times, and
on several Occasions.

By the Honorable ROBERT BOIL.

The Second Edition. Wherein some of the Tracts are enlarged by Experiments,
and the Work is increased by the Addition of a Discourse about the ABSOLVTE
REST IN BODIES.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Herringman at the Blew Anchor in the Lower Walk of
the New-Exchange, M DC LXIX.

PHYSIOLOGICAL ESSAYS.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Herringman, MDCLXIX.

AN ADVERTISEMENT TO THE READER: Prefixed to the First Edition, Put forth A. D.
1661.
THE Publisher desires that the Reader should be informed, that neither were
the following Treatises written near about the same Time (some of them being
diverse years elder than some others) nor yet are they now published in the same
Order that they were written in. For the first of these Discourses (though
penned about four years since) was not only written after the second, third,
and fourth, but after diverse other Essays which the Author has yet lying by him
among his Papers; it being intended for a kind of Introduction to all those
Treatises which under several names, but chiefly that of Physiological Essays,
the Author had then composed. But having during the late Confusions so disposed
of his Papers to secure them, that he could not himself seasonably recover
them; and being engaged by Promise to some friends, to let about half a dozen
of his small Tracts come abroad into the world by such a time, he was fain to
send the following Treatises to the Press as they came, some at one time, some
at another, to his hands. And this his occasions did now and then reduce him to
do in such haste, that he could not attend the correcting either the Printers
Lapses or his own, and particularly was obliged, partly by haste, and partly by
a Distemper in his Eyes, to send away the History of Firmness without so much
as reading it over. All which it is hoped the Equitable Reader will consider in
his favor, and bear with what may be imputable to such Circumstances.

I should add nothing further, were it not that to save the Reader the trouble
of guessing who is meant by that Pyrophilus to whom most of the following
Treatises are addressed, I think it requisite to inform him, that the person
veiled under that name, is that hopeful Young Gentleman Mr. Richard Jones, only
Son to the Lord Viscount Ranelagh and an Excellent Lady, Sister to the Author.

AN ADVERTISEMENT About the Second Edition.
FOr the ease of those that had already perused the first Edition of the
Physiological Essays, and other Tracts that accompanied them, the Author took
the pains to include the principal things added in the present Edition in
Paratheses, that the chief Additions may be found out without the pains of
reading over again the whole Book. But finding these Paratheses to have been,
by an oversight of the Press, omitted, some amends was thought fit to be
endeavored to be made for that, by intimating that the Experiments that
enlarge this New Edition, are, for the most part, to be found in the following
Pages of it

Page 196.202.222.226.227.241.243.246. from page 252 to 255. p. 257. p. 238,
239. p. 263. from p.289 to 291. p. 32 and 33. p. 169, 170.

A PROEMIAL ESSAY, WHEREIN, With some considerations touching EXPERIMENTAL
ESSAYS in General, Is interwoven such an Introduction to all those written by
the Author, as is necessary to be perused for the better understanding of them.
I Know not, Pyrohilus, whether what you will meet with in the ensuing
Discourses will prove worthy of your taking notice of it: Yet I dare tell you,
that if all my Endeavors to serve you were not Duties, I should think I might
deserve your Thanks for venturing to write them for your sake. For I am
sufficiently sensible both how unlearned I am, and in how learned an Age I
presume to write: Nor has the great number of those escaped my Observation, who
finding it a much easier task to censure Experimental Composures than to write
such, endeavor to acquire the Title of Judicious, by condemning all things
that themselves have not written, or thought on. And indeed, Pyrophilus, I had
besides these, so many other discouraging Considerations in my Eye, whilst I
was setting down the following Essays, that I should scarce have prosecuted a
Design so full of trouble, and so unlikely by its success to make amends for
it, if I had thought it free for the securing of my own Quiet and Credit, to
suppress Observations which might prove serviceable to you, who having
sufficiently conversed with Books, are now desirous to begin to converse with
Things themselves. But I must confess, I look upon Experimental truths as
Matters of so great concernment to Mankind, that in spite of the just sense I
have of my own Disabilities, I am deterred from complying with those
Inclinations and Motives that endear silence to me, by considering the Fate of
him, who though he had less entrusted to him than any of his Companions, was
yet severely punished for burying his single Talent. And though, Pyrophilus, I
could not without such reluctance resolve to write, yet I found it much more
uneasy to resolve to write so soon: For I could not but consider, that being
yet but very young, not only in Years, but, what is much worse, in Experience,
I have yet much more need to learn, than ability to teach; and I considered
too, that after a man is grown somewhat acquainted with things themselves, and
has taken some general notice of the Cognations, Differences, and Tendencies of
their Properties, he may every day so much improve his Knowledge, that I am apt
to think, that if God should be pleased to protract my Life a few years longer,
I shall at the end of them be able to look upon what I have hitherto written
with Pity, if not with Blushes. And I have often observed, that it is wont to
happen in the productions of the Mind, as in those of the Body. For as those
that apply themselves to Procreation too young, and before they have attained
to their full vigor and strength, do generally both hinder their own growth,
and become the Parents but of weak and short-lived Children; so they that too
early, and before their Judgment and Experience be fully ripe, addict
themselves to write Books, do commonly both hinder their own Proficiency in
Knowledge, and write but immature, and therefore seldom lasting Treatises. Nor
should I, Pyrophilus, have ever prevailed with my self to present you so early
these Discourses, since by keeping them longer by me, I might easily by second
Thoughts, and fresh Experiences be enabled to correct and enrich them, did not
the frequent and dangerous distempers to which my very sickly Constitution has
of late rendered me obnoxious, make me justly doubt, whether or no, if I should
long forbear to write, Death would not sooner come than the expected Maturity
of Age and Judgment. And though I had no such Consideration to move me to make
have to tender to you the ensuing Discourses, yet this would suffice to engage
me to present them you with all their present defects; that if I should keep
them till I can make them less unworthy of you, I must keep them till you are
grown past the need of them.

And now that I have told you, Pyrophilus, both why I have written the ensuing
Discourses, and why I keep them not by me long enough to present them you with
fewer Imperfections, I suppose you will expect that I should next tell you why
I have cast them into Essays, rather than into any other form. To satisfy you
about this particular, Pyrophilus, I must freely acknowledge to you, that it
has long seemed to me none of the least impediments of the real advancement of
true Natural Philosophy, that men have been so forward to write Systems of it,
and have thought themselves obliged either to be altogether silent, or not to
write less than an entire body of Physiology: for from hence seem to have
ensued not a few Inconveniences.

And first, when men by having diligently studied either Chemistry, Anatomy,
Botanicks, or some other particular part of Physiology, or perhaps by having
only read Authors on those Subjects, have thought themselves thereby qualified
to publish complete Systems of Natural Philosophy, they have found themselves
by the nature of their undertaking, and the Laws of Method, engaged to write of
several other things than those wherein they had made themselves Proficients,
and thereby have been reduced, either idly to repeat what has been already,
though perhaps but impertinently enough, written by others on the same
Subjects, or else to say any thing on them rather than nothing, lest they
should appear not to have said something to every part of the Theme which they
had taken upon themselves to write of.

In the next place, the specious and promising Titles and comprehensive Method
of these Systems have been often found to persuade unwary Readers, that all the
parts of Natural Philosophy have been already sufficiently explicated, and that
consequently it were needless for them to put themselves to trouble and charges
in making further Enquiries into Nature, since others having already
sufficiently made it their business to investigate and explicate Physiological
Truths, our business needs now be no more than to learn what they have taught,
and thankfully to acquiesce in it.

Nor has the Systematical way of writing been prejudicial only to the
proficiency of some Readers, but also to the reputation of some Writers of
Systematical Books. For it not unfrequently happens, that when a Writer, to
vent some few peculiar Notions or Discoveries of his own, presumes to write a
whole body of Philosophy, what is truly his own, though excellent in its kind,
is either lost in the Crowd of the things he has borrowed from others, and so
comes to be overlooked, or at least not sufficiently taken notice of, by the
Reader; or else the unwelcome, and yet in such Composures scarce evitable,
Repetition of many things that others had I know not how often written before,
occasions the laying aside of the whole Book, as a Rhapsody of trite and vulgar
Notions, scarce worth the perusing: and by this means the Author often loses
the Reputation of his peculiar Notions, as well as the Reader the benefit of
them; and that which would have made an excellent and substantial Essay, passes
but for a dull and empty Book.

But the worst Inconvenience of all is yet to be mentioned, and that is, That
whilst this Vanity of thinking men obliged to write either Systems or Nothing,
is in request, many excellent Notions or Experiments are by sober and modest
men suppressed, because such Persons being forbidden by their Judgment and
Integrity to teach more than they understand, or assert more than they can
prove, are likewise forbidden by Custom to publish their Thoughts and
Observations, unless they were numerous enough to swell into a System. And
indeed it may be doubted whether the Systematical Writers have not kept the
world from much more useful Composures than they have presented it with. For
there are very few men, if any at all, in the world, that are enriched with a
competent stock of Experiments and Observations to make out clearly and
solidly, I say not all the Phenomenon of Nature, but all those that belong to
Chemistry, Anatomy, or any such considerable subordinate Doctrine of
Physiology. And those very men that are diligent and judicious enough to study
prosperously any of those parts of Physiology, are obliged to spend so much
time in the accurate Prosecution of that, and are wont to be thereby made so
wary, and so thoroughly acquainted with the difficulty of Physiological
Investigations, that they will least of all men be forward to write Systems.

And what I say, Pyrophilus, of the inconveniences that have hitherto been
observed to flow from men's forwardness to write entire bodies of Philosophy;
may be in its degree applied to the practice of those that pretend to give us
complete accounts of Chemistry, or almost (I say almost) any other considerable
and comprehensive part of Natural Philosophy: Though I deny not, that in such
attempts which are much less difficult than the former, some Men have done
Mankind considerable service, though they have not fully performed what the
Titles of their Writings seem to promise. Nor am I so rigid as to be unwilling
that from time to time some very knowing Writer should publish a System of
Physiology, or any part of it, according to the best Authors and Observations
of that time: For such a Work may be useful, partly, for the instructing of
Youth in Schools and Academies; and partly, that men may have from time to time
an Inventory of what has been already discovered, whereby the needless labor
of seeking after known things may be prevented, and the progress of Mankind as
to Knowledge might the better appear. But then it is to be wished that such
Writings were not published but by very intelligent Persons, nor till some
considerable improvement have been made in Knowledge since the last work of
that Nature. Nor would I be thought to disallow such Writings of very Learned
Men, as though they may bear very general Titles, yet are not published by
their Authors as complete Bodies or Systems of Physiology, but rather as
general Principles (almost like the Hypotheses of Astronomers) to assist men to
explicate the already-known Phenomenon of Nature. For of such kind of Writings,
if their Authors be (as for the most part they are) subtle and inquisitive men,
there may be very good use, not so much by their gratifying the Intellect with
the plausible account of some of Natures Mysteries; as because on the one side
their Writers, to make good their new Opinions, must either bring New
Experiments and Observations, or else must consider those that are known
already after a new Manner, and thereby make us take notice of something in
them unheeded before; and on the other side, the curiosity of Readers, whether
they like or disapprove the Hypothesis proposed, is wont to be thereby excited
to make trial of several things, which seeming to be Consequences of this new
Doctrine, may by their proving agreeable or repugnant to Experiment either
establish or overthrow it.

And that you may know, Pyrophilus, what kind of Writings I mean, I shall name
to you the Learned Gassendus his little Syntagma of Epicuru's Philosophy, and
that most ingenious Gentleman Monsr Descartes his Principles of Philosophy.
For though I purposely refrained, though not altogether from transiently
consulting about a few Particulars, yet from seriously and orderly reading over
those excellent (though disagreeing) Books, or so much as Sir Francis Bacon's
Novum Organum, that I might not be prepossessed with any Theory or Principles
till I had spent some time in trying what Things themselves would incline me to
think; yet beginning now to allow my self to read those excellent Books, I find
by the little I have read in them already, that if I had read them before I
began to write, I might have enriched the ensuing Essays with diverse truths
which they now want, and have explicated diverse things much better then I fear
I have done. But of such Writers the number is yet (and will I fear always be)
so small, that I shall not need to make many Exceptions when I treat of the
usefulness of writing Books of Essays, in comparison of that of writing
Systematically: Or at least, Pyrophilus, whilst I presume not to judge of other
men's abilities, I hope it may be lawful for me to confess freely to you
concerning my self, that I am very sensible of my being far from having such a
stock of Experiments and Observations, as I judge requisite to write
Systematically; and I am apt to impute many of the Deficiencies to be met with
in the Theories and Reasonings of such great Wits as Aristotle, Campanella, and
some other celebrated Philosophers, chiefly to this very thing, that they have
too hastily, and either upon a few Observations, or at least without a
competent number of Experiments, presumed to establish Principles, and deliver
Axioms. For it very rarely otherwise happens, than that Theories that are
grounded but upon few and obvious Experiments are subject to be contradicted by
some such Instances as more free and diligent Enquiries into what of Nature is
more abstruse, or even into the less obvious Qualities of things, are wont to
bring to light. I remember, that being once at Leyden, I was brought to the Top
of a Tower, where in a darkened room (such as is now used in many places to
bring in the Species of external Objects) a Unequal glass, applied to the only
hole by which light was permitted to enter, did project upon a large white
sheet of Paper, held at a just distance from it, a lively representation of
diverse of the chief Buildings in the Town, all which upon the admission of more
light into the room, by opening the Window, did immediately disappear. And
methinks, Pyrophilus, that in diverse of the Philosophical Theories that have
been formerly applauded, something not unlike this may be easily observed: for
though, whilst they are looked on with such a weak and determinate degree of
light, they may appear very artificial and well-proportion'd Fabrics, yet they
appear so but in that twilight, as it were, which is requisite to their
conspicuousness. For if but a full light of new Experiments and Observations be
freely let in upon them, the Beauty of those (delightful, but Fantastical)
structures does immediately vanish.

And truly, Pyrophilus, if men could be persuaded to mind more the Advancement
of Natural Philosophy than that of their own Reputations, 'twere not methinks
very uneasy to make them sensible, that one of the considerablest services
that they could do Mankind, were to set themselves diligently and industriously
to make Experiments and collect Observations, without being over-forward to
establish Principles and Axioms, believing it uneasy to erect such Theories as
are capable to explicate all the Phenomenon of Nature, before they have been
able to take notice of the tenth part of those Phenomenon that are to be
explicated. Not that I at all disallow the use of Reasoning upon Experiments,
or the endeavoring to discern as early as we can the Confederations, and
Differences, and Tendencies of things: For such an absolute suspension of the
exercise of Reasoning were exceeding troublesome, if not impossible. And as in
that Rule of Arithmetic which is commonly called Regula falsi, by proceeding
upon a conjecturally-supposed Number, as if it were that which we enquire
after, we are wont to come to the knowledge of the true number sought for: so
in Physiology it is sometimes conducive to the discovery of truth, to permit the
Understanding to make an Hypothesis in order to the Explication of this or that
difficulty, that by examining how far the Phenomenon are, or are not, capable
of being salv'd by that Hypothesis, the Understanding may even by its own
Errors be instructed. For it has been truly observed by a great Philosopher,
That Truth does more easily emerge out of Error than Confusion. That then that
I wish for, as to Systems, is this, That men in the first place would forbear
to establish any Theory, till they have consulted with (though not a fully
competent number of Experiments, such as may afford them all the Phenomenon to
be explicated by that Theory, yet) a considerable number of Experiments in
proportion to the comprehensiveness of the Theory to be erected on them. And in
the next place, I would have such kind of superstructures looked upon only as
temporary ones, which though they may be preferred before any others, as being
the least imperfect, or, if you please, the best in their kind that we yet
have, yet are they not to entirely be acquiesced in, as absolutely perfect, or
incapable of improving Alterations.

It were very possible, Pyrophilus, to let you see that all that has been said
to recommend to you that form of Writing which (in imitation of the French) we
call Essays, is but a part of what may be pertinently said to the same
purpose. But because this Introductory Discourse it self is to be but an Essay,
not a Book, I dare not long insist upon the Advantages of this sort of
Discourses. Only because I think that if I could engage you, Pyrophilus, and
such other ingenious Persons, to cast their Physiological Observations and
Reflections into Experimental Essays, I should thereby do real Learning no
trifling service, by bringing so useful a way of writing into the request it
deserves; Upon this consideration, I say, I must beg leave to represent to you
this great Convenience of Essays, That as in them the Reader needs not be
clogged with tedious Repetitions of what others have said already, so the
Writer, having for the most part the Liberty to leave off when he pleases, is
not obliged to take upon him to teach others what himself does not understand,
nor to write of any thing but of what he thinks he can write well. And if such
Essays be but as they should be competently stocked with Experiments, it is the
Readers own fault if he be not a Learner by them: for indeed when a Writer
acquaints me only with his own Thoughts or Conjectures, without enriching his
discourses with any real Experiment or Observation, if he be mistaken in his
Ratiocination, I am in some dang^r of erring with him, and at least am like to
lose my time, without receiving any valuable Compensation for that great loss:
but if a Writer endeavors, by delivering new and real Observations or
Experiments, to credit his Opinions, the Case is much otherwise; for let his
Opinions be never so false, his Experiments being true, I am not obliged to
believe the former, and am left at liberty to benefit my self by the later; and
though we have erroneously superstructed upon his Experiments, yet the
foundation being solid, a more wary builder may be very much furthered by it in
the erection of more judicious and consistent Fabrics: such a Writer, if I be
not wanting to my self, will certainly teach me useful Truths, and if it be not
my fault, he can lead me into no errors; and oftentimes the very Experiments
that he delivers, besides that they may be applicable to many other purposes
unthought of by him, may be either sufficient or at least helpful to the very
discovery of the erroneousness of the Opinions they are alleged to
countenance: and I make account that a man that gives me, together with his
conjectures (though erroneous) in matters of Physiology, some noble Experiment
or Observation by which he pretends to verify them, does me no greater injury
than Galileo upon his first Invention of the Telescope would have done an
Astronomer, if he had told him, that he had discovered in Heaven those
imaginary new Stars which a late Mathematician has fancied himself to have
descried there, and at the same time had made him a Present of an excellent
Telescope, with expectation that thereby the Receiver should be made of the
Giver's Opinion; for by the help of his Instrument the Astronomer might not
only make diverse useful Observations in the Sky, and perhaps detect new Lights
there, but discern also his mistake that gave it him.

After what has been said, Pyrophilus, of the Usefulness of experimental
Essays, we must proceed to say something concerning the Manner of writing them:
but because you will also expect to receive some account of the ensuing
Discourses, I shall not treat of those two Subjects apart, but, in discoursing
of the following Essays, shall take occasion to acquaint you with part of my
thoughts concerning such kind of Composures in general, the other
Considerations belonging to the same Subject being already upon several
Occasions dispersed among, and to be met with in, the ensuing Discourses
themselves.

And first, as for the style of our experimental Essays, I suppose you will
readily find that I have endeavored to write rather in a Philosophical than a
Rhetorical strain, as desiring that my expressions should be rather clear and
significant, than curiously adorned: For, to a subject of the serious and
important Nature of Physiology, that saying may unquestionably be applied,
Ornari res ipsa negat, contenta doceri. And certainly in these Discourses,
where our design is only to inform Readers, not to delight or persuade them,
Perspicuity ought to be esteemed at least one of the best Qualifications of a
style, and to affect needless Rhetorical Ornaments in setting down an
Experiment, or explicating something abstruse in Nature, were little less
improper than it were (for him that designs not to look directly upon the Sun
it self) to paint the Eye-glasses of a Telescope, whose clearness is their
Commendation, and in which even the most delightful Colors cannot so much
please the eye as they would hinder the sight. And that it may not be
suspected, that those that would not have it requisite to employ a florid style
in treating of Philosophical Subjects, do but in their own excuse deny the
necessity of such Rhetorical Embellishments as they are not able to afford
their Composures, give me leave to subjoyn, that it was not an unpolished
Naturalist, but that Prince of Orators, Cicero himself, who made this studious
Declaration, Omne (says he) quod de re bona dilucide dicitur, praeclare mihi
dici videtur: istiusmodi autem res velle ornate dicere, puerile est; plane
autem and perspicue expedire posse, docti and intelligentis Viri. But I must
not suffer my self to slip unawares into the Common place of the unfitness of
too spruce a style for serious and weighty matters; and yet I approve not that
dull and insipid way of writing which is practiced by many Chemists, even when
they digress from Physiological Subjects: for though a Philosopher need not be
sollicitous that his style should delight its Reader with his Floridnesse, yet
I think he may very well be allowed to take a Care that it disgust not his
Reader by its Flatness, especially when he does not so much deliver Experiments
or explicate them, as make Reflections or Discourses on them; for on such
Occasions he may be allowed the liberty of recreating his Reader and himself,
and manifesting that he declined the Ornaments of Language, not ou^ of
Necessity, but Discretion, which forbids them to be used where they may darken
as well as adorn the Subject they are applied to. Thus (to resume our former
Comparison) though it were foolish to color or enamel upon the glasses of
Telescopes, yet to gild or otherwise embellish the Tubes of them, may render
them more acceptable to the Users, without at all lessening the Clearness of
the Object to be looked at through them.

And as for Exotic Words and Terms borrowed from other Languages, though I
expect that Persons not conversant in the Philosophical Composures written
(especially of late) in our Language will be apt to suspect me for the willing
Author of diverse new Words and Expressions, yet as for you, Pyrophilus, who
peruse other then Moral, Theological, and Historical Books in English, and find
how much use is made in them of Exotic Terms, I hope you will find that I have
not at all affected them, but have rather studiously declined the use of those
which Custom has not rendered familiar, unless it be to avoid the frequent and
unwelcome Repetition of the same word, (so troublesome to the Ear, and so much
forbidden by Orators) or for some peculiar significancy of some such Word,
whose Energy cannot be well expressed in our Language, at least without a
tedious Circumlocutioo. And in such cases, Pyrophilus, I suppose a Writer may
be allowed to use Exotic Terms, especially when Custom ha^ not only Denizon'd
them, but brought them into request. For as in the Fashions of Clothes, though
perhaps Fools begin them, yet Wise men, when they are once generolly received,
scruple not to follow them, because then obstinately to decline them would be
as ridiculously singular as at first it would have been to begin them: so in
Exotic Words, when Custom has once made them familiar and esteemed,
scrupulous^y to decline the use of them may be as well a fault, as needlessly to
employ them: For it is not the Use but the Affectation of them that is unworthy
a Philosopher. And from the latter of those I hope I have kept my self far
enough: For I should think my self guilty of a very Childish vanity, if the use
I made of Languages were so to write as to be the less understood. But besides
the unintentional deficiencies of my style, I have knowingly and purposely
transgressed the Laws of Oratory in one particular, namely, in making sometimes
my Periods or Parentheses overlong: for when I could not within the Compass of
a regular Period comprise what I thought requisite to be delivered at once, I
chose rather to neglect the Precepts of Rhetoricians, than the mention of those
things which I thought pertinent to my Subject, and useful to you, my Reader.
And for this fault, Pyrophilus, since I have made my self guilty of it but for
your sake, I think I ought to obtain your pardon at least as easily as my own,
since barely to keep you from losing any thing that I conceived might be
serviceable to you, I knowingly expose my style to be censured as
disproportionate to it self.

The next thing, Pyrophilus, of which I am to give you an account, is, why I
have in the ensuing Essays delivered many Experiments and Observations, which
may seem slight and easy, and some of them obvious also, or else perhaps
mentioned by others already. To satisfy you about this, I must inform you that
many of the Particulars which we are now considering, were in my first Design
collected in order to a Continuation of the Lord Verulam's Sylva Sylvarum, or
Natural History. And that my intended Centuries might resemble his, to which
they were to be annexed, it was exquisite that such kind of Experiments and
Observations as we have been newly speaking of, should make up a considerable
part of them. And indeed it were to be wished, that such inquisitive Persons as
cannot be at the Charge, or have not the opportunity, of making new
Experiments, would busy themselves, as they have opportunity, in industriously
collecting and carefully setting down the Phenomenon to be met with without the
Assistance of new Experiments, especially such particulars as seem either to be
of moment in order to the hinting or Confirmation of some Considerable Truth,
or to the Detection of some Applauded Error, or else to have bin, though
obvious enough, yet little taken notice of. For I am confident that very much
may be done toward the Improvement of Physiology by a due Consideration of and
reflection on the obvious Phenomenon of Nature, and those things which are
almost in every bodies power to know, if he please but seriously to heed them;
and I make account that attention alone might quickly furnish us with one half
of the History of Nature, as well as industry is requisite, by new Experiments,
to enrich us with the other. And therefore I confess I think my self beholding
to him that first makes me take notice of what I might easily have known, but
heeded not before; it not seldom happening, that we are prejudiced by, though
we do not complain of that ignorance from which we might relieve our selves, if
we did but diligently turn our eyes to the Observations wherewith even
neighboring and familiar Objects would, if duly consulted, present us. But I
digress, and therefore must step back into the way, and tell you, that the
reasons why I first designed the Narrative of what I had tried and observed for
a Continuation of Sir Francis Bacons Natural History, you will meet with in my
Preface to that specimen of the intended Continuation, which I have given in
those of my Essays that treat Of Promiscuous Experiments: and the reason why I
have since declined that succinct way of Writing, is, for the sake of
Pyrophilus, that I might have, in a more free and uncircumscribed way of
discoursing, a greater Liberty to insist on and manifesf the Reasonableness of
such Animadversions as I thought seasonable for a Person, who, though a great
Proficient in the other parts of Philosophy, is but a Beginner in Experimental
Learning. And the second Reason why I have often made use of seemingly slight
Experiments, is, because such are more easily and cheaply tried, and they being
alleged for the most part to prove some Assertion, or credit some Admonition,
I thought their Easiness or Obviousness fitter to recommend them, than
depretiate them; and I judged it somewhat unkind, or at least indiscreet, to
refer you most commonly for proof of what I delivered, to such tedious, such
difficult, or such intricate Processes, as either You can scarce well make,
unless You be already what I desire my Experiments should help to make You, a
skilful Chemist; or else are as difficult to be well judged, as the truth they
should discover is to be discerned. I was also hopeful that the Easiness of
diverse things inviting you to make trial of them, and keeping You from being
disappointed in Your Expectations, the success of Your first attempts would
encourage You to make trial also of more nice and difficult Experiments. And
till You have tried them, do me the right to think that I deal not unsincerely
with You.

The Reasons of my having diverse times recorded Experiments which You may have
formerly met with, and perchance even in Printed Books, I have elsewhere
deduced in a peculiar Discourse on that Subject: and therefore shall now only
add, that by reason of my being as yet a stranger to the German Tongue, wherein
the most and best Chemical Books are said to be written, I may have set down
diverse Chemical Experiments and Observations that are extant already in that
Hermetical Language, (if I may so call it) without having had them from their
Dutch Publishers, or so much as dreamed of their having been divulged by any
man. I have likewise in my Preface to the Essays that you will meet with under
the Title of Promiscuous Experiments, given You an account why I have not
refrained from mentioning diverse things which may seem very slight, because
very obvious: And I have long had thoughts to inform You in an entire Discourse
to be written on purpose, why I think that even the trivial, and therefore
slighted, truths of Physiology ought not to be despised. And for my own part, I
shall not scruple to confess to You, that I disdain not to take Notice even of
Ludicrous Experiments, and think that the Plays of Boys may sometimes deserve
to be the Study of Philosophers: For as when we go a Hunting, though the flight
of the Hare and the pursuit of the Dogs be to us but sport and recreation, yet
the Beasts themselves are extremely earnest, the one to save his threatened life
by flight, and the other to overtake his desired Prey; so Nature acts very
seriously in all the other things that we make sports with, and is in very good
earnest, whether we Men be so or no.

Perhaps you will wonder, Pyrophilus, that in almost every one of the following
Essays I should speak so doubtingly, and use so often, Perhaps, It seems, It Is
not improbable, and such other expressions as argue a diffidence of the truth
of the Opinions I incline to, and that I should be so shy of laying down
Principles, and sometimes of so much as venturing at Explications. But I must
freely confess to you, Pyrophilus, that having met with many things of which I
could give my self no one probable cause, and some things of which several
Causes may be assigned so differing, as not to agree in any thing unless in
their being all of them probable enough, I have often found such Difficulties
in searching into the Causes and Manner of things: and I am so sensible of my
own Disability to surmount those Difficulties, that I dare speak confidently
and positively of very few things, except of Matters of fact. And when I
venture to deliver any thing by way of Opinion, I should, if it were not for
mere shame, speak yet more diffidently than I have been wont to do. It Is not
that I at all condemn the Practice of those Inquisitive Wits that take upon
them to explicate to us even the abstrusest Phenomenon of Nature: For I am so
far from censuring them, that I admire them when their Endeavors succeed, and
applaud them even where they do but fairly attempt. But I think it is fit for a
man to know his own Abilities and Weaknesses, and not to think himself obliged
to imitate all that he thinks fit to praise. I know also that the way to get
Reputation, is, to venture to explicate things, and promote Opinions: For by
that course a Writer shall be sure to be applauded by one sort of men, and be
mentioned by many others; whereas by the way of Writing to which I have
condemned my self, I can hope for little better among the more daring and less
considerate sort of men, should you show them these Papers, than to pass for a
Drudge of greater Industry than Reason, and fit for little more than to collect
Experiments for more rational and Philosophical heads to explicate and make use
of. But I am content, provided Experimental Learning be ^eally promoted, to
contribute even in the least plausible Way to the Advancement of it, and had
rather not only be an Underbuilder, but even dig in the Quarries for Materials
toward so useful a Structure, as a solid body of Natural Philosophy, than not
do something toward the Erection of it. Nor have my thoughts been altogether
idle and wanting to themselves, in framing Notions, and attempting to devise
Hypotheses, which might avoid the deficiencies observed in other men's Theories
and Explications: but I have hitherto, though not always, yet not unfrequently,
found that what pleased me for a while, as fairly comporting with the
Observations on which such Notions were grounded, was soon after disgraced by
some further or new Experiment, which at the time of the framing of those
Notions was unknown to me, or not consulted with. And indeed I have the less
envied Many (for I say not All) of those Writers who have taken upon them to
deliver the Causes of things, and explicate the Mysteries of Nature, since I
have had opportunity to observe how many of their Doctrines, after having been
for a while applauded and even admired, have afterward been confuted by the
discovery of some new Phenomenon in Nature, which was either unknown to such
Writers, or not sufficiently considered by them. For I have found it happen as
well to many others (that have published their Opinions) as to me (who have been
more private in my Guesses) in our Theories built on either too obvious or too
few Experiments, what is wont to happen to the Falsifiers of Coin: for as
Counterfeit pieces of Money will endure some of them One Proof, as the
Touchstone, others Another, as Aqua fortis, some a third, as the Hammer or the
Scales, but none of them will endure All proofs; so the Notions I mention (in
which sort I fear too great a part of those hitherto extant may be comprised)
may agree very fairly with this or that or the other Experiment, but being made
too hastily, and without Consulting a competent number of them, it is to be
feared that there may still after a while be found one or other, (if not many)
their Inconsistency with which will betray and discredit them.

I have notwithstanding all this on some occasions adventured to deliver my
Opinion, not that I am very confident of being less subject to err in those
particulars than in any of the others wherein I have refrained from interposing
any Conjecture, but because I would manifest to You, that I scruple not to run
the same venture with those incomparably better Naturalists, that have thought
it no disgrace in difficult matters rather to hazard the being sometimes
mistaken, than not to afford Inquisitive Persons their best Assistance toward
the Discovery of Truth.

And because, Pyrophilus, in the Reasons and Explications I offer of Natural
Effects, I have not for the most part an immediate recourse to the Magnitude,
Figure, and Motion of Atoms, or of the least Particles of Bodies, I hold it not
unfit to give You here some account of this Practice, not so much for the sake
of those few Passages in my Essays that may be concerned in it, as for that of
many Learned men, especially Physicians, whose useful Writings begin to be
undervalu'd, and are in danger to be despised, by an Opinion taken up from the
mis-understood Doctrine of some eminent Atomists, as if no speculations in
Natural Philosophy could be rational, wherein any other causes of things are
assigned than Atoms and their Properties. I consider then, that generally
speaking, to render a reason of an Effect or Phenomenon, is to deduce it from
something else in Nature more known than it self, and that consequently there
may be diverse kinds of Degrees of Explication of the same thing. For although
such Explications be the most satisfactory to the Understanding, wherein it is
shown how the effect is produced by the more primitive and Catholic Affection
of Matter, namely, bulk, shape and motion, yet are not these Explications to be
despised, wherein particular effects are deduced from the more obvious and
familiar Qualities or states of Bodies, such as Heat, Cold, Weight, Fluidity,
Hardness, Fermentation, etc. Though these themselves do probably depend upon
those three universal ones formerly named. For in the search after Natural
Causes, every new measure of Discovery does both instruct and gratify the
Understanding, though I readily confess, that the nearer the discovered Causes
are to those that are highest in the scale or series of Causes, the more is the
Intellect both gratified and instructed.

I think it therefore very fit and highly useful, that some speculative Wits
well versed in Mathematical Principles and Mechanical Contrivances, should
employ themselves in deducing the chiefest Modes or Qualities of Matter, such
as are Heat, Cold, etc. and the States or conditions of it, (if we think fit to
distinguish these from its Qualities) as fluid, firm, brittle, flexible, and
the like, from the abovementioned most primitive and simple Affections
thereof. And I think the Commonwealth of Learning exceedingly beholden to
those Heroic Wits that do so much as plausibly perform something in this kind.
But I think too, we are not to despise all those Accounts of particular Effects
which are not immediately deduced from those primitive Affections of either
Atoms or the insensible Particles of Matter, but from the familiar, though not
so universal, Qualities of things, as cold, heat, weight, hardness, and the
like. And perhaps it would be none of the least advantages which would accrue
to Naturalists from a satisfactory explication of such Qualities by the most
primitive and simple ones, that it would much shorten the explication of
particular Phenomenon: For though there be many things in Nature that may be
readily enough made out by the Size, Motion, and Figure of the small Parts of
Matter, yet there are many more that cannot be well explained without a great
deal of Discourse, and diverse successive Deductions of one thing from another,
if the purposed effect must be deduced from such primary and Universal Causes;
whereas if we be allowed to take the Notions of Cold, Heat, and the like
Qualities for granted, the explications and proofs may be much more
compendiously made. He gives some Reason why Stones and Iron and all other
heavy Bodies will swim in Quicksilver, except Gold, which will sink in it,
that teaches, that all those other Bodies are in specie (as they speak) or bulk
for bulk, lighter than Quicksilver, whereas Gold is heavier. He, I say, may be
allowed to have rendered a Reason of the thing proposed, that thus refers the
Phenomenon to that known Affection of almost all Bodies here below, which we
call Gravity, though he do not deduce the Phenomenon from Atoms, nor give us
the cause of Gravity, as indeed scarce any Philosopher has yet given us a
satisfactory Account of it. So if it be demanded, why, if the sides of a blown
Bladder be somewhat squeezed betwixt ones hands, they will, upon the removal of
that which compressed them, fly out again, and restore the Bladder to its
former figure and dimensions, it is not saying nothing to the purpose, to say
that this happens from the spring of those Aerial Particles wherewith the
Bladder is filled, though he that says this be not perhaps able to declare
whence proceeds the Motion of Restitution, either in a Particle of compressed
Air, or any other bent spring.

And as for the Reasons of things assigned by Physicians, they must be most of
them despised, unless we will allow of such explications as deduce not things
from Atoms or their Affections, but only either from secondary Qualities, or
from the more particular Properties of Mixed Bodies. If a Physician be asked why
Rhubarb does commonly cure Loosenesses, he will probably tell you as a Reason,
that Rhubarb is available in such Diseases, because it has both a Laxative
virtue, whereby it evacuates Choler, and such other bad humors as are wont in
such cases to be the peccant Matter, and an astringent Quality, whereby it
afterward arrests the Flux: But if you further ask him the Reason why Rhubarb
purges, and why it purges Choler more than any other humor, it is ten to one he
will not be able to give you a satisfactory answer. And indeed, not only the
manner whereby Purgative Medicines Work, but those other Properties whereby
some Bodies are Diuretic, others Sudorifick, others Sarcotick, etc. are not I
fear so easy to be intelligibly made out as men imagine, and yet a skilful
Physician would justly think himself wronged, if the Reasons he renders of
things in his own Profession were denied the Name of Reasons, because made
without recourse to Atomical Principles. And indeed, there are oftentimes so
many subordinate Causes between particular Effects and the most General Causes
of things, that there is left a large field wherein to exercise Men's Industry
and Reason, if they will but solidly enough deduce the Properties of things
from more general and familiar Qualities, and also intermediate Causes (if I
may so call them) from one another. And I am the more backward to despise such
kind of Reasons, because I elsewhere declare, that there are Some (for I do not
say, Many) things, as particularly the Origin of Local Motion, of which even
by the Atomical Doctrine no Physical Cause can well be rendered; since either
such things must be ascribed to God, who is indeed the true, but the
supernatural Cause of them, or else it must be said, (as it was by the old
Epicureans) that they did ever belong to Matter, which, considering that the
Notion of Matter may be complete without them, is not to give a Physical
efficient cause of the things in Question, but in effect to confess that they
have no such Causes. But of this elsewhere more.

In the mean time, that you may not be drawn away to undervalue such Writers as
I have been pleading for, nor think you ought to refrain from writing what
occurs to you, though true and useful, unless you deduce it, or at least can do
so, from the Epicurean Notions, I shall here briefly represent to you, (what
perhaps you will not hereafter think a despicable suggestion) that there are
two very distinct Ends that Men may propound to themselves in studying Natural
Philosophy. For some Men care only to Know Nature, others desire to Command
Her: or to express it otherwise, some there are who desire but to Please
themselves by the Discovery of the Causes of the known Phenomenon, and others
would be able to produce new ones, and bring Nature to be serviceable to their
particular Ends, whether of Health, or Riches, or sensual Delight. Now as I
shall not deny but that the Atomical, the Cartesian, or some such Principles,
are likely to afford the most of satisfaction to those speculative Wits that
aim but at the knowledge of Causes; so I think that the other sort of men may
very delightfully and successfully prosecute their ends, by collecting and
making Variety of Experiments and Observations, since thereby learning the
Qualities and Properties of those particular Bodies they desire to make use of,
and observing the power that diverse Chemical Operations, and other ways of
handling Matter, have of altering such Bodies, and varying their effects upon
one another, they may by the help of Attention and Industry be able to do many
Things, some of them very Strange, and more of them very Useful in humane life.
When a Gunner or a Soldier employs Gunpowder, it is not necessary that he
should consider, or so much as know, of what and of how many Ingredients (much
less of what kind of Atoms) it is made, and the proportion and manner wherein
they are mingled; but the Notice Experience gives him of the power of that
admirable Concrete, as it is made up and brought to his hands, suffices to
enable him to perform things with it, that nothing but their being common and
unheeded can keep from being admired. The Physician that has observed the
Medicinal virtues of Treacle, without knowing so much of the names, much less
the Nature of each of the sixty and odd Ingredients whereof it is compounded,
may cure many Patients with it. And though it must not be denied, that it is an
advantage as well as a satisfaction, to know in general how the Qualities of
things are deducible from the primitive Affections of the smallest parts of
Matter, yet whether we know that or no, if we know the Qualities of this or
that Body they compose, and how it is disposed to work upon other Bodies, or be
brought on by them, we may, without ascending to the Top in the series of
Causes, perform things of great Moment, and such as without the diligent
Examination of particular Bodies would, I fear, never have been found out a
priori even by the most profound Contemplators. We see that the Artificers that
never dreamed of the Epicurean Philosophy, have accommodated Mankind with a
Multitude of useful Inventions, And Paracelsus, who (besides that he seems none
of the most piercing and speculative Wits) sure had little recourse to Atomical
Notions, if he ever so much as heard of them, was able to perform some things
that were truly admirable, besides those he vainly boasted of; as may appear
not only by what I elsewhere represent, but by what Oporinus himself (as
severely as he otherwise writes against his deserted Master) confesses he saw
of the stupendous cures which Paracelsus wrought with his famous Laudanum,
(whatever he made it of.) But we need not go far to find a noble Example to our
present purpose, since we see that the bare making of trials with the
Lodestone, and Irons touched by it, though the Experimentors were ignorant (as
some fear we yet are) of the true and first Causes of Magnetical Phenomenon,
have produced Inventions of greater use to Mankind, than were ever made by
Leucippus, or Epicurus, or Aristotle, or Telesius, or Campanella, or perhaps
any of the speculative Devisers of new Hypotheses, whole Contemplations aiming
for the most part but at the solving, not the increasing or applying, of the
Phenomenon of Nature, it is no wonder they have been more ingenious than
fruitful, and have Hitherto more delighted than otherwise benefitted Mankind: I
say Hitherto, because though Experience warrants me so to speak now, yet I am
not unwilling to think that Hereafter, and perhaps in no long time, when
Physiological Theories shall be better established, and built upon a more
competent number of Particulars, the Deductions that may be made from them may
free them from all Imputation of Barrenness. But of these things I otherwhere
(though not as I remember in any of the following Essays) more fully discourse.

And therefore I shall now resume the Subject that occasioned this long
Excursion, and add to what I said in excuse of my venturing sometimes to
deliver something as my Opinion in difficult or controverted cases, that I must
declare to you, Pyrophilus, that as I desire not my Opinions should have more
Weight with you than the Proofs brought to countenance them will give them, so
you must not expect that I should think my self obliged to adhere to them any
longer than those Considerations that first made me embrace them shall seem of
greater Moment than any that I can meet with in opposition to them. For
Aristotle spoke like a Philosopher, when to justify his Dissent from his
Master Plato, he said among other things, That for the sake of Truth, men
(especially being Philosophers) ought to overthrow even their own Tenants
((...). Ethic. Nicom. lib. 1. cap. 6.
) And though for a man to change his opinions, without seeing more reason to
forsake them than he had to assent to them, be a Censurable Levity and
Inconstancy of mind; yet to adhere to whatever he once took for truth, though
by Accession of more light he discover it to be erroneous, is but a proud
Obstinacy very injurious to Truth, and very ill becoming the sense we ought to
have of humane frailties. And it ought to be esteemed much less disgraceful to
quit an Error for a Truth, than to be guilty of the Vanity and Perverseness of
believing a thing still, because we once believed it. And certainly, till a Man
is sure he is infallible, it is not fit for him to be unalterable.

You will easily discern, Pyrophilus, that I have purposely in the ensuing
Essays refrained from swelling my Discourses with solemn and elaborate
Confutations of other men's Opinions, unless it be in some very few Cases, where
I judged that they might prove great impediments to the Advancement of
Experimental Learning; and even such Opinions I have been wary of meddling with,
unless I supposed I could bring Experimental Objections against them. For it is
none of my Design to engage my self with or against any one Sect of
Naturalists, but barely to invite you to embrace or refuse Opinions as they are
consonant to Experiments, or clear Reasons deduced thence, or at least
analogous thereunto, without thinking it yet seasonable to contend very
earnestly for those other Opinions which seem not yet determinable by such
Experiments or Reasons. And indeed, to allude to our former Comparison, I would
endeavor to destroy those curious but groundless structures that men have
built up of Opinions alone, by the same way (and with as little Noise) by which
such fantastical structures as those I mentioned to have seen at Leyden may be
demolished. To destroy which 'twere needless to bring battering Engines, since
nothing is requisite to that effect but an increase of Light. And Experience
has shown us, that diverse very plausible and radicated Opinions, such as that
of the Unhabitableness of the Torrid Zone, of the Solidity of the Celestial
part of the World, of the Blood's being conveyed from the Heart by the Veins
(not the Arteries) to the outward parts of the body, are generally grown out of
request, upon the appearing of those new Discoveries with which they are
inconsistent, and would have been abandoned by the Generality of Judicious
Persons, though no man had made it his business purposely to write Confutations
of them: so true is that Vulgar saying, that Rectum est Index sui and Obliqui.

But when at any time, Pyrophilus, I have been induced to oppose others, as I
have not denied my self the freedom that is requisite unto Loyalty to Truth, so
I have endeavored to use that Moderation and Civility that is due to the
persons of deserving Men. And therefore you shall find me not only in one Essay
oppose an Author whom in another I applaude, but sometimes you may find me
commending a Writer in the very same Page, perhaps, where I am endeavoring to
disprove his Opinions: For I love to speak of Persons with Civility, though of
Things with Freedom. Nor do I think it reasonable, either that any man's
Reputation should protect his Errors, or that the Truth should fare the worse
for his sake that delivers it. And as for the (very much too common) Practice
of many, who write, as if they thought, railing at a man's Person, or wrangling
about his Words, necessary to the Confutation of his Opinions; besides that I
think such a quarrelsome and injurious way of writing does very much misbecome
both a Philosopher and a Christian, methinks it is as unwise, as it is
provoking. For if I civilly endeavor to reason a man out of his Opinions, I
make my self but one work to do, namely, to convince his Understanding: but if
in a bitter or exasperating way I oppose his Errors, I increase the
Difficulties I would surmount, and have as well his Affections against me as
his Judgment: and it is very uneasy to make a Proselyte of him that is not
only a Dissenter from us, but an Enemy to us. And that which makes me the more
dislike the bitter way of disputing which I am reprehending, is, that I have
often observed, that though one of the Disputants alone be at first in the
fault, yet the other is most commonly drawn to share in the Guilt, though to
contract it he must imitate his Adversary. For as a mad Dog by biting others is
wont to make those he bites run mad like himself, and do promiscuous Mischief;
so these so provoking Writers are wont to enrage those they offend, and infect
them also with their own virulent distemper. But, Pyrophilus, when I (...) of
dealing respectfully with those I dissent from, I (...) be understood of such
as have well deserved of Expe^^mental Learning, or at least been candid and
sober (...) quirers after Truth. For, as I think that it would much discourage
any prudent Person from venturing to communicate what he thinks he knows to the
World, to find that an Error proceeding from humane Weakness, or the Darkness
and Abstrusity of things, seldom escapes being detected without being made
matter of disgrace or reproach to the Author: so on the other side, when vain
Writers, to get themselves a name, have presumed to obtrude upon the credulous
World such things, under the Notion of Experimental Truths, or even great
Mysteries, as neither themselves ever took the pains to make trial of, nor
received from any credible Persons that professed themselves to have tried
them; in such cases, I see not how we are obliged to treat Writers that took no
pains to keep themselves from mistaking or deceiving, nay, that cared not how
they abuse us to win themselves a name, with the same respect that we owe to
those, who though they have missed of the Truth, believed they had found it,
and both intended to deliver It, and took some (though not prosperous) pains
that they might convey nothing else to us.

I fear it will be requisite, Pyrophilus, to tell you why in some of the
following Essays you will meet with many Passages transcribed out of other
Authors, and in some very few or none at all. And therefore to give you first a
short Account of the Particular mentioned last, I must mind you, that 'twas
most suitable both to my Humor and Design to deliver only those things
wherewith my own Observations, or Trials, or Thoughts, had furnished me,
without troubling you with the Repetition of those things which had been
delivered by others already; those kind of Repetitions, unless they be made
upon some such grounds as we shall presently mention, seeming to me to be as
vainly as ambitiously affected by many Writers, and being deservedly
troublesome to Judicioas Readers, who can easily discern that they add much
more to the bulk of Books than of Knowledge. But this notwithstanding,
Pyrophilus, I thought my self obliged on some occasions, for your sake, to
overcome my Natural Averseness to stuff any Writings of mine with Passages
transcribed from those of others, partly for the Reasons elsewhere insisted on,
and partly for diverse others. As First, because some Particulars are of that
Strangeness, and of that Moment, that they need and deserve to be verified by
more than a single Attestation. Next, because according to the Greek Proverb,
(...), it is not properly to say over the same thing again, when the
Observation, Experiment, or other Passage of an Author, is either illustrated
or otherwise improved by the Repetition, or else applied to some purpose
differing from that to which the Author brought it: That being applicable to
many a single Experiment or Observation which Seneca somewhere says, Quaestion.
Natural. lib. 6. cap. 5. Epistola 64.
Nulla Res consummata est dum incipit; And, Etiamsi omnia a Veteribus inventa
sunt, hoc semper novum erit, Vsus, and Inventorum ab aliis Scientia and
Dispositio. And thirdly, because as the Planets and other Stars have (according
to Astrologers) in their great Synods or Conjunctions, much more powerful, and
sometimes other Influences on the Air and some other sublunary Parts of the
World, than are ascribed to one or two of them out of that Aspect; so diverse
Particulars, which whilst they lay single and scattered among the Writings of
several Authors were inconsiderable, when they come to be laid together in
order to the same Design, may oftentimes prove highly useful to Physiology in
their Conjunction, wherein one of them may serve to prove one part or
circumstance of an important Truth, and another to explicate another, and so
all of them may conspire together to verify that Saying, Et quae non prosunt
singula, multa juvant. It may then I hope suffice to justify me on this
occasion, that not appealing to other Writers as to Judges, but as to
Witnesses, nor employing what I have found already published by them barely as
Ornaments to imbellish my Writings, and much less as Oracles by their Authority
to demonstrate my Opinions, but as Certificates to attest Matters of fact, I
may hope that their Testimonies will as well be illustrated by mine, as mine by
their's, and that all of them may contribute to your better Information.

And if, Pyrophilus, you grant that upon these Considerations I have not done
amiss to apply to my purpose diverse of those things which I found delivered
pertinently to them by those Writers which I chanced to cast mine Eyes on, I
suppose you will not think I need to make you an Apology for my having made
most use of the Passages of those Writers which I suppose will be most
difficult to be met with (such as are many Books of Navigations and other
Voyages) and especially of French Books not yet translated into English or
Latin. And I think I shall less need to make an Excuse for my having for the
most part set down the Passages I recited in the Authors own Words, that being
one of the readiest ways I know to satisfy the Reader, and avoid injuring the
Writer. And indeed, I have met with abundance of Quotations wherein the
Transcriber does so mistake, or so mis-represent the cited Authors Meaning,
sometimes out of Inadvertence, but sometimes too I fear out of Indulgence to
his own Hypothesis, that if ever I should be tempted to trouble the World with
any of my thoughts, I would beseech my Readers, not to look upon any thing as
my Opinion or Assertion that is not delivered in the entire Series of my own
Words; lest a Transcriber should make me deliver those things resolutely and
dogmatically, which I deliver but haesitantly and conjecturally; and lest I
should seem to set down those things Positively as Processes for whose success
I undertake, which I record but by way of Narrative.

For my so frequently mentioning what I have borrowed from other Writers, or
received from my friends, I expect to be excused by that of Pliny, Benignum est
(ut arbitror) and plenum ingenui Pudoris, confiteri per quos profeceris. Though
I have seen diverse Modern Writers that so boldly usurp the Observations and
Experiments of others, that I might justly apply to them what the same Pliny
annexes; Scito enim, conferentem Authors me deprehendisse a juratissimis and
proximis Veteres transcriptos ad Verbum, neque nominatos etc. If other Writers
should not prove more equitable (for I will not say more thankful) than such as
these, they would quickly discourage those whose aims are not very noble and
sincere, from gratifying the Public with Inventions, whose Praise and Thanks
would be usurped by such as will not name them. But perhaps they would be more
just if they reflected on what our Author further adds, Obnoxii profecto animi
and infelicis ingenii est, deprehendi in furto malle quam mutuum reddere, cum
praesertim sors fiet ex Vsura.

And now I have said this concerning the Passages I have borrowed from other
Authors, it will not be improper to add something about those I have declined
to borrow. For you may possibly marvel, that in diverse of the Historical parts
of my Writings I have omitted such Testimonies either of Pliny, Solinus,
Aristotle, Theophrastus, Aelian, or perchance some of the ancient Physicians
themselves (who yet, as more conversant with things, are usually more credible)
as seems very pertinent to my Discourse, and fit to prove what I design. But
when I shall come to entertain you about Natural History, I doubt not but to
satisfy you with the Reasons I shall offer you of this Practice. In the mean
time, I shall only tell you in short, that though I have a just respect for
those Great Names I have mentioned; yet the sense I have of the difficulties I
have found to make and relate an Observation accurately and faithfully enough
for a Naturalist to rely on; and the occasions I have had of looking into
diverse matters of fact delivered in their Writings, with a bold and an
impartial Curiosity; have made me conclude so many of those Traditions to be
either certainly false, or not certainly true, that except what they deliver
upon their own particular Knowledge, or with peculiar Circumstances that may
recommend them to my belief, I am very shy of building any thing of moment upon
foundations that I esteem so unsure, and much less upon the suspected Passages
that Wecker, Paracelsus, Porta, etc. abound with. And therefore (though I well
enough know how much I impoverish my Discourse by this Niceness) yet I do not
think it fair to employ that as an Argument to convince you that has not that
operation upon me my self. And I the rather take notice of my forbearing to
make use of the Historical Traditions and Chemical or Magical Secrets that I
meet in the abovementioned Authors, or any other makers of Collections, unless
the Narrative be (as I was saying) expressly enough delivered upon the Writer's
Personal Knowledge, or that of some other credible Witness; not only because I
would give you an account why several of my Writings are unfurnished with what
most Readers look on as the richest Ornaments of other men's, but because if
this wariness could be introduced, it would be the most effectual way of
persuading men to write those kind of Tracts I would recommend, Physiological
Essays. For he that will confine himself so strictly, will scarce be often
tempted on Physical Subjects, to write either Systems or Volumns.

Another things, Pyrophilus, I must needs advertise you of in reference to the
ensuing Discourses, which is, That besides those Deficiencies in point of
Ratiocination which are due to my personal Disabilities, I have purposely let
pass some Few (and but very Few) Inferences which I discerned well enough not
to be cogent, because I was willing to acquaint you upon some particular
Occasions with all the Experiments then occurring to me, which I thought might
contribute to the Illustration of the Subject in hand, though each of them
apart did not irrefragably, nor indeed so much as strongly infer the Conclusion
in order to which they seemed to have been mentioned as Premises. And this
Practice I made the less scruple of, because I was willing to exercise thereby
your Reasoning Faculty, and try how far you would discern the Tendency of
several things, all of them pertinent enough to the Subject in hand, but not
all of them concluding to the main design in order whereunto they were
alleged. And I supposed that the things by me mentioned, though not
conclusive, being yet Experimental, the mention of them, which in a strictly
Logical way of reasoning must have been forborne, might well make you amends for
the Exercise to which I intended they should put your Reason.

There remains yet one thing, Pyrophilus, of which I suppose you will expect I
should give you an Account; and that is, why in the ensuing Essays I have
mentioned diverse Experiments which I have not plainly and circumstantially
enough delivered. To satisfy you concerning which, I must represent to you,
First, That though for your sake I have oftentimes, contrary to my Reason and
Genius, delivered things, to make them more clear, in such a Multitude of
words, that I now seem even to my self to have in diverse places been guilty of
Verbosity; yet in some other passages, treating of things which Use had
rendered very familiar to me, I may have, to shun Prolixity, unawares slipped
into the Contrary Extreme. Secondly, There are some Mechanical Experiments
wherein I have purposely omitted some manual Circumstances, because I was
unwilling to prejudice some ingenious Tradesmen, who make either a Livelihood,
or at least a gain, by the sale of the productions of such Experiments. And I
made the less scruple to conceal such Mechanical Circumstances, (if I may so
call them) because they were not necessary to the Physiological Knowledge of
the Experiments: in naming of which my intention was to teach you rather
Philosophy than Trades. Thirdly, I mentioned some things but darkly, either
because I received them upon Condition of secrecy, or because some ingenious
persons that communicated them to me, or others to whom I imparted them, do yet
make, and need to make, a pecuniary advantage of them. Fourthly, And some
things that, either having been the fruits of my own Labors, or obtained in
Exchange of such, are freely at my own disposal, I have not yet thought fit so
plainly to reveal, not out of an envious design of having them buried with me,
but that I may be always provided with some Rarity to barter with those
Secretists that will not part with one Secret but in Exchange for another, and
think nothing worth their desiring that is known already to above one or two
Persons. And I think it very lawful to reserve always some concealed
Experiments by me, wherewith to obtain the secrets of others, which being
thereby gained, the other (as being no longer necessary to the former end) may
freely be communicated.

And think not, Pyrophilus, that the bare mention of an Experiment as having
been performed, though the way of making it be concealed, is of no use, if the
Relator of the Experiment be a Person that may safely be credited: For it is
something to be assured that such and such things have been really performed,
and consequently are possible to be done, though we be not yet particularly
acquainted with the means of performing them. And he tells you something, that
tells you upon his own Knowledge, that in such or such Bodies, or Ways of
operating on them, considerable things of such or such a Nature are to be met
with. And for my part, when I go a Hawking or Setting, I think my self beholden
to him that assures me that in such a field there is a Covey of Partridges,
though he does no more toward the giving me them. And it is obvious how much
Europe is beholden to Columbus for the Detection of many Countries in America
which were not discovered by him, nor perhaps till long after his Death,
because he first informed us Knowingly that there were unknown Regions beyond
that vast Ocean which severs the Old World from the New. But I begin to
digress, and therefore shall proceed to tell you, That I am the less troubled
at my Omission of the circumstantial parts of some Experiments, because I think
it will be much for your Advantage to try them over again your self. And as I
have taken care by the truth of the Experiments I have delivered to secure your
success, in case you try them aright; so I cannot be very sorry that you should
in some Particulars have a kind of Necessity laid on you to exercise your own
industry, and thereby increase your Experience.

But besides all that has been said, Pyrophilus, I must freely confess to you,
that there is one thing particularly relating to your self, which has made me
refrain from delivering in the ensuing Essays some of the chief Chemical
processes wherewith they might have been enriched. For not yet knowing with
what seriousness you will addict your self to promote experimental Philosophy,
nor what use you will make of what has been unveiledly communicated to you, I
was somewhat unwilling that some things which had cost me a great deal of pains
should yet fall into any man's hands that scorns to purchase Knowledge with
some pains, and I was desirous, in case you shall prove as industrious as I
hope you will, to have something by me to encourage and cherish your industry,
which may be more suitable to your improved Knowledge. For I must confess to
you, that in reference to the Chemical processes extant in the following
Discourses, I look upon most of them but as trifles, not only in comparison of
those things which a knowing Chemist might have delivered on the same subjects,
but even in regard of diverse processes (not impertinent to those discourses)
wherewith I my self, (as little as I am a Pretender in these Matters) am not
unacquainted: and perhaps I would have given to the following Treatises the
Title of Trifles, instead of that of Essays, if I had not been afraid of
discouraging you thereby, and if the Chemical part of them had been the chief
thing wherewith I intended to acquaint you in them. But if the reception you
give to what we have already writt^n, prove such as may encourage us to
proceed, we may p^rhaps, if God be pleased to vouchsafe us Life and
Opportunity, be invited to impart to you those more con^^^erable Chemical
Experiments, which either the Comm^nication of our friends or our own Labors
have (...) us. For it will be much in the power of the Enter^^^^ment which
these Papers shall meet with, to make them either the Beginning of our Labors
of this nature, or ^he End. And in the mean time, I think I may venture to tell
you, that, as inconsiderable as I have confessed div^rs of the Chemical
Processes mentioned in these Essays to be, yet if ever you take the pains (as I
hope you will) to (...) Experimental Essays, and confine your self to take as
little upon trust as I have done, you will perhaps be ready to believe, that
sometimes a short Essay of this nature, not to say some one single Experiment,
may have cost me more than a whole Treatise written on such a Subject, whereon
to be able without Discredit to write Books, it is almost sufficient to have
read many. And give me leave to add, that as in such kind of Composures,
oftentimes the enabling himself to give a considerable Advertisement, or even
Hint, may cost the Writer more than the making of several Experiments; so it
may be also more beneficial to the Reader than the Knowledge of them. For we
must not always measure the Considerableness of things by their most obvious
and immediate usefulness, but by their fitness to make or contribute to the
discovery of things highly useful. As, if it be true, what is reported by good
Authors of the hazel Wand, or Virgula divinatoria, though the hazel Tree be
much less considerable in reference to its fruit, or immediate productions,
than a Peach-Tree, an Orange-Tree, or even an Apple Tree; yet may it be made
much more valuable than any of them, because whereas they only present us with
fruits, this may assist us to discover in latent Mines inestimable Treasures.

I had almost forgot to advertise you, Pyrophilus, That whereas I have not been
so sollicitous as most Writers are wont to be, to swell the ensuing Essays with
the Enumeration of the various Opinions and Arguments of Authors about the
Subjects I treat of, or to adorn them with acute Sentences, fine Expressions,
or other Embellishments borrowed from eminent Writers; it has not been, because
I utterly dislike the making use of those passages in Classick or other
Authors, that may either give (among the Admirers of those Writers) some
Authority to our thoughts, or very handsomely and Emphatically express them.
For I remember, I have known it reprehended by Learned Men in Epicurus, That
though he writ very much himse^f, he would not vouchsafe in his Writings to
quote those of other Men. And that I have not refrained from making use, now
and th^n, of those Philological Ornaments of Discourse, when they readily
occurred to me, and appeared neither impertinent nor prolix, may I hope suffice
to keep me from being suspected of the Vanity of thinking my self above other
men's assistance. But the reasons of my so much declining to make use of other
men's Authority, or Expressions, were chiefly these. First, That the Weakness of
my Eyes has this long time kept me from reading almost any Books, save the
Scripture, with some Critical Expositions of it, and here and there some
Portions of the Writings of those that pretend to teach their Readers
Experimental Matters: And the unfaithfulness of my Memory as to things of no
great Moment, has made me forget almost all the little Philological and florid
Learning I was formerly acquainted with. And really, Pyrophilus, as for the
Books that treat of Natural Philosophy, I am so sensible of the smalness of the
Advantage which my Disabilities have suffered me to make of them, that instead
of being ambitious to appear a great Reader, I could be very well content to be
thought to have scarce looked upon any other Book than that of Nature. And in
the next place, Pyrophilus, though I ignore not that by this plain and
unadorned way of Writing, I unkindly deny my Essays many Embellishments which I
might give them, and which perhaps you will think they do abundantly need; yet
my frequent Distempers, Journeys, and other Avocations, not allowing me so much
time as I desired, to entertain you on Philosophical subjects, I thought it
more requisite to spend those confined hours in acquainting you with my own
thoughts, such as they are, than with those of other Men; unless (as I formerly
intimated) I can some way or other more than barely recite what I recite of
theirs. And you will easily pardon me the injury which for your sake I do my
own Reputation by this naked way of writing, if you, as well as I, think those
the profitablest Writers, or at least the kindest to their Perusers, who take
not so much Care to appear Knowing Men themselves, as to make their Readers
such.

TWO ESSAYS, Concerning the Unsuccessfulness OF EXPERIMENTS, CONTAINING Diverse
Admonitions and Observations (chiefly Chemical) touching that SVBJECT.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Herringman, Anno 1668.

Advertisement about the two following Essays.
THe Author of these Discourses had enlarged them in this second Edition with
diverse Observations and Experiments, but that he has made use of them already
in other Papers belonging to his Skeptical or Doubting Naturalist.

THE FIRST ESSAY, Of the Unsuccessfulness of EXPERIMENTS.
I Am very sorry, Pyrophilus, that to the many (elsewhere enumerated)
difficulties which you may meet with, and must therefore surmount, in the
serious and effectual prosecution of Experimental Philosophy, I must add one
discouragement more, which will perhaps as much surprise you as dishearten you;
and it is, That besides that you will find (as we elsewhere mention) many of
the Experiments published by Authors, or related to you by the persons you
converse with, false or unsuccessful, (besides this, I say) you will meet with
several Observations and Experiments, which though communicated for true by
Candid Authors or undistrusted Eye-witn^sses, or perhaps recommended to you by
your own ^xperience, may upon further trial disappoint your expectation, either
not at all succeeding constantly, or at least varying much from what you
expected.

This Advertisement may seem of so discouraging a nature, that I should much
scruple the giving it you, but that I suppose the trouble at that
unsuccessfulness which you may meet with in Experiments, may be somewhat
lessened, by your being forewarned of such contingencies: And that if you
should have the luck to make an Experiment once, without being able to perform
the same thing again, you might be apt to look upon such disappointments as the
effects of an unfriendliness in Nature or Fortune to your particular attempts,
as proceed but from a secret contingency incident to some experiments, by
whomsoever they be tried.

But because Pyrophilus, the Advertisement which I am about to give you may
seem, as Paradoxical, so discouraging; it will be but reasonable that I present
you with some instances of the requisiteness of it: which I shall the more
willingly do, because thereby I may not only evince the truth of it, but
somewhat lessen the despondency it is apt to produce, by letting you see, that
though some of your Experiments should not always prove constant, you have
diverse Partners in that infelicity, who have not been discouraged by it.

To make nice and curious distinctions of the several grounds and occasions of
the Unsuccessfulness of Experiments, would perhaps prove a work of greater
difficulty than use, and therefore I shall content my self grossly to
distinguish the causes of that unsuccessfulness, into the particular or
mistaken properties of the Materials employed about them, and some such error
committed in the handling of these Materials, as though it hinder the success
of the Experiment, is not easy to be discerned. Which therefore I mention,
that I may distinguish these kind of Errors that I am now to consider from
those more obvious ones, which proceeding barely from the unskilfulness of the
Tryers of the Experiments, may be easily enough discerned, and either rectified
or avoided by a knowing Artist, or a person well versed and expert in making
those particular Experiments, which through through that unskilfulness may have
miscarried.

The Materials to be employed about the Experiments we are considering may also
admit of several distinctions; as into Natural and Factitious, Sincere and
Adulterate, Simple and Compound, etc. But we shall likewise purposely forbear
the insisting on any of these, and content our selves to cast what we have to
say on this part of our Theme, into a few and comprehensive Observations.

And in the first place we will observe, that diverse Experiments succeed not,
because they were at one time tried with Genuine Materials, and at another time
with Sophisticated ones: and in this case it may be all one, as to the Event of
the Experiment, whether the Materials wherewith it was successfully tried were
sophisticated or not, if those made use of in the latter ^ryal were of
differing Qualities from those employed in the former; because it may very well
happen, that sophisticated Bodies (as we may have occasion to show hereafter)
by the addition of those things, or by that decei^ful way of preparation,
whereby they have been sophisticated, may acquire an aptitude to produce such
effects, as had they not been adulterated, they would not have been fit to do.
Now it is scarcely imaginable to him that has not been very conversant with the
Drugs and Simples sold in Shops, how generally they are adulterated by the
fraudulent avarice of the Sellers, especially if they be such whose
preciousness may make their Sophistication very beneficial to them that
practice it. It has been lately much complained of by some of the Cultivators
of Clover-grass, that of a great quan^ity of the Seed not any Grass sprung up;
which not being imputable to the Soil, nor the Sower, proceeds, as some
Analogical observations make me suppose, from the effeteness (if I may so
speak) of the superannuated Seed sometimes sold in the Shops. And upon this
Subject I cannot conceal from you what was lately affirmed to me by one of the
eminentest and soberest Chemists of Amsterdam, who was also an Indian Merchant,
who assured me, that most of the Cinnamon and Cloves that is brought into these
Western Regions, is defrauded in the Indies of much of the finest and subtilest
Aromatical parts before it be sent into Europe. And to give a more familiar
Instance to our present purpose, you may be pleased to remember, Pyrophilus,
that in one of the first of these Essays, we have made mention to you of great
store of living Creatures which we had observed in Vinegar; of the truth of
which Observation we can produce diverse learned and severe Witnesses, who were
not to be convinced of it till we had fully satisfied them by ocular
demonstration: and yet, Pyrophilus, there are diverse parcels of excellent
Vinegar, wherein you may in vain seek for these living Creatures: and we are
now distilling some of that Liquor (which if we did not think to be of the
strongest and best sort, we should scarce think worth the being distilled for
Spirit) wherein nevertheless we can neither by Candlelight nor by daylight
discern Any of those little Creatures of which we have often seen Swarms in
other Vinegars. Of such fraudulent tricks as those lately mentioned, I could
easily give you diverse Instances, if I were not afraid of teaching Fallacies by
discovering them. But some are so notorious, or otherwise of such a nature, as
that it may be more useful than dangerous to mention them.

It is commonly known, that Sublimate is wont to be sophisticated with Arsnick:
and how differing the effects of such Sublimate may be from those of that which
is faithfully prepared, not only upon Metal^, but (when Mercurius Dulcis and
other Preparations are made of it) upon humane Bodies, they, and scarce any but
they, who are acquainted wi^h the noxious qualities of Arsnick, both to Metals
and Men, can readily imagine. And indeed as for Chemical Preparations Helmont
was not much in the wrong, Accipe pulverem Johannis de ^ Vigo propria manu
paratam, uam alioquin admistus Minio est adulteratus, prout qualecunque
Medicamen Chymicum quod venale exstat fraud plenum est. Helmon. de Febr. c. 14.

Sunt nempe olea essentialia venalia, quaeque magno aere penduntur, adulterata
omnia atque singula, etc. Idem de Feb. c. 15.


when he affirmed, There were scarce any, vulgarly sold in shops, to be relied
on as faithfully prepared. And for my part, I have so often met with Chemical
Preparations which I have found unsincere, that I dare scarce trust any, either
in the administration of Physic, or so much as in the trial of considerable
Expe^iments, which either my own Furnaces do not afford me, or wherewith I am
not supplied by some person of whose skill and faithfulness I have a good
opinion. The other day, having occasion to use some Spirit of Salt, whereof I
was not then provided, I sent for some to a Chemist, who making it himself, was
the likelier to afford that which was wall made: but though I gave him his own
rate for it, at the first Rectification even in a Retort, a single pound
afforded us no less than six ounces of phlegm; and afterward being further
rectified in a high body and gentle heat, the remaining Spirit parted with a
scarce credible quantity of the like nauseous liquor, and after all these
sequestrations of phlegm was not pure enough to pe^form what we expected from
it. Of which complaining to an excellent Chemist of my acquaintance, he sent
for spirit of Salt to a very eminent Distiller of it, who gets much by his
profession, and passes for a very honest man: but this Spirit, besides its
weakness, discovered it self to be sophis^icated with either Spirit of Nitre,
or Aqua fortis, which betrayed it self by its peculiar and odious smell;
whereas Spirit of Salt skilfully and sincerely drawn, is commonly of a greenish
color, bordering upon yellow, and has usually a Peculiar, and sometimes (as I
can exemplify to you in some of mine) a not Unpleasing smell. And let me on
this occasion advertise you, Pyrophilus, that in diverse cases it is not enough
to separate the aqueous parts by Dephlegmation, as many Chemists content
themselves to do, but some Liquors contain also an unsuspected quantity of
small corpuscules of somewhat an earthy nature, which being associated with the
saline ones, do clog or blunt them, and thereby weaken their activity: And
therefore such Liquors to be well depurated require the being distilled off,
and that with a slow fire, that the dry faeces may be left behind in the bottom
of the Glass. To satisfy some persons that this Observation is not groundless,
we have sometimes taken of the better sort of Spirit of Salt, and having
carefully dephlegm'd it, removed it into lower Glasses, (that the less heat
will suffice to make the Liquor ascend) and having gently abstracted the whole
Spirit, there remained in the bottom and the neck of the Retort whence 'twas
distilled, so great a quantity of a certain dry and stiptical substance, for
the most part of a yellowish color, that it seemed strange to the beholders,
that so clear a Spirit should conceal so much of it: and we our selves should
have wondered at it too, had we not remembered, that in what the Chemists are
wont to call the Oil or Rectified Butter of Antimony made with Sublimate, the
Liquor, though distilled and very limpid, almost like fair water, consists in
great part of the very body of the Antimony: which we would here manifest, but
that we elsewhere do it, and therefore choose rather in this place to take
notice, that the Spirit of Salt after this second depuration was so changed,
that it seemed to be a much nobler, and almost another Liquor than it was
before.

But to return to our sophisticated Spirit: what differing effects would be
produced by true Spirit of Salt, and that which is mixed with the Spirit of
Nitre, he that knows the great disparity in the operations of those two
Liquors, whereof (to mention now no other Instances) the former will
precipitate Silver, when the latter has dissolved it, may easily inform you.
Which Instances I mention not as the considerablest which may be produced on
this Subject, but as the freshest in my memory.

In the next place, Pyrophilus, I observe, that even when the Materials
employed about Experiments are no way sophisticated, but genuine, and such as
Nature has produced them, or Art ought to prepare them, even then, I say, there
may be a very considerable Disparity betwixt Concretions of the same kind and
name, and which pass without suspicion for bodies of perfectly the same nature.

This may, to you, Pyrophilus, seem a great Paradox; but perhaps upon
examination it will appear a great Truth: which because I am perchance the
first, or one of the first, that has solemnly asserted, I hope I shall obtain
your pardon if I insist somewhat the longer upon the making it out. For though
Antimony (and the like is to be understood of Quicksilver, Gold, Copper, Tin,
etc.) is wont by almost all men without hesitancy to be looked upon as being
all of it of the same nature as well as denomination; yet he that will take the
liberty to suspect that they may be deceived in that opinion, and then
heedfully observe the differing progress and event of Experiments, may very
well discern, that there is as well a difference in Minerals of the same kind,
as there is in Vegetables and Animals of the same species. And as the
White-rose, the Red-rose, and the Damask-rose differ much from one another,
though all three be Roses; and as the sour and sweet Orange are very differing
betwixt themselves, and both of them from the China Orange, though all be
Oranges; and as the Hound, the Greyhound, the Spaniel, the Tumbler, the
Mastiff, and the Water dog, etc. are very dive^sly qualified, though all of
them be Dogs: so neither are all the parcels of Antimony to be met with in
Mines or Shops of altogether the some Qualities, though all of them be
Antimonial Concretes. There is indeed this difference betwixt the variety to be
observed in Vegetables and Animals, and that which is to be found in Minerals,
That the former is wont to be more obvious to the Eye, and betray it self by
some difference to be observed, either in the size of the Creatures of the same
kind, or in some peculiar shape or color, by which it is easy for Nature
conspicuously to discriminate bodies that consist of many discernably distinct
parts; whereas Minerals appearing to the eye either to be perfectly similar, as
Metals, or at least to consist but of two or three distinct ingredients, as
Cinnaber, and some other Mineral Concretions, the diversity to be found betwixt
Minerals of the same Denomination is hardly to be discerned, before Experience
have discovered it.

And on this Subject I consider, that the womb (if I may so speak) of a Mineral
body is not always like that of an Animal, a place by a competent and peculiar
involving fence secured from the intrusion of all bodies not of kin to that
included in it: But a Mineral being generated in the bowels of the Earth, its
womb is oftentimes accessible and open to other Mineral Juyces or Steams that
pass that way, though of never so differing natures from that of the more
copious Mineral. Insomuch that not only I have had the opportunity to observe
(not without some wonder) Minerals of differing kinds, as Marchasites and
Metals, Marchasites and Stones, (I mean Stones properly so called) Salt and
Sulphur, and the like, blended in the same small lump of matter; but I have
sometimes found in a great mass of one sort of Mineral, small parcels of a
Mineral of a quit differing kind perfectly enclosed in the substance of the
other. But to resume what we were saying before, these intruding bodies (if I
may so speak) being coagulated, and perhaps ripened together with the former by
length of time, are not easily either separable, or so much as distinguishable
at their first digging out of the ground, and much less after their
Colliquation. For the ignorant or heedless Mineman aiming only at the obtaining
a quantity of such a Metal, or other Mineral, as may be vendible under such a
determinate name, has neither the design, nor perhaps the skill, to make nice
separations of the Heterogeneous bodies to be met with in his Oar, but melts so
much of them as he can promiscuously together, and then sells them, not only to
the Merchant, but the Chemist, for that Metal or Mineral whose outward form and
properties (as color, consistence, weight, sound, etc.) it has; though that
Metal under whose name it passes, be indeed but the predominant Ingredient of
the Lump, wherein diverse other Minerals may in small quantities lie concealed,
and yet upon occasion be discovered by exquisite separations, or discover
themselves by unexpected operations, when they meet with bodies fit to act on
them, or disposed to receive impressions from them.

I was lately visited by an ingenuous Goldsmith of my acquaintance, who
complained to me, that being wont to buy parcels of Gold brought in small
pieces, and as it were sandy corpuscles, from Guinea, or some Country of that
Coast, though he found it upon all trials very right Gold, yet was it so very
pale, that few but expert Goldsmiths would meddle with it, as fearing it had
been some sophisticated Metal; adding, that this exceeding paleness of it
sometimes reduced him to melt it with very highcolour'd Gold, or to heighten
its tincture with that of Copper, to bring it to the color of ordinary Gold.

The probability of this may be proved by what is related by Monsieur Flacourt,
Governor of the French Plantation in Madagascar, who in his newly published
History of that Island, speaking of the Metals of it, says, Histoire de
Madagascar. c. 37.
Il y a bien, etc. that is, There is certainly Gold among the Inhabitants of
Madagascar, which has not been brought thither by Foreign Ships: for it is not
possible that such Ships should have left them so much of that Metal as they
have; and besides, it is of a differing nature from that of Europe, which they
call in this Country Voulamene Voutroua. He adds, that this Gold, which they
call Gold of Malacasse, is pale, and is not worth above 10 Crowns, (or about 50
shillings) an ounce; also, that the Negroes affirm, that there are many Mines
of it in the Country where it was formerly dug; that there is three sorts of
it differing in fineness from each other, and discriminated by the Natives by
three peculiar names. But that which he adds as most considerable, is, That
Malacassean Gold is of so very easy a fusion, that it is almost as easily
melted as Lead; whereas we here find the Gold we deal with to require
considerably strong fires, and are wont to cast in Borax to facilitate the
fusion.

Having upon occasion had the Curiosity not long since to visit some Mines of
Lead, and other Metals, I find, that there is a great difference, and
discernable even to the eye, betwixt the several Oars; for instance, of Lead,
some of which I can show you so like Steel, and so unlike common Lead-Oar, that
the workmen upon that account are pleased to call it Steel-Oar, which being of
more difficult fusion than ordinary, they are wont to mix it with other Oar,
which they call Firm-Oar, to facilitate the melting of it. And I likewise took
notice of an Oar, which for its aptness to Vitrifie and serve the Potters to
glaze their earthen Vessels, the Miners call Pottern-Oar, and sell it (at least
where I saw it dug up) dearer than other Oar, from which it differs both
visibly enough, and as the workmen affirm, in diverse other (and those less
obvious) Qualities; and yet all these Oars after fusion do pass
indiscriminately under the name and notion of Lead. In which therefore it is no
wonder that severer Inquirers find a great deal of disparity. I remember I did
not long since cause some Lead-Oar to be tried, which being the most promising
that ever I saw, made me suppose it might contain some considerable quantity of
Silver: but though it proved so rich in Lead as to yield after the rate of
seventy pound in the hundred, yet one of the most expert Artists in Europe
could not extract one grain of Silver out of it; whereas the Lead of very many
Mines, being skilfully examined, will leave behind it upon the Test a
proportion of pure Silver. And though this quantity of Silver be not
considerable enough to make such Mines as yield it pass for Silver-Mines, (or,
as we are wont to call them, Mines-Royal) because the Sliver will not quit the
cost of extracting it; yet such Mines, though they pass but for Lead-Mines with
the Metallist, may appear to be mixed Mines to the Naturalist, who may meet with
diverse Experiments, wherein the little Silver that is in them may make their
Lead operate differently from that of those Oars which are wholly destitute of
Silver.

And as this disparity is discernable in Lead-Oars, so it may well be supposed
that the like would be discovered in the Oars of other Metals, if they were but
purposely and skilfully examined. On which Subject I remember, that a very
experienced person in these affairs, and otherwise very candid and sober, was
lately very desirous I should procure, him some Tin-Oar, alleging, that he had
met with a sort of it, which after a long digestion in Lixiviate Liquors,
afforded him a very considerable proportion of the richer Metals, insomuch that
having a large quantity of that Oar, and finding the Experiment on it to
succeed constantly, he promised to himself a vast Income by it: But when that
stock of Oar was spent, the next that he procured, though with great
carefulness managed as the former, would by no means be brought to afford
either so considerable a benefit, or so much as any at all. Which brings into
my mind, that having once bought a parcel of block Tin, (as the Tradesmen call
that which is of the most pure or unmixt, and as yet unwrought) I was desirous
to try if I could not make a Menstruum to dissolve it in such manner as Aqua
fortis dissolves Silver, and Aqua Regis Gold; because Chemists are wont to
complain, that though they have a Menstruum or two that will dissolve crude
Tin, yet they want one that will keep it dissolved, and will not, which Aqua
fortis will, let it fall into a Calx. Having therefore (by a way that I
elsewhere teach) prepared such a Liquor as was desired, I evaporated a Solution
of the forementioned Tin, and setting it to shoot, found, somewhat to my
wonder, that the Crystals it afforded were not at all like any kind Of Vitriol,
but broad, flat, and exceeding thin, just like those of Silver. Whereupon for
further trial having examined this Salt by the Tongue, we found not that it had
any such taste as the skilfully made Calx of Tin in Spirit of Vinegar, (wherein
it is not Every Calx of Jupiter that is soluble) which (the last time we tried)
seemed to us to have, as it were, a chalybeate taste, but such an excessive
bitterness as may be met with in the Crystals of Silver made with Aqua fortis:
Finding also this further resemblance betwixt the Salts of these two Metals,
that they did both of them presently dye upon the nails and skin a blackness
that could not in a short time be washed off: we should have suspected, that
the Menstruum had exalted the Metal dissolved in it to a greater cognation to
Silver; but having afterward prosecuted the same Trial with the same
Menstruum, and another parcel of block Tin, (the former being casually lost)
this Metal, though bought very soon after the other, and, as I remember, at the
same place, made us conclude, that the event of our trials proceeded from our
having lighted upon a lump of Tin that was of a peculiar Nature.

I remember also that a while since a learned and inquisitive friend of mine
found in his Land a parcel of Oar, part of which he showed me, and some of
which I can show you, but have not yet made trial of it, which seemed to me,
among others that looked upon it, to be Copper-Oar, and which did indeed after
fusion yield very good Copper; but the persons to whom he committed the
examination of the Mine, being very inquisitive, and extraordinarily skilful,
they did (as one of themselves immediately after confessed to me) find in that
Oar, besides the Copper, no inconsiderable quantity of Silver; and in that
Silver (having dissolved it in Aqua fortis) a considerable proportion of Gold.

But to detain you no longer on this Subject, give me only leave to strengthen
the Paradox I have proposed by the authority of that great and candid Chemist
Basilius Valentinus, who speaking of Antimony, after he has told us that there
are several kinds of it, and especially two, the one more Mercurial, and of a
Golden property, witnessed by the shining streaks or beams it abounds with, the
other more full of Sulphur, but destitute of the golden nature that inriches
the former, adds, that there is such a different goodness betwixt the several
sorts of Antimony, as there is betwixt the several sorts of Flesh or Fish,
which, though agreeing in name and, if you please, in nature, do exceedingly
differ in point of goodness. Which brings into my mind the great difference
which I have found, even visible to the eye, betwixt the several sorts of
Antimony; and makes me also remember, that the other day being by an excellent
Chemist showed a parcel of Antimony as a rarity, upon the score of the
variously-colour'd Sulphur wherewith it was conspicuously enriched, the
possessor of it soon after employed it to make Butter of Antimony: but though
he were very expert in that kind of distillation, yet instead of the Liquor he
expected, upon the approach of a gentle fire, he found the neck and body of his
Retort lined with an Antimonial Cinnaber, (or at least a red substance, by him
concluded to be Sulphur) at which being surprised, he was pleased to withdraw
his fire till he had acquainted me with this accident, and in the yet unbroken
Retort showed me the Cinnaber, which is not wont (as you know) to arise till
after the Butter of Antimony is come over, and the remaining matter be urged
with a vehement fire. And it is perhaps to the undiscerned difference of
Antimonies that we may sometimes ascribe that contingency, which we have diverse
times had occasion to take notice of in the making of Antimonial Cinnaber: for
though in our Furnaces it has been very successfully made, yet not only we
have afterward failed of making it, but we have seen much more expert
Chemists, and who because of the high value they do (not undeservedly) place
upon that Medicine, employ themselves oftener than we in making it, diverse times
unsuccessfully attempt the preparing it. And it may be perhaps also from some
diversity either in Antimonies or Irons, that eminent Chemists have (as we have
observed) often failed in their endeavors to make the Starry Regulus of Mars
and Antimony. Insomuch that diverse Artists fondly believe and teach (what our
Experience will not permit us to allow) that there is a certain respect to
Times and Constellations requisite to the producing of this (I confess
admirable) body. Upon which Subject I must not omit to tell you, that a while
since an industrious acquaintance of ours was working on an Antimony, which
unawares to him was, as we then supposed, of so peculiar a nature, that making
a Regulus of it alone (without Iron) the common way, (for his manner of
operation I inquired of him) he found, to his wonder, and showed me his Regulus
adorned with a more conspicuous Star than I have seen in several Stellate
Regulusses of both Antimony and Mars. Yet I dare not be too confident that this
depended only upon the peculiar nature of that Antimony, because since that, my
own Laboratory has afforded me diverse such parcels of Regulus without Mars
(some of which I have yet by me very fairly stellated) which though made of
Antimony that seemed (by its various colors) to be more rich than ordinary in
Sulphur; yet in regard the Antimony did not constantly afford a Starry Regulus,
though by the same person ordered as near as could be after the same manner, it
did not so clearly appear to me, whether the differing event of the several
Trials proceeded from the peculiar nature of this or that parcel of Antimony,
or from some odd and scarce discoverable circumstance in the management of the
operation. But in either case, the mention of these uncertain Events will
properly enough belong to our present Discourse.

As in Antimony, so (as I intimated above) in diverse other Minerals a
considerable diversity may be observed: and I remember I was lately presented
with a piece of a Mineral, which to me, as well as to the rest who looked on
it, seemed to be an ordinary and worthless Marchasite; and yet a Dutch Merchant
(a skilful Mineralist) who was the possessor of it, was very industrious to
procure a greater quantity thereof, having in some of it, on which he had made
Trials, found a rich proportion of pure Gold. And the same Gentleman whose
Copper-Oar I formerly mentioned, digging for more of that Oar, found lately a
quantity of red Earth, which by knowing Mineralists was guest to be but Bolus,
and indeed looked very like it; but being melted with Regulus Martis Stellatus
by a skilful Tryer of Metals, it diverse times richly re^ompenced the Examiners
curiosity, by affording him many grains of fine Gold: and though I doubt
whether this Gold proceeded from the Bolus, or the Regulus melted with it, yet
however it may serve for an instance to show that some Mineral bodies, which
pass without dispute for Minerals of such and such a precise nature, may have
lurking in them Minerals of a quite other nature, which may manifest themselves
in some particular Experiments, (wherein they meet with proportionate Agents or
Patients) though not in others.

That the Talck which is wont to be employed about Cosmeticks is of very
difficult Calcination, is so known a thing to those that have tried to calcine
it, that I have met with good Chemists that have looked on all the Calces of
Talcks but as Impostures. Nor indeed have we calcined Venetian Talck without
some length of time, and much violence of heat. But among many sorts of Talck
we have here in England, there is one which a moderate fire will in less than
an hour reduce into a snow-white Calx, of which I had lately a parcel by me;
and some days since I met with another sort of English Talck which I could
suddenly calcine even with the flame of a candle. And my experienced friend Dr.
K. assures me, that out of a German Talck he met with, he did by digesting it
in a strong Solution of Alcalizate Salts separate pretty store of good Gold,
and might have made it a very gainful Experiment, if all the Talck growing in
the same place had been of the same richness. The like almost has been affirmed
to me by a Gentleman of Eminency, who told me, That from a certain Talck he had
out of Norway, he had once drawn a pretty quantity of very good Gold: and it
seems indeed, that though some have been pleased to laugh at all attempts of
sequestring any thing from any kind of Talck; yet some parcels of that Mineral
afford good store of a Tincture, which may for ought I know be of a golden
nature. For I remember I have met with a kind of darkish-colour'd Talck
(whereof I can yet show you a piece) which when I cast but into Aqua Regis, the
Menstruum manifestly worked upon it, and dissolved its colored parts in such
plenty, that the filtrated Solution passed without suspicion among diverse
knowing Naturalists to whom I showed it, Paracel. de Mineral, Tract.. 1.
for a fair Solution of Gold. Paracelsus himself reckons four kinds of Talck,
Red, White, Black, and of that color which his Interpreter translates Luteous:
and perhaps each of these colors comprises several kinds of that Mineral. And
therefore that Mineralist did not amiss when he added in the same Discourse,
after he had mentioned great variety of Marchasites, Stones, and other
Minerals, Sed and hoc verum est, in terra multa adhuc condi, Paracel. ibidem.
quae mihi incognita sunt, sed eadem nec alii norunt. Certum siquidem est,
progressu temporis tot tamque varia a Deo adhuc proditum iri, de quibus nemo
nostrum nedum unquam somniavit.

It Is vulgarly known, that there is a great difference between Vitriols that
are reputed to be merely of the same Metal. And not to mention those Vitriols
that I have either made or seen, of less usual colors; nor to take notice of
the Veins, Slate, and even loose Earth, impregnated with Coperas that I have
had: to pass by all this (I say) as for those Vitriol Stones whereof we in
England are wont to make our Vitriol, I have seen at the chief work where
Coperas is made so great a variety of them, (diverse of which I have yet lying
by me) that I could scarcely believe the workmen when they affirmed them to be
all Coperas Stones, and cannot but think it both very likely, that some of them
contain other Mineral substances besides Vitriol, and very possible that the
saline parts of those stones upon their solution by the Rain, may work upon
those other substances formerly concoagulated with them, and thereby imbue some
parcels of the Vitriol made of them with qualities other than are essential to
the nature of Vitriol, or belong ordinarily to it.

That there is also a difference betwixt those bodies that pass under the
general name of common Salt, cannot but be obvious to any Chemist that has
occasion to make accurate trials on that Subject. And as for those Concretes
that pass under the name of Saltpeter, there is probably no small disparity
among them: for besides the difference which we have observed and which is
obvious enough betwixt good English Nitre, and that which is brought us over
from Barbary, (which before it is much refined abounds very much with an
adventitious Salt that tastes much like Sea Salt) besides this I say, those
that do use both good European and good East-Indian Saltpeter assure me, they
find much difference betwixt them, and give the preference to the latter: and
indeed I have often thought I discerned a considerable difference in the
operations of several kinds of Saltpeter even after purification: and probably
that sort of Saltpeter which near London an ingenious man of my acquaintance
does sometimes (but cannot always) make, chiefly out of Sea Salt, has some
differing qualities from that which is drawn the common way out of the Earth.
And indeed Saltpeter being but a kind of Sal terrae, generated in very
differingly-qualifi'd parcels of Earth, may probably receive diverse qualities
from the particular soil wherein it grows, though these qualities lie concealed
and unsuspected under the wonted exterior appearance of Nitre. Which
consideration brings into my mind what was lately told me by a very ingenious
Gentleman concerning one of the eminentest of our London Physicians, who was
wont, as this Confident of his assured me, as an excellent secret, to employ in
some of his choice Remedies that peculiar Saltpeter which he had drawn out of
the Earth dug up in Churchyards.

And such kind of differences would probably in other Mineral bodies be taken
notice of, if men's prepossessions did not make them ascribe the variations they
meet with in their Experiments, rather to any other cause than the unsuspected
difference of the Materials employed about them.

Nor is it only, Pyrophilus, among Mineral Bodies of the same name that such a
diversity is to be found, but if narrowly looked into, it is very probable that
a greater disparity may be discovered both among Vegetables and Animals,
reputed of the same nature, than has been yet taken notice of. Herbarists
indeed have exercised a commendable curiosity in subdividing Plants of the same
denomination, and few Naturalists ignore that there are (for instance) many
sorts of Roses, and of Apples, which differ widely betwixt themselves, as we
see the difference betwixt the Red-rose and the White, betwixt the Crab, the
Pippin, and the Pea^-main. But besides these differences which are obvious
enough to be Registered by Botanick Authors, there may be more undiscerned ones
(which yet may be considerable ones) betwixt the Individuals of the same
ultimate subdivision of Plants, arising partly from the temperature of the air,
which makes (for example) Senna growing in England to differ much from that
which is denominated from Alexandria; partly from the nature of the soil, as is
obvious in the change produced in wild Simples transplanted into Gardens; and
partly from many other causes which we have not now leisure to insist upon. But
we see oftentimes, that one Rose much differs from another of the same kind,
and one Pear-main from another Pear-main. To which we may add, that the upper
crust or surface of the Earth being impregnated with subterraneal exhalations
of several sorts, and tempered with variety of Juyces, it may very possibly be,
that some particular Plant may attract some such Juice out of a determinate
spot of ground, as may give it Exotic qualities, and make it differ even from
the neighboring Plants of the same kind. To which purpose I remember, that
traveling diverse years since from Geneva toward Italy, I was in my passage
through Switzerland by a Gentleman of those parts (whose brother had been
formerly my Domestic) invited to his Castle, and entertained among other
things with a sort of Wine which was very heady, but otherwise seemed to be
Sack; and having never met with any such Liquor during my long stay in those
parts, I was inquisitive to know whence it was brought: and being answered that
it grew amongst those Mountains, I could not believe it, till they assured me,
that growing on a little spot of ground whose entrails abounded with Sulphur,
it had from the soil acquired its inebriating property, and those other
qualities which made it so differing from the Wine of the rest of the Vineyards
of that Country. And now I mention Wine, give me leave, Pyrophilus, to put you
in mind of taking notice what a great change is made in that Liquor, when upon
the recess of the spirits and more volatile sulphurous parts, or else the new
texture they make with the others, it degenerates into Vinegar, and yet how
little either diminution of quantity or any other alteration does appear upon
this change to the beholders eye. And though no body is like to lose an
Experiment by mistaking Vinegar for Wine, because both those Liquors and the
changes of them are so familiar unto us, and because we are wont to taste each
of them before we employ it; yet who knows what changes there may be in other
Bodies with whose alterations we are unacquainted, though the Eye, which is
oftentimes the only Sense employed about judging of them, discern no change in
them? as may daily be observed in the superannuated seeds of Plants, which
after their having been kept long beyond their due time, lose all their
germinating power without losing any of their obvious qualities. And here let
me further observe to you, that Urine is made much use of, not only by Dyers,
but ^everal other Tradesmen in diverse operations (some of which we may
elsewhere have occasion to treat of) belonging to their professions. Now these
men being wont indiscriminately to employ Urine, without examining whether it
be rich in Salt or not, and how long it has been kept, it may not be
impertinent to take notice that Chemists, who have occasion to distill it often
in great quantities, assure me that they find a notable disparity betwixt
Urines, that of healthy and young men abounding much more with volatile Salt
than that of sickly or aged persons; and that of such as drink Wine freely
being much fuller of spiritous and active parts than that of those whose drink
is but Beer or Water. But because the differing strength of Urines, though it
be very probable, is not so easily to be satisfactorily made out, we shall
rather insist on this other Observation confirmed to us by Experience, which
is, that though Tradesmen are often wont to boil such and such things
indifferently in any Urine, as if it were all one how new or stale it is, they
may sometimes thereby commit considerable errors. For recent Urine, wherein the
saline parts are yet entangled among the rest, will suffer it self to be boiled
above one half or two thirds away, without the avolation of its volatile salt
and spirits. Whereas Urine that has been diverse weeks kept is liable to a
Putrefaction, whereby the Cement (if I may so speak) of the Ingredients that it
consists of, perishing, or some change of texture occasioning their disjunction
(if not also concurring to produce them) the component parts fall asunder, and
the saline Particles extricating themselves from the rest, will even upon a
very gentle heat (as trial made on purpose has informed us) fly away, and
leave a phlegmatic and unactive Liquor behind them. In confirmation whereof I
must acquaint you, Pyrophilus, with what lately befell me in reference to the
distillation of Urine: for having caused some of it to be buried in earthen
Vessels in a dunghill to be there putrifi'd, for five or six weeks, I was by
diverse occasional Journeys kept from employing it, till it had layn there
between four and five months; and observing, when I caused it to be taken out,
that the covers of the vessels had not been, by him I employed to put them in,
well luted on, and besides were in some places cracked, I suspected that the
Heat of the Dunghill had not only loosened the saline parts of the Liquor, but
driven them away: and accordingly by distilling it in a very gentle heat, and
in a very high Cucurbit, we obtained instead of an active and saline spirit, a
languid and nauseous phlegm. And how great odds there may be betwixt some
Experiments made with recent and putrifi'd Urine, may be easily conceived by
him who knows what operations Salts have in the business of Colors, and is
acquainted with their efficacy in those other Mechanical Experiments wherein
Urine is wont to be employed. But I fear I have dwelt too long upon this Theme,
and therefore I shall proceed to the next.

And in the third place, Pyrophilus, I shall observe to you, that there is a
great difference to be found among many things prepared by Art, that pass under
the same general name: which difference may proceed partly from that which we
have already observed to be found in the Materials of which such factitious
Bodies are made, and partly from the way used in preparing them. To these heads
many particulars may be reduced: But we shall at present restrain our selves to
the mention of two sorts of prepared bodies, namely, of such as are not
putrifi'd and exalted enough, and of such as are so too much.

And to begin with the first of these; it is very certain, that diverse Chemical
Experiments delivered by sober Authors have been believed false, only because
the Menstruums or other Materials emyloy'd in the unsuccessful trials of them
were not as highly rectified, or otherwise as exquisitely depurated, as those
that were used by the Deliverers of those Experiments; so that oftentimes the
fault of a bad Menstruum is injuriously imputed to a good Artist. That
experienced Chemist Van Helmont, in his Paradoxical Treatise of the Stone,
endeavors (as we have elsewhere mentioned) to explicate the manner of its being
generated by the Coagulation immediately ensuing upon the mixture of the two
volatile Spirits of Urine and of Wine. This noble Experiment has been by many
unsuccessfully tried, and has been therefore by them discredited as a Chemical
fiction: and indeed the first, and I think the second time we attempted to make
that Coagulum, we found nothing at all of any such thing as we expected upon
the confusion of the two forementioned Liquors, which though never so much
shaken, and afterward permitted to rest, did never in the least measure
coagulate, which made us long suspect the Experiment; till at length our
favorable thoughts of that expert Chemist, making us think it possible that
the Spirits we employed had not been sufficiently exalted, we dephlegmated some
by more frequent, and indeed tedious Rectifications (which yet proved but
necessary) and then were satisfied by more accurate trials, that Helmont had
not mis-inform'd us.

So likewise the same Author in his Treatise de Peste much extolling, as a
friend to the Stomach, the Entrails, the nervous parts, and even the Head, the
Tincture or Solution of Amber made with spirit of Wine (which Medicine is
indeed no ignoble one when administered to Constitutions that can well bear the
heat of it) diverse Physicians and Chemists have attempted the preparing of this
Tincture with such bad success, that they have given out, that either Helmont
delivered what was not true, or concealed some considerable Circumstance of the
Process.

Whereas having digested sufficiently dephlegm'd spirit of Wine upon very
finely powdered Amber, (which if it be the higher-colour'd yields the deeper
Tincture) in a very gentle heat, (for the neglect of which Caution even expert
Artists have often lost their pains and glasses) we have several times had a
good yellow Tinctur^ of Amber, which was discernable in the Menstruum both by
the smell and taste; and to satisfy some that suspected the Tincture to
proceed but from the exaltation of the Menstruum it self by Digestion, and to
manifest that it was a real Solution of the subtiler parts of ^he Amber, we
poured some drops of it into Beer, or Water, into which the spirit of Wine
suddenly diffusing it self, the dissolved Amber was plainly discernable
swimming like a thin film upon the surface of the Liquor, whence little by
little it steamed away into the air.

There is likewise, as we have tried, to be drawn with spirit of Wine from pure
Salt of Tartar a pretty high Tincture, and of a taste which I thought not
unworthy the taking notice of: but having a while since tried to draw this
Tincture with spirit of Wine which (unknown to me) was much too weak for that
purpose, after I had kept the Glass a while in Digestion, coming to look
whether or no the Spirit was tinged, I found that the Salt of Tartar had drawn
to it self and imbibed the aqueous particles of the Spirit of Wine, and being
thereby (for a great part of it) dissolved into a Liquor like that which is
commonly called Oil of Tartar per Deliquium, the subsiding Salt was by the
interposition of that saline Liquor protected from the action of the spirit of
Wine, which being by this new way dephlegm'd would not mix with the saline
Liquor, but swam entirely above it. To which I shall only add in general, that
the German Chemists are diverse of them so accurate in the Rectification of
their Spirit of Wine, that in England, where we are wont to be less careful
about that Particular, it is usual enough for those Experiments of theirs to be
unsuccessfully tried wherein the Alcohol of Wine (as they call it) is requisite.

And as Spirit of Wine, so many other Menstruums are made unfit for the
perfecting of diverse real Experiments, barely by their not being sufficiently
freed from their weakening Aquosity.

Nor is it only, Pyrophilus, in Menstruums, but in diverse other Bodies, that
the want of an exquisite Depuration may produce in Experiments variety of
Events. As for instance, It has been complained of by sober men, that their
Preparations of Silver, though never so carefully made, have been apt to
produce violent Vomits; whereas we have not observed a well-prepar'd Medicine
of duly refined Silver to work Emetically even in Women and Girls, but by Seige
or Urine. But we cannot wonder at the violent operation of Medicines made of
ordinary Silver: for not only that which is coined is wont, as the Mint-masters
themselves have confessed to me, to be allayed with sometimes about a twelfth
part, sometimes a smaller or greater proportion of Copper, for the greater
convenience of the Coin, but even that Silver which is commonly at great rates
sold for refined Silver, is not wont to be sufficiently freed from its Copper.
Which I not long since manifested in the presence of one of our richest and
eminentest Refiners, by dissolving some of his purest Silver in his own Aqua
fortis; for the greenness of the Solution quickly betrayed the adherency of
Venus to the Silver. And no wonder; for I have seldom seen our chiefest
Refiners blow off from their Silver upon the Test above half its weight of
Lead, whereas we think not our Silver sufficiently refined for some purposes,
till it have been freed from five or six times its weight of Saturn, and then
it has sometimes afforded a Solution almost as clear as water, with only now
and then a light touch of Sky-colour, but nothing near so high as the Ceruleous
(Liquor that is supposed to be a true) Tincture of Silver, artificially
separated from the rest of the Body.

Now that ill effects by the mixture of Copper may be produced in such
Medicines as ought to be of pure Silver, he that is acquainted with the violent
Emetick qualities of Venus can scarcely doubt. And as in men's bodies, so in
other subjects, those Experiments may easily deceive the Artists expectation,
when he hopes to perform with Silver and Copper together those things which
suppose and require Silver without Copper, or any adventitious Metal. And as
Silver, so Gold is very often employed for pure, when it is not so: for even
the foliated Gold which is commonly sold here in England, how fine soever it is
reputed, is not altogether free from the pollutions of other Metals: for our
Gold-beaters, though for their own profit sake they are wont to use the finest
coined Gold they can get (as that which is capable of the greatest extension
under the Hammer) yet they scruple not to employ coined Gold, and that the
Mint-masters (as themselves inform me) are wont to allay with Copper or Silver,
to make the Coin more stiff, and less subject to be wasted by attrition. And as
for those many Goldsmiths and Chemists who think their Gold most requisitely
refined when they have blown from it on the Test a due proportion of Lead, they
may be therein sometimes mistaken: for though Saturn may carry away with him
all the Copper that did imbase the Gold, yet he does not likewise free it from
the Silver (for which purpose Aqua fortis is therefore wont to be used) nay,
the skilfullest Refiner that I ever yet knew, has several times affirmed to
me, that coupleing fine Gold with Lead, the Gold has after retained and
protected from the fire a proportion of Silver that lay lurking in the Lead,
and was afterward separated from the Gold by Aqua fortis, but in so small
quantity, that the Experiment (the cost and pains considered) was not
lucriferous. And of this sort of Instances, Pyrophilus, more might be
presented, if we did not think Prolixity might be unwelcome to you.

But as many Experiments succeed not according to expectation, because the
Menstruums employed about them were not pure enough, so some miscarry because
such Menstruums are but too exactly depurated: for it is not so much the purity
of Liquors in their kind, as their fitness for the particular purpose to which
they are designed, that is in Experiments to be principally regarded. For
instance, we have sometimes for recreation sake, and to affright and amaze
Ladies, made pieces of white paper and linen appear all on a flame, without
either burning, findging, or as much as discoloring them. This is performed by
plunging the paper very thoroughly in weak Spirit of Wine, and then approaching
it to the flame of a candle, by which the spiritous parts of the Liquor will be
fired, and burn a pretty while without harming the paper. But if this
Experiment be tried with exquisitely rectified Spirit of Wine, it will not
succeed. Of this Phenomenon this plausible reason has been assigned, that the
flame of the Spirit of Wine is so pure and subtle, that like an Ignis lambens,
it will not fasten upon the paper. But Experience has informed us, that this
Conjecture is but a mistake, for the flame of Spirit of Wine is so hot, that I
have in Lamp-furnaces employed Spirit of Wine instead of Oil, and with the same
flame I have not only lighted paper, but candles, and even melted foliated
gold. The true reason therefore why that paper is not burned by the flame that
plays about it, seems to be, that the aqueous part of the spirit of wine being
imbibed by the paper keeps it so moist, that the flame of the sulphurous parts
of the same spirit cannot fasten on it. And therefore when the deflagration is
over, you shall always find the paper moist; and sometimes we have found it so
moist, that the flame of a candle would not readily light it. And on the other
side, having purposely made trials of plunging paper into sufficiently
dephlegmated spirit of wine, the paper not having aqueous moisture to defend
it, was very readily kindled and burned by the flaming spirit. And one of our
best ways to try the pureness of spirit of wine is grounded on this very
supposition: For dipping it in a Cotton-wiek like that of a candle, and setting
it on fire, if the flame fasten on the wiek, it is a sign of the goodness of
the spirit; but if it do not, we conclude it to be weak, and not sufficiently
dephlegm'd. It has been likewise observed, that Aqua fortis will work more
readily on Lead if it be allayed with water, than if it be purely rectified. I
other-where also mention an Aqua fortis I have used, which was so strong, that
it would not well dissolve silver it self unless I first diluted it with fair
water. And within this very week wherein I write these things, I have had an
unwelcome proof that Liquors may by too exquisite a Depuration be made unfit
for our purposes. For having, to gratify some ingenious friends, made a
certain Menstruum, wherewith we had formerly done some things upon Gold which
were (not altogether without cause) thought strange enough, we took care at
this time to separate it from whatever was either of an aqueous or an earthy
nature more exactly than ever we had formerly done. But coming to make use of
this sort of Menstruum, we found to our trouble and loss, that instead of
performing its wonted operations upon Gold better than before, we could do
nothing at all with it: For it will not now by heat it self be brought to touch
gold, though that Metal were wont to be dissoluble in it even in frigido. And
to satisfy you, that 'twas the too-exquisite depuration of this Liquor,
especially from its terrestrial parts, that thus unfitted it to touch a Metal
which is otherwise wont to melt as it were naturally in it without Ebullition
(almost like Ice in lukewarm water) we will subjoyn, that not only we in vain
tried to make it serviceable by weakening it with fair water; but having, for
trial sake, taken a little of this numerical parcel of Liquor before it was so
carefully rectified, we found that it dissolved crude gold as well as we had
reason to expect. And it would be considered whether or no in the Extraction of
the Tinctures of several Bodies, Chemists do not only put themselves to a
needless, but to a prejudicial trouble, when they refuse to employ any other
spirit of wine than that which is highly rectified. For, though in many Bodies
the parts desired by the Artists being the Sulphurous ones, the Menstruum is
the better for an exquisite Dephlegmation; yet in diverse other Concretes the
useful and efficacious parts have in them something of Saline, which makes them
more free to impregnate copiously such Liquors as have some Aqueous mixed with
their Sulphurous parts.

But because there is nothing more easy than by diluting spirit of wine,
though never so strong, to make it as weak as one pleases; and because pure
spirit of wine is that of all other Menstruums that Chemists generally make
most use of, and which costs them most of charge and trouble, (insomuch that
here in London that which is perfectly dephlegm'd is valued, in their shops
that sell both, at ten times the price of common spirit of wine;) I presume you
will not take it ill, that without being obliged to it by the Title of this
Discourse, I take this occasion to acquaint you with the way I employ to obtain
dephlegm'd spirit of wine: Especially since the practice of the common way of
frequent Rectifications is (not to mention other Inconveniences) wont to prove
either exceeding tedious, or insufficient. Put then about an inch thick of
Tartar calcined to whiteness (for I find it not necessary to reduce it to a
Salt) and very dry into the bottom of a tall and slender Glass body, and pour
on it as much spirit of wine that has been but once rectified, as will, when
they have be^n shak'd together, swim above the Tartar a fingers breadth (more
or less in proportion to the Tartar you put in) and then the Head and Receiver
being carefully fastened on again, in a gentle heat draw off the spirit of
wine, shifting if you please the Receiver when about half is come over, and if
need be, rectifying once more all that you distill upon dry Calx of Tartar as
before. Whether or no you may meet with this Method in some Chemical Books, I
know not: But it seems that either it has not been clearly taught, or has been
proposed by suspected Authors, or else among other Processes, by being found in
whose company it has been discredited. For the most ancient and experienced
Distillers I have met with, have either contented themselves to follow the
common way of repeated Rectifications, though thereby they lose much time, and
much spirit of wine; or else have had recourse to peculiar Vessels of such a
height, as besides that they are neither easily nor cheaply to be procured, do
not, as far as I have hitherto seen, excuse the need of reiterated
Rectifications. Whereas, when we considered that the fixed Salt of Tartar
readily imbibes Aqueous bodies, and that yet it will not at all mix with pure
spirit of wine, it was easy to conclude, that the Phlegmatic part of the
spirit of wine would be soaked up by the Alcalizate Salt, whereby the
inflammable part would be freed from it. And accordingly when we proceeded
after the manner above prescribed, we found that the Liquor that was produced
upon the first Rectification from the Salt, being fired in a warm Silver-spoon,
did not leave behind it one drop of Phlegm, or so much as the least moisture
upon the spoon, nay, and indeed did endure a severer Examen, to which for
curiositie's sake we thought fit to put it. And when the Distillation was
carefully made, we found by frequently (for trial sake) shifting the Receiver,
that all the Spirit that ascended was (to sense) equally pure, since that which
came up last of all, even till the Calx seemed to begin to grow dry, by
beginning to cleave at the top, did burn all away, as well as that which came
over first. And having for further trial taken out the calcined Tartar, and
distilled it with a good fire, it yielded us pretty store of a nauseous and
strongly-scented Liquor, which seemed to be but Phlegm, both to the taste, and
by its not being at all inflammable though carefully tried. The same Calx of
Tartar being kept in some earthen Vessel upon the fire till it be well dried,
which will require a good heat, may be employed more than once in this
operation. And 'twas not needlessly that we prescribed Bodies tall and slender:
For we found not the Experiment to succeed in large and low ones, and much less
in Retorts, in which the Phlegm is wont to rise together with the Spirit; yet
we found, that provided the distillation were made with a sufficiently mild
heat, a Glass, though very broad, and but moderately high, would serve the turn
so far, as that the first half that ascended (the other being very weak) proved
a Spirit that in a silver-spoon would burn perfectly all away. And because
white Calx of Tartar is sometimes not so easy to be procured, we will add,
that we have for trial sake sometimes substituted Quicklime, or Salt of
Potashes, (made by a single Solution, Filtration, and Coagulation) with no bad
success, especially in case of removing the Receiver before the Ascension of
the last part of the Liquor, though even that it self has sometimes from
Quicklime come up inflammable enough. And therefore this Alcohol of wine we
peculiarly call the Alcalizate Spirit of Wine; and the rather, because Spiritus
vini Tartarizatus, which perhaps may be thought the properest name for it, is
employed by eminent Chemical Writers to signify a different thing. And a
practicable way of making such an Alcaliz'd and pure Spirit of Wine, we thought
not unfit to teach you here once for all, in regard the Menstruum is so highly
useful, not only for Tinctures, Extracts, and many other Chemical operations,
but in the making of diverse Philosophical Experiments, and particularly some of
those which you may meet with in our Writings. And an eminently ingenious
person (but to me a stranger) chancing to get a sight of this Essay, was
pleased to give me thanks for this last part of it, because, though he had very
often made use of Salt of Tartar to improve Spirit of Wine; yet he did it
before, not to dephlegm the weaker Liquor, but to acuate the strong with the
Alcali: Which though I deny not to be a thing feasible, yet (as I told him)
unless it be skilfully attempted, the highly rectified Liquor that is poured
on, will rather leave some of its most spiritous parts behind, than carry up so
fixed a Salt.

THE SECOND ESSAY, Of Un-succeeding EXPERIMENTS.
WHAT has been already said, Pyrophilus, may, I hope, suffice to show you, how
Experiments may miscarry upon the account of the Materials employed in trying
them. And therefore we shall now pass on to consider the Contingencies to which
Experiments are obnoxious upon the account of Circumstances, which either are
constantly unobvious, or at least are scarce discernable till the Trial be
past. And because these Circumstances can hardly be discoursed of in an
accurate Method, (which their nature will scarce admit of) I shall not tie my
self to any other order in setting down the Instances which occur to me on this
occasion, than that wherein they offer themselves to my memory.

And first I must acquaint you with what was not long since seriously related
to me by Doctor K. a person exceeding far both from the Custom, and in this
particular from the Temptation of telling untruths. He then assured me, that
lending his Laboratory in Holland to a friend of his during his own absence,
and leaving in that Laboratory among other things great store of Aqua fortis of
several compositions which he had made, to employ about his famous Scarlet Dye,
this friend of his sent him word a while after his departure, that by digesting
Gold with an Aqua fortis, he had separated the Tincture or yellow Sulphur from
it, and made it volatile, (the remaining body growing white) and that with this
golden Tincture he had, not without gain, turned Silver (as to part of it) into
very perfect Gold. Upon which advertisement the Doctor speedily returning to
his Laboratory, did himself with the same Aqua fortis diverse times draw a
volatile Tincture of Gold, which did turn Silver into true Gold: and (that I
may add That upon the by, to gratify your curiosity) when I demanded whether
or no the Tincture was capable to transmute or graduate as much Silver as
equaled in weight that Gold from whence the Tincture was drawn, he assured me,
that out of an ounce of Gold he drew as much Sulphur or Tincture as sufficed to
turn an ounce and a half of Silver into that noblest Metal. Which I am the more
disposed to believe, partly because my Trials permit me not to doubt of the
separableness of a yellow Substance or Tincture from Gold, and partly because I
am tempted to think, that Silver may have in it a Sulphur (to speak in the
Chemists Language) which Maturation is capable to graduate into a Golden one,
by having been certifi'd by the observations of men very experienced in
Metalline Affairs, (and perhaps too by my own) that sometimes by corrosive
Liquors (which Sir Francis Bacon also, if I mistake not, somewhere observes)
and sometimes by the operation of common Sulphur (especially well opened and
associated with fit Salts) Silver has afforded some grains of very pure Gold.
But our Doctor found himself much mistaken in the hopes of growing rich by this
Experiment: For a while after endeavoring to make it again, his hopes were
frustrated, which he ascribes to the Aqua fortis, and therefore has attempted
the same work afresh. But since all his Trials have been hitherto fruitless,
it is not improbable that the disappointment proceeded from some other more
abstruse cause; for we find such Adventures to have sometimes befallen Artists
irreparably. And Glauber alone, if you will therein credit him, tells us of
several ways by which he made Gold once, and could not do it again. Upon which
Subject I must not omit those very illustrious Testimonies and Instances of
this nature, that I find recorded by that Ornament of his Age and Quality, the
Prince of Mirandula, in his Treatise de Auro. Novi (says he) qui mihi
asseruerit semel se ex mobili argento quod vivum dicitur stabile verumque
argentum confecisse succis and foliis herbarum, Lib. 3. cap. 6.
idque vendidisse peritis explorandae Metallicae veritatis; eisdem mox usum se
foliis frustra, and quod semel perfecerat, nunquam alias, quanquam id saepe
tentaverit, perficere potuisse.

Alium novi (says he further) qui adhuc apud vivos moratur, cui cum aurum and
argentum circiter Quindecies per artem effectum esset, amisit artem eam,
accepitque oraculo socii per quietem habito, id ingratae mentis vitio
contigisse. Vt hinc etiam veritatem Apostolici dicti condiscamus, Neque qui
plantat, neque qui rigat est aliquid, sed incrementum dat Deus. And to both
these Narratives our learned Prince does in the same Book add diverse others.
Retulit quidam mihi (subjoyns he) sese Aurum ex argento fecisse semel magna
copia; secundo se usum eisdem rebus, fecisse quidem, sed minima semper
Quantitate, sic ut detrimentum lucro majus esse supputaverit. Venisse in mentem
uti detrimentum effugere possit, si non ex argento, sed ex aere melioris
condition metalli, sese consequi experiretur, idque se conjecturis firmis
nixum tentavisse: cumque in eo fuisset ut rem sese adepturum speraret, miris
modis evenisse, ut nihil omnino consequeretur.

Idem (continues the Prince) affirmavit ab amico qui expertus hoc ipsum fuerat
accepisse, qui cum ex Cinnabari argentum fecisset optimum, saepenumero sese
postea insistentem operi majore cum diligentia semper eventu rei fuisse
frustratum. And to these Relations of this famous Prince I could add others of
some Acquaintances of mine, who having either once or twice made Luna sixa (as
Artists call that Silver, which wanting but the tincture of Gold abides the
trial of Aqua fortis, etc.) or some other Lucriferous Experiment, have since in
vain attempted to do the like again, and yet have their eyes so dazel'd by the
Gold and Silver they have (either separated or) made, that they are not to be
prevailed with to desist from prosecuting their uncertain hopes.

That diverse Experiments succeed when tried in small quantities of matter
which hold not in the great, it may save you something to be advertised of;
diverse Projectors, especially Chemists, having already very dearly bought the
knowledge of that truth. For oftentimes a greater and unwieldy Quantity of
matter cannot be exposed in all its parts to a just degree of fire, or
otherwise so well managed as a less Quantity of matter may be ordered. But this
is so manifest a truth to those that have dealt much in Experiments, that
whereas many Chemists would be vastly rich, if they could still do in great
Quantities what they have sometimes done in little ones, many have undone
themselves by obstinately attempting to make even real Experiments more gainful.

I have not been very sollicitous to subjoyn Particulars to the foregoing
Observations, because that by reason of the Contingency of such Experiments as
would be the most for my present purpose, you might possibly be tempted to lose
toil and charges upon trials very likely not only to delude your hopes, but
perhaps to make you distrust the fidelity of our relations. Yet for
Illustration sake of what we have delivered, I am willing to mention some few
contingent Experiments that occur to my thoughts.

And first, it is delivered by the Lord Verulam himself, as I remember, and
other Naturalists, that if a Rose-bush be carefully cut as soon as it has done
bearing, it will again bear Roses in the Autumn. Of this many have made
unsuccessful trials, and thereupon report the Affirmation to be false; and yet
I am very apt to think, that the Lord Verulam was emboldened by Experience to
write as he did. To clear up which difficulty, let me tell you, that having
been particularly sollicitous about the Experiment, I find by the relation both
of my own and other experienced Gardeners, that this way of procuring Autumnal
Roses will in most Rose-bushes most commonly fail, but in some that are good
bearers it will succeed; and accordingly having this Summer made trial of it, I
find, that of many bushes that were cut in June in the same Row, the greater
number by far promise no Autumnal Roses, but one that has manifested it self
to be of a vigorous and prolifick nature, is at this present indifferently well
stored with Damask-roses. And there may be also a mistake in the kind of Roses:
for experienced Gardeners inform me, that the Musk-rose will, if it be a lusty
Plant, bear flowers in Autumn without the help of cutting. And therefore that
may be misascrib'd to Art, which is the bare production of Nature. And Cinnamon
Rose-bushes do so much better thrive by cutting than several other sorts, that
I remember, this last Spring my Gardener having (as he told me) about mid-
April (which was as soon as that kind of Rose-bush had done bearing) cut many
of them in my Garden, I saw about the middle of June store of the same bushes
plentifully adorned both with Buds and with blown Flowers.

An uncertainty not unlike that which we have newly taken notice of in the
Experiment of producing Autumnal Roses, has been likewise observed in the
attempts that have been made to make diverse sorts of Fruit grow upon the same
Tree. And as for differing sorts of Fruits of the same denomination, as Apples,
Pears, etc. though some severe Naturalists are unwilling to believe that they
can be made to grow upon the same Tree; yet we dare not imitate their severity,
having lately seen various sorts of Pears fed by the same Tree, and elsewhere
three and twenty sorts of Apple-Grafts flourishing upon the same old Plant, and
most of them adorned with Fruit. Nay, and though the Fruits be not of the same
denomination, yet if they be of kin in nature, they may very possibly be
brought to grow on the same Tree: for we lately gathered ripe Apricocks and
ripe Plums upon one Tree, from which we like-wise expect some other sorts of
stone-fruit. But to make fruits of very differing natures be nourished
prosperously by the same stock, is so difficult a thing, that we can at most
but reckon it among contingent Experiments: for though Pliny and Baptista Porta
relate their having seen each of them an example of the possibility of
producing on one Tree great variety of differing fruits; and though such a
person as the deservedly-famous Astronomer Dr. Ward assures me, that he has
particularly taken notice of Pears growing upon an Apple Tree; and I elsewhere
add a resembling Observation of ours; yet certainly this Experiment has been
for the most part but very improsperously attempted, nor have I yet ever seen
it succeed above once, though tried with very much care and industry. And I
remember that this very year, in the same Garden where I gathered the Apricocks
and Plums above mentioned, I saw the Ciens of a Pear Tree so skilfully grafted
upon an Apple-stock, that it flourished very much with blossoms in the Spring,
and gave me great hopes that it would bear fruit this newly-past Summer, but
has deceived my expectation, as diverse other Plants so grafted in the same
Garden have for many years deluded the hopes of the skilful Master of it, who
assures me, that though diverse of them did for some years successively afford
promising blossoms, yet they all decayed away without bearing any of them any
fruit. Which yet may seem somewhat strange, since not only we have this Summer
gathered Pears upon a graft which a Divine, to whom the Garden belongs,
affirmed to have been grafted upon a Quince-tree; and the industrious Kircher
tells us, that Ex-perientia docet Persicum Moro insitum fructus proferre, etc.
de quo nullum est dubium utpote vulgar pene: but experience tells us, that as
little as a White-thorn and a Pear Tree seem of kin, a Ciens of the latter will
sometimes prosper well being grafted upon a stock of the former.

To contingent Experiments, Pyrophilus, you may if you please refer what is
delivered by those learned Writers, who affirm, That if a Lixivium made of the
Ashes or fixed Salt of a burned Plant be frozen, there will appear in the Ice
the Idea of the same Plant: For we have diverse times purposely made trial of
this Experiment without the promised success: and I remember that in the last
cold season, proper for such trials, I purposely made a Lixivium of fair Water
and Salt of Wormwood, and having frozen it with Snow and Salt after the manner
of Congelation elsewhere declared, I could not discern in the Ice any thing
more like to Wormwood than to several other Plants; and having about the same
time, and after the same manner, exposed to congelation a thin Vial full of a
strong Decoction of Wormwood, (from which an Idea of the Plant may be more
probably expected) thole to whom I showed it after it was frozen could discern
as little like Wormwood in it as my self. It Is true, that in both these Vials
the Ice seemed somewhat odly figured; but it is true also not only that we have
observed that Water wherein a saline body, as Saltpeter, or Sea Salt, or
Sugar, etc. has been dissolved, has afforded us Ice which seemed to shoot into
several figures, but even in ordinary water congealed we have often seen Ice
figured, as if the water had been no Elementary body; which needs not be
admired, since (to omit other causes which may concur to the production of this
effect) many Waters gliding through Earths abounding in saline particles of
this or that nature, may be easily, in their passage, impregnated with them;
whence perhaps it comes to pass, that Dyers find some Waters very fit, and
others very unfit for the dying of Scarlet and some other Colors. And
therefore we cannot but think that the figures that are oftentimes to be met
with in the frozen Lixivium or Decoction of a Plant, will afford but uncertain
proofs that the Idea of each, or so much as of any determinate Plant, displays
it self constantly in that frozen Liquor. And I much fear, that most of those
that tell us that they have seen such Plants in Ice, have in that discovery
made as well use of their Imagination as of their Eyes. And it is strange to
observe what things some men will fancy, rather than be thought to discern less
than other men pretend to see. As I remember Mr. R. the justly famous maker of
Dioptrical Glasses, for merriment telling one that came to look upon a great
Tube of his of 30 foot long, that he saw through it in a Mill six miles off a
great Spider in the midst of her Web; the credulous man, though at first he
said he discerned no such thing, at length confessed he saw it very plainly,
and wondered he had discovered her no sooner. But yet, Pyrophilus, because two
or three sober Writers do seriously relate some stories of that nature upon
their own observation, I am content for their sakes to reckon their Experiments
rather among the Contingent than the absolutely false ones: for it is not
impossible but that among the many figures which frozen Liquors do sometimes
put on, there may appear something so like this or that Plant, that being
looked upon with the favorable eye of a prepossessed beholder, it may seem to
exhibit the Picture of the calcined Vegetable: and we our selves not very long
since, setting to freeze in Snow and Salt a fine green Solution of good
Verdegrease, (which contains much of the Saline parts of the Grapes coagulated
upon the Copper by them corroded) obtained an Ice of the same color, wherein
appeared diverse little figures, which were indeed so like to Vines, that we
were somewhat surpised at the Experiment; and that which increased our wonder
was, that another part of the same Solution being frozen in another Vial by the
bare cold of the air, afforded us an Ice angularly figured, (as we have
observed the Ice of saline Liquors oftentimes to be) but not at all like that
made by the application of Snow and Salt. And having for further trial sake
suffered that Ice wherein the Vines appeared to thaw of it self, and having
then frozen the Liquor a second time in the same Vial, and after the same
manner as formerly, we could not discern in the second Ice any thing like that
which we had admired in the first. And in Wine and Vinegar, as much as those
Liquors partake of the nature of the Vine, we have not after Congelation
observed any peculiar resemblance of it in figure.

The mention we have been making of Ice brings into my memory another
Experiment, which may perhaps be reckoned likewise among Contingent ones, and
that is the Experiment of burning with Ice as with a Glass Lens; which though
some eminent Modern Writers prescribe to be done without taking notice of any
difficulty in it, yet both we and others that have industriously enough tried
it, have met with such defeating circumstances in it, especially from the
ununiform Texture wont to be met with in most Ice, that the making of such
burning-Glasses may be well enough referred to those Experiments whose constant
success is not to be relied on, as we elsewhere more particularly declare.

In the Trade of Dying there is scarce any tinging Ingredient that is of so
great and general use amongst us as Woad or Glastum; for though of it self it
Dye but a Blew, yet it is used to prepare the cloth for Green and many other
of the sadder Colors, when the Dyers have a mind to make them permanent and
last without fading: but yet in the decocting of Woad to make it yield or
strike its color, there are some critical times and other circumstances to be
observed; the easy mistake of which oftentimes defeats the Dyers expectation
to his very great loss, which sometimes he knows not to what to impute, of
which I have heard several of them complain. And therefore diverse of our
less-expert Dyers, to avoid those hazards, leave off the use of Woad, though
growing plentifully enough here in England, and instead of it employ Indico,
though it cost them dearer, as being brought hither sometimes from Spain,
sometimes from the Barbados, and oftentimes even from the East Indies.

Our London Refiners, when to part Silver and Copper they dissolve those mixed
Metals in Aqua fortis, are wont afterward to dilute the glutted Menstruum with
store of fair water, and then with Copper Plates to strike down the dissolved
Silver. But because by ^his manner of proceeding much Copper is wont after the
separation of the Silver to remain in the Menstruum, as may appear by its high
tincture, that this thus impregnated Liquor may be impov'd to the best
advantage, they are wont to pour it upon what they call Whiting (which is said
to be a white Chalk or Clay finely powdered, cleans'd, and made up into Balls)
wherewith the tincted parts incorporating themselves, will in some hours
constitute one sort of Verditer fit for the use of Painters, and such other
Artificers as deal in Colors, leaving the remaining part of the Menstruum an
indifferently-clear Liquor, whence they afterward by boiling reduce a kind of
Saltpeter fit with the addition of Vitriol (and some fresh Niter) to yield
them a new Aqua fortis.

And these things I mention, Pyrophilus, that you may know what I mean when I
tell you, that sometimes the Refiners cannot make this Verditer for a great
while together, and yet cannot tell whence their disability to make it
proceeds. Of which Contingency I remember I lately heard one of the eminentest
and richest of them sadly complain, affirming, that neither he, nor diverse
others of his Profession, were able, not long since, to make Verditer for
diverse months together; and that several others were yet at a loss in reference
to that particular: though for his part he had, without knowing the Cause of
this Contingency, found a Remedy for it, namely, to warm the Menstruum well
before it be poured on the Whiting, on which, when the Liquor was warm, the
tincted parts would fasten, though they would not, whilst (according to the
custom of Refiners) it was poured on cold.

Making likewise the other day a visit, to the chief Copperas work we have in
England, one of the Overseers of it, who went along with me to show me the
contrivance of it, assured me, that diverse times, by the mistake or neglect of
a circumstance in point of time, they had lost, and are yet subject to lose,
some thousands of pounds of Vitriol at a time, which in spite of their wonted,
but not sufficiently-attentive and skilful care, would degenerate into an
Unctuous Substance, not to be reduced into good Vitriol again; unless by the
tedious way of throwing it abroad, and exposing it with the unprepared stones,
from which they draw their Vitriol, to the Rain and Sun to be opened anew, and
fitted for the yielding of Vitriol after the same manner with those crude
Minerals.

Upon this occasion I must not omit, because much conducing to the scope of our
present Discourse, a memorable Relation that I have met with in the Indian
History of the learned Josephus Acosta, who diligently surveyed the famous and
almost inestimable Mines of Peru, and (for one that was not a Chemist) has
delivered diverse considerable and judicious Observations about them. That which
I am now to mention is in that Chapter where he treats of the Silver of the
Indies, Josephus Acosta lib. 4. cap. 5.
set down in these words: It is strange to see not only the difference betwixt
the refining of Metal by Fire, and without it by Quicksilver, but also that
some of these Metals which are refined by the fire, cannot well be molten with
any Artificial Wind, as with Bellows, but when it is kindled and blown with the
Natural Air or Natural Wind. The Metal of the Mines of Porco is easily refined
with Bellows; and that of the Mines of Potozi cannot be molten with Bellows,
but only by the breath of their Guayars, which are small furnaces upon the
sides of the Mountains, built expressly where the Wind lies, within the which
they melt this Metal: and though it be hard to yield a reason of this
difference, yet it is most certain and approved by long Experience.

If there be any Trade that obliges the Artificers to be assiduously conversant
with the Materials they employ, it is that of the Glass-men; and yet even to
them, and in their most ordinary operations, there happen now and then little
accidents, which though they know not well to what to ascribe, are yet capable
of hindering them from doing sometimes what they have done a thousand times. And
I remember that among the last times that I have been at a Glass-house, an
eminently-skilful Workman, whom I had purposely engaged to make some Vessels
for me that required more than ordinary dexterity, was not able when I came
thither to make Metal (as they call that colliquated mixture of Sand and fixed
Salt whereof they blow their Glasses) tolerably fit to be employed: Wherefore
he desired me to take the pains to come again another day, and he would try to
repair his unluckiness. But the next time I came, though it were upon
appointment, his Metal proved again unserviceable, and instead of being
colorless when it was cold, looked as if it had been stained with Blew and
Yellow, and was besides britler than it ought to have been. So that it need be
no such wonder, if Philosophers and Chemists do sometimes miss of the expected
Event of an Experiment but once, or at least but seldom tried, since we see
Tradesmen themselves cannot do always, what, if they were not able to do
ordinarily, they could not earn their bread.

It is affirmed by Helmont and others that treat of the Lapides Cancrorum, that
they grow within the skulls of those Craw-fishes from whence they have their
name: but I have known good Anatomists complain, that they have sought them in
vain in the heads of those fishes, which may well make them distrust the
veracity of those that ascribe them to that sort of Animals; yet we have often
taken those stony Concretions out of the heads of Craw-fishes. But passing
lately through Hungerford, a Town famous for the plenty of such kind of fish,
we made diligent enquiry concerning their Nature, and were there informed by
those that looked to them, that the Concretions above mentioned are to be found
in their heads but about that season of the year wherein they shift their
shells, and that at other times of the year, several persons had in vain
endeavored to store themselves with Crabs eyes at Hungerford. And indeed,
having at the last time of my being there (which was about the latter end of
June) caused diverse large ones to be taken out of the water, we found these
little stones in the head but of one of them; whereas about a fortnight before,
which was near the Summer Solstice, passing by that place, we found in the
wonted parts of the heads several such Concretions as to bigness and shape, but
so soft, that we could easily crush and discind them betwixt our fingers. And
certainly, the mistake of the circumstance of time has much prejudiced the
reputation of many truths: and I remember that Asellius, to whose Anatomical
fortune the world is so much beholden, ingenuously acknowledges, that he had
like to have lost the discovery of the milky veins, because having at first
suspected those unlooked for white Vessels, which he took notice of in the
Mesentery of a Dog dissected alive, to be some irregular ramifications of
Nerves, he was much confirmed in his conjecture by the next Dog he opened; for
having diffected him at an inconvenient distance of time from the Dogs repast,
the slender Vessels he looked for being destitute of the Chyle, which is it
that makes them conspicuous, did not appear: So that he had lost the benefit of
his first lucky observation, had not his Sagacity inclined him to suspect, that
if a Dog were plentifully fed at a convenient distance of time before his being
dissected, the Vessel swelled with alimental juices would be the better
discernable; whereupon having feasted another Dog some hours before he opened
him, he manifestly detected those milky Vessels, whose discovery has since set
Anatomists so usefully on work.

But, Pyrophilus, not to exceed the limits of an Essay, I must not multiply
Instances of the Contingencies of Experiments, but content my self to tell you
in general, that in diverse Cases such circumstances as are very difficult to be
observed, or seem to be of no concernment to an Experiment, may yet have a
great influence on the Event of it. If on either of the Extremes or Poles of a
good armed Lodestone, you leisurely enough, or diverse times, draw the back of
a Knife, which has not before received any Magnetic influence, you may
observe, that if the point of the blade have in this affriction been drawn from
the middle or Equator of the Lodestone toward the Pole of it, it will
attract one of the Extremes of an equilibrated Magnetic Needle; but if you
take another Knife that has not yet been invigorated, and upon the self-same
Extremity or Pole of the Lodestone, thrust the back of the Knife from the Pole
toward the Equator or middle of the Lodestone, you shall find, that the
point of the Knife has, by this bare difference of Position in the blade whilst
it past upon the Extreme of the Lodestone, acquired so different a Magnetic
property, or Polarity, from that which was given to the former Knife by the
same Pole of the Lodestone, that it will not attract, but rather seem to repel
or drive away that end of the Magnetic Needle which was drawn by the point of
the other Knife. And this improbable Experiment not only we have made trial of,
by passing slender Irons upon the Extremities of armed Load-stones, the breadth
of whose Steel-caps may make the Experiment somewhat less strange, but we have
likewise tried it by affrictions of such Irons upon the Pole of a naked
terella, and we found it to succeed there likewise. How strange soever it may
seem, that the same point or part of the Lodestone should imbue Iron with
contrary Properties, barely as they are, during their passing over it, drawn
from the Equator of the Lodestone, or thrust toward it. But whether, and how
far this Observation insinuates the operations of the Loadstone to be chiefly
performed by streams of small particles, which perpetually issuing out of one
of its Poles, do wheel about and re-enter at the other; We shall not now
examine (though this seem one of the most likely Phenomenon we have met with,
to hint a probable Magnetical Hypothesis) contenting our selves to have
manifested by what plainly appears, how much influence a circumstance, which
none but a Magnetic Philosopher would take notice of, may have on an
Experiment. We have also with pleasure observed, how Artificers in the
tempering of Steel, by holding it but a minute or two longer or l^sser in the
flame, (or other competent Heat) do give it very differing tempers, as to
brittleness or toughness, hardness or softness; for as when it is taken out of
the flame to be extinguished, it looks either red, yellow, or blew, so they
esteem and find it fit to make Knives, Engraving Tools, or Springs for Watches,
etc. and yet it passes from one color to another so swiftly, that none but an
Artist expert in tempering of Iron would suspect, that so small a difference
oft-time of its stay in the flame could produce so great a difference in its
tempers. On which occasion, Pyrophilus, I call to mind, that making a while
since some trials concerning Gravers in the Shop of a famous Artificer, he
presented me, as a great rarity, a Graver (which I yet keep) that would make
the usual Experiments about tempering of Gravers appear false to him that
should never try them but upon it; for with all the care wherewith I tried upon
it the known ways of softning Gravers, I could not soften this: which men
eminently skilled in these matters (together with the person that made it)
affirmed to have been made of Damasco-Steel, the strength whereof in cutting
Iron I have (not without some wonder) made trial of. But whether this
singularity which we have mentioned in this Graver proceed from the nature of
the Steel, or from the temper that it had afterward given it, is not yet agreed
upon by those skilful men to whom I have showed it: but one of them, who by
making lnstruments for Navigators, has had the opportunity of making more than
ordinary enquiry into matters of this nature, assures me, that he can easily
soften this kind of Steel, by only taking it off the Fire at a certain nick of
time, differing from that which is wont to be observed in order to the softning
of common Gravers. And who knows but that in many other Experiments, seemingly
despicable and unheeded Circumstances may be of great concernment, though by
reason of the want of such particular Observations as the frequent dealing with
the same body has given Magnetic Philosophers and Artificers occasion to make,
men have not yet taken notice of their importance.

To give you one Instance to this purpose, Pyrophilus, let me take notice to
you, that diverse Planters of Fruit Trees have with wonder observed, that some
Grafts of Cherry-trees, for example, have born fruit the same year that they
were grafted, (nay I have observed some Plants to bear fruit the same quarter
of the year) and others not till the year after their insition, though neither
in the goodness of the Graft, nor in that of the Stock, they had observed any
disparity to which the difference above mentioned could be ascribed; and
therefore the bearing or not bearing of the Ciens of a Cherry-tree the first
year of its Insition is by many Gardiners looked upon as a thing merely
Contingent. And yet indeed it scarce deserves to be reckoned among such
contingent Experiments as we have been hitherto treating of; for I am informed
by the trials of more than one of the most skilful and experienced Grafters of
these parts, that a man shall seldom fail of having Cherries born by his Graft
the same year in which the Insition is made, if he take care that his Graft,
which must be of a good kind, have blossom-buds, as they are wont to be called,
upon it: Whereas if it were only leaf-buds, as they may be termed, it will not
bear fruit till the second season; and this not being taken notice of by vulgar
Gardiners, makes them, as we have said, impute a needless Contingency to the
fruitfulness of such kind of Grafts. Now to discern such buds as are fit to
produce blossoms from such as will display themselves but in leaves, is no
difficult matter, the former sort being more full, and big, and round than the
latter, which are wont also to lie more flat and close to the Graft. And 'twas,
Phyrophilus, such observations as this that induced us after the beginning of
the former Essays, to discriminate from such contingent Experiments as those
wherein the cause of the Contingency is very abstruse and difficult to be
discerned, such other Experiments whose seeming Contingency proceeds from more
easily discoverable causes; for such by diligent observation of circumstances
may be reduced to a greater certainty than the others seem capable of. Though I
dare not deny that even diverse of those contingent Experiments, which to us yet
seem to belong to the first sort, by men's future skill and diligence in
observation may be made fit to be reduced to the second sort.

Before I leave this Subject, Pyrophilus, I dare not omit to say something to
you of the Virgula Divina, or rather Divinatoria, by which many Mineralists
pretend to discover the latent veins of Metals. Some use a forked hazel, whose
horns they hold by the ends one in each hand; and others content themselves to
choose a hazel rod (which some will have to be all of the same years shoot) and
this they bind on to another straight stick of any other wood, and walking
softly with it over those places where they suspect the bowels of the earth to
be enriched with Metals, they say, that if they pass over a Metalline vein, the
Wand will by bowing toward it discover it. And some Dealers in Metals I know
who affirm, that by holding the Metals successively in that hand wherein a man
holds the rod, he may discover what determinate Metal is predominant in the
Vein: for when he puts into his hand that Metal wherewith the Mine chiefly
abounds, the Wand will manifestly bow more strongly than when it is held in the
hand with any other Metal. What to determine concerning the truth of this
perplexing Experiment, I confess I know not. For Agricola himself, after a long
debate concerning it, De re Metallica lib. 20. p. 28.
gives us this account of his sense, Metallicus igitur (says he) quia eum virum
bonum and gravem esse volumus, virgula incantata non utetur, quiarerum naturae
peritum and prudentem, furcatam sibi usui non esse, sed, ut supra dixi, habet
naturalia venarum signa quae observat. Lib. 3. part. 5 cap. 3.
The diligent Kiroherus informs us in his Art magnetica, that having exactly
tried the Experiment with Metals, for he mentions not his having tried it with
Mines, he could not find it in any measure succeed; and we our selves having
several times made trial of it in the presence of the considentest assertors of
the truth of it, could not satisfy our selves that the Wand did really stand
either to the Metals when placed under it, or to the Metalline Veins, when we
carried it over Mines whence Metalline Oar was at that very time digging out.
But on the other side diverse good Authors, and even our diligent Countryman
Gabriel Plat, though wont to be somewhat too severe to Chemists, does ascribe
very much to this detecting Wand, and diverse persons, in other things very far
from credulous, have as Eyewitnesses with great asseverations asserted the
truth of the Experiment before us; and one Gentleman who lives near the
Lead-Mines in Somersetshire, leading me over those parts of the Mines where we
knew that Metalline Veins did run, made me take notice of the stooping of the
Wand when he passed over a Vein of Oar, and protested, that the motion of his
hand did not at all contribute to the inclination of the Rod, but that
sometimes when he held it very fast, it would bend so strongly as to break in
his hand. And to convince me that he believed himself, he did upon the promises
made him by his stooping Wand put himself to the great charge of digging in
untried places for Mines, (but with what success he has not yet informed me.)
Among the Miners themselves I found some made use of this Wand, and others
laughed at it. And this I must take notice of as peculiar to this Experiment,
that the most knowing Patrons of it confess, that in some men's hands it will
not at all succeed, some hidden property in him that uses the Wand being able,
as they say, to overpower and hinder its inclinatory virtue. To which I must
add what a very famous Chemist, who affirms himself to have tried many other
things with it besides those that are commonly known, very solemnly professed
to me upon his own knowledge, namely, that in the hands of those very persons,
in whose hands the Rod will (as they speak) work, there are certain unlucky
Hours, governed by such Planets and Constellations, (which I confess I believed
not enough to remember their names) during which it will not work, even in
those hands wherein at other times it manifestly will. But of this Experiment I
must content my self to say, what I am wont to do when my opinion is asked of
those things which I dare not peremptorily reject, and yet am not convinced of;
namely, that they that have seen them can much more reasonably believe them
than they that have not.

Nor is it only in Experiments, Pyrophilus, but in Observations also, that much
of Contingency may be, witness the great variety in the number, magnitude,
position, figure, etc. of the parts taken notice of by Anatomical Writers in
their dissections of that one Subject the humane body, about which many errors
would have been delivered by Anatomists, if the frequency of dissections had
not enabled them to discern betwixt those things that are generally and
uniformly found in dissected bodies, and those which are but rarely, and (if I
may so speak) through some wantonness or other deviation of Nature, to be met
with. I remember that a while since being present at the dissection of a lusty
young Thief, we had opportunity to observe among other things, that the
interval betwixt two of his ribs was near the backbone filled up with a thick
bony substance, which seemed to be but an expansion of the ribs, and appeared
not to have grown there upon occasion of any fracture, or other mischance.
About the same time being at a private dissection of a large and young humane
Body with some learned men, an ingenious Person Professor of Anatomy there
present, chancing to cut a great Nerve, spied in the substance of it a little
of a very red Liquor, which he immediately showed me, as wondering what it might
be: but I concluding it to be Blood, presently suspected that it might have
proceeded from some small unheeded drop of blood wiped off by the brushy
substance of the Nerve from the Knife wherewith it was cut. Wherefore carefully
wiping a Dissecting Knife, I did in another place cut the Nerve asunder, and
found another very little drop of pure blood in the substance of it as before.
This I did again elsewhere with like success, showing it to the bystanders,
who admired to see a Vessel carrying blood (for such they concluded it to be)
in the body of a Nerve, in regard they remembered not to have ever met with
such an accident; though I the less admire it, because I have in an Oxes Eye or
two observed in that coat which the Moderns commonly call the Retina, and which
seems to be but an expansion of the Pith of the Optic Nerve, little turgent
veins manifestly full of blood.

We further observed in that lately-mention'd body, in which we took notice of
the irregular conjunction of two Ribs, that the Lungs which were very sound had
a supernumerary lobe on one side, which did so little differ from its
companions, that we did not, till we had displayed the Lungs, take notice of
it. And I remember that a while before, being invited by a company of
Physicians to a private Dissection, and the Lungs, which otherwise seemed not
unsound, appearing in diverse places fastened to the ribs, two ingenious
Anatomists that were there present, did so little agree in their Observations
concerning such cases, that the one affirmed, that he had never seen any Lungs
(which had not been excessively morbid) tied to the Thorax; and the other
protested, that he had scarce ever opened a diseased body wherein the Lungs did
not so adhere. But if it were not improper to mind a young Gentleman of
Venereal Observations, I could easily give you an eminent proof of the
disagreement of Anatomical Observators, by insisting on the Controversy
betwixt the famous Writers on that Subject, concerning the Anatomical notes or
tokens of Virginity, many eminent Authors affirming, that they have seldom
failed of finding them in one amongst very many dissected Maids; and many other
Artists, both conspicuous and experienced, peremptorily professing, that they
have seldom or never met with the pretended marks in persons even of the most
undoubted Virginity: and certainly it is very strange, that about a matter
which seems so easily determinable by Sense, accurate and sober men should so
widely disagree, as that the one should profess he has very rarely, if ever,
met with in a humane body what another affirms himself to have as seldom, if
ever, missed. But because, Pyrophilus, this subject is perhaps somewhat
improper to be insisted on either to, or by, a young man, I shall pass on to
tell you, that amongst the accuratest of our modern Writers, I suppose you will
readily allow me to reckon D. Harvey and D. Highmore, and that that though in
their excellent Treatises of Generation they both insist on the production and
changes observable in Hens Eggs, as the Patterns whereunto the Generation of
other Animals may be referred; yet have we diverse times in the progress of
Nature in her formation of a Chick, observed considerable variations in point
of time and other circumstances (though in the main our Observations commonly
agreed) from what is by them delivered: which diversity may easily proceed from
the differing constitutions of Hens, their differing assiduity in sitting on
their Eggs, the differing qualifications of the Eggs themselves, and several
other particulars of like nature. And I remember, that the other day taking
notice of this to my learned friend Dr. Highmore, he readily acknowledged to
me, that he himself had likewise observed diverse circumstances in Eggs whilst
they were hatching, which varied from those set down by him in his Book, though
he had there accurately expressed the changes he discerned in those Eggs which
at that time afforded him his Observations. And indeed there are certain things
of such a nature, that scarce any single man's accurateness in making a single
Observation about them, can secure him from appearing unskilful or unfaithful
in his Observations, unless those that shall afterward examine them chance to
be endowed with a somewhat more than ordinary either equity, or sagacity, or
both. For instance, he that first affirmed that a Needle animated by a
Loadstone did constantly convert its extremes to the opposite Poles of the
Earth, could scarce suspect himself of having delivered any thing which he had
not carefully tried. And yet of those excellent Pilots, Gonzales Oviedo and
Sebastian Cabot, (who are said to have in America first taken notice of the
Declination of the Mariners Needle) he that did first in those far distant
parts of the world compare the Meridian Line afforded by Magnetical Needles
with one Mathematically drawn (which may be readily found by accurate
Sun-dials) and thereby observe the variation of the Needle, or its declination
from the true Meridian Line, might easily conclude the Observer formerly
mentioned to have been faulty, by reason of his finding the Needles variation
differing (perhaps by diverse degrees) from that delivered by the first
Observer. And this second man's Observation might appear to have been as
carelessly made to a hundred other Observers, if the Observations of Navigators
had not made it apparent, that the Declination of the Needle is far from being
the same in all places: for though Cardan (as Kircher and Fracastorius, as
another informs us) be pleased to affirm, Fournier Hydr. l. 11. c. 11.
that the Lodestone declines as many degrees as the Pole star is distant from
the Pole of the world; yet besides diverse reasons, common Experience
sufficiently manifests the inconsiderableness (not to speak more harshly) of
that assertion. For about the Islands of the Azores, especially that of Corvo,
over which the first Meridian is by many supposed to pass, the Magnetic Needle
has bin observed directly to respect the Poles, without any sensible
declination from them; but in other places it is wont to vary sometimes
Eastward, sometimes Westward, more or less. Insomuch that not only our
venturous Countryman Captain Thomas James observed it in 63 degrees
North-Latitude to be no less than 27 Degrees, In the Table annexed to his
Voyage.
48 Minutes; but a learned Mathematical Writer that is lately come forth, makes
the Declination at the Fretum Davis to amount to what is almost incredible, 50
Degrees. And this Deflexion of the Needle sometimes to one side of the
Meridian, sometimes to the other, happens with so much seeming irregularity, as
has made both the diligent Kircher himself, and diverse other Magnetic Writers,
almost despair of reducing these kind of Observations to any general Hypothesis.

To which we may add, that perhaps very few even of the exactest Observations
of this nature made an Age since, would now appear accurate to them that should
try them in the self-same places wherein, and the self-same manner after which
they were formerly made. So that the diligentest of those Observers would
appear to us to have been negligent, if the sagacity of some of their
succeeders had not prompted them to suspect, that even in the same place the
Needles variation may vary. And I remember, that having not long since enquired
of an English Contriver of Mathematical Instruments for the use of Seamen,
what he had observed concerning this alteration of the Needles variation, he
told me, that by comparing of ancient and modern Observations made by himself
and other accurate Mathematicians at London, he had found the Declination
constantly to decrease, and, as he conjectured, about 12 or 13 Minutes (though
that methinks be much) in a year. And it will be yet more difficult to set down
any Observation of this nature which will appear exact to posterity, if that
strange thing be true (as it may well be) which was related to Kircher by a
friend of his, who affirms himself to have observed a notable change of the
Needles Variation at Naples, after a great Incendium of the neighboring
Mountain Vesuvius; which alteration he not absurdly suspects to have proceeded
from the very great change made in the neighboring subterraneal parts by that
great conflagration. And it seems the same Observation has been taken notice of
by Mathematicians elsewhere. Livie 11. chap. 10.
For the learned Jesuit Fournier in his French Hydrography tells us in more
general terms, that since the Incendiums of Vesuvius the Declination (of the
Needle) has notably changed in the Kingdom of Naples. The same Author somewhere
delivers what (if it be true) is remarkable to our present purpose, in these
words. There are persons who have observed, that the same Needle that declined
5 degrees upon the surface of the Earth, being carried down very low into
certain Caves, declined quite otherwise. I added those words, if it be true,
not to question the veracity of the Author, but because it is very possible the
makers of the observation (though learned men) may have been mistaken in it
without suspecting themselves in danger of being so. For I should scarce have
imagined, unless my own particular observation had informed me, in how great a
variety of Stones and other Fossiles the Oar of Iron may lurk disguised: so
that it is no way incredible, that knowing Chemists themselves, and much more
Mathematicians and others, not being aware of the Observation of what I have
newly delivered, may presume, because they saw not in the deep Caves above
mentioned any Minerals like the vulgar Iron Oar, that there is nothing of that
Metal there, when indeed there may be enough to occasion that Deflexion of the
Needle; which (especially if it be strongly excited) may be often drawn aside
by Iron or other Magnetic Bodies, at a greater distance than those that have
not tried will be apt to suspect: which may perhaps be the reason why in the
little Island of Ilva (upon the coast of Italy) where they dig up Iron and
store of Loadstones, of which I have seen in Toscany of a prodigious bigness,
there is in different, but neighboring places, such a strange disparity of the
Needles variation as curious men have recorded.

Nor are Magnetical and Anatomical Observations the only ones which are subject
to disagree now and then, without the negligence of those that make them: but I
want time, and I fear you would want patience, to consider at present as many
of them as might be easily enumerated to you.

I suppose, Pyrophilus, you may have observed, how I in the past Discourse have
forborne to insist on Medicinal Experiments, which I have purposely done,
because they are so many, and almost all of them subject to such uncertainties,
that to insist on them would require much more time than my occasions will
allow me to spend upon this Essay. And indeed in Physic it is much more
difficult than most men can imagine, to make an accurate Experiment: for
oftentimes the same disease proceeding in several persons from quite differing
causes, will be increased in one by the same remedy by which it has been cured
in another. And not only the constitutions of Patients may as much alter the
effects of remedies, as the causes of diseases, but even in the same Patient
and the same disease, the single circumstance of Time may have almost as great
an operation upon the success of a Medicine as either of the two former
particulars, as we may elsewhere have occasion by sundry Instances to manifest.
But besides the general uncertainty to which most remedies are subject, there
are some few that seem obnoxious to Contingencies of a peculiar nature: such is
the Sympathetick Powder, of which not only diverse Physicians and other sober
persons have assured me they had successfully made trial, but we our selves
have thought that we were Eyewitnesses of the operation of it; and yet not
only many that have tried it have not found it answer ^^^ectation, but we our
selves trying some of our own p^^^^ring on our selves, have found it
ineffectual, and u^^bl^ ^o stop so much as a bleeding at the Nose, though upon
Application of it a little before we had seen such a bleeding, though violent,
suddenly stopped in a person, who was so far from contributing by his Imagination
to the effect of the Powder, that he derided those that he saw apply it to some
of the drops of his blood. Wherefore that the Sympathetick Powder and the
Weapon-salve are never of any efficacy at all, I dare not affirm; but that they
constantly perform what is promised of them I must leave others to believe. But
making mention of remedies of this nature, though I am willing, Pyrophilus, to
put a Period both to your trouble and my own, yet I must not omit to tell you,
that whereas the Paeony-root has been much commended both by ancient and modern
Physicians of no mean account, as an Amulet against the Falling Sickness, and
yet has been by many found ineffectual, we have been apt to suspect, that its
inefficacy, if it be but infrequent, might possibly proceed from its having
been unseasonably gathered; and when I was last in the West of Ireland,
acquainting the eminentest of the Galenists there with my Conjecture, he
confirmed me in it, by assuring me that he had often ^ry'd the Paeony-root
unseasonably gathered without success, but having lately gathered it under its
proper Constellation, as they speak, (which is when the decreasing Moon passes
under Aries) and tied the slit Root about the Necks and Arms of his Patients,
he had freed more than one, whom he named to me, from Epileptical fits.
Agreeable whereunto I find, that a famous Physician of Grenoble, Monsieur des
Grands Prez, in the last of his Observations communicated to the famous
Practical Physician Riverius, solemnly professes his having diverse times freed
his Patients from the Falling Sickness by the single outward application of
Paeony-roots, collected and applied as is abovementioned. But though he thence
infers the usefulness of observing the Stars in the practice of Physic, yet
before much weight be laid upon such improbable Notions as most of those of
judiciary Astrologers, the Influence of Constellations upon Simples, etc. ought
by severe and competent Experiments to be better made out than hitherto it has
been.

But to say no more of the contingent Observations to be taken notice of in
trials Medical, I could tell you that I have observed even Mathematical Writers
themselves to deliver such Observations as do not regularly hold true. For
though it has been looked upon as their privilege and glory to affirm nothing
but what they can prove by no less than Demonstration; and though they use to
be more attentive and exact than most other men in making almost any kind of
Philosophical Observation; yet the certainty and accurateness which is
attributed to what they deliver, must be restrained to what they teach
concerning those purely-Mathematical Disciplines, Arithmetic and Geometry,
where the affections of Quantity are abstractedly considered: but we must not
expect from Mathematicians the same accurateness when they deliver Observations
concerning such things wherein it is not only Quantity and Figure, but Matter,
and its other Affections, that must be considered. And yet, less must this be
expected when they deliver such observations as, being made by the help of
material Instruments framed by the hands and tools of men, cannot but in diverse
cases be subject to some if not many Imperfections upon their account. Diverse
of the modern Astronomers have so written of the spots and more shining parts
or (as they call them) Faculae, that appear upon or about the surface of the
Sun, as to make their Readers presume, that at least some of them are almost
always to be seen there. And I am willing to think, that it was their having so
often met with such Phenomenon in the Sun that made them write as they did. And
yet when I first applied my self to the contemplation of these late
discoveries, though I wanted neither good Telescopes, nor a dark room to bring
the species of the Sun into, yet it was not till after a great while, and a
multitude of fruitless Observations made at several times, that I could detect
any of these Solary spots, which have during many months at least appeared so
much seldomer than it seems they did before, that I remember a most ingenious
Professor of Astronomy, excellently well furnished with Dioptrical Glasses, did
about that time complain to me, that for I know not how long he had not been
able to see the Sun spotted. And as for the Faculae that are written of as such
ordinary Phenomenon, I must profess to you, Pyrophilus, that a multitude of
Observations made with good Telescopes at several places and times whilst the
Sun was spotted, has scarce made me see above once any of the looked for
Brightnesses.

And as the nature of the Material Object wherewith the Mathematician is
conversant, may thus deceive the Expectations grounded on what he delivers; so
may the like happen by reason of the Imperfection of the Instruments which he
must make use of in the sensible observations whereon the mixed Mathematics (as
Astronomy, Geography, Optics, etc.) are in great part built. This is but too
manifest in the disagreeing Supputations that famous Writers, as well Modern as
Ancient, have given us of the circuit of the Terrestrial Globe, of the distance
and bigness of the fixed Stars and some of the Planets, nay, and of the height
of Mountains: which Disagreement, as it may oftentimes proceed from the
differing Method and unequal skill of the several Observers, so it may in
diverse cases be imputed to the greater or less exactness and manageableness of
the Instruments employed by them. And on this occasion I cannot omit that sober
Confession and Advertisement that I met with in the noble Tycho, who having
laid out besides his time and industry much greater sums of money on
Instruments than any man we have heard of in latter times, deserves to be
listened to on this Theme, concerning which he has (among other things) the
following passage: Facile (says he) lapsus aliquis pene insensibilis in
Instrumentis etiam majoribus conficiendis subrepit, Tycho Brahe lib. 2. de
Cometa An. 1577. p. 133.
qui inter observandum aliquot scrupulorum primorum jacturam faciat; insuper si
ipse situs and tractandi modus non tamabsoluta norma perficiatur ut nihil
prorsus desideretur, intolerabilis nec facile animadvertenda deviatio sese
insinuat. Add quod instrumenta usu and aetate a prima perfectione degenerent.
Nihil enim quod hominum manibus paratur ab omni mutatione undiquaque existit.
Organa enim ejuscemodi nisi e solido metallo affabre elaborentur, mutationi
aereae obnoxia sunt; and si id quoque detur ut e metallica materia constent,
nisi ingentia fuerint, divisiones minutissimas graduum non sufficienter
exhibent, dumque hoc praestant, sua magnitudine and pondere seipsa ita
aggravant, ut facile tum extra planum debitum aut figuram competentem dum
circumducuntur declinent, tum etiam sua mole intractabilia redduntur. Quare
magis requiritur in Instrumentis Astronomicis quae omni vitio careant
construendis, artificium pari judicio conjunctum, quam hactenus a quamplurimis
animadversum est. Id quod nos ipse usus longaque docuit Experientia non parvo
labor nec mediocribus sumptibus comparata.

Hitherto our noble Author. And as for the observations made at Sea, the
diligent Fournier advertises, that however many Sea-captains and others may
brag of their Mathematical Observations made on Shipboard, yet he, upon trial
of many Instruments both at Sea and ashore, makes bold to affirm, that no
Astronomer in the world can be sure to make his Observation at Sea within ten
Minutes of the precise truth, no not (says he) upon the Sand it self within one
Minute of it.

But instead of acquainting you with what may be drawn from the writings of our
Hydrographer, to prove that his Assertion is rather modest than too bold, I
shall observe, that the Observations even of skilful Mathematicians may hold so
little, or disagree so much, when they pretend to give us the determinate
measures of things, that I remember of three very eminent modern
Mathematicians, who have taken upon them by their Experiments to determine the
proportion betwixt Air and Water, the one makes not the weight of Water to
exceed above a 150 times that of Air, the other reckons Water to be between 13
and 14 hundred times, and the third no less than 10000 times the heavier. Not
to mention a modern and famous Writer or two, who have been so mistaken as to
think, that the weight of the Water in comparison of the Air is I know not how
much under-reckon'd even by this last (overbold) Estimate. And if I had leisure
I could annex an Experiment partly statical, and relating to the weight of the
Air, which though we made diverse times in an hour, yet we missed of the like
success twice as often in the same hour, without being able to know beforehand
whether the Experiment would succeed within some pounds weight. But of this
more perhaps elsewhere.

The Ends, Pyrophilus, which we have proposed to our selves in setting down the
things by us delivered in this and the former Essay, are principally two.

And first, we desire that the Instances we have given you of the Contingency
of Experiments may make you think your self obliged to try those Experiments
very carefully, and more than once, upon which you mean to build considerable
Superstructures either theorical or practical, and to think it unsafe to rely
too much upon single Experiments, especially when you have to deal in Minerals:
for many to their ruin have found, that what they at first looked upon as a
happy Mineral Experiment has proved in the issue the most unfortunate they ever
made. And I remember that the most experienced Mineralist I have hitherto been
acquainted with, though his skill has been rather gainful then prejudicial to
him, has very seriously told me, that he could quickly grow an extraordinary
rich man, if he could but do constantly whatsoever he has done, not only two or
three, but many times.

The other End, Pyrophilus, to which I had an Eye in writing the past
Discourses, was, that they may serve for a kind of Apology for Sober and
Experimental Writers, in case you should not always upon trial find the
Experiments or Observations by them delivered answer your expectations. And
indeed it would prove a great discouragement to wary and considerate
Naturalists from enriching the World with their Observations, if they should
find, that their faithfulness in setting down what they observed is not able to
protect them from blasting imputations of falsehood, but that by publishing any
thing for the good of others, they must expose their reputation to all the
uncertainties to which any of their Experiments may chance to prove obnoxious.
It Is true indeed, that if a Writer be wont to be fabulous or transcriptive, and
to deliver things confidently by hearsay without telling his Readers when he
does so, if his Experiments upon trial succeed not, we may be allowed to impute
their unsuccessfulness rather to him than to our selves or to chance, and need
not think our selves obliged to have so much a greater care of his reputation
than he had of his own, as for his sake to try more than once what he for our
sakes never tried so much as once. But if an Author that is wont to deliver
things upon his own knowledge, and shows himself careful not to be deceived,
and unwilling to deceive his Readers, shall deliver any thing as having tried
or seen it, which yet agrees not with our trials of it; I think it but a piece
of Equity, becoming both a Christian and a Philosopher, to think (unless we
have some manifest reason to the contrary) that he set down his Experiment or
Observation as he made it, though for some latent reason it does not constantly
hold; and that therefore though his Experiment be not to be relied upon, yet
his sincerity is not to be rejected. Nay, if the Author be such an one as has
intentionally and really deserved well of Mankind, for my part I can be so
grateful to him, as not only to forbear to distrust his Veracity, as if he had
not done or seen what he says he did or saw, but to forbear to reject his
Experiments, till I have tried whether or no by some change of Circumstances
they may not be brought to succeed. Thus a while since finding in Sir Francis
Bacon, that he delivers as a somewhat unlikely truth, that Spirit of Wine will
swim upon Oil (of Almonds) we forthwith made trial of it, but found the Oil
swim upon the Spirit of Wine, and this upon several trials before Witnesses:
but our tenderness of the reputation of so great and so candid a Philosopher
made us to bethink our selves, that (though he mentions it not, nor perhaps
thought of any such thing, yet) possibly he may have used Spirit of Wine more
pure than ordinary; and thereupon having provided some that was well rectified,
we found that the Oil that was wont to swim upon Spirit of Wine, not freed from
its aqueous parts, did readily sink, and quietly lie in the bottom of that
which was carefully dephlegm'd. And so having been informed that the learned
Dr. Brown somewhere delivers, that Aqua fortis will quickly coagulate common
Oil, we poured some of those Liquors together, and let them stand for a
considerable space of time in an open Vessel, without finding in the Oil the
change by him promised, (though we have more than once with another Liquor
presently thickened common Oil.) Whereupon being unwilling that so faithful and
candid a Naturalist should appear fit to be distrusted, we did again make the
trial with fresh Oil and Aqua fortis in a long-neck'd Vial left open at the
top, which we kept both in a cool place, and after in a digesting Furnace; but
after some weeks we found no other alteration in the Oil than that it had
acquired a high and lovely tincture: notwithstanding which being still
concerned for the reputation of a person that so well deserves a good one, the
like Contingencies we have formerly met with in other Experiments, made us
willing to try whether or no the unsuccessfulness we have related might not
proceed from some peculiar though latent Quality, either in the Aqua fortis or
the Oil by us formerly employed; whereupon changing those Liquors, and
repeating the Experiment, we found after some hours the Oil coagulated almost
into the form of a whitish Butter. Nor dare I allow my self to be confident,
that I shall not need to be dealt with by you upon some occasions with the like
equity that I have been careful to express toward others. And since the
writing of thus much of this very Essay, having desired a very skilful and
candid Chemist to do me the favor to provide me some of the purest and
strongest Spirit of Salt that could be made; he kept some Salt in a vehement
fire for diverse days and nights together, and freed the extracted Liquor so
carefully and so skilfully both from its phlegm and its terrestrial faeces,
that after all I have written in the former Essay concerning that Menstruum, I
must freely confess to you, that I am now satisfied, that a Spirit of Sea Salt
may without any unsincerity be so prepared as to dissolve the body of crude
Gold, though I could not find that the Solutions I made of that Metal were red,
but rather of a yellow or golden color, much like those made with common Aqua
Regis. But neither this Artist nor I have been since able to make another
Spirit of Salt capable of dissolving Gold, notwithstanding all the industry we
have employed about it, which makes me refer this to Contingent Experiments;
unless the prosperous event of our former trial may be ascribed to the quality
of the Salt that was distilled, which was brought from the Island of Mayo,
where the scorching Sun makes out of the Seawater a Salt that is accounted
much stronger and more spiritous than that which is wont to be made in France
and other more temperate Climats. And let me, Pyrophilus, take this opportunity
to add, that if I had not very cautiously set down the Observation I related in
another Essay This is one of those that make up the Book of the Usefulness of
Experimental Philosophy.
concerning the little Fishes or Worms I there teach you to discover in
Vinegar, I should perhaps need much of your equity to keep me from being
thought to have imposed upon you in what I there delivered. For I have since
met with diverse parcels of Vinegar wherein the Observation could not be made,
for one wherein it held; so that I am glad to keep by me some Vinegar stocked
with those scarce visible Animals to satisfy ingenious men, among whom some
have been fain, after their own fruitless trials, to come to me to show them
the things delivered in that Observation. What I mentioned a little above to
have been tried upon Sallet-oyl, puts me in mind of telling you, that among our
Experiments concerning the changes of colors, we were about to acquaint you
with one which we had formerly made upon common Oyl-Olive, it seeming to us a
not inconsiderable one, since it was a way that we devised of instantly
changing the color of the Oil from a pale Yellow to a deep Red, with a few
drops of a Liquor that was not red but almost colorless. This Experiment, as
we were saying, Pyrophilus, we were about to set down among others concerning
Colors, but because we do not willingly rely on a single trial of such things
as we know not to have been ever tried before, we thought it not amiss for
greater security to make the Experiment the second time, but could not then
find it to succeed, nor even since upon a new Trial (probably by reason of some
peculiar quality in that particular parcel of Liquor we first made use of)
which made us think fit to omit the intended mention of it; but if I had upon
my first trial acquainted you with it without any further scruple, you might
upon trial have suspected, if not concluded, that I had misinformed you, though
I had really delivered nothing but what I had tried. And indeed, Pyrophilus,
though I have not the vanity to pretend to have deserved so much of you as such
Naturalists as Sir Francis Bacon have deserved from every ingenious Reader of
their Books; yet perhaps you will do me but Right to believe, that though some
of the Experiments I have delivered may prove Contingent, yet I have not
delivered them unfaithfully in reference to what I thought I observed in them
and remembered of them. And though I desire you should so read my writings as to
give no farther assent to my Opinions than the reasons or Experiments produced
on their behalf require, yet in matters of fact which I deliver as having tried
or seen them, I am very willing you should think, that I may have had the
weakness to be mistaken, but not an intention to deceive you.

There is yet one thing more that I shall venture to acquaint you with before I
conclude this Essay, though you may think it relishes of a Paradox, and it is
this: That when I am satisfied of the Abilities and Circumspection of a Writer,
delivering a matter of fact as upon his own knowledge; I do not presently
reject his Observation as untrue, much less condemn the Person himself as a
Liar, whenever I find that it seems to be contradicted by a contrary and more
undoubted Observation, or to contradict a received and plausible either
Hypothesis or Tradition: but rather try if by fit Distinction or Limitation I
can reconcile them; unless I can imagine something or other which might
probably lead him to mistake. And of this indulgence to an intelligent Writer I
have this reason to give, That sometimes there happen irregularities contrary
to the usual course of things, as is evident in Monsters; and sometimes the
received Hypothesis, though perhaps not to be rejected as to the main, will not
hold so universally as men presume; and sometimes too the contradiction be
twixt the Observations may be but seeming (by reason of the want of some
unheeded Circumstance necessary to make them inconsistent) and so they may both
be true.

We might dilucidate and confirm what we have newly delivered by several
Instances, were it not that this Essay is already but too prolix. Wherefore we
shall only recommend to your Consideration these few Particulars.

That the Irish Spiders (of which, whatever is vulgarly believed to the
contrary, my self have in Ireland seen diverse) are not poisonous is not doubted
by the Inhabitants, who have had many Ages experience of their harmlesness: and
yet I dare not deny what the learned Scaliger somewhere affirms, that in (his
Country if I mis-remember not) Gascony their venom is so pernicious, that they
sometimes poison those that tread upon them through the very soles of their
shoos. And that even here in England (though a Country so near to Ireland) some
Spiders (at least) are venomous even without biting, I may elsewhere have
occasion to give you an experimental proof.

It is so much taken for granted by diverse Authors, who pretend likewise to
give reasons of it, and by the generality of their Readers, that under the same
Meridian the magnetic Needle keeps every where the same variation without
changing it by being carried Northwards or Southwards, that it is like if many
Persons better acquainted with Magnetic Speculations than Trials, should read
in the relations of the Hollanders, that under the Meridian that passes by the
Island of Corvo, where the Needle points directly at the Poles, and which is
therefore wont to be reckoned the first Meridian, they found at two places, the
one about 46, the other about 55 Degrees of Northern Latitude, a Declination in
the former of those Elevations of no less than 7 or 8 Degrees, and in the
latter of a far greater number; and also that they found under the 20. Parallel
of Southern Latitude under the same Meridian of the Azores 10 or 11 Degrees of
Declination; many, I say, if they should meet with these particulars, probably
would suppose the Dutch to have been very bad Observers, because these
Observations do not (as we intimated above) agree with the Theory of the
Needles Declination. And yet if we confer these Observations with others of the
like nature made by good Navigators and other skilful men along other
Meridians, we may, I suppose, find cause rather to rectify the general opinion
than reject the Dutch Observations for their disagreeing with it, especially if
we take into consideration what is affirmed by the Jesuit Jules Alenis (whom
Fournier, amply treating of Longitudes, extols for the accuratest Observer of
the Needles variation that ever was) sailing into China in a great Portugal
Carraque, and accompanied by the famous Pilot Vincent Rodrique, who had then
made 28 Voyages to the Indies. For out of one of this Fathers Letters Fournier
has preserved this memorable passage, You must (says he) take notice of one
thing very considerable, De la Longitude chap. xxxiv.
namely, that the further you go from the Equator in the same Meridian, the
greater you will find the Magnetical variation. There are some eminent modern
Naturalists who affirm, that they have assuredly tried by Weather-glasses, that
Cellars and other Subterraneal places are colder in Winter than in Summer: and
yet not to oppose to this Experiment the common Tradition to the contrary, I
remember, that the bold and industrious Captain James (formerly mentioned) in
the relation of his strange Voyage published by his late Majesty's command, has
this notable Observation, where he relates the excessive coldness of the water
they met with in Summer in that Icy Region where they were forced to Winter in
the Year 1632. Moreover our Well (says he) out of which we had water in
December, had none in July.

Lastly, though in the Western parts it have been observed, that generally the
inside or heart as they call it of Trees, is harder tha^ the outward parts, yet
an Author very well versed in such matters treating of the building of Ships,
gives it us for a very important Advertisement touching that matter, that they
have observed at Marseilles, and all along the Levantine shores, that that part
of the Wood that is next the Bark is stronger than that which makes the heart
of the Tree. Fourn. Architecture Navale chap. 22.
But to draw at length to a conclusion of this already too tedious Essay; The
Ends above mentioned, Pyrophilus, being those which I proposed to my self in
writing the past Discourse, you will make an use of it, which I was very far
from intending you should, if you suffer it to discourage you from the vigorous
prosecution of your Enquiries into Experimental Knowledge: nor indeed is any
thing that has been said fit to persuade you to other than Watchfulness in
observing Experiments, and Wariness in relying on them, but not at all to such
a despondency of mind as may make you forbear the prosecution of them: for
neither does the Physician renounce his Profession, because diverse of the
Patients he strives to cure are not freed from their diseases by his Medicines,
but by death; nor does the painful Husbandman forsake his Cultivating of the
ground, though sometimes an unseasonable storm or flood spoils his Harvest, and
deprives him of the expected fruit of his long toils. For as in Physic and
Husbandry, those that exercise them are kept from deserting their professions,
by finding, that though they sometimes miss of their Ends, yet they oftentimes
attain them, and are by their Successes requited not only for those Endeavors
that succeed, but for those that were lost: so ought we not by the
Contingencies incident to Experimental attempts to be deterred from making
them, because not only there are many Experiments scarce ever obnoxious to
casualties, but even among those whose event is not so certain, you may very
probably make an Experiment very often without meeting with any of those
unlucky accidents which have the power to make such Experiments miscarry; and
sure the prosperous success of many succeeding attempts is well able to make
amends for the fruitless pains employed on those few that succceed not;
especially since in Experiments it not unfrequently happens, that even when we
find not what we seek, we find something as well worth seeking as what we mist.
Of this last-mention'd truth we may elsewhere have occasion to discourse more
largely, and therefore shall now conclude with barely minding you, that even
Merchants themselves are not wont to quit their profession, because now and
then they lose a Vessel at Sea, and oft-times their Ships are by contrary winds
and other accidents forced to put in at other Ports than those they were bound
for. Which example^ the rather make use of, because that as the American
Navigators employed by the European Merchants having been by storms forced from
their intended course, have been sometimes times thereby driven upon unknown
Coasts, and have made discovery of new Regions much more advantageous to them
than the fairest and constantest winds and weather could have been; so in
Philosophical Trials, those unexpected accidents that defeat our endeavors do
sometimes cast us upon new discoveries, of much greater advantage than the
wonted and expected success of the attempted Experiment would have proved to us.

SOME SPECIMENS OF AN ATTEMPT To make CHEMICAL EXPERIMENTS Useful to Illustrate
the Notions of the CORPVSCVLAR PHILOSOPHY.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Herringman, Anno 1668.

THE PREFACE, Giving an account of the two following Treatises, and Proposing
the Desirableness of a good Intelligence betwixt the Corpuscularian
Philosophers and the Chemists.
THere are many Learned Men, who being acquainted with Chemistry but by report,
have from the Illiterateness, the Arrogance and the Impostures of too many of
those that pretend skill in it, taken occasion to entertain so ill an opinion
as well of the Art as of those that profess it, that they are apt to repine
when they see any Person capable of succeeding in the study of solid
Philosophy, addict himself to an Art they judge so much below a Philosopher,
and so unserviceable to him: Nay, there are some that are troubled when they
see a Man acquainted with other Learning countenance by his Example sooty
Empiricks, and a study which they scarce think fit for any but such as are
unfit for the rational and useful parts of Physiology. I now take notice of
these things, because they gave occasion to the two following Treatises. For
perceiving diverse years ago, that some Learned Men of the temper above
described thought it strange (if not amiss also) that one of whose studies they
were pleased to have too favorable an Expectation, should spend upon Chemical
trials (to which I then happened to be invited by the opportunity of some
Furnaces and some leisure) much of those Endeavors which they seemed to think
might be far more usefully employed than upon such an empty and deceitful
study; perceiving this, I say, I thought it not amiss to endeavor to manifest,
that without seeking after the Elixir that Alchymists generally hope and toil
for, (but which they that knew me knew to be not at all in my aim) I did not in
the Prosecution of Chemical trials do any thing either without an end, or
unsuitable to the Design I had of attempting to promote Men's Knowledge of the
works of Nature, as well as their Power over them. In order to this, I did not
think it enough to show, that by an Insight into Chemistry one may be enabled
to make some Meliorations (I speak not of Transmutations) of Mineral and
Metalline Bodies, See the Essay of the Usefulness of Chemistry in the II. Sect.
of the I. Part Of the Usefulness of E. P.
and many excellent Medicines for the Health of Men, besides diverse other
Preparations of good use in particular Trades, and in several Occurren^es of
Humane Life; I did not, I say, think it enough to do this, because that though
this might suffice to evince that a rational man might without losing his time
employ some of it to understand and promote Chemistry; yet this would scarce
suffice to manifest it to be useful to Philosophy. And therefore there seemed
requisite some specimens, which might show that Chemical Experiments might be
very assistant even to the speculative Naturalist in his Contemplations and
Enquiries.

But against my attempting any thing of this Nature, three Difficulties opposed
themselves. The first was the want of Leisure, in regard I was already
pre-engag'd to write of other Subjects, and to prosecute some Experiments,
whose event I was concerned to know. Another Impediment was, that for other
Reasons elsewhere mentioned, and chiefly to keep my Judgment as unprepossess'd
as might be with any of the Modern Theories of Philosophy, till I were provided
of Experiments to help me to judge of them, I had purposely refrained from
acquainting my self thoroughly with the entire System of either the Atomical, or
the Cartesian, or any other whether New or Revived Philosophy; and therefore I
could scarce be fit to show how Chemical Experiments might illustrate their
Doctrines. And thirdly, some of those Learned Men for whom I was to write, more
favoring the Epicurean, and others (though but a few) being more inclinable to
the Cartesian opinions, it seemed very difficult to gratify by the same
Composures Persons of differing Persuasions.

But as to the first of these Discouragements, since my Preengagements to other
Themes were not unknown to those for whom I was to write, it might reasonably
be presumed they would overlook such unaccurateness as should appear imputable
to haste: And besides, some such Subject might be chosen to write of, as would
conveniently admit Enlargements and Additions, according as my leisure should
afterward serve me to annex them

On occasion of the second Impediment, I remembered, that having diverse years
before read the Lives of the Atomical, among other Philosophers, in Diogenes
Laertius, and having sometimes occasionally heard mention made of diverse
Epicurean and Cartesian Notions, and having hence framed to my self some
general, though but imperfect, Idea of the way of Philosophizing my friends
esteemed; I thought I might without a more particular and explicit Enquiry into
it, say something to illustrate some Notions of it, by making choice of such
as, being of the more simple and obvious, did not require skill in the more
mysterious points of the Hypothesis they belonged to.

And as for the last of the three Discouragements above mentioned, I
considered, that the Atomical and Cartesian Hypotheses, though they differed in
some material points from one another, yet in opposition to the Peripatetick
and other vulgar Doctrines they might be looked upon as one Philosophy: For
they agree with one another, and differ from the Schools in this grand and
fundamental point, that not only they take care to explicate things
intelligibly; but that whereas those other Philosophers give only a general and
superficial account of the Phenomenon of Nature from certain substantial Forms,
which the most ingenious among themselves confess to be Incomprehensible, and
certain real Qualities, which knowing men of other Persuasions think to be
likewise Unintelligible; both the Cartesians and the Atomists explicate the
same Phenomenon by little Bodies variously figured and moved. I know that these
two Sects of Modern Naturalists disagree about the Notion of Body in general,
and consequently about the Possibility of a true Vacuum, as also about the
Origin of Motion, the indefinite Divisibleness of Matter, and some other
points of less Importance than these: But in regard that some of them seem to
be rather Metaphysical than Physiological Notions, and that some others seem
rather to be requisite to the Explication of the first Origin of the Universe,
than of the Phenomenon of it in the state wherein we now find it; in regard of
these, I say, and some other Considerations, and especially for this Reason,
That both parties agree in deducing all the Phenomenon of Nature from Matter
and local Motion; I esteemed that notwithstanding these things wherein the
Atomists and the Cartesians differed, they might be thought to agree in the
main, and their Hypotheses might by a Person of a reconciling Disposition be
looked on as, upon the matter, one Philosophy. Which because it explicates
things by Corpuscles, or minute Bodie^ may (not very unfitly) be called
Corpuscular; though I sometimes style it the Phoenician Philosophy, because
some ancient Writers inform us, that not only before Epicurus and Democritus,
but even before Leucippus taught in Greece, a Phoenician Naturalist was wont to
give an account of the Phenomenon of Nature by the Motion and other Affections
of the minute Particles of Matter. Which because they are obvious and very
powerful in Mechanical Engines, I sometimes also term it the Mechanical
Hypothesis or Philosophy.

By such considerations then, and by this occasion, I was invited to try
whether without pretending to determine the abovementioned controverted
points, I could by the help of the Corpuscular Philosophy, in the sense newly
given of that Appellation, associated with Chemical Experiments, explicate some
particular Subjects more intelligibly than they are wont to be accounted for,
either by the Schools or the Chemists. And how^ver since the vulgar Philosophy
is yet so vulgar, that it is still in great request with the Generality of
Scholars; and since the Mechanical Philosophers have brought so few Experiments
to verify their Assertions, and the Chemists are thought to have brought so
many on the behalf of theirs, that of those that have quitted the
unsatisfactory Philosophy of the Schools, the greater Number dazzled as it were
by the Experiments of Spagyrists, have embraced their Doctrines instead of
those they deserted; For these Reasons, I say, I hoped I might at least do no
unseasonable piece of service to the Corpuscular Philosophers, by illustrating
some of their Notions with sensible Experiments, and manifesting that the
things by me treated of, may be at least plausibly explicated without having
recourse to inexplicable forms, real Qualities, the four Peripatetick Elements,
or so much as the three Chemical Principles.

Being once resolved to write some such Specimina as I formerly judged
requisite, I soon bethought my self of the Experiment hereafter delivered
concerning Saltpeter, diverse of whose Phenomenon I did also, as time would
permit, cast into one of the Essays I was then engaged to write to a Friend.
And having dispatched that little Treatise, it found so favorable a Reception
among those Learned Men into whose hands it came, that I was much encouraged to
illustrate some more of the Doctrines of the Corpuscular Philsosophy, by some
of the Experiments wherewith my Furnaces had suppli^d me; which also as
occasion served I did, partly by writing some Physico-Chymical Treatises, and
partly by making such large Notes on the Essay concerning Saltpeter, as might
plentifully contribute to the History of Qualities, of which I had sometimes
thoughts. And this continued, till in the year before the last, Viz. A. D. 1659.
the public Confusions in this (then unhappy) Kingdom reducing me to quit my
former Design, together with the place where my Furnaces, my Books, and my
other Accommodations were, I fell afterward upon the making of Pneumatical
trials, whereof I lately ventured to give the Public an account in a Book of
New Experiments Physo-mechanical about the Air.

I should not trouble the Reader with so prolix a Preface to such small
Treatises as those whereto this is prefixed, but for these two Reasons. The
one, that I hope the foregoing Narrative will make me be the more favorably
judged by the Philosophers I desire to serve, if sometimes I write less
skilfully of their Opinions than perhaps I should have done had I allowed my
self to search into them: And the other, that I am earnestly solicited to
publish some other Tracts, tending to the same purpose that these do; to which
also should I ever be induced, by the Reception these may meet with, to trouble
the World with them, the same Preface as it is now penned may serve for an
Introduction. I had almost forgot to take notice, That whereas at the end of
the Essay concerning Saltpeter I mentioned a then newly-publish'd Treatise of
the laborious Glauber's, which I had not then perused, I found it to contain
some Observations concerning the History of Saltpeter, which, if they be true,
are considerable enough: I must again reco^mend the examination of them to the
Readers Curiosity, having been hindered by diverse Avocations from saving him
that labor my self. And whereas also some years after I was informed of
another little Book he had put out since the former, wherein he teaches us a
way of purifying Saltpeter, to make a Conjunction of the spirituous and fixter
parts of it, and then to suffer the Mixture to evaporate and so crystallize
into Nitre; This would I confess have made me apprehensive of passing for a
Plagiary with those that did not know me, but that it was easy for me to clear
my self by the Testimony of very Learned Men, who had some years before perused
my Treatise, and especially of one person, (well known by his Writings) who was
pleased to like it so well, as to desire he might translate it, and had
accordingly long before turned it into very elegant Latin. I might perhaps
venture to add, that though I could not justify my self by so convincing a
proof of my Innocence, yet he that shall take the pains to consider that I
could not borrow of Glauber the various Phenomenon I have particularly set
down, and much less the Reflections on them, and shall compare in what
differing manners, and to what differing purposes, we two propose the making of
Saltpeter out of its own Spirit, and fixed Salt (He but prescribing as a bare
Chemical Purification of Nitre, what I teach as a Philosophical Redintegration
of it;) He, I say, who shall compare these things together, will perchance
think, that I was as likely to find this last named Experiment as another.
Which things I say not, as if I scrupled to make use of the industrious
Glauber's or any other man's Experiments, especially when I borrow not with them
any of the Doctrines I build on them; but because since I neither did nor could
take any notice of Glauber's Book in mine, I judged it requisite to say
something to prevent my being thought to have unthankfully taken one of the
chief Passages of my Discourse from a Book to which I was utterly a stranger.

The Reasons of my thus consenting to publish the following History of Fluidity
and Firmness, without the rest of those Annotations which I writ upon the same
Essay touching Saltpeter, are partly, that these are my recentest Composures
of this Nature, (having been written but the last year save one) and were set
down when I allowed my self to be less unacquainted with Writers addicted to
the modern Philosophy; partly also, because the considerableness of the Subject
invited me to make these Annotations much more copious, and somewhat less
unaccurate, than my Notes upon almost any other part of the Essay; and partly,
(and indeed principally) because mention being sometimes made of this History
in my freshly published Physico-Mechanical Experiments, both the Printer, and
some Learned Gentlemen who were pleased to think that Book not unworthy the
Translating, have solicited me to let this Treatise be annexed to the several
Versions they are about of that Pneumatical piece, and to the English Edition
of the three foregoing Discourses, which the Printer fears would, without the
company of these or some others, make but too thin a Book.

And I thought fit to premise to this History, the Essay concerning Saltpeter,
not only because it might appear very improper to publish Annotations without
the Text it self whereunto they relate; but indeed because I find that there
are still many Learned Men, of the same disposition with those I have mentioned
in the beginning of this Preface; whence I am invited to divulge this Essay by
the same Considerations that at first induced me to write it. Especially since
I remember not that among the new Philosophers I have met with any one
Experiment that does so fairly and sensibly accommodate so many of their
Opinions. And indeed I freely confess, that I shall think my self to have done
no useless service to the Commonwealth of Learning, if I prove so fortunate,
as by these, or any other Writings of mine to the like purpose, to beget a good
understanding betwixt the Chemists and the Mechanical Philosophers, who have
hitherto been too little acquainted with one another Learning: There being to
this very day a great and almost general Misunderstanding betwixt the
Corpuscular Philosophers and the Chemists; most of Those (on the one hand)
looking upon the Spagyrists as a company of mere and irrational Operators,
whose Experiments may indeed be serviceable to Apothecaries, and perhaps to
Physicians, but are useless to a Philosopher that aims at curing no disease but
that of Ignorance; and most of the Spagyrists (on the other hand) looking upon
the Corpuscularians (if I may so call them) as a sort of empty and extravagant
Speculators, who pretend to explicate the great Book of Nature, without having
so much as looked upon the chiefest and the difficultest part of it, namely the
Phenomenon that Their Art has added to the former Edition of this vast and
obscure Volume. But that some of the principal of the Hermetick Opinions may be
more handsomely accommodated by the notions of the Phoenician Hypotheses, than
by the common Philosophy of Elements of substantial forms, (which yet their
Writers so frequently allude to and otherwise employ) may appear from hence,
that whereas the Schools generally declare the transmutation of one Species
into another, and particularly that of baser metals into Gold, to be against
Nature, and Physically impossible; the Corpuscular Doctrine rejecting the
substantial forms of the Schools, and making Bodies to differ but in the
Magnitude, Figure, Motion or Rest, and Situation of their component particles,
which may be almost infinitely varied, seems much more favorable to the
Chemical Doctrine of the possibility of working wonderful changes, and even
transmutations in mixed Bodies. And on the other side, there are scarce any
Experiments that may better accommodate the Phoenician principles, than those
that may be borrowed from the Laboratories of Chemists. For first, Chemistry
enabling us to depurate Bodies, and in some measure to analyze them, and take
asunder their Heterogeneous parts, in many Chemical Experiments we may better
than in others know what manner of Bodies we employ, Art having made them more
simple or uncompounded than Nature alone is wont to present them us. And next,
many Chemical operations being performed in close, and yet in transparent
vessels, we may better know what concurs to the effects produced, because
adventitious Bodies (or at least all grosser ones) are kept from intruding upon
those whose Operations we have a mind to consider. And lastly, the Bodies
employed by the Chemists being for the most part active ones, the progress of
Nature in an Experiment, and the series of successive alterations through which
the matter passes from first to last, is wont to be made more nimbly, and
consequently becomes the more easy to be taken notice of and comprehended. So
that all this considered, I hope it may conduce to the Advancement of Natural
Philosophy, if, as I said, I be so happy as, by any endeavors of mine, to
possess both Chemists and Corpuscularians of the advantages that may redound to
each Party by the Confederacy I am mediating between them, and excite them both
to enquire more into one another Philosophy, by manifesting, that as many
Chemical Experiments may be happily explicated by Corpuscularian Notions, so
many of the Corpuscularian Notions may be commodiously either illustrated or
confirmed by Chemical Experiments.

A PHYSICO-CHYMICAL ESSAY, CONTAINING An Experiment with some Considerarations
touching the differing Parts and Redintegration of SALTPETER.
SECTION I.
SALTPETER, Pyrophilus, though in that form wherein it is sold in Shops, it be
no very obvious Concrete; yet either in its rudiments, or under several
disguises, it is to be found in so great a number of Compound Bodies,
Vegetable, Animal, and even Mineral, that it seems to us to be not only one of
the most Catholic of Salts, but so considerable an Ingredient of many
sublunary Concretes, that we may justly suppose it may well deserve our serious
enquiries, since the knowledge of it may be very conducive to the discovery of
the Nature of several other Bodies, and to the improvement of diverse parts of
Natural Philosophy.

SECT. II.
But not having at present much leisure allowed me by several avocations to
make accurate Enquiries into the nature of Saltpeter in general; and, which is
more considerable, being not yet furnished wi^h a competent number of
Experiments requisite to such a purpose; I must content my self for this time
to tender you some assistance toward the discovery of how differing Substances
may be obtained from Nitre, and compound it again, by presenting you some
Reflections on an Experiment, which my desire to hasten to another Subject
obliges me to set down nakedly, as I first tried it by way of Narrative.

SECT. III.
We took then common Nitre (as we bought it at the Druggists) and having by the
usual way of Solution, Filtration, and Coagulation, reduced it into Crystals,
we put four ounces of this purified Nitre into a strong new Crucible If it be
here demanded, Why the Experiment was not made with a greater quantity of Salt
peter? we may answer, That the mentioned Quantity was most proportionate to the
best Crucible we then had. And if it be further asked, Whether it were not the
better way of obtaining the several substances separable from Nit^e; to distill
it in close Vessels without addition of any foreign Body? we shall reply only
by representing, That the proposed way is not so practicable as one would
imagine: for a^ acqui^seing in the common practice of Chemists, who are wont to
mingle with the Saltpeter they distill three or four times its weight of Brick,
Earth, or some other Additament, which (esp^cially in so great a proportion)
may much alter the Nature of the fixed Salt remaining behind with it; we have
had the curiosity to try more than once, whether we could distill Saltpeter per
se in glass Retorts, and found, that though to avoid giving too strong a fire,
we once (at least) placed the Retort only in a pan full of Sand; yet when the
heat was grown strong enough to melt the Salt, it cracked the Retort, and did
partly run out at the crack; only we obtained some small quantity of a Liquor,
which by its sowreness and operation taught us what we might have expected of
the rest of the volatile part of the Ni^re, in case the Vessel would have held
till it had passed over into the Receiver.
in which (the Vessel being first well neal'd to prevent cracking, and covered
to prevent the falling in of any thing that might unseasonably kindle the
Petre) we melted it into a limpid Liquor, and whilst it was in fusion, cast
into it a small live Coal, which presently kindled it, and made it boil and
hiss, and flash for a pretty while: after which we cast in another glowing
Coal, which made it fulminate af^esh; and after that we cast in a third and a
fourth, and so continued the operation till the Nitre would neither fulminate
nor be kindled any more: after which we continued to keep it in a strong fire
for above a quarter of an hour, that if any volatile part should yet remain, it
might be forced off.

SECT. IV.
Then taking out the Crucible, and breaking it whilst it was hot, we took out,
as carefully as we could, the remaining fixed Nitre before it had imbibed much
of the moisture of the air, and dividing it into two equal parts, we dissolved
one of those portions in as much fair water as would just suffice for the
solution of it, and then dropped on it Spirit of Saltpeter till the ebullition
occasioned by the mutual action of those contrary Liquors did perfectly cease;
and forthwith Filtrating this mixture, we exposed it in a new open Vial to the
air in a window; and returning to the other portion of fixed Nitre, which we
had set apart and not dissolved, we dropped on that likewise of the same Spirit
till the hissing and ebullition were altogether ceased, and then we exposed
this mixture also in an open glass Jar to the air in the same window with the
former.

SECT. V.
The event of these Trials was, that the mixture wherein fair water was
employed, did in a few hours fasten to the lower part of the sides of the Glass
wherein it was put, some saline particles, which seemed by their form (and
partly too by their shooting about the lower parts of the Vessel) to be
Saltpeter; amongst whose little Crystals nevertheless there appeared to swim
very little grains (much smaller than Mustard-seeds) of some other kind of
Salt, environed with a downy matter, not unlike that which is oftentimes to be
observed in Rose Water, and several other distilled Waters when they begin to
decay. The Crystals were the next day taken out, being by that time grown
somewhat greater, and more numerous, and disclosed themselves, upon trial, to
be indeed Nitrous, as well by their manner of burning, as their shape.
Concerning the latter of which, since learned Modern Writers have
misrepresented it, some making Nitre to be Cylindrical, and others of a figure
less approaching to the true one; I think my self obliged in this place to
observe to you by the way, that having purposely considered some large Crystals
of refined and unanalyz'd Nitre, the figure being in such best discerned, they
appeared to have each of them six flat sides (not always of equal breadth in
respect of one another) whereof any two that were opposite were commonly
parallel. But to return to our augmented Crystals of Nitre: what the other
matter that adhered to them was, there was so very little of it, that we could
not well discern, though we then suspected it to proceed from the want of a
just or exact proportion betwixt the Volatile and fixed parts of the Nitre that
were to be reunited.

SECT. VI.
The remaining Liquor being poured into an open glass Jar, and left in the same
window, continued five or six days without manifesting any considerable
alteration; but at the end of that time there began to appear in it very fine
crystalline styriae of Petre, which grew more and more numerous during a
fortnight longer; at which time, being wearied with attending the so slow
consumption of the Liquor, we poured it from the Crystals, and set it in a
digesting Furnace to evaporate more nimbly.

SECT. VII.
The other mixture wherein no water was employed did presently, for a great
part of it, subside in the form of Salt; over which there swam a little liquor
which also seemed to keep the subsiding particles of Salt from congealing into
one coherent mass, or so much as greater lumps: and a part of this drenched
Salt being taken out and permitted to dry in the Air, did not appear very
regularly figured, but yet seemed here and there to recede very little from the
shape of Saltpeter, and being cast on a quick coal it burned partly after a
manner not peculiar (that we have observed) to any distinct kind of Salt; and
yet it partly seemed to imitate the flashing way of deflagration proper to
Nitre. The remaining part of this Salt, together with the Liquor swimming upon
it, we kept for about a month in the open air, without discerning any
observable change in the Liquor till toward the latter end of that time, and
then we found it partly coagulated into small saline masses, whose figure we
were not able to discern; and therefore dissolving the whole mixture in a
little fair water, and filtrating it, we found (after evaporation in a
digesting Furnace) about one half of the Salt shot into fine small Iceicles of
the shape of Crystals of Petre, but somewhat differing from them in taste upon
their first being put upon the Tongue; but upon a live coal they burned not
unlike Petre. And the remaining half of this dissolution, being somewhat
hastily pressed to exhale, let fall its Salt in a figure which we could not
reduce either to that of Saltpeter, or of any other determinate kind of Salt.

For the clear comprehending of this Experiment, you may be pleased,
Pyrophilus, to take notice,

SECT. VIII.
1. That a new coal is not to be cast on the Nitre till the detonation
occasioned by the former be either quite or almost al^ogether ended; unless it
chance that the pussing (...) the coal too soon out of the Crucible, (...)
toward the end of the operation:) which seems to happen chiefly because the
first part of the Nitre growing to be predominant, the inflamable and halituous
particles cannot break through the matter, now grown more stiff, but by such
impetuous eruptions as make them oftentimes toss back the coals as soon as
ever they are cast into the Crucible: and in this way of proceeding we have
been forced to spend much more time, than the opinion of the ready
deflagrability (if I may so speak) of Saltpeter did beforehand permit us to
imagine.

SECT. IX.
2. That we discerned by our Scales, that the weight of the Spirit of Nitre
requisite to be dropped on, till all the ebullition made betwixt that Liquor and
the Solution of fixed Nitre were ceased, did not amount to so great a weight as
the Saltpeter lost in its detonation, and yet fell not much short of it.

SECT. X.
3. That the fixed Nitre this way made, differed but very little from vulgar
Salt of Tartar in its lixiviate taste, in its aptness to attract the air, or
to relent by the moisture of it, and in its other more obvious qualities; only
whereas Salt of Tartar is wont to be white (which nevertheless being flux'd has
been by others, as us, observed to become of a kind of sky-colour) this fixed
Nitre was of a deep color betwixt blew and green: which color upon the
affusion of the Spirit of Nitre vanished; whereas otherwise (to observe that to
you upon the by) some sort of calcined Nitre will so obstinately retain that
color, that I keep by me a bluish green Liquor made of fixed Petre, I know
not how oftentimes successively resolved per deliquium and coagulated again,
till it would no longer be reduced to a dry Salt, but to an unctuous body
easily flowing in heat like Wax: my design in which trial it were here somewhat
improper to insist on.

That our friends might not be obliged to wait so long for the Redintegration
of Nitre, but might see the Experiment made in as little time as is possi^le,
we devised a more expeditious way of uniting the divorced parts of our (...),
and it was only by suffering such fixed Nitre as is mentioned by our Author to
run per Deliquium into a Liquor, which being separated from its faeces by
filtration through cap-paper was very clear and limpid: For, when we had a mind
to show the Experiment, we did only upon this Liquor drop some Spirit of
Nitre, and that, after such a noise, sparkling and effervescence, as our Author
speaks of, (all which hastily vanished) did immediately associate it self with
a competent proportion of the fixed Salt swimming in the Solution, and
therewith fall down in little Ice-icles of a Nitrous shape and nature; and when
we pleased to continue the affusion of the acid Spirit, this emergency of
Saltpeter would be observable from time to time, till either all, or almost
all the fixed Salt had united it self with the other. And these little Ice-icles
being dried in lumps, did as well upon the tongue and upon a quick coal, as
they had done to the Eye, disclose themselves to be so truly Nitrous, that our
friends were not wont without some wonder, as well as much pleasure, to behold
Saltpeter thus suddenly generated in less than a minute of an hour. These
small Ice-icles being in sufficient plenty dissolved in fair water, we did for
trials sake reduce by Congelation to fairer Cyrstals.

But though this be the perfectest and readiest way of reproducing Nitre, yet
because it often requires, especially in dry weather, a long time to reduce
fixed Nitre per Deliquium into a Liquor, we have sometimes substituted the
following way. We dissolved in fair water as much fixed Nitre as we could, and
filtrating the Solution through Cap-paper we satiated it with Spirit of Nitre,
after the manner above described, and then setting it to evaporate very slowly,
and afterward suffering it to cool, we obtained within some hours after the
first mixture of the Liquors, store of fine little Crystalls of Petre, which
shot in the Liquor; the remaining part of which being evaporated afforded more
of them. And though the evaporation and Crystallization cost us diverse hours,
yet it seemed that the Saltpeter was produced presently upon the ceasing of
the conflict betwixt the two Liquors. For the mixture before evaporation tasted
very like a Solution of common Nitre, and the little drops that upon the
effervescence skip'd out of the Glass, and fell back upon the sides of it, did
there many of them presently coagulate into little grains of Nitrous Salt.

SECT. XI.
And because, Pyrophilus, it may be suspected, that the Saltpeter mentioned to
have been produced by the reunion of the volatile and fixed part of that
Concrete, may have been only some associated particles of Saltpeter, that by
lurking undiscernedly in the fixed Nitre had escaped the analizing violence of
the fire, and by the affusion of fair water were set at liberty to assemble
together, and thereby disclose themselves in their true shape.

To remove this scruple, and to let you see that much the ensuing Discourse
will not need your supposing, that the Experiment of the Redintegration of
Petre was accurately made, and did accordingly succeed; I must here annex, that
though by diverse other Chemical Experiments which I have had occasion to make
with Saltpeter, I sometimes discove^'d, that now and then some undiscerned
particles of the Saltpeter may possibly escape our diligence when we make
fixed Nitre; yet those particles are too few to amount to such Crystals of
Petre, as the assusion of the acid Spirit upon the lixiviate Salt are capable
of affording: And that we have, to satisfy our selves farther in this
particular, purposely satiated, according to the former manner, a Solution of
common Potashes, bought of them that are wont to sell it in Shops, (who are
not so foolishly knavish as to adulterate them with Saltpeter, which is much
dearer than potashes) and filtrating the Solution from its copious faeces,
found after evaporation, in the remaining Liquor, within about two or three
days, and sometimes much sooner, pretty store of Crystalline Salt in a Nitrous
figure, which though at first it tasted somewhat corrosively, (perhaps because
the proportion betwixt the Nitrous Spirit and the Potashes was not duly
observed) yet after it had a while remained upon the tongue, the taste of it
much emulated that of Saltpeter; and part of it being cast upon a live coal,
did by its blew and halituous flame discover it self to be of the nature of
that Salt. To which we may add, that we likewise tried the experiment with Aqua
fortis and Salt of Tartar, and thereby produced Saltpeter, though but in small
quantity, and a long time. And those two additional Experiments I the rather
mention, because many of the ensuing Reflections may be justified by them,
although the main Experiment made on Saltpeter alone should in diverse
pariculars be supposed (for we have used our endeavors that it may not be
found,) to have been mistaken.

SECT. XII.
The Reflections which may be made on this Experiment are more than I have
either the skill or leisure to prosecute, and therefore I shall content my self
to present you very succinctly with a few of those that do the most readily
occur to my present thoughts.

And first, this Experiment seems to afford us an instance* by which we may
discern that Motion, Figure, and Disposition of parts, and such like primary
and mechanical Affections (if I may so call them) of Matter, may suffice to
produce those more secondary Affections of Bodies which are wont to be called
Sensible Qualities.

SECT. XIII.
And to begin with the Tangible Qualities, as Heat and Cold; it is commonly
held, that Saltpeter is in operation a Cold Body, if not one of the coldest in
the world; and accordingly Physicians and Chemists are wont to give it in
Fevers to allay the inward exaestuations of the blood and humors: and that
profound Naturalist the Lord Verulam highly commends a little of it, and did
for many years himself make use of it, to condense the Spirits. But whatever
it be in inward operation, certainly to the outward sense it appears very cold:
And yet the parts of this so cold Body (its Spirit and Alkali, by the latter of
which Chemists are wont to mean any fixed Salt produced by burning) put
together, do immediately agitate each other with great vehemence; and did in
our Experiment produce such an heat, that I could scarcely endure to hold in my
hand the Vial, wherein much less than an ounce of each was mixed, though but
leisurely and almost by drops: as if Heat were nothing but a various and nimble
motion of the minute particles of Bodies. For in our Experiment, as long as
that confused agitation lasted, so long the heat endured, and with that
agitation it increased and abated; and at length when the motion ceased, the
heat also vanished.

SECT. XIV.
Upon the mixture of the two forementioned Liquors there was also produced a
very audible sound, not unlike the hissing produced by the quenching of a live
coal in water; and this hissing was, as that other is wont to be accompanied
with an effervescence and boiling up of the Liquor, with store of bubbles, till
it was ready to run over the Vessel. This sound seemed to proced from the
nimble and smart percussions of the ambient air, made by the swift and
irregular motions of the particles of the Liquors: And such a kind of sound,
but much louder, was produced by the impetuous eruptions of the halituous
flames of the Saltpeter upon the casting of a live coal upon it. What interest
such a smartnesse in striking the air has in the production of Sound, may in
some measure appear by the motion of the bullet, and that of a switch or orher
wand, which produce no sound if they do but slowly pass through the air;
whereas if the one do smartly strike the air, and the other be shot out of a
Gun, the celerity of their percussions on the air puts it into an undulating
motion, which reaching the Ear, produces an audible noise even at a good
distance from the body, whose swift passage causes those nimble vibrations in
the air, as we may elsewhere have occasion to declare. And that in the sound
observable in our Experiment, the contiguous air receives many strokes from the
particles of the Liquor, seems probable, by the sudden and eager tumultuation
of the parts of the Liquors: and by this, that the noise increased and decayed
proportionably to the ebullition of the Liquors, and ceased altogether as soon
as the saline particles floating in them had by their conflict tired themselves
into quietness. And it is to be observed, that the noise ended long before the
heat. To the latter of which such an intestine tumult of the parts of many
bodies is sufficient, as is yet incapable to produce a sound. As we see in
Amber or good hard Wax heated by rubbing; and in many Liquors which retain a
considerable degree of heat a good while after the expiration of the noise the
noise they made in boiling.

SECT. XV.
We mentioned also, that our fixed Petre was of a bluish green color, which
upon the affusion of the acid Spirit suddenly vanished. That disposition of
parts, whereby the light reflected to the eye, was so modified as to produce
that color being now altered. And the like change we have sometimes observed
to be producible in fixed Nitre, by the bare leaving it a while in the moist
air. To which I must add, that in some such kind of Experiments I have observed
the copious fumes, arising from the mixture, to make the unfill'd part of the
Glass look of a reddish color; which is not more odd than that which we have
lately had opportunity to observe in Soot, which though it be so black it self,
and result from the coalition of dark exhalations, yet pres'd with a strong
fire, has filled our Receivers with fumes white enough to make them look as if
they were replenished with milk. And we have sometimes also taken great
pleasure to behold the variety of Colors which may be now and then discerned
in the sublimate, made by gradually subliming in an Urinal a mixture of equal
parts of only white Sal-Armoniack and black Antimony. But to wander no longer
far from our present Experiment, give me leave to inform you, that a while
since attempting to make Salt of Tartar, resolved in a little fair water, an
ingredient of Saltpeter by the addition of good Aqua fortis, the union of
these two Liquors produced a deep green color, which not only was diffused
quite through the mixture, but also appeared to reside peculiarly in certain
particles of it. For having for trial sake filtred it through Cap-paper, there
remained in the Fil^^e a powder of a very deep and lovely color, but in so
little quantity, that we could not attempt any Experiment upon it to make it
confess its nature. But this circumstance is not to be omitted, that the Salt
of Tartar that was then employed was extraordinay pure, having been by a
peculiar art (elsewhere to be taught you) brought, without any addition, into
fair-figur'd Crystals almost like lumps of white Sugar Candy. To which I must
add, that the same Aqua fortis with a Solution of other pure Salt of Tartar,
did likewise produce a color much resembling the former, but much fainter. And
it is farther to be taken notice of on this Subject, partly, that Nitre it
self, although it seem to have nothing of kin to Redness, does in distillation
yield blood-red fumes (fondly called by some Chemists the blood of the
Salamander) which fall again into a Liquor that has nothing of red in it; and
partly, that the fixed Nitre, that did before appear opacous, by a new
disposition of its parts conjoined with those of its reimbib'd Spirit, becomes
again somewhat Diaphanous and Crystalline as it was at first.

SECT. XVI.
Upon the mixture of these two Liquors there also obtrudes it self upon the
Sense a very strong and offensive smell, proceeding from the Spirit of Petre;
which perhaps occasioned some Chemists to call a Menstruum (wherein that
Nitrous spirit and smell is predominant) the Stygian water. But though the
Nitrous Spirit have a very strong and unwelcome odor of it self, yet is it
made much more offensive by being poured on its own fixed Salt; for upon their
conflict, the matter, being vehemently agitated, does more copiously emit such
stinking exhalations than before, and sends forth fumes manifestly
discernable as well to the Eye as Nostrils. The odor of the fixed Nitre is
very languid; but that which it discovers being dissolved in a little hot water
is altogether differing from the stink of the other, being of kin to that of
other alkalizate Salts. And yet the Saltpeter from which such
differingly-sented bodies spring, and which may again emerge from the coalition
of them, has not been observed, as I remember, to have any smell at all.

SECT. XVII.
The tastes of these two bodies are as differing as any of their other
qualities: for the Spirit is exceedingly acid, and may be called a strong and
sour Acetum Minerale; whereas the fixed Nitre has as strong a taste of Salt of
Tartar as the Spirit has of distilled Vinegar: and yet these two bodies, whose
sapours are so pungent, and so differing, do both spring from and unite into
Saltpeter, which betrays upon the tongue no heat nor corrosivenesse at all,
but coldness mixed with a somewhat languid relish retaining to bitterness. And
though we must not conceal from you, that in our trial the redintegrated
Saltpeter had upon its first impression upon the tongue a taste more sharp and
perforating (if I may so speak) than ordinary Nitre; yet that pungency may not
improbably be supposed to have proceeded from some Acid particles of the Spirit
that were not yet duly incorporated with, but only loosely adherent to, the
more perfectly Nitrous parts, which afterward discovered it self upon the
tongue. And however, the difference betwixt the taste of this new Salt, and
those of the Acid and Alkalizate Salts whereof it consisted, and
(unquestionably) the taste of these compared with that of the crude Petre which
was dissipated into them, were sufficient to warrant this Reflection.

SECT. XVIII.
Of the other Observables presented us by our Experiment, we must, Pyrophilus,
content our selves to mention but a few; our haste being such that it will not
permit us either to enumerate them all, or to insist long on any of them.

SECT. XIX.
Secondly then, the proposed Experiment seems to make it some what
questionable, whether or no Inflammability does strictly in all mixed bodies
require a distinct Sulphurous ingredient; and whether or no in some Concretes
it may not result from such a contrivance of parts, as that thereby the
particles of the Concrete are disposed to be set a moving by the adventitious
whether Fiery or Calorisick Corpuscles of another body, in such numbers, and
with such celerity, as may put them into that Scheme of matter which we call
Flame. How violent an heat may be produced upon such an account as this, may in
some measure appear by an Experiment wherein our present Theme Saltpeter is
the main Agent. For if into a Vial filled with good Spirit of Nitre you cast a
piece of Iron, you may perceive that the Liquor, whose parts moved placidly and
uniformly before, manifested no heat to the touch, meeting with pores and
particles in the Iron capable of very much altering the motion of its parts,
(and perhaps also that of some very subtle Intercurrent matter,) those active
parts do presently begin to penetrate, sever, and scatter abroad the particles
of the Iron (almost as Gunpowder does the pieces of breaking Grenades) with
such rapidity, and in such plenty and throngs, that being themselves also put
into a very swift and irregular motion (whence soever it proceeds) there is
hereby produced a heat capable (if the quantity of the Liquor and Metal be
great enough) to burn his hand that holds the Vessel, and perhaps break the
Vessel (if it be not very open) all to pieces; whereas by casting into the same
Spirit of Nitre little lumps of Camphire, whose particles were indisposed to
occasion the like disturbance and agitation in the Nitrous Spirit, we observed
the agitation made of the particles of the white Gum to change it only into a
yellowish and fluid seeming Oil.

SECT. XX.
But not to wander any further, our own experiment informs us, that Saltpeter
(which not only is inflammable, but burns very fiercely and violently) may be
produced by the coalition of two bodies, which are neither of them inflammable;
the one being a fixed Salt, that to become such has already suffered the loss
of all that the fire could deprive it of, and the other being a Spirit
abounding with acid particles, which kind of Salts have been observed to be
more apt to quench than foment fire.

SECT. XXI.
And because we may elsewhere, God assisting, treat more particularly of the
Inflammableness of Bodies, we will now add but a few lines concerning that of
Nitre, that this circumstance of it might not escape our observation, namely,
that upon casting Saltpeter on a glowing coal, or upon the casting of a
glowing coal into melted Saltpeter, the Nitre will immediately take fire and
flash out into bluish and halituous flames; whereas if the same Nitre be
placed in a Crucible, though that Crucible be by degreees made glowing hot, and
do immediately with its concave surface in innumerable places touch the
particles of Nitre, yet the strange Salt will be thereby melted, but not
kindled. The Reason of which Phenomenon I must not now (but may on another
Occasion) spend time to enquire after.

SECT. XXII.
It may also, Pyrophi. deserve the Enquiry, whence it proceeds that whereas the
body of Saltpeter when committed to Distillation is oftentimes very well
dried, and consists of Saline parts which are generally accounted to be of a
very dry nature, yet the spirits of Petre forced by the fire into the Receiver
should not, like Sal-Armoniack, and some other bodies distilled with the like
he^t and vessels, adhere in the form of Sublimate to the Receiver, but fall
into a liquor, which does not, for ought we have seen or heard of, either
totally or in part coagulate again in the cold, as we have seen Spirit of Urine
and other volatile liquors (afforded by Animal substances) often do; and as we
have observed, though rarely, even in the corrosive liquor that is wont to be
called Butter of Antimony. And the like Enquiry may be made concerning the
liquidnesse of the distilled Spirits of decrepitated Salt, calcined Vitriol,
and diverse other bodies, which seem to have been destitute of moisture, when
committed to Distillation.

SECT. XXIII.
But this not being precisely a Phenomenon of our Experiment, we shall not
here prosecute it, (though perhaps we else where may) but rather observe to
you, Pyrophilus, that whereas good Spirit of Nitre being left in an open
vessel, is wont to smoke and waste it self in an Exhalation sensible,
especially if it be excited by a little heat, not only in the Nose but to the
Eye; this Fugitive Spirit when it is once reunited to its own fixed Salt,
emits no such steam, though kept a good while near a considerable fire: which
Instance may somewhat assist us to make out, that the most fugitive parts of
Concretes may in spite of their natural Mobility be detained in bodies by
their Union and texture with the more sluggish parts of them, among which those
lighter and more active Ingredients may be so entangled as to be restrained
from Avolation.

SECT. XXIV.
Another thing worth considering in our Experiment is this, that upon the
dropping of the acid spirit into the Alkalizate liquor, if you place the
open-mouthed glass wherein the Experiment is performed betwixt the light and
your eye, you may plainly discern, that the Saline particles of these liquors
toss one another (or are tossed by some brisk invisible substance) to the
height of diverse fingers breadth up into the air, whence most of them fall back
into the Vessel like a thick shower of little drops of rain: And it were worth
enquiring, whence this sparkling of the parts of these mixed liquors arises; and
whether the Saline Corpuscles may be conceived rapidly to move differing ways,
and so, thwarting each other in their courses, and rudely justling at their
Occursions, some of them are forced to bound or fly upwards, (almost like Ivory
balls meeting each other on a Billyard-Table.) And to assist you in this
Enquiry, give me leave to inform you, that the particles thus thrown into the
air appear to be most of them Saline by this Observation; that soon after the
fall of the forementioned showers, you shall find the sides of the glass
wherein the affusion of the Nitrous spirit has been made, all embroidered with
little grains of Salt, left there by those wandering drops that fell besides the
liquor.

SECT. XXV.
And let me farther observe to you, that there seems to be a very nimble
agitation in the particles of the Spirit of Nitre, by this, That upon the
pouring of Aqua fortis (whose Active part is little else than Spirt of Nitre)
upon a Solution of Salt of Tartar in fair water, in which diverse small lumps of
the Salt remained yet undissolv'd, we have observed the acid spirit to sever
the particles of the Salt with such impetuosity, that the numberless little
Bubbles produced upon their Conflict, and hastily ascending in swarms from some
of the little, lumps, made them emulate so many little, but rapidly rising,
Springs. And to make it yet appear more probable, that there may be such
crossing motions in the parts of these liquors, we observed, that after the two
contrary Salts had by their mutual conflict tired each other, (or rather had
been upon their occursions fastened to one another) there would follow no
farther ebullition or skipping up and down of little drops of the liquors, upon
the putting in of more Spirit of Nitre, unless there were added likewise more
of the Alkalizate liquor.

SECT. XXVI.
And, before we pass on from this Reflection, it may not be useless to take
notice of the difference that there may be betwixt those active parts of a body
which are of differing Natures, when they are as it were Sheathed up, or Wedged
in amongst others in the texture of a Concrete; and the same particles, when
(extricated from these Impediments) they are set at liberty to flock together,
and by the exercise of their nimble motions display their proper, but formerly
clogged activity, or acquire a Disposition to be briskly agitated by some fine
interfluent matter. For though in the entire body of Saltpeter the Ingredients
it consists of, or the differing substances into which the fire dissipates it,
do so mutually implicate and hinder each other, that the Concrete, whilst such,
acts but very languidly; yet when the parts come to be dislocated, and the
halituous and Alkalizate particles are enabled or made to disband from the
Concrete, and associate themselves with those of their own nature, we see with
how great an activity both the acid Spirit and the fixed Salt are endowed.

SECT. XXVII.
And we may yet farther observe, that it is not barely an indefinite
nimblenesse of motion, and activity of the particles of Saline liquors, that
enables them to perform each of their particular effects: for to the production
of some of these there seems requisite, besides perhaps a Modification of their
Motion, a determinate Figure of the corpuscles, answerable to that of the pores
of the body by them to be dissolved; as Spirit of Nitre corrodes Silver, but
not Gold; which nevertheless, its particles associated with those of
Sal-Armoniack, and thereby acquiring a new Figure, and perhaps a differing
Motion, will readily dissolve: and the liquor of fixed Nitre will for the same
reason, dissolve such Sulphurous and unctuous bodies as the acid spirit will
not corrode; nay, and I have carefully observed, that there may be liquors that
will not dissolve some bodies, unless the motion or activity of their
particles be allayed or modified by the mixture of fair water, or such unactive
vehicles.

SECT. XXVIII.
Another particular which in our Experiment we may take notice of, is, the
unwariness of those vulgar Chemists who presume confidently (and
indiscriminately enough) to ascribe to each of the heterogeneous Ingredients,
or (in their language) Principles of a Concrete analys'd by the fire, the
virtues and properties (perhaps too in an exalted degree) of the entire body.
But though this be an error of very ill consequence in reference to diverse
Chemical preparations of Medicines; yet having elsewhere discoursed purposely
of it, we shall here content our selves to allege against it the instances
afforded us by the Experiment under consideration: for in that we may observe,
that when Saltpeter is distilled, the volatile liquor and fixed Salt into
which it is reduced by the fire, are endowed with properties exceeding
different both from each other, and from those of the undissipated Concrete:
for the Spirit of Nitre is (as we formerly have observed) a kind of Acetum
Minerale, and possesses the Common qualities to be met with in acid spirits as
such; whereas the fixed Nitre is of an Alkalizate nature, and participates the
qualities belonging generally to lixiviate Salts; and Saltpetre it self is a
peculiar sort of Salt, discriminated by distinct properties both from those
Salts that are eminently acid, as Alum, Vitriol, Sal-gemmae, etc. and from
those that are properly Alkalizate, as Salt of Tartar and Potashes; and
accordingly, we may easily observe a vast disparity in the effects and
operations of these three bodies. For several, if not all of those mineral Ones
which Aqua fortis will by corroding dissolve, the Solution of fixed Nitre will
precipitate; and diverse, if not all of those Sulphurous and unctuous bodies
which the Solution of fixed Nitre will dissolve, the acid spirit of Petre will
precipitate. And we have in a trice re-dissolved with the Spirit a Solution of
Sublimate precipitated with the other liquor: Thus, if into a Scarlet tincture
made by an Infusion of Brasil in fair water, we pour a little Spirit of Nitre,
the shaken liquor will in a moment change its Redness for a kind of Yellow,
which by pouring on it a little of the Solution of fixed Nitre, may be again
graduated into a somewhat Sanguine color, sometimes paler, and sometimes
perhaps deeper than the first; whereas a Solution of Selt-petre it self poured
on either of the former tinctures, the Red or the Yellow, has not been by us
discerned to have produced any sensible alteration. And whereas Saltpeter it
self is partly fixed, and partly volatile, the acid Ingredients of it are
altogether volatile, the Alkalizate fixed. But having elsewhere occasion to
speak to this subject, we shall now proceed to tell you, that

SECT. XXIX.
It may pass for another Observable presented us by our Experiment, that it
gives us occasion to enquire whether the Air does not contribute something to
the artificial production of Saltpeter, or at least to the figuration of it
according to the perfecter shape belonging to that kind of Salt: for we
formerly observed, that the Salt which was leisurely permitted to shoot of it
self in the liquor exposed to the open air, did shoot into more fair and large
Crystalline Stiriae, than those that were gained out of the remaining part of
the same liquor by a more hasty evaporation, though made but in a digesting
Furnace. And we have also observed, that when once we poured Aqua fortis on a
strong Solution of Salt of Tartar, till no further effervescence was
discernable betwixt them, though the mixture by a somewhat quick heat afforded
a Salt that seemed to be very Nitrous, yet it would not be brought to shoot in
so fair and conspicuously-figur'd Crystals of Petre, till it had been a good
while exposed to the open air: but whether the air its self impregnated with
the promiscuous streams of most of the bodies of the terrestrial globe, (and
perhaps with seminal effluvia from some of them) do really contribute any thing
either to the Production or Figuration of Saltpetre in our Experiment, I dare
not yet determine, for two chief Reasons.

SECT. XXX.
Whereof the first is because the Figuration seems not improbably ascribable,
not so much to the proper efficiency of the air, as to the convenience which by
quietness, and a competent vehicle to move in, was afforded to the Saline
particles, to conform themselves (or be conformed by a Concourse of Agents and
Circumstances) to that figure which is most natural to them. For we have
observed already, that the fixed Nitre which was not dissolved in water, before
the affusion of the acid spirit, did not shoot into the wonted form of
Cristalls of Petre, but remained a kind of Nitrous powder, the acid and
Alkalizate Saline particles not having a convenient vehicle to expand
themselves in; but being necessitated, for want of room, to make an
unseasonable and overhasty coalition, upon which their own weight made them
subside in the figures resulting from their casual concourse, and therefore
probably differing from those into which the Saline corpuscles would have been
disposed, had they been allowed a competency of vehicle and time.

SECT. XXXI.
The other reason of my hesitancy about the use of the Air in our experiment,
is, that I inconsiderately forgot to try whether part of that Liquor which shot
into Crystals in an open-mouthed glass exposed to the air, would not have done
the like, if it had been left quiet as long as the other was, though in a
vessel accurately stopped: Whether the Air have any great interest in the
Figuration or in the Reproduction of Nitre, the Author has since examined by
particular Trials; but in Vessels and by ways not to be easily described in few
words, and therefore the further mention of them is reserved for another
Discourse.
but whatever the Air has to do in this experiment, I dare invite you to
believe, that it is so enriched with variety of steams from Terrestrial (not
here to determine whether it receive not some also from Celestial) bodies,
that the enquiring into the further uses of it (for I mean not it is known uses
in Respiration, Sailing, Pneumatical Engines, etc.) may very well deserve your
curiosity. To encourage which, I dare at present only tell you, that though I
cannot yet pretend to much experience in this particular, yet we have known
such changes (seemingly Chemical) made in some Saline Concretes, by the help
chiefly of the volatilizing operations of the open air, as very few, save those
that have attentively considered what Helmont, and one or two other Artists,
have hinted on that subject, or have made trials of that nature themselves,
will be apt to imagine.

SECT. XXXII.
And if upon further and exacter trial it appears that the whole body of the
Saltpeter, after it is having been severed into very differing parts by
distillation, may be adequately reunited into Saltpeter equiponderant to it is
first self; this Experiment will afford us a noble and (for ought we have
hitherto met with) single instance to make it probable that that which is
c^mmonly called the Form of a Concrete, which gives it it is being and
denomination, and from whence all it is qualities are in the vulgar Philosophy,
by I know not what inexplicable ways, supposed to flow, may be in some bodies
but a Modification of the matter they consist of, whose parts by being so and
so disposed in relation to each other, constitute such a determinate kind of
body, endowed with such and such properties; whereas if the same parts were
otherwise disposed, they would constitute other bodies of very differing
natures from that of the Concrete whose parts they formerly were, and which may
again result or be produced after it is dissipation and seeming destruction, by
the reunion of the same component particles, associated according to their
former disposition.

SECT. XXXIII.
The Redintegration (or Reproduction) of an analyz'd body, if it can be
accurately and really performed, may give much light to many particulars in
Philosophy, and would certainly be very welcome both to the embracers of the
Atomical Hypothesis, and generally to those other Modern Naturalists, who
aspire to such Explications of Nature's Phenomenon as may at least be
understood: all whom I wish, that though men cannot perhaps in all things, yet
at least as far as they can, they would accustom themselves to speak and think
as Nature does really and sensibly appear to work; and not to acquiesce in
Notions and Explications of things which, strictly examined, are not
in^elligible.

Wherefore I am about to attempt a Reproduction in Vitriol, Turpentine, and
some other Concretes, in which it seems not unlikely to be performable: and
perhaps you may see cause to think that the Experiment of Saltpeter, even as
we have already made and proposed it, though it be not an exact and adequate
Redintegration, is yet not far from being a real one; the dissipated parts of
the Concrete truly re-uniting into a body of the same nature with the former,
though not altogether of the same bulk.

SECT. XXXIV.
And yet I think it requisite to represent to you, Pyrophilus, that Saltpeter
is a body whose parts are not Organical, and which is not so much as very
compounded; and that therefore bodies that consist of more numerous
Ingredients, and much more those whose Organical parts require a much more
artificial and elaborate disposition or contrivance of their component
particles, cannot be safely judged of, by what is possible to be performed on a
body of so simple and slight a contexture as is Saltpeter: for we see that
even wine, though no organical body, nor so much as the most compounded of
inanimate. Concretes, when it is spirit is, though by the gentlest distillation,
drawn from it, will not, by the reunion of it is constituent Liquors, be
reduced to it is pristine Nature; because the workmanship of Nature in the
disposition of the parts was too elaborate to be imitable, or repairable by the
bare and inartificial apposition of those divided parts to each other: besides
that in the dissociating action, even of the gentlest fire, upon a Concrete,
there does perhaps vanish, though undiscernedly, some active and fugitive
particles, whose presence was requisite to contain the Concrete under such a
determinate form; as we see in Wine degenerating into Vinegar, where the change
seems to proceed from this, that upon the Avolation or (if I may so speak)
Depression) of some subtle sulphurous spirits, whose Recesse or degeneration
is not to be perceived by any sensible diminution of bulk in the Liquor, the
remaining parts fall into new leagues or dispositions, and constitute an acid
Liquor somewhat fixed and Corrosive, and consequently of qualities very
differing from those of the Wine, whose souring produced it: as we more fully
declare in our Experiments relating to Fermentation.

SECT. XXXV.
And certainly there is, as we formerly said, so artificial a contrivance of
particles requisite to the constitution of the Organical parts of living
bodies, that it will be scarce possible for humane Art or Industry to imitate
so as to equal those exquisite productions of Nature: And therefore I wonder
not that the story of the Phoenix's resurrection out of her own ashes should by
the best Naturalists be thought a mere fiction. And if that relation, mentioned
by the inquisitive Kircherus as an eyewitness of the Reproduction (if I may so
call it) of Shell-fishes near the brink of a Lake in the Sicilian Promontorie
Peloro, Lib. 3. de Art Magnet. Par. 5. Cap. 3.
by the watering of their broken bodies with Salt water in the Spring, be
strictly true, it seems much more improbable that such changes and vicissitudes
should be bare Redintegrations of the dissociated parts of such restored
bodies; than that In some Papers about the origin of Living Creatures supposed
to spring of themselves.
, (according to what we elsewhere teach,) they should be New Productions made
by some seminal particles undiscernedly lurking in some part of the destroyed
body, and afterward excited and assisted by a Genial and cherishing heat so to
act upon the fit and obsequious matter wherein 'twas harbor'd, as to organize
and fashion that disposed matter according to the exigencies of it is own
Nature. For that in some bodies the Seminal particles may a while survive the
seeming destruction of life, is not altogether without example, as we elsewhere
professedly manifest. And in Kircher's story it is to be observed, that the
restored Animals were but Shellfish; in whose slimy and viscous substance the
Spirits and Prolifick parts are probably both more diffused and kept from being
easily dissipable; to which I know not whether it will be worth while to
subjoyn, that in such Fishes the Mechanical contrivance is but very plain, and
as it were slight and obvious, in comparison of the exquisitely elaborated
parts of more perfect Animals.

SECT. XXXVI.
The last observable, Pyrophilus, that we shall at present take notice of in
our Experiment, shall be this, That it may thereby seem probable that some
Chemical remedies may be too rashly rejected by Physicians, because Oil or
Spirit of Vitriol, Aqua Regis, or other Corrosive Liquors, have been employed
in their preparation: For it is confidently affirmed by many Physicians, and
but faintly denied by some Chemists, that the Corrosive Menstruums made use of
in the preparation of remedies, can never be so exquisitely washed off from
them, but that some of the Salts will adhere to the Medicines, and perniciously
display their Corrosive Nature in the body of him that takes them. And it is
not to be denied, but that many ignorant and venturous Chemists do unskilfully
(and therefore dangerously enough) employ Corrosives sometimes without any
necessity or real advantage to invite them to it, and sometimes without
sufficiently freeing their Medicines from the corroding Salts, by whose
assistance they were prepared; for it is not always the frequency of ablutions,
though with warm water, that will suffice to carry off the Salts from some
bodies; and therefore those great Artists, Helmont and Paracelsus, prescribe
some things to be dulcifi'd by the abstraction of the water of whites of Eggs,
(which though it seem insipid, has been found a great disarmer of corrosive
Salts) and others by the frequent distillation of Spirit of Wine, which indeed
(not to mention the Balsamic parts it may leave behind) we have observed to
have a faculty of carrying up with it the Saline Particles of Spirit of Vinegar
adhering to some Chemical remedies. But all this notwithstanding, Pyrophilus,
there may be several bodies (and perhaps more than are commonly taken notice
of) which quite alter the nature of the acid Salts employed to prepare them, by
occasioning those Salts to degenera^e into another nature, upon the very act of
corroding, or else by so associating their own Salts with those of the
dissolving Menstruum, that from the Coalition of both, there emerges a third
body differing in qualities from either. As in our experiment we find that the
Spirit of Petre, which is much more sharp and corrosive than the strongest
distilled Vinegar, and the fixed Nitre which is Caustic like Salt of Tartar,
and may, I suppose, well serve for a Potential Cautery, (as Surgeons speak) do
by their mutual action work themselves into Saltpeter, which is far enough
from having any eminently fretting Quality, and may be safely taken inwardly in
a much greater Dose than either of its Ingredients.

SECT. XXXVII.
How much corrosive Salts may dulcifie themselves by corroding some bodies, you
may easily try by pouring distilled Vinegar or moderate Spirit of Vitriol upon
a competent proportion of Corals, or Crabs Eyes, or Pearls, (or, as I suppose,
almost any testaceous body.) And for my part, though I am very shy of employing
corrosive Liquors in the Preparation of Medicines; yet I have lately given a
Preparation of refined Silver made with Aqua fortis it self, or Spirit of
Nitre, not only innocently, but with such success, that a couple of
Experienced Physicians themselves, that were troubled with a superfluity of
serous humors, sent to request it of me for their own use.

SECT. XXXVIII.
It were therefore worth while, in every Preparation where Corrosive Liquors
are wont to be employed, or may seem requisite to be so, to consider the
distinct nature of the particular bodies to be wrought upon, or consult
Experience whether or no the acid Menstruum do communicate to the Concrete any
Particles capable of retaining their fretting Quality after the end of the
Operation; or whether or no the Salts do not so spend and tire themselves in
the act of corroding, that being as it were sheathed, they become unable to
corrode any further; or whether or no the Menstruum do not in the body to be
corroded meet with some such Saline particles, as may with it constitute a new
and inoffensive substance, as when Spirit of Vinegar, by corroding calcined
Lead, is turned with it into a Salt, not of an acid, but a Saccharine taste,
such as invited Chemists to give it the name of Sugar of Saturn. In the former
of these cases the Medicine may be dangerous, unless it be after the Solution
or Corrosion ended exquisitely dulcifi'd from all remainder of the Corrosive
Salts. But in the two latter cases the remedies may in spite of the
Corrosiveness of the Menstruums employed about them, be safe and innocent
enough; for it matters not much how sharp and fretting the severed Ingredients
of a remedy were, provided the remedy it self resulting from them be not so.
And whereas it is objected, that in diverse of these remedies the Corrosive
Salts are not really destroyed, but only disguised, because by distillation it
is possible to separate from them the Liquors used about them as Corrosive as
ever: it may easily be replied, that besides that in several Medicines, the
Matter of Fact will not hold in diverse others; the Objection built on it is
much more specious than solid, for it very little concerns us to be sure that
out of the Medicines we take or give the violence of fire cannot separate
Corrosive Salts; provided we be duly satisfied, that no such separation can be
made by the heat or Juices of a humane body. And therefore, though it have been
affirmed, that Tartarum Vitriolatum would upon the urgent solicitation of a
strong fire, part with much of (that most fretting liquor upon animal
substances) the Oil of Vitriol, that concurred to its Production; yet our best
and wariest Physicians, not only Chemists but Methodists, scruple not to give
it inwardly in several constitutions, and distempers. And to end this discourse
with the Experiment that began it, we clearly see that Saltpeter is frequently
and innoxiously given inwardly, though the Salt, that makes even Aqua fortis so
Corrosive, be the principal Ingredient of it, and may by distillation be driven
from it.

SECT. XXXIX.
It would not have been very uneasy for me, Pyrophilus, to have added to
diverse particulars of the past Discourse, Experiments and considerations
tending to countenance or illustrate the Reflections therein set down: but in
the first place, I wanted leisure to expatiate; in the second place, I was
unwilling to anticipate what I have to say to you in other Essays, especially
expecting to have elsewhere occasion to make mention of Saltpeter. And besides
all this, I am (to tell you the truth) desirous to impose on you a kind of
necessity of prosecuting this Experiment, further than when I made it I had
opportunity to do. For as I am apt to think it may prove a noble one: so I am
sufficiently sensible of my having not yet been able to look into the bottom of
it; and that very sense of my own ignorance, helped to keep me from lengthening
your trouble in this Essay, lest by solemnly endeavoring to countenance my
Conjectures, I might be thought Dogmatical in a hasty Scrible, wherein it is
much more my design to awaken and engage your Curiosity, than acquaint you with
my opinions. And yet I thought it not amiss to mention the past considerations,
such as they are, partly because this one instance seems so fai^ly to
accommodate more than one Notion of the intelligible Philosophy, which seems
hitherto not to have so much as employed, much less produced, any store of
Experiments; and partly, because I would have you take notice, that more
Observables than one may sometimes be very reasonably sought for in a single
Experiment. And perhaps too, I was willing by my spending a whole Essay upon
one Experiment, without allowing my self to wander often from it, to invite you
to think with me, That Experiments ought to be estimated by their value, not
their number; and that a single Experiment, I say not such as that the last
Essay treats of, but in general, such as, it may be, may as well deserve an
entire Treatise, as a great many less considerable ones. As one of those large
and orient Pearls that are fit to adorn a Monarchs Crown, may outvalue a very
great number of those little (though true) Pearls that are to be bought by the
ounce in Goldsmiths and Apothecaries shops.

SECT. XL.
Having newly met, Pyrophilus, with some small Treatises freshly published by
Glauberus, and not having now the leisure to consider, or indeed so much as to
peruse, much less the opportunity to make trial of diverse Particulars, which by
turning over the leaves of the book, I find mentioned by him in relation to
Saltpeter, I must recommend to you the care of examining the Particulars he
delivers; and trying how far some of them may serve to correct, or to confirm,
and how far others may be corrected by what has been in the past discourse set
down concerning Saltpeter upon Experiments, some of whose fruits I can yet
show you, which were made upon the account of the divisiblenesse of Nitre into
fixed and volatile parts, long before the Publication of Glauber's Treatises.

THE HISTORY OF FLUIDITY AND FIRMNESS.

Begun by R. B.

ADVERTISEMENTS Concerning the following TREATISE.
THAT the Author in those Animadversions upon the Essay touching Saltpeter,
whereof the ensuing Treatise makes a part, might with the more freedom and
convenience add, alter, and even retract as he should see cause, he thought
fit to write them as if they were made on the Work of another.

The Author hopes, That the Equitable Reader considering that the following
Particulars touching Fluidity and Firmness were first written but by way of
Annotations upon the beginning of the abovementioned Essay, will excuse the
unaccurateness of the Method, as a fault scarce evitable on that occasion. It
is also hoped, that if the Reader will remember, that he was told in the
Preface to the newly-mention'd Essay, that most of those whom to gratify, That
Treatise and the ensuing Notes on it were written, were addicted to the
Epicurean Philosophy; The Authors Explicating things chiefly according to the
Atomical Principles will not be thought strange, nor be looked upon as a sure
Argument of his being wedded to the particular opinions wherein the Atomists
differ from other modern Naturalists; especially* since he has on some
occasions plainly enough intimated the contrary, by proposing, together with
the Atomical ways of resolving a thing, another Explication more agreeable to
the Cartesian, or some other modern Hypothesis.

The following Tract was entitled a History of Fluidity and Firmness, because
indeed the having set down Experiments and other matters of fact relating to
the Subjects treated of, is the Main, though not the Only thing the Author
dares pretend to have done in it. And he styles the History as it now comes
abroad, Begun: Partly, because he would invite abler Pens to contribute their
Observations toward the completing of what he is sensible he has but begun;
and partly because he may hereafter, if God permit, do something of that kind
himself.

And lastly, the Author, though troubled that he can do it, dares not but
Advertise the Reader, That some Pages partly a little after the beginning, and
partly about the middle of the following Treatise, having been lost through the
negligence or mistake of him to whose Care the sheets whereon it was written
were committed; he fears he has not been able, otherwise than very lamely and
imperfectly, to repair that loss out of his Memory.

THE HISTORY OF Fluidity and Firmness.
The First Part. Of FLUIDITY.
SECT. I.
WHether Philosophers might not have done better in making Fluidity and
Firmness rather States then Qualities of Bodies, we will not now examine. But
under which soever of the two Notions we look upon them, it is manifest enough,
that they are to be reckoned amongst the most general Affections of the
Conventions or Associations of several particles of matter into Bodies of any
certain denomination, there being scarce any distinct portion of matter in the
World that is not either Fluid, or else Stable or Consistent. And therefore, I
presume, it may be well worth while to consider what may be the general causes
of these two States, Qualities, or Affections of Matter; and to Try whether by
associating Chemical Experiments to Philosophical Notions, there may not be
given at least a more Intelligible and more Practical of both these Subjects,
than has been hitherto afforded us by the Doctrine of the Schools, which is
wont to appear very unsatisfactory to discerning Men; many of whom look upon
what is wont to be taught by the Peripateticks, concerning Fluidity and
Firmness, as well as other Qualities, to be partly too general to teach us
much, and partly too obscure to be understood. And that which at present
invites us to this Enquiry is, chiefly, that some Circumstances of our Authors
Experiment, touching Saltpeter, may afford us some useful assistance in our
designed search. For though the chief Phenomenon and Circumstances of the
Experiment may be thought principally to respect Fluidity; yet since that and
Firmness are contrary Qualities, and since it is truly, as well as commonly,
said, That contraries surveyed together serve to illustrate each other, it may
reasonably be hoped, That the Light which the circumstances just now related to
may give to the Nature of Fluidity, may facilitate the knowledge of that of
Compactness: nevertheless, we shall often be obliged to treat of these two
qualities together, because the Experiments we are to produce do many of them
relate to both.

SECT. II.
A Body then seems to be Fluid, chiefly upon this account, That it consists of
Corpuscles that touching one another in some parts only of their Surfaces (and
so being incontiguous in the rest) and separately Agitated to and fro, can by
reason of the numerous pores or spaces necessarily left betwixt their
incontiguous parts, easily glide along each others superficies, and by reason
of their motion diffuse themselves, till they meet with some hard or resisting
Body; to whose internal surface, by virtue of that Motion, their Smallness, and
either their Gravity, or something Analogous or Equivalent to it, they
exquisitely, as to sense, accommodate themselves.

SECT. III.
What notion Epicurus, and the Ancient Atomists his followers, had of fluid
Bodies, may be learned from these Verses of his Paraphrast Lucretius: Illa
autem debent ex laevibus atque rotundis
Esse magis, fluido quae corpore liquida constant.
Nec retinentur enim inter se glomeramina quaeque,
Et procursus item in proclive volubilis extat.
And indeed, it is probable enough that in diverse Liquors the little surfaces
of the component particles are smooth and slippery, and that their being so
does much facilitate the gliding of the Corpuscles among themselves; and
consequently, the Fluidity of the Body they compose. Nor is it to be denied,
that the Spherical figure of such Corpuscles may also conduce to their easy
rouling upon one another: but there are diverse other figures which may make the
little Bodies endowed with them voluble enough to constitute a fluid substance.
And the other qualities to be met with in diverse liquid substances, and even in
water it self, and Oil, seem to argue their parts to be otherwise shaped, and
those fluid Bodies which are not Liquors, as Air and Fire, seem to be composed
of particles not all or most of them round, but of very various, and sometimes
of very irregular figures, and yet that such Bodies deserve to be called fluid
ones, will be manifest anon: And that they make a much more considerable part
of the Universe than those that are wont to be called Liquors, may be argued
from hence, that except the Earth, the Planets, and perhaps too the fixed Stars,
the rest of the World, as vast as it is, seems to consist chiefly, if not only,
of an Aetherial, thin, and fluid substance, as may appear (to omit other
arguments) by what latter Astronomers have observed concerning the free and
unresisted motion of such Comets as have by a Trajection through the Ether,
for a long time wandered through the Celestial or Interstellar part of the
Universe.

SECT. IV.
And here let us observe, that it is not necessary to the Fluidity of a Body,
nay, nor to its appearing fluid to the Eye it self, That the Corpuscles it
consists of be crowded as close together as they are wont to be in water, and
other bodies that are commonly looked upon as the only Liquors. For though a
parcel of matter no bigger than a grain of Corn, being rarified into smoke,
will possess an incomparably greater space than it did before; and though, if a
Body be further rarified into flame, its expansion will be yet much greater:
yet both smoke and flame may be so ordered, as to appear like Liquors. We have
practiced diverse ways, to make the fumes of Bodies acquire a visibly-level
superficies like water; but the easiest, though not perhaps the best, is this,
(part of which I remember I have seen performed as a kind of trick by a very
ingenious Person.) The mouth being filled with the smoke of Rosemary (that
happening to be at hand when I made the Experiment) if this smoke be
plentifully blown into a glass Pipe of an indifferent size, and open at both
ends; and if when it is well filled with smoke, the lower end be presently
stopped, and the glass be kept still a while in an erected posture, the fumes
will settle by degrees to a level superficies like water: so that, though you
gently incline the Pipe any way, the upper surface of the smoke will
nevertheless quickly grow parallel to the Horizon. And if the glass be
further (but slowly) made to stoop, the smoke will seem to run down in a Body
like water, whilst it continues in the Pipe, though when it is come to the
lower end of it, instead of dropping down like water, it will commonly rather
fly upwards and disperse it self into the Air. And as for flame, I foresee I
shall ere long have occasion to mention an Experiment, whereby I have sometimes
endeavored to show, that even two contiguous flames, as expanded Bodies as
they are, and as open as their Texture is, may like visible Fluids of a
differing kind retain distinct surfaces.

SECT. V.
But instead of Examining any further, how many Bodies are or may be made
visibly to appear fluid ones; let us now resume the Consideration of what it is
that make Bodies fluid; especially, since having intimated some of the Reasons,
why we are unwilling to Confine our selves to the Epicurean notion, we hope it
will the less be disliked, that we thought fit to make such a description of a
fluid substance, as may intimate, that we conceive the conditions of it to be
Chiefly these Three.

The first is the Littleness of the Bodies that compose it: For in big parcels
of matter, besides the greater inequalities or roughnesses that are usual upon
their surfaces, and may hinder the easy sliding of those Bodies along one
another; and besides that diverse other Affections of a fluid Body cannot well
belong to an aggregate of gross Lumps of matter; besides these things, I say,
the bulk it self is apt to make them so heavy, that they cannot be agitated by
the power of those causes (whatever they be) that make the minute parts of
fluid Bodies move so freely up and down among themselves: whereas it would
scarce be believed, how much the smallness of parts may facilitate their being
easily put into motion, and kept in it, if we were not able to confirm it by
Chemical Experiments. But we see that Lead, Q^ick-silver, and even Gold it
self, though whilst they are of a sensible bulk, they will readily sink to the
bottom of Aqua Regis, or any other such Liquor; yet when the Menstruum has
corroded them, or fretted them asunder into very minute parts, those minute
Corpuscles grow then so much more capable of agitation than before, that
quitting the bottom of the Liquor, they are carried freely every way, and to
the top, with the associated parts of the Liquor, without falling back again to
the bottom. Nay, we see that ponderous and mineral Bodies divided into
corpuscles small enough, may be made so light and voluble, as to become
Ingredients even of distilled Liquors; as we may learn by what some Chemists
call the Butter, others (simply) the Oil, and others the Oleum Glaciale of
Antimony, which though it be after Rectification a very limpid Liquor, yet does
in great part consist of the very Body of the Antimony, as may appear (not to
mention its weight) by this, that it is most easy to precipitate out of it with
fair water store of a ponderous white calx, reducible by Art to an Antimonial
glass. Nay, we make a Menstruum, with which we can easily at the first or
second Distillation bring over Gold enough to make the distilled Liquor appear
and continue ennobled with a Golden Color.

And to show yet more particularly, that great Bodies are too unwieldy to
constitute fluid ones; We may further observe, how as well Nature as Art, when
either of them makes Bodies of considerable bulk fluid, is wont in order
thereunto, to make a Comminution of them, as we may observe in diverse Examples.

SECT. VI.
Thus we see that in the stomachs of Dogs, Nature, to reduce Bones into those
fluid Bodies, Chyle and Blood, does by some powerful and appropriated juice,
(whether belonging to the Stomach it self, or thrown out of the Arteries in the
passage of the circulating Blood) dissolve them into parts so minute, that the
acutest Eye would not tempt a man to suspect, that such a Liquor had ever been
a Bone. And that it may not be objected that this dissolution is chiefly
performed, or at least must always be assisted by the Liquor which Animals take
into their Stomachs by drinking; I shall represent not only that we find by
experience how little, common water the only usual drink of Dogs, Wolves, etc.
is able to dissolve bones though they be very long not macerated but boiled in
it; but that (if we may believe Natural Historians and credible Travelers)
there are some sorts of Animals, as particularly Camels, that may be brought
not to drink once in many days, even when they travel in hot Climates. And to
make you think this the less improbable, I shall add, that I am familiarly
acquainted with an Ingenious Gentleman, who, as himself and an ancient
Virtuoso, in whose house he lives, have informed me, does usually drink but
once in several days, and then no excessive draught neither. And when I asked
him how long he had actually abstained not barely from drink, but from
thirsting after it? He answered, that he had once (some few years before)
continued about nine days without either taking or needing any drink; and he
doubted not but that he might have continued much longer in that state, if by
distempering himself one night with long and hard study he had not had some
light inclination to take a small draught, which served him for about four days
longer. And when I asked him whether in that hot Summers day that preceded the
evening wherein he happened to tell me this, he had not drunk at all? he
answered Negatively. And it adds to the strangeness of this Peculiarity, that
this Gentleman is in the flower of his Youth, being but about twenty two years
of Age, and of a Sanguine and Florid Complexion. And (to annex that also upon
the By) I learned by enquiry from him, that he sweats freely enough, as I
remember I saw him do, that his Diet is the same with other men's, without
restraining him from the free use of Salt Meats, and that his Urine is in
Quantity much like that of ordinary Men of his Age and temperament. But to
return to what I was saying more generally of the Stomachical Menstruum of
Animals; I shall add on this occasion, that to make some kind of Imitation of
it, I prepared, and do elsewhere mention and teach a certain Liquor, that I
use, whereby I have in a short time, and without fire, dissociated the parts of
roasted or boiled flesh, bread, fruit: etc. and pulled them asunder into very
minute Bodies, whereby I have reduced sometimes one, sometimes another of them,
together with the Menstruum, (which needs not much exceed them in Bulk) to the
consistence of a fluid Body.

We see likewise, that Fusion makes metalls fluid, and in Fusion there is
manifestly a comminution of the melted Body, the Heat alone of Gold, Silver, or
Iron, though increased even to Ignition, being not able to make those metalls
become fluid, whilst they continue in masses of any sensible bulk. To which I
shall add anon, that even melted Metalls may have their Fluidity increased by
a yet further Comminution of their parts.

SECT. VII.
And to resume here the Consideration of that very difficult Question, which we
have elsewhere men^ion'd, it seems well worth Enquiry, whence it happens that
in the distillation of common Salt and other saline Bodies, which not only are
not fluid, but are hard even to brittleness, there will yet be obtained a
perfect and permanent Liquor, and from some of them a very considerable
proportion of it. In answer to this Question it may indeed be said, That in
diverse dry Bodies, such as Hartshorn, Wood and Bones, committed to
distillation, the fire does no more than separate the aqueous or other liquid
parts from the others, wherewith they were blended in the Concrete, and bring
them together into the Receiver, where they convene into a Liquor. But besides
that this it self is perhaps more easily said than proved, it does not reach
the propounded Difficulty: For with what probability can it be affirmed of
Bodies that have been already calcined or melted? such as are the red Calx of
Vitriol, and flux'd Sea Salt, etc. which yet afford Liquors, though their
aqueous and other looser parts have been already driven away by a strong fire
before their being exposed to distillation. I have sometimes then considered,
whether it may not seem less improbable to conjecture, that the vehement
agitation produced in such Bodies by the violence of Heat, does both divide
them into minute Corpuscles, and drive over swarms of them into the cold
Receiver, where loosing their former vehemence of agitation, they are reduced
into a Liquor, chiefly, (for I would not exclude concurrent causes) by reason
that the fire happened to rend the Concrete into parts, by their extreme
littleness, or their shape, or both, so easy to be tumbled up and down, that
the wonted agitation of the Air, propagated by the interposed Bodies or Medium;
or else that the same cause, whatever it be, that gives the Air its wonted
agitation, is able to give such minute Corpuscles enough of it to keep them
fluid.

SECT. VIII.
That there is constantly in the Air a various motion of the small parts, will
be anon declared. That also some Bodies will be kept fluid by a much less
measure of agitation than is requisite to others, seems probable from hence,
That Wine will continue a Liquor in such a languid warmth of the Air, as will
not keep the parts of water moving, but permit them to rest in the form of Ice.
And in cold Countries, where Wine it self would congeal, (as I have by Art made
it do here in England) it is observed, that though the more aqueous parts will
by the loss of their motion be turned into Ice, yet the more subtle and
spirituous parts remain unfrozen; and so do diverse other Liquors, (especially
Chemical) of very subtle and voluble parts. And the Corpuscles that chiefly
compose that Body which is properly called the Air, though it appears by
weather-glasses that Cold may very much contribute to condense it, (that is, to
occasion the approach of its parts to one another, or, reduce them to a closer
order) have not been observed to be frozen by any degree of cold whatsoever;
which seems to proceed from hence, that by reason of their extreme littleness,
(not excluding their figure) there cannot be so little of agitation about the
Earth, as not to be sufficient ^o continue a various motion in such very minute
Bodies, and consequently to keep them fluid.

Now, That likewise it is possible that a saline Spirit should consist at least
in great part of very minute grains of Salt, we elsewhere declare, where it is
taught, that a Sal-Armoniack may be made by Spirit of Urine and Spirit of Salt,
as the common Sal-Armoniack is made with crude Salt: and there a way is also
shown, how these two Salts, (the Urinous and the other) as strictly as they are
united in the compound, may be readily divorced. And agreeably to this I
observe, that as (according to what I elsewhere note) a common Aqua fortis may
be enabled to dissolve Gold, (on which of it self it will not fasten) by the
addition of Spirit of Salt; so I find that common crude Salt barely dissolved
in it, will give it the like power of working upon Gold. Nay, I have tried that
crude Nitre dissolved in good Spirit of Salt, may make it serve for an Aqua
Regis. And I remember on this occasion, that having inquired of the most noted
Person in Holland for the distilling of corrosive waters, what was the greatest
proportion of distilled Liquors that ever he was able to obtain from Sea Salt;
he (though a man not given so much as to boasting) affirmed to me, that by
using instead of the ordinary Caput mortuum, as Brick-dust, Sand, etc. (that
Chemists are wont to mingle with Salt before they distill it) a certain whitish
clay, he had sometimes brought over almost the whole body of Salt into a
Liquor; insomuch that from a pound of Salt he could draw, and that without any
extraordinary trouble or degree of fire, fourteen Ounces of Liquor. And when,
because I suspected that much of this might be water forced from the clay
mingled with the Salt, I enquired whether he had ever dephlegmed this Liquor;
He answered me, that he had purposely done it; and sometimes found no less than
about twelve ounces of it to be strong rectified Spirit: which brought into my
mind that almost incredible passage of Beguinus, who somewhere teaching the
Distillation of another Salt, adds to the end of his Directions, That if you
have wrought well, you shall get from a pound of the matter a pound of Spirit.
But because from all these Liquors distilled from such kind of Salts, it is
possible either by Rectification or some more Philosophical way to obtain a
portion of phlegm or water, I leave it to further Enquiry, whether or no the
Fluidity of these distilled Liquors may not in diverse cases be in part
furthered by the mixture of some particle^ of an aqueous nature, (such being
fit to make Dissolvers and vehicles for Salts) which may not absurdly be
suspected to have been produced by the action of the fire upon the Concrete
committed to distillation; if we allow with that famous Chemist Helmont, That
by the Alchahest all gross Bodies may be totally, and that without it, even
Oil and Salt may in great part, (and that without Additaments) be reduced into
insipid water.

SECT. IX.
We shall anon, (when we come to treat of Firmness) mention our having made a
certain substance so disposed to Fluidity, that it may be made to change the
stable consistence for a liquid one, by so small an Agitation, as only the
Surplusage of that which the ambient Air is wont to have about the middle even
of a Winters day, above what it has in the first or latter part of it. Nay, we
have made even a Metalline Salt or Vitriol, capable of this proclivity to
liquefaction, of which we have unquestionable witnesses. And therefore, it need
not appear incredible, that other heaps or aggregates of Corpuscles much
lighter than these, though heavier than those of the Air, may have all their
parts so minute and fitted for motion, that the wonted agitation of the Air may
not only about noon, but at all other times of the day keep them in motion, and
thereby in the state of Fluidity.

SECT. X.
And here I must add, that 'twas not altogether without cause that I lately
took notice of the shapes as well as the sizes of Bodies, in reference to their
fitness to constitute fluid ones. For though I be not sure but that in those
Bodies, as Sal-Armoniack, Antimony, etc. which are by the fire sublimed into
flowers rather than distilled into Liquors, the magnitude of the component
Corpuscles may not be a hinderance to the Fluidity of the Body they constitute:
yet this seems as probably referable to their figure, unapt for the requisite
motion, as to their bulk. And I have sometimes made to this purpose this
Experiment. That by slowly distilling Oyl-Olive per se in a glass Retort,
(placed in Sand) I found, as I expected, that about the third part of the Oil,
which was driven over into the Receiver, did there coagulate into a whitish
Body almost like Butter. So that although it seemed manifest by the strong
smell and very piercing taste of this white substance, that the Oil which
afforded it had its particles, as it were, torn in pieces; and though
distillation be wont to obtain Liquors even from consistent. Bodies; yet in our
Experiment of a concrete that is naturally fluid, the distilled Liquor it self
proves not to be so: of which no cause seems more obvious, than that the
newly-acquired shape of the dissipated parts of the Oily Corpuscles makes them
unfit for motion; either Absolutely speaking, or at least in Respect of one
another, by making them less pliant than formerly, or giving them a figure more
easy to be entangl'd with the neighboring Corpuscles, or else by making their
surfaces less smooth and slippery than before.

SECT. XI.
But to return thither whence we have digress'd, and mention some more familiar
Examples of the Conduciveness of the smallness of a Bodies disjoined parts to
its Fluidity, we may take notice, that of Bodies that consist of incoherent
parts, and are made up, as it were by Aggregation, those de caeteris partibus,
in their being poured out most resemble Liquors, that are the smallest; as
would appear upon the emptying of several Sacks, the one of Apples, the other
of Walnuts, the third of Filberts, the fourth of Corn, the fifth of Sand, and
the sixth of Flower.

Confectioners also, Cooks, and others that make much use of whites of Eggs,
will easily reduce those clammy and viscous Bodies into a thin and fluid
substance, to which for its affinity with water many give the same name: and
yet this difference of Fluidity being effected only by long and skilfully
beating the mass with a whisk, or even with a spoon, seems to be produced but
by pulling asunder the parts, (which perhaps before were long and somewhat
twined) and breaking them into shorter or lesser, and consequently more voluble
ones. And I remember, I have seen a good quantity of that jelly that is
sometimes found on the ground, and by the Vulgar called a Star-shoot, as if it
remained upon the extinction of a falling Star, which being brought to an
eminent Physician of my acquaintance, he lightly digested it in a well-stopt
glass for a long time, and by that alone resolved it into a permanent Liquor,
which he extols as a specific to be outwardly applied against Wens.

SECT. XII.
And here we will subjoin an Observation afforded us by the Art of Casting,
which has sometimes yielded us a not unpleasant Diversion. It Is observed then
by Goldsmiths well ve^s'd in that Art, (and has been recommended to me by an
Artificer eminently skilful in it) as one of the chief Remarques belonging to
it; that when any such curious work of Silver is to be cast, as requires that
the impression of hairs or very slender Lines be taken off by the Metal, it is
not enough that the Silver be barely melted, but it must be kept a considerable
while in a strong fusion: For if it be too soon poured out, the figure it will
make will be but blunt; whereas if it be kept a competent time in Fusion, the
matter becoming thereby more Liquid as well as hotter, will be thin enough to
run into the smallest cavities of the Mould, and so receive a figuration even
from the delicatest of them. Whence it may probably be deduced, that some
Bodies already fluid may by a further comminution of their parts be made yet
more fluid. The like increase of Fluidity may be observed in some other fluid
Bodies, especially unctuous ones, as Turpentine, Oil, etc. when heat begins to
break as well as agitate their parts.

I may elsewhere have occasion to mention, how by the operation of the fire the
Crystalline Salt of Urine may be reduced without Additaments to a strong and
ponderous Liquor: though in this, as perhaps also in some of the former
Instances, it is not unlikely that (as we may hereafter more particularly
declare) there may concur to the pr^duc'd change of consistence some
alteration in the figure of the Corpuscles whereof the firm Body consisted.

And if that be true which Helmont in several places affirms of his prodigious
Liquor, Alkahest, it is possible to turn Plants, Animals, Stones, Minerals,
Metals, or whatever kind you please of consistent Body here below, into a
Liquor equiponderant to the resolved Concrete: which (if granted) seems to
argue, That the most solid Body by being divided into parts small enough to be
put into motion by the causes that keep those of water and other Liquors in
agitation, may become fluid Bodies. And this Intimation I shall add for the
sake of Philosophers, that barely by long Digestions, (and much more if they be
helped by seasonably-repeated Distillations) in exactly stopped Vessels, and a
due degree of heat, there may be made in the parts of many Bodies, both
Vegetable and Animal, so great a change from the state of consistence to that
of Fluidity, as those that contenting themselves with ordinary courses of
Chemistry, have not had a peculiar curiosity for trials of this nature, will
not be forward to expect.

SECT. XIII.
The Second of the abovementioned three Conditions is, That there be store of
vacant spaces intercepted betwixt the component particles of the fluid Body, or
at least about those of the^ that are superficial: for without this there will
not b^ room for each of the Corpuscles to continue its agitation upon the
surfaces of the neighboring ones; and there would be no Cession of any,
because there would be no place unpossest for the impelled Corpuscle to be
received in. But when I speak of vacant spaces, ordinarily, (if not always)
requisite to be intercepted betwixt the particles of fluid Bodies; I intend not
to determine whether or no such spaces should or may be vacuities properly so
called; it being commonly sufficient to this second Condition of a fluid Body,
that in the little spaces intercepted between those that either are, or at
least are considered as solid parts, there be none but such as will easily
yield to them, and cannot considerably resist the freedom of their motions.

Which being premised to keep this Condition from being mistaken, we may in
confirmation of it take notice how Snow, which at its first falling is of a
loose and open texture, does easily yield to the impressions of the hand: But
when by being strongly compressed and formed into Balls, the little Icy bodies
it consists of are brought into a closer order, and many of them thrust into
the little spaces formerly possessed only by the yielding Air, they become unable
to give way to the motions of our hand as before, but compose a hard and
resisting Body. We see also, that when water is strongly forced into and kept
compressed in a Bladder, so that its exterior particles have not about them as
before the yielding Air to give way to them, when they should according to
their wont swell about the sides of the Bodies that endeavor to press it
inwards, it emulates a hard body, and resists such motions as otherwise it
would readily yield to; unless a more easy Cession be occasioned by the
Retching of the moistened Bladder it self.

And I choose to instance in a Bladder distended with water, rather than in one
full of Air, because, though this latter will also emulate a hard Body, yet in
this case the tention of the Bladder would perhaps be ascribed to a kind of
Spring, which diverse Experiments have taught us to belong to the Air: whence
it might be said, that since the enclosed Air will suffer it self to be thrust
inward a good way, though it will quickly when permitted fly out again; the
hardness of a well-blown Bladder proceeds not from want of the rooms requisite
to the Cession of the aerial Corpuscles, but to the motion of Restitution
natural to them, when like an innumerable company of little Bow or Springs,
being bent by the force that compresses the sides of the Bladder, they do as
soon as it is taken off stretch themselves out again (some one way, some
another) as far as is permitted them by the imprisoning bladder, which they
thus every way keep strongly distended.

But this having of vacant spaces or some yielding matter about the Corpuscles
of a fluid Body, seems requisite to its being so, but as what in a School-term
one may call a Removens prohibens, I mean, only as it obviates that impediment
to their motion, which exquisite fullness may be conceived to give to the
various glidings amongst themselves of the parts of a Body supposed to be
perfectly of the same hardness or softness, or, if you please, altogether
equally disposed or indisposed to yield to one another. And although in such
Bodies, as Water, Wine, Oil, Quicksilver, and the like, that are generally
agreed upon to be fluid Liquors, it will I presume be granted, that this second
Condition we have been speaking of may take place; yet I will not say that
'twere altogether absurd to question, whether there may not be a portion of
matter consisting of parts so minute, and so agitated, and consequently so
easy to be either crumbl'd into yet smaller parts, or squeezed into any figure
as occasion requires, that they may incessantly change places among themselves,
and thereby constitute a most fluid Body, without any vacuities, receptacles,
or yielding matter about them, unless perhaps it be about the exterior parts
of those of them that from time to time happen to be the superficial Corpuscles
of this thinnest Liquor. But though we have said, that this may be questioned
without absurdity, yet it will not so much concern us in this place to examine
whether the affirmative may be rationally maintained, as to proceed to consider
what is farther requisite to that state of matter we are now treating of,
especially the Qualification yet unmention'd seeming to be the principal of all.

SECT. XIV.
For the Third and Chief Condition of a fluid Body is, that the particles it
consists of be Agitated Variously and Apart, whether by their own innate and
inherent motion, or by some thinner substance that tumbles them about in its
passage through them. For this seems to be the main difference betwixt solid
Ice and fluid Water, that in the one the parts (whether by any newly acquired
texture, or for want of sufficient heat to keep them in motion) being at rest
against one another, resist those endeavors of our fingers to displace them,
to which in the other the parts being already in motion easily give way. For
whereas in the Ice, every part actually at rest must by the Law of Nature
continue so, till it be put out of it by an external force capable to surmount
its resistance to a change of its present state; in Water each Corpuscle being
actually (though but slowly) moved, we need not begin or produce a new motion
in it, but only bias or direct that which it has already, which many familiar
Instances manifest to be a much easier task. From this Agitation of the small
parts of Liquors it comes to pass, that these little Bodies, to continue their
motion, do almost incessantly change places, and glide sometimes over,
sometimes under, and sometimes by the sides of one another. Hence also may be
rendered a reason of the softness of fluid Bodies, that is, their yielding to
the touch; for the particles that compose them being small, incoherent, and
variously moved, it can be no difficult matter (as we lately intimated) to
thrust them out of those places, which being already in motion they were
disposed to quit, especially there being vacant rooms at hand, ready to admit
them as soon as they are displaced. And hence it likewise happens, that these
little Bodies must be very easily moveable any way upon the motion of the mass
or Liquor which they compose; and that being very small, and moving so many
ways, they cannot but (according to Aristotle's Definition of things fluid) be
very unfit to bound themselves, but very easy to be bounded by any other firm
Body; for that hinders them from spreading any further: and yet to continue
their various and diffusive motion as much as they can, (especially their
gravity, at least here about the Earth, equally depressing and thereby
levelling as to sense their uppermost superficies) they must necessarily move
to and fro, till their progress be stopped by the internal surface of the Vessel,
which by terminating their Progress (or Motion toward the same part) does
consequently necessitate the Liquor those little Bodies compose, to accommodate
it self exactly (for ought the Eye is able to discern to the contrary) to its
own figure.

SECT. XV.
This short and general Account of Fluidity may we hope be as well further
explicated and illustrated, as confirmed, by the following Instances and
Experiments, and therefore we shall forthwith proceed to Them.

And it will be fit to mention in the first place those that are afforded us by
the Body our Author treats of, Saltpeter, they having occasioned our writing
about this Subject.

Saltpeter then may be made fluid two several ways, either by, or without a
Liquor.

By the intervention of a Liquor it puts on the form of a fluid Body, when
being dissolved in water or aqueous juices, it is not by the Eye
distinguishable from the solvent Body, and appears as fluid as it; which seems
to proceed from hence, that the agitated particles of the water piercing into
the joints or commissures of the Corpuscles of the Salt, do disjoyn them, and
thereby divide the Nitre into parts so small, that it is easy for those of the
water, wherewith they are associated, not only to support them, but move them
to and fro: whence it comes to pass, that these Particles being so small, and
swimming some one way, some another in the yielding body of water, make no such
resist^nce against the motion either of a man's hand or other external Body that
strives to displace them, as they did in their saline form.

But that with much less Liquor a Nitrous body may be rendered fluid, may appear
to him that shall expose such fixed Nitre as our Author teaches to make, to the
moist Air of a Cellar: For there it will run per deliquium, (as Chemists speak)
into a Liquor, which consists of no more aqueous Particles than are necessary
to keep the saline ones (which seem to be much smaller than those of unanalyz'd
Nitre) in the agitation requisite to Fluidity.

SECT. XVI.
And hence we may proceed to consider, what Fluidity Saltpeter is capable of
without the intercurrence of a Liquor: and this may be twofold. For first, if
it be beaten into an impalpable powder, this powder, when it is poured out,
will emulate a Liquor, by reason that the smallness and incoherence of the
parts do both make them easy to be put into motion, and make the pores they
intercept so small, that they seem not at a distance to interrupt the unity or
continuity of the Mass or Body. But this is but an imperfect Fluidity, both
because the little grains or Corpuscles of Salt, though easily enough moveable,
are not always in actual motion; and because they continue yet so big, that
both they and the spaces intercepted betwixt them are, near at hand,
perceivable by sense. But if with a strong fire you melt this powdered Nitre,
then each of the saline Corpuscles being sub-divided into I know not how many
others, and these insensible parts being variously agitated by the same heat,
(both which may appear by their oftentimes piercing the Crucible after fusion,
wherein they lay very quietly before it) the whole body will appear a perfect
Liquor, and be thought such by any Beholder that shall judge of it but by the
Eye: and such also is the Fluidity of melted metals, in which, when they are
brought to fusion in vast quantities, I have seen the surface waved like that
of boiling water, and sometimes parcels of Liquor thrown up a pretty way into
the Air. And not only Fire and other actually and manifestly hot. Bodies are
able to make some hard ones fluid, but it seems also that some bodies may be
brought to Fluidity by others which to the touch appear cold, if they be but
fitted to change the texture of the hard body, and put its inflected parts into
a convenient motion; as may be seen in the Chemical Experiment of turning the
brittle body of Camphire into an Oil for the time, by letting it lie upon Aqua
fortis, which perhaps bends and complicates the formerly rigid particles, and
puts them into such a motion, that they do as well glide along as somewhat
twine about each other. And I further tried, (not having found it mentioned by
the Chemists) that Camphire may by a dexterous application of heat be brought
in close glasses both to flow and to boil almost like Oil. It Is true, that
these Liquors taken from the fire quickly lose that name, and grow solid again.
But the duration of a thing is not always necessary to denominate it such; for
the Leaf of a Tree, for instance, whilst it flourishes, may be as truly green
as an Emerald, though the leaf will after a while wither and turn yellow, which
the stone will never do; and in cold Climates, where Lakes, etc. at other times
navigable, are sometimes frozen so hard, that Carts and even great Ordnance may
safely be drawn over them, Ice and water are the one a stable, and the other a
liquid Body, notwithstanding that the same portion of matter which at one time
is frozen into a hard and solid substance, was a little before a fluid Body,
and (now and then in a very short time) will be thawed into a Liquor again.

SECT. XVII.
I know not whether it be requisite to take notice, that the Fluidity which
Saltpeter acquires upon fusion by fire seems very much of kin to that which is
acquired by solution in water. But if fusion be made rather by the Ingress and
transcursions of the atoms of fire themselves, than by the bare propagation of
that motion with which the agitated particles that compose fire beat upon the
outside of the vessels that contain the matter to be melted; in such case, I
say, both those kinds or manners of Fluidity newly ascribed to Saltpeter will
appear to be caused by the pervasion of a foreign body: Only in dissolution the
fluid body is a Visible and Palpable Liquor, and consequently more gross,
whereas in fusion the fluid substance that permeates it is more thin and
subtle, and divides it into much smaller parts, and so adds very little to its
bulk.

SECT. XVIII.
But because some scruple may possibly arise about this matter from hence, that
the powder of Nitre, how fine soever, seems fluid but just whilst it is pouring
out, and even then is but very imperfectly so; and that as for fusion, that is
wont to reduce the melted body to a new and permanent state, as the
formerly-mention'd powder of Saltpeter, which before fusion was but a heap of
incoherent particles, is by it made a solid and considerably hard Body: to
prevent, I say, or remove such scruples, we will set down one Experiment that
we long since met with, as to the main, in the shops of Stone-Cutters, which
though unregarded by them, will excellently serve to make out what we mention
it for. Take then good Alabaster, or in defect of this, of that white stone
which is well known to our Masons by the name of Plaster of Paris, beat it very
small, and put as many pounds as you please of the finely-searc'd powder into
any flat-bottom'd (and first well heated) vessel of Brass or Iron (bigger or
lesser according to the quantity you intend to burn:) Increase the fire by
degrees till it grow to be strong, and when the calorifick Atoms shall have in
sufficient numbers pervaded the heap of powder, or, if you please, when the
igneous Corpuscles have by their numerous and brisk strokes upon the vessel
communicated by its means their agitation to the enclosed powder, and when by
either of these ways, or both, the fire (which may also resolve some of the
more spirituous and exhalable parts (whereof Distillation has shown me that
Alabaster is not destitute) into Vapors) shall have put the little bodies it
consists of into actual motion (which will be quickly done) you shall see it
assume the form of a Liquor, and boil with numerous great and confused waves
just like a seething-pot: and if, whilst it continues in this state, you stir
it with a stick, it will not like a heap of sand, or as it self would do at
another time, resist the motion thereof, but yield thereto like a Liquor, and,
like it, will seem to have something of the Nature of a coherent body; for by
stirring it any thing strongly near one side of the Vessel, you may make the
waves beat very manifesty against the opposite part of it. And besides all
this, you may observe this further resemblance betwixt this boiling matter and
a Liquor, that there will fly up out of the Pot great store of steams like
smoke, but that they are white, which will sometimes like smoke ascend, for
ought can be discerned, to the very top of the Chimney, and leave its color
upon the places by which plenty of it has past. Besides, those that make this
Experiment often, as we have taken pleasure to do, may have the opportunity to
observe, that when the Vessel has continued so long over the fire that the
contained Alabaster relapses into the form of a heavy moveless powder, by
keeping it a while longer in the heat, it will for once at least resume the
form of a fluid body, and boil again as before, the spirituous steams whose
avolation promoted the Ebullition, being not yet quite spent. And lastly, if
when it seems most a Liquor, you take up a little of it, and as nimbly as you
can cast it upon a sheet of white Paper, it will not at all wet it, but
immediately discover it self to be a moveless incoherent powder, as it was
before its being set over the fire; whereby it (I hope) appears, that a heap or
aggregate of such little bodies as are neither Spherical nor otherwise
regularly shaped, nor small enough to be below the discernment of the Eye, may,
without either fusion or being poured out, be made fluid barely by a
sufficiently strong and various agitation (from what cause soever that proceed)
of the particles that make it up, and lose its fluidity immediately upon the
ceasing of it.

Thus have we seen how very much it conduces to the making of a Body fluid,
that its small parts be actually moved. But whence this motion proceeds, we
shall not at present venture to determine. For though in the Examples newly
mentioned, and some others, most men will be forward to ascribe the motion
produced in the parts of the fluid Bodies there mentioned, to the action of the
fire whereunto they were exposed; yet what it is that puts the parts of fluid
Bodies in general into the motion requisite to make them such, is a Question of
which the true Resolution indeed were very desirable. But the full debate of it
will not, I hope, be here expected from me, whilst I am writing but Notes,
since it would engage me to discuss two or three of the difficultest as well as
the importantest Controversies belonging to Natural Philosophy. For first, I
should be obliged to consider whether Motion, or a propensity to it, be an
inherent Quality belonging to Atoms in general, and not losable by them; or
whether all Motion is communicated by impulse from one Body to another. And
since those that of late have taught that all visible Liquors, as Water, Oil,
Quicksilver, etc. owe their fluidity chiefly to the agitation of some thin and
restless matter which incessantly permeates them, do deduce the necessity of
such an Ethereal substance principally from the impossibility that there can be
any Vacuum properly so called in the Universe, wherein yet are very many spaces
unpossest by either Air or grosser Bodies than it: the Examination of this
subtle matter would draw on the Consideration of the nice Controversies that
perplex Philosophers concerning Emptiness, which 'twere more difficult for us
to examine in few words, than it is necessary for us to meddle with them in
this place; since not writing of the first Principles of Physiology, but of
Fluidity, which is but a secondary or derivative quality (if I may so call it)
it seems sufficient to give a notion of it, that we deduce it not from the
unintelligible substantial form of the fluid Bodies, but from those simple and
general Affections of Matter, the Figure, Situation, and Motion of its small
parts.

SECT. XIX.
Wherefore declining to add any thing in this place to what we have otherwhere
discoursed concerning the Origin of Motion, and the possibility or
impossibility of a Vacuum; we will proceed to take notice that there is one
thing more which we may learn from Saltpeter touching the Nature of Fluidity,
and that is the distinction betwixt a fluid Body and a wetting Liquor, which
are wont, because they agree in many things, to be confounded, but
inconsiderately enough: for though every wetting Liquor be fluid, yet every
fluid Body does not wet. The Air, the Ether, and even flame it self may be
properly called Fluid Bodies according to the notion of Fluidity hitherto made
out, and yet will scarce by any man be called Moist Liquors; and Saltpeter,
whilst in fusion, is really a Liquor, and so is every melted Metal, and yet
these wet not the bodies they touch, as do Water and other wetting Liquors,
which are fluid bodies with this peculiar qualification, that they stick to and
moisten the dry bodies which they touch (or at least abound with some parts,
which being separated from the rest and reduced to a Liquor, will do so.) And
according to this notion, methinks, it may be conceived, that the humidity of a
body is but a relative thing, and depends chiefly upon the congruity or
incongruence of the component Particles of the Liquor in reference to the pores
of those particular bodies that it touches: for, sometimes the little
eminencies and pores of the surface of the dry body on or against which the
Liquor flows, are of such magnitudes and figure, that the particles of the
Liquor find admittance into those pores, and are detained there (by which means
they usually soften it;) and sometimes the pores and asperities of the dry
bodies surface are so incommensurate in bigness and figure to the particles of
the Liquor, that they glide over the surface without sticking or adhering
firmly to any part of it. This may be exemplifi'd in Quicksilver, which cannot
be said to be a humid body in respect of our hands or clothes, or of almost all
other bodies of the World, upon whose surfaces it will roll without leaving any
of its particles lodged in their pores, or fastn'd to their little eminencies,
whence it is called by vulgar Chemists, the water that wets not the Hands: but
in reference to diverse Metals, especially Gold and Tin, Quicksilver may be
said to be a humid Liquor, for it insinuates it self into their pores, and
thereby mollifies their bodies, as other Liquors do those that are moistened by
them. And even water, that wets almost all other Animal and Vegetable, and many
mineral bodies, besides that it is commonly enough observed to stand in almost
globular drops upon Cabbage-leaves, seems not a humid Liquor in relation to the
feathers of Ducks, Swans, and other waterfowl, whom Nature having designed to
fly sometime in the Air, and live sometimes in the water, she providently
makes their feathers of such a texture, that they do not, like the feathers of
diverse other birds, admit the water, which imbibed would make them unfit for
the use of flying. And it is observable, that upon the change of texture in a
Liquor, it may be brought to stick to the surface of a body to which before it
would not adhere; as may appear by this, that though Quicksilver alone will
not stick to glass, yet if there be mixed with it a due proportion of Lead, Tin,
and Tin-glass, though neither of them will adhere to glass, yet their liquid
mixture (as we have often tried and elsewhere The Writing here referred to, is
the Second Tome of the Usefulness of Experiment. Philosophy, which should have
appeared before these Specimens.
taught) readily will, even without the assistance of heat.

SECT. XX.
If it be objected, that this various agitation of the insensible parts of
water and resembling bodies wherein we make the Nature of Fluidity chiefly to
consist, is but an imaginary thing, and but precariously asserted, since by our
own Confession they are so small, that the particles themselves, and more, the
diversity of their motions are imperceptible by sense, which represents water,
for Example, to us as one continued body, whose parts are at perfect rest;

If this, I say, be urged against our Doctrine, we shall not deny the Objection
to be plausible, but must not acknowledge it to be unaswerable.

For of the seeming continuity of Water and other Liquors this may be the
Reason, That the particles whereof the Liquor consists, being too small to be
visible, and being not only voluble, but in actual motion, the pores or vacant
spaces intercepted between them, must also be too little to be discerned by the
Eye, and consequently the body must appear an uninterrupted or continued one:
not to mention, that, were the parts of the Liquor less minute, their shifting
of places would hardly be perceived by the Eye, each displaced Corpuscle being
immediately succeeded by another like it. It Is true, that a heap of grains of
Nitre, though upon its effusion out of the Vessel it somewhat emulates a fluid
body, does yet when it rests in the Vessel appear to be but an aggregate of
many little incoherent bodies heaped up together; because the intervals or
holes left between them are great enough to affect the sense: But if the same
Salt be reduced into an Alchoole (as the Chemists speak) or impalpable powder,
the particles and intercepted spaces b^ing then extremely lessened, the body
they make up will much more resemble an entire mass, though it be looked upon
from a nearer distance; and so when this powder is by the fire further broken
into parts incomparably smaller than those of the powder, and which
consequently intercept such extremely little pores, that not only Saltpeter,
but some Metals, and even Gold it self, (from which it will not be supposed
that any thing exhales to lessen it) are by some affirmed (for I have not my
self diligently enough observed it, and do yet doubt it) to take up rather less
than more room melted than cold, why should we not grant that these pores may
be little enough, not any where to discontinue the body as to sense?

SECT. XXI.
And that the incoherent parts of fluid bodies are also diversely agitated, some
this way, and some that way, though the sense cannot discern it, may be proved
by their sensible operations. The Author now finding that something concerning
the various motion of the parts of fluid Bodies, which he has but touched upon,
has been, though but briefly and without Experiments, yet excellently explained
in a mathematical way by Monsieur des Carts in the 56th and 57th Articles of
the second Part of his Principles, thinks fit to refer the inquisitive Reader
thither for fuller satisfaction about tha^ Particular.]
For without such local motion, how could the particles of water pierce into
the recesses of Bodies, and occasion those putrefactive alterations that are
wont to be imputed to superfluous moisture? And how comes it else to pass, that
aqueous Liquors so readily diffuse themselves into, and so exquisitely mingle
with one another? as we see when red and white Wine are in a trice confounded
into Claret: and without this various agitation of the parts of water, how
could it be that lumps of Sugar or Salt cast into it, should quickly be so
perfectly dissolved in it, that the lumps themselves totally disappear, and the
dissociated parts are carried about every way by those of the water, even from
the bottom to the very top? as is evident particularly in Sea Salt, which when
the superfluous Liquor is sufficiently exhaled, begins visibly to coagulate,
not at the bottom, but upon the surface of the water; and not only Salt, but
even Gold it self, though the heaviest of bodies, may have its parts so
scattered by the agitation of those waters, as Experience has taught us, and as
you may easily try by putting a little of the Solution of Gold made in Aqua
Regis into 15 or 20 times as much fair water, which will all thereby be
immediately enobled with a Golden Color. That the little bodies whereof flame
consists are fiercely agitated, appears oftentimes even to the Eye, and will
scarce be denied by him that considers the operations of it, and the vivid
beams it darts round about it against the neighboring bodies. And that the
particles that compose our common air are also very diversely agitated, we may
be induced to believe by sundry particulars. As first, by those little moats
that from a shady place we see swimming up and down in the Sunbeams, and by
the tremulous motion which that of swarms of little bodies in the air seems to
impart to distant objects looked on after Sunrise through a good Telescope,
(and which by the bare Eye in hot weather may be often discovered by certain
very dilute shades, which seem to tremble upon the walls of high-roof'd Halls
and Churches, and other spacious Buildings.) Next, (and more easily) by this,
That if you take Salt of Tartar, first brought to fusion, and place it in a
Cellar, or even in an ordinary Room, it will in a short time (now and then in a
few minutes) begin to relent and have its surface softn'd by the imbibed
moisture of the air, wherein if it be left long enough, it will totally be
dissolved into clear Liquor; which would not be, if the moist vapors that help
to constitute the air did not move to and fro every way, and were not thereby
brought to the Salt, and enabled to insinuate themselves into its pores, and by
that means dissolve it, and reduce it with themselves into a Liquor.

And even in Summer, when the air is wont to be much dryer than at other
Seasons of the year, one may quickly discover that there are in the air store
of aqueous Corpuscles, moved some one way and some another, by the Experiment
of putting into a Drinking-glass, for want of Ice and Snow, some Beer or Wine
actually very cold: for thereby, after a while, the outside will appear all
bedewed with little drops of Liquor; which seems plainly to be no other than
the aqueous steams that swimming up and down in great multitudes in the air,
are by its agitation toward all parts carried, as every other way, so to the
sides of the Glass, and being there condensed by the coldness of that smooth
Body, turn into visible and palpable water. And, if I much mis-remember not, it
was one of the circumstances of the last Experiment of this kind we have had
occasion to take notice of, That the drops that fastn'd themselves to the
outside of the Glass, purposely left in part unfill'd, reached either not at
all, or very little further than the surface of the Liquor within the Glass,
whose coldness as it seems did not infrigidate those upper parts of the Glass,
to whose level the Liquor it self did not reach. To which I could easily add
Arguments to prove, that the drops we have been speaking of proceeded not from
the transudation of the Liquor within the Glass, if I thought it worth while to
disprove so unlikely a Conjecture. But instead of that I shall only intimate,
that from this Experiment useful hints may be taken both Theorical and
Practical, and particularly that a Reason may perchance be given of a strange
way of catching a Salt and Liquor out of air, barely by glass-vessels of a
peculiar and skilful contrivance. Much of what we have lately said will, I
presume, be the less wondered at, if we subjoyn what Experience has taught us,
That it is not difficult by the help of a convenient Furnace and fit Vessels to
make that ponderous Metal, Lead, ascend to a good height in the open air, in
the form of a copious smoke: such a smoke we discerned after a while to be
carried so many ways by the aerial Corpuscles that it met with in actual
motion, that it was soon dispersed so far as to disappear: which perhaps will
be thought some confirmation of what we formerly delivered, when we taught how
much the being divided into very minute parts may conduce to the Fluidity even
of ponderous Bodies.

SECT. XXII.
And though Quicksilver be, excepting Gold, the heaviest known body in the
world, yet when it is reduced into vapor, it seems to be carried to and fro
like the other terrestrial particles that swim up and down in our air: for I
remember, that an expert Gilder not long since complained to me, that if when
he evaporated Quicksilver, he forgot to take off his Rings from his hand,
though they touched not the Quicksilver whilst it was in a body, the roving
fumes would oftentimes fasten upon the Gold in such plenty as would put him to
much trouble to get them off from his Rings; one of which he showed me that he
had lately thus whitened, and as it were silvered over with Mercurial fumes,
and was then to restore to its native Yellow.

SECT. XXIII.
But let us return to visible Liquors, and endeavor to prove almost ad Oculum,
as they speak, that their ins^nsible parts may be every way agitated, though
their motion be but seldom visible to us. Take then what quantity you please of
Aqua fortis, and dissolve in it as much as you please of ordinary coined
Silver, (it not being necessary for this Experiment that it be refined) and
pour the colored solution into 12 or 15 times as much fair water, and then
decant or filtrate the mixture, that it may be very clear. If you look upon
this Liquor, the parts of it will seem to be all of them as perfectly at rest
as those of common water; nor will your Eye be able to distinguish any
Corpuscles of Silver swimming in the Liquor: and yet that there are such
metalline Corpuscles agitated to and fro with and by those of the water will
quickly appear, if you immerse into it a flatted piece of clean Copper, for by
that time you have held it two or three minutes of an hour (perhaps not so
long) in the Liquor, you shall see the particles of Silver that were roving up
and down the Liquor, fasten themselves in such swarms to the Copper-plate, that
they will appear in their native hue, and cover it, as it were, with a loose
case of Silver, which may be easily shaken off in the form of a metalline
powder: and if several such Plates be left all night, or for a competent number
of hours, in the bottom of the Vessel, you may the next day find all the
particles of Silver that were dispersed through the whole body of the Liquor,
settled upon or about them; the deep bluish green tincture you will discover in
the water proceeding only from some little parts of the Copper Plates, and of
the Alloy of the Coin, dissolved by the saline particles of the Aqua fortis.
And I remember, that to complete the Experiment, I have sometimes made even
these fall to the bottom of the Vessel, by leaving a lump or two of Spelter
there for two or three days: for, not only those metalline Corpuscles that were
just over or near to the determinate place where I put the Spelter, but also
all the rest, into how remote parts soever of the Liquor they were diffused,
did setle upon the Spelter, as appeared both by its increase of bulk, and by
their leaving the water clear and colorless; which plainly seems to have
proceeded from hence, that the particles of the water were restlesly and every
way agitated, and so by frequently gliding along the surface of the Spelter
they must carry thither of the Corpuscles of Copper mingled with them, some at
one time and some at another, till at length all were brought to it and
detained there.

SECT. XXIV.
That of the particles of Spirit of Wine, and such like inflammable Liquors
drawn from fermented Juyces, though they seem to the Eye to be at rest, a good
many do yet move confusedly and very nimbly, I remember I have long since
manifested by an easy and ocular proof which I devised about 10 or 12 years
ago, when (being yet scarce more than a Boy) I first began to consider what
Fluidity might be. The Experiment as I writ it down, with all the Circumstances
and Observations relating to it, I have not now by me; but having diverse times
been desired to show it to Learned men (Physicians, Mathematicians, and others)
I cannot have forgotten those Phenomenon of it that are the most pertinent to
our present Subject. Supposing then that in pure Spirit of Wine, beside the
aqueous parts that glide softly along each other, there are store of volatile
and Spirituous Corpuscles, whose agitation is stronger, I let fall (from a
pretty height, that it might be broken into small drops by its fall) into any
wide-mouthed glass filled with this Liquor, (which must not be ov^r dephlegm'd,
lest the Oil sink in it) a little common Oy^ or Spirit of Turpentine, which I
therefore made choice of, because its tenacity, greater than that of the
Chemical Oils of Spices, makes it that it will neither mingle with Spirit of
Wine, nor spread it self, as diverse other distilled Oils will, upon the surface
of it, but keep it self in the form of round drops, whose shape facilitates
their motion. The Oily drops then swimming at the top of the Spirit of Wine,
will be, by the disorderly rovings of the agile parts of it (which hit against
them little Globes, as the vivous Spirits ascend to exhale) made to move
restl^sly to and fro in an irregular manner, the drops sometimes bearing up to
one another, as if all or most of them were presently to unite into one body,
and then suddenly falling off, and continuing to shift places with one another,
after a manner pleasant and strange enough to them that never before saw the
Experiment: and this dance will continue for half an hour or an hour, (or a
shorter or much longer time, according to the quantity and strength of the
Liquor) till the spirituous parts being flown away, the drops being no longer
impelled lie at rest upon the disspirited Liquor, as they would upon common
water. And whereas the nimble motion of the drops might be suspected to proceed
from some secret contrariety in Nature betwixt the Oil of Turpentine and Spirit
of Wine; besides that I could easily show that those two Liquors have no
Antipathy, I not only tried the Experiment with another inflammable Liquor than
Spirit of Wine, but (if I much misremember not) sound, as I expected, that
little pieces of chopped straw (such both being light and not easily imbibing
moisture) being gently let fall upon the Spirit of Wine, were in a tumultuous
manner carried to and fro upon the surface of it; though I am not sure but that
the motion of the Oily drops may be in part due to some partial solution made
of them by the vivous Spirit, which during that ^ction may tumble them to and
fro; not to add that I have by some trials, been tempted to suspect the air may
have some interest in the motion of the drops. However, I have mentioned the
recited Experiment, not as if I thought that either it or fugitive Spirit of
Wine were fit to teach us the nature of fluid Bodies in general, but to show by
an ocular example that there may be a quick and intestine motion in some parts
of a Liquor, notwithstanding that the unassisted Eye can discern no such
matter. I shall not here relate, how having caused to be Hermetically sealed up
some of these Liquors in a glass, to try how long the extravagant dance of the
drops would last, when the more spirituous parts of the vinous Liquor could not
exhale, my vessel was soon broken without any discernable violence. Nor shall I
now take notice of any of the other Phenomenon of our Experiment, partly,
because I have elsewhere mentioned most of them; and partly, because I think it
more pertinent to our present Theme, to observe that this unseen agitation of
the minute parts will not only hold in light and spirituous Liquors: For, that
the insensible parts even of the heaviest Liquors themselves are also in actual
motion, though many may think it unfit to be believed, will follow from what
has been already delivered concerning the nature of fluid bodies, as such; and
may be confirmed by this, that whereas three of the heaviest Liquors we yet
know of, are Quicksilver, Oil of Tartar per Deliquium, and Oil of Vitriol,
that first-nam'd will even in the cold penetrate into the pores of foliated
Gold, and destroy the texture of that closest of Metals; the Liquor also of
Salt of Tartar will in the cold draw tinctures from several bodies, and we have
endeavored to evince the agitation of the parts of Oil of Vitriol, not only by
showing how in the cold it would corrode diverse Metals, but by casting little
pieces of Camphire into it, which without the assistance of the sire were made
liquid by it, and appeared like so many drops of Oil. And he that yet doubts,
whether the parts of these two Oils (as Chemists abusively call them) how
ponderous soever they be, are fiercely agitated or no, may probably be soon
satisfied by shaking an ounce or two of each of them together, and observing
the heat, hissing, ebullition, and sparkling, that will suddenly ensue upon
their being blended.

SECT. XXV.
But here we must take notice, that though it belong to the Nature of fluid
Bodies, that their par^s do easily shift places; yet that is to be understood
only as to the parts of the same fluid Bodies, as water, or of such differing
fluid Bodies as are disposed readily to admit each others particles, and mingle
together, as we see in Water and Wine. For otherwise, fluid Bodies may be of
such differing natures, that when two or more of them are put together, they
will not mix, but each retain its own distinct surface; so that in regard of
one another, the contiguous Bodies do in some degree emulate each of them the
Nature of a consistent Body: for though it cannot be looked upon as a hard body
but a soft, because of the easy Cession of its superficies, yet it does like a
compact or consistent body deny to mingle permanently with the contiguous
Liquor or other fluid substance. And I somewhat wonder, that Lucretius and
other Atomists should (at least for ought I remember) over-see this
Observation, since it is obvious enough in Oil, which will not mix with water,
but float upon its surface: Not to mention, that Quicksilver will not
incorporate with any of the familiar Liquors known to the Ancients. I had
almost forgot, that I promised at the beginning of this Discourse an Instance
concerning Flame, which I will therefore now recite. And it is, That having by
an easy preparation of Copper, by the intervention of a little Sal Armoniack,
(which I have already taught in another Treatise An Historical Dialogue about
Flame.
) so opened the Body of that Metal, as to make it inflammable; I took some
small grains of this prepared Mineral, and put them under the wieck of a strong
and actually burning Candle, whereby (as I expected) they were with the melted
tallow soon carried up to the bottom of the flame, and by it so kindled, that
the green (not blew) flame of the cupreous Body did (somewhat to the wonder of
the Spectators) burn for a good while (this combustible matter being
marvellously lasting) distinct from the yellow flame of the Candle, as if there
had been some invisible partition between them. But to return to the
unminglable Liquors we were formerly speaking of; the cause why these retain
their distinct surfaces, my present task does not oblige me to enquire into:
but this I shall observe in general, that it seems to depend very much upon the
texture of the particular Liquors, and perhaps too upon the peculiar motions of
their minute parts. For I have observed, that though pure Spirit of Wine and
Salt of Tartar, resolved into a Liquor by the moisture of the Air, will, when
put together, retain distinct surfaces, or presently regain them if you shake
the Liquors never so strongly together; yet by adding a little fair water to
either of them, the texture being thereby altered, it will easily incorporate
with the other. And thus although that (as I noted already) common Spirit or
Oil of Turpentine will not mingle with Spirit of Wine, yet having had the
curiosity to make a trial with Oil of Turpentine abstracted skilfully, and with
a very gentle fire, (for otherwise the Experiment may easily miscarry) from
melted or at least well decrepitated Sea Salt, we found, according to
expectation, that though there appeared no visible alteration in the Oil, yet
we could easily by shaking confound it with pure Spirit of Wine. Moreover,
though lixiviate Liquors and Oils will not by an ordinary Agitation be
permanently joined, yet I have tried, that by digesting a good while a solution
of Salt of Tartar with Oil of Almonds, I could reduce them to a soft Saponary
substance: which Experiment makes somewhat more to my present purpose, than the
common practice of Sope-Boylers, because I did not, as they, boil away the
water wherein the lixiviate Salt is dissolved. I might add also, that if you
put one part of Quicksilver into about four parts of Oil of Vitriol, you will
find (at least if the Experiment proceed always after the same manner as it has
done with me) that the two Liquors will remain distinct whilst you keep them in
the cold, but if by degrees of heat you bring the Oil of Vitriol to boil, it
will pierce the surface of the Quicksilver, and by partly incorporating with
it, reduce it to a substance very differing from what it was. But because these
two last Experiments may be with less improbability than the two that preceded
them referred to other causes, I shall no farther insist on them, but take
notice of one thing more concerning the difference of fluid Bodies. And it is
this.

SECT. XXVI.
I observe, that some of them do not only not mingle with others that are
contiguous to them, but fashion the surfaces of those others, and reduce them
to determinate shapes. This I have taken pleasure to consider in some Chemical
Liquors, which I have purposely put together; for Instance, having poured
Spirit of Wine upon Oil of Tartar per Deliquium, (as Chemists call it) I found
that the superficies wherein they touched each other was flat, or (as to sense)
parallel to the Horizon. But if this were done in a very slender or narrow
glass, with the mouth unstop'd, though the lower surface of the Spirit of Wine
which touched the other Liquor appeared very level; yet the upper superficies,
which was contiguous to the Air, was manifestly very concave. And if to these
two Liquors I did in a broader glass pour Oil of Almonds, that Oil would sink
to the bottom of the Spirit of Wine, (that being well rectified) and floating
upon the Oil of Tartar, would separate the two Liquors, and both above and
below retain a flat or level surface. But if instead of Oil of Almonds, or
another expressed Oil, I dropped into pure Spirit of Wine, swimming upon Oil of
Tartar, some common Oil of Turpentine; the Oil would gather into parcels, (some
of the bigness of hail-shot, some as big as small Pistol-bullets, and some of
other sizes) which in case they did swim in the Spirit of Wine, and touched
neither of its surfaces, seemed globulous, and continued so (the glasses being
stopped) for many hours: But in case they emerg'd to the upper part of the
Spirit of Wine, as much of them as lay immersed in the Spirit (which was by far
the greatest part of them) appeared round, and continued so long as I pleased;
the upper parts only of th^se little globes appearing to have the same surface
with the Spirit of Wine. And I further observed, that some small drops would as
it were rest constantly upon the superficies of the Oil of Tartar, touching it
but as it were in a point, and continuing to the Eye Spherical; though the
surface of the Liquor were purposely now and then somewhat shaken. But that
which I took special notice of was, that having (upon design) into pure Spirit
of Wine (for upon common Spirit Oil will swim) let fall some great drops of Oil
of Turpentine, they did at first sink to the bottom of it, and lie upon the
surface of the Oil of Tartar almost like Hemispheres, whose unequal part was all
above the Oil of Tartar; but after a while they were, as I ^xpected, pressed on
all sides and fashioned into round Bodies (yet a little more protuberant at the
sides than the top) which seemed scarce to touch the surface of the Oil of
Tartar on which they leaned. Diverse other Observations of this kind were
afforded me by some peculiar mixtures that I made of Chemical Liquors: But not
having the leisure to set them down, much less to enquire into their causes, I
should scarce have mentioned what I have already delivered (especially since we
found that a light variation of Circumstances would often alter the event of
such trials, which we have therefore set down barely historically) but that
finding that drops of Water, Quicksilver, and other fluid Bodies, seemed to be
fashioned into a round figure by that every way almost equal pressure of the
ambient Air; and having likewise tried, that Quicksilver suspended in the Air
(as it may easily be, if the Torricellian Experiment being made in a tube
exceeding slender, some Air be afterward dexterously let into divide the long
Mercurial Cylinder into diverse short ones) has both at the top and bottom,
where it is exposed to the Action of the Air, a very protuberant surface;
finding, I say, these Effects of fluid Bodies upon one another, I thought it
not amiss to intimate, how some Experiments might be made that may possibly
facilitate the giving an Account of the figuration of some of the more
considerable fluid Bodies, which, as we noted already, make up much the greater
part of the Universe: especially, since I could easily enough make it probable,
that such steams of the terrestrial Globe as may well be supposed to be the
chief Ingredients of our Atmosphere, may like a Liquor retain a superficies
distinct from that of the ambient and contiguous Body. And since we are
speaking of the distinct surface of fluids, the occasion invites me to add an
Experiment, which, though apt to miscarry upon the account of unheeded
Circumstances, has yet, when all things were rightly ordered, succeeded very
well: I will, I say, subjoin it here, because it shows a way of dividing in a
trice, a Liquor Transparent, and, as to sense, Homogeneous into two very
differing Liquors, the one Diaphanous, and the other Opacous, which will not
mingle. The Experiment is this; Dissolve one Ounce of clean common Quicksilver
in about two Ounces of pure Aqua fortis, so that the Solution be clear and
total, then whilst it is yet warm, pour into it by degrees, lest they boil
over, half an Ounce or one Ounce of Filings of Lead, and if no Error, nor ill
Accident have intervened, the Lead will be in a trice praecipitated into a
white Powder, and the Mercury reduced into a Mass (if I may so speak) of
running Quicksilver, over which the remaining part of the Aqua fortis will
swim, whereby we may see that Liquors being reduced into very minute parts, may
mingle very well, the Corpuscles of the one supporting in that state those of
the other, though in greater Bulk, especially the Texture of one being somewhat
varied, they will retain distinct Surfaces. N.B. Note, that when the Operation
succeeds not well, the Mercury need not, for all that, be lost, but may (in
great part at least) be recovered by freeing the Praecipitated matter from the
rest by filtration, and then diligently grinding the white Praecipitate with
Water, by which means, the Mercury will little by little be ga^hered into
drops. And though this be far from being the true Mercury of Lead, as I may
elsewhere show you; yet some Inducements, not here to be named, incline me to
look upon it, as somewhat differing from common Mercury, and fitter than it for
certain Chemical uses.

SECT. XXVII.
And here I should pass on to the Consideration of Firmness; but that when a
while ago I discoursed of the Agitation of the Corpuscles that compose Oil of
Tartar and Oil of Vitriol, I forgot to add, that not only in fluid bodies, but
in some also of those that are consistent, there may perhaps be more motion in
the insensible parts than our senses discern, or we are wont to imagine:
especially in those bodies, which having been once endowed with life, are,
though not fluid, yet either soft, or at least not perfectly hard. I have more
than once taken pleasure to look upon an heap of swarming Bees, for though they
make not up a liquid but coherent body, which may be turned upside down without
losing its coherence, and which being beheld at a distance, seems to be one
entire mass or body; yet it is evident to him that looks at them near enough,
that the particular Bees that swarm have most of them their distinct and
peculiar motions, and that yet these motions of the particular Bees destroy not
the coherency of the heap; because that when one of the more innermost Bees
removes, as she lets go her hold from those that she rested on before, and goes
away from those that rested on her, so she meets with others on which she may
set her feet, and comes under others that in like manner set their feet on her,
and so by this vicissitude of mutual supports their coherence and their removes
are made compatible; and if instead of Bees, the swarm consisted of extremely
little flies, their particular motions would perhaps be inconspicuous. And that
some such thing may happen in the consistent bodies we have been speaking of,
seems probable from hence, that in wainscot and other hard wood, we often see
little heaps of dust produced in them by putrefaction; and not only in Cheese
we many times see multitudes of mites start up, but in Apples and other Fruits
we oftentimes find Magots, though the skin be whole, (which could not be unless
the parts of the matter were variously transposed, (that is, put into a local
motion) and connected after a manner suitable to the Nature of the infect to be
produced:) And by the growth of bones in the bodies of perfecter Animals, as
well in respect of the internal cavity, where the marrow lodges, as of the
external surface, as also by the growth of the shells of Oysters and Snails,
(though cold Animals) from a size inconsiderable at first, in regard of what is
afterward attained to, and by some other resembling particulars, it seems that
the small particles that constitute even the solid parts of Animals are not,
whilst the Creature lives, (or at least whilst it grows) altogether exempt from
some (though slow and insensible) local motion. And I remember, that it has by
a very diligent observer been affirmed to me, that he saw several pieces of Gum
swet out of an old wainscot of above twenty years standing. Which I the less
wonder at, because I have several times seen viscous Exsudations disclose
themselves like drops of Turpentine upon Deal-boards, which had been made use
of about Buildings. (But of this subject more (perhaps) elsewhere.)

SECT. XXVIII.
After we have hitherto discoursed of Fluidity as considered in distinct
Bodies, we might properly enough say here something of what furtherance or
hinderance in respect of Fluidity one Body may receive by being mingled with
another. But the consideration of those changes of Consistence which may be
produced by Mixture, is a Subject that we shall have such frequent occasions to
treat of in what we are to deliver about Firmness, that we shall now only give
this general Admonition, That it is not so safe as one would think, to foretell
the consistence of a mixture of two or more Bodies, from the bare consideration
of the consistence of those Bodies whereof it is to be compounded. And that we
might at once both manifest this, and insinuate what Judgment should be made of
what is said by so many Chemists and others, who without Limitation teach, That
the Addition of Salts to metalline and mineral Bodies does much facilitate
their fusion, I remember I purposely made and employed this Experiment.

We dissolved crude Copper in a due quantity of Spirit of Nitre, and by
Evaporation reduced the Solution to a kind of Vitriol of a lovely color. We
also corroded with two parts of Spirit of Nitre one of good Tin, and suffered
the mixture to reduce it self (as it easily did) to a substance almost like
Meal. Of this mixture we put a parcel into a Crucible, and suffered it to grow
(and for a pretty while to continue) red hot: Nay, we put some of it upon a
quick coal, and excited the heat by frequently blowing the fire, without
finding that this metalline meal did at all melt, though Saltpeter be a
fusible Salt, and Tin it self be of exceeding easy fusion. Whereas, although
Copper be a metal which is much harder to melt, not only than Tin and Lead, but
even than Silver, (as those well know that mix Silver with Copper to make a
fusible mixture to sod^r upon Copper and Brass) yet was this metal, that will
end^re a long and strong Ignition by being joined per Minima with the same kind
of Nitrous Corpuscles, that had so contrary an effect upon the Tin, so
strangely disposed to fusion, that the Vitriol would melt with as small a heat
as that of ones hand. Nay, we have made such a Vitriol either with Spirit of
Nitre or with (what differed little from it) a certain Aqua fortis as would
even in Winter be made to stand melted for diverse hours together, by the
languid warmth of the Sun, though shining on it but through a window, where it
also stood but in an unstop'd Glass. So fit it is that we consider as well the
new Texture that mingled Bodies obtain by the association of their particles,
(whose size and shape, and perhaps motion may be thereby much altered) as the
consistence of the particular Bodies before their being mixed.

THE HISTORY OF Fluidity and Firmness.
The Second Part. Of FIRMNESS.
IT is sufficiently known that the Chemists ascribe the Firmness and Hardness
of Bodies to Salt, and teach that the Saline Ingredient of them is the
Principle of Coagulation in them, and the cause of their Compactness and
Solidity. But though this opinion of the Chemists be embra'cd by so many modern
Philosophers and Physicians, that some may think it superfluous to make enquiry
after other Causes, yet others (to whom the Explications of Chemists seem not
always so much as Intelligible) will upon the very account of the Receivedness
of the proposed Opinion, think it rather worthy to be examined than to be
acquiesc'd in. However, without making it our business, either to side with, or
oppose any Sect of Naturalists, we will apply our selves a while to consider
the thing it self in prosecution of the Design already begun. And having in the
foregoing Part of our little History taken a general view of Fluidity; we will
now proceed to try what Light it will afford us to discover the nature of
Firmness or Compactness.

And since fluidness and stability being contrary qualities, are to be
apprehended under contrary notions, we may conceive that the firmness or
stability of a body consists principally in this, that the particles that
compose it, besides that they are most commonly somewhat Gross, either do so
rest or are so entangled between themselves, that there is among them a mutual
cohesion whereby they are rendered unapt to flow or diffuse themselves every
way, and consequently to be, without violence, bounded and figured by other
surfaces than those which their connection makes themselves constitute.

In this rude Description of Firmness we have intimated Three principal causes
of it, namely the Grossness, the quiet Contact, and the Implication of the
component parts.

The first is Grossness of Parts, of which we have in effect almost
sufficiently discoursed already: for since treating of Fluidity, we manifested
at large how conducive smalness of Parts was to that Quality; it is easy to
deduce that Grossness of parts in a Body must commonly be a great disposition
to its being Firm. And bigger Corpuscles being caeteris paribus more difficult
than lesser to be put into motion, when they are on^e at rest, it is obvious
that a Body consisting of such Particles is less disposed to become fluid, and
consequently more apt to continue firm, than if its component parts were
smaller, and thereby more easy to be displaced. But when I speak of the
Grossness of Corpuscles, I pretend not to determine whether or no Body or
Matter be so perpetually divisible, that there is no assignable portion of
matter so minute that it may not at least Mentally (to borrow a School term) be
further divided into still lesser and lesser parts: For allowing this
indefinite Divisibility of corporeal substance, it is plain that it may in some
sense be averred, that there are no firm Bodies whose Parts are not extremely
minute. But I understand by the gross parts I here speak of, such Corpuscles as
actually convening to constitute a Body, are scarce dissipable or divisible
into lesser by the Agitation of the ambient Air or Ether, or by the other
causes of the Fluidity of Bodies.

It is also to be noted, that when I spoke of the fitness of grosser Corpuscles
to make a firm Body, I added, Caeteris paribus, because it may happen that the
breaking of the small parts of a Body into minute Particles may make them but
the fitter to contribute to the Firmness of the Body they belong to: For the
parts of the divided Corpuscles may by their comminution acquire a new, and
perhaps a more irregular shape than before, upon whose account they may be more
disposed to be entangled among the neighboring Particles, or may be better
fitted to get into and fill the pores of some kind of Bodies. And in in such
little Particles, not only the minuteness may make them lie closer together,
and consequently the better exclude the Air: but the greatness of the surface
in proportion to the bulk of the matter may perhaps in some Cases occasion a
fuller contact, and so facilitate the constitution of a very firm Body, in case
these minute parts (whose intervals (if they intercept any) need not be other
than very small) shall be placed and disposed to the best advantage for a full
contact of one another. But as I said a while before, from what we have already
delivered (concerning the size of parts, when we treated of Fluidity) it may
easily be understood how much the magnitude of them may conduce to Firmness;
and therefore we will presently pass on to the mention of the two other things
to be considered in reference to consistent Bodies. Whereof of the one is the
bare Rest of the small and contiguous parts that make up the firm Body; and the
other the intricate Texture of such parts in the body they make up. And either
of these two seems alone sufficient to render a body stable: though Nature do
perhaps oftentimes make some (though not equal) use of both, to fasten the
parts of the same body more firmly together.

Of the former of these Causes, I am informed that the justly famous Monsi^ur
Des Carts has also taken notice, but without adding proof from Experiments, or
Observations. But it seems to have been either overlooked, or, (as incongruous
to their Hypothesis of the innate motion of Atoms) rejected by the old
Atomists, and by Lucretius, who takes notice (that I remember) only of the
latter: for though they did of old make mention of the sudden divulsion of two
flat and solid Bodies, yet they employ that Observation but to prove a Vacuum,
(without otherwise taking notice, that I have met with, of those things that
are most material in such Observations to our present purpose, and without
deducing thence what we shall endeavor to do in order to the explication of
the causes of Firmness.) Upon what account then soever the Atomists have
omitted to reckon for a cause of Firmness that which we have newly been
speaking of; yet (as we observed above) If two bodies be once at rest against
one another, it seems consonant to the Catholic Laws of Nature, that they
should continue in that state of rest, till some force capable to overpower
their resistance puts them out of it. And whatever may be said of the
unloosable mobility of Atoms strictly so taken, yet that diverse parts of
Matter may compose bodies that need no other Cement to unite them than the
juxta-position which we here presuppose, and the resting together of their
parts, whereby the Air and other fluid Bodies that might dissociate them are
excluded, I have been inclined to think by what I have observed in grinding of
Glasses: for sometimes the unequal surface of one body being ground upon the
concave surface of another, the two surfaces will happen to be so closely and
exactly fitted to one another, (their immediate contact in all their parts, or
at least in innumerable of them, hindering the intercurrence of the Air) that a
man is not able without breaking one or both of them to pull them directly
asunder; but if you will sever them, you must be fain to make one of them to
slip along the surface of the other: which makes the Glass-Grinders often
complain of the trouble they meet with in separating such bodies. Nay, if you
lay two flat Glasses ground very true and well polished upon one another, so
that their surfaces may almost every where touch each other, (to which it will
be requisite to rub them a little one upon another, for the better exclusion of
the Air) you may by lifting up the uppermost, lift up the lowermost (though
perhaps, as we have often tried, two or three times bigger) with it, as if the
two Plates of Glass made but one body. Nay, we have diverse times taken up four
or five pieces of Glass at once, laid and pressed thus one upon another, and
might perchance have taken up a greater number, if we had had more of them at
hand. And trial has also informed us, that if you hold a Looking-Glass very
level with the unfoliated side downward, and rub a little against it a piece of
other very flat and very smooth Glass, you may easily by that way only, fasten
them to one another; so that the lowermost Glass, though large, will hang
between the uppermost and the ground, to the wonder of those that behold it,
and can discern nor imagine nothing capable to keep it from falling: and by the
same way (as we shall recite anon) we have often made one considerably thick
piece of Marble take and hold up another, having purposely caused their flat
surfaces to be carefully ground and polished, without which the Experiment will
not succeed. Nor is it requisite that the glasses be flat to make them adhere
very closely together, provided their immediate contact be made according to a
large surface: for to what we have already mentioned concerning the cohering of
unequal and concave Bodies, we may add, that having purposely applied a long
glass-stopple of an almost conical figure, and well ground, to the mouth of a
thick quart Bottle, whose neck was made long and of a figure convenient to
receive the stopple, and ground within fit for it, we found that these two
glass bodies touching one another in a multitude of parts, did adhere together
so closely, that when the stopple was carefully put in, we could easily, and
diverse times one after another, lift up the bottle, though there was by our
guess above a pound of Liquor in it. Unless we suppose, without much
probability, that because it is found, that moving them to and fro upon one
another, and pressing down the stopple, promotes their sticking, their adhesion
may be in part ascribed either to some Elastical motion in the parts of the
pressed glass, or to the exquisite adaptation of the almost numberless, though
very small, asperities of the one, to the as numerous little cavities of the
other; whereby the surfaces do lock in with one another, or are as it were
clasped together. For as polished as the surfaces may appear to sense, we must
not deny that there may be such inequalities in them, since being wont to be
polished with Putty or some such powder, or heap of grating and irregularly
shaped Corpuscles, they must needs make store of little furrows, and ridges,
and other Asperities on them. But to insist on these Conjectures were to
digress.

Yet here we must not decline taking notice, that, at least here below, the
sticking together of such bodies as are of sensible Bulk, and whose smooth
surfaces immediately touch one another, may possibly not so much proceed from
this, that their parts, as we formerly observed, are at rest among themselves,
and by their immediate contact do make up as it were but one body; as from the
pressure of the Atmosphere, proceeding partly from the weight of the ambient
Air, (mixed with the Effluviums of the terrestrial Globe) and partly from a kind
of Spring, by virtue of which the Air continually presses upon the bodies
contiguous to it, though through accustomance and negligence, and perhaps some
other causes not here to be insisted on, we neither feel it in our own bodies,
nor take notice of it in others. Now this pressure of the Air every way being
supposed, I think the adhering of the smooth bodies we speak of (for we suppose
them far greater than the particles of the Air) to one another may probably
enough be ascribed to this, That when, for instance, the smooth surfaces of two
pieces of Glass do so exquisitely touch one another, that none of the ambient
Air is either intercepted or admitted between them, then the undermost glass
will suffer no pressure on that side which touches the uppermost; the parts of
the uppermost glass having no sensible spring in them (so that they can only
Resist, but not Repel the other:) but that side of the undermost Glass which
is exposed to the Air will be pressed upon thereby; and there being, as we
said, no Elastical pressure on the other side of the glass to balance this, it
is not to be wondered at that the inferior glass should not fall off from the
other, in regard the weight that would carry it downwards is much too small to
overcome that force of the Air that thrusts it against the uppermost glass: As
if one should with his hand thrust a plate of Iron broad-wise against the flat
cieling of his Chamber, the Iron would not fall as long as the force of the
hand perseveres to press against it. Nor is it material, that in our Case the
pressure of the Atmosphere is supposed to force the lowermost glass upwards:
For if we suppose the Air to consist of innumerable little springs (as it were)
bearing upon and supporting one another, and whereof the lowermost are bent by
the Weight of all that are incumbent on them, it will be easy to conceive that
near the surface of the Earth, (about which the Air must diffuse it self by
reason of the Gravity of its small parts, and the Resistance of the Earth
against their Descent) it may press almost equally every way, and by a kind of
Recoyl (though not properly so called) from the Terrestrial Globe upwards, may
strongly press any body upon which it can bear, against any other which has no
such Elastical power to repel from it a body so pressed against it.

This Difficulty being thus dispatched, we shall proceed by two or three
particulars to confirm our Conjecture at the Cause why smooth Bodies stick
together upon bare juxta-position or contact. And first ^ observe, that if a
piece of flat glass be, as we formerl^ mentioned, appended to a Looking-glass
held with the unfoliated side downwards, parallel to the Horizon, though the
adhering glass will not drop down, yet it will v^ry easily be moved any way
along the level surface; and if by inclining the Looking-glass any way, you
deprive it of its former Level, the smaller glass will easily slide downwards
upon the surface of the greater. Of which the Reason seems to be, partly that
the Gravity as such of the lower glass does not considerably resist the
horizontal motion of it, but only the motion upwards, whereby it must recede
from the Center of heavy Bodies, as might, if need were, be probably deduced
from diverse Instances obvious enough; and partly, or rather chiefly, that to
the edges of the glass the Ambient Air is contiguous as well on the one side as
on the other, and so the pressure of the Air being equal on every part of the
edges, the gravity of the smaller glass is not hindered by the Air (which can
as fast succeed on one side, as it is displaced on the other) from making it
slide down the shelving surface of the greater Glass, whereas of the broad and
flat sides of the lowermost glass the one is, as we said, pressed by the spring
of the Air, whilst the other suffers no such pressure from the Looking-glass,
to which it was applied. And so, if you take a small open-mouthed glass, and
plunge it into a Vessel full of Quicksilver with the mouth upward, that the
Quicksilver may fill it without leaving any Air in it, and if then, whilst it
is under the Quicksilver, you turn the mouth downwards, and so keeping it
upright, lift it up till the mouth be almost come to the top of the Mercury;
you shall perceive that the glass will remain almost full of Quicksilver in
the Vessel: And this will continue so, though you incline the glass this way or
that way, provided you keep the mouth of it within the Mercury. And this
Experiment, though more noble when tried with Quicksilver, will succeed also
when tried, as it may more easily be, with water. Of which the Reason seems to
be, that the glass hinders the Quicksilver in it from the pressure of the
incumbent air, whereas the Quicksilver in the Vessel being exposed to it, must
by it necessarily be forced up against the surface of the inverted bottom of
the glass, where it meets no Elastical power to repel it downwards. For, that
it is not Natures Abhorrency of a Vacuum, that keeps the Quicksilver from
descending till some air can come to succeed in its room, the famous Experiment
invented by Torricellius, and found true by many others, and our selves,
touching the descent of Quicksilver in any Tube of above two foot and a half
long, seems clearly to evince. And to confirm what we have said, and show
withal, that it is not so much the Contact of Bodies according to a large
surface, as that Contact is considered in it self, as by reason of its being
ordinarily requisite to the exclusion of Air, that at least here below keeps
bodies from falling asunder; I shall relate, that having by a certain Artifice
out of a large glass (with a narrow mouth) caused a certain quantity of air to
be sucked, we found that by immediately applying a Book (which then chanced to
lie at hand) to the Orifice of the Vessel, the Book was readily lifted up and
sustein'd in the air as long as we pleased, though the surface of the suspended
Body could be touched, as is evident, but by the Ring which incircl'd the
Orifice of the Vessel, and though the weight taken up (besides that it was
inconveniently shaped for such a trial, which would probably have succeeded as
well with a much greater weight, if we had had one fitly shaped at hand)
exceeded twenty Ounces Much more considerable Instances of this nature may be
met with in the Author's New Physico Mechanical Experiments.
. Of which event the Cause seems plainly to be this, that by reason of the
Exsuction of some air out of the glass, the Elastical power of the remaining
Air was very much debilitated in comparison of the unweaken'd Pressure of the
External air, which being able to press the Book against the Orifice of the
Vessel with greater strength than the internal air can resist, thereby it comes
to pass, that the whole Orifice of the Vessel, though there be but part of it
of solid body, does yet on this occasion perform in some measure the part of an
entire surface exactly smooth.

It may be considered also (to add that upon the by) whether upon the
Principle lately explicated may not in some measure depend the solidity of
glass. For though its parts seem very little or not at all branched or
interwoven one within another, and appear very smooth and slippery, yet since
the fire that brought them to fusion, and consequently to be fluid, may well be
supposd to have sub-divided and reduced them into very small Particles, and to
have thereby assisted them to exclude the air from b^twixt them, it may seem
that it needs not much be wondered at, if the immediate contact of such small
and smooth Corpuscles suffice to make them hold together; for that their union
is strict enough to keep out the air, may appear from this, that those that
blow glasses, and those that distill in them, find not the air can traverse the
pores even of heated glass; and as for any more subtle matter, we see by the
free passage of Light and Heat, or, to speak more warily, of magnetical
Effluvia through glass, without injuring its texture, that such matter but
moderately moved will not hinder the little solid parts from cleaving together.
And on this occasion it might be considered, how much the juxta-position of
their Corpuscles crowded together by fusion may contribute to the consistence
and brittleness of Saltpeter, and diverse other bodies, which may from an
incoherent powder be readily turned into one Mass; as also how far the sticking
together (for I speak not of the figures composed by them) of the small parts
of hanging drops of water, and such other Liquors as are not thought to consist
of Corpuscles hooked or branched, may be ascribed to the contact of their small
parts, and the exclusion of air. These, I say, and some other such things might
be here considered, but that we are forbidden to examine them particularly, and
especially what has been represented touching the solidity of glass, (which we
suspect another cause may have a great Interest in) by our haste, which calls
us to the remaining part of our Discourse.

Though then it be hence (to omit other proofs elsewhere mentioned)
sufficiently manifest, that the Air has a spring, and that a strong one, yet
there appears no great necessity of having recourse to it for the giving an
Account why the two smooth glasses above mentioned were able to adhere so
closely to each other: For a probable Reason of the same Phenomenon may be
rende^'d by the pressure of the Air considered as a weight. And first, we must
recall to mind what we (a little above) said of the Recoyling, (or Rebounding
of the Pressure) of a Cylinder of Air from the Earth, to the suspended piece of
glass, proceeding from this, that the fluid Air, which is not without some
Gravity, being hindered by the resisting surface of the terrestrial Globe to
fall lower, must diffuse it self, and consequently press as well upwards as any
other way. Next, we may consider, that when the surfaces of two flat Bodies of
any notable (and for example of equal) breadth do immediately touch each other,
and lie both of them level with the Horizon, and one of them directly over the
other; in this case, I say, since the Air cannot move in an instant from the
edges to the middle of the two surfaces that lie upon each other, the lowermost
cannot be drawn away downwards in a perpendicular line from the uppermost, but
that by reason of the stiffness and contact of the two Bodies, it must
necessarily happen that at the instant of their separation, should it be
effected, the lowermost glass will be pressed upon by the whole (Crooked)
Pillar of Air, supposed to reach from the top of the Atmosphere, and to have
for Basis the superficies of the undermost glass. For at that instant, the Air
having not time to get in between the two glasses, there is nothing between
them during that instant to resist the pressure of that Air which bears against
the lower superficies of that undermost glass, and consequently such a
revulsion of the lower glass cannot be effected but by a weight or force
capable to surmount the power of the weight of the abovementioned Cylinder of
the Atmosphere; and this, as I said, because that by reason of the sudden
separation, the upper surface of the glass has not any air contiguous to it,
which, were it there, would (according to the nature of Fluid and springy
Bodies) press as much against the upper surface of the glass, as the Pillar of
the Atmosphere against the lower, and consequently sustain that Endeavor of
the Air against the lower side of the glass, which in our proposed case must be
surmounted by the weight or force employed to draw down the lower glass. And
hence we may understand (to add that upon the by) That it is not necessary
that the contiguous surfaces of the two flat glasses we have been treating of,
be paralleled to the Horizon: For if you should hold them perpendicular to it,
their divulsion would not cease to be difficult, provided it were attempted to
be made by suddenly pulling one of the broad surfaces from the other in a level
line, and not by making one of the surfaces slide upon the other; for in the
former case, the separation of the contiguous Bodies will be hindered by the
weight or pressure of the lateral Air (if I may so speak) that bears against
the broad sides of the glasses contiguous to it. But whereas in these cases we
suppose the superficies of the two glasses to be so exactly flat and smooth,
that no Air at all can come between them; Experience has informed us, that it
is extremely difficult, if at all possible, to procure from our ordinary
Tradesmen either Glasses or Marbles, so much as approaching such an
Exquisiteness: For we could very hardly get either experienced Stone-cutters,
or Persons skilled at grinding of glasses, to make us a pair of round Marbles,
though of an inch or two only in Diameter, that would for so much as two or
three minutes hold up one another in the Air by contact, though they would
easily enough take up each other, if the uppermost were drawn up nimbly, before
the Air could have leisure to insinuate it self betwixt them.

But this notwithstanding, we endeavored by the following Expedient, not only
to manifest that the Power or Pressure of the Air is in these Experiments very
great, but also to make some Estimate (though but an imperfect one) how great
that Power is.

Having then provided a pair of Marbles of an inch and half in Diameter, and as
flat and smooth as we could get, and having considered, that as 'twas the
getting in of the Air between them that (for the reason above declared)
hindered them from sticking strongly together; so the Access afforded to the
Air was for the most part due to that scarcely evitable roughness or inequality
of their surfaces that remained in spite of the Polish: considering these
things, I say, we supposed that the intrusion of the Air might be for some
while prevented by wetting the surfaces to be joined with pure Spirit of Wine;
and that yet this Liquor, that seems the freest that we know of from tenacity,
would not otherwise than by keeping out the air prove a Cement to fasten the
stones together. But because the easy separation of such smooth Bodies as
adhere but by contact does in great part (as we formerly noted) proceed from
this, That whereas it is very difficult to hold such Bodies exactly level for
any considerable space of time, and yet the least Inclination any way gives the
lower Body opportunity to slide off; because of this, I say, we resolved in the
first place to see what could be done by fastening to the upper Marble certain
Wires and a Button, in such manner as that the lower Marble, when it was
joined, might freely fall directly down, but no^ slip much aside, being
hindered by the Wire. And in pursuit of this we found, that not only the dry
Marbles could be made to take up and hold up one another, but that once by
drawing up the upper Marble nimbly, we could take up (but not keep up for any
time) together with the lower Marble, a Scale, and in it a pound weight of 16
Ounces Troy.

After this we moistened the surfaces of the Marbles with such pure Alkalizate
Spirit of Wine as we elsewhere teach to make, which was so thin and subtle,
that not only we burned some of it before we would employ it about this
Experiment in a Silver Spoon, without leaving so much as any sign of Phlegm
behind; but it would (in the open air) almost in a moment fly away from the
surface of the Marble anointed with it, and leave it dry and glossy. The
Marbles being skilfully wetted, and kept by the abovementioned wires from
slipping aside, we cast into a Scale fastened to the lower of them diverse
weights at several times, and by nimbly pulling up the higher stone, tried many
times how much we could draw up with the lower, and did sometimes take up above
an hundred Ounces, and once an hundred thirty two Ounces Troy, besides the
Scale that contained them, and the Marble it self, the Diameter of whose smooth
surface was by measure but about an inch and two thirds.

But here I must take notice, both in relation to this and the following
Experiments to be set down concerning smooth Marbles, that we never yet found
any sort of Experiments, wherein such slight variations of circumstances could
so much defeat our Endeavors; which we therefore mention, that in case such
Experiments be tried again, it may be thought the less strange, if others be
not able to do as much at the first and second, or perhaps the tenth or
twentieth trial, as we did after much Practice had made us expert in this nice
Experiment, and suggested to us diverse facilitating Circumstances, which could
not here in few words be particularly set down.

And now, because we perceived that the Spirit of Wine was too fugitive and
subtle a Liquor for our purpose, we supposed that Oil, as it would better fill
up the little cavities of the Stones, so it would more exactly keep ^ut the
air, and less easily v^nish into it. And accordingly, having moistened the
surfaces with a due Proportion of good expressed Oil of sweet Almonds, and
having carefully observed the other requisite Circumstances, we to^k up some
drams above four hundred Ounces Troy hanging at the lower Marble.

And that you may not suspect that it was by glewing the Marbles together, that
the Oil did enable them to make so much greater resistance against separation
than the Spirit of Wine did; I shall add, That in case the flat surfaces of
the joined Stones were held not parallel, but perpendicular to the Horizon,
that so the air might (as we formerly also observed) immediately succeed as the
looser Marble should slide off, the weight of some Ounces was now and then
requisite to draw down the Marbles when they had nothing but Spirit of Wine
between them, whereas they would easily enough slide off from one another when
they were cemented together with Oil: perhaps because that the Spirit of Wine
by reason of the smallness and penetrancy of its parts, and because of its
fugitive nature, did not so well fill up the little pores and furrows of the
surfaces of the Marbles; whereby the little protuberances getting into those
little cavities, might more resist the sliding of the Marbles upon one another
surfaces, whose texture is better fitted to make their surfaces smooth and
slippery.

And to show that the resistance of such contiguous Marbles to a violent
separation is greater in those which being broader are pressed against or
resisted by a proportionably bigger (though not a longer) Pillar of the
Atmosphere; We caused two Marbles to be made, whose Diameter was three inches
or a very little more: and having after the abovementioned manner employed
Spirit of Wine to keep out the air from between them, we did after some trials,
with the uppermost of them take up the lowermost, and with it four hundred
sixty eight, or four hundred and seventy Ounces. But making use of Oil of
Almonds instead of Spirit of Wine, we did with our own hands draw up twice, one
time after another, with the undermost Stone, a much greater weight, namely,
eighty four pound or 1344 Ounces (Troy weight) notwithstanding which weight we
manifestly perceived the Marble at which it hung to stick strongly to the other.

And here again we will take notice, that the interposed Oil was so far from
being able as a Cement, rather than by keeping out the air, to make these
Marbles stick so close together, that, whereas Bodies glew'd or cemented
together are wont to make an almost equal resistance to their being separated,
in what Posture soever you place them, I made our Marbles, even when we tried
this last Experiment, very freely slide upon one another, by impelling the
upppermost to the right hand or to the left, with my Finger or my Thumb:
(whereof the reason is intimated above, where we mentioned almost the like case
in Glasses) and having sometime before taken up a weight which we conjectured
to be not much inferior to that last named, we presently for trial sake held
the Marbles with their edges downwards, and found that those that in an
Horizontal Position could not be drawn asunder by so great a weight, did in
another posture presently fall asunder by their own weight, which made one
readily slide off from the other to the ground. Now although we have confessed,
that this way of measuring the force of the Air is not Accurate; yet we hope it
will not be thought Useless, since (not to mention that by thus breaking the
Ice, we may make way for the happier Enquiries of others) it not only shows us
that this pressing or sustaining force of the air, as unheeded as it is wont to
be, is very Great, but it may also assist us to conjecture how Great it is,
which though we cannot hereby determine precisely and with certainty, yet we
may estimate it with much less uncertainty than otherwise we could.

I know that the Peripateticks, and the generality of the School Philosophers,
will confidently ascribe the sticking of the Marbles, not to the cause we have
assigned, but to Natures Abhorrency and fear of a Vacuum. But not to engage our
selves now in a Disquisition that when we discoursed of Fluidity we did (for
the Reasons there expressed) decline to meddle with; We will, without disputing
whether or no Nature either can at all admit, or do abhor a Vacuum, content
our selves to confirm the Explication given of this Phenomenon by these two
Considerations. The one, That if Nature did so violently oppose a Vacuum as is
pretended, it is not likely that any force whatsoever that we could employ
would be capable to produce one; whereas in our case we find, that a little
more weight added to the lower of the Marbles, is able to surmount their
Reluctance to separation, notwithstanding the supposed danger of thereby
introducing a Vacuum. And my next Consideration is, that (according to what we
have hitherto delivered) without having recourse to any such disputable
Principle, a fair account may be given of the proposed Phenomenon, by the
pressure or weight of the Air. And that what we have said concerning the latter
of these may be entertained with the less difficulty, let us suppose, that when
the Marbles stick well together, the lowermost of them, or the appendant weight
were fastened to the ground: For in this case there appears no reason to
believe that their power to resist separation would be less than it was before.
And yet it seems evident, that the uppermost Marble would not be
perpendicularly pulled up but by such a force as were at least (I say at least)
able to lift up a weight equal to that of the last mentioned Marble, and of a
Pillar of Air having the Stone for its Base, and reaching to the top of the
Atmosphere; since at the instant of Revulsion, before the Air can get in, and
spread it self between the Stones, there is not for ought appears any such Body
under the upper Marble, as can help the hand to sustain the weight both of that
Marble and the incumbent Cylinder of the Atmosphere, which then gravitates upon
it, and consequently upon the hand; because there is no Air, nor other
equivalent Body underneath it, to sustain its part of the weight, as the lower
Air is wont to do in reference to the heavy Bodies that lean on it, and to the
weight of the incumbent Air. And therefore we need not much marvel, if when
only a less weight than that of the forementioned Pillar of the Atmosphere
hangs at the lower Marble, it should be capable of being drawn up by the
uppermost, rather than suffer a divulsion from it. As we see that when two
Bodies being fastened together, are endeavored to be drawn asunder by forces
or weights not able to separate them, they will usually both of them move that
way, toward which either of them is the most strongly drawn. On which
occasion, I remember what I have sometimes observed in one of the ways of
trying the strength of Load-stones: For if the Lodestone be able to take up
more than its own weight, you may as well lift up the Lodestone by a Knife, as
the Knife by the Lodestone. And though one accustomed to judge only by his
Eyes, would have imagined, that when I held the great weights formerly
mentioned suspended in the Air, there was no strong endeavor to pull up the
upper Marble from the lower, because my hand being for a while held steady,
seemed to be at rest; yet he will easily be invited to suspect that in such a
thought there may be a great mistake, who shall consider, that neither did the
weight sensibly appear to pull the lower Marble downwards, though my hand
assured me that the weight had not lost its Gravitation. And if I shall add,
that once, when the weight after having been lifted up into the Air, was
casually so loosened from the upper Marble, as suddenly to drop down, my hand,
unawares to me, was by the force of that Endeavor it just before employed to
sustain the fallen weight, carried up with such violence, that I very sensibly
bruised it by the stroke it gave against the face of a Bystander, who chanced
out of curiosity to hold his Head over the Marbles.

And here it will not be impertinent to bring in an Experiment that I once
devised, not only for other uses, but to illustrate the subject we have been
hitherto treating of. The Trial I lately found registered among my Adversaria,
in these Terms. A Brass Valve of about an Inch Diameter was with Cement well
fastened to the shorter Leg (which was but of very few Inches in Length) of a
long Glass Siphon left open at the end of the other Leg. This Valve being let
down to the Bottom of a tall Glass Body full of water, so that 'twas (if I much
mis-remember not) between a Foot and half a yard beneath the surface of the
water, when there was let in as much water into the Pipe, as reached in that as
high as the surface of the External Water in the Tall Cucurbite: Then about an
Ounce weight was put into the opposite Scale of a Balance, to the neighboring
Scale whereof one end of a string was tied, whose other end was fastened to the
said Valve, whose parts would be thereby drawn asunder. But when the water was
emptied out of the Pipe, and the Valve was let down to the former depth, there
was requisite about 5 Ounces, that is 4 Ounces more than formerly, to disjoin
the parts of the Valve, and let the water get in between: And when (the Siphon
being freed from water) the Valve was listed higher and higher, together with
the Pipe, there needed less and less weight to make a Disjunction; two Ounces
of Additional weight (to the one Ounce requisite to counterpoize the Cover of
the Valve it self) on the water sufficing to lift up the Cover, when the Valve
was held about half way, between its Lower station, and the Top of the water; a
single Ounce sufficing afterward, and half an Ounce of Additional weight
proving enough to disjoin the parts when the Valve was held but a little
beneath the surface of the Liquor.

This relation of an Experiment which I afterward showed to many Virtuosi,
will perhaps seem somewhat dark to you without a Scheme; but if you consider it
attentively enough to apprehend it thoroughly, I presume it will show you, that
whether or no there be upon any other score a repugnancy to the separation of
smooth Bodies joined by immediate contact; yet certainly there may be a great
Repugnancy upon the bare Account of the Gravity of the medium, wherein the
Divulsion is attempted. For in our case the Fuga Vacui, if there be any, ought
to resist the separation of the Parts of a Valve still kept under water, as
much near the Top of the water, as at the Bottom. And therefore the great
difference found in that resistance at those different places, may be
attributed to the Pressure of the Ambient water, that thrust them together. And
though it be true that Air is an Exceeding Light Body in comparison of water;
yet in diverse Trials I have found the Disproportion in Gravity of those two
Fluids not to exceed that of a 1000. to 1. So that considering how many miles,
not to say scores of miles, the Air may reach upwards, there seems no absurdity
at all to suppose that the bare Pressure of it against the Marbles formerly
mentioned, may keep them as coherent as we found them to be.

But since this I have been able to make an Experiment, that does sufficiently
confirm the former Doctrine. For having suspended the two coherent Marbles in a
Capacious Glass, whence by a certain contrivance, the Air could little by
little be drawn out, we found as we expected, that whilst there remained any
considerable quantity of Air in the Glass, the lower Marble continued to stick
to the other, the Pressure of the remaining Air, though but weak, being yet
sufficient for the sustentation of the lower Marble, which it was not after the
Air was further withdrawn. And if when the Disjunction was made, the upper
Marble were by another contrivance let down upon the lower, so as to touch it
as before; though whilst the External Air was kept out of the Glass, the upper
Marble might easily be raised without taking up the lower with it; yet when the
outward Air was let in, the Marbles were pressed together, and became again
strongly coherent.

But it is now high time to look back to that part of our Discourse, which the
consideration of our Marbles has so long enticed us from directly prosecuting.
Although then it may from the past Discourse be conceived, that in Bodies of
sensible bulk, whose smooth surfaces touch one another, the force of the Air
does mainly make them cohere; yet it seems that generally in Bodies (whether
greater or smaller) it is a sufficient cause of Cohesion that the parts of the
Body are at rest by one another, though perhaps the entire Concretion be
removed from place to place. For Bodies of sensible bulk being either fluid or
consistent, and it being (as above we have taught) the chief requisite of a
fluid Body that its small parts be in motion, there seems not any thing
necessary to keep a Body from being fluid, and consequently to keep it a firm
Body, but that its contiguous parts be in a state of rest.

I know that almost all Philosophers both ancient and modern, require something
else than the Rest of the parts (of which scarce any of them takes the least
notice as of a thing conducive to Firmness) to the keeping together the parts
of a dry and stable Body. But although to engage very far in such a
Metaphysical and nice Speculation were unfit for me, (at least at present, when
I am but to endeavor to explicate Fluidity and Firmness in the sensible Bodies
we converse with;) yet we dare not quite skip it over, lest we be accused of
Overseeing it. The greater number of Contemplators ascribe the effect under
Consideration to a certain substantial form, to which they assign, among other
Offices, that of keeping all the parts united into one Body. But what this form
is, and by what means it unites the parts so strongly in a Diamond or a Ruby,
etc. and so loosely in Tallow, Camphire, or the like slight concretions, and
how the substantial form continuing the same in Water and Ice, the same matter
may easily and frequently become by turns a hard and a fluid Body; how these, I
say, and diverse others things are effected by the forms of solid Bodies, is to
me, I confess, at least as difficult to conceive, as to imagine without it a
cause of Cohesion in the parts of a dry Body.

Other Learned Men there are among the modern Naturalists who have recourse
some of them to a Spirit, which penetrating and fastening to each other all
substances corporeal, unites them into one World; but others fancy rather a
certain Cement or Glue, whereby they conceive the parts of Bodies to be made as
it were to stick to each other. But as for this last Hypothesis, it would be
considered, that though Glue is made use of to join together Bodies of sensible
bulk, yet Glue it self being a Body that is so too, it must also it self
consist of lesser parts sticking to one another; which allows me to demand the
cause of the mutual Coherence of those parts. And if it be answered, that they
likewise stick together by the Intervention of some more subtle Glue, I shall
again represent that this Glue also must consist of corporeal parts; and
therefore I shall further demand how these also stick together: and if the like
Answer be again made me, I shall still renew the like Demand, till at length
the Answerer be reduced to confess, that parts of Matter so very small cannot
be reasonably supposed to be kept together by a Cement. And if the Corpuscles
that make up the finest Glue imaginable are not kept together by a Cement, we
may be allowed to ascribe their Adhesion to the immediate Contact and Rest of
the component parts, (which is a cause intelligible, and at least probable)
till some other sufficient cause be assigned, which I do not take that to be
which is taught by the Patrons of the first Hypothesis lately mentioned,
concerning a Spirit diffused through the mass of matter. For not to mention
that the Agility of a Spirit seems not so proper a Qualification for that which
is to fasten Bodies together, we may consider, that this substance which is
called a Spirit is indeed but a subtle Body. And why therefore may not the
minute parts of other Bodies, if they be conveniently shaped for Adhesion,
stick to one another, as well as stick to this Spirit? And I should here also
demand, how the parts of this Spirit are kept fast to one another. If any
should answer, That this Spirit consists of parts which are inseparable, and
yet perhaps of a hooked shape, which fits them to fasten themselves to the
Bodies they take hold of, and thereby those to one another; this would be to
propose such a new Notion of the diffused Spirit, as I know not whether those
whose Opinion I have been examining did ever dream of, or would be content to
adopt: and sure according to this Hypothesis there must be a wonderful plenty
of these little Spirits in the grossest Bodies; and Ice for example, which is
thought so destitute of Spirits, must be well-nigh half made up of them: For
these little spirituous parts can fasten no parts of other Bodies together but
those they touch, since otherwise the parts of other sorts of matter, if but
contiguous, might cohere without these, which is against the Hypothesis. And
since each of these small spirituous Corpuscles, if I may so call them, being
really a natural Body, and by consequent necessarily divisible, at least by
Thought, into parts, I shall ask the Proposers of this new Notion of Spirit,
upon what Account this Corpuscle can be indivisible; I mean, what it is, if it
be not Rest and immediate Contact, that hinders but that the parts (or
designable parcel of corporeal substance) which are divisible by thought,
should be always kept together, and never be actually divided. I am not averse
indeed from granting, that they may almost always escape Dissolution: but I am
apt to suspect that may be, because that by reason of the extreme smallness,
and the Rest and strict Contact of their parts, they can scarce ever meet with
an Agent minute and swiftly enough moved, to be able to shatter them or
dissociate the combined parts. For to say, that it is the Nature of every such
Corpuscle to be indivisible, is but to give me cause to demand how that
appears: For so important an Assertion needs more than a bare Affirmation for
proof.

And if two of these Corpuscles that are presumed to be indivisible should,
being smooth and of the same figure, (as for Example Cubical) happen to lie
upon one another, and a third should likewise chance to be fitly placed upon
the uppermost of the two, what should hinder but that this Aggregate may by the
violent knock of some other Corpuscles be broken in the midst of the whole
Concretion, and consequently in the middlemost body? For suppose them as
Adamantine as you please, yet since Corpuscles as hard as they are, can be made
very violently to knock against them; why may not these grate or break the
middlemost Corpuscles, or any of the others? as we see that Diamonds themselves
may be reduced to powder by other Diamonds, though not (as Artificers versed in
the Trade inform me) by Attrition with any other stone. To prove that the
Cohesion of the middlemost of the three lately-mention'd small Deyes with the
other two, the one above it, the other below, is not so strong as that of the
parts of that middlemost Corpuscle, notwithstanding that the contact between
each two adjoining Bodies is supposed to be full, (for so it must be in such
Bodies, though not always in others visibly greater, in which some subtiler
substance may be supposed to come in part between them;) to prove this, I say,
there must be assigned some better cause of the Cohesion of the matter in one
part of the proposed Body than in the other. And it cannot with probability be
pretended, that a Corpuscle presumed incapable to be divided should consist of
hooked parts: and if that should be pretended, yet even these hooks also ^eing
true Bodies, the Question would recur concerning Them and be still renewable in
infinitum. If it should be said that these minute Bodies are indissoluble,
because it is their nature to be so; that would not be to render a Reason of
the thing proposed, but in effect to decline rendering any. And though I know
that in every Hypothesis about the principles of things, something is allowed
to be assumed, as not being to be explained or proved by any thing more primary
than it self; yet I know not whether this excuse be proper in our Case, wherein
it seems that the entireness and permanency of any parcel of matter, how minute
soever, may be probably enough deduced from the immediate Contact, the Rest and
the extreme littleness of its designable parts. And if for a last refuge it
should be said, that the designable parts of these Corpuscles are therefore
unseparable, because there is no vacuity at all intercepted between them;
besides that this is contrary to the supposition formerly made; for such
extremely minute Deyes as we imagined to be one upon another, having their
surfaces according to our Postulatum, flat, smooth, and exquisitely congruous,
could no more than the parts of either of the three Corpuscles have any vacuity
intercepted between them: besides this, I say, this is both to suppose a Vacuum
in all divisible Bodies, and that too as the cause of their being such, and to
decline the former Hypothesis touching the use of this Spirit, and take
Sanctuary among the Atomists, to whose opinion about the account upon which
those Bodies they call Atoms are not dissipated, although some of the
Considerations we have alleged against the newly examined opinion may in part
be applied; yet diverse of their other opinions do so fairly comport with the
generality of our Experiments in these Notes touching Fluidity and Firmness,
that I am willing to decline clashing with them, by not pursuing now any
further a Disquisition, which, as I said a while ago, is not necessary to my
present design: especially, since the dim and bounded Intellect of man seldom
prosperously adventures to be Dogmatical about things that approach to
Infinite, whether in vastness or littleness. Nor indeed would I have that
looked upon as a resolute Declaration of what I think of so abstruse a Subject,
which I have rather proposed to avoid saying nothing, where I supposed it
expected I should say something.

The other thing then, which in our Description of a firm Body we mentioned as
capable to make it so, is the texture of the parts (whether homogeneous or not)
that constitute it; and though the Juxta-position and Rest of these parts may
possibly alone suffice to make the Body stable; yet this Texture seems to be
the most usual cause of stability, and sometimes also it may superadde a degree
of that quality to that which bodies may have upon the former account only.
For, though whilst the parts of the Body are actually at rest it cannot be
fluid, yet those parts, if they cohere to one another but by rest only, may
Caeteris paribus be much more easily dissociated and put into motion by any
external Body actually moved, than they could be if they were by little hooks
and eyes, or other kind of fastenings intangl'd in one another; it being often
necessary in this case violently to break off these fastenings before the
little bodies fastened together by them can be disjoined, and put into such a
separate motion as is requisite to the constituting of a fluid Body.

We formerly made use of that familiar substance, the white of an Egg, to
illustrate the nature of Fluidity: Let us now try whether it will also assist
us in our enquiry after the causes of stability. When an Egg is made hard by
boiling, since whether we suppose this Induration to be effected by bare motion
or impulse, or else by the insinuation of fiery Corpuscles, since I say there
is nothing that appears to get in at the shell, unless perhaps some calorifick
Atoms, and perchance too some little particles of the fluid water it is boiled
in, it is not easy to discover from whence else this change of consistency
proceeds, than from a change made in the texture of the parts whereby they are
connected and disposed after a new manner, fit to make them reciprocally hinder
the freedom of each others motions. But if instead of hardening the whites of
Eggs by the heat of the fire, you beat them very well into froth, you may
perceive that froth to emulate the nature of a stable Body: for not only you
may raise it up to a pretty height, and make it retain a sharp top almost like
a Pyramide; but I remember I have for curiosity sake made with a little care a
long and proportionably thick Body of these bubbles hang down from my finger
without falling, like an ice-icle from one of the Reeds of a thatched House,
and yet in this there appears not any alteration to be made in the fluid Body,
save a mere Mechanical change of the disposition of its parts: which may be
confirmed by water beaten into froth, for there the heaped bubbles will quickly
subside and fall back into water of the very same consistence it was of before.

Now there may be several things whereby a body may be put into such a texture
as is convenient to make it firm or stable. And of these, before we consider of
them particularly, it will be fit to take notice in general, that for the most
part it is not from any of them Single, but from two or more of them Concurring,
that the Stability of Concretions proceeds.

The first and chiefest of these seems to be the fitness of the shapes of the
component particles to fasten to each other; as if some were figured like the
handles of Buckets, and others like the hooks, that are wont to be employed to
draw them up out of the Well, or some like buttons, others like loops, some
like male, others like female screws (as Mechanicians speak) or as if many
together were so variously branched, that their parts may be so interwoven one
within another, as not to be easily separable (as we often see in a well-made
dry hedge, of which if a man go to pull away one bough, he shall often be
unable to do it without pulling away with it diverse others whose slender twigs
will be entangled with it.) An eminent example of the power of the bare Texture
of many small Bodies (even such as each of them apart is not perhaps
extraordinarily shaped for such a purpose) to make a stable one, is afforded us
by Ropes and Cables; where only by twisting together and wreathing the slender
and flexible threads the Cable is made up of, they are so well as it were wedged
in between and fastened to one another, that they constitute a Body not to be
broken by the weight of an Iron Anchor, nor perhaps by the force of a Ship
violently driven on by the fury of the Winds and Waves. This figuration of the
Corpuscles that make up consistent Bodies, seems to have been the chief if not
only cause of their consistence in the Judgment of the ancient Atomists, this
being the account that is given of it by Lucretius.

Denique quae nobis durata ac spissa videntur,
Haec magis hamatis inter sese esse necess' est,
Et quasi ramosis alte compacta teneri.
In quo jam genere imprimis adamantina saxa,
Prima acie constant, ictus contemnere sueta,
Et validi salices, ac duri robora ferri,
Aeraque quae claustris restantia vociferantur.
And indeed, so innumerable may be the correspondent figures which are fit to
fasten bodies to one another, that it is very possible that two bodies, whereof
each a part is fluid, may upon their Conjunction immediately entangle their
parts in one another, and thereupon acquire such a new texture, that their
parts cannot as formerly dissociate themselves at pleasure, and move along one
another surfaces, nor consequently flow after the manner of Liquors, but are
so connected or entangled, that the motion of one of them will be resisted by
many, and so the whole Body will become firm or stable. Something like this may
be seen in the Experiment mentioned by our Author, where he teaches that the
distilled Liquor of Nitre, and that made per Deliquium out of fixed Nitre, will
presently upon their mixture in part concoagulate into saline and consequently
stable Bodies: but this seeming only a reunion of the saline particles that
did, though invisibly, swim up and down in the aqueous parts of the mingled
Liquor, which after this separation remains both more copious than the saline
parts, and as fluid as before, we will add a noble instance (mentioned to
another Purpose by Lully and Hartman) to declare how much the firmness of
bodies depends upon their t^xture. If you take then the Alchool or
highly-rectify'd Spirit of Wine, and exquisitely deflegm'd Spirit of Urine, and
mix them in a due proportion (as I remember the last time I made the Experiment
I took about equal parts by guess, though two of the former to but one of the
latter, if This be excellent, be a better Proportion;) you may in and about a
minute of an hour turn these two fluid Liquors into a constant Body; and ^
confess it was not without pleasure, that I have immediately upon the shaking
of these two Liquors seen them shoot into the likeness of Snow, and acquire
such a consistence, that I could without spilling the mixture turn the vessel
that contained it upside down.

But I dare not expect to have this Experiment believed even by most of them
that shall try it, Experience having taught me, that it will not succeed,
unless the Spirits of Urine and of Wine be both of them more exactly deflegm'd
than is usual even among Chemists. Yet so much more does this coagulation seem
to depend upon the Salt of U^ine as of such a texture, than barely as U^inous,
that we will add that, As the spirit of fermented Urine is not (whatsoever some
eminent Chemists may think or say) so indispensably requisite, but that my
curiosity leading me to try whether other Liquors, which I supposed to be of a
resembling nature, might not serve the turn, I found that
sufficiently-rectifyed Spirit of Hartshorn (to mention that alone here) may be
made to supply its place: So I endeavored to make it probable by this, That
having tried a certain method (though that may seem strange to most Chemists)
of so ordering Urine, This Way the Author afterward Pub^ished in another Book.
that without staying at all to ferment or putrify it either forty days or
half so many hours, I can make the volatile or saline Spirit ascend first in
distillation though I use but some such gentle heat as that of a Bath: Having,
I say, by this means distilled a very strong Spirit of unfermented Urine, and
rectified it too, I found, as I expected, that I could not by any means make it
coagulate with Spirit of Wine, which seemed to proceed from the differing
texture of this Spirit from that of Fermented, or rather Putrified, Urine,
since I had added nothing to the fresh Urine I distilled, but what was
extremely fixed and belonging (as Chemists speak) to the mineral Kingdom.
Wher^upon having had the curiosity to enquire of some of my Chemical
acquaintances, I found that they complained that they had not been able to
coagulate Spirit of Wine with the saline Spirit made of mere Urine, without any
addition at all, when they distilled that Urine without a previous putrefaction
(which is not wont to be perf^cted under six weeks or thereabouts.) But to
return to our Coagulum we will annex, That this is further remarkable in this
Experiment, that this while coagulated substance being put into a glass vessel
exactly stopped and kept in a gentle heat (which yet it self is not pe^haps
necessary, though expedient) for some weeks or months, will at least for the
gr^atest part by much (for I have not yet totally seen it do so) resume the
fo^m of a limpid Liquor; as if eith^r all the c^ooked particl^s that conn^cted
the small coalitions of the Vinous and Urinous Corpuscles to one another, were
by the motion they were put into by the external heat one after another broken
off, or else the same little concretions (for the Menstruum seems to consist
chiefly of them, being able to perform other matters than either of the single
Liquors whereof it is constituted) either afflicted by outward warmth, or
inab^ed thereto by some other cause of mobility, did after many and various
attempts to clear themselves of each other, little by little so unbend or break
off the crooked particles that entangled them, as at length to extricate
themselves, and become capable of freely shifting places among themselves, and
so of the form of a Liquor.

And here I shall add a couple of Experiments for the sake of their affinity
with some parts of the newly recited Experiments about the Vino-Urinous
Coagulate.

And first it seemed to me worth trying, whether some Acid Salts being duly
ordered would not concoagulate with Spirit of Wine, as well as with Urinous
Salts; and having for a while digested together in a convenient proportion pure
Saccharum Saturni, made with Spirit of Vinegar, and rectified Spirit of Wine, I
found the mixtures so changed in point of Consistence, that upon inclining the
Glass which contained it, none of it would run down the Sides. But this
Experiment did not afterward seem to me either easy or consistent, nor is it
more then one of the ways, and I doubt none of the best, of attempting what we
have proposed.

The other Experiment I promised you, relates to the resolution of the Coagulum
of Spirit of Wine (which to be performed by digestion requires a very long
time) And I wish I had not some reasons to hinder me from communicating to you
the way of making of it at present; it being an Experiment that seems somewhat
strange in its kind; but that part of it which is directly pertinent to our
present Argument, you will, I trust, believe upon my Relation, which is, that
by the addition of nothing but of a very fixed and very dry Body (insomuch that
'twill not yield any thing by the common way of distillation even in a naked
fire) by the sole addition, I say, of this dry Body, the newly mentioned
Coagulum, which is also a consistent Body, may in a few hours be brought into a
permanent Liquor (quite distinct from the dry Body) which when Experience first
recommended this way to me, was of too subtle and penetrating a Nature, not to
make me expect from it considerable Effects, both in Chemistry and Physic, of
which imitation you may be pleased to take notice.

But to return to what I was about to subjoyn after the mention of our
Coagulum, as that is an Example of firmness produced by Texture; I will here,
because it is not easy to procure Spirits pure enough to make such a
Concretion as that. I will here, I say, set down another way of speedily
hardening one fluid Body by another; for if you take the white of an Egg, and
beat it till it become thin, and then shake well into it about half its
quantity (perhap^ much less might serve the turn) of right Spirit of Salt, you
shall have in a few minutes the mixture so coagulated, that I remember when we
turned the glass wherein we made it upside down, not a drop of Liquor did run
out, though some hours after we obtained a little by breaking the crudled
matter. And another Experiment much of the nature of this is said to be
delivered by Sir Francis Bacon, who teaches to coagulate whites of Eggs with
Spirit of Wine: and indeed, if you observe a circumstance (unmention'd, that I
hear of, by him) which is the shaking of the two Bodies well together, and if
your Spirit of Wine be good, the Experiment will succeed very well, insomuch
that I remember I have made this way a Coagulum, from which no Liquor would
drop down in about a minute of an hour. But whereas this great Naturalist
conceives this hardening of the Egg's white to be performed by the heat of the
Spirit of Wine, I shall willingly confess he has assigned the cause
ingeniously, but must doubt whether he have done it truly: for there are
diverse things that seem to argue Spirit of Wine, as inflammable as it is, to
abound with a piercing Salt, and that such saline Corpuscles may suffice to
crudle whites of Eggs, our freshly-mention'd Experiment of crudling the white
of an Egg with Spirit of Salt does sufficiently declare; and not only we have
performed the like effect with some other Acid Spirits, and particularly that
called Oil of Vitriol, but it may be produced, though more slowly, even by a
crude Salt; for by long beating the white of an Egg with a lump of Alum, you
may bring it for the most part into white cruds. So that if we will allow the
coagulation we treat of to be performed by the Spirit of Wine as hot, it seems
that that heat must be only such as may be ascribed to the active particles of
saline bodies, which yet are commonly accounted rather cold than hot. But
because I somewhat doubt how justly they are reputed so, I will add, that I
did purposely for trials sake, take the Serum or Whey that is wont to swim upon
man's Blood after it is cold and settled, and endeavored in vain to coagulate it
with such Spirit of Wine as would coagulate Eggs, and yet this whey will at
least as soon as (if not much sooner than) whites of Eggs coagulate over a
gentle heat of Embers; which makes it doubtful, whether the effect proceed not
from the greater correspondency in texture of the Spirit of Wine with one of
the Liquors than with the other, rather than from the heat ascribed to it,
which did not at all coagulate the whey.

But although we have mentioned some Examples to show that two fluid Bodies may
be associated into a consistent one; yet we want not an Experiment to make it
appear, that likewise by the change of Texture a fluid Body may be divided into
two consistent ones. This Experiment which we have partly taken notice of
before (treating of Fluidity) is, that having for trials sake by convenient
degrees of fire distilled over a due proportion of the more volatile parts of
f^llet Oil, neither the Liquor that came over, nor the substance that remained
behind in the Retort was fluid, though the Oil that yielded them had been so.

But when I put to the Oil before Distillation a convenient quantity of common
Salt, and one or two other things, that were fit to change the Texture of the
branched or hookt Corpuscles whereof it consisted; I could then obtain an Oil
of common Oil, that both dropped into the Receiver in the form of a Liquor, and
continued a Fluid Body; which may probably be of good use to Surgeons,
Varnishers, and Men of some other Professions.

And to make it the more likely, that by Additaments of some such nature as
that newly mentioned, some g^^sser and cloggy parts are retained, or else much
subtiliz'd and otherwise altered. I shall add that pros^cuting (...) I
happened to meet with in the discourse of a (...) Chemist, I practiced a way so
to desecate the (...) muddy Oil of Am^er drawn per se, that a pretty (...) of
it would come over so transparent and (...) lour'd, that the Experiment did not
a little please (...) showed it to. And if it do not appear upon trial, (...)
this way of preparing Oil of Amber does by detaini^^ some parts, which though
more gross then the rest, may yet be no useless one; impair the Remedy, and
that it does not, upon some other score infringe the medicinal virtue of the
Oil, the Experiment will not be unuseful. For the Liquor that is thus prepared
is not only very diaphanous and well colored, but so pure and subtle that
'twill swim, not only upon Water, but upon Spirit of Wine it self. And 'twill
be no despicable thing, it by extending or further applying this Experiment to
other indisposed Bodies, many Empyreumatical Oils distilled by strong fires in
Retorts, can be brought to emulate essential Oils (as Chemists call them) drawn
in Limbicks, as to clearness and lightness.

The additament I last thought fit to make use of for purifying Oil of Amber
was briefly this.. Two Pound or somewhat less of good Brandy, One Pound of good
Sea Salt, and half a Pound of the Oil to be subtiliz'd, mix and distill them
together.

Upon the mention I made above of the white Coagulum of the Spirits of Wine and
Urine, I remember what I have sometimes observed in the essential Oil of
Anniseeds (as Chemists speak) distilled with store of water in a Limbick and
Refrigeratory, nam^ly, that in the heat of Summer it would remain a perf^ct
Liquor like other Chemical Oils; but during ^he cold of the Winter, though
they, notwithstanding that season, continued fluid as before, the Oil of
Anniseeds would coagulate into a Body, though not of an uniform Texture to the
Eye like Butter (but rather almost like Camphire) yet like it white and
consistent, not without some kind or degree of Brittleness.

And on this occasion I will here insert an Experiment which should have been
set down in that part of the former History of Fluidity, where I mention, that
the small parts of a Body may be sufficiently agitated to constitute a Liquor
by the Air or other Agents not se^sibly hot themselves. The Experiment take
^hus. Casting by chance my Eyes in the Winter time upon a glass of Oil of
Anniseeds which stood coagulated by the cold of the season, I presently
bethought my self of making a Liquor (whose process belongs to another
Treatise) of which as soon as I had prepared it I made this Trial. I melted
with a gentle heat the congeled Oil of Anniseeds to make it flow, and then
covered part of it in another glass wi^h a Mix^ure I had provided: and h^ving
let them both rest in the window, I found, that the mere Oil being fully
refrigerated again, coagulated as before; but that which was covered with the
other Liquor continued fluid both day and night, and in several changes of
weather, and does still remain at the bottom of the Menstruum a clear Oil
distinct from it, though I have purposely shaken them together to confound them.

And because, Pyrophilus, I have not discovered to you the Menstruum I made use
of, I will here present you with a Succedaneous Experiment made with a common
Liquor. I took then good clear Venetian Turpentine, and having slowly
evaporated about a fourth or fifth part of it, till the remaining substance
being suffered to cool would afford me a coherent Body, (or a fine Colophony) I
caused some of this transparent and very brittle Gum (of which I have elsewhere
taught you some uses) to be reduced to fine powder: of which I put into pure
Spirit of Wine a greater proportion, then I judged the Liquor was capable of
dissolving, to the end that when the Spirit had taken up as much of the Powder
as it could, there might remain at the bottom a pretty quantity of our
Colophony. On which, though the Menstruum (being already glutted) could not act
powerfully enough to dissolve it, yet it might give the matter (which it had
already so far softened, as to reduce it into a coherent mass) agitation enough
to emulate a fluid (though somewhat viscous) Body. And accordingly I obtained a
sluggish Liquor, which continued fluid, as long as I pleased to continue the
Menstruum upon it. The like Experiment I tried with clarified Rosin, and with
fine Colophony, though but bought at the Shops; and although the Trial
sometimes succeeded not ill, yet I found not the success constant and uniform,
whether because the Bodies to be dissolved were not defecated and pure enough,
or that I did not hit upon the best proportion between the Solvent and them.
But this circumstance I shall not omit, that when the glutinous Liquor was
separated from the Menstruum, it would by degrees, though but slowly, harden in
the Air. The Application of which property, for the preservation of small and
very tender Bodies, I shall not here more expressly hint then by having barely
named it. I had forgot to add, that whilst the substance continued fluid, I
could shake it, (as I lately told you ^ could the Oil of Anniseeds) with the
supernatant Menstruum, without making between them any true or lasting Union.

Which last circumstance brings into my mind another Experiment that I likewise
forg^t to add to that part of the former History of Fluidity, where I take
notice, that the particular Textures of fluid Bodies may be reckoned among the
chief causes of their being disposed, or indisposed to mingle with one another.
For partly to confirm this Conjecture, and partly to manifest that it is not
universally true which Chemists are wont to think, that Acid Salts and Oils
will not incorporate or mingle; I took an arbitrary quantity (and, as I
remember equal weight) of common Oil of Vitriol and common Oil of Turpentine,
as I bought them at the Druggists: these I put together very slowly, (for that
circumstance should not be omitted) and obtained according to my desire an
opacous and very deep-colour'd mixture, whose almost Balsam-like consistence
was much thicker than either of the Liqu^rs that composed it. (The like
Experiment also succesfully tried with some other Chemical Oils, but found none
preferable for this purpose to Oil of Turpentine.) And to make it probable that
the disposition of these Liquors to mingle thus presently together depended
much on their Texture, we made the mixture be war^ly ^^s^ill'd over, (for else
the Experiment will searce suc^eed) and thereby obtained, (as we elsewhere
men^ion to another pu^pose) a certain gross substance, which was that which
seemed to mediate the former union betwixt the two Liquors. For this substance
being separated, and thereby the Texture of one of the Liquors (or perhaps
both) being changed, the Liquors (which came over very clear into the Receiver)
swome upon one another; nor have I since been able by shaking them together to
confound them for any considerable time, but they presently part again, and do
to this day remain distinct as well as transparent. But after having forgot to
set down these things in their proper place, I must not forget also, that to
employ here more words about them were to digress.

To this then annex we, that the Liquor we elsewhere mention our selves to have
distilled from Benzoin, has been and is still subject to much more frequent
vicissitudes of Fluidity and Firmness; for part of it all the year long
continues in the form of a blackish Oil, and the rest according as the season
of the year or of the day makes the weather cold or hot, frequently changes its
Texture, sometimes appearing perfectly the same with the newly-mention'd Oil,
and sometimes shooting into clear and variously-shap'd Crystals, which fasten
themselves to the bottom and sides of the Vessel, till a warmer part of the day
or of the Season resolves them again into a Liquor. And these two last
Observations may also serve to confirm what we formerly taught, that the
Fluidity of some bodies depended almost wholly upon the various agitation of
their parts: for in there instances the parts of the Anniseeds and those of the
B^nzoin, upon the operation or absen^e of the languid heat of the ambient air,
sometimes agitating them, and sometim^s suffering them to rest, did constitute
a fluid or a consistent Body. An^ h^ving thus taken no^ice of this upon the by,
we will (...) the other Examples mentioned under this second head, that which
it a^forded as to ou^ present purpose by Salt-P^tre, which being ^issolv'd
(...) ^^fficient quantity of common water, will seem to be lost in it, and to
constitute with it one uniform fluid substance; but if a competent quantity of
that water be boiled (or permitted to exhale) away, and the remaining liquor be
suffered to rest a while, especially in a cool place, the saline particles will
be re-uniting themselves and by the exclusion of the aqueous parts, constitute
stable and determinately-figur'd Ice-icles or Crystals.

The consideration of this may suggest to us another way, that seems quite
contrary to the former, whereby some bodies may become firm and solid, and that
is by the intermingling of a due proportion of water or some other Liquor. For,
though the small parts of such fluid Bodies, being themselves in motion, are
apt to give those of others such an agitation as we have formerly taught that
Fluidity principally depends on; it seems that the admission of any Liquor must
rather conduce to the making of a body fluid than consistent; yet if we consult
Experience, it will instruct us otherwise; for when I have taken either an
equal or a double weight of Oil of Vitriol and distilled it warily from running
Mercury; very much the greater part of the Liquor would come over, and leave
behind it a very white Powder considerably fixed. And if we examine that
familiar Production of Chemistry, Mercurius dulcis (which they now use to make
by subliming of together two parts of crude Mercury, with but one of Sublimate,
which consists chiefly of Mercury already) we may find that in That which is
counted the best, the fluid Body of Quicksilver is so contex'd with the Salts
it carries up in Sublimation, that the dry and brittle Body they compose may
contain far more (perhaps twice more) Quicksilver than Salt. And other
Experiments may persuade us, that the mixture of a convenient Liquor may cement
bodies into one hard Concretion, which would scarce be compacted together
otherwise. Nor is it against reason that it should be so; for there may be
differing qualifications required to a body whilst it is constituting, and when
it is constituted, and though the motion of the parts that make it up, oppose
the firmness of a formed body, yet it may conduce to the making of a firm body:
for when a great many hard Corpuscles lie together loose and incoherent, they
do, as we formerly noted, emulate a fluid body; whereas by the mixture of a
Liquor, those loose Corpuscles being for a while dissociated and put into
motion, they may after many Evolutions apply themselves to one another after
that manner that is most requisite to make them touch one another closely, and
according to a greater surface. Whereupon it often follows, that the Liquor in
which they did formerly swim is either squeezed out upon their closing, or else
so dispersed in small particles, and disposed of among those of the harder
Corpuscles, that they are unable to agitate them, or prejudice their mutual
cohesion.

And here to dilucidate the subject under consideration by an instance that
seems very pertinent to it, we will make a further use of the Experiment
formerly mentioned touching the burning of Alabaster: For if the powder, after
it has done boiling and has been sufficiently burnt, and kept some hours (the
most experienced Artificers observing that it is not so convenient to employ it
presently after it is taken off the fire) be well beaten and tempered up with
fair water almost to the consistence of thin pap, if the powder have been
rightly prepared and skilfully tempered, you shall see that fluid substance in
a few minutes of an hour b^gin to set (as the Tradesmen speak) that is to
exchange its Fluidity for Firmness, so that if it were b^^ore cast into a
mould, it will perfectly retain the figure of the internal surface thereof.

Now that in our mixture there is for a while such an agitati^n of the hard
parts produced upon the aff^sion of ^he wate^, and a^t^rwards an ^xc^usion of
the s^perfl^^us water, we may confirm partly by this, That when any
considerable quantity of burnt Alabaster is tempered up with water, the mixture
after a little time grows sensibly hot, and sometimes continues so for a pretty
while: and partly also by this, That having purposely for trials sake filled a
new and good Glass-Vial, containing about half a pint, or pound, with the
mixture we speak of, and when it was top full, stopped it up very close, the
liquid mixture within less than half an hour cracked the Vial (though standing
in a window) in several places, and at those crevises discharged it self of
about a spoonful of clear water, the remaining mixture retaining perfectly the
figure and dimensions of the Vial, and growing as hard as Chalk or somewhat
harder, insomuch that we were fain to employ several strokes with a strong Iron
to divide the mass.

And let me here add, that some other substances may this way afford much
solider Bodies than burnt Alabaster does: and therefore it may be a thing of
good use to enquire out and try what other Bodies, easily to be procured, may
be thus brought to a new and lasting Solidity. For the Learned Hydrographer,
Fournier, speaking of those Damms or Digues (as he calls them in his Language)
which are sometimes made in the Sea to secure Shipping, (as I have seen at the
Port of Genoa and elsewhere) after having told us that the Romans made the
fairest Harbors in the World by the help of a certain Sand to be met with at
Cuma and Puteoli in the Kingdom of Naples, which Sand mingled with a third
part of Quicklime acquires in the water a flint-like hardness;, Hydrograph. Du
P. G. Fournier, Lib. 2. Cap. 6.
subjoyns this Observation of his own, J'ay veu, etc. that is, I have seen
(says he) in Flanders near Tournay a certain sort of ashes of Lime made of
Marble, which was excellent for any kind of work made in the water. For having
made a Bed of great stones, they cast upon them whole Baggs full of such ashes
instead of Mortar, and the water betwixt the stones having tempered up these
ashes, petrified them to that degree, that in a short time they became as hard
as Marble. Thus far He. But to pursue our former Discourse.

That also which we intimated of the conduciveness of the various tumblings to
and fro of the hard particles to their uniting into one firm concretion, seems
confirmable by what we have observed in some saline Liquors, especially certain
parcels of Spirit of Hartshorn, which whatever were the constitution of the
ambient air, rem^ind fluid some of them for many months, after which the saline
Corpuscles began to shoot at the bottom of the remaining Liquor into
exquisitely-figur'd Crystals, which at length grew copious enough. For this
spontaneous coagulation of the little saline Bodies happening so late, it
seemed that it was preceded by almost innumerable evolutions, which were so
many and so various, that at length the little bodies came to obvert to each
other those parts of themselves by which they might be best fastened toget^^^
and consti^ute a firm body. Which conjecture seemed t^^ less improbable,
because we could not well imagine th^^ this coagul^tion proceeded (as that of
dissolved Alum and other Sal^s is wont to do) from the evaporation of the
superfluous Liquor; for the Glasses wherein what we have mentioned happened
being carefully stopped, there was no danger of such an avolation, and if any
thing could get away, it must have been the subtle peircing and fugitive
Spirit, (which indeed, as my Nose had informed me, does oftentimes penetrate
ordinary stopples) for the flying away of those volatile parts would only have
left the remaining Liquor more aqueous. And it is well known to those that deal
with such kind of Liquors, that the more aqueous they are, the l^ss apt they
are to Crystallize. And however it will serve our turn, that there was but an
insensible diminution of the Liquor upon the recesse of whatever it was that
got through the Cork.

To the same purpose I remember also, that having in a Crystal Vial carefully
kept a pretty quantity of well-colour'd Tincture of Amber, made with pure
Spirit of Wine, it remained fluid for a year or two, and during that time
presented us with a strange Phenomenon that belongs to other papers. This
Phenomenon is partly described at large in one of the Authors
Physico-Mechanical Experiments.
But having been absent for two or three years from the place where we locked
it up, we found, when we came again to look upon it, that that though it had
formerly remained fluid so long, yet several yellow lumps of Amber, almost like
Beads, with one side flat, had here and there fastened themselves partly to the
bottom, and partly to the sides of the Glass: the rest of whose internal
surface continues yet transparent.

Another thing whereby bodies become stable is, the admission of adventitious
Corpuscles into their Pores and recesses. And of the ways by which these
foreign Corpuscles may bring the substance they invade to be compact, these
four appear the chief.

First then, the adventitious Corpuscles we speak of may produce stability in
the matter they pervade, by expelling thence those voluble particles which,
whilst they continued in it, did by their shape unfit for cohesion, or by their
motion oppose the coalition, or disturb the Rest of the other particles whereof
the Body consisted. But of this having already discoursed, proceed we to what
is to follow.

In the next place then, foreign Bodies may contribute to the stability of a
substance they get into, by hindering the motion of the little Bodies that
constitute it.

And thirdly, such advenient Bodies, especially if they be not of the smallest
size, may produce a firmness in the substance which they get into, by
constituting with the particles it consists of, Corpuscles more unapt for
motion, and fitted for mutual cohesion.

These two we mention together, because that very often Nature imploys them
together for the introducing of stability into Matter.

To these seems to be reducible the way of turning the fluid body of milk into
cruds by the mixture of a little Runnet, whose saline particles pervading the
body of the milk, do not only make a commotion in the parts of it, but fasten
the branched particles of it to one another, and with them constitute a body of
another texture than was the milk; and the weight of these crudled bodies
reducing them by degrees into a closer order, does, whilst it presses them
together, squeeze out the thinner and more serous Liquor, which the Runnet was
unable to coagulate, and which being thus severed from the grosser parts of the
milk, may well be more fluid than milk it self is wont to be. And that there is
some coalition of the particles of the Runnet with the coagulated ones of the
milk, may appear by the complaints that Houswives sometimes make of their
Dairy-maids, that the Cheeses taste too strong of the Runnet, when too great a
proportion of it has been mingled with the milk. And though we ascribed the
crudling of the milk to the saline particles of the Runnet, we ignore not that
not only common Runnet, but also diverse juices of herbs will crudle milk, as
is well known in thole parts of Italy where Cheese is made without Runnet. But
we made especial mention of the saline Corpuscles of the Runnet, because really
Houswives are wont to salt it, and because saline Liquors do manifestly and
powerfully operate in the coagulation of milk, which may be crudled by juice of
Limons, and I know not how many other Acid Salts. And to manifest yet further
the coagulative power of them, we have sometimes in about a minute of an hour
arrested the Fluidity of new milk, and turned it into a crudle substance, only
by dexterously mingling with it a few drops of good Oil of Vitriol. But of the
effects of various Salts upon milk we elsewhere may, and therefore shall not
now, discourse.

Between this last recited Exp^riment, and the two following ones, 'twill not
be improper to insert the immediately ensuing one, for the Affinity which it
seems (in different respects) to have with both.

I remember (then) that I diverse years ago prepared a Salt, which either was,
or at least answered well to the qualities ascribed to that which is now called
Glauberus's Sal Mirabilis, which seemed to have in it a coagulative power, in
reference to common Wa^er. For whereas Salt of Tartar, Common Salt, Ni^re, etc.
being dissolved in Water, do upon evaporation of a sufficient quantity of that
Water, recover indeed their pristine Saline Forms, yet they do but coagulate
themselves, without concoagulating with them, either any Water, or at least so
much, as Chemists have thought worth the taki^g no^ice of: Whereas this Salt we
speak of, being p^epar'd for the purpose, and dissolved in a convenient
quantity of Water, does upon its recoagulation so dispose of the aqueous
Particles, among its own Saline ones, that if the Experiment be well and
carefully made, almost the whole mixture will shoot together into fine
Chrystals that seem to be of an uniform Substance, and are consistent enough to
be even brittle, and to endure to be pulverized, si^ted, etc. though the
Concretion may have such a Proportion of Water in it, that (as I remember) when
the Experiment succeeded well, from three parts of Water and but one of Salt, I
had about four parts of Crystals.

I need not tell you that this Salt s^ems to have a somewhat more then ordi^ary
Res^mblance of a ^rue Coagulum, since it reduces so much water into a stable
consi^tence; yet it does in no contemptible proportion materially concur to the
Body produced. But I may hereafter (which I must not do now) entertain you
about a Salt of a differing kind from this; and which put me upon considering,
whether there may not be a Coagulum more properly so called of Common Water,
which may in a very small proportion operate upon a great quantity of that
Liquor, as Runnet does on Milk.

I have not yet examined whether it will be sufficient to refer merely to the
second and third ways lately mentioned of making Bodies become stable in the
Phenomenon I am about to speak of, or whether it may be reasonably supposed
(and added as a fifth way) that the Bodies to be coagulated may (in great part)
be brought to be so; by so acting upon the Bodies to which they are put, that
the Agent Liquor (if I may so speak) does by its action com^unicate to the
subject it works on, or lose upon some other account some sub^le parts whose
absence fits the disposed remaining Fluid for such a Cohesion, as may suffice
to make a Body be (though very soft, yet) consistent. But however 'twill not be
amiss to take some notice of Effects, which, what e're the cause be, belong to
the History of Fluidity and Firmness.

I some years since prepared a Substance of a whitish color, which would not
only destroy the Fluidity of some other Liquors, but would give a consistency
to a notable proportion of Oil of Vitriol it self, though the par^s of this
Liquor be presumed, upon the score of its corrosi^eness, and i^s aptness to
grow very hot with many other Bodies and make them smoke, to be very vehemently
agita^ed.

And I remember that I sometimes showed the curious a Glass Vial well stopped,
upon the bottom of which lay a little of this newly mentioned whi^ish powder;
ov^r which the^e was a considerable propo^^ion of Oil of V^^ri^l* in a
consistent Form without seeming to have any thing to do with the Powder, as
indeed it had been only poured upon it, and suffered to stand in the cold for
some time (which if I mistake not was a day or two) at the end of which the
above mentioned change was wrought on the Liquor by the powder which did not
appear to be dissolved thereby. Which Phenomenon seemed indeed to argue, that
there happened in this Experiment (that was not the only one of the kind I then
made) something like the coagulation formerly mentioned of Quicksilver by the
Vapor of Lead, some subtle parts of the Coagulator, if I may so call it,
invisibly pervading the Liquor whose Fluidity was to be suspended, though it
seem not improbable to me, that the effect produced might depend upon both
causes, this newly expressed, and the other a little abovementioned; where I
guessed that a change of Texture, and thereby of Consistence in the Menstruum,
might be the result of the Operation of the Menstruum, and the Body it acts
upon. And because this powder is not so easy to be prepared, I shall add that
you may (though not so well as by the newly mentioned way) see the Coagulation
of a Menstruum upon a firm Body which it does not seem to dissolve by the
ensuing Experiment, Take Crystals of Saltpeter very well dried, but not
powde^'d, and gently pouring on it in a Glass Vial some good Oil of Vitriol
till it swim about half an Inch, or perhaps more above the Salt, leave the Vial
closed with a cover of Paper in a cool quiet place, where it may not be shaken;
and if the Trial succeed with you as did it with me, the Liquor will, though
slowly, so settle it self about the Nitre, that though you incline the Vial to
any side (or perhaps turn it upside down) it will not run out; and I have
sometimes taken notice of little Saline Bodies, and as it were Fibers, that
seemed to keep the parts of the mixture united together. I made also some other
Trials to coagulate unflegmatick A. F. upon Nitre and some other Bodies, the
Phenomenon of which Trials, did not oblige me to renounce the lately mentioned
Conjectures about the causes of such changes of consistency in Liquors, as I
have been speaking of: For I still think it highly probable that the best
Coagulator I have met with acts but as a finer sort of Runnet, which in an
inconsiderable quantity really disperses material parts of it self through the
Liquor to be wrought on, though these when the Coagulator is a consistent Body,
be perchance so few or subtle as not to make any Visible diminution of the Body
it parts with.

A more eminent Example to our present purpose may be afforded us Sometimes
(for I am sure the Experiment will not Always succeed) by the notable way of
coagulating Quicksilver, and thereby turning it from a fluid into a firm body
by the vapor of melted Lead, in which when it is taken off the fire (but
before it be quite grown hard again) a little cavity must be made with a pebble
or a stick, that the Quicksilver tied up in a rag may be nimbly put into that
hole, and be congealed by the permeating stream of the cooling lead. Which
Effect may be less hopefully expected by the way wont to be prescribed by
Authors (most of whom I doubt never made trial of it) then by another that I
have practiced and may on another occasion show you. And that some metalline
steam does really invade the Quicksilver, seems probable by the wasting of Lead
by fusion, and by the operations ascribed by Chemists to the fume of Lead upon
Gold, about which I may elsewhere tell you what is come to my Knowledge.

And I remember that not long since, an ingenious Physician of my acquaintance
keeping some Lead long in fusion to reduce it per se into a Calx, and holding
his head often over the melting pot to observe the alterations of the metal,
was suddenly purged diverse times both upwards and downwards, which both he and
I ascribed to the Saturnine exhalations. And though I suspected the Congelation
formerly-mention'd might proceed from the egress of some subtle substance that
formerly agitated, but after deserted, the Mercuria^ Corpuscles; yet that the
Concretion of the Quicksilver might be effected by some benumbing vapor of
the Lead, seems confirmable by a notable accident that befell that famous
Geometrician Doctor Wallis, who related it to me as a Phenomenon he knew not
well what to make of; namely, That he and other Learned Men at Oxford being
minded to make the Experiment under consideration, they found that upon the
first fusion of the Lead the immersed Quicksilver was very well coagulated by
it; but when they came to melt it the second time, and put new Qui^ksilver into
it, the Experiment would not succeed, at which they wondered, finding by Trials
that the Lead might be so easily deprived of its power of hardening
Quicksilver. That this Observation will always hold true, I am not apt to
believe; but that such Learned and Candid Naturalists should either be mistaken
in making it, or mis-relate it, 'twere injurious to susp^ct: wherefore
supposing that to have then at least happened which one of them registered in
writing, and more then one of them told me; it seems to countenance what we
have delivered, and looks as if according to our Doctrine there were in Lead a
coagulative steam or Spirit, and yet (at least in that parcel of metal) in so
small a proportion. as that it almost totally dislodges or spends it self upon
the first opportunity it meets with of passing into Quicksilver.

We have elsewhere to another purpose mentioned our having sometimes (for, as
we there advertise, it will not always succeed) made an Experiment which seems
of kin to the former, and may give much light to the matter under
consideration, and it was this; We poured upon Aqua fortis common Sallet Oil,
which floted together at the top of it, but after some hours had its texture so
changed by the ascending steams or other subtle insinuating particles of the
saline Liquor, that it was turned into a white consistent (and sometimes a
brittle) body like Butter, remaining all in one Cake on the top of the
Menstruum. And the like Experiment (but in a longer time) we have performed
with expressed Oil of sweet Almonds instead of common Oil.

And to show further, how much the operation of the same visible Agent may be
diversified as to the Production of Fluidity or Firmness, according to the
differing dispositions of the Bodies it acts on. I have sometimes (I remember)
taken the same Aqua Fortis, or Spirit of Nitre wherewith I had coagulated
expressed Oil of Olives, and having poured it off from the Butter-like
Substance: I cast into it some good Camphire, which without heat was thereby
reduced into an Oil, that retained a distinct Superficies from the Menstruum
which it swam upon, and would not incorporate with, so that the same numerical
Menstruum without the help of any degree of fire, turned a brittle Body into a
Liquor, and the Liquor into a brittle Body (for such is the Substance that may
be made of common Oil, if it be suffered to float long enough upon the
coagulating Liquor) which brittle Substance (to add that upon the by) seemed
to have received a more durable alteration from the steams of the Menstruum
then was expected. For not only when melted with fire, it would upon
refrigeration recover its consistence without becoming again fluid, as when
'twas in the form of Oil; but I made a Trial or two without success to reduce
it to a Liquor by mixing it with Oil of Tartar per Deliquium, which, you know,
has a great Faculty to find out and mortify Acid Spirits, such as those of the
Nitre or Aqua Fortis that had (whether as mere Acids I now examine not)
coagulated our Oil.

The fourth and last way whereby Corpuscles entering from without into a Body
may give it a stable consistence, is by making such a commotion in the parts of
it, as may make them apply themselves one to another according to a greater
surface, or otherwise complicate and dispose them after the manner requisite to
make them stick together.

This way of making Bodies become consistent, is seldom or never employed by
Nature without the concurrence of some of the other ways already mentioned: but
we have distinguished it from the two last recited, because in them we suppose
that some of the adventitious Corpuscles are stopped in the body to whose
firmness they conduce, and (though perhaps but in a very considerable
proportion) do concur to make it up; whereas here we suppose that without
materially concurring to constitute the body they work upon, they do only
agitate and variously move the particles it consists of, perhaps breaking some,
bending and twisting others, and in a word so altering the Texture, that the
parts that did formerly either move separately, or adhere together but loosly,
are now reduced to a closer order, or a more implicated Texture, and thereby
more firmly connected to one another. That the bare disposition of the parts of
a body in reference to each other, without any addition of foreign matter, may
do much toward stability, we may see both in some examples formerly mentioned,
and in Osier wands, which when lying loosly in an heap together may each of
them very easily be dissociated from the rest; but when they are breaded into a
Basket, they cohere so strongly, that when you take up any one of them, your
shall take up all the rest. To which may be added those many obvious though
perhaps unheeded Instances wherein by the bare Texture of the slender hair or
filaments whereof Wool or Silk consists, Cloth, Silk-stockins, and many other
durable Garments are made by illiterate Tradesmen.

We may also observe the force of bare motion in altering the texture, and
thereby the consistence of bodies by the common way of Churning, for there the
external impulse of the Churn makes a great commotion in the parts of the
Cream, and tumbles and shuffles them perpetually to and fro among themselves,
whereupon it happens, that the more branched Corpuscles meeting with one
another are entangled, and thereby separated from the rest, and after many
occursions all these parts are at length fastened to one another, and excluding
those of the Butter-milk, which seem not so conveniently shaped for mutual
cohesion, do constitute Butter; which is wont to be made yet more consistent,
or rather more compact, by being beaten or otherwise compressed, as the parts
thereby reduced into a closer order squeeze out the fluid Butter-milk that was
intercepted among them.

It will perhaps be thought more strange that a fluid Body, nay a distilled
Liquor which is very volatile and passes for simple and Homogeneous, and is at
least far less compounded than milk, should by motion, without the mixture of
any new matter, be made coherent: and therefore I hope that it will not only
second the Example newly alleged, but likewise confirm some main points of our
Doctrine touching Firmness, if we observe that even the Chemical Oil of
Turpentine, which passes for one of the Principles or Elements of that Body,
may be in great part, if not wholly, coagulated without addition. And yet (not
to anticipate what I may have occasion to deliver elsewhere concerning this
Experiment) I shall now only relate, That enquiring a while since of a very
expert Chemist, whether he had not sometimes observed (which I have often done,
as I elsewhere declare) Oil of Turpentine to begin to coagulate if it were
often distilled; he went with me to his Laboratory, and there let me see in a
Receiver some Oil of Turpentine which he had often disti^l'd over per se, in
good part coagulated into a whitish and consistent Body: affirming also to me,
that he had sometimes by frequent Distillations, without Addition, obtained
from clear Oil of Turpentine a far greater proportion of such a stable
substance. Whose consistence, whether it should be ascribed to the fires
breaking the Oily Corpuscles into parts more fit for mutual cohesion, or
whether it proceed from a new texture of the same Corpuscles, only chancing by
those various Evolutions to be disposed after such another manner as to
complicate or otherwise connect them, I need not now spend time to enquire;
since it is enough for my present purpose, that in this example we have one that
declares, how much even motion without the Addition of any sensible substance
may in some cases conduce to Firmness.

And here to illustrate our Doctrine about this Quality and Fluidity, by
showing what the intestine motion of the parts, even without the assistance of
adventitious heat, may do, to make a Body change its consistence according to
the previous disposition of the matter, and become of firm, fluid: as we lately
saw Oil of Turpentine made of fluid, firm. I will add on this occasion what I
observed of Oil of Wax distilled in a Retort with an Additament of the like
nature with that I formery mentioned, when I spoke of the fluid Oil drawn from
Oil of Olives. For this Oil of Wax, though at first it came over for the most
part, if not totally, in the form of a Butter; yet by standing on a shelf (and
that not in a hot place, as a Stove or Laboratory) I observed it little by
little to resolve into a transparent Oil, and purposely enquiring of him that
looked after it, whether or no this effect might not be ascribed to the
increased warmth of the Weather, he assured me of the contrary, having taken
notice what effects the changes of Weather had upon it.

But what if we should say, that fluidness and stability depends so much upon
the texture of the parts, that by the change of that texture the same parts may
be made to constitute either a fluid or a dry body, and that permanently too?
These last words I add, because of what may be said to this purpose concerning
the change of water into Ice, and Ice into water, and of metals into fluid or
hard bodies, by fusion and refrigeration: for in these examples the acquired
hardness of water and fluidity of metals may be presently lost upon the bare
removal of those bodies into a temperate air; whereas in the instance we are to
give, the acquired texture is so durable, that without an extreme external
violence, such as would destroy most other stable bodies, it is not to be
destroyed. And this instance is afforded us by that admirable Repository of
Natures wonders, Quicksilver: for if some Ounces of this fluid mineral be put
into a convenient glass vessel, and that vessel be first exactly stopped and
kept for 6, 8, or 10 weeks (or longer, if need be) in a sand Furnace whose heat
may be strong and constant, the Corpuscles that constitute the Quicksilver
will, after innumerable revolutions, and perhaps bendings, twistings, and other
changes, be so connected to one another, that instead of a fluid Body, they
will appear in the form of a red powder, that Chemists Precipitate per se:
which change is so unexampl'd, that though among the more curious Spagyrists it
be very well known, yet many Naturalists cannot easily be brought to believe
it; whom to convince of the possibility of it by a much less tedious
preparation, I take half a pound or a pound of Quicksilver, and with a strong
fire distill it out of a glass Retort, and for the most part there will remain
in the bottom and about the sides of the vessel a little red powder, which
seems to be nothing but part of the fluid body (most exposed to the action of
the fire) turned into a dry one eight or ten hours space.

After what manner the fire produces so odd a change in the Quicksilver, I do
not presume to know. It Is true, that though the parts of Liquors do, as we have
formerly taught, touch one another but in part of their superficies, yet they
all of them seem to have some degree of viscofity, or some slight and loose
complication or other kind of Adhesion of parts, as appears by their being so
easily contexed into those thin membranes or films we call bubbles, insomuch
that not only Spirit of Wine, that seems the most light, and most fluid of
Liquors: will afford bubbles, but (what may seem strange) we have diverse times
purposely observed, that Quicksilver it self, as ponderous as it is,
especially being suffered to fall in a slender stream into a vessel almost full
of the same mineral, will afford bubbles numerous and large enough, although
(as those also of the Spirit of Wine) quickly vanishing.

And hence it might be imagined, that in the operation we are treating of some
such change is made in the Quicksilver, as we formerly observed to be made in
the white of a Egg, when by a new disposition of its parts, either heat or
beating it makes it a kind of stable body, or else it might be pretended, that
there is a variety of parts argued to be in Quicksilver by the great variety
of its effects upon other bodies, and that by the frequent evolutions which the
fire makes of those parts among themselves, they come at length to be so
applied to one another, that either they lock into each other as it were, or
slip upon one another surface in such a manner as that as much of their
surfaces immediately touch one another as is requisite to make them cohere, as
we formerly mentioned of several very smooth pieces of glass mutually adhering
without any other Cement than the congruity and immediate contact of their
surfaces. But though these Conjectures and diverse others might be proposed, yet
I fear all of them would prove but mere Conjectures. Nor were we much assisted
to make better by looking upon our Mercurial precipitate in one of the best
Magnifying Glasses in the World; for what we there discovered was only, that
the red powder had in it many Corpuscles of sundry other colors, and that the
little grains of powder seemed to be of no determinate shape, but looked like
slender fragments of Red Coral: and having but some small dust of a shining
precipitate of Gold and Mercury into the same Augmenting Glass, all we could
discern was, that the little grains of this precipitate differed from those of
that made of Mercury alone, in that these (which a Chemist would take notice
of) were so transparent throughout, that one would verily think he beheld the
best sort of those precious Stones-Gold-smiths call Granats. But though we
pretend not to make out how the new Texture is produced in the Quicksilver, yet
to make it still more evident that its change of consistence proceeds from its
change of Texture, we will add, that having a great curiosity to try whether
our powder could not be made fluid again, I procured some precipitate per se of
a Person who formerly lived with me, and was expert in many Mercuri^l
operations, and presented me some of his own making: this being weighed and put
into a convenient glass was carefully pressed with a naked fire (which should
be stronger than that wherewith it was precipitated) and at length it rose by
degrees in fumes, which settled in the neck of the Glass in many drops of
revived running Mercury; all which being collected into one, we found that
there wanted but about a sixth or seventh part of what we had put in, and we
supposed we should not have wanted that neither, but that the vehemence of the
fire had melted the glass, which swallowed up a part of the powder that made a
great show through it, after what was colliquated had been removed from the
fire.

This Experiment brings into my mind another that was judged uncommon enough,
and it was This: Being not long since master of about half an ounce of a
certain Mercury, which some ways of examining it that I had employed, induced
me to think Mercury of Saturn; I imagined (for some reasons) that it might be
made very serviceable to confirm our Doctrine touching Fluidity and Firmness.
And accordingly I found upon Trial, that I could, barely by shaking it long,
reduce it to a black powder: in which form it would continue as long as I
please to let it do so. And when to the Bystanders there appeared nothing in
it that gave suspicion of a fluid Body, I could in a Trice, only by dexterously
rubbing it in a small Marble Mortar, reduce it little by little into running
Mercury, as it had been before. Which quick passage from one quality to
another, being made, not only without the help of Fire, but without adding or
taking away any visible Substance, proved no ignoble Instance, how much Motion
and Rest, and the thence easily resulting Texture of the Component Corpuscles
of a Portion of Matter, may contribute to its Fluidity or Firmness.

From the Experiment of precipitating Quicksilver per se, and from some other
things, partly delivered already, and partly to be delivered by and by, we may
learn what to think of the opinion of some Eminent Modern Philosophers who
teach, that a fluid body is always divisible into bodies equally fluid, as
Quantity into quantities, as if the particles of fluid Bodies must also be
fluid themselves: for by them it seems to appear, that Quicksilver, and some
other other actually fluid Bodies consist very much of hard Corpuscles, since
by the change of their Texture they may be deprived of their Fluidity and
become stable. We see also that the stiff and solid particles of Salts
dissolved in common water, and of Silver dissolved in Aqua fortis, being by
those Liquors sufficiently dissociated and separately agitated, do with them
constitute fluid Bodies. And we have elsewhere mentioned to another purpose an
Experiment which may not impertinently be repeated here, namely, that by
putting together in^o a glass Retort one part of Quicksilver and four of common
Oil of Vitriol, and distilling them in a sand furna^^^ wi^h a strong fire,
there remained in the bottom of (...) V^ss^l a ponderous Calx or Powder, so far
from being f^uid* that it was but in part dissoluble in water: and that which
seems to prove that in the very liquid Oil of Vitriol, though a distilled
Liquor, the saline Corpuscles that chiefly compose it, do retain their
stiffn^ss (generally to be found in undistill'd Salts) is, that by steeping our
Calx in fair water, we could separate from it a considerable quantity of
particles, which upon the evaporation of the water coagulated into store of
saline and bri^tl^ bodies. And that these proceeded rather from the M^nstruum
than the metal, we were induced to think, b^ (...) serving the dry Calx, before
any water was poured on (...): for though the saline part of the Mixture did
not weigh (perhaps any thing near) so much as the Mercurial distinctly did, yet
the Aggregate or Mixture did weigh a great deal more than the Quicksilver did
when it was put in; and the Oil of Vitriol that was abstracted, a great deal
less than it did before it was committed to distillation. Nay, I once or twice
observed in a glass, where I kept a quantity of Oil of Vitriol, that there did
spontaneously fasten themselves to the sides little saline Crystals, which when
I took out, I found hard and brittle; but when I had for trial sake exposed
them to the air, they presently resumed a fluid form, and appea^'d to be Oil of
Vitriol. In the Observation also lately mentioned concerning the spontaneous
coagulation of Spirit of Hartshorn, it seems evident, that Bodies which are all
or most of them hard, and appear so when they are commodiously connected to
each other, may yet constitute a fluid body when they are reduced to sufficient
smallness, and put into a convenient motion. And indeed, if the least particles
of fluid bodies were not (many of them at least) endowed with their determinate
bigness and shapes, but that such fluid bodies could be always divided into
particles fluid also, how comes it to pass that some Liquors cannot pie^ce into
or moisten some bodies which are easily pervious to other Liquors? for if the
particles of the excluded Liquor were of necessity always divisible into fluid
ones, there seems no reason why they should not be sub-divided into so very
small ones, as that no pores can be supposed little or odly figured enough to
keep them out.

It Is true indeed, that as it is hard to demonstrate, so it is not easy to
disprove, that the matter whereof fluid bodies consist is capable of b^ing
indefinitely divided: and it may be granted too, that by how much the smaller
parts a body is divided into, by so much the more easily, Caeteris paribus, are
the parts of that body to be put into motion. But this divisibility of a fluid
body into perpetually lesser and lesser parts belongs not to it properly as it
is Fluid, but as it is a Body; such divisibility, if supposed true, being a
primary affection of matter it self, and belonging as well to those portions of
it that are hard as to those that are fluid. And though it were admitted, that
such an endless division as is presumed might be made Mentally (as they speak
in the Schools) that is by the thought or operation of the mind, yet it would
remain a great question whether o^ no Nature does actually so far mince and
sub-divide Bodi^s: as may appear by what has been freshly noted. And ^owever,
it is not only requisite to the constitution of a fluid body that the parts of
it be small enough, but that they be also actually moved. For we observed not
long since, that the dust of Alabastar put into motion did (though its
Corpuscles were not insensible) emulate a fluid Body, and immediately ceased to
be fluid when they ceased to be agitated: whereas the particles of water, as
minute and apt as they are to constitute a fluid substance, do yet make that
hard and brittle body we call Ice, when those little particles upon what
account soever are reduced to be at rest.

By what has been hitherto discoursed, we may also be assisted to judge of the
Doctrine of the Chemists, who teach that in all Bodies, Coagulation, Stability,
Hardness and Brittleness depend upon Salt: for though what above has been said
of Crudling of milk by saline Liquors, and the hardness and brittleness obvious
in Salts themselves, may keep us from denying that the saline principle is very
powerful in the coagulation of some bodies, and does produce much firmness or
even brittleness in many or most of the concretes wherein it is predominant;
yet this hardening power of Salt seems not to proceed from any peculiar and
inexplicable property it has to coagulate other bodies or make them compact,
but from the shape and motion of its Corpuscles, which it seems are more fitted
by Nature than those of many other Concretes to insinuate themselves into the
pores of other bodies, and fasten their particles to themselves, and to one
another, either by wedging their Corpuscles together, or by their stiff and
slender parts, or their sharp angles or edges piercing diverse of them
together; as when many Pieces of Paper are kept from scattering by a Wire that
runs through them, or as when a Knife takes up at once diverse pieces of Bread
and Meat by being stuck into them all. But whenever there is in the
constituent parts of the body a sufficient fitness and disposition to adhere
firmly to one another, Nature may of those parts compose a stable body, whether
they abound in Salt or no, it not being so much upon Chemical Principles, or
even upon the Predominancy or Plenty of any one Ingredient, as upon the shape
and motion of the component parts of bodies, that their Fluidity and Firmness
depend. I will not here urge that Salts are generally reducible by an easy
mixtu^e with water into the form of Liquors; nor that Sea Salt, Salt of Tartar,
and diverse other sorts of Salts, will of themselves, even in the Air, if not
very dry, assume the form of fluid Bodies; nor yet will I press the shortly to
be mentioned Example of Coral, which is confidently affirmed to be soft whilst
it remains in the Salt water, and to grow hard when taken out of it. I will not
here, I say, press these and the like Arguments, but content my self to have
hinted them, because they are such as I cannot well in few words make out and
vindicate. Wherefore I shall rather demand, what Salt can be made appear to
pass out of the body of melted Lead into that of Quicksilver, to perform in it
the coagulation abovementioned? What accession of Salt is there to be observed,
when running Mercury is precipitated per se into a powder? and how will it be
proved, that when in a well-stop'd glass the whole body of water is in frosty
nights turned into firm Ice by the cold of the ambient air, that coagulation is
performed by Salt, it having not yet been made appear by Chemists, that either
Salts or even the distilled Spirits of them can penetrate, without a kind of
Prodigy, the narrow pores of unheated glass? It is usually observed in Eggs,
that though at their first coming out of the Hens belly, the shells are soft,
yet soon after they grow hard and brittle; and yet it appears not how the
saline Ingredient is increased to effect this speedy induration: and (to
subjoyn that by the by) albeit I am not averse from thinking that the coldness
of the outward Air, and its imbibing some of the loosest of the moist parts of
the soft Egge-shell, may concur to this effect; yet there are many Observations
of Egge-shells that have been found hard in the womb of the Hen. And I well
remember I have taken notice, that diverse Eggs not yet laid, but found at one
time in the body of the same Hen, were each of them furnished with a complete
and brittle Shell. But I think I can draw a much stronger Argument against the
Chemical opinion from the consideration of an Egg: for I demand what plenty of
Salt can be made appear to pierce the hard shell, and more close-wrought
membrane that both lines it and involves the Egg, especially since it is
certain, that in Egypt and diverse other places Eggs may be hatched by a
temperate external heat without the Hen. And yet we may here observe, that the
same internal substance of the Egg which at first was fluid, the yolk and white
that composed it being so, is upon the exclusion of the Chick turned almost all
of it into consistent Bodies, some of them tough, as the membranes and gristles
of the Bird, and some of them harder and almost brittle, as his bones and beak;
and all this as we said without accession of new Salt. It would be hard for
Chemists to prove, that Diamonds and Rubies, which are counted the hardest
Bodies we know, (and at particular trials of whose hardness I have sometimes
wondered) do abound in Salt; at least it will not be unreasonable for us to
think so, till Chemists have taught us intelligible and practicable ways of
separating (at least some) true Salt from either of those Jewels. And it may be
also doubted whether the blood of Animals when it is freest from Serum, do not
(though a Liquor) as much abound with Salt as their skins or their flesh.

And since it is with Chemists that I am now Reasoning, I presume I may be
allowed to press them with Arguments drawn from some of the Eminentest Writers
of their Sect. For the generality of Chemists, and ev^n those that are by the
rest, and themselves too, called Philosophers, not only granting, but asserting
and maintaining the Transmutation of great quantities of Quicksilver and the
other ignobler metals into Silver or Gold by means of the white or red Elixir,
I shall demand of them whence it happens, that one grain of the powder of
Projection can turn a whole pound of Mercury into true Gold or Silver, and
consequently change a very fluid Body into a very firm one, though the
proportion of Salt employed to coagulate the whole Mass of Quicksilver would
not amount to the six thousandth or seven thousandth part of the Liquor; though
we should grant that the powder employed to work this mavelous change were
all of it Salt, to which yet Chemical Writers seem to ascribe much more of the
sulphurous Nature. And to this I shall add, what the famous and acute Helmont
does to another purpose relate upon the Experience of Raymund Lully and his
own, concerning his prodigious Liquor, Alkahest; namely, that being abstracted
from common Quicksilver, it does in a quarter of an hour coagulate it: and yet
in this coagulation he points at this as a singular Phenomenon, that this
Liquor which is as well immortal as exceeding saline, Helmont de Febr. cap. 14.
leaves nothing of it self with the Mercury on which it works, and yet so
coagulates it, that he prescribes the making it into a subtle powder.

I remember also to our present purpose, that a Physician of much veracity in
what he relates, discoursing with me the other day about an odd preparation
that he saw at the present Duke of Holstein's, (that Learned Prince and great
Chemist) assured me that among other things he there took notice of a glass of
Spirit of Urine, which in warm weather remained in the form of a L^quor, but in
cold weather did totally coagulate into Cry^talline salt: and being asked by me
if he knew how this Urinous body had been prepared? he answered me, that the
Duke caused Spirit of Urine exceeding rich in volatile Salt to be distilled
very many times; after every Distillation re-conjoyning all that came over in a
Liquid with that which remained in a saline form, till by very frequent
cohobations all the parts of the Urinous substance were brought to the union or
coalition abovementioned. What we may propose concerning the various
consistence of the saline part of Urine upon our own knowledge, we shall for
certain Reasons reserve for another place.

And on this occasion we will annex a few particulars, which may tend not only
to the making of the Chemical Hypothesis about the coagulation of bodies
doubtful, but to the confirmation of much of the Doctrine by us proposed. The
first shall be an Observation afforded us by the Art of making Sugar, wherein
very great care is taken, that nothing acid (and especially juice of Limons)
fall into the Caldrons or other Vessels wherein the juice of the Sugar-Cane is
to coagulate into Sugar: for though acidity be generally by the Chemists
ascribed to Salt, yet here the saline bodies are so far from promoting the
coagulation of the saccharine sirrup, that they would quite hinder it. And
because that through the want of Sugarcanes in these parts, we are reduced to
take this Observation upon the credit of others, and because also in it self it
seems somewhat strange, we will vouch for it two eminent Authors in whose
Writings we met with it. The one is the ingenious French Publisher of the
natural and moral History of those American Islands, commonly called by the
French Les Isles Antilles, and by us the Caribe Islands, who describing
particularly how his Countrymen make Sugar in those parts, Hist. Moral. Cap. 5.
gives this caution toward the latter end; Sur tout, etc. that is, Above all,
great heed must be taken to let no juice of Citrons (or Limons) fall into the
Caldrons, for that would absolutely hinder the formation of the Sugar. The
other is the diligent Gulielmus Piso, who having given us a particular account
both by words and pictures of the way of making Sugar, tells us that, Si
momentum succi Limonis vel acidi quid injiciatur, sacchari consistentiam
nunquam acquiret, Histo. Not. and Med. Brasil. l. 4. c. 1.
sed in totum perditur. To which I shall add, that having purposely inquired
concerning this Observation, it has been confirmed unto me by Persons that
pretend more than ordinary knowledge of the Art of ordering Sugar: which
likewise affords us another Observation not impertinent to the Theme we treat
of; for the best Authors that write hereof inform us, that the juice squeezed
out of the Sugarcanes is wont first to be boild and depurated in vast Vessels
of Copper or Brass, whence it afterward is conveyed to be further purified and
coagulated into smaller ones; and that whilst it is in the former, they use to
pour upon it some very strong Lee to facilitate the separation of its
feculencies, as in the smaller ones it is usual to pour a little Oil or Butter
upon the boiling juice, to keep the sirrup from boiling over. Now that which
they further observe to our purpose, is related almost after the same manner
both by our French Author and by Piso, and by the latter of them in these
words, Observatu dignum (says he) si oleum majoribus inderetur ahenis in
quibus Liquor primus, Gulielm. Piso, and Author Gallic. ubi supra.
Caldo dictus, purificatur, saccharo conficiendo plane foret ineptus: vicissim
si minoribus lixivium sicut majoribus infundatur, aeque impossible saccharum
conficere. So much the Fluidity and Firmness of bodies depend upon their
texture, how much soever Chemists would have them depend upon Salt.

But to this borrowed Observation, though borrowed of Authors not to be
distrusted, we will add two or three Experiments of our own, which we hope may
the more confirm the Doctrine by us proposed touching Stability in Bodies,
because it was our aim in them to bring light by them to the matters we treat
of.

First then, we prepared a Liquor elsewhere to be described, which is almost if
not altogether as saline as Aqua fortis it self, or any other acid Spirit that
is commonly known: and yet when in this Liquor we laid fragments of solid
Hartshorn of several sizes to steep, even in a cold place, the Menstruum was
so far from hardening them, that it would (without dissolving them as corrosive
Liquors do metals) gently pierce into them and soften them, so that in about
two or three days it would reduce them to a kind of white slime or
mucilaginous substance at the bottom of the Liquor. We took also good salt of
Tartar, and on it poured good Spirit of Vinegar, as long as the affusion of it
would produce any ebullition: Then we distilled off the Liquor, which came over
almost insipid, the saline parts that make Spirit of Vinegar so sharp, being
retained by the Salt of Tartar: Upon the remaining dry mixture we poured fresh
Spirit of Vinegar as long as any hissing ensued thereupon, and afterward
abstracted the aqueous parts of this parcel of Liquor also, and so we
proceeded, till having sufficiently impregnated the fixed Salt with the saline
parts of the distilled Vinegar, we obtained according to our desire a mixture
which (though it were all made up of Salts, and such Salts too as being made by
the Chemical Analysis of the Bodies whence they were drawn, may according to
the Chemical Doctrine be looked upon as pure and Elementary) was yet so near
Fluidity, that it required not the heat of the fire to turn it presently into a
Liquor, which shape it assumed with a gentler warmth than one would expect from
a saline Body. Lastly, we took common Oil of Vitriol, and cast into it diverse
little pieces of Camphire, which floating upon it were by degrees and after
some hours wholly reduced into a reddish Oil, that was to be seen altogether
upon the top of the other Liquor. Then having fo^merly tried that Oil of
Vitriol would easily mix with common Oil, we tried also by shaking the saline
and Camphorate Liquors together to unite them, and easily confounded them into
one high-colour'd Liquor, which seemed very uniform, and continued so (at least
as to sense) for many hours. Then we added to this mix^ure three or four times
as much fair water, and (as we expect^d) the Camphire immediately recovered a
white consistent Body, and by degrees settled at the top of the L^quo^: where we
may observe, that the Camphire is no^ made hard bu^ fluid by its mixture with
the saline Corpuscles of Oil of Vitriol, and exchanges its Fluidity for
Firmness upon the affusion of Saltless water. And thus much it may suffice to
have said touching the Chemists deriving the stability of Bodies from their
abounding in Salt.

And as for the hardness and brittleness they ascribe to the same principle,
how much they may be increased or diminished in a body without the acc^ssion or
decrement of the saline principle or ingredient, may appear by that Experiment
mentioned by us to several purposes, of tempering a slender piece of Steel; for
when it has been sufficiently heated, by plunging it red hot into fair water,
which is more likely to dissolve than increase its Salt, you may make it not
very hard alone but very brittle, whereas by only suffering it to cool
leisurely in the air, it will be both much less hard and more tough, and if
after having quenched it in cold water you again heat it till it have attained
a deep blew, it will become (comparatively) soft and very flexible, and that
not from any wasting of the saline ingredient by the fire, for if this softn'd
steel be again heated red hot and suddenly refrigerated, whether in water or
otherwise, as before, it will re-acquire both hardness and brittleness.

Now that by these operations a real change is made in the disposition of the
small parts of the steel, we have elsewhere evinced even by a sensible proof.
And that by procuring a closer order and more immediate contact of the parts of
a body, a man may without increasing the Salt increase the hardness of it, is,
as we formerly also no^ed, obvious in Snow, which whilst it lies in flakes as
it falls upon the ground, composes but a soft and yielding body: But when the
same snow is by being strongly pressed every way betwixt the hands formed into
Balls, the little whether Iceicles or frozen bubbles it consists of are so
approached to one another, and forced into an order which allows so little wast
of room, that the formerly-intercepted spaces being most of them filled up with
little bodies, the Iceicles can no longer yield as they did before to the
pressure of a man's fingers, but constitute a mass considerably hard, which yet
may be made harder being melted into water, and afterward frozen into Ice; for
this having been a fluid Body, (and in such, Room is wont to be better
husbanded than in others) the bubbles intercepted in it cannot keep it from
being of so close a texture as to be considerably hard.

I know that not only professed Chemists, but other persons who are deservedly
ranked amongst the modern Philosophers, do with much confidence entirely
ascribe the induration, and especially the Lapidescence of bodies to a certain
secret internal principle, by some of them called a form, and by others a
petrifying Spirit, lurking for the most part in some liquid vehicle. And for my
part, having had the opportunity to be in a place where I could in a dry mould
and a very elevated piece of ground cause to be dug out several Crystalline
bodies, whose smooth sides and Angles were as exquisitely figured as if they
had been wrought by a skilful Artist at cutting of precious Stones, and having
also had the opportunity to consider diverse other exactly or regularly shaped
Stones and other Minerals, some dug out of the Earth by my friends, and some
yet growing upon stones newly torn from the Rock, I am very forward to grant,
that (as I elsewhere intimate) it is a plastic Principle implanted by the most
wise Creator in certain parcels of matter, that does produce in such
concretions as well the hard consistence as the determinate figure. We deny not
then, that these effects depend most commonly upon an internal principle, but
the difficulty consists in conceiving how that internal principle produces its
effects, which these Writers not pretending to explicate intelligibly, we
thought it not amiss briefly to survey some of the principal ways by which it
seems that Nature makes bodies firm and stable, whereby we may be assisted to
judge whether it be as necessary to have recourse to a plastic Principle or a
Gorgonick spirit in all other quick and notable Indurations of Bodies in the
cold, as in the hardening of such Bodies whose curious and determinate either
internal Textures or outward shapes (common to several Concretions of one kind)
argue their having been framed by some one formative power, or by diverse
seminal Principles convened together. But this we will do without affirming
either that she cannot by some other yet unobserved way make consistent bodies,
or that of the ways by us discoursed of, she is wont so to confine her self to
any one, tha^ she does not frequently make use of two or more of them to
produce the same effect.

And because Hardness is a high degree of Firmness, I suppose it will not be
impertinent to show by some examples how small an external operation may
without any appearing adventitious Salt make a soft body hard, and even
brittle, when there appears not any other change to be made than that of the
Texture or disposition of its component particles.

It is a Tradition amongst Naturalists, that Coral grows soft at the bottom of
the Sea, but when it is brought up into the open Air, though it retains its
bulk and figure, it hardens into a stony Concretion, according to that of Ovid.

Ovid. 15. Metamorph. Sic and coralium quo primum contigit auras
Tempore durescit, mollis suit herba sub undis.
Whether or no this Tradition is strictly true, we had no^ opportunity when we
staid at Marseilles (whose neighboring Sea is the chiefest in Europe where
Coral is wont to be fished) to give our selves an ocular satisfaction. But
whatever some say to dis^redit the tradition, nay, how confidently soever
Beguinus (who seems to have the most strongly argued against i^) has rejected
it, it must not be denied to be, sometimes at least true, (and that is enough to
serve our present turn. Beguin. Tyrocin. Chym. Lib. 2do Cap. 10.
) For the Learned Gassendus in the Life of Piereskius, relating how that
incomparable Gentleman had the curiosity to fish for Coral near Toulon, (a
noble Port not far from Marseilles) has among other things this passage, (
viz.) The plants which were plucked up and drawn out were neither red nor
handsome till their Bark was pulled off; in some parts they were soft, and
would give way to the hand, Lib. 4o. Anno Domini, 1624.
as toward the tops, which being broken and squeezed they sent forth milk,
like that of Figs. I remember likewise, that the Learned Jesuit Fournier, who
being also a French Hydrographer, and one that writes of Marseilles and Toulon
as places very well known unto him, may be safely credited on this occasion,
after he has particularly described the way of fishing Corals near Toulon, he
adds, These plants are neither red nor polished when they are drawn out of the
water, till their Rind have been taken off, nay, they are soft, and being
brok^n or else squeezed betwixt the fingers, they throw out a kind of milk
resembling that of Figs; and when one leaves off pressing them, he may see the
small holes or pores that harbored the milk that was squeezed out. Thus far
He. Hydrograph. de P. Fournier. Lib. 4. Cap. 27.
The credibleness of a good part of these narratives has been confirmed to me
by a practiser of Physic in the East Indies, who having made some stay at his
return on the Island of Mehila, (near that of Madagascar) where store of white
Coral is reported to grow, I enquired of him whether he had gathered any, and
whether he found it soft whilst it was growing? and he an^wer'd me, that he had
of late years diverse times gathered Coral upon the Sands of that Island, and
found it, when he gathered it, exceeding white, and (to use his expression) as
soft as an Onion, adding, that though it would in a very short time grow hard
in the air, (which he ascribed, how justly I know not, to the external heat of
the Sun) yet it is very well known to the Seamen that deal in that ware, that
if it be not gathered at a seasonable time of the the year it will not keep
long, but either crumble away or otherwise decay, which disagrees not with the
experienced Piso, Lib. 4. Cap. 68.
who in his natural History of Brasil, speaking of some places of the Brasilian
Coast, where diverse stony plants, some like little Trees, some otherwise
framed, may be seen in clear weather growing in the bottom of the Sea, tells
us, that, e fundo erutae mox durissimae, si insolentur in littore, siccae
niveique coloris fiunt. As remarkable a change is that I meet with in Scaliger,
who tells us as upon his own knowledge of some, who at the Urinary passages
voided a slimy matter, which in the Air coagulated into a firm substance; the
story being memorable, take it in his own words thus: Ex bovillis oppidanus
nostris adjutus medicamentis eminxit vitrum sane ex illa nobili Paxagorae
pituita, dum mingeretur albuminis mollitie emissum vitri duritie ac splendore,
Senatoris filius ejecit, pultis modo multos, and maximos: qui aeris contactu
postea in gypseam tum speciem tum firmitatem concrevere; hic quoque nunc recte
valet. Having likewise had the acquaintance of an inquisitive Merchant of
Dantzik, and also of an ingenious Chemist, that spent some time in that City
and the neighboring Country, along whose coast our European Amber is wont to
be dragged out of the Sea, I inquired of them, whether they had never observed
in Amber a property like that which is reported of Coral: and one of them, as I
remember the other also, has assured me upon his own particular Observation,
that lumps of Amber are sometimes taken soft out of the Sea, and grow hard in
the Air; which is the more credible to me, because I have at a Polonian
noble-mans seen (besides other intercepted things) a whole Spider, and that
none of the least, perfectly enclosed in a piece of hard and transparent yellow
Amber. And elsewhere I have seen ten or twelve (if I mis-remember not the
number) pi^ces of such Amber, which contained, one a Fly; another a Spider, a
third a Straw, and each of the rest some such other thing. And it seems not
impossible, that the contract of the external air may put the parts of such
small Bodies into a new motion, whereby some voluble Corpuscles that hinder
their reciprocal adhesion may be excluded, and the particles themselves pressed
or otherwise disposed into a closer order; and we find that some Oyl-colours,
after they are brought to their due temper, may be preserved very long in the
same degree of softness, if they and the shells that contain them be kept all
the while under water, whereas in the air they would quickly change their
Texture, and become dry and h^rd.

But though in this last mentioned Example, and some others the removal of the
body out of the water into the air seem manifestly to contribute to its growing
hard, yet it seems not to us so easy to determine what share the air has in
effecting such indurations: for Gassendus relates of Piereskius, that he being
wont in the Summer time to wash himself in one of the lesser streams of the
River of Rhosne, he there made the following Observation. Once upon a time he
felt the ground, which he had wont to find even and soft, to be grown hard with
little round balls or bunches, Gassend. in vita Piereskii, lib. 1.
like hard boiled Eggs when the shell is peeled off; at which wondering, he took
some of them up, and carried them home, that he might show them to his Master,
and demand of him the Reason. But the miracle was increased when a few days
after returning to the River, he found those little balls or lumps turned into
perfect pebble stones, which he observed likewise to befall those which he had
carried and laid up at home. But how far this story will prove that such
coagulations must be effected by a substantial form or a petrifying Liquor, we
define not, especially since, not to repeat what we delivered already touching
calcined Marble out of Fournier, we have elsewhere delivered upon our own
Observation, that two or three spoonfuls of such pap of burnt Alabaster as we
have lately been speaking of, (and instead of which Artificers use another
stone called by them Plaster of Paris, burnt and and tempered up with fair
water) did in the bottom of a vessel-full of water into which we poured it in a
short time coagulate into a hard lump, notwithstanding the water that
surrounded it; which, it seems by the Texture of the mass, was kept out of its
pores, as it is out of those of the Oils of Cinnamon and Cloves, which though
fluid bodies, and sinking in water, suffer not its particles to insinuate
themselves into theirs: and Artificers observe, that the coagulating, property
of burnt Alabaster will be very much impaired, if not lost, if the powde^ be
kept too long, especially in the open Air, before it be made use of; and when
it has been once tempered with water and suffered to grow hard, they tell me
they cannot by any burning or powdering of it again make it near so se^vic^able
for their purpose as before; so much does the co^gulation of these powders mixed
with water seem to depend upon their Texture and other Mechanical qualities.

I remember also, that though the bones found in the Hearts of Deer, and so
magnified by Physicians, do in the air acquire a hard and bony consistence; yet
having had the curiosity to consider one of them in the Heart of a Deer newly
killed, I found it there of a cartilaginous softness and flexibility.

And here I will adventure further to confess, that I have oftentimes doubted
whether or no not only consistent Bodies but some of the most solid ones in the
World may not have been fluid in the form either of Steams or Liquors, before
their coalition and their concretion either into stones or other mineral
Bodies. I know there are many who think that Stones, Marchasites, and other
such solid and durable Bodies, were made together at the Creation or other
beginning of the Universe, and who will not admit that such concretions can be
now generated. But not here to debate that famous Controversy, whether stones
may be said to grow and to be nourished, in the strict sense of those
Expressions, I think it not difficult to show that such parcels of matter are
now to be me^ with in the form of stones as did not before appear (...) that
form, but whilst it was divided into minute (...) was it self some fluid Body
or other, or at (...) as a material part concur to the constituting (...) that
was so. Of this, besides what we elsewhere (...) concerning it, we shall anon
have occasion to (...) some proofs; and therefore we shall now only mention ^wo
or three instances. The first whereof shall be, that we saw, among the Rarities
of a Person exceedingly curious of them, a stone fl^t on the outsides, on one
of whose internal Surfaces was most lively engraven the Figure of a small Fish,
with all the Finns, Scales, etc. which was affirmed to have been enclosed in
the Body of that stone, and to have been accidentally discovered, when the
stone chancing to receive a rude knock upon its edge, split asunder. I remember
also that a while since a Housekeeper of mine in the Country inform^d me, that
whilst a little before he caused in my absence one of my Walls to be repaired,
the Mason I was wont to employ casually breaking a stone to make use of it
about the Building, found in it (to his wonder) a piece of Wood that seemed
part of the branch of some Tree, and consequently was afterward enclosed with
that solid case wherein he found it. This cavity in the body of the stone and,
as I remember, the stick it self he took out of it, he forthwith brought my
House keeper, to whom I have given di^ections to send them me. For this example
seems to me a more cogent proof of the increase of stones, than some others
that eminent Naturalists much rely on, for Reasons discoursed of in another
place: where we also make particular mention of that Ghur or Metalline juice,
In some of the Authors Papers about the Origin of Minerals.
which though the Latin Writers of Chemical and even of Metalline matters have
not, that I remember, given us any account of, yet I find a German or two, that
were very conversant in the Mines themselves, to have in Books written in their
own Language taken a special notice of it. Besides, I have at present something
to deliver upon my own Observation, which unless we will suppose (what seems
not probable) that there were from the beginning made together with and in the
midst of great Masses of one kind of Mineral little parcels of another of a
quite differing sort, seems manifestly enough to argue, that either whole
quarries of stone, or heavy and shining Minerals, or both, may have been fluid
Bodies. The Observation whereon I ground this Conjecture is, not only that we
have met with in Lead-oar and also in Minera Antimonii parcels of a white stone
or spar environed with a Metalline body, though I think I have yet by me such
lumps of Oar; but chiefly that I have with my own hands taken a hard and
ponderous shining Mineral, which I keep for a Rarity, like a Marchasite, of the
shape of a Pear, and of about the bigness of a Walnut, out of the very Body of
a stone wherein I suspected it to be enclosed, and which environed it on all
sides: and this I took not out of a small and loose stone, but a large stone
dug out to make Statues of. And I remember that one of those that wrought
upon it told me, that in fashioning it into Satues they found some more
Minerals in the same parcel of stone, which were also presented me. To which I
shall add, that an ingenious Statuary having in another place taken much pains
to saw asunder a very large stone, when he came to the midst of it, found he
could saw on no further, and the stone being afterward broken, he perceived
that that which so obstinately resisted his Saws was a round Marchasite, which
he brought to me, as a Lover of such Curiosities. But I made him for my further
satisfaction bring me also that part of the stone wherein the Marchasite stuck,
and by comparing them together discerned that as much of the stone as was
contiguous to the Marchasite had a kind of rust about it, and fitted the
Marchasite so close, as if either the Marchasite had been formerly liquid, and
had afterward been as it were molded in that Receptacle, or the stone had
been formerly of some soft or fluid matter, which did exactly accommodate it
self to the shape of the other Body; or else, as if both the matter of the
stone and that of the Marchasite had been at once fluid Bodies, but had each of
them preserved its own surface distinct (according to what we formerly noted of
differing fluids) till one of them (probably the Marchasite) first growing
hard, the other, as being yet of a more yielding consistence, accommodated it
self to the harder's figure.

But the most eminent Instances to declare how much the Fluidity and Firmness
of Bodies depend upon the contrivance and Texture of their parts, are afforded
us by those waters which being permitted to rest a while do spontaneously cease
to be fluid and coagulate into stone it self. There was lately an Ingenious
Man, who going to visit some Leaden Mines wherein he had a share, found in the
Mountain in whose Entrals they were hid a Cave, from whose arched Roof there
dropped down a petrescent Liquor, which oft-times before it could fall to the
ground congealed, and by apposition of like matter increased so much that they
hung from the Roof like Ice-icles in a frosty night from the sides of a House;
and of these he gathered and brought me diverse, which are perfect stones hard
and brittle, and of eight or ten inches long, and proportionably thick. Another
ingenious friend of mine being lately in France in the C^ve so famous for
petrifying Liquor to be there seen, observing some drops of water to congeal
into stone whilst he stood by, took them away with him, and sent them me in a
Letter. Nay, we shall scarce deny that an external agent of almost insensible
bulk may turn animal Bodies into stony ones, by introducing a new texture into
their parts, if we will with some modern Writers believe Aventinus, who in his
Bavarian History has recorded, that at a time and place by him specified, above
forty Countrymen, as also some Milk-maids with their Cows killed upon an
Earthquake, had their Bodies by a terrene Spirit turned into statues, which he
says were seen by the Chancellor of Austria and himself. And some relations
of this Nature we meet with in other Authors, which, if they be allowed of,
seem much to confirm our Doctrine; for in these strange petrifications, the
hardening of the Bodies seems to be effected principally, if not only, as in the
induration of the fluid substances of an Egg into a Chick, by altering the
disposition of their parts, since the petrifying wind or steam cannot be
supposed to have any such considerable (perhaps not any sensible) propo^tion as
to bulk to the body changed by it, as to be thought to effect this change
principally as an Ingredient.

Add we to all these things, that Pamphilio Piacentino is by an other Author
quoted for writing an unparrel'd Story, which because written in Italian, I
shall English the substance of it, which is this: That a Woman in Venice, after
having eaten an Apple, was taken with hideous tortures, and in the space of
twenty four hours dying, was turned into exceeding hard stone, and this was
judged to be the effect of the poisoned Apple she had eaten. Which narrative,
if we may believe it as confidently as the famous Alleger of it Pamphilio
appears to do, would seem to argue, that even to the wonderful induration of
Bodies there is sometimes no other principle requisite than what may result
from the lucky mixture of the parts of several Bodies. And lest we should seem
to build altogether upon the Observations of others, which cannot by us be now
brought to strict examination, we will have recourse to a pr^cticable
Experiment of our own trying, which though we have elsewhere mentioned, we
shall not scruple here to repeat, because we there omitted to speak of that
Circumstance of it, which is the most pertinent to our present design.

Take then two Ounces of Quicksilver, two Ounces and a half of the best
Verdigreese, about half an Ounce or an Ounce of common Salt, a pint or pound of
White-wine-Vinegar, and as much fair water, mingle the Verdigreese,
Quicksilver, and the Salt very well, and put the mixture with a little of the
Vinegar and water into a new Drying Pan, (I tried it in a new Earthen Vessel,
but without good success) in which fry it over the fire for diverse hours,
keeping it continually stirred, and putting in more Vinegar and water from time
to time, as that already put in consumes away; then take out the mixture, and
in several clean waters wash it carefully from the adhering Salts; then dry
away all the Aqueous moisture with a clean linen Clo^h, and you shall have a
bright Amalgama almost like Quicksilver. Now that which is remarkable and to
our present purpose in this Experiment is, that though this dried mixture be a
good while after it is perfectly cold not only so^t, but so near to fluid, that
I have cast it into moulds and mad^ imbost Images of it, (when it has been
dexterously made, but scarce otherwise;) I have found, that by laying i^ (...)
hours in the air, which seemed less cold than it self, it has acquired such a
hardness, that being thrown against the floor it would rebound, and was brittle
like over-harden'd Steel. And yet in this Example the induration of the Amalgam
appears not to proceed from an innate and inward principle, but from the new
Texture resulting from the coalition of the mingled Ingredients that make up
the Amalgam, whose parts being variously moved, partly by the fire (and perhaps
too by the Salts) and partly by the native propensity to motion of the
Mercurial Corpuscles, were by little and little, or by degrees, so disposed,
that whereas before touching one another but loosly, it was easy to thrust
some of them toward the middle of the body without stirring much of the Mass
(as to sense) by this change of Texture the particles are brought to touch one
another more closely and in greater portions of their surfaces, and to be so
complicated, entangled, or otherwise connected among themselves, that you
cannot endeavor to thrust one of them out of its place, but that its motion
shall be resisted by many others, to whom it is so fastened, that you cannot
move one part of the Mass without either moving the whole with it, or
manifestly breaking it off from the whole, and thereby destroying the
continuity and unity of the Body.

Now whereas in setting down this Experiment, we spoke as if several
Ingredients did concur to constitute the soft Mass, which afterward grew so
hard, we might very safely do so, since the Quicksilver was not so barely
changed in Texture as that formerly said to have been coagulated by the mere
fume of Lead, but concealed in its self a great number of metalline Corpuscles
besides others, as we made appear by separating from the Amalgam, merely by the
force of fire, a pretty quantity of true and perfect Copper. That the Salts
also both were Ingredients (though in small proportion) of the Mass, and might
have some operation upon the other particles, we may render probable by this,
that having purposely exposed some of this Mass for a pretty while to a moist
Air, we found, as we looked for, that the formerly invisible particles of Salt,
that had so insinuated themselves into the Amalgam, that all the water wherein
it was washed did not separate them from it, had so wrought upon the metalline
particles that were most outward, that they had in many parts of the surface of
the Mass turned themselves with it into a kind of Verdigreese, which seemed
almost to hide the surface of the Concretion. And that in the more inward parts
of a much harder Body than our yielding Amalgam, where Cuprious particles
abound, saline Corpuscles may have a great operation, may appear by certain
sorts of Minerals to be found in some parts of England and elsewhere under the
form of stones, of which they make Vitriol; for these abounding with
vitriolate, that is, both saline and metalline particles, will, after they are
taken out of the ground and laid in the open air, by the working of the inward
Salt, some sooner and some later, swell and burst asunder, which could hardly
come to pass without a great change made in the internal disposition of the
parts, of such stony Concretions. And I remember, that having l^id a mineral of
Kin to these stones a while in the air, though but in a Chamber, I found its
surface powdered with little grains of Vitriol, as both their Color and their
Taste informed me.

Now whether or no we suppose that the fire did put the parts of the Amalgama
into any lasting Agitation, yet the Mass being almost fluid after it was taken
from the fire, its parts may according to our notion of Fluidity be well
supposed to have some kind of motion among themselves; and it will not be
denied, that the fire might concur with other things to make that motion
convenient to cause the parts to fasten themselves to one another: For that ^he
motion wherein a soft and almost fluid Body is once put may possibly tend to
harden it long after that motion seems to be extinct, may be made probable by
what has been affirmed to me by eminent and experienced Masons, namely that the
best sort of Lime made into Mortar will not have attained its utmost
compactness till twenty five or thirty years (perhaps not till three or
fourscore) after it has been employed in Building; and this is given me as one
of the Reasons, why in the demolishing of ancient Fabrics, it is sometimes
more easy to break the stone than the Mortar.

And lastly, that we also made mention of the Texture resulting from the
mingled Ingredients of our Amalgam, we might justify by saying, that having
changed the proportion of the Quicksilver to the Verdigreese, we found that
the Amalgam coagulated much more slowly, and when it was coagulated, was much
less hard than when one used the quantities above specified.

Here I should put a period for the present to this Discourse, but that having
in a late Writer met with a notable Observation of the natural Induration of a
soft Body, I think it worthy to be here annexed, partly, because the French
Book is not common, no more than the Observation; and partly, that by
conferring together this natural Induration with that Artificial one freshly
mentioned, it may the better appear how Nature and Art have sometimes
resembling operations in rendering Bodies solid. My Author then (by name Pierre
Pelleprat) being not long since sent with some other Jesuits upon the laudable
errand of Preaching the Gospel to the Indians of the Southern America, Relation
des Messions des P.P.J.J. secon. part, cap. 1.
has among other things this passage in the short Relation he makes of the
American Continent. There is (says he) one thing worthy of Observation near the
mouth of this great river (he speaks of that of the Amazons) which is, That men
find there a kind of green Clay that is soft as long as it is in the water, so
that one may print on it all kind of Figures, and give it what shape one
pleases; but when it is exposed to the Air, it hardens to that degree that
Diamonds are not much harder than the stones it affords -- I have (adds he)
seen Hatchets made of this Clay, which the Savages employed to cut Wood with,
when they had not the use of ours, etc.

And now at last, I see it is time to put a period to a discourse, that has been
unawares lengthned far too much already: But yet I think you will easily pardon
me, if I conclude it not abruptly; but with the recital of an Experiment, which
having had the honor to be seen, as to the main part of it, by an illustrious
meeting of Curious Men; their having been pleased to speak very advantagiously
of it to others, excited a curiosity among them, to know by what artifice,
effects that were so uncommon, had been produced. The Scope therefore, and the
manner of making the Experiment, were in short as follows.

Being desirous to show how much Fluidity and Firmness may depend upon the
Texture and upon the Motion or Rest of the insensible parts of Bodies, I first
make with good Spirit of Vinegar, a Solution of Coral so strong, that when it is
filtrated and cooled, it will commonly, after some time, begin to have a kind
of Sediment at the bottom; the clear Liquor I gently pour off, when the
Experiment is to be made, and to this I put a convenient proportion of very
well dephlegm'd Spirit of Wine, which if it be poured on very slowly and
warily, may be made for a pretty while to swim upon it in the form of a
distinct Liquor: but if by a few shakes I mingle them together, they will
presently unite into a Concretion, of which when the Experiment succeed very
well (as it did when I showed it to the abovementioned Assembly) not one drop
will fall to the ground, upon turning up the wide mouth Glass it should be made
in, and holding it with the mouth directly downwards.

And this so hastily produced consistence may be durable enough, if it be
carefully looked to: But to dispatch the whole Experiment in a short time, I
take a little strong Spirit of Nitre (which perhaps is not needful if good Aqua
Fortis be at hand) and putting about an equal, or other convenient quantity of
it to this Mixture, I nimbly stir it and the Spirit together: whereupon the
Whole is reduced in a very few minutes to a transparent Liquor.

N. B. Though I have diverse times made and shown this Experiment, yet there are
so many Circumstances requisite to make the first part of it succeed very well
(for to make it succeed in some measure is not so difficult) that the event has
sometimes deceived me, in spite of the several Trials I have made. Wherefore
'twill not be amiss to intimate.

First, That one of the first times, if not the first, I made such an odd
Concretion, was, with the Solution not made with Spirit of Vinegar, but with
Spirit of Verdigrease: (which I commonly distill without additament) though
afterward I was invited to prefer strong Spirit of Vinegar, which was the
Liquor wherewith the recited Experiment was exhibited.

Secondly, That it often happens that if the Solution of Coral (which is not
the only body wherewith I have made such Trials with indifferent good success)
be not sufficiently strong and impregnated) with Saline parts, or the Spirit of
Wine be not sufficiently rectified, the shaking of the two Liquors will not
change the consistence of the whole mixture, but leaves some part of it fluid,
or else the Concretion will not begin presently to be made, but require to be
waited for a while.

Thirdly, That I once at least (if not oftener) observed, that when by mingling
the two Liquors and shaking them in a narrow mouthed Glass whose Orifice was
stopped, they would not concoagulate (as it was confidently expected they should)
yet by trying the Experiment in a wide mouth Glass to which the Air had free
access, it succeeded to my content.

Fourthly, That in the Reduction of the Concretion to a fluid Body, it is not
proper to employ in stirring it a Knife or any other Metalline Body except it
be of Gold; but rather some Stick of Glass, or at least some clean Stick of
Wood, lest the Menstruum should corrode it, and thereby spoil, or at least
blemish the Experiment.

Fifthly, That the proportion betwixt the Coralline Solution and the Spirit of
Wine depends so much upon the strength of the former Liquor, and the
dephlegmedness of the latter, that it is scarce possible to determine generally
and exactly what quantity of each ought to be taken; and therefore a Trial or
two made with a little of the particular Solution you intend to employ (for
some Solutions require more, others less Spirit of Wine to concoagulate
adequately with them) will better direct you what proportion of Spirit will
suit that particular parcel of Liquor then any general Rule I can propose.

I know I might here, and perhaps it may be expected that I should, take an
occasion to treat also of Hardness, Softness, Brittleness, Toughness,
Stiffness, and those other qualities that are of kin to Fluidity and Firmness;
but though I confess, I once had thoughts of writing a kind of History of more
Qualities than those, yet remembering that wise Counsel given us by one of the
Ancients, Noscenda est mensura sui, I am now very well content, after having
already tired my self and I fear you, to recommend so useful but difficult a
work to Persons more able and more at leisure than I find my self to go through
with so great an undertaking; contenting my self at present, to have attempted
in what has been delivered concerning a couple qualities of such extent, that
every sensibly big Body in the Universe seems endowed with one or other of them
(I mean concerning Fluidity and Firmness) the explicating of Qualities somewhat
more intelligibly than is wont to be done in the Peripatetick Schools, and to
have opened a way (which I hope many will tread) of applying Chemical
Observations and Experiments to the deduction of those effects of Qualities
from such general and obvious affections of matter; as Bigness, Motion, and
Figure, which even the Hermetical Writers have hitherto contented themselves to
refer to Salt, Sulphur, Mercury, and the like: the Chemical notion of which
(three Principles) though of very good use in some other (especially of the
more practical) parts of Physiology, seems not as yet to have brought any great
light to such matters as we have been treating of, having been hitherto
directed not so much to the indagation of Causes, as to the production of
Effects.

The End of the Notes touching Fluidity and Firmness.
FINIS.
OF Absolute Rest IN BODIES.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Herringman at the Blew Anchor in the Lower Walk of
the New-Exchange, MDCLXIX.

AN ADVERTISEMENT.
SInce it has not been thought amiss that something should be intimated to the
Reader about the Occasion of the ensuing Tract, I shall acquaint him with it as
briefly as I can, by telling him that it was This. Some very ingenious
Gentlemen happening to meet as Visitants at the Author's Lodgings, fell
accidentally into a Discourse about the Absolute Rest supposed to be in many
Bodies, that seemed to have its Rise from a mistake of the true meaning of a
passage or two in the History of Fluidity and Firmness, (that was then
re-printing.) But the Conference chancing to have a period to it, whilst
several things pertinent to the Author's purpose remained yet unsaid: the
Curiousness of the Subject invited him to draw up (hastily enough) the Sum of
what he had said, and might further have said if opportunity had served, about
the Point in debate, for the further satisfaction of an inquisitive Virtuoso
that was present at it. And this was the Rise of the following Discourse, which
being written on an Occasion administered by the History of Fluidity and
Firmness, whereof a New Edition was ready to come abroad; 'twas thought not
improper that this Tract should attend it, as a kind of Appendix, without the
First and Last part of a Letter, whereof the Body only is necessary to the
Design of it.

AN ESSAY Of the INTESTINE MOTIONS Of the PARTICLES OF QUIESCENT SOLIDS. Where
the Absolute Rest of Bodies is called in Question.
SECT. I.
TO remove the Doubt or Scruple that began to be discoursed of just before we
last parted, I shall need to do little more than enlarge the Particulars, which
(you know) I had then time but briefly to make mention of. For the state of the
Question was, (as you may remember) this, Whether there be among Bodies any
absolute Rest? On which occasion I answered, That Rest being a word that to me
seemed somewhat ambiguous, I thought 'twas requisite to clear the sense of the
Question before I offered at answering it.

For the word Rest, when we speak of distinct Masses of Matter, looked upon as
quiescent, does in the vulgar acception of the Term signify, such a state of a
visible and entire Body, or (rather) of the Corpuscles it consists of, that
they are actually Vnmoved as to sight; the Eye (and perhaps not the Touch)
being not able to discern any local Motion in them.

Consonantly to this first Member of the distinction of the word Rest, I
briefly intimated to the Company, that in this sense of a Corpuscles being at
Rest, I thought it manifest, that there is such a thing in Rerum Natura: Since
without granting such a Rest in the component Particles of some kind of Bodies,
as Diamonds, Iron, Porphiry, etc. 'twill be (I conceive) very hard to explain,
how there can be such solid Masses (as those Minerals are) made up of small and
separable Particles. Which being said, I added, that I saw no reason why such a
kind of firmness, where the inward motion of the insensible Particles is almost
infinitely slow, may not suffice to give an account of as great a firmness as
we use really to find among consistent Bodies.

But whereas I had intimated to the Company, by the lately begun Distinction,
that besides this popular sense of the word Rest, there was a second, more
rigid and Philosophical Notion, or kind of Rest, which for distinction sake may
be called Absolute or Perfect Rest; which imports a continuance of a Body in
the same place precisely, and includes an absolute Negation of all local
Motion, though never so slow or imperceptible; I told them that in this rigid
sense of the word Rest, I durst not affirm, that there are any Bodies at Rest
in the Universe (at least for any long time) but willingly allowed it to be
made a Problem, whether there be any or no: adding, that perhaps I inclined to
the Negative part of the Question.

Having thus historically summed up what passed betwixt us about the state of
the Controversy, I need not tell you, that the Doubt I expressed was thought
to relish too much of a Paradox; and therefore since the company's quick
separation allowed me then no opportunity of enlarging, and since I promised no
better Arguments than might be expected in a point that I proposed but as
Problematical; I shall now endeavor to show you that the side of the Problem I
was judged inclined to, is (at least) not so improbable as some thought it.

To prove Negatives directly, being wont (as you well know) to be no easy
Task, and especially in such cases as this; you will not, I presume, expect
that I should attempt the proving of my Conjecture otherwise than by showing
positively, that some of those Bodies which we think to have their parts most
at Rest, are not exempted from having Intestine Motions in them; since 'twill
be consequent to such a proof, that it must be probable, that in other Bodies
whose Solidity is confessed to be inferior, the component Particles are not in
a state of Perfect Rest.

SECT. II.
If it were necessary and expedient, I should begin my Arguments by saying
something against Absolute Rest, in favor of the contrary Opinion, by arguing,
agrave; Priori, as they speak, from the constitution of the World, whether we
consider it according to the Epicurean or the Cartesian Hypothesis of the
Origin of things. For the Epicureans supposing this World to be produced by
the casual concourse of Atoms, and ascribing to every particular Atom an
innate, and unlooseable mobility, or rather, an actual motion, or a restless
endeavor after it; it is consonant to think, that though in Concretions, they
so entangle one another, that they cannot in a short time, or a visible manner
clear themselves from one another, yet they do incessantly strive to
dis-entangle themselves and get away: by which means there is always in the
Atoms even of Solid Bodies, actual endeavors of each of the distinct Atoms to
extricate it self from the rest: (which endeavors usually at last succeed,
whence comes the decay and destruction of Bodies) and in the mean while these
perpetual and contrary endeavors produce intestine Commotions in the internal
parts of the Body wherein these Atoms were imprisoned.

On the other side according to the Cartesian Doctrine, the Materia Subtilis,
that constantly passes like a stream through the Pores even of the solidest
Bodies, may well be supposed in its passage to be continually shaking or
otherwise agitating the insensible Particles that make up the body that seems
to be at Rest, without discovering their Motion to the Eye: As when in Summer
time (to explain my self by a Comparison) a gentle breath of Wind passes
through a Grove removed a pretty way off from the Spectator, though his Eye
discern no change in the Grove he looks on, yet the Wind as it blows through
the Trees will shake some of the Branches as well as the flexible Twigs; and
not only blow the Leaves into various postures, but blow some of them quite
away.

I might easily enlarge on this Subject, but having elsewhere done it on
another occasion, I think it may be now more proper to satisfy some of the
Company, who are yet entangled with the same prejudice with many other very
Learned men, who look upon it as a Precarious and Chimaerical Fancy of the
Atomists, to imagine, that in Solid, and as to sense, Quiescent Bodies, there
should be any intestine Motion of the component Particles, neither the Motions
nor the Corpuscles themselves being to be seen, and both of them being
therefore as well incredible as invisible.

A solemn Debate of the whole Question about the Minuteness of Atoms belongs
not to this place, where it may suffice to answer the Objection.

SECT. III.
And first, As I have elsewhere hinted, it may appear by diverse of the
Phenomenon above cited (in the History of Fluidity) that when Water and several
other Liquors seem to be continued Masses of Matter, and to be as much at rest,
as the very Glasses that contain them; their constituent Corpuscles are in an
actual and various though slow and unperceived Motion.

Next, That there may be likewise such a Motion in the minute parts of Silver
and Iron themselves, may be easily argued, by heating those Metals till they
come to be almost red hot: for then though the eye can discern no motion of the
Corpuscles those Metals consist of, yet their being able to burn those that
hold them in their naked hands, shows that their brisk Motions may be
discovered by the help of the Touch; and if you spit upon them the Liquor will
boil, as if it were over the fire. And lest it should be objected, that so
anomalous and violent an Agent as the Fire, is necessary to these Trials, I
shall add, that, provided the minute parts be sufficiently agitated, it matters
not whether the Motion be produced by Fire or no; for by the nimbly hammering
of Iron or Silver, you may put the minute parts into such a Motion, as will
make the Metal very ho^ to the Touch, and being communicated to Spittle or
Water, will excite Bubbles, and scatter the dissipated parts of that Liquor
into the Air, in the form of Smoke or Vapors; nay I elsewhere show how I have
easily excited a very sensible, though not a visible agitation, and heat in the
internal parts of a Metal, barely by my naked hands, without any external
instrument whatsoever.

And whereas it may be objected, that though the Motion already generated is
unseen, yet we may discern a change of the component Corpuscles of a Body which
are in the Act of altering its Texture, and introducing a new alteration or
quality in the Body to be wrought on, or destroying some pre-existent quality:
I briefly answer (for I would not here repeat what I have elsewhere said of
this point) by this clear Experiment, that though your Eye can discern no
change in the outward and visible, much less in the more latent and internal
Corpuscles of Iron: a vigorous Loadstone by passing along its Axis from one
Pole of the Stone to the other, and back again, yet the Texture of the Iron is
by that action of the Lodestone so changed, that it acquires, and then loses
those admirable Qualities we call the Attractive and Directive virtue or
faculty peculiar to Magnetical Bodies.

And to show you that the invisible Motions even of Metalline Bodies may be
quick and brisk enough, and may be sensible, though not visible; We shall need
to consider but the state of a good Bell so long after the Clapper has struck
it, that no shaking or other Motion is to be seen in the body of the Bell it
self, and yet it causes in the Air an odd kind of ringing, or if I may so call
it, undulating Sound or Motion, which will sometimes last a considerable while;
and if the Bell be fitted for sharp notes, 'twill not be without a shrilness:
for if sounds proceed, as is elsewhere made probable, from the nimble
percussions of the Air put into a quick and waving motion by sonorous Bodies;
this acuteness of sound will show, that whilst to the Eye the Bell seems to be
at Rest, yet the minute parts of it continue in a very brisk motion, without
which they could not strike the air strongly and fast enough to make it produce
so shrill a noise in the Ear.

But, I confess to you, that my thoughts present me a Difficulty, which though
un-mention'd at our meeting, may afford an Objection, perhaps more difficult
than any of (not to say all) the foregoing, namely, That it is scarce
imaginable, how such solid and hard Bodies should have their internal parts
wrought upon by such slight Agents as the air, and perhaps some yet minuter
matter that is dispersed in it; and how it is possible, that where there is an
actual Motion it should be so slow, that a Corpuscle of Iron, for instance,
seated in the internal Part of a Magnetic Needle, should spend so long time as
our conjecture requires in traveling so little a space as from thence to the
next Superficies of the Needle. But to this double Objection, though some
instances which you will meet with in the following part of this Paper, may be
properly applied to solve it: yet not to make your curiosity wait, I will here
speak a word or two to each of the members of the Objection.

SECT. IV.
And to the first, I say, That these Intestine Motions of the Corpuscles of
hard Bodies, need not be solely, nor perhaps principally ascribed to those
obvious external Agents, to which we are wont to refer them, since these may
but excite or assist the more principal or internal Causes of the Motions we
speak of, as you may gather from what was but lately mentioned of the connate
and unlooseable mobility of the Atoms, according to Epicurus, and the
permeation of the most Solid Bodies by the Cartesian Materia Subtilis; and we
may see by the sudden effects of the Lodestone, in endowing Steel wi^h
Magnetic Qualities, and depriving it of them again (both which suppose the
intervention of a change of Texture, and this a production of Local Motion in
the Metal) that very minute and insensible Corpuscles of matter are not
incapable of effecting durable changes in the solidest Bodies.

And as for the other member of the Objection, I confess it is not easy for us
who are wont (perhaps too much) to follow our Eyes for Guides in judging of
things corporeal, and to deny existence to most things, to most things whereto
Nature has denied a visible bulk: it is not easy, I say, for us to imagine so
great a slowness as it is very possible for Nature to make use of in her
Operations, though our not being able to discern the motion of a shadow of a
Dial-plate, or that of the Index upon a Clock or Watch ought to make us
sensible of the incompetency of our eyes to discern some motions of natural
Bodies, which reason, tells us ought to be incomparably slower than these. But
not now to dispute about the existence and Attributes of infinite slowness, or
at least a slowness in the next possible degree to infinite: I consider that it
has not that I know of been demonstrated, nor attempted to be so, that the
motion of the Corpuscle, for example of the Needle above mentioned, must be
made in a direct line from the place where 'twas first supposed to be to the
Superficies of the Needle; for it seems more rational, and to agree better with
the Phenomenon, to suppose, that the way of this Corpuscle in the Body 'twould
quit, is extremely crooked and intricate (almost like that of a Squib in the
air, or on the ground) for it being on the one hand urged on by the Causes
whatever they be that make it strive to fly away, and on the other hand hindered
by the Corpuscles whereto it is connected, and by the occursions of other
Corpuscles whose motions may be opposite to, or disagreeing with those of our
designed Corpuscle; it may probably, before it can extricate it self, be
reduced to encounter and wrestle, as it were, with many other Corpuscles, and
be by them sometimes thrust or impelled to the right hand and to the left, and
sometimes also repelled inwards, even after it is come to the superficial part
of the Needle; whence it may not presently have the liberty to fly away, but
may be drawn back by some other Corpuscle, wherewith it is yet connected, and
which happening to be it self thrust inward may draw after it, and so entangle
again our almost disbanded Corpuscle: besides that, the gravity of the
component Particles of a Body is oftentimes such, that it is easier for the
Agent that puts them in motion, to continue them in that slow motion among
themselves, than drive them up into so light a medium as the air, as experience
shows in those Bodies that are called Fixed, as Gold, and Glass, though in
actual fusion.

But, I forget that I promised you to decline Speculations, and therefore I
shall only name to you a couple of Instances which will serve to confirm both
what I was lately saying, and what I am now in proving.

SECT. V.
The first of these I shall take from what is usually granted as matter of
Fact, namely, that if a Spring, though made of so hard a Body as Steel, be
forcibly bent, and kept but a moderate while in that posture, as soon as the
force that kept it bent is removed, it will again return to its former Figure;
but if it be kept too long in that forced position, it will by degrees lose
that which they call the motion of Restitution, and retain its new crooked
Figure, though the force that bent ^t be removed; which shows both the power of
some of the more familiar Agents in Nature, and (which is that the showing
whereof I here chiefly aim at) that where there is a continued endeavor of the
parts of a Body, to put themselves into another state, yet the motion, or
rather the progress may be much more slow than men seem as yet to have taken
notice of, since 'twas a great while before ^he Texture of the Corpuscles of
the Steel were so altered as to make them lose their former springiness.

But I will second this with a more illustrious Experiment, which will at once
confirm what I have just now said, and show that the Air or the invisible
Corpuscles harbored in it may have no inconsiderable power to act upon, and
effect changes in the solidest Bodies.

To this purpose I shall only observe to you, that though if a Bar of Iron
having one of its ends held perpendicularly, and at a fit distance, to the
Lilly or North-Point of the Mariners Compass (I mean that which points toward
the North) it will, as I elsewhere mention, drive it away toward the East or
West: and if this same lower end of the Bar of Iron be put into a contrary
posture, it will presently lose its temporary magnetism, as I elsewhere
declare. Yet if this Bar be very long kept upright in a Window or other
convenient place, then, as some late Magnetical Writers will tell you, it will
have acquired a constant and durable magnetic power. Which is a Phenomenon
that makes exceedingly for our present pu^pose, since it hence appears both
that the Air together with the magnetical Effluvia of the Earth that it
receives in its Pores, is able without outward force to work durable changes in
so solid a Body as Iron, and that the motions of the internal Parts, for these
are requisite to the change of the Metal's Texture, are performed with a
wonderful slowness, since the Bar must be very long exposed to the air, perhaps
before it acquires any durable magnetism at all, but at least before it
acquires so vigorous and fixed a magnetism as by this means it may attain to.

But, because most of the Instances to be proposed in the following part of
this Essay, may serve for Confirmations of what we have been discoursing; I
shall proceed to them, yet not 'till I have advertised you, That I purposely
decline to mention diverse Phenomenon that may even by Learned men be thought
fit examples on this occasion, (such as the Nutrition, Growth, and Wasting of
Animals and Vegetables) because such Bodies receiving constant supplies of
Corpuscles, of several, and often unknown, Natures, there may be difficulties
suggested about them, not easy to be cleared without longer Discourses than I
can allow this Essay.

SECT. VI.
The first Instance then that I shall mention about Vegetable substances, shall
be taken from Lignum Vitae, or Guaiacum (for many Artificers give them the same
name, and use them promiscuously for the same purposes;) of which, though it
seem to be the solidest wood we know (insomuch that I as well as some others
have ordinarily used it to pound solid Bodies in) yet the skilfullest Tradesmen
I have met with, have upon my inquiry informed me, that if it be wrought before
it be well seasoned by length of time, it will show it self very frangible;
which an eminent Turner told me he had often found to his loss: For having
turned diverse fine pieces of Work of Lignum Vitae, before 'twas duly seasoned,
he found almost all of them by the heat of the Sun (which the uses of many of
them required they should sometimes be exposed to) crack, and cleave asunder,
into I know not how many parts; whereby those fine pieces of workmanship were
quite spoiled. And I remember, that having inquired of an old experienced
Tradesman, of whom I bought an excellent Mortar of Lignum Vitae, how long he
had kept the Wood in seasoning before I had the Mortar, he answered me (if I
much mis-remember not) 20 years, under which time it is not fully seasoned for
some purposes; of which opinion of his, having occasionally spoken to the
lately mentioned Turner, this experienced Workman much confirmed me in it; as
he likewise did in an Observation I not long since made about the slow and
unperceived motion that may be, not only in the more loose and fugitive Aqueous
parts of Lignum Vitae, but in far more unlikely ones. For he told me that he
had often found, in Turning that Wood, Cavities of several sizes in the very
inward and solid part of the Wood (which every way encompassed them) and in
those Cavities considerable quantities of a certain Gum, much cried up by some
for an Anti-Venereal Medicine.

The use I would make of these Examples is this, That since so solid a Body as
a Trunk of Lignum Vitae is, when the Tree is newly felled, may require so long
a time as 20. years, or upwards, to be seasoned ( i.e.) brought to its full
compactness and toughness; and (...) account upon which time seasons Wood seems
to be this, That by degrees the looser Aqueous, and more fugitive parts exhale
into the air, whereby the remaining solid ones are brought into a closer order,
and have leisure to be so placed among themselves, as is most convenient to
make their Texture firm and durable: it will follow, that even in the internal
parts of this solid Wood there must be, not only in the looser and lighter
Corpuscles, that extricate themselves, and exhale away, a true local motion,
though much too slow to fall immediately under the discernment of our senses.
And, if the lately mentioned Gum be either totally, or so much as in part
generated, as to sense, after the felling of the Tree, as some Analogous
Instances that I have elsewhere taken notice of, make it probable; then the
Example will further be considerable to our present purpose, by showing that a
substance so gross, and so little volatile in comparison of the Aqueous parts,
as is the brittle Gum I speak of, may permeate to a great thickness, a very
solid and inanimate substance; which cannot be done without an intestine,
though insensible motion among the parts of the Wood, and probably a
marvellously slow motion of those of the Gum.

SECT. VII.
But it will possibly seem more strange, that very thin pieces of Wood, and
those sawed off from a Tree of a much looser Texture, should be much longer in
seasoning than that solid and ponderous Wood we have been speaking of. And
indeed this discovery is not to be made, as in Lignum Vitae, by the
brittleness, or other obvious qualities in the Wood, but by a subtler way; and
accordingly having purposely consulted with the Makers of Musical Instruments,
and with some ancient Musicians, I was much con^irmed by them in my opinion:
And I remember, the last Maker of Viols, Lutes, etc. of whom I enquired of what
Age he thought such Instruments, especially Lu^es, ought to be to attain their
full and best seasoning for sonorousness; he replied, that in some of them 20
years would be requisite, in others 40, according to the nature and thickness
of the Wood, and other circumstances. But an Ancient Musician that was present
at what was said, informed me that there were some famous Lutes, one or two of
which he named to me, that attained not their full seasoning and best resonance
till they were about fourscore year old. And thus much for inanimate Vegetable
substances.

SECT. VIII.
As for calcined Stones made up into Lime, and sorts of raw stones, I have
already observed from the credible relations of Masons and others, that the
Walls in some Buildings attain not their hardness and solidity till they are 40
years old, or perhaps much ancienter; and since in gradually proceeding to this
degree of solidity, these Walls resemble the seasoning of Lignum Vitae forme^ly
explicated, the motion of the internal parts may be argued from the change of
Texture as well in these as in that.

And, if I would rob other Tracts (to which they more properly belong) I could
here easily add some such Instances of the hardening and softning of Stones by
time, as would much confirm what I have now been delivering; but I shall rather
choose to confine my self here to the two Examples following, not taken notice
of in Quarrys or by Masons.

The first is, That there are Marchasites, consisting as well of a stony as of
a metalline substance, which, though harder than many other sorts of Stones,
and even than Marble, have yet so great a motion in their internal parts, that
if they be exposed to the air, not only they will have a Vitriolate
Efflorescence, if I may so speak, on their superficies (as I have observed in
diverse other Marchasites) but they will in Tract of time burst the Stone in
Pieces; of which sort I had sometime since, and I hope I have yet a bulky
Marchasite that I procured from a Virtuoso that lives just by a Vitriol-work,
whither these among other Vitriol-Stones are brought, and where this Stone
being chosen for its largeness, was taken up and carefully kept by that
ingenious person till it burst of it self, and till I sent for it. And to
satisfy my self a little further, that the internal parts of Marchasites may
be as well disposed to be vitriolated as the external; I remember I broke a
hard Marchasite that I had from another place, and laying it some short time in
a Chamber-Window, I found the new superficies made by the Tracture about the
middle of the Stone to have acquired an Efflorescence of a vitriolate Nature.

The other instance, which is very odd, and much talked of, is this: An
ingenious Gentleman of my acquaintance, casually meeting me one day, told me
that he had a Turquois-stone, which if he were not mistaken had a wonderful
property, for there being in it several spots of Colors differing from the
rest of the Gem, these spots seemed, though very slowly, to move from one part
of the stone to the other. And this he thought himself to have taken notice of
for very many Months (perhaps a couple of years). This Relation seemed so
strange that the Relator was not at all surpised, when to ascertain my self of
the truth of it, I desired to have the Ring this stone was set in, for a while
in my own keeping, to which he readily assenting; besides that I took very
heedful notice of the situation of the spots, I employed a very ingenious
youth that then lived with me, and was skilled in drawing, to make the Picture
of the stone with the spots as they were then placed, and afterward to have a
watchful eye upon it, and from time to time (as once perhaps in two or three
weeks) to draw a new Picture of them; by comparing several of which Pictures,
it was unanimously concluded that the spots did shift places in the Turquois,
as if the matter they consisted of made its way through the substance of the
stone: As we lately noted that the Gum of Lignum Vitae seemed to do through the
substance of the Wood: And as far as we observed, the motion of these spots was
exceeding slow and irregular, though perhaps it might have been reduced to a
somewhat less uncertainty, were it not that by an unwelcome accident we were
deprived of the opportunity of continu^ng our Observations long enough. And
this brings into my mind, that the Turquois being a stone, of which ^ had met
strange stories in good Authors, I once ask^d several questions about it, of a
noted Jeweller; and enquiring among other particulars, whether he had not
observed some changes that seemed spontaneous in the substance or color of the
stone? he replied that in some few Turquois's he had observed two differing
Blews in differing parts of the same stone, and that one of those Colors would
by slow and unperceived degrees invade, and at length overspread that part of
the stone, which the other Color possessed before. I shall here add, that the
same Gentleman that lent me the spotted Turquois, showed me afterward an Agate
Haft of a Knife, where was a certain Cloud, which he told me an ingenious
Person had for some years observed to remove to and fro in the stone, and had a
while since to convince the Relator lent him the Agate, of whose Phenomenon he
promised me an account, when he shall have had the stone in his custody for a
competent time, till the expiration of which, it may suffice to have said of
this Agate what I have now related.

SECT. IX.
But because that Diamonds and Glass are generally looked upon, especially by
Chemists, as Bodies of the closest and firmest Texture that Nature and Art
afford, if we could show an intestine motion even in the parts of these; fitter
Instances for our purpose could not in reason be desired: I shall venture to
say something of each of them, though what I have to say about Diamonds, is
proposed rather to ground a suspicion of what may be, than a demonstration that
it must be.

In the first place then, to remove that prejudice that may be entertained from
the incomparable hardness of Diamonds ^which I confess experience has made me
admire) as if Bodies so hard and solid could not have their parts put into
motion but by some extraordinary, not to say, prodigious force; I shall only
repeat here what I have elsewhere shown, that Diamonds are Bodies that easily
enough become actually Electrical, and that some Diamonds (of which sort I have
a small one by me) will by rubbing upon a cloth be brought to shine in the
dark, the Quist of both which transient Qualities requiring a change of Texture
even in the internal parts; and the Friction that produces that change, doing
it immediately by putting the parts of the stone into local-motion, it may be
thence argued, that a very moderate force may suffice to beget an internal
motion in the inward Particles of Diamonds themselves.

And I am not sure but that more hidden Agents may make impressions upon these
hardest Bodies. For in a Ring that I am wont to wear on my little Finger, which
has no Diamond, save one more than that shining one I lately mentioned, I have
I know not how often seemed to my self to observe a manifestly greater
clearness and sparklingness at some times than at others, though I could not
refer it to the clearness or dullness of the weather, the moisture or dryness of
the air, the superficial clearness or foulness of the stone, or any other
manifest cause I could think of. And in this I was the more inclined to think I
might not be mistaken, because, besides that the notice I took of it, was
frequent, I have by me a rough Diamond just as it came from the Rock, in whose
Electrical faculty I have taken notice of changes as to the degree of strength
wherewith it attracted, and that within the compass of a very little time,
though I could not find any cause whereto I could refer so surprising a
Phenomenon. And I must not here omit, that chancing one day to show the newly
mentioned Diamond Ring to a very ingenious Lady that used to wear in Rings and
Bracelets store of those Gems, and telling her what changes I had taken notice
of in the Diamonds; she who had observed more about Gems than any Lady I had
yet met with, appeared but little surprised at what I told her, and affirmed to
me that she had diverse times observed the like alterations in some Diamonds of
hers, which sometimes would look more sparklingly than they were wont, and
sometimes far more dull than ordinary. And when I objected, that possibly that
dullness might be imputed to the weather, or some casual foulness of the surface
of the stone, she replied that she had been aware of those circumstances,
rubbing the stones clean, and otherwise taking care to secure an Observation,
which she had made too often to have deceived her self in it. If I remember
aright, I have elsewhere mentioned how I saw a considerable, but Cloudy,
Hungarian Diamond, which the Owner would have presented me, made clearer by
lying for some time in a cold Liquor, wherein he affirmed that upon his keeping
it longer the stone would lose more and more of its cloudiness; and what I my
self saw sufficed me to argue, that changes may be produced even in the inward
parts of such Diamonds by Agents that act without any appearing Violence.

SECT. X.
And if it be true that Diamonds, as I elsewhere observe about many other
stones, may be generated from time to time in the bowels of the Earth, it may
not perhaps be absurd to imagine, that even true Diamonds, that seem perfect,
and are fit for Rings, may long continue to have an insensible motion through
the whole stone, whereby the Corpuscles it consists of are disposed into a more
convenient Texture for the constituting of an extremely hard body. For though
it be taken for granted, that Adamantine Bodies, because they are generally
exceeding hard, are equally so, yet that supposition is not favored by
Experience. And I remember, that to satisfy my self further about such
matters, I repaired to an ancient Artificer eminent in his Trade, which was the
cutting and setting of Diamonds, and that having demanded of him whether he
found that all Diamonds were of equal hardness; he answered me, that having
dealt in these Gems near 20 years in Amsterdam, and diverse years in England, he
perceived that there are of later years brought over worse and worse sorts of
Diamonds, and that he finds several of the recent Diamonds so soft and brittle
in comparison of those he was anciently wont to set (and which he with other
Jewellers called Diamonds of the old Rock) that he is often afraid, and
unwilling to meddle with them, when they are brought to him, left he should
spoil them in the cutting, or polishing. But this I only repeat historically,
till further observation shall discover whether these are Diamonds not yet
fully ripe, and capable of growing harder by further maturation, or whether
they be of a peculiar sort of Diamonds whose nature it is to be always softer
than those of the old Rock.

SECT. XI.
This brings into my mind a confirmation of the unequal hardness of Diamonds,
whatever be the cause of it, which I met with in a little Book lately Published
in his own Language by a Frenchman, who giving his Reader an Account of the
Eastern Diamond-Mines from the Relation, as he affirms, of a late Eyewitness,
speaks thus of the third and last Mine called Gazerpoli, They are very clear,
and of a good Water, but they cannot be ground by mutual Attrition (if I
understand the Term he uses) but with stones of the same Mine; for if one
should employ for that purpose the stones of another Mine, those of Gazerpoli
would be broken in pieces: Egrezes, page m. 17.18.
They do also easily break upon the Wheel, and those that are not versed in the
knowledge of stones may easily be deceived (in them.) Of which our Author adds
the Example of a Portuguais, who refusing 1200 Crowns for one of them at
Ligorn, when he went to have it cut at Venice, it broke upon the Wheel into
fifteen or twenty pieces.

Another Example that seems to make more for our present purpose is afforded by
the same Author, speaking of the second Mine, which breeds the greatest stones
called Gane or Colonor; for he says, that sur^la plus part, i. e. upon the most
of these stones after they are cut, there appears always as it were a kind of
greasiness or unctuosity, which invites you ever and anon to have recourse to
your Handkerchief to wipe it off, which one would guess to proceed from some
insensible Effluvium, that exhaling out of the stone comes to be checked and
condensed by the air on the superficies of it, as it happens to sweat on the
skins of Animals: the truth of which conjecture I would examine by very nice
scales, if I could procure such Diamonds.

SECT. XII.
And because Rubies, though inferior in hardness to Diamonds, are yet harder
than most other Gems, and much more than Marble and the like courser stones, I
will not omit on this occasion, what was more than once affirmed to me by an
observing Lady, whom, if she were not too nearly related to me, I could scarce
mention without an Elogy. For casually casting my eye upon a fair Ruby she wore
upon her finger, and desiring to consider it more attentively, she pulled off
the rich Ring 'twas set in, and reaching it me, told me 'twas worth my
curiosity to consider it. For besides that 'twas so fine a stone, that 'twas
thought worth being left her as a Legacy by a great Lady (her dear friend) that
was famous, as I knew, for the variety of the rich Jewels she was Mistress of;
this Ruby would not unfrequently vary the degrees of its luster she knew not
why. For sometimes it seemed to be ennobled by a more vivid fire than ordinary,
and at other times it would be manifestly more dull and cloudy than it is wont
to be: and this not imputable, as she expressly assured me upon repeated
Observations, to the Cloudiness of the Weath^r, or any superficial foulness of
the stone. And that I might be convinced as well as she her self was, she
desired me to rub it very clean, and then take notice of the present luster of
it, of which e're long she presumed she could show me a manifest alteration
(for I was then come to visit her and pass some weeks with her in her house)
but my occasions calling me away within a few days after, I had not time to
wait for the event of her promise.

How for what has been said concerning Diamonds may be allowed to be
Argumentative toward the scope of this Discourse, I shall willingly leave to
the discovery of time, and further Observation; the mention I have made of the
foregoing particulars, having been invited partly by the nobleness of the
subject, which made me willing to add these Relations to what I have elsewhere
written about them; and partly because thus much at least seems probably
deducible from what I noted about the exciting of Diamonds by rubbing, both to
attract, and to shine, that notwithstanding their incomparable hardness, an
intestine motion of their minute parts may be without any considerable violence
quickly produced.

SECT. XIII.
And now 'twill be time to consider the other Body I promised to take notice
of, namely Glass. For this being thought so compact and firm a Body, that it is
indistructible by Art or Nature, and being also of so close a Texture, that the
subtlest Chemical Spirits (that are yet known) cannot pervade it, and lastly
having given such proofs of the fixedness of its parts, as to have long endured
the violence even of a Glass-house-fire, we can scarce imagine a Body more
unlikely to have any motion amongst its component Particles: and yet that they
may not be always at perfect Rest among themselves, I have been induced to
think by the following, and the like Observations.

First, having enquired of a famous and experienced Maker of Telescopes, as
well as of those that use such Instruments, whether he did not observe that the
Venice-Glasses he employed would sometimes crack of themselves whilst they were
yet in Plates, and sometimes do the like after they were ground into Convexes,
and polished up; he answered affirmatively. And though it seemed improbable
that Glasses brought so far off as from Venice, and many of them kept a good
while here in England before there be occasion to grind them: and perhaps
longer after their having been ground before they crack, should after all this
time retain an internal motion among their component Particles: yet I have been
induced to conjecture that some saline Corpuscles more numerous than the Nature
of the Glass required, may, by degrees though slow and unperceived, so tend
toward the superficies of the Glass, as either to get out of the Pores of it,
or crack, or burst the Glass in endeavoring to force their passage outward.
For having purposely enquired of the above-named Artificer, and some other
observing men that deal in Optical Glasses, whether it had not been taken
notice of, That there would sometimes be, especially in Winter and very moist
Weather, a kind of Efflorescence of a saltish taste manifestly discernable upon
the surfaces of their Glasses; I was answered in the Affirmative, especially by
the abovementioned Artificer, who having more occasion and opportunity to take
notice of such things, told me that he had by tasting found these Exsudations
sensibly saltish.

SECT. XIV.
And I was the more apt to entertain the lately proposed Conjecture, because of
a thick Glass Cup that I have yet by me, in the making of which, to render it
the more Diaphanous, I supposed an over great proportion of Salt had been
employed. For this Cup though for a while it continued clear and entire, yet
before the ensuing Winter was ended, though it did not so crack as to fall to
pieces, but still retains its former shape, yet it was flaw'd with such a
multitude of little cracks, that at a distance it looks like a While, not like
a Christalline Cup.

SECT. XV.
I remember also that I have sometimes, though not often, had Vessels and other
Bodies of Glass of a considerable thickness, which have of their own accord
broken suddenly asunder, with noise enough to make me take notice of it. And
that this did not always happen for want of the Glass's being gradually or
slowly coo^'d, or, in the Workmens Language, neal'd, I was persuaded not only
by the spontaneous cracking, not without a loud noise of a thick and empty
Glass Vessel, that had for I know not how many Months been kept locked up in my
Study; but by the like Accidents, which I after found had happened unto others.
For enquiring of some that made great store of Glass Vessels, as well as of
others that sold them; I learned from both, that they had sometimes by their
losses been made to take notice that Glasses that had been long made, and kept
unemployed would break of themselves, when there was no visible outward Agent
near enough to be suspected of the having broken them. And since this very Page
began to be written, I had a fair Crystal Vial, not too well stopped, which
cracked at the thick bottom, in a Glass-Cabinet (that was fixed to a Wall) where
I kept that with other choice Vials under Lock and Key; no other of the
included Glasses (full nor empty) nor yet of the external Glasses appearing any
way cracked or injured. Nay even great and strong Looking-Glasses are not quite
exempted from these accidents. For I remember that having purposely enquired of
an honest man that furnished the greatest part of London with large
Looking-Glasses, whether he did not sometimes find them crack, and that with
noise; he showed me diverse large Plates of excellent Glass, and assured me,
that sometimes after they had been a good while in his Shop, some of them would
of themselves, not only crack with a loud noise, but now and then also (though
rarely) fly asunder with that violence as to break some of the neighboring
Plates though thick and strong.

SECT. XVI.
And having also a mind to enquire further, whether this disposition to break
in some sorts of Glass, might not continue much longer than I had opportunity
to observe, I addressed my self to an ingenious Master of a Glass-house, and
demanded of him how long he had taken notice of Glass to continue sound and
whole, and yet afterward to break of it self. He replied that he had once a
great parcel of Glasses packed up, which not having the occasion he expected to
vend and make use of, lay by him for a great while; and yet when afterward he
had unpack'd them, and ranged them, in a short time a great many of them,
amounting to about a fourth or third part of the whole number, cracked of
themselves; and when I asked how long the Parcels had lain by before they were
opened, he replied, that 'twas as he remembered between four and five years.

SECT. XVII.
These Instances (to which I could add diverse others) I have therefore
mentioned because either of the two Hypotheses in congruity whereunto they seem
likeliest to be intelligibly explicable, will favor the Doctrine hitherto
patronized. For according to the Atomical Theory, it may be conceived that
there is a constant intestine Motion of the small parts of the Glass upon the
score of their constituent Atoms, which endeavor or tend to extricate
themselves and get away, which at last they do, by breaking the Glass in some
brittle, or other fit place; where (after a multitude of encounters and
evolutions) a competent number of them may happen to be got together, and find
their Motion (outward) withstood: whence may ensue so unequal an agitation
there, of the formerly coherent parts of the Glass, as to make the more
agitated ones part from them that are less so; and consequently crack the
Glass. To which agrees what I have often observed in Chemical and Mechanical
Trials made with Glass-Vessels, That if there be any grain of Sand or Gravel,
or any little Lump of the Alkalizate matter Glass is made of, conspicuously
enclosed in the substance of the Vessel, 'twill both be much the more apt to
break, and if it do, will almost always begin to crack at that place, (whence
usually as from a Center several cracks go several ways) the part of the Glass
where the blemish is, being commonly of a differing Texture from the rest (as
is often manifest to the very eye) and being by that incongruous Texture
disposed to be put into a motion differing from, and perhaps very
disproportionate to that of the neighboring Parts.

SECT. XVIII.
I must not here stay to examine, whether or no this motion of the internal
parts may not (in diverse cases be made more efficacious by the penetration of
some subtle and moist matter into the Glasses Pores, (especially the more
superficial ones of some Glass of a looser sort) and so by degrees vitiate the
Texture of the Body, and promoting the Agitation and swelling of the saline
Corpuscles, enable them to burst the Glass, after some such manner as the
Marchasites I lately mentioned, came to have a vitriolate Efflorescence, and
even to be burst by the operation of the Air; this, I say, I must not now stay
to examine, because I would hasten to propose the second Hypothesis, and tell
you that (else) we may, congruously to what we elsewhere discourse, imagine,
That in tract of time, there is produced in some parts of a Glass a Texture
that makes it resist more than it did formerly ^he free passage of the Ae^her,
or some other subtle matter, that was accustomed (perhaps stream-like) to
permea^e it before; which transient matter now finding its passage obstructed
(and perchance almost quite hindered) by the vitiating of the Pores of the
Glass, or some other (inconvenient) change of Texture in it, and endeavoring
to con^inue its wonted motion through it, does so stretch the Pores, or
otherwise offer violence to the Texture of the Body, that it causes a divulsion
in the parts, which according as it is more or less forcibly or suddenly made,
does either barely crack the Glass, or make it fly asunder. To the precedent
Doctrine these two things agree not ill: The First, That Glass is a Body easily
made Electrical by rubbing, which makes it probable that its Particles may
easily be put into motion. And the Second, That such a Divulsion may be made in
Glass by but an inequal motion between the neighboring parts; as may appear by
the Chemical practice of cracking Glasses, which they often think fit to do,
only by applying a red hot Iron to the place till it be sufficiently heated,
and whilst it is very hot, moistening it with cold water (or even Spittle)
which by cooling the part that it touched, and consequently checking the
Agitation of the Corpuscles it meets there, whilst the contiguous parts retain
their former vehement Agitation, occasions a discontinuity or divulsion in the
Glass, some of whose parts are in so swift, and others are in so slow a motion.

SECT. XIX.
And on this occasion I shall add chiefly, because I would not pretermit so
considerable a Phenomenon, That even when Glass seems to have lost the degree
of heat that one would think necessary to have its shape or bigness sensibly
altered, there may remain yet so much agitation in the minute parts, as, when
they are modified by the Air, by the Cold, or by some other invisible Agent, to
make them alter the bulk or shape of the whole Vessel they compose; and that
(which one would not expect) by enlarging the Vessel, at least if we allow not
in the case any change of Figure: For it has often been observed in those
Glass-houses where they work White Glasses, as they call those that are pure
and clear, that when they have blown Glasses into a mold, to give them more
exactly the desired shape and size, these Glasses when they are cold cannot
well be put again into the same mold they were blown in, and require that the
Cells of Guard Vials that are to receive them be made a little larger: which
Observation an eminent Artificer of my acquaintance that gets considerably by
fitting fine Glasses to Cases; has much confirmed to me by his complaints of
the inconvenience, easy to be incurred, by the not knowing, or not remembering
so unlikely an Effect of the cooling of Glass. But I must not prosecute the
consideration of these, and the like Phenomenon, nor examine which of the
preceding Explications is preferrable, having mentioned them, as I was saying,
chiefly to show, that which of them soever we pitch upon, it will argue an
intestine motion in the Corpuscles of the Glass, which motion we shall think
may be very slow, if we consider how long a time it is on some Occasions in
producing its effects before it brings them to be discernable to our senses.

SECT. XX.
Having thus made it probable, that among the parts of such solid Bodies, as I
have hitherto instanced in, there may not be such a perfect Rest, as is
generally believed; it will I suppose be expected that I should now draw this
consequence from what has been said, That there is no such thing as absolute
Rest in Nature. But since at my first men^ioning this Paradox to you, I
proposed it but as Problematical, and since I consider that we are not yet
sure, but that though many of the parts of solid Bodies may not be always
moveless, yet some others of them may sometimes for a while at least be at
perfect Rest: I shall conclude as I began, and without resolutely denying that
there can be any such thing in rerum natura, as absolute Rest, I shall content
my self to say, That it is not either absurd to doubt whether there be or no;
nor improbable to think that there is not, since we have not found it in those
very Bodies, where with the greatest likelihood it might have been expected.

FINIS.

