The Honble. Robert Boil.


THE WORKS OF THE HONORABLE Robert Boil, Esquire EPITOMIZED.

VOL. I.

By RICHARD BOULTON, of Brazen-Nose College in Oxford.

Illustrated with COPPER PLATES.

-- Consilium est, universum Opus Instaurationis (Philosophiae) potius
promovere in multis, quam perficere in paucis.

Verulamius. LONDON, Printed for J. Phillips at the King's Arms, and J. Tailor
at the Ship in St. Paul's Churchyard, MDCXCIX

IMPRIMATUR Liber Cui Titulus, THE WORKS Of the HONORABLE ROBERT BOIL, Esquire
EPITOMIZED By RICHARD BOULTON,

JOHN HOSKYNS, V. P. R. S.
Vecesimo Septimo Martii, 1699.
ERRATA.
IN the Preface, page 2. lin. 13. read less entertaining Digressions. P. 64.
for dissolve into Crystals, read dissolve, shoot into Crystals. P. 433. l. 7.
read which would not have been done, were, etc. P. 436. l. 1. read in our Third
Plate. In the Table, under the Letter T. l. 2. dele their.

TO THE Right Honorable JOHN Lord SUMMERS, BARON of Evesham Lord High
Chancellor of England, AND President of the ROYAL SOCIETY; And to The
Honorable Sir JOHN HOSKYNS, Vice President: Together with the Council and
Fellows Of the said SOCIETY, INSTITUTED For the Advancement of Natural
Knowledge; This VOLUME, Intitul'd an EPITOMY OF Mr. BOYLE's WORKS, Is humbly
Dedicated by RICHARD BOVLTON.

TO THE Right Reverend Father in GOD NICOLAS, Lord BISHOP of CHESTER.
My LORD,
THAT I presume to lay a Book before Your Lordship, which bears so mean a Name
as mine in the Title Page, might want a better Apology than I could make, were
there not likewise the Illustrious Name of that justly esteemed and most Famous
Author, the Honorable Mr. Boil before it.

For were the following Sheets, entirely the Products of my weak Endeavors
only; I should think it no small Piece of Vanity to hope for Your Lordship's
Notice, and much more to expect your Patronage: But, since the Honorable
Author's Works have sufficiently recommended themselves to the Learned World;
and more especially to those that are most Eminent for Learning themselves; He
cannot but already, amongst Those, have deserved Your good Esteem; and
therefore, should I endeavor an Encomium of so Great a Man, by way of Apology
for my present Presumption, I should but let Your Lordship see, that all I can
say of so Eminent a Person, would come far short of the Esteem You have for him
already: Not that I can pretend to know Your Lordship's Sentiments in any
Particular, any further, than I may presume to guess, by the Notion I have of
Your Lordship's Esteem for Learning and Learned Men.

But though the Name of Mr. Boil may be sufficient to recommend the Honorable
Author's Works to Your Lordship, and the rest of the Learned World; yet if Your
Lordship will be pleased to condescend to Patronize Your most Humble and
Obedient Servant, who has the good Fortune to Conduct them into the World, and
to extract those purer Streams of Knowledge, which are separated from the less
discerning Part of Mankind, by polite Apologies and Florid Complimental
Digressions, It will be the greater Happiness, that I have the Honor to be
Just to the Author and Serviceable to the World; But much more, that I have at
the same time, so Favorable an Opportunity of expressing my Gratitude for the
Favors which Your Lordship has already been pleased to bestow on me: Favors,
which are much more valuable, because Your Lordship's; and which carry with
them a double Obligation of Gratitude; the One to Your Lordship and the Other
to my good Friend and Worthy Patron Dr. Robert Angel, to whom I am infinitely
Obliged for Your Lordship's Favor, and for being first made known to Your
Lordship.

But it will not be the only Happiness to me, that Your Lordship is pleased to
Patronize my present Undertaking; but it may in a great Measure Contribute to
their Candid Acceptance by the World, who will put a higher Value upon them,
for Your Lordship's Favorable Approbation.

Indeed, were it Generally received and agreed on, what some People hold, viz.
That Philosophy is prejudicial to Religion; I should have more Reason to beg
Your Lordship's Pardon, than Your Patronage; since it must be in Vain to hope,
that One, who promotes the Latter, by Instructive Doctrine; and what is more, an
Examplary Life, to be imitated, but not paralleled; should encourage any
thing, that may be of Disservice to that: But I need not tell Your Lordship,
that the Honorable Author has made it appear, That we may search into
Efficient Causes, without denying the. All-Wise Author of Created Beings, his
just Attributes: For, whoever diligently searches into Efficient Causes, cannot
but discern the Necessity of an Omnipotent Creator, who first established the
Laws of Nature, and gave them their due Limits; and our Author having made it
evident, that Efficients themselves, direct us to Final Causes; and
confequently rather dispose and incline a Man, than hinder him from being a
Good Christian; your Lordship needs no other Inducements to promote it.

And indeed, were I not satisfied, that Philosophy, if rightly made use of, by
the Effects it has upon my Self, did not enable Me the more to discern the
Shortness of the Utmost Seize of Finite Capacities, and to adore what I
cannot comprehend; I should be so far from desiring Your Lordship's Patronage,
that I should be ready to oppose it my self, to the utmost of my Weak
Endeavors: And were it not too soon to make Your Lordship Promises, before I
have qualified my Self to write any thing of my own, worth Your Lordship's
Notice, I should not be backwards to say, That I may in a few Years, show that
it will afford us no small Light in explaining the Mosaic Creation, in
directing us to frame some faint Ideas of the Methods by which the Omnipotent
Fiat brought the World to what it now is, and to prove the Works of the
Omnipotent Creator, as Historically delivered by Moses, consonant with
Philosophy.

But I am afraid, that, endeavoring to make an Apology for this Dedication, I
ought to make another, for having been too tedious already; since Your
Lordship's own Judgment, will satisfy You of the Usefulness of Philosophy, and
since that Consideration is enough to induce You to encourage it.

Yet I cannot persuade My self, so soon to pass by this Opportunity of
expressing my Gratitude to Your Lordship: nor can I forbear reflecting on my
own Happiness, under Your Lordship's Patronage: For as no one better
understands, how to encourage the Endeavors of those, that make Improvements
in Knowledge their Aim, than those that are most intimately acquainted with it,
and than Your Lordship; So it is an equal Happiness to be under the Protection
and Favorable Eye, of a Patron so desirable: Neither is it any Vain Opinion I
have of my own Merit, that makes me think my self Happy under such a Patron,
but rather the Sense of my own Weakness; for could I persuade my self that I
deserved Your Lordship's Favor, or the Favor of some Others, both eminent and
Learned, to whom I am obliged: I must be very vain indeed.

But notwithstanding the Sense I have of my own Weakness, Your Lordship's
Favor will encourage me to improve the small Talent I have, since in the
Search of Truth,

Est aliquid prodire tenus, si non datur ultra. But My LORD, the World, who are
wont to find in Dedications, the Characters of their Patrons, may wonder that I
have declined the Usual Method, since any one that knows Your Lordship cannot
want Materials for a Character, that might be of Use to the World, in setting
them a Good Pattern to imitate: Yet since Your Lordship's Character would be
drawn amiss by so mean a Pen as Mine; I would rather be thought out of the
Common Road, than mistaken in it; since any Body that knows what Character
belongs to a Truly Apostolical Bishop, is not unacquainted with Your
Lordship's: Therefore since no Encomiums can add to that which can only be
augmented by a Continuance of Your Life; the Fear of Mis-representing, is the
Reason I decline it.

But not to take up too many of Your Lordship's precious Minutes, which are
always Employed in doing Good, and promoting Christianity in it is Original
Stream; that Your Lordship may live long, for the Honor of the Church, and the
Good of those that are under Your Care, is not only the Wishes of those that
think themselves happy under the ^nspection of Your Lordship; but more
particularly of,

My LORD, Your LORDSHIP's Most Dutiful, and Most Obedient Servant, RICHARD
BOULTON.

Plate the Second
Fig: 1 page 407
Fig: 2 page: (...)
Fig: 6 page: 432
Fig: 3 page: 416
Fig: 4 page 410.
Fig: 5. page: 420


Plate the Third.
page: 435.



Plate the fourth.
page: 435



Plate 5.
Fig: 1. page 438
Fig: 3. page 454
Fig: 2 page 452.
Fig: 4. p. 459


Plate. 6.
Fig: 1 page 443
Fig: 3 page 445
Fig: 2. page 443.
Fig: 4. page 447


Plate. 7.
Fig: 4. p: 470
Fig:2 page 4^^
Fig: 3 page 470
Fig: 1. page 456.


Plate. 8.
Fig: 3 page 474
Fig: 4 page (...)
Fig: 5. page 475
Fig: 7. p: 477
Fig: 8. p:477.
Fig: 6 page 476
Fig (...) page 4^^
Fig: 2 p ^^4


THE WORKS Of the HONORABLE ROBERT BOIL, Esquire EPITOMIZED.
BOOK I.
CHAP. I. Considerations and Experiments concerning the Origin of Forms and
Qualities.
The Division of this Chapter.
THAT before I descend to a more particular Consideration of the Doctrine of
Forms and Qualities, I may premise some General Apprehensions of the Doctrine,
to be collated with, and to be either confirmed, or disproved by what follows
of Particular Forms and Qualities; I will, at the Entrance, give you a short
Account of our Hypothesis, comprised in the Eight following Particulars. We
teach then (but without peremptorily asserting it)

Matter Defined.
I. That the Matter of all Natural Bodies is the same, Namely, a Substance
Extended, Divisible and Impenetrable.

Motion the Catholic Agent of the Universe.
II. That since there could be no change in Matter, if all its Parts were
perpetually at rest amongst themselves, to discriminate the Catholic Matter of
the Universe, into a Variety of Natural Bodies, it must have Motion in some or
all its Parts, which Motion must be variously determined.

And though it is manifest to Sense, That there is Local Motion in Matter, yet
Motion is not congenite to Matter, nor coeval with it, Local Motion being not
included in the Nature of Matter, which is as much Matter when at rest as in
Motion: And though it be hotly disputed, How Matter came by that Motion, by
those who acknowledge not an Author of the Universe; yet, since a Man is not
the worse Naturalist, for not being an Atheist, we allow that the Origin of
Motion in Matter is from GOD; and that, since it is unfit to be believed, that
Matter in Motion left to it self, should casually constitute this Beautiful and
Orderly World, Guided by GOD in the Creation of Things.
it is not amiss to think, That the Wise Author of Things, guided the first
Motions of the small Parts of Matters so, that they might convene after a
Manner requisite to compose the World, and especially did contrive those
Curious and Elaborate Engines, the Bodies of Living Animals, enduing most of
them with a Power of propagating their Species. But to pass by such Notions, I
shall proceed to what remains requisite to explicate the Origin of Forms and
Qualities, as soon as I have taken Notice, That Local Motion seems to be indeed
the Principal amongst Second Causes, and the Grand Agent of all that happens in
Nature; Bulk, Figure, Rest, Situation and Texture, being the Effects of Motion,
or the Conditions and Requisites, which Modifie the Operation, as in a Watch,
or Key, it is Motion that makes all the other Requisites useful.

Motion, Size and Shape, three Primary Affections of Matter.
III. That Matter being Naturally by a variously determined Motion, divided into
Parts, each of those Parts must needs have a peculiar Size and Shape: So that
there are three Essential Properties, or Primary Affections of the Parts of
Matter, Magnitude, Shape, and either Rest or Motion; the two first of which may
be called Inseparable Accidents: Inseparable, because Bodies extended and
finite, cannot be devoid of a Determinate Shape; Accidents: because that
whether Physical Agents may have a Power to alter the Shapes, or subdivide
Bodies or not, yet mentally they may do both without destroying the Essence of
that Matter.

Whether there be in Bodies Qualities and Accidents, distinct Entities from
them.
Whether these Accidents may be called the Modes, or Primary Affections of
Bodies, to distinguish them from those more compound Qualities (as Colors,
Tastes, and Odours) or the Conjuncts of the smallest Parts of Matter, I shall
not now determine; only one thing which is taught by the Modern Schools
concerning Accidents; Namely, That there are in Natural Bodies Real Qualities,
and other Real Accidents, which are no Modes of Matter, but Entities distinct
from it, and which may exist separate from all Matter. To clear this Point, we
must take Notice, That Accident is used in two several Senses; for sometimes it
is opposed to the fourth Predicable (Property) and is defined, That which may
be Present or Absent, without the Destruction of the Subject; as a Man may be
sick or well, yet a Man: And this is called Accidens Praedicabile, to
distinguish it from what they call Accidens Praedicamentale, which is opposed
to Substance; and as Substance is commonly defined to be a thing that subsists
of it self, and is the Subject of Accidents; so Accident is said to be Id cujus
esse est inesse: And therefore Aristotle, who usually calls Substances (...),
Entities, calls Accidents (...), Entities of Entities, these needing a Subject
of Inhaesion. And we are likewise to take Notice, That, according to them, That
is said to be in a Subject, which has these three Conditions; That however it
(1) be in another thing, (2) is not in it as a part, and (3) cannot exist
separately. This premised, it will appear easily, that if they will not allow
these Accidents to be Modes of Matter, but Entities really distinct from it;
they make them indeed Accidents in Name, but represent them under such a
Notion, as belongs only to Substances, the Nature of a Substance consisting in
this, that it can subsist of it self. So that we may consider, when a Bowl runs
along or lies still, that Motion or Rest, or Globous Figure, are not any parts
of the Bowl, nor real and Physical Entities distinct from it, but certain
Modifications, and several Capacities in relation to the Matter of that Bowl.

An Excursion about the Relative Nature of Physical Qualities.
Qualities the result of a peculiar Modification.
BUT because this Notion about the Nature of Qualities may be of some
importance, I shall illustrate it a little further. We may consider then, That
whoever was the first Inventor of Locks and Keys, they both consisted of a
piece of Iron, of a determinate Figure; but in respect of the Congruity betwixt
the Wards of the Locks, and those of the Keys, they each of them obtained new
Capacities; it being a peculiar Faculty of the Key to unlock, as of the Lock to
be unlocked by it; yet by these new Attributes, no real or Physical Entities
were added, either to the Lock or Key: so those Qualities, which we call
Sensible, though by virtue of a Congruity or Incongruity in point of Figure or
Texture to our Sensories, the portions of Matter they modifie, are enabled to
produce various Effects, upon whose account we make Bodies to be endued with
Qualities, yet they are not in those Bodies any real distinct Entities, or
different from the Matter it self, furnished with such a determinate Bigness,
Shape, or other Mechanical Modifications. It is reckoned amongst the principal
Properties of Gold, that it is dissoluble in Aqua Regis; and if one should
invent another Menstruum, that will in part dissolve pure Gold, yet the Nature
of Gold is not at all different now, from what it was before either of those
Menstruums were invented, there no new real Entities accruing to it, without
the Intervention of a Physical Change in the Body it self, by the Addition of
these Attributes.

Proved by Physical Observations.
There are some Bodies neither Cathartick, nor Sudorifick, with some of which
Gold, being embodied, acquires a Purging Virtue, and with others Diaphoretick
Qualities; and Nature her self does, either Artificially, or by Chance, produce
so many things, that have new Relations unto others: And, Art especially
assisted by Chemistry, may, by variously dissipating Natural Bodies, or
compounding either them or their constituent Parts with one another, form a
multitude of new Productions, which will be able each of them to cause new
Effects, either immediately upon our Sensories, or upon other Bodies, whose
changes we are not able to perceive; so that no Man can know, but that the most
Familiar Bodies, may have a multitude of Qualities, that he dreams not of; and
a considering Man will hardly imagine, That so numerous a crowd of real Physical
Entities can accrue to a Body, whilst in the Judgment of all our Senses it
remains unchanged.

Again, Glass beaten is commonly reckoned amongst Poisons, which deleterious
Faculty is no superadded Entity distinct from the Glass, but depends on the
sharp Points and cutting Edges of the Fragments, which by Mechanical
Affections, cut and wound the Membranes of the Stomach and Guts; from whence
follow great Gripings and Contorsions, and often a Bloody Flux by the
Perforations of the Capillary Vessels, and horrid Convulsions by the consent of
the Brain and Cerebellum, as also great Dropsies, occasioned by the loss of
Blood: And that those Effects depend on the Edges and Points of the Fragments,
appears, because when the Guts are sufficiently lined with Slime, or the
Corpuscles of the Glass are ground fine, they pass without damage along with
the Execrements.

And this may put us in mind, That the Multiplicity of Qualities, in the same
Natural Bodies, may proceed from the bare Texture, and other Mechanical
Affections of its Matter: For every Body is to be considered not barely as an
entire distinct Portion of Matter; but as it is a Part of the Universe, placed
amongst a great number and variety of other Bodies, upon which it may Act, and
by which it may be Acted on, in many ways, which are falsely thought to be
distinct Powers or Qualities in the Bodies, by which those Actions and Passions
are produced. And every Portion of Matter thus considered a few Mechanical
Affections are sufficient to diversify it from other Bodies: As in a Watch,
there are a great many Qualities; as to show the Hours, to strike, to give an
Alarm, or to show the Age of the Moon and Tides; yet these are all to be
attributed to the determinate Shape and Texture of the Parts of it, and the
Motion of the Spring. So the Sun has a Power to harden Clay, and soften Wax,
to melt Butter, and thaw Ice, and a great many more, which seem contrary
Effects; yet these are not distinct Faculties in the Sun, but the Productions
of Heat diversified, by the different Textures of Bodies it chances to work
upon.

And thus much (Pyrophilus) may serve to remove the Mistake, That every thing
Men are wont to call a Quality, must needs be a Real and Physical Entity. To
conclude this Excursion, I shall add this short Advertisement, That to make
what I have declared more intelligible, I have rather done it by Examples, than
Definitions; the latter being more difficult, because of the difficulty of
assigning the true Genus's of Qualities. And,

Here it may not be amiss to take Notice, That Aristotle himself does not only
define Accidents, without setting down their Genus; but when he comes to define
Qualities, tells us, That Quality is that by which a Thing is said to be
Qualis; which is to define the Thing by the Same, without denoting its Genus;
for it is supposed to be as little known what Qualis is, as what Qualitas.
Besides, it is a Doubt whether it be not as false as obscure; for to the
Question Qualis res est, Answer may be made out of some, if not all of the
other Praedicaments of Accidents.

Posture, Order and Texture Secondary Affections of Matter.
IV. Besides the forementioned Primary Affections of Matter, viz. Motion, (or
Rest) Bulk and Shape; which a portion of Matter singly by it self must have; if
all the rest of the Universe were annihilated, there being now in the Universe
multitudes of Corpuscles mixed together, there arise two new Accidents, or
Events: The one relates to its Posture, in reference to the Bodies about it
(whether erected, inclined or horizontal) and the manner of those Bodies in
reference to each other, which may be called Order; as Aristotle in his
Metaphysics recites this Example, from the Ancient Corpuscularians. A and N
differ in Figure, and A N, and N A in Order; Z and N in Situation; and Posture
and Order indeed seem both reducible to Situation. And, lastly, when these
Corpuscles do so convene, as to make up a Body; the Disposition and Contrivance
of Parts in the whole, may be called the Texture of it.

Colors, etc. no inherent Qualities,
V. We are to consider, That the Bodies of Sensible and Rational Beings, being
endued with several Senses, adapted so, as to receive from without various
Impressions, according to the Diversity and peculiar Texture of each Part;
these Impressions being falsely imagined to proceed from real Qualities,
inherent in those several Objects, have been signified by several Names, as
Heat, Color, Sound, Odor, together with a vast variety of each, as so many
Species, to be ranked under these Genus's; which really depend on the Figure,
Shape, Motion, Texture, and the Manner in which these Bodies, differently
modified, variously affect the Senses.

VI. But here is one Difficulty to be removed, which is, That besides the
Sensible Qualities, evident in Relation to our Senses, they have an absolute
Being irrelative to us; since they do not only Operate upon our Senses, but
other inanimate Bodies. To clear which, I have several things to represent.

But Secondary Effects of Matter.
1. That there are Simple, and more Primitive Affections of Matter, from whence
these Secondary Qualities do proceed, and on which they depend. 2. The
Knowledge we have of the Operations of Bodies, proceeds from some Sensible
Quality, or some more Catholic Affection of Matter; as Motion, Rest, or
Texture; generated, or destroyed in one of them. 3. We are to consider every
distinct Body that affects our Senses, not as a bare Lump of Matter, of that
Bigness and outward Shape that it appears of, most of them having their Parts
curiously contrived, and in Motion too. And likewise we are to consider the
Universe that surrounds us, as a great Engine, with no Vacuity, or no
considerable one betwixt its Parts; and the Actions of Particular Bodies, are
not to be estimated, as if two Portions of Matter of their Bulk and Figure,
were placed in some Imaginary Space beyond the World, but as situated in the
World, as now constituted, and their Actions liable to be promoted, or
hindered, or modified by the Actions of other Bodies about them; for it is not
giving of a Concave Speculum, that Figure, that enables it to burn Wood, or
melt Metals; but the Sunbeams thrown together into a Point, by the help of
that Concavity. And to show how various and different Effects the same Action
of a Natural Agent may produce, according to the several Dispositions of the
Bodies it works upon, we may consider, That though in two Eggs, the one
Prolifick, the other Barren, before Incubation, the Sense can distinguish no
Difference; yet their internal Disposition is so different, that if they be
both exposed to an equal Degree of Heat, the one will be changed into a putrid
Fetid Substance, and the other into a Chick, furnished with a variety of
Organical Parts of very curious Textures. 4. I grant that Bodies may have those
Qualities we call Sensible, though there were no Animals in the World, every Body
having such a Disposition of its Constituent Corpuscles, which duly applied to
the Sensory of an Animal, would produce a Sensible Quality, which another would
not. So that if there were no Sensitive Beings, those Bodies that are now the
Objects of our Senses, would be but Dispositively endued with Colors, and the
like, and Actually only with those more Catholic Affections of Bodies, Figure,
Motion, Texture, etc. To illustrate which, we may consider, That, though an Echo
is supposed to be a Peculiar Faculty, in the Rock, yet it is nothing but a
Repercussion, and the undulated Motion of the Air, reverberated by that Rock,
which striking upon the Ear, causes such a Sensible Quality. Qualities act by
virtue of Local Motion.
5. The Sensible Qualities, which are acquired by the Action of one Body on
another, are no otherwise produced, but by some Local Motion of Parts, or some
change of Texture produced by that Motion: For, when a Pin, by a Dissolution of
the Continuity, causes Pain, that Pain is only a Consequent of its Motion,
which superadds no real Quality to the Pin, which it had not before: And
therefore I shall intimate, That when for shortness of Speech, I make use of
the Word Qualities, I would be understood to mean them in a Sense suitable to
the Doctrine abovementioned. As when I would say, Roughness is apt to offend
and grate the Skin, I would mean, That a File or other Body, by having upon its
Surface a multitude of hard, and extant Parts of an Angular or Sharp Figure, is
qualified to cause the mentioned Effect.
Of the Nature of a Form.
Form the Result of a Congeries of united Accidents.
VII. We may now consider further, that certain conspicuous Accidents being
associated into Bodies; those Bodies are distinguished by Genus's and Species,
as they are referred to a more Comprehensive sort of Bodies, or to a narrower
^pecies, or Individuals: As amongst Fossils, the Superior Genus comprehends
both Metals, Stones, etc. each of which Concretes, in respect of that Genus,
are Species, comprehended, as they are Fossils, under that Superior Genus.

Now when those Accidents, which are Essentially requisite to compose a Body,
of this or that Kind, are united; the Texture of that Body is called the Form:
which, though some think to be a kind of Soul, which, when united to a Natural
Body, acts in it, by virtue of several Qualities inherent in that Soul, yet,
really, it is nothing distinct from that Matter, but only such an Agreeable
Convention of Accidents, as by common Consent, are reputed sufficient to make a
Portion of Universal Matter belong to this or that Determinate Genus, or
Species of Natural Bodies. And those Qualities in Bodies, which are usually
ascribed to the Substantial Form, do not proceed from any Real Substance
distinct from Matter, but a Convention of those Primary Mechanical Affections
of Matter beforementioned; viz. Bulk, Shape, Motion or Rest; and the Texture
thence Resulting, which is the Form, or Essential Modification; which
Convention of Accidents are capable of performing what we usually ascribe to a
Form, since they are sufficient to discriminate it from all other Species of
Bodies.

The Effects of Forms whence.
And since the Form of a Body by some is asserted to be the Principle of its
Operations, it may not be amiss here to take Notice, That besides those
Operations, that proceed from the Essential Modification of the Matter, the
Body being considered per modum unius, as one entire Agent, it may have several
other Operations in Respect of the Particular Corpuscles of which it is
composed; as in a Watch, besides those things it does as a Watch; the several
Constituent Parts of it, as the Springs, Wheels, etc. may, each have their
peculiar Attributes, as Bulk, Shape, etc. upon the Account of which it may do
several things besides what it performs as a Watch: And if the Effects of those
Corpuscles of which Bodies are composed are sometimes so Prodigious; as for
Instance, the Effects which Fire produces by its Heat, we need not wonder that
such great things may be done, as we sometimes see by several Active Qualities
convening into one Body; since we see Engines perform very strange things, by
virtue of those Accidents, viz. the Shape, Size, Motion, and Contrivance of
their Parts.

Of Generation, Corruption, and Alteration.
VIII. Having thus according to our Hypothesis showed what is meant by a Form,
it remains that we explain, what is to be understood by Generation, Corruption,
and Alteration. In order to which we are to consider,

Considerations requisite to the Doctrine of Generation, etc.
1. That there are some Particles of Matter so small, that though they be
Mentally, or by Divine Omnipotence, divisible, yet are scarce Actually divided
by Nature; which in that respect may be called Minima Naturalia. 2. That there
are Multitudes of Corpuscles, consisting of a Coalition of several of these
Minima Naturalia, whose Bulk is so small, and Adhesion so close, that though not
absolutely indivisible into the Minima Naturalia, yet very seldom are actually
divided; and these are the Seeds or immediate Principles of many sorts of
Natural Bodies, as Earth, Water, etc. 3. That both the Minima Naturalia, and
those Primary Clusters resulting from the Coalition of them, having their
determinate Bulk and Shape; when these are united, the Size and Shape by their
Juxta-position must be often altered, and oftentimes their Tendency in and to
Motion varied; which Accidents will also happen when they are dis-joyn'd, by
which Unions and Separation of Parts, the Size and Shape being variously
altered, they are accordingly adapted to several Pores, upon which Account they
have different Effects upon several Bodies. 4. That when several of these
Corpuscles are associated, and put into Motion, that Motion will produce great
Alterations, and many new Qualities in the Bodies they compose; as Air swiftly
moved, is called Wind, and feels colder to the Touch; and Iron rubbed against
Wood, feels warm. But besides these Invisible Alterations, there are several
which are visible; as when the Particles, by knocking together, are broke and
dis-joyn'd, and by that means acquire new Forms, their Bulk and Figure being
altered, and the Texture and Interstices of the Parts being also varied: Thus
Water froze, acquires Firmness, and loses its Transparency; and Milk, by a
languid intestin Motion of its Parts, in hot Weather, turns into a thinner
Liquor, and into Cream, which agitated in a Churn, turns to an Oily Substance,
and a thin fluid. So Fruit, by being bruised, loses its Color, Taste, Smell,
and Consistence: From whence it appears, that Motion is not only the Grand
Agent in Altering, but Composing and Constituting the Forms of Bodies. 5. And
that since the Qualities of Bodies are derived from the Size, Shape and Motion,
and the Texture, or Essential Modification of the Parts of Matter, we need not
deride the Ancient Atomists, for attempting to deduce Generation and Corruption
from the (...), the Convention and Dissolution, and their Alterations from the
Transpositions of their Atoms; though I believe they all three are concerned in
Generation, as well as Corruption and Alteration.
Generatition, Corruption, etc. what.
These things premised, our Doctrine of Generation, Corruption and Alteration may
be comprised in a few Words; for when there is such a Concurrence of Accidents
as are requisite to constitute any determinate Species; such a Species is said
to be generated; in which Action no new Substance is produced, but that which
was Praeexistent obtains a new Manner of Existence, or new Modification; which
is evident in the making of a Watch, where the Parts are the same, when
separate, as when joined, only the Union in respect of the whole, makes a new
Body of a peculiar Modification: And when that Union of Accidents, which
denominates a Body generated, is destroyed and dissolved, that Body, losing its
Essential Modification, is said to be corrupted; for as a Watch is said to be
made, when its Parts are put together; so when they are again displaced, it is
no longer called a Watch.

Hence we may learn to understand that Axiom, Corruption unius est Generatio
alterius; and e contra for when those Accidents which make one Body, are by any
means altered, it loses that Denomination, and being modified anew puts on
another Form, and becomes a Body of another Kind.

Putrefaction what.
And here before we wholly leave off the Consideration of Corruption, it may not
be amiss to take Notice, That Putrefaction is but a peculiar kind of
Corruption, where the Texture of Matter is more slowly altered, than in
Corruption in a strict Sense; and also, that all the Essential Qualities are
not destroyed.

Alteration what.
And here it may be seasonable to take Notice also, That though the Form of a Body
depends on its Essential Modification, yet it seldom happens, that a Body
acquires no other Qualities, than what are essentially and absolutely necessary
to denominate its Species; since in most Bodies it falls out, that there are
some Qualities, which whether absent or not, don't essentially change the
Subject; the Acquisition or loss of which is called Alteration (or by some
Mutation). Generation and Corruption, depending on an Acquisition or Loss of
the Essential Qualities of a Body.

But to conclude this Theoretical Part, let us reflect briefly on the
Fruitfulness of this Mechanical Hypothesis: For, according to this Doctrine, the
World we live in is not a moveless indigested Mass of Matter, but an (...), or
Self-moving Engine, whose Parts are most of them in a variety of Motions; and
so close set together, as to leave no Vacuities, or very little ones betwixt
them. And since the various Coalitions of these Parts, are enough to make
several Bodies of as various Textures; and we see such a vast variety of Words
made only of 24. Letters differently situated, we need not wonder that so many,
and such multitudes of Bodies should result from Matter differently Modified,
by a Coalition of Matter subject to so many Accidents, as Matter in Motion must
be, its Parts being subject to be altered variously by the Addition,
Comminution, or Substraction of a few Parts of Matter.

CHAP. II. Further Considerations concerning Particular Qualities.
HAVING said thus much of the Qualities of Bodies in General, I now proceed to
Particulars: And here I shall not spend Time in reckoning up all the Different
Significations of the Word Quality; since what follows will explain, what Sense
we use it in: I shall therefore only in short intimate, That several things
have been accounted Qualities, Primary Modes of Matter, and Complexions of
Qualities mistaken for Real Qualities.
which seem rato be Complexions of them; as Inanimal, Animal, Health and
Beauty; the last of which seems to be the Result of Symmetry and Complexion,
with Agreeable and Delightful Colors. There are other States of Matter also,
as Rest and Motion, Size and Shape, usually called Qualities, which are rather
to be accounted Primary Modes of Matter. But this concerning Names rather than
Things, I shall (waving the usual Divisions of Qualities) treat of them
according to the following Division: viz. First, I shall consider them under
two Heads; to wit, Manifest and Occult Qualities; the former of which we shall
divide (...) gredients of a Body, is evident; since Water Hermetically Sealed,
being froze, instead of retaining Fluidity and Transparency, becomes Brittle,
Firm, and sometimes Opacous; which Qualities upon a Thaw it again loses. Also
fixed Metal, barely by being hammered, becomes brittle; which Quality it
presently loses, when heated in the Fire. And Silver, by being hammered, puts
on Qualities, which it by no means had when cold; as a Power to melt some
Bodies, and to dry others; with several others, which it only acquires, by
Virtue of the invisible Agitation of its Parts, put into Motion, by hammering.

I might add several Instances of this Kind, but having mentioned them in other
succeeding Chapters, I shall omit them here; and pass to

The Third Consideration, which has been proved in the preceding Chapter;
which is, That we are not to consider the Effects of Mixed Bodies, as the bare
Result of the Parts of Matter of such a determinate Texture; but as placed
amongst other Bodies, on which they may variously act, and be acted on.

But Fourthly, to remove this Objection, we must consider, That the
Peripatetick, as well as Chemical Principles, are incapable of accounting for
the various Phenomenon of Nature, which the Corpuscular Philosophy has a
greater Advantage in: For neither the different Colors of the Planets, nor the
Generation and Perishing of Spots in the Sun, are to be accounted for by the
Doctrine of the Peripateticks, nor Chemists; besides several Phenomenon relating
to Magnetism, Music, Dioptricks, Catoptricks and Staticks.

And indeed, I should think it not a little strange, that the various Textures,
The Difference in Agents and Patients diversify the Actions.
as well as Motions of Bodies, would not more sufficiently account for the
Phenomenon of Nature, than the Cosideration of Quiescent Ingredients; for as
all Natural Bodies, act on one another by Motion; so that Motion is variously
determined, according to the different Textures of the Agents and Patients.

But to proceed to the Second Objection against the Corpuscularian Philosophy;
which is, A Second Objection against the Corpuscularian Philosophy answered.
That it is impossible, so great a variety of Qualities should arise from so
few Principles, as Matter and Motion. In answer to this, I shall endeavor to
show, that it is possible those Catholic Affections of Matter, should be
derived from Local Motion; and that those Principles being variously combined
and joined together, should afford Phenomenon, as various as any to be observed
in Nature.

And First; If we allow what is undeniable, viz. That the Tendency of Matter,
as to Motion, is different in several Parts of the Universe; it will follow,
that by Local Motion so diversified, Matter must be divided into Parts distinct
from one another; and consequently, being Finite, must necessarily have a
determinate Size, as well as Shape: And since all the Universal Bulk of Matter,
has not its Parts in a constant Motion, some of them, being intangl'd
together, must needs be at Rest. And hence the Primary Affections of Matter
flow.

But there are yet other Affections of Matter, belonging to the lesser
Fragments of it, in Respect of their Situation, as Posture, either Horizontal,
Erect, or Inclining, in reference to our Horizon; and also a peculiar Order, in
Relation to each other; the Union of which Parts collectively considered, may
properly be called Texture, or Modification. And since most Bodies are made up
of Parts something Irregular; it is impossible but that there should be
Interstices, or Pores left betwixt them. And further, some Parts of Bodies,
being very subtle and fine, and easily put into Motion by Heat, or other
proper Agents; such Bodies cannot but emit good store of Effluviums. And when
Particles of Matter are fitted and adapted, so as to adhere together, they form
those similar Bodies, called Elements, which being mixed with one another,
constitute Compound Bodies; which being again associated with Compounds, form
Bodies, still more Complex; which Compounding and Decompounding of Bodies, The
Difference betwixt Mixture, and Texture.
may be Properly called Mixture; which differs from Texture, because it implies
a Heterogeneity of Parts, which the latter does not. And Lastly, all Bodies,
whether Simple or Compound, are to be considered, as placed in the World, as it
is now constituted, and ruled by The Universal Fabric of things, as well as
the Laws of Motion.

The Phoenomena exhibited by the Corpuscular Principles very numerous.
From hence it appearing, That Matter is very Naturally diversified by eleven
Primary Affections, to which it self being added, makes twelve; we may by
Parity of Reason consider, that if such an inaccountable Number of Words, may
be made of the 24. Letters; it will not be hard to think, that so many
different Modes of Matter may arise from such Finite Principles, as could
Reasonably be supposed to result from the various Associations of those ten
Letters.

And indeed, an inaccountable Number more: since every one of these Principles
admits of an Incredible Variety. As first, there may be a vast Variety of
Associations in respect of the Figure or Number, or Order of the Parts joined;
as in Figure, some may be Triangles or Squares, others Pentagons, etc. There
may also another Variety proceed from the Different Shapes and Sizes of the
Parts of Matter united; their Figures being either Spherical, like a Bullet,
Elliptical, like an Egg, or Cubical, as a Dye, etc. together with a great many
others: Examples of which the Instruments of Carvers, Gravers, etc. afford;
those Tools being not only of different Sizes, but also various Shapes. And
there is no less Variety in the Degrees of Motion; since Motion may be
infinitely different in Swiftness or Slowness, Uniformity or Difformity; as
also, according to the different Lines in which Bodies move, as Straight,
Circular, Hyperbolical, Ellyptical, etc. as also according to the differently
Figured Parts they strike against; to which Causes of Variety, may be added the
different Sizes or Shapes of the Bodies moved: as also, the several Degrees of
Compound Bodies, and the different Modifications of their Ingredients; and
likewise of the Mediums through which they move, as well as the Degreess of
Impulse. And the Effects of these may be varied again, according to the
different Situation or Determinate Natures of the Bodies they strike against.

Musical Instruments afford instances of the various Effects of Motion.
And, that Motion is able to produce a vast Variety of Effects, we may learn
from Musical Instruments; where according to the Difference of the Air's
Motion, arising from the various Vibrations of the Strings, etc. different
Sounds are produced; which, as they are more or less coincident cause either
Concords or Discords in Sound.

But it would be too tedious to mention all the Diversities which might happen
in Qualities, by the various Combinations of our Ten Principles; and therefore,
since from hence their Fertility may sufficiently appear, I shall proceed to

A Third Objection answered.
The last Difficulty raised against the Corpuscular Philosophy, which is, That
if the Qualities of Bodies depend on the Size, Shape and Textures of Bodies,
all Bodies of the same Colors must have the same Textures; and if the same
Textures; the same Qualities in other respects: But we see it is contrary,
since the Calx of Hartshorn is insipid, and yet the Volatile Salt of Hartshorn
is very strong Scented, and of as strong a Taste: To which a great many more
Examples might be added were it necessary.

Considerations in order to remove the Difficulty.
But I shall rather, since it is not requisite, offer the following
Considerations to remove the Difficulty.

First, That several Heterogeneous Parts may be lodged in the Pores of a Body,
which though of a different Nature from the Body it self, yet they may produce
some considerable Effects; as in Perfumed Gloves, the Odoriferous Parts are
both different in Substance, and have different Qualities from the Leather the
Gloves are made of.

The Second Consideration is, That Parts of very different Natures may be
linked together, not in an Essential Structure, but a Juxta-Position, or
Peculiar kind of Composition, and yet afford the same Qualities,
notwithstanding their Essential Differences; for invisible changes in some
Parts of Matter, may be sufficient to cause new Qualities, though the Essential
Parts of those Bodies be unaltered; and not only so, but diversified enough to
denominate them of different Species. So a Bar of Iron, by being hammered, may
feel hot, though there be no visible alteration in the Nature of the Metal by
an intense Agitation of the Insensible Parts of it.

But to illustrate this Consideration a little further; though a Piece of Iron,
Wood or Tin, should have sharp protuberant Parts, yet are they distinct
Substances, notwithstanding they all agree in that Quality of Roughness; and if
those rough Parts were worn off, and the Body endowed with a smooth Quality,
yet still would they in respect of their Substance, remain unaltered: And though
the superficies of Steel, Brass, Flint or Marble should be polished as to
become Specular, their Essential Differences would still be the same. And as I
took notice before, though Air be put into an Undulating Motion by different
Instruments, yet if the Motion be raised to the same degree, it causes the same
Sound, and produces the same Note. So that Bodies may agree in some
Extra-Essential Attributes, and yet be different in their Essential
Modifications: To confirm the Truth of which, Heat will afford us an Eminent
Example, which may be produced in a Body, by putting its Parts into Agitation,
without destroying the Essential Properties of the Body so affected: So that
the Essential Nature of a Body may not be concerned in reflecting the Rays of
Light, which produce those Extra-Essential Qualities, which are called Colors;
since to produce Whiteness in a Body, it is sufficient, that the Surface of
that Body be so modified, as to reflect the Rays of Light copiously and
undisturbed, whatever the Essential and proper Texture of that Body is.

Different- Qualities afforded by Bodies Homogeneous as to Sense.
And here it may be proper to take notice, that there are several Bodies
Homogeneous as to Sense, which afford different Qualities; as Saltpeter,
becomes fluid and transparent, when briskly agitated in a Crucible; whereas it
has other Qualities when cool, being a hard and white brittle Substance: And
the Powder of Alabaster being duly exposed to a convenient heat, acquires
several Qualities not different from those of fluid Bodies. So Aqua Fortis
although it be transparent and clear, yet if raised in the form of Fumes, it
puts on a red Color.

The Third thing I would propose to remove this difficulty is, what has been
several times hinted before, viz. That a Body is not to be considered barely as
a determinate Substance, but as a part of the Universe, and placed amongst
other Bodies. But

Fourthly, As to that part of the Objection, which questions the Corpuscular
Principles, in making it appear, why a Body so qualified as to cause whiteness,
should have other Qualities which are of no Affinity with it; what has been
already delivered, may be sufficient to remove it, viz. That the
Extra-Essential Parts may be so qualified, though the Essential Parts be not
altered; which we have more reason to believe, since most sensible Qualities
are only relative Attributes, and may result from an accidental Motion, or more
than ordinary Laxity or Density of Parts, or some other such like Affections.

Several Qualities exhibited by Venice Turpentine
To illustrate which, if a Third part of Venice Turpentine be evaporated, we may
obtain from it a Colophony of a Reddish Color, which being beaten small, will
lose its Transparency, and be turned into a white Opacous Powder; which with a
Moderate heat will again be restored to its former Transparency, Fludity and
Color; into which fluid Body, if one immerges the end of a Quill, something
below the Surface, and blows Artificially, it will rise in Bubbles, curiously
adorned with vivid and lively Colors; and if in that state you take it into
your Hands, it is Viscid enough to draw into Strings; and if put into a
Triangular Figure, will like a Triangular Glass, yield a variety of Colors:
When cold, it is very brittle, and if moderately rubbed, it is endowed with an
Electrical Virtue of attracting Straws: The same Phenomenon will appear upon
managing purified Rosin after the same manner.

Another Experiment of the like Nature tried upon Putrified Urine.
To this I shall subjoyn another instance, to show, that a Homogeneous Body,
may, by shape or other Mechanical Affections, have different Qualities in
respect of our Senses, and the Attributes assigned to it upon that Score: The
instance is in Putrified Urine Distilled, the Spirit of which, when it has by
frequent Distillations been dephlegmed, has a pungent Taste, and swims in a
Phlegmatic Vehicle, being also of a very offensive Smell; whose Salts when
freed from the Water, are of a white Color, and are sharp and caustic if
applied to an Excoriated Part; besides which Qualities, they likewise make the
Eyes water, and cause Sneezing. And in respect of Physic, their Qualities are
no less noted, being Diuretic, Diaphoretick, and Specific in Hysteric Fits;
when mixed with Filings of Brass, they turn them into a green Color; yet if
mixed with Blew Juices of Plants, they change that Color for a Green one. They
dissolve Copper, yet destroy the Corrosive Virtue of other Acid Menstruums; and
precipitate the Copper when dissolved by them: Yet if common Salt be associated
with it, this Salt ceases to produce most of the forementioned Effects, and
forms a Body very like Sal Armoniack: which change may probably depend on the
Motion and Shape of its Parts destroyed, since by Evaporating most of the
Liquor, I have found the Salt not only much less Fugitive and Volatile than
that of Urine, but the Crystals of a different Figure, being like Combs and
Feathers. And

These Considerations, together with the Extra-Essential Changes of Bodies, may
let us see, that Substances may work variously upon different Senses as well as
other Bodies; and those Effects too, may depend on Extra-Essential Changes,
which may be wrought in Motion, Shape and Texture, etc. the Essential
Modifications of Bodies nevertheless agreeing. So that from what has been
said, the Objection, I hope, will seem less considerable, and not so perplexing
as some imagine.

And these Three Difficulties I have the rather considered, because they may
not only explain, but confirm and illustrate what is delivered in the Chapter
before, concerning Forms and Qualities; and may also clear and render more
Intelligible, some things hereafter to be related.

CHAP. III. Of the Origin of Forms.
THE Origin of Forms, Pyrophylies, is one of the most Noble, yet most Obstruse
Enquiries in Natural Philosophy; so that the Wisest of the Peripateticks, have
either confessed their Inability, or given Explanations of them very
insatisfactory. But not to examine all their Various Opinions on this Point, I
shall only here briefly consider the Opinion of the Modern Aristotelians,
having already in our Hypothesis laid down in the foregoing Chapter, our
Thoughts on this Subject.

The Doctrine of the Aristotelians considered.
The Controversy betwixt us and the Schools is this, Whether the Forms of
Natural Bodies be eduted out of the Power of the Matter, and whether they be
substantial Entities distinct from Matter? That they are not, appears from what
is contained in the foregoing Chapters; and therefore what I shall here insist
on is, that the Doctrine of the Peripateticks is to me Incomprehensible; for
though the Schoolmen make use of an Obscure Distinction, viz. That in producing
Forms, the Power of Matter is partly Eductive, and partly Receptive; yet since
they deny Forms, to exist in Matter; it is hard to conceive how they should be
educed, before existent: And since the Receptive Power, only enables Matter to
receive a Form, how can it help to produce it, when the Form must be produced
before the Receptive Power can lodge it?

It is manifest, that the Body has a Receptive Power in Relation to the Soul,
Forms not educed out of the power of Matter disproved.
which nevertheless they allow to have a Substantial Form, yet not educed out
of the Power of Matter. It Is true, were the Form of a Body a more subtle
Portion of Matter, as Spirit is of Wine, the Eductive Power might be
considerable; and signify the same, as if it were granted, that the Form is
but a Modification of Matter; which would amount to this, viz. That by proper
Agents, Matter may be so disposed, as to produce a Body of this or that
denomination: As the Form of a Sphaere may be conce^ ^o exist potentially in a
Piece of Brass; because that Metal is capable of being put into such a Form:
But this they disallow, because, if it were granted, Forms would be but
Accidents. And as for the other way of educing Forms out of Matter, as Spirit
out of Wine, that cannot be granted by them; because, then Matter and Form
would be the same Substantial Principle diversified by Accidents.

But they tell us strange things of the Efficacy of the Agent, which works upon
the Matter out of which Forms are to be educed: To which it may be briefly
answered, That the Agent can only act as a Physical Agent; and if the Form
produced by it is Operation, be a Substance not preexistent in that Matter it
works upon, and which constitutes the Body, the Form must either be made of
some Parts of that Matter, or created de novo; if they allow the former, then
the Form is not a Substance distinct from Matter; but if they will not allow it
to be made of Matter, it must be de novo, i. e. out of nothing; which being
granted, Natural Bodies must be produced by Creation and Generation, and not by
the latter only; and it is strange if they allow that a Physical Agent can
effect that, which Ancient Philosophers thought too great to be ascribed to God
himself.

The Aristototelian Doctrine of Forms contrary to Reason.
And as for these Reasons, what they say of the Origin of Forms, is to me
Incomprehensible; so, that what they deliver concerning Substantial Forms is
irreconcilable to Reason: For though they allow these Forms to be Substances,
yet they teach, that they depend upon Matter, both in fieri and in esse: i. e.
they cannot exist out of the Matter which supports them; which is to give them
the Name of Substances, but the Nature of Accidents. Nay, these imaginary Forms
as much invalidate the Doctrine of Corruption, as that of Generation; for if a
Form be a Substance distinct from Matter, it must exist of it self, as the Soul
of Man does, when the Body is dissolved: But they assert, that in Corruption
the Form cease to exist; by which means they make it an Accident, and
likewise contradict what they commonly hold, viz. That upon Corruption Bodies
are resolved into their first Principles; since if what they assert of Forms be
true, Bodies are but partly dissolved into their first Matter, and partly
annihilated or restored to the common Stock of Forms; which, notwithstanding
any thing to the contrary, must be immortal.

Arguments alleged by the Schools in defense of their Doctrine answered.
But to examine some of the most Plausible Arguments brought by the Schools to
evince their Doctrine of Forms: First, they argue thus, Omne compositum
substantiale requirit materiam and formam substantialem ex quibus componatur:
Omne Corpus Natural est compositum Substantiale, Ergo, etc. In which,
Syllogism for Brevity sake I shall deny the Minor, because nothing in Nature is
composed of Matter and a distinct Substance, but Man.

The Second Argument they bring, is, that if Substantial Forms were denied, all
Bodies must be Entia per Accidens; to which it may be answered, that there is
no such Necessity, since Matter, Figure, Texture and Motion, ordinantur per se
and intrinsice, to make up natural Bodies.

Another Argument which they allege is, That if there were no Substantial
Forms, there could be no Substantial Definitions; which comes to no more, than
that if we don't grant some things which are not in Nature, we shall want a
Foundation for our Definitions: And indeed if we must define Natural Bodies by
Imaginary Forms, which we know not, it is better to exchange Substantial for
Essential Definitions, grounded on the Essential Differences of Natural Bodies
themselves.

Their Physical Arguments considered.
These Arguments for Substantial Forms being examined, I shall briefly consider
the Physical Arguments usually alleged for the proof of them.

The first is, the Spontaneous cooling of hot Water; an Action usually
attributed to the Power of the Substantial Form; which might be plausible, were
it not otherwise to be explained; for Bodies esteemed cold, having their Parts
in a less Agitation than the Natural Juices about the Sensory, cause that
Sensation; but when the Parts of that Water, by the heat of the Fire, are put
into a Violent Motion, stronger than that of the Parts of Matter about our
Sensory, it becomes hot; which hot Water being removed from the Fire, and the
Agitation of its Parts being diminished, it returns to its just Temperature: To
effect which, a Substantial Form is no more requisite, than when a Ship is put
into a violent Motion in a Storm, there is required a Substantial Form to stop
its Motion upon the ceasing of that Storm. And in opposition to Substantial
Forms, it may be likewise considered, that Water in upper Rooms in hot
Climates, will be kept warm, and in Nova Zembla, in the Form of Ice, merely by
the Temper of the Air, in spite of the Substantial Form.

Another Argument urged is, that Matter being indifferent to all Accidents, it
wants a substantial Form to link the Accidents requisite to every Particular
Body together. To which it is answered, that the World being now made and
constituted, the Phenomenon of Nature depend on one part of Matter acting on
another; so that especially fluid Bodies frequently change their States, being
altered by the several Seasons of the Year, and Temperature of the Air, which
is evident from the different Effects it has on Weather-Glasses. So that the
Accidents observable in most Bodies, depend on Agents and Efficient Causes,
which produce in Matter what in the Precedent Chapter we call an Essential
Form: And there is no need of a Substantial Form to keep those Accidents
together, since they will continue in the same state, till some other Agent
works on them, which is strong enough to destroy and change the Texture and
Form of that Matter; which Agent, the assistance of a Substantial Form being
not able to resist, the Body in spite of the Peripatetick Doctrine must be
changed; an instance of which we have in Lead, which (though when melted, it
returns to it is pristine state upon cooling) if it be long continued upon a
Violent Fire, will be turned into a reddish brittle Glass, and lose all its
former Qualities; and retains those new acquired ones, till some powerful
Extrinsick Agent, cause a fresh Change. On the contrary, Oranges, Tamarinds,
Senna, and several other Bodies, retain the same Qualities, when gathered and
removed from the Soul of the Tree, and without the influence of its Form, which
they had before whilst growing: And the color of Snow soon perishes,
notwithstanding its Substantial Form, its Texture being altered by a
Dissolution.

The Parts of a Body may adhere without the help of a Substantial Form.
But there is still another Argument generally alleged in favor of Substantial
Forms; which is, that without them, the various changes observable in Bodies,
and the adhering of several Parts of Matter united into one Totum, would be
unaccountable. As to the first Part of this Argument, it is easily answered,
since Local Motion variously determined, is able to effect considerable and
various Changes in Bodies; an Instance of which (besides what has been said in
the first, and the preceding part of this Chapter) we have in Tallow, which by
the Mechanical Effects of Fire, exchanges Heat for Coldness, Fludity for
Firmness, and instead of Whiteness, puts on Transparency. And besides the
Changes which are caused by the Action of one single Quality in an Agent, as
Heat; the Operations of Bodies, proceeding from the Texture of the whole, are
various, as appears by Factitious Vitriol, which is made of Iron and a
Corrosive Menstruum, yet has all the Qualities of Natural Vitriol.

And as to the Second Part of the Argument, viz. That the Parts of a Body could
not be united into one without a Sustantial Form; I answer, That a Connection of
Parts conveniently figured is sufficient; as when a Pear is grafted on a
White-thorn, or a Plum is inoculated on an Apricock; there is a Union of Two
different Forms merely by a Connection of the Parts of Matter, and the Parts
grafted or inoculated, receive Nourishment as naturally, as if they were
supposed to be joined by a Substantial Form, to a Stock of the same Form and
Texture with themselves. Another Instance of Union by a Connection of certain
figured Parts, we have in Glass, where the Particles of Sand are linked
together with the Saline ones, by the help of Colliquation, and the violent
Action of the Fire.

But to conclude; I am not ignorant that it is alleged in favor of
Substantial Forms, that they render Natural Philosophy much more perfect, and
that it would be very imperfect without them; which comes to no more, than that
if we must not explain things difficult by things unknown, we must be
imperfect; where I think the Imperfection is not at all remedied; for should it
be asked why Jet attracts Straws, or why Rhabarb is a Cholagogue, and the
Answer should be, by reason of their Substantial Forms; it would be all one as
to say, by I know not what, because those Forms are unknown.

Being therefore in things purely appertaining to Natural Philosophy, unwilling
to believe what is not intelligible, I shall leave the Doctrine of Substantial
Forms, to those that have clearer Heads than my self, and shall rather proceed
upon Intelligible Principles.

The Form of a Body is its Essential Modification.
I shall therefore briefly intimate what has been delivered before concerning
our Notion of Forms, viz. That the Form of a Body is its Essential
Modification; and though Matter at the first Beginning of things, had both Form
and Motion from the wise Creator of things; yet now the various Forms of Bodies
depend on the Effects of Local Motion, which divides, and variously transposes,
and so alters both the Textures and Forms of Natural Bodies, though I say, at the
Creation, the Parts of Matter were guided by a Supreme Power, so as to convene
into an orderly and well contrived Fabric.

CHAP. IV. Considerations concerning Subordinate Forms. as they are usually
held by several Learned Modern Philosophers.
IT is usually held by several Modern Philosophers, That besides the Specific
Form of a Body, The Notions of Modern Philosophers, concerning Subordinate
Forms,
there are several Subordinate Forms in Determinate Parts of it, subservient to
that which is the Common Form of the whole Substance; and which, upon the
Dissolution of a Body, become Specific Forms themselves; the Specific Form
which presided over them before, being destroyed: As when in a Living Animal,
the Soul, which is the Specific Form of that Animal Body is separated from it,
the Forms which were before lodged in every Part, as subordinate to that,
become the Specific Forms of each Part: But though Sennertus ingeniously
alleges the Specific Virtues of Plants in favor of this Doctrine, yet we have
reason to repute them invalid Arguments; since we see, That several Flowers
retain their Natural Colors and Smells, and for ought we can perceive, the
same Virtues with which they were endu'd when growing, after they were gathered.

Considered, and examined.
But since this Doctrine has been made use of, to corroborate their Notions of
Substantial Forms; I shall make it appear, that what they atrtibute to
Subordinate Forms, may be explained by the Corpuscular Philosophy. In order to
which, I shall consider and observe,

First, That the Technical Word Form is usually made use of, to signify some
conspicuous Phenomenon of a Body, upon the Abolition of which it is said to
change, or deposit its Form.

Secondly, That those Parts, or Substances usually held to be the subject of
Inhesion to a Subordinate Form, are Organical; and though some appear as to Sense
Similar; yet are they composed of Parts very different: As Vitriol, which though
to Sense it appears to be a Similar Substance, yet it is by Art discovered to
consist of Saline Parts, united with a Metalline Substance: And Rhubarb, which
instead of that Specific Form it had whilst growing, according to their
Doctrine, exerts its Subordinate or Substantial Form, when laid up for use,
retains Virtues, which are different from each other; as a Styptick Virtue,
when the Purgative is extracted: So that there is no Reason but that it should
have Subordinate Forms, agreeable to each of these Qualities, distinct from
those which are called Forma Mistionis, by the Schools: But further, we may
observe in an Almond, which though when gathered, it loses its Vegetative Form;
and that which was before Subordinate becomes the Specific Form of it: yet
there is no Reason why we should deny Forms Subordinate to that, since by a
bare Pressure, it discovers it self to consist of an Oil and an Insipid
Substance, both of which have Forms distinct from that of the entire Fruit: To
these, Observations to prove Subordinate Forms.
I shall add two Instances more; the first of which is in Sulphur Vive, which
by being kindled under a Bell, yields oily Parts which are spent in a Flame,
and Saline Corpuscle, which, being condensed by the Moisture of the Air, adhere
to the sides of the Glass, and constitute a Menstruum violently corrosive,
which will afford a dry brittle Salt. The Second Instance is in Cinnabaris
Fossilis, which is a Substance compounded of three Forms, very distinct from
each other; as that of Mercury, and Sulphur, which is also a Compounded
Substance: From all which it appears, that there are in most Concretes, besides
the Substantial Forms of the whole, Forms Subordinate to those, belonging
properly to the Parts of those Compound Bodies. But,

A Compound Form what.
Thirdly, That all the Ingredients of a Compound by Uniting, make one Form, upon
the Union of which all the Effects of that Body depend, is evident in
Gunpowder, the Action of that Compound depending on the Concurring and united
Effects of Charcoal, Nitre, and Sulphur: So that

Fourthly, Though a Compound acts by Virtue of its Composition, and ad modium
unius; yet each of its Ingredients retain their particular Attributes, as well
as their Modifications, which distinguished them from other Bodies before that
Composition was made: and this is evident from what some of the Aristotelians
write concerning the Life of an Embryo; viz. That an Embryo has a Vegetative
and Sensitive Life, before that of a Man; where the Vegetative and Sensitive
Souls, pre-existent to the Rational, are not destroyed, but only deposed by the
Succession of a Superadded Soul; which become the Specific Form; from whence
it Naturally follows, that there are Forms which in respect of others are only
Preparatory, and dispose the Matter modified by them, to receive a more
exquisite Stamp, or a more perfect Form; which, if it be not added, those ruder
Forms, are nevertheless Specific in respect of those Bodies they are the Forms
of.

But though I make use of these Arguments, I would not be thought to adopt
altogether what these Men teach, In what Sense the Soul may be said to be the
Specific Form.
having elsewhere explained, in what Sense, according to their Doctrine, the
Souls of Living Bodies may be said to be their Forms, by observing the
Difference betwixt Animating and Natural Forms, as to the Manner of their
Informing the Bodies they belong to. As the Soul is not the sole Architect of
the Body, nor do the Properties of the Body flow from it, though in other Bodies
the Compound Form, as well as Qualities, depend on the Forms of the Ingredients
of that Body united. In what the Specific Forms of an Animate Body differ from
those of an Inanimate.
And indeed the Properties of a Body are so far from flowing from the Specific
Form, where the Soul alone is esteemed so; that in Brutes, as well as Plants,
several Qualities remain undestroy'd, after the Form is destroyed; as Shape,
Color, and Virtues, etc.

And though it be held by some, That there is a Forma Cadaveris, that keeps the
Parts of a dead Body united, and preserves their Qualities entire; yet, since
it is only held as necessary, to support the Peripatetick Doctrine, we shall not
dispute it; but shall only say, That the Fabric and Connection of the parts of
a Body, are sufficient to preserve the Pristine Qualities of it from
Dissolution, till the Internal Agitation of the Juices breaks that Texture:
which is apparent by what has been observed in very cold Countries, as Russia
and Sweden; where the dead Bodies are for several Months kept unburied, and
uncorrupted: and in Aromatic Plants, there is an undeniable Argument, since
after the Vegetative Soul is destroyed, they continue uncorrupted for several
Years.

The Forms of the Ingredients of a Compound truly esteemed Forms.
But to determine whether the Soul be the sole true Form of an Animate Body, is
not our Design at present; and therefore I shall only bring an Instance or two
to show, That the Forms of the Simple Ingredients of Compound Bodies are as
truly Forms, as those of a Complex Body. The first is, That the Spring of a
Watch is as truly a Spring before it is made a Part of that Watch, as after;
and as truly has its Form: And though Copper by Corrosive Spirits be turned into
a Vitriol, and consequently the Form of Copper, in respect of that Vitriol,
becomes a Subordinate Form; yet it is as truly one as that of any other Body.

(...), hard to be determined amongst Natural Bodies.
And though Aristotle attributes to Forms (...), yet it is a Matter of Difficulty
to know what Form is most Noble; since Pearls, which are of the greatest Value,
being prepared in the Form of a Magistery, are of little Value to them that
only wear them; though by a Sick Man the latter is more to be prized.

Fifthly, But though it be so difficult to distinguish Valuable Forms, from those
of less Esteem; yet there may be allowed some Distinction amongst Subordinate
Forms, in as much as some belong to Similar, and others to Organical Parts.

Sixthly, amongst the Parts of Plants, or Animals, there may be some Parts so
modified, as to put on the Form of Seminal Principles, which upon the
Dissolution of that Body, may act as such, in actuating and guiding some Parts
of Matter so, as to convene into Insects, etc.

Seventhly, Upon the Dissolution of the Specific Form of a Body, the Body is
to be considered as beset with other Substances, which may act upon it; as the
Sun, Air, or some other Agent; by means of which the Seminal Principles may be
put into Action, or new Forms may result, from new Contextures of that Matter.

Sennertus his Opinion agreeable to the Corpuscular Philosophy.
These Observations being premised, I shall endeavor to show, That what the
Learned Sennertus delivers, is agreeable to the Corpuscularian Philosophy.

I agree then with the Learned Sennertus, That the Faculties of Plants and
Animals, depend not on the Materia Prima, and Vegetative or Sensitive Soul; nor
on the Form of Mixed Bodies, considered barely as such; but that there is
something else requisite to produce that Variety of Effects, observable in
Specific Medicines.

But though I allow these things, yet I disallow their Way of Explaining them, as
well as a great deal more which they assert; as, That Subordinate Forms act
under the Superintendency of Specific Forms; Subordinate Forms act not under
the Superintendency of the Specific Forms.
forasmuch as we may as easily attribute the Effects of a Compound Body, to the
mixed Action of the Compounded Ingredients, as to the Subservient Actions of
Subordinate Forms, which united will have an Action in common, and proper to
their Complex Modification; it being different from what each of those
Ingredients would produce separately. As in a Balance, the Scale, which by its
Specific Gravity ought to tend downwards, is raised upwards, by the Addition
of a Weight in the other Scale. So an Arrow, by the Spring of a Bow, is forced
to fly in a Line, different from what its Specific Gravity would incline it
to, and with greater Violence. And as a Clock, whose Parts concur to the
forming of an Engine, proper to produce such Effects, as usually are produced
in that Machine, does not act by Virtue of a Superintendent Specific Form; but
the Parts are set on Motion, and move Mechanically by the help of Weights; so,
several Subordinate Ingredients, may have a Joint Effect, each of those Bodies
cooperating, and modifying each other's Actions. Likewise Gunpowder, acts not
by Virtue of a Specific Form, superintending Subordinate ones, but
Mechanically, by Virtue of the Joint Effects of its Ingredients; which is
evident, since the Effects of the Composition are so different from what the
separate Ingredients would produce; and as from hence it appears, that the
Efficacy of it depends on its Mechanic Texture; so, to make it appear, that
the Ingredients were but slightly mixed, I boiled the Powder of it in Water,
and, evaporating the filtred Liquor, obtained Cristals of Saltpeter, the black
stuff remaining in the Filtre, being insipid, and inflamable like Sulphur: And
this black Matter being boiled in a strong Lixivium, so as to dissolve the
Sulphur, the Sulphurous Liquor will run through a Filtre, leaving the Charcoal
behind; into which Liquour if an Acid Spirit be dropped, the Sulphur
precipitates in the Form of a white Powder.

But to illustrate our Doctrine of Forms and Qualities a little further, I shall
add, That a blue and yellow Powder being mixed in a just Proportion, produced a
green Color: which did not happen, because those two Ingredients were
subservient to a Predominant Form; but because they both being joined made a
Compound Impression upon the Eye. And likewise in making Sublimate or Vitriol;
all that is requisite to enable them to produce Effects proper to such Bodies,
is, that the Parts should be in a proper manner contex'd and modified together;
and then, they are not only capable of performing what is usually ascribed to
them, upon the Account of their more specific properties; but some, which are
not different (as Vomiting, and Purging, etc.) from those Effects, which are
said to be produced upon Vegetables, upon the account of a Superintendent Form.

So that though the Operations of Compounded Substances depend on the United
Texture of Subordinate Forms, Neither are the Actions of Compounds wholly to be
attributed to their Union.
yet, as I have before taken Notice the Actions of those Bodies, are not wholly
to be attributed to their Union; since upon the Dissolution of that Contexture,
each Body has its determinate Form and Virtue; as when the Ingredients of
Gunpowder are again separate; or as when a Rose loses its Specific Form, by
being taken from the Tree: But,

To conclude this Discourse, we shall again take Notice of what we have before
hinted at in the beginning, viz. The unfixt use of the Word Form, and that a
Body is said to be of this or that Form, upon the Account of a very few
Qualities: If then the Form be nothing but a Congeries of Accidents, it may, by
proper Agents, lose that Form, the Subordinate ones still remaining
undissolv'd; The Modifications of Bodies twofold.
till a more powerful Agent destroys them too: (so that a Body may have a
twofold Modificatiod:) As for Instance, The Spring of a Watch, may, by being
put into the Fire, lose that Elastick Virtue; yet nevertheless the Substance is
Iron, and retains Qualities proper to such a Substance. Again, another Instance
we have in a Rose, which when it has lost its Faculty of receiving a
Nutritious Sap from the Tree, yet it retains other Qualities, which depend on
the Texture and Modification of its solid Parts, the former being only
Qualities, in respect of the Specific Form; but the latter, the Result of its
Contexture.

To illustrate this Notion a little further, I shall make use of the following
Comparison, viz. That as a Mill, which is an Organical Machine, performs what
belongs to it as such, as long as it is supplied with Water; so a Plant is
enabled to effect several things, whilst actuated by a Vital Spirit: And
further, as a Mill upon the Consumption or Congelation of that Water, still
retains the same Parts it had before, so do the Parts of a Plant, though the Soul
ceases its communicative Virtue. And to continue the Parallel further, as the
Constituent Parts of a Mill are not destroyed, though the Faculty of Operating as
such be lost; so neither is the Water, but only by reason of Congelation, or
Evaporating in the Form of Exhalations, ceases to coexist in a Form fit to turn
the Mill: So though a Plant or Flower be lopt off, and retains the same Texture
of its solid Parts, yet when it ceases to be watered with a continual supply of
Sap, the Sap is only dispersed in the Air, or intercepted, and spent in some
other Part of the Tree: From whence it appears, that nothing at all perishes,
but only the Manner of Union, and the Particular Modification of those Parts of
Matter cease; so that those solid Parts are no longer fitly adapted to be
nourished by those Fluids. Which Instance may serve to illustrate our Doctrine,
though there be considerable Difference betwixt the things compared, inasmuch as
a Plant has not always that Aptitude to be again actuated as the Mill has.

But there are some Instances, which may render the Difference less
considerable, if we consider that the Rose of Jericho, which though for several.
Years gathered, and withered, is so far refreshed by Water, as to seem but
lately gathered: And I have observed, that though a Plant of Aloes had several
Years hung near the Ceiling of my Chamber, yet it was by the use of a
convenient Liquor, so far renewed, as to perform several things, which are
usually the Effects of Life and Growth. And the like is confirmed by what may
be experimented in Wasps, which, though drowned in Water, will yet recover Life
by the Heat of the Sun.

The Qualities of a Body whose Specific Form is destroyed, depend not on the
United Action of the whole Ingredients
But to wave needless Illustrations, I shall proceed to observe, That though a
Body has laid down its Specific Form; yet the Qualities remaining, are not
always the Result of the united Subordinate Forms; but depend sometimes on the
determinate Forms of Particular Parts of that Body, though the Union be such as
to preserve the Structure, as to Sense, unaltered; as appears when an Extract
is drawn out of Rhubarb, or the Juice of Oak-Bark is extracted by Water, the
Remaining Substances, though as to outward appearance the same, New Qualities may
be added upon a Dissolution of a Speficick Form.
retain not their Specific Virtues. Besides, upon the Abolition of Specific
Forms, several new Qualities may be added to a Body, which it had not before,
by the Influence of external Agents: As when Musk results from the Action of
some External Body upon Flesh: For not only the Seminal Rudiments, latent in
Bodies that have undergone a Change, exert themselves; but several outward
Agents, to which those Bodies are exposed, do, by agitating and altering the
Textures of that Matter, promote such a Favourble concourse of Circumstances,
that Noble and very Exquisite Forms, may result from their Union and
Contexture. As a Limestone, being Physically changed by the Influence of
Congruous Particles, when exposed to the Air, will yield Saltpeter, genuine
and inflammable. And I have often observed an Efflorescence upon certain
Marcasites, agreeable in both Color and Taste, as well as other Operations,
with Vitriol, which could be nothing but the Effect of outward Agents, changing
the Texture of those Parts, which lay open to the Air for some time.

The Modidifications of a Body may be twofold, first in respect of ths
Specific Form, secondly in respect of its own Parts.
But to wave there things, I shall illustrate a little further, what I just
before hinted concerning a twofold Modification of Matter, viz. the Relation it
has to a Specific Form, and that which is the mere Result of Texture amongst
its own Parts: what I shall offer, is, That some things are attributed to the
Soul or Specific Form, which may be effected by the mere Subordinate
Association of Parts, promoted by a mutual Concourse of Natural Agents; as the
Excrements may be voided when a Man's dead, or Fruit may be ripened after it is
gathered, without the assistance of the Expulsive Faculty of the Soul in the
former, or the Perfective in the latter. Agreeable to this, the Inquisitive
Oviedo relates a Story to the Emperor Charles the Fifth, of a Fruit in the
West Indies, called Anana's, which are gathered as soon as One is ripe, the
rest being kept in Chambers to acquire Maturity afterward. And the Learned
Josephus Acosta relates the following Account of the Fruit of a Plane-Tree to
the same, viz. That they usually gather it when green, which being laid up in a
Vessel mixed with a certain Herb, gradually ripens. But the Diligent Piso tells
a Story, more to our Purpose, of those Brasilian Plants, called Pacoeira, and
Bananiera; for concerning the Fruit he says, Continentur plerumque in Vno Ramo,
quatuordecem aut sedecem numero, ut it a una Planta, proferat septuaginta aut
octuaginta, qui subinde Virides avulsi, nunc in Aedibus, nunc in Navibus
suspenduntur, donec justam maturitatem and flavedinem consequantur: And he also
says of the Boughs, when lop'd off, Ramus autem ille fructibus onustus, interea
dum illi maturescunt, augetur, floresque semper protrudit, ex corpore illo
foli^ceo, etc. And it is not less remarkable, that Onions, and such like Fruit,
as well as Potatoes, will shoot of their own accord, though suspended in the Air.

But not here to take Notice how far these things may result from the Exertion
of Latent and Seminal Principles, I shall rather observe, That several things
usually ascribed to the Soul, may result even from the Texture of the Body,
concurring with external Causes; as the Hair, or Nails will grow considerably
for a long time, after the Body is dead.

A Cessation of Vital Functions upon Death, no Arguments of the Soul's
Superintendency whilst living.
And though by the Espousers of Sennertus his Opinion, the Cessation of the Vital
and Animal Functions upon Death, are looked upon as strong Arguments, That the
Soul is the Agent, which effects whatever is acted in the Body; yet I conceive
it depends on somethings very precarious; since notwithstanding what is
manifest to us, the Cessation of those Faculties may depend on the internal
Organization, which may in some measure be destroyed; Since the Body consists
of Parts, not only solid, but soft; as the Brain, and also liquid, as the
Humors; a right and convenient Coaptation of which is required to preserve
Life, considerable Changes in the Humors, being enough to obstruct
Circulation, on which Life so much depends. Thus in Palsies, though there be no
visible Change; yet by an Indisposition, either in the Humors or Vessels, the
Parts become void of Sense as well as Motion: And even Sleep it self, so alters
the Disposition of our Bodies, that Odours and Sounds are not perceived by a
sleeping Man, though nothing externally obstructs the Operation of the Soul,
which lodges in the Body; and what considerable Alterations in the Humors may
be effected, without our Perception, may be urged, from the Effects which
Thunder has upon Wine, in turning it into a Vinegar, sower and uninflamable.

The former Doctrine of Subordinate Forms, applied to Inanimate Bodies.
But to render what I have said of Subordinate Forms, more intelligible, I shall
lay it down in certain Propositions, without making long and tedious
Excursions, applying it chiefly to Inanimate Bodies: And first I shall consider,

1. That the signification of the Technical Word Form, is indeterminate; since
it is not agreed what is enough to determine, what Forms Bodies are of; it
being not only disputed, whether Water, by being froze, loses its Form or not;
But further, several Bodies have no particular Forms assigned to them; as Ink,
Gunpowder, Beer, Coal, etc. Nay, some Bodies considered in different Respects,
may seem to have more Forms than One, as in Vitrum Saturni, which is made of
Lead, it may be doubted, whether it has the Form of a Metal or Glass; since it
has a great many of the Qualities of Both, as Fusibility, Transparency, and
Brittleness; and will, contrary to common Glass, dissolve in Aqua Fortis, yield
a sweet Solution, and may be reduced into a Malleable Lead by Fire; so likewise
Amel, whose Ingredients are calcined Tin, together with Salt and Sand, and some
burnt Copper, will again yield most of the same distinct Ingredients; yet the
Compound had not all the Properties belonging to these Bodies. But,

The Nobleness of Forms, hard to be distinguished.
II. It is a Matter of Difficulty to determine the Nobleness of Forms.

This is not only evident from Examples before given, but several others; as
Glass of Antimony, is more apt for some uses than Crude Antimony, and vice
versa. Again, it has been formerly a Dispute, and may be a Doubt still,
Whether the Powder resulting from Gold and Silver precipitated, be a Nobler
Metal than Gold; of which were a Spagerical Physician, and a Goldsmith to
judge, the Former would value the Powder, as much as the Latter would the Gold.
Again, though Silver Soder be the Result of Silver, alloy'd with Copper or Brass,
and of very great use; yet it may be questioned, whether it is not by that
means rendered less valuable. And though a Plant be petrified, and for that
reason valued as a Rarity; yet is that New Form in it self less Noble than the
former.

The most Noted Qualities of a Body, denominate its Form.
III. Though several Alterations are made in Bodies, by a Recess or Access of
Qualities, yet they retain the same Denomination, and are said to have the same
Form, by reason of some Eminent Quality or Use; which is proper to them.

For which reason Vitrum Antimonii is called so, because it has the Fusible
and Transparent Qualities of Glass; though it, in other Respects, besides its
Vomitive and Purgative Properties, has Qualities different from Glass. So all
Unctuous Bodies, as Oil of Almonds, Olives, etc. are called Oils, because
Fluid, and not apt to be mixed with Water; yet there is a great deal of
Difference betwixt them, and Empyreumatical Oil of Guajacum or Box: So likewise
several Substances of very different Effects, are reckoned amongst Salts;
because they readily dissolve in Water, and are very sapid; so that the Word
Form, seems to be applied to Bodies on the account of some Metaphysical
Conceptions, and in respect of some General Use; rather than Physical Forms, by
which Substances of the same Form, are said to be of the same Specific Nature
and Virtue. From whence it may be thought that several Substances are generally
Class'd together, as they are alike States of Matter, rather than agreeable
Forms: As Water and Wine may be turned into Ice, or Tallow and Mineral
Concretes, may become of the number of Substances which constitue Flame.

The Action of several Compounds depends on the Union of their Parts.
IV. That by Compound Bodies, several Effects will be produced, upon the account
of the Union and Joynt-Action of their Ingredients.

These Operations, by the Schools, are said to be done Action Communi; as when
a Man disputes viva voce, the Rational Soul concurs with the Vocal Organs, to
the Forming of Syllogisms: Or, to use a plainer Instance, as a Bullet acts on a
Plane, by Virtue of its whole Specific Gravity, though it touches the Plane but
in a Point; the other parts acting on it by the Intervention of that: Or as in
a Pair of Scales, the whole Substance of a Man, and all that he has about him,
presses upon the Scale, though he touches it but with his Feet. But to use an
Instance of the Concurrent, or Actio Communis, of an Organical Body; the
Effects of a Compound Body, are like that of a Watch, where if any Part be
wanting, the Complex Action so much depends on the Common, and Joynt-Action of
the whole, that the Action of the whole is destroyed.

Inanimate Bodies have Subordinate Forms.
V. It is agreeable to Reason, to admit of Subordinate Forms, in Bodies
Inanimate.

Against this it is objected, That one Body cannot have two Forms. To this it
may in short be answered, That though a Body can have no more than one Adaequate
Form; yet being a Compound, it may have several, which are Subordinate to, and
Parts of that; as the Parts of a Watch have each their own Forms, which are
Subordinate to the Form of the whole.

A Second Objection is, That a Body having a Complete Form, whatever is
Concurrent to it, makes it Ens per Accidens. To this it may be answered, That
according to the Schools, the Soul and Body, which have each separately
distinct Forms, being joined, make Vnum per se, and not per Accidens; and the
Rational Faculties, which are its Accidents, are said to make Vnum per se: So
that thence, by Parity of Reason, though a Congeries of Accidents, concur to the
Forming of a Body, yet the Operation and Property of the whole United, being
one, it may as well be said to be Vnum per se. Add to this, that the
Peripateticks have not scrupled to teach, That the Forms of Elements, are not
destroyed by being mixed, yet they hold each of the Bodies made up of them, to
be Vnum per se.

But it may be further answered, That though a Form be complete in it self, yet
the Form resulting from the Union of another with it, may be far more Noble,
and perform things much more curious than before: As when Sulphur and Nitre are
added to Charcoal; or when a Spring is added to the other Parts of a Watch,
where by the Addition of these Forms, the pre-extent are not destroyed, but
improved; the whole, in each Composition, making one Compound Form.

A Superadded Form may modify the Actions of Subordinate ones, without
dest^^y^ng them.
VI. Sometimes a Superadded Form is Accidental to a Pre-existent; yet it
modifies the Operations of it, without altering its Nature.

As a Needle, which has its Form considered as Steel, besides its Figure as a
Needle, and by being touched with a Lodestone, acquires several other
Properties; as to attract others, and instead of its Indifferency to move any
way, regulates its Motion, so as to point North and South; of which Properties
it is again deprived by being drawn upon the Pole of a powerful Lodestone.

But that we may more clearly understand, how a Superadded Form modifies the
Actions of a Body, we need but reflect on the Parts of a Watch, from whence the
Forma Totius proceeds; where we may see, how the Spring, by being bent,
acquires a Tendency to expand, and how the Wheels moderate that Expansion: From
whence we may gather how the Parts of a Body, which united, make the Forma
Totius, concur in superadding several New Qualities to the whole. So a piece of
Lead is Vitrify'd by the Action of the Fire, by which Action the Parts, which
before were pliable, become brittle; and being otherwise ranged as to
Situation, give way to the Rays of Light, and becomes Transparent: And
Saltpeter, by the Addition of Coal and Sulphur, instead of burning by degrees,
and leaving an Alkalizate Salt behind it, flashes all away at once.

Compound may act by Virtue of one single Ingredient.
VII. Besides the Actions of a Body, which are specific, in respect of the
whole; it may have several Operations depending on the separate, and particular
Properties of an Ingredient.

This may appear from what has been delivered above: But to make it more
clear, I shall again intimate, what has been before delivered, viz. That the
Parts of a Watch, retain several of their Pristine Qualities, when put
together, as they did before: To which another Instance might be added, from
what is elsewhere said of Gunpowder. To which it may be added, That several
Ingredients in Physical Compositions, retain their own Qualities, though the
Composition has in General a Particular Effect upon the account of its
Mixture. As for Instance, Ambergreece retains its Smell, as well as Aloes its
Taste, when made up into Pills with other Ingregredients; and Opium likewise
its Soporifick Qualities, though mixed with so great a number of Ingredients as
those of Venice-Treacle.

Another Example we have in the Precipitate of Gold and Mercury by Heat, which
though it has a red Color, different from both the Ingredients, yet the Mercury
retains its Salivating Faculty.

The most noted often esteemed the Specific Form.
VIII. That is often called the Specific Form in several Natural Bodies, which
is not the Presiding, but only the most Eminent.

To prove this, we are to consider, what has been already observed: As First,
That the Signification of the Word Form, is made use of Arbitrarily, and
without sufficient Distinction. Secondly, That Forms are only Respective, and
the Result of a Determinate Coexistence of the Parts of Matter. Thirdly, That
they are attributed to Bodies, upon the account of some particular Qualities;
as Unctuousness in Oils, etc. or some particular Use. Pourthly, Agreeably to
these, a Body must be endued which several of those Qualities, upon the Account
of which Bodies are referred to different Classes. As in Vitrum Antimonii, in
which besides those Qualities by which it is referred to Glass, it has a
Vomitive and Purgative Faculty, by which it is brought into another Class in
Physic. Fifthly, It is not requisite, that these Forms should depend on one
another; since neither the Vomitive nor Purgative Faculty depend on the Form of
Glass, they both being inherent in the Calx, before it was Vitrify'd, and would
be preserved, though the Glass, without an Addition of other Matter, should be
turned into a Regulus. Sixthly, To these Observations, we may add, That the
Qualities of Bodies, are said to be less or more Noble, in respect of their
different Uses: As in Glass of Antimony, though the Glass may be taken for the
Noblest Form by an Artist, yet its other Antimonial Qualities are more Eminent
amongst Chemists and Physicians. Seventhly, From these Considerations we may
gather, that the most Predominant Form is not always that which denominates the
Form of a Body; but sometimes that which is most Eminent, that is, most
regarded.

Some are rather Concurrent Forms, than Subordinate.
IX. The Forms just now mentioned, are rather to be esteemed Concurrent, than
Subordinate.

And indeed, where the Denominating, or most regarded Form, may be so varied,
they rather seem Concurrent than Subordinate, in respect of the Body, whose
Attributes they are.

So that the Subjection of some sort of Forms, seems very difficult to be
explained. And indeed we are so apt to mistake Names for Things, since by only
denominating some Bodies, which have Particular Operations, we are apt to
attribute what is the sole Effect of Modification, to that Metaphysical
Conception, which we have of an Aerie Form, rather than to the Body considered
as a Physical Agent, endued with a Mechanical and Adventitious Texture. And it
is so far from Appearing that there is any thing of Supereminency, or Dominion
of one Form in all the Operations of a Compound Body, that in some Simple
Bodies, the Specific Form is not in the least concerned in the Effects of
them; as Water will scald by Virtue of its Adventitious Heat, which is contrary
to those Qualities attributed to its Form as such. And so Springiness may be
added to, or taken away from Silver, without altering the Specific Form of the
Metal; nor does the Form of a File, considered as Metal, affect what is
attributed to it, upon the Account of those Asperities: Nor is the more than
usual Hardness the Product of the Substantial Form, but an acquired Temper
given it by the Smith.

It would be an easy Matter to add several other Instances: But to conclude;
Though the uncertain Signification of Terms, has made the Foregoing Discourse
the more Difficult and Dark; yet I hope it may serve to detect some received
Errors, and promote a truer Theory concerning these Matters.

CHAP. V. Experiments and Thoughts about the Production and Reproduction of
Forms.
Bodies distinguished into Spaecies how.
IT was not without Grounds that I intimated in the preceding Chapter about
Qualities, that Bodies are in a great measure distinguished into several
Species by a sort of Tacit Agreement; there being as yet, no Diagnosticks
sufficient to distinguish the several Species of things, but they are rather
taken for distinct Species, by being known by such Names, than any true
Characteristicks. As for instance, some well skilled in the Writings of
Aristotle, hold, that Water and Ice are not esteemed distinct Kinds of Bodies,
they both having the same Nature; yet Galen not without Reason, favors the
contrary Opinion, since they differ both in respect of Fluidity and Firmness,
as well as Transparency: Besides, Ice and Salt beaten together, will freeze
other Liquors, whereas Water and Salt will not; where there seems to be
difference enough to denominate them Two distinct Species of Bodies, as well,
as that Must, Vinegar, Wine, Spirit of Wine or Tartar, should be esteemed so;
or that a Chick should be thought different from the Egg which was hatched. Yet
some Aristotelians have been very doubtful whether the Natures of them be
different or not, as also whether Clouds, Hail* Rain or Snow differ in Specie
from Water* though the Writers concerning Meteors us^^^ly treat of them as
different.

And if so small an Accident as Mo^^^^ o^ whatever distinguishes Wind and
Exhala^^^ is enough to entitle them to distinct Species of Bodies, a Greater
Right may be presumed (...) Paper and Rags, Glass and Wood-Ashes, should be
esteemed so too; as also Soap, Sugar, Gunpowder, etc. For it is not a
sufficient Objection that most of these Bodies are Factitious; for the present
state of a Body, denominates its Species, however it came by that Nature; as
the Salt which is made in the Isle of Man, by the Sun acting upon the
Seawater, is as much Salt, as that which is artificially made by the Heat of
the Fire, by boiling Seawater in Chauldrons; and Silkworms and Chickens
hatched by the heat of Ovens or Dunghils, are equally as much Silkworms or
Chickens, as those produced by the heat of the Sun, or warmth of a Hen.

The Products of Art, the Effects of Nature.
Besides, the Objection, that most of the forementioned Bodies are Factitious,
is less valid, since they seem equally performed by Nature, the Artificer being
only concerned in putting Natural Agents together, which take the same Measures
in causing their Effects, as if they had casually been brought together by
Chance: As in Chemistry, the Agent which is Fire, operates upon the Subjects it
has to work upon as Fire, and not as it is barely an Instrument of a Chemist;
and therefore though the Application belongs to the Chemist, the Action is as
much Natural, as the Productions of Aetna or Vesuvius; where by the internal
Action of the Fire, Stones are Calcined, and Metals not only colliquated, but
Metalline Flowers and Ashes dispersed about the adjacent Parts.

And I am not without Probability inclined to believe, that several Minerals as
well as other Bodies, which lie near the Center of the Earth, are rather the
Productions of Subterraneal Fires, changing the Textures of other Bodies than
that they have lodged there, since the first Creation of things; for we see,
that Lead becomes Minium, and Tin Tutty, in a very small time, and the Fumes of
Sulphur, uniting with those of Mercury, convene into that delicate red Mass
called Vermilion, which has so far the similitude of a Mineral, that it has
been called by the same Name of Cinnabaris: So that we may easily conceive, how
in the Bowels of the Earth, certain Mineral Fumes penetrating and uniting with
a stony Concretion, Minerals may be formed: From whence it may appear, that a
Congeries and Union of Accidents, is as sufficient to discriminate the several
Species of Bodies, as the imagination of Substantial Forms.

The Artificial Production of Vitriol, correspondent to the Natural.
But to illustrate the Mechanical Origin of Forms, we may take notice of the
Artificial Production of Vitriol, which is so like the Natural, that it makes
us able to guess what Measures are taken in the Natural Production of it. And
since Vitriol is not a mere Salt, but rather (to use a Chemical Term) a
Magestery, it is requisite to observe, that according to the sense of that
Word, it is not prepared by a Separation of Principles, but by the changing the
Form of a whole Body, by an Addition and intimate Union of a Saline Menstruum:
Agreeable to which Notion it is to be noted, that an Acid Spirit, and a
Metalline Substance, may be drawn as well from Artificial as Natural Vitriol;
and consequently both must be equally natural Vitriols in the strict sense of
that Word.

But these are not the only Characteristicks of the Natural Agreement of
Factitious and Natural Vitriol; since Vitriol of Mars, whether prepared by Oil
of Vitriol or Spirit of Salt, has both the Color, Transparency, Brittleness,
aptness to Fusion, and Styptical Taste, with the Vitriol of Marchasites; as
also several other Qualities, as to turn an Infusion of Galls into Ink; a
Vomitive Faculty, when taken in a small Dose; as also to be endowed with
Crystals of very Curious Figures, and a Disposition to run per Deliquium, as
Guntherus Belichius has observed common Vitriol made use of in Germany to have.

And here we see, that the same Qualities may arise from the Union and
Association of Two Ingredients, which are to be found in Common Vitriol;
without the Incomprehensible force of Imaginary Substantial Forms, or a
Generation of a Form distinct from the Ingredients and their Essential
Modification; or a Texture of Parts of convenient Shapes and Sizes: Neither is
there such an Intimate Mixture, as the Schools imagine, of these Two
Ingredients, but a Juxta-Position and new ranging of their Parts in respect of
Order and Position: Which is evident, since by Distillation the greatest part
of the Vitriol may be drawn off, leaving the Metalline Substance behind; and
that most of its Qualities depend upon the Position of its Parts is plain,
since through a good Burning Glass, the Sun Beams will so alter their Order and
Texture as to turn it red.

CHAP. VI. Doubts and Experiments, concerning the Curious Figures of Salts.
The Figures of Salts to be accounted for, with the help of a Plastic Power.
THOUGH I am not willing to acquiesce in the Doctrine of Substantial Forms, since
to me they are Incomprehensible; Yet I am as forward to own, That I acknowledge
the Admirable Wisdom of our CREATOR no less, because He has thought fit that
the Changes and Alterations in Matter, should depend on Accidents easy and
intelligible, at least with less Difficulty to be conceived, than the
incomprehensible Doctrine of Substantial Forms: And though the Curious and
Delicate Shapes of Salts, be Generally used as Arguments of the Great Plastic
Skill of Substantial Forms; yet I must own, I think them very slight things,
compared with Organized Bodies; and therefore I would not have it inferred,
That because the Figures of Salts may be accounted for, without the Assistance
of Plastic Powers, that therefore the Bodies of Animals may.

That Substantial Forms are not necessary to the Production of those Curious
Figures in Salts, I am induced to believe; First, Because a Concrete of no less
Curious Figured Parts, than other Vitriols may be made by a bare Connection of
Metalline and Saline Bodies. Secondly, because according to the different
Quantities of Liquor, or the space of Time they shoot in, their Figures vary:
According to which Agricola, lib. 12. p. 462. de re Metallica, speaking of the
Cords that are immerg'd into Vitriol-Water, for the Crystals to stick to, says,
Ex his pendent restes lapillis extentae, a quo Humor spissus adhaerescens
densatur, in translucentes atramenti sutorii, vel cubos vel acinos, qui Vvae
speciem gerunt.

Crystals obtained from an Alkaly.
I remember also, that having a long time thought that the Method usually taken
in preparing Alkalyes, such as Salt of Tartar, etc. was the reason, why they
are gathered in the Form of Calx; I took care to dissolve Alkalyes well
purified in Water, slowly evaporating it, till crusted over, with an Icy Crust;
which being preserved entire, lest they should want a sufficient quantity of
Liquor, to give them liberty to move, in order to their more Curious and
Congruous Coalitions, I continued them in a moderate Heat for some time, and
then breaking the Crust, I had a variety of figured Lumps of Crystalline Salt;
transparent, and not much unlike white Sugar Candy.

From Oil of Vitriol, and a Solution of Sea Salt.
Likewise having several times distilled Oil of Vitriol, and a strong Solution
of Sea Salt together, till the Matter left behind was dry; that Salt Substance,
when dissolved in Water, filtrated and evaporated, would shoot into Salts, of
Figures differenr, according to the various Proportions of the Ingredients; yet
nevertheless though sometimes in the same Glass the Salts would be of different
Figures; yet would they be more exquisitely figured, than those of Vitriol
often are. And from a Mixture of Spirit of Wine, and Spirit of Nitre, digested
long together, From a Mixture of Spirit of Wine, and Nitre.
I have got Crystals much like in shape to Crystals of Saltpeter; and I have
obtained Plates of Crystals, made up of solids, very curiously shaped, and so
congruously adapted, as to make a very plain Surface, much different from what
I have elsewhere mentioned from a Solution of Silver in Aqua fortis, or Spirit
of Nitre; when I have ordered it so, that it should shoot leisurely.

Thirdly, I have several ways made it appear, That Insensible Parts of Matter
of various, though very curious Shapes, guarded with plain as well as smooth
sides, will convene into Bodies differently shaped. And though Blood, Urine, and
Hart's-Horn, might probably have their Substantial Forms destroyed by the Fire;
yet forasmuch as the Saline Parts, with which they are impregnated, are of the
Figures just now mentioned, in the Liquors they have been exposed, to shoot
leasurely; I have observed several Masses, the surface of some of which were
Plains, very curious and delightful, and the Figures of others exactly
Geometrical: And stillatious Acids, as well as the Bodies they are appropriated
to dissolve into Crystals variously figured, according to the Nature of the
Menstruum, or the Bodies it works upon; as I have experienced with a Menstruum
which would dissolve Gems, and likewise with Coral dissolved in Spirit of
Verdigreece: For which Reason, when I tried whether the Shapes of the Particles
of Silver, dissolved in Aqua fortis, would dispose them, Salts obtained from a
Solution of Copper.
without a Coagulation with Salts, to shoot into smooth and flat Concretions; I
observed, that Part of the Solution being diluted with distilled Rainwater,
and a Copper-Plate immersed in the Liquor, after it had remained there a while,
Clusters of Metalline Bodies, devoid of Transparency settled about it, joined
together in Plates very thin, yet very glossy and flat, the Edges of the
largest, being prettily shaped.

From Gold.
And that the Particles of Gold are apt enough to associate with Congruous
Salts, and to compose Bodies of determinate sizes, I have observed in Crystals,
afforded me by Gold, dissolved in Aqua Regis, and being preserved in a cold
place, till the superfluous Moisture was evaporated: And from the Parts of Gold
divided by a stronger Menstruum, so minutely as to be capable of being
sublimed, I have obtained Crystals much of the same shape, though different in
size from one another.

And I remember, having long since dissolved several Saline Bodies together in
Water, by a gentle Evaporation, they have yielded Concretes, different in shape
from each of the Ingredients; but it oftentimes is very difficult to associate
them, because some are disposed to Crystallize sooner than others: As may be
observed in purifying Barbary Nitre, from the common Salt it is mixed with; and
as Agricola, lib. 12. de re Metallica, takes Notice, where a Vitriolate
Substance, and that from whence Allom is drawn, are joined together; yet
Venetian Borax, Crystals obtained from Venetian Borax.
though made up of several Salts, yields Crystals of very Regular and Geometrical
Figures: And the Caput Mortuum of common Aqua fortis, which consists of Bodies
disagreeable in Nature, by frequent Solutions and Coagulations of their Saline
Parts, yield Salts of very curious Figures, as Triangles, Rhomboids, Hexagons,
Prisms, and Pyramids, composed of several Triangles, meeting in a Vertical
Point, and as curiously shaped as Cornish Diamonds.

But the Acquisition of new Shapes, by being compounded, is not only
practicable in these Grosser, but even in Chemical Salts, which affect one
another, with an Ebullition; because in that Conflict, the Volatile Spirits
unite and lose much of their Force; so that being less apt to fly away upon
Evaporation, Salts obtained from Spirit of Urine, and Nitre, etc.
they form curiously shaped Crystals; as I have Experienced with Spirit of
Urine and Spirit of Nitre, Spirit of Sheeps Blood and of Salt, Spirit of Nitre
and Oil of Vitriol, and likewise with Spirit of Salt and Spirit of Urine; the
last of which shows, how much Compound Figures are owing to the Union of the
Particles of the Ingredients, of which they are composed; the Spirit of Urine
and Salt, affording Concretes different from those of Oil of Vitriol and Spirit
of Urine; the shape of the first being like that of a Comb, whose Teeth stand
out on each side; or like a Feather, the Crystals on each side being so much
inclined: Crystals of a like Figure to which, From Soot and Sal Armoniack.
arise from a just Proportion of Soot dissolved, and coagulated with common Sal
Armoniack.

Fourthly, To confirm what I have above delivered concerning the Origin of
Vitriol; and also to make it appear, That the Figure of its Parts depends on
the Texture of its Ingredients, I shall add another Particular, which is, That
having compared the Composition of Artificial Vitriol, I thought it might
reasonably be ranked under the same Species with the Natural: To which I shall
subjoyn, that having also considered, that Oil of Vitriol, and Spirit of Salt,
were improper Menstruums to dissolve several Metals, I made use of Aqua fortis,
which with Copper, made a Curious Vitriol; and with Silver, it afforded
Crystals shooting into thin Plates; and with Lead and Quick Silver, it yielded
Crystals far more thick, and differently shaped from each other.

Now if from hence it appears, That the Curious Figures of Salts, generally
alleged as Arguments of the Necessity of Substantial Forms, depend merely upon
Texture; why may not the more Ordinary Phenomenon of Nature, since it is
manifest that Matter, and a Congeries of Accidents, are sufficient to account
for what is usually attributed to Imaginary Forms? Neither can I see Reason,
why Arguments grounded on the Qualities and Effects of Bodies, esteemed
factitious, may not be sufficient to show us, what may be ascribed to the
Mechanical Affections of the universal Mass of Matter; since it is not agreed
how factitious shall be distinguished from that Species of Body, called The
Productions of Nature. In favor of which Gunpowder is no despicable Instance;
where by a bare Mixture of Nitre, The Ingredients of Gun Powder.
Charcoal, and Sulphur, without the least shadow for the Pretense of a
Substantial Form, a Body is produced, of Effects more prodigious, than any of
Nature's Production: Nor can Nature produce a more Noble Concrete than Glass,
which is but the Product of Matter, brought together by Art; where in less than
an Hour, an Opaque Body becomes transparent, and acquires several other
Qualities, for as much as appears to Sense, without the Addition of any other
Body; which yet by another change, in a trice, may make a Substance not Glassy,
but Opacous.

Substantial Forms not necessary to Discriminate Bodies.
Nay, the Aristotelians themselves allow, That there may be slight Changes in
Matter, so as to distinguish Genus's, without an Introduction of Substantial
Forms; as in Coral, which in the bottom of the Sea is tender, and grows like a
Plant, yet when hardened in the Air, it is by several Eminent Writers, class'd
amongst Stones: And indeed, its Calx is very much unlike the Ashes of Plants,
being apt to be corroded by Vinegar, as Lapis Stellaris, and several other
Mineral Stones are.

And a thing equally to be admired, is to be seen in Sombrero, an Island in the
East Indies, near Sumatra, according to Sir James Lancester; who relates a
Story of a Worm, which is transformed into a Tree; and that again into a Stone,
much like white Coral: And Piso, in his History of Brasil, vouches many
Witnesses for the Transformation of Animals like Grass-hoppers, into
Vegetables. Likewise Michael Boym, a Jesuit, affirms, That he saw in the Island
Hainan, in China, Crabs, which pulled as out of the Water, were immediately
petrified.

But, Pyrophilus, that I may draw to a Conclusion, I shall only further add, to
what has gone before, Oil of Vitriol turned into Allom.
that Remarkable Experiment of Helmont's, which is that Oil of Vitriol may be
turned into Allom, by the Fumes of Mercury: To which may be added another
Instance, presented us in the Production of Saltpeter: For if on the white
Salt, afforded by Solution of Potashes, Spirit of Nitre be poured, Salts
obtained from Spirit of Nitre and Pot. Ashes.
till they cease to ferment, that Mixture will yield Crystals endued both with
the Shape, and other Qualities of Nitre.

CHAP. VII. Experimental Attempts concerning the Redintegration of Bodies.
HAving already to confirm the Origin of Forms, as intimated in our Hypothesis,
alleged the Measures taken in the Productions of Forms, I now proceed to
illustrate it from their Reproduction, which might prove the stronger Argument
of the Two, could it be clearly made out; because to Re-produce a Body, whose
Substantial Form has been destroyed, may argue, that a Form is only a
Modification of the Parts of Matter of which a Body is composed, in such order
in reference to each other, as is requisite to produce such Properties: Whereas
were those Parts otherwise placed, they would make up a Body of a different
Nature; which would be again of the nature of the former were the Parts of
which it consists associated in their former Order.

But though an Adaequate Redintegration of Bodies Chymically Analized were
impossible, by Reason of some Dissipated Parts; yet such a one as is possible,
may be sufficient to our Purpose; which is the Experiment concerning the
Reproduction of Saltpeter. But Experimental Attempts of this kind being very
difficult, all that I shall do at the present, is, to represent that
Difficulty. And

An Attempt to reunite the Parts of Amber.
First, we shall do it by relating our Success in an Attempt to dissipate and
reunite the Parts of common Amber; for having put Four or Five Ounces of Amber
into a Glass Retort, by a gentle Heat it began gradually to melt and bubble;
and after the Operation was ended, we found in the Receivers half the weight of
the Amber, consisting of a Mixture of Volatile Salt, Spirit, Phlegm and Oil;
and in the bottom of the broken Retort, we found a Cake of Matter very black,
yet so smooth, that nothing could be finer Polished; so that it might very well
have supplied the place of a Looking-Glass; which, when it was broke, the
Fragments were accompanied with a more than ordinary Luster. All which divided
Parts of Amber being mixed in a Glass Body, to which a Blind Head was luted,
and placed in Sand, the Fire being by Accident increased, the Fumes raised the
Vessel out of the Sand, which falling, the Top of it was broke, by striking
against the side of the Furnace, and the Fumes flew away. The remaining Matter
was very like Tar, but would not Tincture Spirit of Wine; though with Oil of
Turpentine, it would make a Blood-Red Balsom. The whole Process being again
renewed, and some Accidents happening, we could not finish the Experiment.

An Attempt to reunite the Parts of Roch-Allom.
But notwithstanding the Difficulty of Trials of this kind, having once drawn
what Quantity I could of Phlegm and Spirit from Roch Allom, and poured it again
upon the Caput Mortuum, after some time, some Parts were so associated again,
as to form several curiously figured Crystals: An Attempt to reunite the Parts
of Vitriol.
And though Vitriol may seem a Body unapt for such Experiments, yet I once drew
from blew Vitriol a Phlegm and Spirit together, with a heavy Oil, which being
divided into several Parts, the red Caput Mortuum was divided into an equal
Number, one part of each of which being mixed over Night, in the Morning I
found several Grains of pure Vitriol upon the Surface of the Matter; which I
again found upon the Mixture of another part of the Powder and Liquor, only
more in Quantity; and this Experiment was also confirmed by a Third Trial.

As also of Antimony and Oil of Vitriol.
To these I shall add, what happened upon the digestion of powdered Antimony,
with a double quantity of Oil of Vitriol: For having drawn from it a little
Liquor, together with a considerable Quantity of combustible Antimonial or
Antimonio-Vitriolate Sulphur, the Caput Mortuum remaining in the Report was
light and friable, and upon the upper part white like common Wood-Ashes; the
rest being like a Cinder. Whereupon we exposed it to the Fire, in a Retort of
Glass well Coated, and fitted with a Receiver; and after some time separating
the Vessels, we found very little Sulphur sublimed; and not the least
Antimonial Quicksilver, but the Caput Mortuum was united into a Mass of black
Antimony, covered over with white transparent Glass. From whence we may infer,
that Antimony generally abounds with more Sulphur than is requisite to
constitute that Mineral; though in this Experiment we might suspect, that part
of it was turned into Glass, by the Loss of the Sublimed Sulphur.

Another to reunite the Parts of Vitriol.
But amongst all my Experiments of the Redintegration of Bodies, the following
was the most successful; for having distilled from several Ounces of Turpentine
in a Glass Retort, a considerable Quantity of Transparent Liquor, and a dry
brittle Caput Mortuum, I reduced the Caput Mortuum into Powder, which by that
means was turned from a Red, to a pure Yellow Color; and being mixed with the
Liquor, was formed into a Red Balsam; which, by a continued Digestion, began to
lose that Color, so that the Powder being wholly dissolved, it could not be
distinguished from Laudable Turpentine.

CHAP. VIII. Experiments concerning the Origin of Qualities and Forms.
HAving in some of the foregoing Chapters, given a short Scheme of the
Principles of the Corpuscularian Philosophy, for the better understanding our
Experiments concerning the Productions and Changes of Particular Qualities, I
shall now lay down such Natural Phenomenon as induced me to take up such
Notions, in which, not Art but Nature discovers her Operations.

EXPERIMENT I.
An Experiment to illustrate what has been delivered concerning Forms and
Qualities.
The First I shall begin with is, what occurs in hatching of an Egg. And.

First, we are to consider, that in a Prolifick Egg, by the same Reason, that
Bones and Membranes are called Similar Parts of an Animal; the Liquor of the
Yolk, as well as the White, is to Sense, a Similar Substance, though by
Distillation several Substances may be drawn from them.

Secondly, That by beating the White of an Egg well, it loses much of its
Tenacity, and becomes a fluid Body; in which Agitation, there is only a
Mechanical Alteration of the Texture of the Body.

Thirdly, That the Rudiments of the Chick, lodged in the Cicatricula, are
nourished only by the White, till it becomes a great Chick; the Yolk being
reserved as a stronger Nourishment, till the White is spent, and the Chick is
able to digest it; and in effect the Chick seems to be furnished with Head,
Wings, Beak and Claws, before the Yolk is touched.

Lastly, It is not a little to be admired that so Soft and Similar a Liquor as
that of an Egg, should be in so short a time, changed into a Chick, endowed
with Organical Parts of different Fabrics; and Similar ones different in
Texture very much from one another; besides the Liquors contained in the Solid
Parts, being as different as the former, and endowed

First, With new Qualities, as Color, Taste, Odours, Heat, Hardness, etc.
Secondly, Qualities distinct from Sensible ones, as Fludity, Consistency,
Hardness and Flexibility, etc. Thirdly, Occult Qualities, as when Birds or
Parts of Annimals, afford Specific Medicines, or at least most Noble ones. But

Fourthly, since some may Object, that these Parts are formed by the Plastic
Power of the Soul, and that a Chick is not a Mechanically contrived Engine, we
are to consider, that let the Plastic Principle be what it will, yet still,
being a Physical Agent, it must act after a Physical manner; and having no
other Matter to work upon, but the White of the Egg, it can work upon that
Matter but as Physical Agents, and consequently can but divide the Matter into
Minute Parts of several Sizes and Shapes, and by local Motion so variously
contex them, as is requisite to produce an Animal of this or that Species;
though from so many various Textures of the Parts formed, there must naturally
arise such different Colors, Tastes and Consistencies, and other Qualities, as
we have taken Notice of: For we are not here to consider so much, what is the
Agent or Efficient in these Productions, but after what manner the Matter they
are made of, is affected in producing them: To illustrate which, we may
observe, that a Man who is to frame a Building, or some curious Engine, though
he may by the help of Reason and Art, skillfully contrive his Materials, yet he
can but move, divide, transpose and contex the several Parts, into which he
reduces the Matter assigned.

And that the Soul of a Hen, does not any more contribute to the forming of a
Chick, is plain; fince we are assured, that multitudes of Eggs may be hatched
merely by the regulated Heat, either of Ovens, or Dunghills: Whence it easily
appears, That the Plastic Power, no otherwise contributes to the Formation of
a Chick, than by guiding the Parts of the White, put into Motion by the
external Heat; so, that they may associate after a manner necessary to produce
an Organical Chick.

EXPERIMENT II.
Water may, by altering its Texture, put on New Forms.
Water, though a Homogeneous, Diaphanous, Fluid Body, devoid of Color, Taste and
Smell, etc. may, by altering the Texture of its Parts, acquire Attributes
different from these: This is evident, in the Growth of Vegetables, when
nourished even by simple Water, in Bottles; where I have observed, that
Crows-foot, after six Months Growht, weighed above three times as much as
before it was put in. But not only Crows-foot, but several other Plants, owe
their Substance to the Particles of Water, altered in Texture, as Spearmint,
Marjorane, Raphanus Aquaticus, and Ranunculus: From whence we may infer, that
the same Particles of Matter which compose Water, may, by having their Parts
differently modified, produce several Concretes, endu'd with different
Qualities, as Firmness, Volatility, Colors, Smell, and Taste; together with
other Specific or Occult Qualities: Yet it is to be admired, that so insipid a
Body as Water, should be converted into a Juice so caustic, as that of
Ranunculus, or one so inflammable as Oil, which may be drawn by Distillation
from Plants, only nourished in Bottles.

OBSERVATION III.
All Plants may be nourished by one and the same Substance.
It is usually believed, That Plants by the Faculties of a Vegetative Soul,
select and suck in a Juice, appropriated to each; rather than that they are all
nourished by one Juice differently modified in that Plant: But the Latter will
easily appear, if we consider, what happens in Grafting and Inoculations; for
if a Pear Tree be Grafted into a White-Thorn, the Aliment sucked in by that
Root, will be so altered, as to yield Nourishment to a Pear; Fruit much
different from that of the White-Thorn: The same is evident in Inoculations,
where the Sap, selected by the Root, is so altered in the Bud inoculated, that
the same Sap, which in the Genuine Branches of the Tree, constitutes one sort
of Fruit, is turned into another, in those springing from the inoculated Bud.
And here it is further Remarkable, That not only the same Juice yields various
sorts of Substances in different Plants, but even in the same Tree; where the
Skin of the Fruit differs from its Flesh, and that from the Stone, and all of
them from the Substance of the Tree; not only in Color, but several other
Qualities; as the Blossoms of a Peach, have a Purgative Virtue, which is not in
the Fruit: And Garcias ab Horto affirms, That the Seeds of solutive Cassia
fistula, are Astringent: An Account not unlike to which we have of certain
Kernels of a Fruit, much like a White Pear-Plum, by Mr. Lygon, in his History
of Barbados, p. 67, 68. Five of which worked a dozen times upwards with him,
and twenty times by Stool; yet by taking away a thin Film, which divides the
Kernel into halves, the Nut is as sweet as a Jordan Almond, and has no sensible
Operation: Which Relation is also favored by Monardes, under the Title of
Fabae Purgatrices, where he speaks of a Purgative Fruit, brought from America,
from Carthagena, and also from Nombre de Dios. And Vincent le Blank, in his
Survey of the World, p. 260. Part. 2. gives an Account of a Golden Apple, as
bitter as Gall, containing Five Kernels, of an equal Bigness with Almonds,
whose Juice is sweet; and he also relates, That of a thick Film, which
encompasses the Nut in the Shell, they prepare an Excellent Sweet-Meat.

OBSERVATION IV.
Further Instances in Cheese.
We have also an Instance, how Matter may be altered, by a Variation of its
Texture in Rotten Cheese; which differs from the Sound, both in Color, Taste,
Smell, and Consistence. In which likewise, by a good Microscope, we may
perceive Clusters of Animals, endu'd with Parts very differently modified, and
Qualities little different from Occult ones.

CHAP. IX. A Continuation of Experiments concerning Forms and Qualities.
EXPERIMENT I.
MIX a convenient Quantity of Camphire, grossly beaten, with Oil of Vitriol, and
when it begins to dissolve, and, by shaking the Glass, to mix with the Oil, it
will first tinge it with a Yellow, and afterward a Color not much different
from Red; which Tincture will be so deep, as to render the Clear Oil Opacous.
And from the Ingredients perfectly mixed, if in just Proportion, may be
obtained a Liquor void of a Camphire Smell; yet by the sole Addition of Fair
Water, the Mixture will become Pale, and the Camphire will again associate, and
form a floating Combustible Body as before dissolved, and renew its Odor.

Several Phenomenon the Result of a Change in Texture.
From the Phenomenon of this Experiment, may be drawn several Instances to our
Purpose.

I. That a Light Body reduced into Parts, conveniently Figured, may be mixed
with a Body heavier than it self; so that Gold, the heaviest of Bodies, may
float in a Liquor, if its Parts be dissolved, and rendered minute enough by
Aqua Regis. From which two Observations we may Learn; That the Textures of
Bodies, as well as the Rules of Hydrostaticks, are concerned in determining,
whether Bodies will sink or swim.

II. That several Colors may be produced, by a Mixture of a Colorless Liquor,
and a White Concrete.

III. That those Colors may again be destroyed, and the former renewed by
Water, which can neither afford the Color it reduces Camphire to, nor destroy
that of the Liquor.

IV. That a Light Body emerges out of one much lighter, which did not in a
heavier Liquor, which the Mixture was before the Addition of Water; which may
be an Argument against the Schools concerning Mistion; since some of them
assert, That, in Mistion, the Elements depose their own Forms, and put on new;
whereas the Camphire had not its Form destroyed throughout the Process; but
still retained its own Qualities in a Disposition to be again united.

V. It is to be admired, That Odours should depend on so slight a Texture, that
Camphire, by a bare Separation of its Parts, should lose its Scent, and upon
the Mixture of a Body void of Odor, should again recover its Smell; and that
so slight a Texture, as that of the Oil and Camphire, should, as to Sense,
wholly for a time alter the Qualities of the Latter: And that several of the
preceding Phenomenon, are caused by the Particular Texture of the Liquors, made
use of to exhibit them, is manifest, because if Camphire be cast into Spirit of
Nitre, well dephlegm'd, it will not afford those Phenomenon, which it does with
Oil of Vitriol. And when to the Red Mixture, abovementioned, two or three
parts of Spirit of Wine, were added instead of Water, no such Changes
succeeded; but the whole Mixture, with its Accidental Color, was dissolved by
it, being in Color much like Red Turbid Wine: So that the Color of the
Mixture was wholly owing to the Mixture of the Oil and Camphire, and depended
on their Union; which is further confirmed, because when we added a sufficient
quantity of Water to that Turbid Liquor, it presently deposed its Color; and
the Particles of Camphire immediately emerged in the Form of a white Powder.

But there are other Phenomenon, which by a prosecution of this Experiment, the
Mixture afforded us: For,

VI. Having kept the Mixture moderately warm in a Glass Retort, and distilled
it; the Liquor drawn off had a Smell, unlike both that of the Camphire, and
also that of the Mixture: And the Ingredients united in this Mixture, were
both. Transparent, in the Sense that Fluid and Solid Bodies contus'd are said
to be so; yet the Remaining Mass, not only became Opacous, but of a very Black
Color: some Parts of it, being not unlike polished Jets; which is the more
Remarkable, because Camphire Chimically handled, usually ascends in White
Flowers, leaving behind them a Caput Mortuum of an Agreeable Color.

VII. The last Phenomenon this Mixture afforded us was, That though Camphire be
a Body very much disposed to dissipate, and fly away; yet by the Association of
the Oil, it might be kept together, so that the Caput Mortuum above-named, was
able to endure a pretty hot Fire in the Retort, before it was reduced to that
Pitchy Substance, lately taken Notice of: And further it was Remarkable, That
Part of the Substance being taken out of the Retort, and kept in a Red-hot
Crucible for half an Hour, it afforded a considerable quantity of Black Brittle
Matter, without the least Smell of Camphire: Fixedness and Volatility are so
much varied by Texture.

EXPERIMENT II.
Diversities of Qualities depend on Variety of Textures.
Amongst the various Experiments, which might be produced to prove, That the
Diversity of Qualities depends on the various Alterations of Texture; I shall
instance those afforded me in Copper and Silver, by the Intervention of
Sublimate; where we shall have a Considerable Number of Changes, made by the
Recess, Addition, and Trasposition of the Insensible Parts of Matter.

First then, Having put a Pound of Venetian Sublimate, grossly beaten, into a
Glass Retort; we threw in Copper Plates, an Inch broad, and about as thick as a
Grain of Wheat; so that the Ascending Fumes, might by Compulsion act on the
incumbent Metal: Which being done, we placed the Retort in a Sand Furnace; and
having adapted a small Receiver, we continued a Gradual Fire, for seven or
eight Hours; and at the last increased it to a considerable degree, which was
as high, as the Furnace would permit: The Effects of which Operation were the
following.

1. Very little Liquor was carried over into the Receiver, but about ten Ounces
of Sublimate was crusted over the Neck of the Retort: The Retort contained two
Ounces and a Quarter of Running Mercury; and what was to be admired was, the
Acid Spirit, uniting with the Copper, left the Mercury unaffected. 2. When the
Fire was increased, the Matter, beginning to Melt in the Retort, made a Noise
not unlike to Vitriol, when brought to a Fusion, in a Calcining Pot: which
Circumstance constantly accompanied this Experiment; whereas the same
Experiment being again tried, we scarce could find either in the Retort, or
Receiver, the least Running Mercury. 3. The Lump of Metal in the Retort, was
heavier by more than two Ounces; some of the Plates being too thick, and yet
retaining their Shape and Malleableness; the others, being changed into a
Brittle Lump, like a piece of good Benjamin, which, when broke, was of diverse
Colors, and almost Transparent. 4. But this Lump, being divided into smaller
Pieces, and exposed to the Air in white Paper, in a Night's Time it was
Colored like Verdigreese on the outside; which by its longer continuance in
the Air, penetrated deeper; yet the Paper which it stained, was tinged with a
Green, inclining to Yellow. And here we may take Notice of the strange Subtlety
of the Air, which altered some of these Fragments so, that they were covered
over with a Powder, like Viride aeris, notwithstanding they were shut up in a
close Box. 5. Here I shall observe, That several Copper Plates, off which
Sulphur had been drawn, had not their Shapes altered in the least; but were
colored over with a white Silver color, which penetrated the whole Substance
of them, being much more glorious within, than on the Surface of the Metal: so
that we suspected the Sublimate to be adulterated with Arsenick; but that it
retained its Malleableness; which Arsenick usually takes away. 6. We thought it
more considerable, because the Venus of the Copper was so unlocked, that the
forementioned Transparent Substance, would melt like Rosin, and burn with a
lasting Flame, if laid on a Red-burning Coal, or held to a Candle, much like
the Flame of Sulphur, only more Green.
To these Phenomenon, afforded by Sublimate and Copper, I shall join some,
observed in the like Experiment, with Sublimate and Silver.

We put ten thin Silver Plates into a well-coated Retort, with double the
weight of Sublimate upon it, which when Sublimed, the Sublimate ascended into
the Neck of the Retort; in which was to be found several Portions of Revived
Mercury: In the bottom of the Retort was a Lump of Matter, which could scarce
be separated from the Glass, but was brittle and of a Pale Yellow, and much of
the same weight with the Metal. In the middle of the Lump, were contained
pieces of Silver very brittle, but not totally dissolved: This Rosin, as that
of Copper, when moistened by the Air, was in 24 Hours covered over with a
Greenish Dust; but whether it were the Result of Sublimate working on the
Copper, which Silver is generally alloy'd with, or on the Compound Metal, I
will not dare to determine: Yet it is usual for Painters to make a sine kind of
Azure of Silver, by corroding it with Saline Bodies: All that I shall add to be
observed in this our First Trial, is that this Rosin, when cast upon hot Coals,
continued flaming for a considerable Time, the Color of the Flame being very
like that of Copper.

But for a Second Experiment, we made use of an Ounce of Refiu'd Silver
Laminated, and cast upon double its quantity of Sublimate; which, by the
violent Force of the Fire, being partly melted, we found in the Retort a Lump
of Matter, which in some places next the Glass, was covered with a thin Plate
of Silver, the remaining part of the Metal, (except some small pieces) being
dissolved into a Substance, neither like Silver, nor any other Metal or
Mineral. In which process it is strange, that so fixed a Metal, should, by an
Addition of a Fourth Part of Matter, be so altered in its Qualities; as also,
that a Mass of an Amber or deep Amethystine Color, (some of whose Parts on he
upper Superficies were of a light Yellow, which on the lower ended abruptly in
a color not far from a Black one) should be the Result of a Mixture of two
white Bodies: Nor is it less to be admired, that a Body Transparent like Amber,
should be made of so Opacous a Body as Silver, mixed with a white Powder; and
that Silver, instead of the Qualities of a Metal, should become a Friable Body;
and when cut with a sharp Instrument, like Horn; as also, that it should be
changed into a Body, apt to take Flame at a Candle, which before was difficult
to melt.

These Experiments being tried; To show how much these Qualities depended on
the Particular Textures of Bodies, I took two distinct Urinals, and put Gold
finely Laminated in one, and Refined Gold in the other, with a treble weight of
Sublimate to each; which though raised in a Sand-Furnace, altered neither of
them: But in these Experiments, being forced to make use of a Sand-Furnace, I
could not employ a Fire so strong as I could have wished for, which might in
some measure alter the Phenomenon, which our Experiment might have otherwise
afforded: But,

Before I leave this Experiment, it may not be improper to give the following
Advertisement, viz. That a further Improvement might be made of this
Experiment, by making use of several kinds of Sublimates; which might easily be
obtained by raising several other Bodies up with Sublimate. Of which I shall
add an Instance; for having Sublimed a Mixture of equal Parts of Sal Armoniack,
and Common Sublimate, in Urinals placed in a Sand-Furnace, I obtained a
Sublimate different from the former; for Salt of Tartar dissolved, being dropped
into the Common sort dissolved in Water, turned it into an Orangetawny Color,
but changed a Solution of the other into a Liquor white like Milk.

To try the Effects of this New Sublimate, we Sublimed it with a Mixture of
Copper in the Retort, in the bottom of which was to be found a Cupreous Rosin,
which would, as the other abovementioned, turn to Verdigreese: But it is very
Remarkable in this Experiment, That the Sublimate was tinged with a
Blewish-Green, by Particles of the Copper carried along with it; and also, that
in the Receiver, was found near an Ounce of Liquor tinged with Copper: From
whence it appears, That this opened the Texture of Copper, more Powerfully than
the other Preparation of Sublimate.

The same Method is not requisite to produce a Body, provided the Result be of
the like Texture.
EXPERIMENT III.
To make it appear, That there are several Ways to produce the same Qualities
in Bodies, provided the change of Texture be the same, I shall instance a
Particular Experiment made with what the Alkymists call The Preparation of Luna
Cornea.
Luna Cornea.

Having dissolved Refined Silver in Aqua fortis, and Filtrated the Solution, we
dropped Spirit of Salt into it, till the Liquor would no longer curdle, which
being Filtrated through Cap-Paper, we dried the Remaining Substance, washed and
cleared from its Salts, whilst it remained in the Filtre, by running fair Water
through it; when dried, it was melted into a Mass in a Viol, covered with
Ashes, and being preserved in Fusion for a little time, afforded a Luna Cornea.
But if instead of dropping the Salt upon the Solution, the same Method just
before laid down, be taken with the Crystals yielded by that Solution
moderately evaporated, they will shoot into Diaphanous brittle Crystals, much
different from those of other Metals endu'd with several other Qualities, the
Quantity of Salts interposed betwixt the Parts of the Metal weighing but a
third part of the Compounded Mass.

In the Foregoing Process, the following Phenomenon may be taken Notice of, to
our present Purpose:

First, That though Acids, and Alcalyes have generally contrary Effects, yet both
Oil of Tartar per Deliquium, and Spirit of Salt have the same Effect in
Precipitating Silver; which evinces, That the Precipitation of Bodies is
neither to be attributed to Alkalyes nor Acids, considered as such; But to a
mutual Interposition and Texture of the Parts of the Matter, whereof those
Bodies consist. Secondly, It may be observed, That Bodies Diaphanous, and void
of Color, may be changed into Opacous, and white ones. Thirdly, That a white
Powder may be turned into a Yellow Body, in some measure Transparent. Fourthly,
That Silver by a Mixture of Saline Parts, may be rendered so apt to Fusion,
that it will melt like Wax at the Flame of a Candle. Fifthly, It is remarkable,
That though either of the Ingredients of this Mixed Body, would readily dissolve
in Water; yet the Composition would not. Sixthly, It is to be admired, that a
Body in Texture, not unlike a piece of Horn, should be the Result of an
Association of two rigid Bodies: Wherefore to be satisfied, That the Alteration
depended on the Texture of Parts of the Ingredients, I made use of the Oil of
Vitriol, instead of Spirit of Salt, and found that the Concrete resulting from
an Union of that with the Crystals of Silver, differed from the former, it
being much more brittle, and easily divided into Parts.
But what is more remarkable is, That a Body compounded of one of the most
Bitter, and another of the sowerest Taste, should be it self insipid, or of a
different Taste from either of them: And it is yet as strange, that Salts so
fugitive, and apt to dissipate in the Air, as those of Aqua fortis and Spirit
of Salt, should by acquiring a New Texture put on such a degree of Fixedness,
as to melt with a Metal, and that without the least perceivable Evaporation.

EXPERIMENT IV.
Several Phenomenon in Proof of the Doctrine of Forms and Qualities.
Having made a Salt of very different Qualities from all others, and which is
so nice in the Preparation, that it is as difficult to direct how it is to be
made, as to make it; I shall rather choose to mention what Phenomenon it
afforded me.

The First Thing Observable was, That though the Ingredients of this Salt were
Eminently Saline, yet the Salt it self was judged by a Stranger to be Sweet,
though it had a Sweetness peculiar to it self, as every Sweet Body has: Another
Thing Considerable is, That though it be of an Inoffensive Smell, when cool; yet
if exposed to a considerable Heat, it emitted Effluviums more strongly faetid
than those of Aqua fortis, Spirit of Armoniack Salt, or Distilled Urine;
whereas those Fumes being again united, into a Salt, became Inoffensive as
before.

And it is further to be Observed, That though all Volatile, Fixed, and Lixiviate
Salts are so specifically different from each other, that being mixed together,
they ferment, and by that means destroy each other, and unite into a Substance
different from each; yet this Salt is so powerful, as to be destroyed by none
of them; but being mixed with any of them, remains quiet, and without the least
Ebullition: But to be further satisfied that it was different from each of the
forementioned Salts; I tried several Experiments, by which I sound, that it
would neither turn Syrup of Violets red, as Acids do, nor green, as Volatile
and Fixed Salts usually do; and though Spirit of Armoniack, Salt, or Urine will
turn a Solution of Sublimate in Water, white; and Salt of Tartar will give it
an Orange Color; yet was it not in the least altered by this: Nay, though this
Salt was dropped into a Solution of Syrup of Violets, along with Acids and
Alkalyes, yet did it not hinder their Effects: Though in Dissolving several
Substances, this Salt exceeds both Aqua fortis, and Oil of Vitriol.

And it is further Observable, That though by a gentle Heat, this Salt wholly
Sublimes; yet when mixed with Liquors, it does not fly away, as other Volatile
Salts do; and though it be Volatile, yet it will run per Deliquium, as soon as
any Salt can do, and as present reassumes its own Form, the Superfluous
Moisture being taken from it; add to this, That by a gentle Heat it may be
dissolved in a Limpid Liquor. And, it is endu'd with a Quality yet more
Admirable, for it will readily dissolve, either in Spirit of Wine, or Water, or
Oils themselves: whereas some Bodies which may be dissolved in Water, cannot
incorporate with Oils or Spirit of Wine, and e converso.

EXPERIMENT V.
Several Changes in Bodies may be effected by the Addition, or Substraction,
and new Modification of Matter.
The Experiment which I am about to deliver, I presume, will be sufficient to
show, That Considerable Alterations in Bodies may be effected, by the Access of
some Parts, and a Recess of others, the Remaining Parts being Modified afresh.
The Experiment is the following, viz. Digest for some Time one Part of
Sea Salt, with a double Proportion of Spirit of Nitre; which being distilled in
a Retort, till the Caput Mortunm remains dry, the following Changes of
Qualities will be observable; First, That it becomes an Aqua Regis, and would
dissolve Gold, but not Silver; yet would precipitate the Latter when dissolved
in Aqua Regis: Secondly, The Taste is more mild, affecting the Sensory, rather
like Nitre, than common Salt: Thirdly, It becomes Fusible, like Saltpeter; and
like Nitre, dissolves in the Flame of a Candle. But Fourthly, Though it be a
Quality of Sea Salt to resist the Action of Fire, and of Acid Spirits to cool
Inflammations; yet a Lump of this Matter cast upon Coals, flamed like Nitre; as
also by an Addition of Charcoal, when melted in a Crucible, it would burn with
a lasting and splendid Flame, which would again renew, upon a fresh Addition of
burning Charcoal. But what I chiefly designed in this Experiment was to turn an
Acid into an Alkaly, An Acid may be turned into an Alkaly.
which was effected by consuming the more Fugitive Parth of the Salts, by
repeated Deflagrations; whereupon it acquired, instead of an Acid, a Lixiviate
Taste; would turn Syrup of Violets green, precipitate a Solution of Sublimate,
into an Orange Color; and as other fixed Salts, would ferment with even Spirit
of Salt; which Alkalyzate Nature, could not be supposed to proceed from the
Charcoal Ashes; because the whole Quantity made use of, could not yield above 2
or 3 Grains of Salt: Yet that I might be further satisfied, I dropped a
sufficient Quantity of Aqua fortis upon the Lixiviate Salt, till the Mixture
ceased to ferment; which upon Coagulation, shot into Saline Crystals, from the
Inflammable Qualities of which it appeared, That the Nitrous Spirit was united
with the Alkaly. And if it should be again suspected, that the Alkaline Parts
were only the Remains of some of the Aqua fortis, which might be carried over
into the Receiver: I answer, That Nitre being an Acid, it must follow that two
Acids united, were turned into an Alkaly.


And to prosecute this Experiment further, we distilled a Mixture of Spirit of
Nitre, with a double Proportion of Spirit of Salt; yet though some Parts of the
Nitre were carried over with the Salt, the Remaining Substance would wholly
flash away, if placed upon the Coals, like common Nitre.

EXPERIMENT VI.
Several Phenomenon exhibited by a Mixture of Oil of Vitriol, etc.
Having Distilled Oil of Vitriol with a Solution of Nitre in a Glass Body and
Head placed in Sand, I drew from it a Spiritus Nitri, which before
Rectification would dissolve Silver, though it was diluted with Water treble to
the weight of the Nitrous Parts. And from the Matter left behind, and
evaporated to a Dryness, I obtained a Salt, which would shoot into Crystals,
neither like those of Crude nor fixed Nitre, nor those of Vitriol, but of a
Figure hard to be described. As for the other Qualities of it, it was easily
fusible by Heat, yet was not inflammable like Nitre, though quick Coals were
thrown upon it in a Crucible; for it was so far from that, that when it was hot
enough to kindle Sulphur, it neither flashed nor flamed it self, as Saltpeter
usually does; yet this white Substance, being kept in Fusion for a while, with
a little piece of Charcoal in it, smelled very strong of Sulphur, and had a
very Fiery Taste on the Tongue, as also a Color very red.

Encouraged by these Circumstances, (they being agreeable to what Glauber
relates of his Salt) and since he made use of Vessels of Silver, I judged it
could not be Aqua fortis that he opened the Sea Salt with; nor common Spirit of
Salt, because too weak; wherefore having put an equal weight of Oil of Vitriol,
and Sea Salt together, into a Glass Cucurbite set in Sand, I obtained, besides
Phlegm, a Spirit of Salt; which mixed with Spirit of Nitre, dissolved Crude
Gold; and likewise when poured upon Spirit of Urine, and fermented, till there
no longer succeeded an Ebullition, after a gentle Evaporation, it shot into
Crystals, like Combs and Feathers; from whence it appeared to be of a like
Nature to Sal Armoniack. The Experiment sometimes also succeeded, when instead
of Oil of Vitriol, I made use of Oil of Sulphur by the Bell.

But to apply this Experiment to our present Purpose; we may observe, That though
Sea Salt be so fixed, as not to be raised without a considerable quantity of
beaten Bricks, to prevent its Fusion, and a naked Fire; yet when its Parts are
unlocked by an Addition of Oil of Vitriol, they may be carried over with a
Moderate Fire in Sand, the Vitriol being fixed and left behind; yet in other
respects considerably changed, so as to be void both of the Taste of Sea Salt
and Vitriol.

And from this Experiment, what I formerly intimated, likewise appears; viz.
That the Figures of Salts, by being embodied with other Substances, might be so
far changed, as to shoot into Crystals of very different Shapes: For from the
Caput Mortuum Dissolved, Filtrated, and leisurely Coagulated, may be obtained
Crystals, much more transparent and of a different Figure from those of
Sea Salt, and from each other.

But to conclude this Experiment, I have found this Preparation of Sal
Mirabilis very uncertain and tiresome, by reason of the Disparities of Bodies
taken to be Oil of Vitriol.

EXPERIMENT. VII.
The different Qualities of all Bodies are theproducts of Matter variously
Modified.
To show that all Metals and their different Qualities, were but the Effects of
one common Mass of Matter differently Modified, as to the Shape, Size and
Texture of their Parts; I took the following Method, viz. Having praecipitated
the Bezoardicum Minerale, by an Affusion of Spirit of Nitre, on the rectified
Oil of Butter of Antimony, I drew off by Distillation as much of the Liquor as
I could; sometimes cohobating it upon the Powder of the Antimony; which being
done, I melted pure Gold with Three or Four times it is weight of Copper, which
being put into Aqua fortis, the Copper was dissolved, and the Gold subsided in
the form of a Powder, which was further purified by an Ancient Chemist, and by
a competent heat restored to it is Natural Color; which being dissolved in a
large Quantity of the above mentioned Liquor there remained a considerable
Quantity of white Powder, which would neither be dissolved by the above named
Menstruum, nor Aqua Regis.

The Gold being a second time reduced to a Body, by a repeated Solution in the
aforesaid Menstruum, yielded more of that Powder, which reduced to a Body was
White, and being dissolved in Aqua Fortis had the same nauseous bitter Taste
with Silver; so that it is plain the Transmutation of Metals is not impossible,
nor Gold a Metal impossible to be destroyed; so that I am more apt to believe,
that by proper Menstruums the Body of Gold may be so ordered, as to communicate
a Tincture to a Liquor duly conjoined; The Transmution of Metals not impossible.
as when Sulphur and Mercury by a Coalition constitute Vermilion; since from
this Instance it is plain, that the Color of the Tincture (as well as of the
Vermilion) may be produced by the Position and Texture of some Particles of
Gold associated with that Liquor.

And that the Color of such Tinctures as well as of the Gold it self depend on
certain Particles conveniently Modified, I rather believe, because I am told,
that a known Man in the Netherlands had a certain Menstruum, which would
extract a blue Tincture from the Calx of Copper, prepared by a Dissolution in
Aqua Fortis, leaving a white Powder behind, which would by Fusion be turned
into a Metal of the same Color.

A second Inference which may be drawn from the foregoing Experiment, is, that
if Gold, one of the most Permanent Bodies, may have it is Texture destroyed,
there is no Body in Nature but may undergo a Change, when wrought on by an
appropriated Agent; and that the noblest of Metals may be Mechanically
transmuted; from whence it appears also, that the noblest of Forms, are but the
Results of the Texture of the Parts of Matter of which they consist; and a
Convention of Accidents, which are the Substratum of that Texture: So that
without a substantial Form, merely by a saline Menstruum, the Body of Gold may
be changed into another substance, of very differing Qualities from what it had
before.

But to render our present Experiment more instructive; I shall add another
Attempt, to sublime Gold after the following Method. Having then dissolved
laminated Gold in some of the above mentioned Menstruum, we drew it off in a
Retort placed in a Sand-Furnace, by which means a considerable Quantity of Gold
was elevated, and either fell into the Receiver in the Form of a Golden
colored Liquor, or shot into red Crystals like Rubies in the Neck of the
Retort; which in the Air would run per Deliquium: Where we are to observe, that
by a new Affusion of the Menstruum upon the remaining Calx, more of itwould
still be elevated by Distillation.

But to make this Experiment more serviceable, it will be necessary to Note,
that upon pouring running Mercury into this elevated Tincture, the Particles of
it were immediately Gilded, and by degrees, the Mercury being kept in Motion,
the whole Liquor lost it is Tincture, which being decanted, and the Gilded
Mercury with a good Quantity of Borax Melted in a Crucible, the elevated Gold
was reduced into a Mass; which evinces what I just now taught, viz. that a
Liquor might be Tinctured by having the Parts of that Body, from whence it
received it is Tincture, conveniently interwoven in it is Texture, without being
wholly destroyed.

And here I think it seasonable to advertise, that having elsewhere mentioned a
Volatile Gold in some Oars, where none of that Metal is to be found; I would be
understood to mean it Volatile in no other Sense, than the foregoing
Sublimation intimates, viz. that it is Volatility depends on a mixture of
Volatile Parts which carry it along with them, when dissolved into very minute
Parts; so as to be capable of Swimming in that Vehicle.

EXPERIMENT. VIII.
How so hard a Body as Silver, etc. may become a sour substance by an
alteration of Texture.
Having dissolved an Ounce of refined Silver in Aqua Fortis, and permitted it to
Crystalize, we found, that the Silver, by the addition of Acid Salts, was
increased in weight several Drachms; which distilled in a Retort, with such a
degree of heat as made the Retort red hot, yielded a Phlegm eminently Sower.
Which shows, that a very Bitter Body may yield a substance of a quite different
Taste. For the Liquor being cold in the Receiver, Smoaked as well as Smelt and
Tasted like Aqua Fortis, and by corroding Copper turned it into a Bleuish
Color.

After wards we made a Solution of Minium in Aqua Fortis, and having by
Filtration and Evaporation procured a Saccharum Saturni, we Distilled it in a
well coated Retort, over a naked Fire, and obtained an offensive Acid which had
the Smell of Aqua Fortis; which being put upon Minium, bubbled, and making a
considerable noise, presently afforded a Liquor, from which might easily be
obtained a true Sugar of Lead: Where it is observable, that the Caput mortuum,
was neither Sweet, as before Distillation; nor Sower, as the Body drawn from
it; but insipid and easily reducible, by Fusion, into a malleable Lead.

Phenomenon to be observed in this Experiment.
In which Experiments, the following Phenomenon are also Remarkable: First, that
the Salt, which increased the Silver in weight no more than a third or fourth
Part, was able to Sublime the greatest Part of that fixed Body.

Secondly, that the Parts of the same Liquor, being mixed with three several
Metals, may produce as many different Tastes; though the same Aqua Fortis should
be successively made use of in those three Experiments, and howsoever varied in
respect of Order in the Trial: And here we are to observe likewise, that Part
of the Distilled Spirit of Nitre, being poured on the Caput Mortuum of
Saccharum Saturni, turned some Parts of it into a Vitriol; and another Part of
it being poured upon Filings of Silver, the Silver, being partly dissolved with
a hissing Noise, was Coagulated into a Bitter Salt.

EXPERIMENT IX.
Because Transmutation of Bodies, whose Textures are esteemed Primordial, as
those of the Elements, and which are found to be Ingredients of most
Compositions here below, will be a further Confirmation of the Possibility of
Altering the Textures of other Bodies; I shall subjoyn, what Progress I have
made, in order to turn Water into Earth.

A Transformation of Water into Earth.
Having therefore in a Glass Vessel distilled Fair Rainwater, and several times
re-distill'd it again; we found, that after every Distillation, there was a
considerable Quantity of white Earth remaining at the bottom of the Vessel,
which was more plentifully afforded in the latter Distillations, than the
first; and therefore we had the greater Reason to believe, it could be nothing
else but a certain quantity of Water, turned into Earth; which afforded the
following Phanomena, viz. 1. Being put into a Microscope in the Sunbeams,
Phenomenon exhibited.
it appeared to consist of Parts exceeding fine, which were as fine in the
Microscope, as Hair-powder usually is to the Eye; yet not in the least
Transparent. 2. Being mixed with Water, it turned it into a whitish Color, as
the Powder of white Marble usually does; yet being settled in the Bottom, it
remained undissolv'd. 3. After it had lain a considerable time in a Red-hot
Crucible, it was neither diminished in quantity, nor did it in the least smoke.
4. It exceeded Water in weight, so as to be equal to twice its Bulk of Common
Water, being almost as heavy as Wood-ashes, freed from their Salts; which, to
its Bulk of Water, is as 1 to 2, which does not much come short of the weight
of white Glass, which is twice and a half heavier than its weight of Water: So
that from these Phenomenon, we had Reason to term the Forementioned white
Substance, Earth; considering likewise its fixedness, and other Qualities.


But further it is to be Observed, That the Glass in which it was distilled,
was not in the least damaged by this Process: as also, That an Ounce of Water
yielded six Drachms of Powder, Water almost wholly convertible into Earth.
a considerable quantity of Water still remaining behind.

So that this Experiment is no small Confirmation of our Hypothesis: For if
Elements themselves may be Transmuted, and Artificially Destroyed, by an
Alteration of the Texture of their Parts; why may not Considerable Changes be
effected also in other Bodies, by a Local Motion, and a New Manner and Form of
Union of Parts, of different Figures and Sizes; since in this Experiment, the
Parts of Water being modified anew, form a Solid Body, of very different
Qualities from what belonged to it before, as want of Transparency, Solidity,
etc.

How Water acquires the Form of a Solid Powder.
As for the Manner of its being so modified anew, it may easily be conceived,
That the Parts of Water, being put into Motion, and rubbing upon one another,
by violent Occursions, might be so altered and adapted as to stick together,
and to form several little Moleculae, which being more condensed, and
consequently heavier than Water, could no longer swim in it; but obtained the
several New Qualities before mentioned.

And that the Change was thus effected, we have Reason to believe; since by a
bare Circulation, in a just Degree of Heat, Quicksilver will assume the Form
of a Powder, which will not with so much ease be raised by the Fire, as the
Mercury it self; but this will be further illustrated by the Tenth Experiment.

Inferences drawn against the Doctrine of the Chemists.
Therefore to draw Inferences from this Experiment, which may disfavour the
Hypostatical Principles of the Chemists; If Water be capable of being changed
into Earth, by the same Reason the other Ingredients of Bodies may; and in the
Analization of Bodies there may be a Transmutation of Substances, as well as a
Separation of Pre-existent Principles. From hence also may be brought strong
Arguments against Helmont; who, because he boasted of an Alkahest, which, he
says, would turn all Bodies into a Liquor, therefore concluded all Bodies were
made of Water; for by the same Reason I might say, All Bodies are made of
Earth; because Water may be turned into Earth: So that though he should turn all
Bodies into Water, yet that Water being again capable of being disguised, it
would only show, That Water and Earth may be mutually Transmuted, by a
successive Change of Texture.

But to leave these Reflections, I shall mention some Scruples, concerning this
Transmuted Powder, which I could not have time to satisfy my self in: As,
Whether the Water Remaining was lighter than before Distillation? Whether the
Particles of Insipid Bodies, may act as Menstruums in the Dissolution of
others? not but that they may be so changed in the Vessels of Plants, as to
become sharp and powerfully penetrating. Whether the Weight of the
Glass-Vessel, was diminished by this Experiment? I should likewise be willing
to be satisfied, Whether Water it self be truly a Homogeneous Body? which if it
be, it will be strange, that without the help of a Plastic Power, or Seminal
Principle, it should be so transmuted; since that a bare Convention of the
Particles of a Fluid into a Concrete should alter their Specific Gravity, is
hard (if not impossible) to be paralleled by Art.

But in this Experiment it is further Remarkable, That Oil of Vitriol poured
upon this Powder, would corrode it, and that by an Effusion of Spirit of Salt
there was raised a considerable Ferment; as when Spirit of Salt is put upon
Lapis Stellaris: So that I suspected the Rainwater might be impregnated with
some of the Sandy Parts of Glass dissolved, by the help of the Fire, and
actuating the Particles of it; but this Suspicion was partly taken off, because
I had observed the like Ebullition, upon a Mixture of Spirit of Salt with
Wood-ashes, which were cleared of their Salts in Boiling Water.

But to conclude this Experiment, we may further reflect upon the foregoing
Suspicions; that if the Body of the Glass-Vessel were in the least dissolved in
this Operation, it will be a powerful Instance of the Force of Insipid
Menstruums; and it will be no less a Confirmation of the Doctrine of Forms and
Qualities before delivered, that Water it self is subject to undergo such
considerable Changes, as this Experiment shows it is.

I might produce a great deal more on this Occasion, to corroborate what I have
delivered concerning Transmutations; but I shall only add, that I, as well as
two several Persons whom I employed, have without the Addition of any thing,
obtained from Spirit of Wine, which was wholly inflammable, a considerable
Quantity of Phlegm; and that too, without its being affected by any Visible
Body.

EXPERIMENT X.
Consider able Changes may be wrought in Bodies by Mixture, and the Texture
thence resulting.
To conclude this Chapter, I shall add an Experiment, to show what sudden
Productions and Alterations of Qualities may be effected by a Coalition of the
smallest number of Ingredients, generally taken for Homogeneous Bodies; from
whence it will appear, That the Changes of Bodies, in themselves considerable,
may be effected by very easy Mixtures, viz.

Having by Degrees mixed an equal weight of Spirit of Wine, and Oil of Vitriol
together, and placed them in a Bolt-head, stopped close with hard Wax, and a
Cork; digest the Mixture in a Moderate Heat, for some time; then pour it out
into a Glass Cucurbit, luting on a Head and a Receiver, to preserve the Subtle
Spirits from flying away; then with a moderate Heat draw off the Spirit of
Wine, till the Drops begin to come over-sowrish; then shift the Receiver, and
carefully go on with the Distillation, increasing the Fire till as much is
drawn off as you can, keeping the Substance remaining in the Cucurbit, in a
Glass well stopped, and secure from the Air.

The Phenomenon exhibited by this Experiment were the following: First, That
the Spirit, first drawn from these two Inodorous Bodies, was endowed with a
Smell different from all others, and parts though pleasant and fragrant, yet very
subtle and penetrating. Secondly, That the Liquor, drawn off last, had a very
strong Sulphurous Smell, which stunk, and affected the Sensory, so powerfully,
that it would almost take away one's Breath. Thirdly, This Mixture yielded a
Liquor, which would mix with neither of the former; yet was very subtle,
pleasant, and Aromatical. Fourthly, The Substance remaining in the Bottom of
the Vessel, was Opacous, and almost as black as Jet, and withal very brittle.
Fifthly, And though it was made up of two Liquors, the one corrosive, and the
other inflammable, and both of very pungent Tastes; yet was it void of Taste,
and could not without great difficulty, if at all, be brought to burn. Sixthly,
Neither would it be mixed for some Days with Water, though the Oil and Spirit,
readily diffuse themselves in that Liquor; besides, it was of so very fixed a
Nature that it would not be raised by a strong and lasting Fire, though both Oil
and Vitriol, and Spirit of Wine be extremely Volatile. And now,

Having thus in short laid down these Experiments, as sufficient Proof of the
Doctrine before delivered, I shall conclude with this Reflection, viz. That in
all the Changes and Alterations, that have been effected by Art, it appears,
that they are so far from depending on the Imaginary Substantial Forms of the
Schools, that they evidently appear to be the sole Effects of Local Motion, so
altering the Figures and Sizes of the Minute parts of Bodies, or otherwise
transposing them; as, upon a fresh Association and Coalition of them, to form
New Concretes, of Textures very different from the former. And if Motion, Bulk,
and Shape, together with peculiar Textures, be enough to cause so many
different Phenomenon, as have been laid down; there is no Reason, why other
Qualities may not be produced by the same Fertile Principles; since all the
Difference betwixt the Works of Nature and Art, in altering the Forms of
Natural Bodies, lies in this, viz. That in the Works of Nature Active and
Passive Bodies casually meet together; and in the Latter the different
Substances, concerned in every New Production, are brought together by an
Artist; for in both the Agent acts as a Natural Agent.

CHAP. X. An Experiment, with some Considerations touching the differing Parts
and Redintegration of Saltpeter.
SALTPETER is a Concrete so universally concerned in the Composition of most
Bodies, that it will be of no small Import to Natural Philosophy, to enquire
thoroughly into the Nature of it; which will in some Measure appear, by
considering how many Substances may be drawn from it, or turned into it; which
will be briefly intimated in the following Experiment.

An Attempt to redintegrate the Form of Saltpeter.
Having, according to the usual Method, Crystaliz'd Nitre, we melted four Ounces
of it in a Crucible into a Limpid Liquor, throwing in Live-Coals successively,
till it would kindle and fulminate no longer; and continuing it in a strong
Fire a considerable time, to dissipate the remaining Volatile Parts, and then
breaking the Crucible, we divided the fixed Nitre immediately into two
Portions; one of which being dissolved in as much Water as was sufficient, we
dropped in Spirit of Saltpeter, till the Ebullition, raised by the Mixture of
these Liquors, wholly ceased; and then filtrating the mixed Liquor, we exposed
it to the Air in an open Glass-Viol; and on the other Part undissolv'd, we
likewise dropped the same Spirit, till the Firmentation ceased, exposing it to
the Air in an open Glass-Jar.

In the former Mixture, wherein the Water was put, in a few Hours certain
Crystals of Saltpeter stuck to the Lower Parts of the Glass, amongst which
were several other Crystals, like Mustard Seed, encompassed with a downy
Substance. The Crystals the next Day being considerably greater, were taken
out, and both by their Burning and Shape, appeared to be Nitrous, ( Nitrous
Salts being furnished with flat Sides, which when opposite are usualy
parallel;) and as for that downy Matter which adhered to some of them, we
judged it to proceed from the Disproportion of the Volatile and Fixed Parts of
the Nitre, which were to be joined together anew. These things being observed,
we poured the remaining Liquor into an open Glass-Vessel, which in about three
Weaks-time, being again Saturated with Petre, we poured it from the Salt, and
evaporated it in a Digesting Furnace.

The other Mixture, which was only fixed Nitre and Spirit of Saltpeter, for
the most part presently Subsided in the Form of a Salt, which when dried in the
Air, was of very irregular Figures; and, in some Parts, not much different in
Shape from Saltpeter; which it also much resembled in Burning, though the
Deflagration was in some measure peculiar to it self. But this Salt, together
with the Liquor swimming upon it, being preserved in the Air for about a Month
longer, after Evaportion, the one half shot into Crystals, which burnt much
like Petre, and had a Similar Figure, though a different Taste; and the other
half, being speedily exhaled, shot into Crystals, of a distinct Figure from all
others.

Cautions to be observed in the Foregoing Experiment.
Now to make this Experiment clearer, the following Things are to be observed;
1. That in Fixing the Nitre, New-Coals are not to be cast into the Crucible,
till the former are almost spent, or be thrown out by the violent Exhalations
of Nitrous and Volatile Parts. 2. That the Quantity of Spirit of Nitre dropp'
upon the Fixed Nitre, was almost proportionable to the Saltpeter, spent in the
Fixing of it. 3. That this Fixed Nitre was very little different in Taste from
Salt of Tartar; had the same aptness to Absorb Air, and to relaxate in moist
Air: Yet it differed in Color, being betwixt a Blue and a Green One, which it
lost upon the Affusion of Spirit of Nitre.


Another Method of Reuniting the Parts of Saltpeter.
But this Method being tedious, I shall propose a Way more expeditions, which is
this; Having run Fixed Nitre per deliquium, and by Filtration separated it from
its Faces, we dropped upon the Liquor Spirit of Nitre, which, after a Ferment
usual to a Mixture of those Liquors, presently shot into Crystals, in Shape, as
well as Nature, manifestly Nitrous.

A Third Method.
Another way we took was this: Having Impregnated a Solution of Fixed Nitre in
Water, with Spirit of Nitre, and filtrated it through Cap-Paper, the Cool
Liquor, in a short time, shot into Crystals, like those of Petre; and the
Liquor, being again Evaporated, afforded a fresh Quantity of Crystals not
unlike the former.

But lest the Sal-Petre re-produc'd by the Coalition of these two Bodies,
should be thought to lodge in the Fixed Nitre; and only to be unyok'd by their
Solution, it is requisite to annex, That the greatest Quantity that can be
supposed to remain in the Fixed Nitre, would not amount to such a Quantity as
that Mixture affords: And to make the Matter less suspicious, we impregnated a
Solution of Potashes, after the same manner as we had done the Fixed Nitre,
Saltpeter obtained from Potashes, Aqua fortis, and Salt of Tartar.
which after Filtration and Evaparation, shot into Crystals, which 0103 0207 V
3 were very like Saltpeter in Taste, as well as their Deflagration upon
Live-coals. We likewise obtained a small Quantity of Saltpeter, from Aqua
fortis and Salt of Tartar associated.

But to draw Inferences from the Foregoing Experiment; from hence we may learn,
That the Sensible Qualities of Bodies may be accounted for by the Mechanical
Motion, together with the Figure and Disposition, or Modification of their
Parts.

And first, though Saltpeter be a Body inwardly, and in it self cooling; yet the
Parts of it differently Modified, in our Experiment, being put together, do
immediately put each other into so violent a Heat, that I could with much ado
hold the Glass in my Hand; so that Heat seems to be nothing but a quick Motion
of the finest Particles of Bodies, since it no longer continued in that
Mixture, than the Parts of it were in Agitation.

Upon the Mixture of these two, viz. the Spirit of Nitre, with the Fixed, there
was likewise produced an audible Sound, proceeding from the Percussion of the
Air, by the swiftly and impetuously agitated Parts of the Mixture: A Sound like
to which is produced by a hot Coal cast into Water, or into melted Nitre in a
Crucible, though the Latter causes a Sound much louder. Which Sound probably
proceeded from the Percussion of the Air, because the Motion of a Bullet, or a
Stick, where the Quickness of the Percussion puts the Air into an Undulating
Motion, will cause a Sound, as soon as that Undulating Motion reaches the Ear;
and it is further confirmed, because that Sound no longer continues, than the
Parts are violently agitated: And here it is to be observed, That the Sound,
produced by the Mutual Conflict, ceases long before the Heat, which is acquired
by that Ebullition; from whence it may be inferred, that the same Intestine
Motion of Parts which are able to produce Heat, are incapable of causing
Sounds; as Amber continues warm a considerable time after the Sound, made in
rubbing of it, cease.

Several Qualities flow from an Alteration of Texture.
We observed likewise, That the Fixed Petre was of a Color betwixt Blue and
Green, which it presently lost upon the Mixture of the Acid Spirit, the
Disposition of Parts being so altered, as to reflect the Rays of Light
differently to the Eye; A Change not unlike which happens upon the Exposing
Fixed Nitre to the Air: And it is not less to be admired, That Soot, which is
Black, and a Congeries of Opacous Exhalations, should, by the help of a good
Fire, fill the Receiver with Fumes as white as Milk: And the Colors to be
observed upon the Sublimation of Black Antimony, and White Sal-Armoniack are no
less pleasant.

But to return to the Experiment: Having not long ago attempted to make
Saltpeter, of Salt of Tartar, and Aqua fortis, the Mixture united, proved to
be of a very Green Color, which resided more peculiarly in some Parts of it
than others, though the Salt of Tartar was a particular Preparation, whose
Crystals were as white as Sugar Candy. It is on this occasion likewise further
to be observed, That though Fumes of Nitre, raised Distillation, be of a Red
Color; yet they condense into a Liquor altogether void of it; and also, That
Fixed Nitre, though an Opacous Body, yet does it unite, with the imbibed Spirit,
into Diaphanous Crystals.

Several Qualities destroyed. and regained by the Redintegration of Saltpeter.
There is likewise to be observed, Upon the Mixture of these two Ingredients, a
very offensive Smell, caused by the Spirit of Saltpeter, emitting stinking
Exhalations, stirred up by the Mutual Conflict betwixt it, and its Fixed Salt;
where it is strange, that this Mixture should have a Smell, which is neither in
Nitre, nor either of the Ingredients; and yet, that it should lose that Smell
again, when turned into Nitre.

Besides the Taste of the Spirit, being strongly Acid, and the Taste of Nitre,
like that of Salt of Tartar; it is surpizing, that these two should unite into
a Body of so much less pungency in Taste as Nitre, bateing that it is a little
sharper by reason of some Spirituous Parts sticking to the Particles of the
Nitre.

But besides these there are several other Reflections may be made on the
preceding Experiment; for it seems a Question, whether there is any real
necessity of a distinct Sulphur to render a Body Inflammable, or whether rather
Inflammability depends on a disposition of Matter to be put into Motion by the
help of adventitious Bodies; as when the Ingredients of our Experiment are
mixed; or when a Piece of Iron is cast into Spirit of Nitre; for the Parts of
that Liquor, which before were quiet and cold, meeting with Pores which
disorder their Motion, they presently begin to move among one another with a
strange Rapidity, and to cause such a Heat, that the Vessel would burn the
Hands of them that held it: And here it may not be amiss to take notice of one
thing further, that Occurs in our Experiment, viz. that though Nitre put upon a
burning Coal, or a burning Coal being cast into it, will consume it self, in a
Blue Flame, yet when it is contiguous to the Sides of the Crucible which is red
Hot, it melts without the least Flame. It may be also worth Enquiry, why Nitre
which is a solid Body should not rather stick in the Form of Sublimate to the
Receiver, like Sal Armoniack, than condense only into a Liquor, which does not
again coagulate as some Volatile Spirits do.

But leaving these Phenomenon, I shall observe further, that though Spirit of
Nitre, exposed to the Air Insensibly exhales, yet when associated with it is own
fixed Salt, it admits no such Effluviums. Another thing to be observed is, that
upon a Mixture of these two Liquors, several Saline Parts are tossed out of the
Glass into the Air, which falling down again, several Grains of Salt will
remain on the outside of the Vial, which will be visible if the Experiment be
tried in the Sun Beams. And that there is a very brisk Motion amongst the Parts
of Spirit of Nitre, is evident by dropping some of it into a solution of Salt
of Tartar; for immediately some Grains were shattered in Pieces, and thrown up
to the top with a seeming Violence; till the strength of those Liquors was
mutually diminished by their frequent Occursions: And that the Parts of each
have contrary tendencies in their Motions is plain, from this, viz. if when the
Ferment ceases, more of one of these Liquors was dropped in, there followed no
Ebullition, till some of the other was added to Ferment with it.

The same Particles of Matter have different Effects when in a Fluid, from what
they have in a solid Form.
And here it is seasonable to observe what different Effects the Parts of these
Bodies have when at liberty and disjoined in Liquids, from what they produce
when locked up in Concretes, though their Effects, even then, are not wholly to
be attributed to the briskness of their Motion, but also, to their determinate
Sizes; by which means Aqua Fortis, which leaves Gold untouched, will dissolve
Silver; yet, by an Addition of Sal Armoniack, it having acquired a new Figure,
and a peculiar Motion, it Works upon Gold; and for the like Reasons a Solution
of fixed Nitre will dissolve Unctuous Bodies, which the Acid Spirit will not
Work upon.

Again we may observe, that the several substances into which Saltpeter is
reduced, viz. the fixed Salt and the Volatile Liquor, are both different from
the Concrete it self; which is an Argument against those Chemists that pretend,
that Bodies Distilled, retain the Virtues of those Bodies they are Distilled
from; Chemistry rather destroys than discovers the Principles of Bodies.
for the Acid Spirit of Nitre will precipitate the same Bodies, which fixed
Nitre dissolves. And so Spirit of Nitre will turn a Tincture of Brasil into a
Yellow Color, which it will lose, and in some Measure by an addition of a
Tincture of fixed Nitre, regain the former, whereas a Solution of Saltpeter
changes neither of these Tinctures. Eut to proceed,

This Experiment gives us Reason to believe, that the Air is considerably
concerned in the Production of Saltpeter, and in giving a Figure to it is
Salts; since the Crystals, which shoot in the Solution exposed to the open Air,
are of a more exact Size and Figure, than those obtained after a quicker
Evaporation. Besides which we have observed, that a Mixture of Aqua Fortis and
Salt of Tartar yielded Crystals much more like Nitre, when it had been exposed
to the the Air for some time, than what it afforded upon an immediate
Crystallization.

As for the Reason why the Crystals which shoot in the Air, are more naturally
Figured than others; I conceive it to be, because the Air is a more quiet and
undisturbed Vehicle for them to move leasurely in, by which means they have the
Liberty of uniting as they ought, to form Crystals of a natural Figure, which
Guess is confirmed, because the Crystals which shot in Water, where they have
room enough, and an indifferent Vehicle, were more perfect than those, which
were produced by a Mixture of the nitrous Powder and Saline Spirit, where they
were forced, for want of Room, to Cry stalize, before they had time to Convene
after a manner requisite to make them of a natural Figure and Size.

But to proceed: This Experiment, which shows how a Body divided into different
substances, by Distillation, may be again united into an Original Concrete,
will be a very strong and convincing Instance to prove, that the Forms and
Qualities of Bodies depend on an essential Modification of their Parts; and
that the difference observable in particular Substances, depends on a different
Texture, and a Coalition of Parts of different Figures and Sizes; so that the
Redintegration of Bodies is no more, but a restoring of their former Parts into
the same Order and Position, being Artificially handled, so as to acquire their
former Sizes and Figures in order to their Coalition.

Yet this I think necessary to be represented, viz. that the Composition of
Nitre is so little Organical, that it will be hard to judge what success, in
order to Redintegration, may be expected in other Bodies, where the Fabrics of
them are so curious, by Reason of their numerous Ingredients, and the curious
Contexture of them, that the latter is not to be imitated by Art, in the
Production of Substances much less Organical, than the Parts of living Animals.

Chemical Medicines laid aside too rashly.
The last Observation I shall make on our Experiment, is, That from what has
been said it may be thought that some Chemical Medicines may be too Rashly laid
aside by some Physicians, who suppose, that the Menstruums made use of in their
Preparations, are in some measure mixed with them; since, besides that those
Salts may by care be washed away, several Parts of them may be so altered by
Corrosion, that those, associating with other Particles of the Body they work
upon, may degenerate into an innocent Concrete: An Instance of which we have in
our Experiment, where a corrosive Spirit and a Caustic fixed Salt, unite into
an innocent Medicine. And that Corrosive Salts may in a great measure be
dulcified by their acting on other substances, is evident in a Mixture of
Spirit of Vitriol and Crabs Eyes, or any other testaceous Body. And again,
though Vinegar powerfully corrodes calcined Lead, yet uniting with it, it
constitutes a Sweet Body, in which the sharpness of Vinegar is perfectly
destroyed. And though it be an Argument usually alleged against the use of
Medicines so prepared, that from several of them corrosive Particles may be
drawn; yet since the same may be Effected by the Action of Fire upon
Saltpeter, the Objection is as invalid as the general Practice of Physicians
can make it.

CHAP. XI. Containing the History of Fluidity.
WHETHER Fluidity and Firmness, might not with more Reason be esteemed States
than Qualities of Bodies, or not; this is most certain, that they are to be
accounted the most General Affections of Matter, all Bodies being either Fluid
or Solid: If then these Qualities or States of Bodies be so General, it will be
of moment to consider the Causes of them; and the rather in this place, because
the Foregoing Experiments of Saltpeter may serve to illustrate them.

The Definition of a Fluid Body.
To proceed then: A Body is said to be Fluid, because it consists of Parts,
which easily slip upon one another's Surfaces to and fro, when moved, by Reason
of the Porous Interstices, which remain betwixt those Parts, which they are
made up of, they not being wholly Contiguous on every side; and also, because
by Virtue of that Motion, they spread and diffuse themselves on every side,
till opposed by some Solid Body, to the Internal Superficies of which, they
presently adapt themselves.

And what Thoughts Epicurus, and the Ancient Corpuscularians had of Fluidity,
will appear from these Verses of his Paraphrast Lucretius.

Illa autem debent ex Laevis at que Rotundis
Esse magis, fluido quae Corpore liquida constant.
Nec retinentur enim inter se glomeramina quaeque,
Et procursus item in proclive Volubilis extat.
And indeed, we may rationally believe, That the Smoothness of their Parts may
much contribute to the Fluidity of Liquors, as well as the Globular Figures of
them; though there are several Fluid Bodies, whose Parts are of Figures very
various, besides Flame and Air; the Figures of whose Parts are very irregular.

Bodies whose Parts are less condensed than Water, to be esteemed Fluid.
And here we are to take Notice, That to render a Body Fluid, there is no need
that its Parts should be so closely condensed, as those of Water are; since
Flame and Smoke may be so managed, as to resemble Liquid Bodies; of the Latter
of which we have Proof, by blowing Rosemary-Smoke into a Glass-pipe, which, if
when it is filled, the lower End be stopped, and the Pipe be held in a
Perpendicular Line, the Surface of the Fumes will subside till Level; and though
the Pipe be inclined several ways, yet the Superficies of the Smoke answers to
the Horizon, till the Glass be further inclined; and then, the Smoke will run
along the Pipe like Water, dispersing it self afterward in the Air.

But to return to the Cause of Fluidity: We conceive that there are Three
things requisite to render Bodies Fluid: Minuteness of Parts requisute to
Fluidity.
1. The Minuteness of the Particles which constitute them; by which they are
disposed to an Intestin Motion, and to be preserved in it more easily; as the
Parts of Lead, Quicksilver, and Gold, when dissolved by a Menstruum, are
easily raised and mixed with the Parts of that Menstruum. Nay, Fluidity so much
depends on the Minuteness of the Parts of Matter, which constitutes Fluid
Bodies, that the Parts of Antimony, dissolved and broken into small Corpuscles,
may be turned into Butter of Antimony; and, that Butter of Antimony, is chiefly
made up of the Substance of the Antimony, is evident, since by a Mixutre of
fair Water, a white Calx will precipitate, easily convertible into Glass of
Antimony. And Nature her self supplies us with further Instances; since the
very Substance of Bones, is, by Comminution in the Stomachs of Dogs, turned
into a Liquor: And to confirm this Observation, I shall add, That I knew a
certain Gentleman, who was a close Student, who lived for several Days together
without the least Drink, though in the mean time he sweat moderately, and easily
enough, his Urine being agreeable to his Constitution, as the Urine of other
Men's generally is to theirs: But that Solid Substances may yield, and be
turned into Fluids, by a Comminution of their Parts, may be evinced by the
Fusibility of Metals; since the more the Massy Particles of Metal are broke
into small Parts, the more their Fluidity is increased.

A Fluid may be obtained from a Consistent Body.
And here it may not be unseasonable to enquire, how it comes to pass, That a
Transparent Liquor should be drawn from such Brittle Bodies as Common Salt; I
know it is usually alleged, That the Fire only separates the Moist, from the
Dry Parts; but since Bodies already Calcined or Melted, must needs by the
Action of the Fire, have their moist Parts likewise so separated; it is rather
probable, That the Fire only divides their Parts, and puts them into a violent
Agitation, by which they are raised in the Form of Vapors, which falling into
the Receiver, condense into a Fluid; whose Parts, by reason of their Shape and
Size, being apt for Motion, continue to move up and down, and so preserve that
Body in the Form of a Fluid, the Motion of the Air, or of some Interposed
Bodies concurring to preserve the Parts of that in Motion likewise; and that
the Air abounds with Parts, perpetually in a various Motion will appear by and
by.

Some Bodies more easily preserved fluid than others.
But in the mean time that a much greater Degree of Motion is requisite to
preserve some Bodies in a Fluid Form than others, is plain, since several
Bodies will be froze with one Degree of Cold, with which others will not; and
though the Watery Parts of Wine, in some Countries, will freeze; yet the
Spirituous Corpuscles of the same Liquor remain untouched: And though it is
evident, by the help of good Weather-Glasses, that Cold condenses the Air; yet
it was never so far condensed, as to become Ice; because the perpetual Motion
concurring with the Minuteness and Shape of its Parts, they are always in an
Agitation requisite to keep it in that Form; and it is not improbable, but that
the Parts of Salt are very Minute; since, from Experiments before mentioned, it
appears, That Spirit of Salt and Urine, will unite into a Sal-Armoniack; and it
is further confirmed, since, Common-Salt, mixed with Aqua fortis, will dissolve
Gold, as well as Spirit of Salt joined with the Latter: and though Crude Nitre it
self, be mixed with Spirit of Salt, the Resulting Mixture will supply the Place
of an Aqua Regis. And I am informed that, that a Chemist in Holland, drew no
less than fourteen Ounces of Spirit from a Pound of Salt, a whitish Clay being
made use of instead of the Common Caput Mortuum; and that when he had
dephlegm'd the Spirit, twelve Ounces remained very highly rectified; which may
be something in favor of Beguinus, who pretends to have got a Pound of Spirit
from a pound of Salt. But it may be a Question, Whether the Fluidity of these
Bodies may not in part proceed from the Action of the Fire, working upon some
Parts of the Concrete; since a Phlegm or Water may be obtained from Rectified
Spirit, so as to change Part of it into a moist Body like Water. And this will
rather be thought probable, if we consider and believe what the Famous Helmont
says, viz. That he could reduce Oil and Salt into Insipid Water, The Figures of
the Parts of Bodies, as well as their Sizes, contribute to tseir Fluidity.
without the help of that Noble Alkahest, which would render Gross Bodies
wholly Liquid.

And here it is requisite to add, That it is not only the Sizes of the Parts of
Bodies, that endues them with a Disposition to Fluidity, but also, their
Shapes; and I am the more confirmed in this Opinion, because, having distilled
Oil of Olives in a Glass-Retort, per se, near a third Part of it was coagulated
in the Receiver, into a whitish Substance, not very much unlike Butter; where
the distilled Substance, which usually is fluid, though drawn from solid
Concretes, was on the contrary in this Experiment, a Consistent one, yielded by
a Liquid; for which no other Reason can be given, but that the Shape of the
Liquid Parts were so altered, as to become unfit for Motion.

But to return to the Reason of Fluidity, it is evident, That in pouring of
Sand, Corn, Flower, Apples, Walnuts, etc. out of a Sack, that that Aggregate of
Bodies, whose Parts are the least, appears most like Liquids; and it is
commonly observed, That Whites of Eggs, by being beaten with a Whisk, presently
lose their Clamminess and Viscidity, and are reduced to a thin and fluid
Substance, their Parts being broke asunder, and more minutely divided. And I
have observed, that That Jelly (which is by the Vulgar thought to fall from a
Star) by being a long time digested in a well-stopp'd Glass, became a permanent
Liquor.

Again, it is observed, That when Silver is to be cast in Moulds, and to
receive the Curious and Fine Impressions of Hair-Lines, the Metal is not only
to be poured in very hot, but to be kept a Considerable Time in Fusion, before
it is thin enough to run into those Lines, and to take exact Impressions of
them; from whence it appears, That Bodies already fluid, may become more fluid;
and the like Instances might be brought from other Bodies, as Turpentine, Oil,
etc. And if what Helinont asserts of the Liquor Alkahest, be true, viz. That it
will turn all Substances, whether Minerals, Metals, Plants, or Animals, into a
fluid Substance, of an equal Weight with each other; then it follows, That to
divide a Body into Parts small enough, is enough to make it fluid. And to this
I must add, that considerable Changes may be effected, merely by a long
Digestion in Vessels well stopped, and placed in a Convenient Heat.

2. The Second Requisite to constitute a Fluid Body, is, That it should have
considerable Vacuities or Pores, betwixt the Parts of it; Porousness in Bodies
requisite to their Fluidity.
for if there were no such Spaces, the Parts being put into Motion, would not
have Space to continue it in, nor could one Particle by the Impulse of another,
be forced to give way. But before I proceed, it will be requisite here to Note,
That by Spaces, I would not be thought to mean Vacuities properly so called;
but that there is no such Substance betwixt them, which will obstruct the
Motions of the more Solid Parts.

This Caution being premised, I shall (to illustrate this Second Requisite)
observe, That Snow, which is of an open and slight Texture, before it is
compressed, may soon be squeezed into so close and compact a Lump, as to resist
a very strong Pressure; the Air, which before was interposed betwixt the Parts
of it, being pressed out. Again, we may observe, That when Water is closed up
in a Bladder, and wants its Liberty to move in a yielding and free Medium, the
Parts thus confined together, resist Impressions like a Solid Body; and this
Experiment I the rather made use of, than a Bladder distended with Air, because
the Distention of that, might partly be attributed to the Spring of the
Included Air.

How such Vacuities contribute of Fluidity.
But it is further to be observed, That though such Vacuities are necessary to
constitute Fluid Bodies, yet they are only so, to use School-Term, as Removens,
prohibens, i. e. they prevent the Inconveniences which must be the Consequence
of a Plentitude, viz. Want of Liberty to move; or in other Words, as they
dispose the Parts of a Body, to yield to each other's Motion. And here I would
Note, That though in most Liquid Bodies, this Doctrine may take place; yet I
conceive it not altogether absurd, to Question, Whether Matter may not be so
exquisitely agitated and divided, as to fill up these Vacuities, and to be
squeezed into any Figure, as Occasion requires. But not to spend Time in
examining this Point at the present, I shall proceed

A Perpetual Motion if Parts requisite to Fluidity.
3. To the Principal and last Requisite, in Modifying a Fluid Body; which is,
That all the Particles of a Fluid Body, should be separately and variously
moved up and down, either by Virtue of some subtle Matter diffused through
their Substance, or an inherent Quality of their own. For the Difference
betwixt Solid and Fluid Bodies, seems to consist in this, viz. That the Parts
of Solids are at rest, and not so apt to yield to the Pressure of One's Finger,
as the Parts of Liquids are, which are in Motion; since the Latter being
already agitated to and fro, it is much more easy to guide that Motion, than to
put the Parts of a Body into Motion; whose Parts, according to the Laws of
Motion, must be at rest, till moved by an Agent powerful enough to put them
into Motion.

But when once they are put into Motion, by the same Laws, they must continue
so, till stopped by some other Body; and consequently, they must be in a
perpetual Change, as to their Places and Order: so that hence it appears, why
some Bodies come to be so soft, since such small Parts of Matter, being in
Perpetual Motion, must needs yield very easily to the Touch, and give way to
the Impressions of other Bodies. And also, it cannot but dispose them easily to
be confined by the Vessels they are contained in, and as apt to disperse
themselves, when Liberty is given them.

Having premised this Brief Account of Fluidity, I shall now proceed to
illustrate it by Experiments: And first, by that concerning Saltpeter.

The Doctrine of Fluidity illustrated by Experiments.
Saltpeter then may become a Fluid Body, either by having the Particles of it
dissolved in Water, so that they may move up and down, and to give way to the
Impression of an External Agent, as the other Parts of that Liquid do; or it
may put on a Liquid Form, by being exposed to the Air in a moist Cellar, where
by running per Deliquium, the Saltpeter will be dissolved, and put on so far
the Form of a Liquid, as to have all it is Parts in an Agitation, sufficient to
rank it amongst Fluid Bodies.

But Saltpeter may put on a Liquid Form, without the Addition of a Liquid
Body; as first, It may be reduced to so fine a Powder, as to resemble a Liquid,
in the pouring of it out of one Vessel into another, besides the other
Requisites of a Fluid Body; viz. That it has Vacuities betwixt its Parts, and
that they may be easily put into Motion; only they differ from the Parts of
Liquids in some Respects, since the Powder has not it is Parts always in
Motion; besides the Vacuities are more sensible: But notwithstanding, if by the
force of Fire each of these Parts be again subdivided, those insensible
Corpuscles, being violently agitated, make up a Fluid Body: So the Particles of
Metals, being by the same Agent separated and put into Motion, do not only move
variously one amongst another, but are sometimes tossed a considerable height
into the Air. And not only Fire, but some other Bodies, which are sensibly
Cold, may, provided the Texture and Motion of their Parts be rightly disposed,
reduce several Substances to a Liquid Form; so Camphire puts on the Form of an
Oil, when swimming upon Aqua fortis: And when Saltpeter is by the Action of
Fire, endowed with a Fluid Form, it is equally a Fluid, as when incorporated
with Water, there being very little difference betwixt these two States of
Nitre; only that in the Former, the Agent, which keeps the Nitrous Parts in
Motion, is more Volatile and Brisk, and divides it into smaller Parts, without
making an Addition to its Bulk.

But, perhaps, it will be a Scruple, Whether the Powder of Nitre be an
Imperfect Fluid, when poured out, or rather like a heap of Sand, not reduced to
a permanent State of Fluidity: To remove this Scruple, we may take Powder of
Alablaster, or instead of it, Plaster of Paris, and we shall find, that by
putting it into a hot Vessel, by the continued Action of the Fire, the Parts of
that Powder will be so agitated, and, by the Assistance of the more Spirituous
Parts, kept in Motion, as to Boil and emit Steams like a Fluid Body, and
altogether resemble a Coherent Substance; yet, if it be removed from the Fire,
it again subsides in the Form of a Powder, though for once again it will assume
the Form of a Liquid, if exposed to a competent degree of Fire; yet when the
Ebullition of the Parts of it are most violent, if a small Portion of it be
thrown upon a piece of Paper, it appears to be nothing but a very fine Powder:
From whence it is evident, that Fluidity depends on a vehement and various
Agitation of Parts; which Fluidity the same Body may be deprived of, by losing
that Intestine Motion.

What the Motion of the Parts of Fluids depends on.
And thus it briefly appears how much Motion contributes to the Fluidity of
Bodies. And here, though it would be very desirable to determine what is the
Essential Cause of that Motion; yet since it is a Matter of too much Intricacy,
it being by some held to be inherent in Matter, and by others to be promoted by
Impulse, I shall rather pass it by, than enter upon an Examination of those two
Points; especially, since there would be the same Necessity of Discussing
others, which equally relate to the Cartesian Principles: It may therefore
suffice in short, that neglecting the Unintelligible Doctrine of Substantial
Forms, we rather ascribe it to those Catholic Affections of Matter, Motion,
Shape, and Situation.

But to omit what we have elsewhere delivered concerning these Catholic
Affections of Matter, we shall observe, what this Experiment further affords
us: We are therefore to take Notice, That there is a difference remarkable
betwixt a Fluid, and a Body which has a Quality of Wetting Bodies which are
Contiguous to them; since every wet Body is Fluid, but not vice versa: For Air,
Flame, Melted Liquors, or Saltpeter, though fluid, are all void of a Wetting
Quality.

Humidity a Relative Quality.
Whence we are led to consider, That Humidity is but a Relative Quality,
depending on the Congruity that one Body has to stick to the Pores of another;
whence some Fluid Bodies, whose Parts are not adapted, so as to adhere to the
Pores of other Bodies want that Quality, as Quicksilver, which slips over the
Surfaces of most Bodies, without sticking to them; though in Respect of some (as
Gold or Tin,) it may be esteemed Fluid; since, inasmuch as it dissolves them,
it has much the same Virtue as Liquids have in softening other Substances: And
that Humidity depends on an apt Configuration of the Parts of Matter, and their
Congruity with the Pores of other Bodies, is further evident, since Water it
self, in respect of some Bodies, is not moist as the Feathers of Swans, Ducks,
etc. Add to this, That it is further observable, that when the Texture of a
Liquor is changed, it may adhere to Bodies it would not stick to before: As for
Instance, Though neither Quicksilver, Lead, Tin, or Tin-glass, will stick to
Glass; yet a due Proportion of each mixed together will presently, without the
Assistance of Fire, adhere to it. That the Pores of a Body cannot be perceived
no Argument of their Nonexistence.


But further: If it be objected, That the Insensible Agitation of the Parts of
Fluid Bodies, are but Imaginary and Precarious; since the Smallness of them,
makes them too fine to appear: I must answer, That since their Vacuities, are
so small as not to be Visible, it is as impossible to discern their Parts, and
consequently the Motion of them; since one Part is so presently succeeded by
another, that the Eye has always a whole heap before it, though separated by
Pores so small as to be undiscerned. And though the. Vacuities betwixt the Parts
of powdered Nitre, be so large, as to be discerned by the Eye; yet when it is
Corpuscles, by the Action of the Fire, are rendered more Minute, not only
Saltpeter, but Gold also, are said to possess a less Space, and consequently
must leave less Vacuities betwixt their Parts, and which are altogether
Invisible to the Eye: For which reason the Body appears continuous.

The Motion of the Parts of Liquids variously determined.
And that the Particles of Fluid Bodies, are in Motion, variously determined,
appears from their Effects; since they not only penetrate, but putrify some
Bodies, and presently dissolve them; as when Sugar is cast into Water, that
sweet Substance is dissolved, and its Parts so much associated with those of
the Water, as to be carried up to the Top of it; which is further observable in
Seawater, whose Salts upon Evaporation swim at the Top of the remaining
Liquor; and it is not less remarkable, That a Solution of Gold in AquaRegis,
will presently Tincture twenty times as much fair Water: And further, That the
Particles of Flame may be discerned to move very fiercely, even by the Eye, is
commonly known, and further confirmed, both by their Operations, and the Rays
which every way expand themselves, and strike against the Neighboring Bodies.
And that the Air has it is Parts in a constant Motion, variously agitated, we
have a great deal of Reason to believe; since we may easily discern whole
swarms of Motes swim up and down in the Sunbeams: and not only so, but in
clear Sunshine Days, we may perceive on the Walls of Churches, and other
Spacious Buildings, certain obscure Shades to quiver and tremble: And we have
yet a further Instance in Salt of Tartar, which, after Fusion, being for a
considerable time left in a moist Cellar, will dissolve, and put on the Form of
a Clear Liquor, by imbibing the Moistness of the Circumambient Air, which
penetrates, and gets into the Pores of the Salt by an Intestin and Powerful
Motion. And it is further to be Noted, That if in Summer, cold Water be put
into a Glass, the moist Vapors which move about it, will be condensed on the
outward side of the Glass, and appear in the Form of Dew, those Moist
Particles, which swim in the Air, being, by the Perpetual Motion of it is Parts,
successively driven upon the External Superficies of it: In trying of which
Experiment it is Remarkable, That the Dew on the outside, was not to be
observed above the Surface of the Liquor contained in it. And these Relations
are the less to be wondered at, if we consider, that so weighty a Body as Lead,
may be raised in the Form of Smoke, a considerable height into the Air, by the
Assistance of proper Vessels, placed in a convenient Furnace; which Smoke, will
be soon scattered and dispersed, by the Various Motion of Aerial Particles: And
this Experiment does not only show, that the Parts of Air are in a Perpetual
Motion, but also how much the Minuteness of them contributes to their Fluidity.

And though Quicksilver much exceeds any other Body in Weight, except Gold, yet
it is Minute Parts, agitated and raised in the Form of a Vapor, will, like
other small Particles of Matter, glide to and fro in the Air; whence it has
oftentimes happened, that in Evaporating of it, several pieces of Gold have
been so whitened over with the Fumes of it, as not to be got off again without
a great deal of Trouble.

But to make it almost Visible, that the Parts of Liquid Bodies, are
perpetually in a variously determined Motion, mix a Solution of unrefin'd
Silver in Aqua fortis, with 15 times its Proportion of Fair Water, Decanting or
Filtrating the clear Mixture: In which Liquor the Parts of the Silver are not
in the least discerned, though upon Immerging a Copper-Plate into it, the
Particles of that Metal, which before swam up and down in the Mixture,
presently adhere to the Copper, and crust it over with a Metalline Powder; and
if the Copper Plates remain in that Liquor for a Night, the whole scattered
Corpuscles of Silver will be collected together about them, the Liquor being
Tinctured with a Blue Tincture, by some Parts of the Copper, corroded and
divided into Parts, by the Salt Parts of the Aqua fortis. And to render this
Experiment still more Useful, I have observed, That by letting a piece of
Spiltre lie in this Tincture for some Days, the Copper Particles were gathered
round about that also, from all the Parts of the Liquor; which could not be,
were not the Water in a Perpetual Intestin Motion; so that its Parts might, by
often changing their Places, successively strike against the Spelter, and so
leave the Silver behind.

To this Experiment may be added another, which I have long since tried, when
first I began to consider the Reason of Fluidity. I dropped then, into Spirit of
Wine, moderately Deflegm'd, a small quantity of Oil of Turpentine, letting it
fall so far, that it might by the force of it be broke into small Drops, which
by reason of their Tenacity, being unapt to mix with the Spirit, would swim
upon it, and be moved up and down, variously and irregularly, by the Spirituous
Parts of the Liquor, which struck against them in their Ascension; and whilst
these Spirituous Parts continue to exhale, it is pleasant to behold, how the
Globous Parts of the Oil will sometimes be gathered together, and almost unite,
and presently after, be again dispersed abroad, and move to and fro amongst one
another; and this Motion would continue, till the most Agile and Spirituous
Parts of the Liquor were wholly spent. And lest this Motion of the Oily Parts,
should be suspected to arise from some Antipathy betwixt it and the Liquor, I
tried the Experiment with small chopped Straws, which were likewise impetuously,
and confusedly moved up and down on the Superficies of the Spirit: From whence
we may learn, That there may be an Intestin Motion of the Parts of a Liquid
Substance, though it be not discerned by the Eye. I might here reckon up a great
many more Phenomenon exhibited by this Experiment; but it shall suffice to take
Notice, besides what has been already deliverd, That some of the
aforementioned Spirit, being closed up in a Glass, Hermetically sealed, to try
whether the Oily Drops would continue their Motion, when the Vinous Spirit
could not exhale, the Vessel was presently broke, without any force otherwise
discernible, than by the effects of it.

And that the small Parts of the most weighty Liquors, are actually in a
Continual Motion, may not only appear from what has gone before, but may be
further confirmed; since Quicksilver will not only penetrate into the Pores,
but destroy the Texture of so solid a Metal as Foliated Gold: And Salt of
Tartar, though cold, is able to extract Tinctures from several Bodies: And that
the Parts of Oil of Vitriol are in a Perpetual Motion, may be evinced, by the
Corrosive Qualities of it, which it powerfully exerts without the Assistance of
Heat, not only in Corroding Metals; but if pieces of Camphire be thrown into
it, they are presently turned into an Oily Substance. And whoever is unwilling
to believe that there is an Intestin Motion of Parts in these two Oils, may
easily be undeceived, by the Heat and Ebullition, which follows upon the
Mixture of them agitated together in a Glass.

But here we are to observe, that though it be an Essential Property of Fluid
Bodies, that one Particle readily gives way to another; and that the other is
as apt to succeed in the Place of it interchangeably; yet that is not to be
conceived of all Fluid Bodies in General; but is to be understood only in such
Bodies, as are either Simple and Homogeneous, or as have an Aptitude to mix
with each other, as Wine and Water; since there are some Liquid Bodies, which
will not be mixed together; but like compact Substances, resist the Impressions
of each others Superficies; and it is not a little strange that Lucretius and
some other of the Ancient Atomists should overlook so obvious an Observation,
since it is apparent in Oil, which will not mix with Water; but more eminently
in Quicksilver, which denis to mix any of those Liquors which were familiar
amongst them.

But to add an Experiment which is more remarkable, having so prepared and
opened the Body of Copper with a sufficient Quantity of Sal Armoniack, as to
render the prepared Mineral inflammable; I applied some Grains of it to the
Wiek of a Candle, by the force of whose Flames it was not only Melted, but
carried up along with the Tallow to the Bottom of the Flame; where it was
observable, that the Flame of it was both lasting, and as distinct from that of
the Candle, as if the two Flames had been separated by the Interposition of
some other Body.

Why some Liquids are unapt to mix with each other.
But to return to what I have said of the unaptness of Liquors to mix with one
another, the reason in general seems to be no other than the particular Texture
and peculiar Motion of their Parts. And this I am the rather induced to
believe, because Salt of Tartar, dissolved by the moistness of the Air into a
Liquid Form, will readily mix with Spirit of Wine, the Texture being only
changed by an addition of Water; though before, they both had their distinct
Superficies; and though mixed by a Violent Motion, yet would presently separate
again, and each regain it is former Position. And Oil or Spirit of Turpentine,
gently drawn off from Sea Salt, Melted or well Decrepitated, will readily mix
with Spirit of Wine, though there was no sensible difference betwixt that Oil
and another which would not. Again, a Solution of Salt of Tartar, digested for
some time with Oil of Almonds, would be turned into a soft Saponary Substance;
though, by a strong Agitation, Lixivial Liquors cannot be mixed with Oils.
Moreover, though cold Quicksilver will not mix with Oil of Vitriol, yet, the
boiling Oil will, by piercing it is Substance, both alter and incorporate with
it.

The Superficies of Liquids by pressing one against another, give each other a
determinate Figure.
There remains one thing, yet to be taken notice of concerning the Difference in
fluid Bodies, which is, That some of them, which will touch each others
Superficies without Mixture, will also reduce them to a determinate Shape. As
for Instance, if Spirit of Wine be poured upon Oil of Tartar per deliquium,
though the contiguous Superficies of both be parallel to the Horizon, yet the
upper Superficies of the Spirit will be endewed with a visible Concavity, if
the Experiment be tried in a slender Glass unstopped. In which Liquors it may
be further noted, that upon a Mixture of Oil of Almonds, it presently separated
the one from the other, the Superficies of the Oil of Almonds contiguous to the
Oil of Tartar, being Level as well as that, which was next to the Spirit of
Wine: But if Oil of Turpentine be poured upon it instead of Oil of Almonds it
will be divided into several Portions, some of which Swimming in the Spirit of
Wine, will be of a Globular Figure, and others which rise to the top of the
Liquor, will be partly Level with the Superficies of the Liquor, and partly
Sphaerical, on the immersed Superficies. And it may be yet further observed,
that some Globular Parts would, though the Liquor was shaken, continually Swim
upon the Oil of Tartar, being contiguous to it only in a Point. But what is
more Remarkable is, that several drops of Oil of Turpentine falling into the
Spirit of Wine, lay upon the Superficies of the Oil of Tartar, like so many
Hemispheres, their unequal Superficies being upwards; yet by degrees they became
Globular, being equally pressed on every side, and touching the Oil of Tartar
only in a Point. And these Experiments I have the rather recited, because, they
being added to that which may be observed in the Torrecellian Experiment by
suspending Mercury in the Air (by admitting Air into the Glass Tube, so as to
separate the Mercurial Pipe into several Short ones, which will have on each
side a Superficies something unequal) because I say, they might be of Use in
Accounting for the different Configurations of Fluid Bodies, as well as the
distinct Superficies of those Vapors which Swim in our Atmosphere.

A Transparent Liquor may yield a Liquor Diaphanous and another Opacous.
Having said thus much of Fluidity, it may not be amiss to subjoyn one
Experiment which shows, how a transparent Liquor may be divided into two, the
one Diaphanous, and the other Opacous. Pour into a warm Solution of an Ounce of
Quicksilver with a double Quantity of Aqua Fortis, about half an Ounce or an
Ounce of Filings of Lead, being cautious that it be not put in so fast, as to
make the Liquor Boil over; the Event of which will be, that the Lead will be
immediately precipitated in the Form of a white Powder, the Mercury running
together again into a Fluid Body immersed in the Aqua Fortis. And here it is to
be noted, that if the success of this Experiment be frustrated, the Mercury may
by degrees be again recovered if the white Precipitate be diligently ground for
some time with Water.

Motion in the Parts of some Consistent Bodies.
But to put a Conclusion to this Chapter, it is highly probable, that not only
Fluid, but some consistent Bodies have their Parts in a certain degree of
Motion; whence, as we may conjecture, proceeds that Dust which is the Effect of
Putrefaction, in some sorts of Wood: And it is not absurd to imagine, that from
hence Worms in Fruit as well as Magots in Cheese derive their Original. And
that there is Motion amongst the Parts of some consistent Bodies, is further
made probable, both by that Turpentine which I have observed to Sweat out of
Deal Boards, and the growth and increase of the Bones, and other consistent
Parts of Bodies; but more particularly in those of colder Animal Substances; as
Oyster-Shells, Crabs-Claws and such like consistent Substances.

Having said thus much concerning Fluidity, it might not be improper to take
notice how by the Mixture of Liquids, their Fluidity is sometimes promoted, and
also sometimes destroyed. But since we shall have occasion sometime or other in
the following Chapter, to make such Observations; I shall, to close this
Chapter, add an Experiment, which may intimate, that the event of Mixtures is
not always certain: The Experiment is the following; We Evaporated a Solution
of Copper in Spirit of Nitre, from whence we obtained a Vitriol of a lovely
Color: We likewise dissolved one Part of good Tin in a double Quantity of
Spirit of Nitre; and though Saltpeter as well as Tin, be both Fusible, yet this
Metalline Mixture would neither melt on quick Coals, nor in a red hot Crucible:
Whereas the Vitriol of Copper would melt with the heat of ones Hand, though the
Metalline Ingredients be much more hard to be brought to Fusion than Lead, or
even Silver it self; and we have sometimes obtained such a Vitriol, as might be
preserved in a Fluid Form by the Languid heat of the Sun in Winter, either with
Spirit of Nitre or a certain Aqua Fortis: From whence it appears, that the
Textures of Compositions are to be considered, as well as the Particular
Consistence of the Ingredients.

CHAP. XII. Experiments concerning the Superficial Figures of Fluids.
Especially of Liquors Contiguous to other Liquors.
COnsidering that the greatest Part of the Universe, is made of Fluid Bodies,
especially if according to the Cartesian Hypothesis, the Sun and fixed Stars
consist of Fluids, it may not be amiss to illustrate, what we have only hinted
at in the foregoing Chapter: For the following Experiments made about the
superficial Figures of Fluid Bodies, may not a little contribute to illustrate,
as well what has been before delivered, as what has been said concerning the
Pores of Fluid Bodies; besides, they may be of no small use, in accounting for
several Phenomenon belonging to the Grand System of the World.

EXPERIMENT I. and II.
The Figure of the Surface of a Nitrous Liquor.
To try whether the concave Surface of Fluids, contained in a Pipe, was wholly
to be attributed to the Pressure of the Contiguous Air, I poured Dephlegmed
Spirit of Wine upon a strong Alkalizate Menstrum, which was made of fixed Nitre
run per deliquium in a moist Celler, and contained in a Cylinder of Glass of
about a quarter of an Inch Diameter; I found that the Menstrum changed it is
concave for a horizontal Superficies; and the like succeeded in a Glass of a
much greater Diameter. And that Superficial Cavity was likewise almost
destroyed by pouring on Oil of Turpentine instead of Spirit of Wine.

EXPERIMENT III.
Of Water.
If instead of the former Liquor, common Water was put into the Glass Cylinder,
it retained it is former Surface, though Oil of Turpentine Swam upon it instead of
Spirit of Wine.

EXPERIMENT IV.
To try what Surface would be made by an Oil heavier than Water, Of Oil of
Turpentine.
by being contiguous to it, I put pure Oil of Turpentine into a Glass Cylinder,
and found that the Concave Superficies which it had whilst the Air was
Contiguous, became Unequal and protuberant upon an Affusion of Water.

EXPERIMENT V.
The Superficies of a Solution of Tartar, etc.
Again having put Salt of Tartar deliquated into a Glass Cylinder, and poured
Oil of Guajacum upon it, we found, that the Concave Superficies was not altered
as it was by Oil of Turpentine: And having gently poured Water upon these two,
the Oil of Guajacum Swam betwixt the Water and the Oil of Tartar, having a
Unequal Superficies at each end, that next the Oil of Tartar being most
protuberant.

EXPERIMENT VI.
Of Oil of Cloves.
Having likewise put Oil of Cloves into a Glass Cylinder; by pouring Water upon
it, it is Concave Superficies presently became Unequal; and this Oil being too
heavy to Swim upon Water, we poured some of it upon Deliquated Salt of Tartar,
pouring upon it likewise a little common Water, which being done we found the
Oil Protuberant at both Ends, but more at that which was Contiguous to the
Water.

EXPERIMENT VII.
Again, having put a considerable Quantity of Quicksilver into a Pipe of the
same Diameter, Of Quicksilver.
but much longer than the former; we found, that the Superficies of it, which
was otherwise considerably Protuberant, was in some measure Depressed, when
Water instead of Air was Contiguous to it.

EXPERIMENT VIII.
Of the same.
Upon trial, whether a greater or less Quantity of Water would alter the Surface
of the Mercury, I found that the greater the Quantity of Water was, the more it
was depressed; though it did not always succeed: But when the Cylinder, being of
a considerable length, was filled with Water, the Mercury Contiguous to the
Glass was depressed to a Level; having, in the Center of its Superficies, a
Protuberance Semicircular and raised above the other level Surface half it is
Diameter, which Protuberance gradually subsided as the Mercury was drawn off.

EXPERIMENT IX.
The Surface of Liquors in Vacuo Boyliano.
Having conveyed two of the aforementioned Cylinders, one containing Water,
and the other Mercury into our Pneumatical Receiver, we found that,
notwithstanding the Air was not Contiguous, the Superficies of the Water was
not manifestly altered by the Exsuction of the Air, though the Mercury seemed
sometimes to be a little more Protuberant, especially when the Exhausted Air
was let in with any Celerity. But one thing in the Mercury, which was
observable; was, that upon the Exsuction of the Air, several Bubbles seemed to
rise in the Mercury, and how much those might conduce to the mentioned
Phenomenon, we leave others to try. Again, having conveyed another Cylinder
into our Receiver, which contained an Oil, whose Superficies, when Water was
poured upon it, was Unequal; we found, that upon the Exsuction of the Air,
neither the Oil lost it is Protuberant, nor the Water it is concave Superficies:
From which Experiments it may appear, what Effects the Pure Ether would have
upon such Bodies, were they removed out of this Atmosphere.

EXPERIMENT X.
Though the Figures of the Parts of scattered Fluids, and of condensed Vapors,
be usually Globulous; yet those Observations being too Transient, to deduce
from them the Figures of the Parts of Fluids, we tried the following
Experiment, that I might observe something more Remarkable: Having mixed Fixed
Nitre, dissolved into a Liquor by running per deliquium, with exactly rectified
Spirit of Wine, and found that, those two Liquors, though shaked together, would
retain distinct Surfaces; I dropped Oil into the Spirits, which gradually
subsided till it touched the Superficies of the Nitrous Liquor. The Phenomenon
exhibited by this Experiment were the following.

Phenomenon exhibited by a Nitrous Liquor and Spirit of Wine.
I. That if the Drops were small, they retain an exact Spherical Figure, being
neither depressed by their own weight, nor the gravity of the ambient Spirit,
the Oil being much of the same specific Gravity with the Spirit of Wine. II.
If an Aggregate of Drops were a quarter of an Inch in Diameter, the Pressure of
the upper Parts would depress the lower so much as to form a Plain on that side
Contiguous to the Nitrous Liquor, so that the Horizontal exceeded the
Transverse Diameter in Length. III. And if the Quantity of Oil was greater, it
would so depress the lower Parts, as to form an imperfect Hemisphere, the lower
Part of it having it is plain and horizontal Superficies, parallel to that of
the Superficies of the Nitrous Liquor. IV. But if the Oil poured in, was
moderate as to Quantity; though at the first it would spread over the Surface of
the Nitre, yet, by degrees, it would be compressed and be so raised, as to form
either an Hemisphere upon the Surface of the Nitrous Liquor, or a Segment of a
Globe, or even of an Imperfect Ellipsis; to the production of which Phenomenon
the Tenacity of the Oil, as well as the Ambient Spirit in some Measure
contributed. V. Though these Globules of Oil would sometimes readily mix and
associate, when brought together; yet, for the most Part, they would make an
Impression into one another without uniting, and again recover, their former
Figure when permitted to separate. VI. It was not unpleasant to behold, how if
a large Quantity of Oil was poured into the Spirit, the Unequal Superficies of
it would acquire various Figures upon the Motion of that Ambient Spirit; and if
the Agitation was strong, several Parts being broke off, would form as many
Aggregates of a Globular Figure.
EXPERIMENT XI.
Of Oil of Turpentine
Having put a Mixture of two Oils, one of which was drawn from Turpentine, into
other Liquors, to try whether the Lighter Oil would separate from the heavier,
with which it was incorporated; I found, that though it answered not my
Expectation; yet as the Quantity of either of the Oils was prevalent, the
Mixture would either sink or swim, in the Liquors it was put into. And to the
Phenomenon exhibited by Oil of Turpentine, it may be added, That when part of
it is contiguous to the Liquors it is put into, and part adheres to the Glass,
the Superficies contiguous to the Water is of Figures too various and
extravagant to be described.

EXPERIMENT XII.
Several Colors exhibited.
It is to be noted, that when the Nitrous Liquor is very clear, it will, in the
former Experiments, be very difficult to discover where the Surfaces of the two
Liquors are contiguous, they both appearing to be one and the same Mass, except
some Dust swims upon the Nitrous Liquor, or the Rays of Light fall obliquely
upon it.

EXPERIMENT XIII.
Having poured a peculiar sort of Oil upon a Deliquation of Nitre and Tartar,
tinged with Cochinele, I observed, that by holding the Mixture in a certain
Position, the plain Superficies not only variously refracted the Incident Beams
of Light, so as to represent several vivid Reflections, but the plain
Superficies appeared almost as unequal, as that of Quicksilver; and it was
further to be observed, That it almost as strongly reflected the Rays of a
Candle, as a Close Specular Body usually does; which Phenomenon could not
proceed from the Alkali altogether, but might partly from the Concurrent Action
of the Oil, which I observed to contribute to Refraction, when mixed with other
Liquors; but I shall not here endeavor to determine, what was the Cause of the
Forementioned Phenomenon; but in order to it shall observe, First, that neither
the Confining Plain, which separated these two Liquors, nor the Superficies of
the Nitrous Liquor, was the Occasion of that Red Color, which the Flame of the
Candle acquired. Secondly, the Liquor being chafed, the uppermost would be
turned into a Froth, consisting of Bodies imperfectly Globular, which in a
little time would form a rude Physical plain, the Upper Superficies of which,
would reflect the Rays of Light very briskly; and when the Parts of the Froth
became a little finer, they would reflect the Rays of a Candle, so as to
represent so many pieces of Silver polished, or a Copper Plate freshly immersed
in a Solution of Silver in Aqua fortis: To which Phenomenon a Third may be
added, viz. That the confining Surface of the aforementioned Oil upon Spirit of
Wine, was not a little strongly reflective. Most of these Phenomenon before
mentioned, were afforded, by making use of Oil of Limons instead of the former,
except that the Reflection was not so brisk.

EXPERIMENT XIV.
Of Oil of Aniseeds.
Having poured Oil of Aniseeds dissolved by a Moderate Warmth, upon warm Water,
contained in a Viol, I found that the Upper Surface of the Oil, as well as that
of the Water was Concave; though the Lower Superficies of it was very Protuberant
and Unequal; and when it had been removed for some time into a Cold place, so
that the Oil might be Coagulated, the Unequal Superficies of the Oil was
something less protuberant: So that it seemed to resemble a
Concavo-Convex-Glass made use of for Dioptrical Purposes.

EXPERIMENT XV.
It is not only observable in the former Liquor, that the Oil caused a much
more vivid Reflection, in a Fluid than Consistent Form; but it may be further
noted, That even the Shining Reflection of Quicksilver, may be increased by
the Addition of a Liquor: For if Distilled Mercury be put into a Viol, and
Petroleum be gently poured upon it, the Reflection will be sensibly increased
by the Addition of that Liquor; but whether that Reflection proceeds from some
Subtle Body included betwixt the Petrloeum and the Mercury, I shall not
determine; only to make it probable, That were there such a Body included it
might much contribute to such a Phenomenon, I shall add, That I once saw a
Transparent Body, which was supposed to have a true Oriental Pearl in it; but
upon the Breaking of it, that which was supposed to be a Pearl, was nothing but
a Cavity containing a Substance, something grosser than Air: And I have a piece
of Glass by me, which has Air included in a Cavity of a Pear-like shape, which
causes such a vivid Reflection, as to resemble a fair Pearl. And I am Master of
a Small Stone, which looked upon in one's Hand directly down, seems to be like
Common Glass; but if the Beams of Light in another posture fall upon it
obliquely, it appears to be a fine Opal, or Oriental Pearl.

EXPERIMENT XVI.
An Experiment in Vacuo Boyliano.
Having melted a Gummy Substance in a deep round wide-mouthed Glass, and
conveyed it into our Pneumatical Receiver; upon extracting the Air, we found,
that which was contained in the Pores of the Gummy Substance, to rise in
Bubbles, several of which settled at the Top, and others were detained in the
Body of it, upon the Cooling of that Substance: Where it was to be observed,
that those which were included in the Gummy Substance, did not only cause a
considerable Reflection, but also the Air was so rarified in them, that upon
the intro-admission of external Air into the Receiver, those Bubbles, which
were raised to the Top, and adorned with Curious Colors, like those of a
Rainbow, were presently broke:

EXPERIMENTS XVII, and XVIII.
Of Water included in Oil.
Though it is usually thought, That the Parts of Water are Spherical, in falling
Rain; yet since Hail, which is nothing but Drops of Water froze, and often of a
Figure different from Orbicular; to be further satisfied concerning their
Figures, we conveyed several Portions of Water into Oil of Cloves, and found,
that one which was as big as a Pea, was so near an Orbicular Figure, as to
approach an Elliptical one; and other Portions of Water, which were larger,
were somewhat Elliptical, but rather more depressed in the middle; and these
Phenomenon were afforded by those Portions of Water which were only contiguous
to the Oil and Air.

EXPERIMENT XIX.
Having put Oil of Turpentine upon Oil of Cloves, which was contained in a
Glass Cylinder; I observed, that Water being encompassed betwixt these two
Heterogeneous Bodies, the Surface of the Oil of Cloves was but a very little
protuberant; And the lower Surface of the Oil of Turpentine, was but moderately
Unequal.

EXPERIMENT XX.
Of Coagulated Oil of Aniseeds.
To try whether Fluid Bodies would retain their smooth Surfaces, when reduced to
a Solid Form, I left Oil of Aniseeds to coagulate upon Water, and found that
that Superficies, which was Contiguous to the Air, as well as that which was
next the Water, had each a peculiar kind of Roughness.

EXPERIMENT XXI.
Having exposed one Portion of Water to be froze, with Oil of Junipers upon it,
and another with Oil of Turpentine; I found that the Ice, which was under each,
had a different and peculiar Surface: A Variety of Surfaces may likewise be
observed upon several frozen Liquors, which abound with Water. And I have
observed my self, in a red Decoction of Soot of Wood, set to freeze, Crystals
shaped like Daggers, curiously embossed, as well as fringed at the ends.

EXPERIMENT XXII.
And besides the Irregular Surfaces of a frozen Liquor, contiguous to a
Heterogenous Body, I have observed in Oil of Vitriol, that Part of it being
froze, the Superficies, which was contiguous to the Liquid Part, was very
unequal with several Asperities.

EXPERIMENT XXIII.
And not only Bodies, which are Naturally Fluid, but those brought to Fusion by
Art, acquire Various Sufaces upon their putting on of a Solid Form; For I have
observed, upon the Surface of a Regulus Martis Stellatus, and a Regulus of
Antimony without Mars, Curious Embossments of the Figure of a Star; but if to
these Bodies Copper be Artificially added, they acquire New Surfaces, sometimes
resembling a Net: And I have now by me, a Mass of a Conical Figure, consisting
of two Parts, contiguous to each other, which when separated, the lower Part
had upon it is upper Side, a great many Protuberances; and the Conical Part on
it is Superficies, which was contiguous to that, was furnished with Cavities
answerable to, and adapted to receive those Protuberances: Whence it might be
inferred, That the more Metalline Part, which was embossed with those
Protubetances, was first hardened, and the other more scorious and
recrementitious Part, was afterward adapted in it is Coagulation to the
Protuberances of that which would melt with the Heat of ones Hand, though the
Metalline Ingredients be much more hard to be brought to Fusion than Lead, or
even Silver it self; and we have sometimes obtained such a Vitriol, as might be
preserved in a fluid Form by the languid Heat of the Sun in Winter, either with
Spirit of Nitre or a certain Aqua fortis: From whence it appears, that the
Textures of Compositions are to be considered, as well as the particular
Consistence of the Ingredients.

CHAP. XIII. Containing the History of Firmness.
ALTHOUGH the Compactness and Solidity of Bodies, is usually attributed to the
Coagulating Qualities of a saline Ingredient, by the Chemists, yet since their
Explications are not intelligible, I shall proceed to enquire after another
Cause. First then

The Solidity of a Body being a Quality contrary to Fluidity, A Definition of
Solidity.
seems to consist in this, viz. That the gross Parts of solid Bodies are so
entangled and interwoven together, that they are unapt to diffuse themselves
several ways, like fluid Bodies; and that the Figure of their Superficies is
rather to be attributed to the Connection of the Parts that compose them, than
to the Impressions of outward Bodies. In which Definition these three Things
appear to be the Causes of Solidity, viz. Grossness of Parts, Rest, and the
Implication of the constituent Parts.

The Grossness of the Parts of a Body contributes to its Solidity.
And First, That the Grossness of the Parts of a Body contributes to the
Solidity of it, is evident from what has been already said of Fluidity; for if
Minuteness of Parts is requisite to produce such a Quality as Fluidity, it must
follow that the Inaptitude that is in grosser Matter to be put in Motion must
be a further Argument, That the Grossness of Particles is conducive to Firmness.

But here it is to be noted, that by Grossness or Minuteness of Parts, I would
not pretend to decide the Controversy, Whether Bodies may be indefinitely
divided into smaller Parts; but I would only intimate, that though mentally all
Bodies may have an indefinite Divisibility, yet the Parts of solid Bodies are
made up of a Number of such minute Parts, as convening together form those
grosser Corpuscles, which, when united, are not to be dissolved by the external
Impressions of ambient Air or Ether, or any thing else, usually reckoned
amongst the Causes of Fluidity.

Secondly, It is to be noted, That though I have said, that the Grossness of
Bodies contributes to their Firmness, yet I would be understood to mean,
caeteris paribus; for the gross Parts of a Body, by being broke and divided
into smaller, may be so disposed, to lie nearer one another, so as upon their
more close Union, to put on the Nature of Firmness more conspicuously, by
affording a more full Contact to other Bodies, especially, if those minuter
Parts be so adapted, as to leave smaller Pores betwixt them. But this being
evident from what has gone before, I shall pass on to

Rest contributes to the Solidity of Bodies.
The other Requisite for the producing of solid Bodies, viz. Rest, which, though
it is taken notice of by the Ingenious Des Carts, yet since it is not
confirmed by Experimental Philosophy, I shall here illustrate it a little
further; first observing, that it is agreed on to be one of the Laws of Motion,
That when a Body is at rest it will continue to be so, till forced to move by
the Impulse of an outward Agent; and whatever may be urged by some Atomists,
concerning the Adhesion of the minute Parts of Matter, yet, that a
Juxta-position of Parts is sufficient, without the Addition of a Cement, is
evident; since several Pieces of Glass, if exactly fitted and polished, will
adhere so firmly together, that by lifting up the uppermost the rest will
adhere so closely as to be raised with them; which will also succeed, if two
Marbles exactly polished and ground, have their Superficies applied to one
another; and it is further remarkable, that if two Glasses be rubbed one
against another, the one will be suspended at the other, without any visible
Prop to support it, and preserve it from falling. But here it may be necessary
to take notice, that an exact and level Superficies is not always requisite to
make the Experiment succeed, since a concave and a unequal Glass rightly adapted
will adhere with the same degree of Cohesion; an Example of which we have had
in a Glass Stopple, duly adapted to the neck of a Bottle; by which the Bottle,
containing a Pound weight of Liquor, might several times be lifted up from the
Table; which could proceed from nothing, but the close contact of those two
Bodies; unless it be urged, that by pressing the Stopple down the small
Asperities of the one might be squeezed into the small Pores of the other.

A Juxta-position of Parts, not the only Cause of their Adhesion.
But though from hence it may be argued, that a bare Juxta-position is sufficient
to account for the Cohesion of the Parts of some Bodies, yet it is not to be
denied, but that their strict Contact may be promoted by the Spring and
Pressure of the Atmo-sphere; since by reason of their Juxta-position, the Air,
which presses upon the lower Superficies, has not an equal Pressure to balance
it on the other Side of the same Piece; it being immediately contiguous to the
lower Superficies of the Piece adjoined to it; by which Means the Pressure of
the Air resisting the Gravity of the Glass, instead of tending toward the
Center it is boy'd up and pressed against the upper Piece, just as if a Board
were pressed with ones Hand against the Cieling of a Room, which will continue
in that Place as long as the Pressure with ones hand is continued: And indeed,
That the Air does so press upon the lower Superficies of Glass is but the
natural Effect of the Weight and Spring of it, which being bent and pressed
together, by the Weight of incumbent Air, will naturally recoyl and fly back,
from the Superficies of the Earth, upon any Body which is in the Way to be
pressed upon.

The Weight and Spring of the Air may contribute to the Cohesion of Parts.
To confirm this Conjecture I shall add, that if a Piece of Glass be stuck to
the Superficies of a Looking-glass parallel to the Horizon, it will stick fast
to it, except it be moved by one Hand; but if the Horizontal Superficies be
inclined, the smaller Glass will readily slip from one Side of the greater to
the other, accordingly as it is differently inclined. The Reason of which is,
partly because the Gravity of it does not resist the Horizontal Motion, but
only that which tends from the Center; and partly, or chiefly, because the
Pressure of the Air on both Edges of the Glass is equal, and consequently its
own Gravity makes it tend either this or that way, as the Glass is variously
erected or inclined; whereas the Superficies adhering to the Looking-glass
receives no Pressure proportionable to the Pressure of Air recoyling against
the lower Surface. And for a like reason, if the neck of a glass Viol full of
Mercury be immersed in fluid Quicksilver, the Bottle will continue near full,
as long as the neck of the Glass is immersed in the Quicksilver, though it be
several ways inclined; the Reason of which seems to be, only the Pressure of
the external Air upon the Surface of the Mercury; by which Means it is forced
up against the Surface of the inverted Glass, so that for want of an equivalent
Pressure upon the Mercury in the Glass it is kept from subsiding; for that it
does not proceed from Nature's Abhorrency of a Vacuum is plain, from what has
been tried concerning the suspended Mercury in the Torrecellian Experiment; and
that it may appear more fully, that the Exclusion of Air, as well as its
immediate Contact, contributes to the keeping of Bodies from falling asunder,
it will suffice to relate, that having sucked a good Quantity of Air out of a
Bottle, and applied a Book which was next at hand to the Orifice, it stuck so
firmly to it, that, though the Weight of it was 20 Ounces, it would be raised a
considerable Height, and though but a small Part of its Superficies adhered to
the circular Edges of the Glass. The Reason of which seems to be no other, than
that the Pressure of the external Air overpowers the weak Resistance made by
the Air in the Bottle; and since the Resistance of the internal Air is so weak,
the whole Orifice of the Bottle seems in some Measure to be a common
Superficies; for as much as the Pressure of the Air in the Bottle, scarce makes
any sensible Impulse upon that Part of the Book encircled by the Edges of it.

The Solidity of Glass depends on a Juxta-position of Paris.
And it is not altogether improbable, but that the compact Texture of Glass, may
depend on a like Juxta-position of Parts, since the Particles of Fire, in the
making of it, may so divide the Parts of the Ingredients as to render them
subtle enough for so strict and close a Union, as is requisite to exclude Air
from betwixt them; for it is not only obvious, That Air cannot penetrate the
Pores of it, when heated in Distillation, but in blowing of Glasses where it
has not the least Vent; through the Pores of it, though impelled with Force, yet
its Pores are fine enough to give way to the Beams of Light and Heat, and
likewise to the fine Effluvia of a Loadstone, without damaging the Texture of
it in the least; nor would it be more absurd to conceive that the Parts of
Saltpeter or Ice were after the like manner joined together, by a
Juxta-position.

But to return to the Place from whence we have made this short Digression;
though from hence it appears, that the Spring of the Air may contribute to the
Cohesion of the Parts of Solids; yet it is not altogether necessary, since the
same may be accounted for by the Air considered barely as a Weight; for the Air
being a fluid Body, and pressing by its Gravity toward the Center, it must
needs diffuse it self every way, when resisted by the Surface of the Earth, and
consequently expand it self orbicularly, by which means the whole Pillar of Air
incumbent on it, being virtually incumbent on the lower Superficies of the
Glass, whatever separates one from the other, must out-balance that Pressure of
the Air; otherwise (there being no Air betwixt the two Glasses) they must needs
stick together; but it is not necessary that the contiguous Superficies of
these two Glasses should be equal to the Horizon, since if they be
perpendicular, the Sides of the Glasses have a collateral Pressure from the
Pillars of Air pressing against them, and consequently the Difficulty must be
as great to separate them.

But to try more exactly, How much the Pressure of the Air is concerned in the
former Experiments, we took two polished Marbles, as smooth as we could get,
and fastened Wires to the uppermost, so that the lowest could not slide off the
other Horizontally, but, if any way, must fall Perpendicularly; which Caution
being observed, we found, the one would not only draw up the other, but a Pair
of Scales fixed to it with 16 Ounces of Troy Weight; and to make the Experiment
more complete we found, That when the Surfaces of the Stones were wet with pure
Spirit of Wine, the Air being by that Means kept from insinuating it self
betwixt the Stones, the uppermost would not only draw up the other with a pair
of Scales, but an hundred, and sometimes a hundred and thirty Ounces of Troy
Weight; though the Diameter of the Stones exceeded not an Inch and two Thirds:
But having repeated the Experiment with Oil of sweet Almonds instead of Spirit
of Wine, we found, that it took up above four hundred Ounces Troy Weight: And
that it may not be suspected, That this Difference proceeds from the more
clammy Parts of the Oil, which caused the Stones to adhere more closely, I
shall add, That the contiguous Surfaces being held perpendicular, though they
would easily slide off each other, when moistened with Oil, yet would they not
slip down, when moistened with Spirit of Wine, without an additional Weight
joined to one of them, the Protuberances of one, perhaps, being fastened in the
Pores of the other.

But to show, That the Adhesion of these polished Marbles is proportionably
greater as the Diameter of them is larger, and consequently as they are pressed
together by a larger Pillar of Air, I repeated the same Experiment with Spirit
of Wine, and took up about four hundred and seventy Ounces; but when I made use
of Oil of Almonds, the Weight raised, was much more considerable, being a
Thousand three hundred and forty four Ounces of Troy Weight; besides at the
same time the Marbles were observed to stick close together: And here again,
lest it should be suspected, that the Oil made the Adhesion more close, I shall
relate this Observation, viz. That though it required so great a Weight to
separate these Stones when their contiguous Surfaces were in an Horizontal
Line; yet would they easily slide one upon another, not unlike the contiguous
Glasses before mentioned; and for the same Reasons; and if they were the least
inclined either this way or that, their own Weight was sufficient to separate
them: From whence it appears how much the Air may be concerned in compressing
the Particles of solid Bodies together.

And lest it should be further objected, That the Cohesion of these Stones
rather proceeds from Nature's Abhorrency of a Vacuum, than the Cause assigned
by us, I shall add these Considerations; First, That if it were so, the same
Reason would hold when a much more considerable Weight is fastened to the lower
Marble; yet we see, that then, notwithstanding Nature's Abhorrency of a Vacuum,
they presently part. Secondly, That the Pressure of the Air is sufficient to
account for it: Which to make it more plausible I shall add, that though the
Stone were fastened to the Ground, yet it would require as much Force, to
separate the Uppermost from it in a Perpendicular Line, as to lift up a weight
aequiponderant with the Stone, and the Pillar of Air incumbent on it, since
there is neither Air, nor any other Body, betwixt the two Stones to help to
raise the Lower up, and in part to sustain the weight of the incumbent
Atmosphaere; and therefore it needs not seem strange, that when the lower
Marble and the weight affixed to it, is not sufficient to balance the weight
of the Atmosphaere, it should rise along with the Uppermost when drawn up,
rather than be separated from it; since it is usual, for two Bodies, when
joined together, to move the same way, if they be not separated by Weights or
some other Force; which is observable in trying of Load-stones; for if the
Lodestone be able to raise a Body more ponderous than it self, the Knife will
as soon raise the Lodestone as the Lodestone will lift up the Knife.

To Illustrate what has been said I shall add an Experiment registered amongst
my Adversaria, which is this, viz. Having immerged a Glass Siphon with a Brass
Valve cemented on one end, almost half a Yard in a tall Cucurbite, till it
touched the Bottom, I filled it with Water, till the Superficies of the Water
in it, was equal to that in the Cucurbite, which being done, I took a pair of
Scales, putting an Ounce weight into one Scale, and fixing a String to the
other, one end of the String being likewise fastened to the Valve, fixed to the
bottom of the Glass Tube; where it was to be observed, that by that single
Ounce I was able to open the Valve, whereas when the Water was poured out of
the Pipe, and it was immersed again, the Valve would not be opened again
without the Additional weight of four Ounces; And in this Experiment it was
further to be observed, that as the Valve was raised higher and higher in the
Cucurbite, a weight portionably less was sufficient to open it. In which
Experiment, if fuga Vacui resisted the opening of the Valve, it would have
required the same weight at the top of the Water as in the Bottom, the Valve
being in both places under Water. And therefore the difference rather proceeds
from the Compressure of the Ambient Water, that presses the Parts of the Valve
together. And though Air be a Body much more light than Water, yet considering
that the difference is but about as much as 1000 to 1, and that the Particles
of Air, which press upon our Atmosphaere, are incumbent upon each other for
several score Miles in height; it is not absurd to expect, that their pressure
should be considerable, and sufficient to press the two Marbles together.

For a further Confirmation of our Doctrine of Firmness, to this I shall add
another Experiment, which is, that having suspended the aforementioned coherent
Marbles in a large Glass, when the Air was considerably exhausted the lower
presently fell from it; And though the uppermost was let down to it, yet it could
not be raised, till fresh Air was admitted into the Glass again, and then they
were again pressed strongly together and became coherent as in the open Air.

Rest it self for the most part sufficient to cause Rest.
But to return to our Discourse from which these Experiments have made a
Digression; though the Pressure of the Air may so join Bodies together, as to
make them coherent; yet generally, Rest it self is sufficient to render a
substance Solid; for since from what we have said above, concerning Fluidity,
it appears, that it depends on the Motion of Minute Parts one amongst another;
to deprive Matter of that Motion is enough to render it Solid, the Parts of a
Solid being contiguous and at rest.

The Opinions of some Ancients and Moderns briefly refuted.
I know it is by all Philosphers, whether Modern or Ancient, usually held, that
there is something else requisite to keep the Parts of a stable Body together:
For some hold, that a Substantial Form is requisite; but since it is equally as
difficult to conceive, how Matter should be so variously united in several
Substances, by a substantial Form as without it, we may as well fly to
imaginary Substances which are united by their peculiar Texture.

Others think, that the Particles of solid Bodies are linked together by a
Spirit diffused throughout the World, or by a certain sort of Glue, which Glews
their small Corpuscles together. But as to the first its altogether unlikely;
for it may as well be a Question how those Parts stick to the Spirit, as how
they stick to one another themselves; and it will be no less difficult to
conceive, how the Particles of that Spirit it self come to be fastened together.
Besides, were that true, it would follow, that Ice, which is looked upon as a
Body void of Spirit, must abound with it; since the Parts of that brittle
Substance, could not be joined by a Spirit which was not betwixt them: Nor is
it more Reasonable to suppose them joined by a Cement, since it might likewise
be asked, how the Parts of that Cement were linked together, which should it be
affirmed to be done by a Substance yet finer, the Question might still be
continued ad Infinitum; so that, it would at last be allowed, that some Parts
of Matter must adhere without a Cement, or there must be Cements finer one than
another ad Infinitum; which since it cannot be allowed, we may as well suppose,
that the Parts of a Body adhere without a gross Cement, as that the Parts of a
subtle Cement can stick together without another Substance to Cement them;
especially, since the Corpuscles of a Body may be so figured and contrived as
to be linked amongst one another very firmly; an agreeable Contact, with a real
rest of Parts, contributing to render the united substances a Solid Body.

But in favor of the former Opinion, it is urged by some, that the Spirit
which they suppose joins the Parts of a Body together, consists of Parts
indivisible; and consequently, there is no need of another substance to Unite
them: But since Bodies as Solid and Adamantine as these can be supposed to be
may be broke, a bare Affirmation must not be taken for Proof; for to suppose,
that these Parts of Matter were made up of hooked Parts; it would be as
reasonable to believe, that those hooked Parts might not be broke, as that by a
violent Agent the Particles of the most Solid Bodies cannot be divided, since
it is plain they may.

But to proceed, The last thing we supposed necessary to constitute a Body, was
the Texture of its Parts; and indeed though a Juxta-position and Rest of the
Parts of a Body, are sufficient to render it Solid; yet if those Parts are more
intimately interwoven with one another, so as to be linked together like Hooks,
it must contribute to render the Body much more firm, Parts so joined, being
much more difficultly separated, and put into Motion, than those which have
only an immediate Contact; And it may not a little serve to confirm our
Opinion, to take Notice, that in an Egg or Water, by a mere alteration of
Texture, the Disposition of Corpuscles of those Substances are considerably
changed; as when an Egg is, by the insinuation of the Parts of Fire, so
altered, as to become hard; or as when the Latter as well as Water is beaten
into a Froth, which in some Measure is like a Solid Body, as long as they
continue in that Form.

Having thus far inquired into the conjunct Causes of Solidity, we shall
consider briefly, how many Ways a Body may come to be so Modified, and what
things are requisite to make Bodies apt to put on such a Form.

The Figure of the Parts of a Body contribute to their Solidity.
The first and most remarkable thing is the Figure and Shape of the Parts of
Matter, as if they be hooked or otherwise shaped, so as to entangle one within
another, they will be with more difficulty separated; which is evident in
close-set Hedges, where by pulling away one Bough the slender Twigs of others
interwoven with it, make it harder to be separated; and not without pulling
some others along with it; ^o likewise the slender Threads, which make up
Cables, being twisted and wound one within another, are capable of sustaining a
much greater Weight, and require much more Force, to braeke them. And indeed
this Configuration of Parts seems to have been the Opinion of the ancient
Atomists, of which Lucretius has given the following Account in these Verses;
Denique quae nobis durata ac spissa videntur,
Haec magis hamatis inter se esse necess' est,
Et quasi ramosis alta compacta teneri.
In quo jam genere imprimis adamantina Saxa;
Prima acie costant, ictus contemnere sueta
Et validi salices, ac duri robora ferri,
Aeraque quae Claustris restantia vociferantur.


And indeed the correspondent Figures of Bodies may be so numerous, that the
same Particles, which before in two distinct Bodies were Liquid, may, by an
Union, have their Parts so interwoven with one another, as to become Solid; an
Instance of which has been given in the foregoing Chapter concerning
Saltpeter, where by a Mixture of a Liquor distilled from Nitre, with a Mixture
of fixed Nitre run per Deliquium, a third Substance will be obtained firm and
brittle, viz. a Saline Body. To this I shall add another, mentioned with a
different design by Lully and Hartman, which is the following, viz. If two
Parts of rectifyed Spirit of Wine; be mixed with one of Spirit of Urine
exquisitely Dephlegmed, they will in a Minute unite into a consistent Body; but
in this Experiment it is to be Noted, that the Spirits must be more rectified
than those usually made use of by the generality of Chemists; and I shall
further observe, that having my self had the Curiosity to try it, I found that
Spirit of Hartshorn well rectifyed would have the same Effects, if made use of
instead of Spirit of fermented Urine. And it may be fit yet further to observe
that though there was such a predisposition in the Parts of fermented Urine to
Coagulate with Spirit of Wine, yet the highest Spirit of unfermented Urine
being of a different Texture would not Coagulate as the former. And it is
further to be noted, that if this white Coagulum was kept in a Glass well
stopped for some Months, by the means of Heat it would be Melted into a limpid
Liquor; those Parts of the Liquor which were entangled one within another being
broke and dissolved, so that the Particles of the united Liquors being again
restored to such Figures as would enable them to move upon one another's
Surfaces, the Coagulum assumed the Form of a Fluid Body.

To this I shall subjoyn two Experiments which seem to have an Affinity with
the former; the first is, That rectified Spirit of Wine, by being digested with
Saccharum Saturni prepared with Spirit of Vinegar, so far changed its
consistency as to remain in a Glass without floating as a Liquid when the Glass
was inclined; the Second is, That by the Addition of a dry Body, from whence
nothing could be obtained by the help of the Fire, to the Coagulum just now
mentioned, the result of this Mixture was a permanent Liquor.

But for as much as the forementioned Experiment which produced the Coagulum
upon the Mixture of Spirit of Wine and Urine is difficult to be performed,
since it is a hard Matter to obtain Spirits fine enough for such a purpose, I
shall subjoyn a more easy one, which is, That if Spirit of Salt be added to the
White of an Egg beaten to a certain Thinness, the Mixture will be so much
Coagulated as not to afford the least Drop, though the Glass in which the
Experiment is tried, be turned with the Mouth downwards for a considerable
time. And Sir Francis Bacon relates an Experiment much to the same purpose;
which is, That if the White of an Egg be shaken with Spirit of Wine it
presently turn into such a Coagulum as will not yield one Fluid Drop in a
Minutes time, and though that great Naturalist attributes the Effect of this
Mixture, to the Heat of the Spirituous Parts; yet I rather think it the Effect
of the particular Texture of its Saline Parts, since other Salts which are
accounted cool, have the same Effect; And not only so but though Spirit of Wine
will Coagulate the Whites of Eggs, yet it has not that Effect upon the Serum
of Man's Blood, though the Heat of the Fire will Coagulate the one as well as the
other.

But it does not only experimentally appear, that a consistent Body may result
from a Mixture of two Fluids, but also that a Fluid may undergo such an
Alteration as to be changed into two Consistent Bodies; and this is evident in
distilled Sallet Oil, since the Substance drawn over is devoid of Fluidity as
well as that which remains behind; and to make it appear, that the Reason of it
is the bare result of Texture and the hooked Figures of its Parts, if we add to
the Oil a sufficient Quantity of Common Salt, it affords an Oil, which falls in
drops into the Receiver, and retains its Fluidity. And to this it may be added,
That by adding two pound of Brandy, and one of Sea Salt to eight Ounces of Oil
of Amber, the Texture of that Oil was so far from being so changed, as to come
over clear and transparent; as Essential Oils drawn off in Limbecks, usually
do. To which we may likewise add, That the Texture of Oil of Aniseeds,
distilled in a Limbeck and Refrigeratory, with a sufficient Quantity of Water;
will, by the Winter's Cold, be coagulated into a white brittle Substance, though
it continues Fluid all the Summer.

The Texture of Bodies contributes to their Fluidity, or Firmness.
And to make it further appear, how much the Alteration of Texture contributes
to the Fluidity, or Firmness of Bodies; and to what weak, and almost
inconsiderable Agents, those Effects may be attributed; I shall subjoyn another
Experiment, which shows, that the Particles of a Body may be sufficiently
agitated, to render it Fluid, by another not sensibly hot; for having melted
coagulated Oil of Aniseeds by the Fire, and put it into two Glasses; the one
was congulated again in a short time; yet the other continued dissolved, being
only covered over with a Menstruum, in whose Parts there is no sensible Heat.

To this I shall add another, of a much like Nature, which is the following.
Having powdered some of that brittle Gum or Colophony, which remains upon the
Evaporation of about a fourth Part of Venice Turpentine, I mixed so much of it
with Spirit of Wine, that, the Liquor being wholly impregnated with it, some
part might remain undissolv'd; which nevertheless had its Parts put into an
Agitation, sufficient to render it, in some measure, a Fluid, though a Viscous
Substance, notwithstanding the Force of the Menstruum was spent upon what had
been dissolved; but though this Substance was kept in a Fluid Form in the
Menstruum; yet in the Air, it would harden in a little time. And in this
Experiment, it is likewise observable, That though, by a violent Agitation, the
Viscid Matter was mixed with the Menstruum, yet it presently separated, and
subsided again.

The Textures of Liquots contribute to their Mixture.
And this suggests to my Memory an Experiment, which shows how much the Textures
of Liquors contribute to their Mixtures with each other; for though it be usually
in General asserted by the Chemists, That Salts and Oils will not mix together;
yet I obtained an Opacous Liquor, like Balsam in Consistence, from a Mixture of
an equal weight of Oil of Turpentine, and Oil of Vitriol: And that it might
more evidently appear, that the Mixture of these two Fluids, depends on the
peculiar Texture of each, I committed the Mixture to Distillation; and obtained
a gross Substance, which seemed to be that which united the other Liquors: For
as soon as this was drawn off, the Liquors presently succeeded, but separate
one from another, being not to beunited again, by a Violent Agitation, but so
as to separate again, and swim one upon another. To this may be added the
Liquor, which we have mentioned in another place, obtained by Distillation from
Benzoin: One Part of it always continuing in the Form of an Oil; and the other,
according to the Difference of the Weather, either shooting into clear
Crystals, or preserving it is Fluid and Oily Form. To which may be subjoined
what we have formely taken Notice of concerning Saltpeter; which, though when
mixed with Water, it becomes Fluid; yet, upon an Evaporation of some Part of
that, it presently shoots in Solid Chrystals: From whence it not only appears,
what a gentle Agitation of Parts is sufficient to keep a Body Fluid; but from
hence we may observe, That sometimes Solid Bodies result from a Mixture of
Liquids: So Oil of Vitriol, distilled with Quicksilver, leaves a white Calx
behind it; and if we consider how Mercurius Dulcis is prepared, we shall find,
that that Solid Substance consists for the most part of Quicksilver, the Salts
united with it being scarce one Part of three of the Composition. And though
Fluidity be opposite to Solidity, yet may it conduce to the Production of a
Solid Body, since those Particles which lie in the Form of a Powder, and are
not in a capacity to unite, may, by swimming in a Fluid, have the Opportunity
of frequent Occursions, so that their Motion bringing them often together, they
may, in time, be disposed to unite into one Body; which is evident in Powder of
Alablaster; which, if when it has been boiled for a considerable time, it be
well burnt, and reduced to the Consistence of a thin Pap, with clear Water,
will become firm, and admit of, as well as retain, any Form impressed upon it,
by the Internal Surface of whatever Mould it is cast in: Where, that the Parts
of the Alablaster are put into Motion, and variously agitated in the Water, is
evident, from that sensible Heat, which for some time, succeeds the Affusion of
Water; and this has been sufficiently experienced, by filling a Glass full of
this Mixture, which some time after it was stopped, broke the Viol, and
hardened into a Substance, correspondent in shape to the Cavity of it; several
Spoons-full of this Liquor it was moistened with, being squeezed out at a
Crack, which was made by the Swelling of the Powder; and this Substance
acquires such a Degree of Firmness, as to endure several strokes with a strong
piece of Iron, without breaking.

But there are several other Substances, which may acquire a greater degree of
Solidity, than the Powder of Alablaster burnt; for the Learned Hydrographer
Furnier, Hydrograph. lib. 2. cap. 6. relates a Story of a sort of Sand in the
Kingdom of Naples, near Cuma and Puteoli, two parts of, which mixed with a
third of Quicklime, becomes a hard Substance like Flint, when it has lain or
some time in the Water: To which Relation he subjoyns, That the Lime-ashes of a
certain Marble, near Tournay in Holland, being cast into Water, upon a heap of
Stones, petrifies to that degree, as to change into a Substance as hard as
Marble.

But to return to what we have digress'd from, That the Variously determined
Motions of the Parts of Matter, contributes to their Union and Coalitions, into
Solid Substances, appears from those Curious Salts, which Spontaneously shoot
and Crystallize in the Bottom of Spirit of Hartshorn, when it has been
exposed to the Air for several Months: For those Particles, by frequent
Occursions, are by degrees so disposed to unite, that at the length those
Parts, which are most apt to cohere, meeting together, they form exquisitely
figured Crystals, which adhere to the sides of the Vessel. And it is not less
Remarkable, That though a Tincture of Amber, drawn with pure Spirit of Wine, for
some Years continued Fluid; yet, at the last, some of its Parts were so
combined, as to form little Parcels of Amber, almost Spherical in Shape, which
adhered partly to the Sides, and partly to the Bottom of the Vessel.

Solidity may proceed from the Interposition of the Minute Parts of another
Body.
But there are yet other ways, by which Bodies may become Compact and Solid, as
first by the Insinuation of Small Particles of Matter, into their Pores and
Recesses; which may produce their Effects various ways: First, by driving out
those Particles, which being disposed to Motion, hindered the Cohesion of the
Fluid Parts. Secondly, by obstructing the Motion of the Fluid Parts: And,
Thirdly, by altering the Constituent Parts of the Fluid, so as to render them
unapt for Motion, and inclinable to a mutual cohesion: So the Particles which
constitute Rennet, by Uniting with some Parts of the Milk they are mixed with,
link them together, and cause them to unite into a Coagulum; and that the Parts
of the Rennet cause them to coagulate; and that they unite those Viscid Parts,
and link them together, is plain; since it is a usual Complaint that the Cheese
made where Rennet is used, tastes very strong of it. And that the Coagulating
Virtue depends on the Saline Parts of the Rennet, appears; since other Acid.
Liquors have the like Effect in Coagulating Milk, as Juice of Limmons, etc. as
also a very small Quantity of Oil of Vitriol, artificially mixed with it. To
which I shall add, That some Years past, I prepared a certain Salt, endew'd
with Qualities not unlike those ascribed to Glauber's Sal Mirabilis; which
would not only, like other Salts, when dissolved in Water, upon Evaporation,
shoot into Crystals, it self; but also would coagulate, and Crystallize a
treble Quantity of Water with them, which would so far put on the Nature of a
Salt, as to become brittle, and to be reducible to Powder.

A Liquor turned into a Consistent Body, by the Addition of a Powder.
And it may not be fruitless here to subjoyn, That though the Particles of Oil of
Vitriol, be in so violent an Agitation, as to acquire a Sensible Heat, upon
their Mixture with some Bodies; yet I so altered the Texture of that Liquor,
as, by a Mixture of a certain whitish Powder of my own Preparation, to render
it a Consistent Body: In which Experiment, it was observable, That several
Days, after the Oil was coagulated, the Powder remained undissolv'd in the
Bottom of the Viol; so that the Coagulation seemed to be effected by some
subtle Effluvia, insinuating themselves into the Pores of the Liquor. To this
Experiment, I shall subjoyn another, in which the same Effect was produced, by
leaving Oil of Vitriol upon Crystals of Saltpeter well dried; where it was to
be noted, That the Oil was not only Coagulated, but seemed to be joined
together, by certain Fibers, which were formed out of the Saline Effluvia of
the Saltpeter, dispersed through the Body of the Oil. And that those subtle
Effluvia, which insinuate themselves into the Pores of a Fluid Body, may so
alter the Texture, as to render it Solid, is more eminently evident, from the
Fumes of Lead, which Coagulate and harden, Quicksilver; and that Lead, does
really emit such Fumes, is evident, from the Effects which a Physician]
observed in himself; viz. both Vomiting and Purging, by barely holding his Head
over melted Lead, several times successively. and it has been observed by the
Famous Geometrician Dr. Wallis, That the Fumes of Lead, have, by being several
times melted, been so spent, that the Lead, after the first time it was melted,
sometimes lost it is a Coagulating Virtue. And Phenomenon not much different
from the former, are exhibited by the following Experiment: For if either
Common, A Fluid turned Solid.
or Oil of Sweet Almonds, be poured upon Aqua fortis, the Steams of the Latter
will soon Coagulate either of them; whereas if Camphire, which is a brittle
Substance, were cast upon the same Aqua fortis, it would be turned into an Oily
Substance; A Solid Body turned Fluid.
which shows how much the Effluvia of Bodies may contribute to Fluidity, or
Firmness, accordingly as the Bodies acted on, are pre-dispos'd to assume
different Forms: And before I leave this Experiment, it may be material to take
Notice, That though Oil of Tartar, per Deliquium, be endew'd with an
Extraordinary Faculty of Mortifying Acids, yet it would not reduce the
Coagulated Oil to a Fluid Form.

But to proceed: The Last way by which such Penetrating Effluvia may conduce to
the Solidity of Bodies, is, by putting those Bodies into such Violent Motions,
as they may, by being impelled upon, and knocked one against another, be
disposed to Union, and to be entagl'd one within another.

And though this Concurrent Cause, never acts separately, without the
Joynt-Action of the aforementioned Ways, yet is it necessary to make a
Distinction; because this differs from the Former, in as much as these
Effluvia, contrary to the other, make up no part of the Body, upon which the
Alteration is wrought, but only agitate the Parts of it: So that the Figure and
the Texture of the Parts of the Body, become different from one another, A
Complication of Parts sufficient to render a Body Solid.
and more complicated. And that a bare Complication of Particles, is
sufficient, in a great Measure, to render a Body stable, will appear from an
Observation very common; viz. That That though from a heap of Osiar-wands, a
single Twig may be taken, without removing the rest; yet if they be twisted
together in the Form of a Basket, the whole follow upon the taking up of one;
and the same may be observed, in most of the Works of Mechanics. And what
great Effects bare Motion may have, in altering the Textures of Bodies, is
manifest, and very obvious in Churning; where the Branched Particles, which are
dispersed and diffused through the whole, by frequent Occursions, are so freed
from the rest of the Liquor, that they presently unite, and form that soft Oily
Substance called Butter; and not only so Homogeneous a Body as Milk, may be so
altered by Motion, but even Oil of Turpentine, may be rendered a Consistent
Body, without the Assistance of any other Agent, than Motion given to it is
Parts by Distillation, the Substance drawn off being a Stable and Consistent
Coagulum. And to illustrate farther, what we have delivered of Fluidity and
Firmness; I shall add the following Experiment; viz. That Oil of Wax, being
distilled, afforded a Substance not unlike Butter; which when it had stood a
while, was dissolved, without the Influence of any External Heat, into a
Transparent Oil.

A Change of Qualities succeed a Change of Texture.
But further: Fluidity and Firmness so much depend upon Texture, that the same
Corpuscles, which united one way form a Fluid, by an opposite Texture, may
become Solid, and e converso: And this is not only evident, in Water
successively Froze and Thawed again; but also in Metals, which, after Fusion,
put on their Pristine Form, upon Cooling: But a more Emiminent Instance is,
That Quicksilver being kept in a Sand-Furnace, for about ten Weeks, in a
Glass-Vessel well stopped; the Particles of that Body, being variously
entangl'd and wound together, constitute a Red Powder; which may, by Chemists,
be precipitated per se; and in a few Hours, if a quantity of Quicksilver be
distilled in a Glass Retort, a Red Powder, like the former, will remain in the
Bottom, as well as about the Sides of the Vessel: In which wonderful
Phenomenon, it is not absurd to imagine, that the Change is wrought, much
after the same manner as in Whites of Eggs, which by an Alteraration of
Textures, become hard; or, that by frequent Revolutions, the Parts of that
Liquor are so linked one within another, as to put on a different Form; and
whatever may be the Method by which this Change is effected, yet, that it
depends on an Alteration of Texture, is most certain; since that Powder being
raised in the Form of Fumes, in a convenient Glass, condensed into Running
Mercury, in the Neck of it.

But to prove further how much Motion, or Rest, contributes to the Fluidity or
Solidity of Bodies, I shall add, That I once had Mercury, which I looked upon
to be Mercury of Saturn, which by being barely agitated to and fro, would put
on the Form of a Black Powder, which would again become fluid Mercury, by
grinding it in a Glass-Mortar.

Fluids consist not of Parts divisible into Fluids, as Quantity into Quantity.
From which Experiments of Mercury, we may learn, what may be thought concerning
the Opinions of some Modern Philosophers, who are of Opinion, That Fluid Bodies
may be divided into Fluid Bodies, as Quantity into Quantity; as if every
Particle of a Fluid Body, must be Fluid it self; since, from the aforementioned
Experiments, it is evident, that the Particles which constitute Fluids, are
Solid in themselves; forasmuch as, upon a bare Change of Texture, they appear
in that Form; which is rendered further probable, if not evident, both since
the Particles of which Salt consists, being dissolved in Water, put on, as to
Sense, the Forms of Fluids; as well as, because the Corpuscles of so Solid a
Body as Silver, do the same, when dissolved in Aqua fortis: And on the
contrary, the Calx, remaining behind, after a Distillation of Quicksilver, with
four times its quantity of Oil of Vitriol, in a Sand-Furnace, is a Consistent
Substance, which, if dissolved in Water, will after Evaportion, shoot into very
brittle Crystals; which rather proceeds from the Parts of the Oil condensed,
than from those of the Metal; since the Calx remaining behind, exceeded the
weight of the Mercury, the Liquor drawn off, being not equal to that of the
Oil. And I am further confirmed in this Opinion, because I have observed
several Crystals sometimes to adhere to the Sides of a Glass, in which Oil of
Vitriol was contained, which were again resolved when exposed to the open Air
into the pristine Form of Oil. But it may be further urged, as an Argument
against the Divisibility of fluid Bodies into such fluid Parts, that if it were
so, all Bodies would be equally disposed to insinuate themselves into the Pores
of other Bodies; and it would not happen, that one Body should be more inclined
than another.

Motion as well as Minuteness of Parts requisite to Fluidity.
It is not indeed to be denied, but that a fluid Body may be divided into very
small Parts, considered barely as Matter; and that Minuteness of Parts may
render it more apt for Motion, and consequently more fluid; but it does not
therefore follow, That the Parts of a fluid Body are indefinitely so divided,
because considered as Matter, they may be Mentally, since it does not appear,
that they are Naturally so divided: Besides, to render a Body fluid, Motion as
well as Minuteness of Parts is requisite, which appears from what we have said
before concerning Powder of Alablaster, which puts on the Form of a fluid, by
having its Parts violently agitated. But

Solidity not altogether proceeding from Saline Parts.
From what has been already premised it appears likewise, What Thoughts we are
to entertain of the Doctrine of the Chemists, who assert, That Coagulation,
Stability, etc. are the Effects of saline Parts. For though Salt has a Power to
curdle Milk and coagulate other Humors; yet the hardening Properties of it are
not the Effects of any inexplicable Qualities inherent in it; but of the Shape
and Motion of the Particles which constitute it, which, by insinuating
themselves into the Pores of a Body, and sticking several Parts together, do
like a Wire fasten them one to another. But notwithstanding the saline Parts of
a Body may thus contribute to the Solidity of it, yet it is not an Ingredient
altogether necessary; since the Parts of a Body may be so interwoven, and, by
reason of their Figure and Contexture, be so disposed to Union, as to form a
solid Body without the Association of a saline Ingredient; besides, it might be
urged, That Salts themselves may easily be reduced into fluid Substances, by a
Mixture of Water; and several of them, as Salt of Tartar, etc. will, without
the Addition of any other Body, barely by being exposed to the Air, be rendered
fluid.

But not to insist upon these Instances, I shall rather desire to know, what
Salt can be supposed to insinuate it self into, and cause Solidity in Mercury,
when it coagulates in the Fumes of Lead? Or what Access of saline Parts can be
imagined in the Preparation of Mercury precipitated per se? And it may as well
be questioned, how any saline Body can penetrate the fine and subtle Pores of
Glass? When, in a cold Night the Water contained in it is frozen, and is turned
to so consistent a Substance as Ice. And it may be likewise noted, That though
the Shells of Hens Eggs be soft when first laid, yet they presently harden
without the Addition of any other saline Ingredient. And that this Effect
cannot be wholly attributed to the Influence of the Air, it may be urged, that
it has oftentimes been observed, That Shells have been found hard several
times in the very Bodies of the Hens, before they were laid.

But that which I look upon to be a more convincing Argument, is, that in
Egypt, where Eggs are hatched by the Influence of a moderate external Heat,
that fluid Substance is changed into several Parts, of very different Degrees
of Consistency, without the Addition of any other Body, or the Accession of a
new Salt.

But further, I shall make use of Arguments drawn from the Concessions of the
most Eminent of their own Writers; for in transmuting of Quicksilver into
Gold, by a white or red Tincture, the Quantity of it being only a Grain to a
Pound of Quicksilver; it may justly be demanded, How so small a Quantity
should change six or seven Thousand times its Weight, whereas even that Grain
is not altogether saline, Part of it being a* sulphurous Substance? And it is
observed, that Helmont affirms upon his own, as well as the Experience of
Raymond Lully, that if the Alkahost were drawn from Quicksilver, the fluid
Mercury would be so coagulated, as to be capable of being reduced into a
Powder, though not the least of the saline Liquor was left behind. And I am
credibly informed that the present Duke of Holstein has by him a certain Glass
Spirit of Urine, which in cold Weather shoots into Crystals, and in warm
dissolves into a limpid Liquor, which Spirit was no otherwise prepared than by
cohobating the distilled Spirit so often, till the whole saline urinous
Substance was brought over united together into one Mass.

And for a further Confirmation of the Doctrine by us delivered, to these I
shall add, that it has been observed, that if so much as Juice of Lemmons
falls into a Caldron of Sacharine Syrup, it keeps the whole Mass from Thickning
into a Sugar; and this is confirmed, both by the French Publisher of the
Natural and Moral History of the American Islands, called Les Isles Antilles
Histor. Moral. Cap. 5. and also by Gulielmus Piso Histor. Not. and Med. Brasil.
l. 4. c. 1. the latter of which expresses himself in these Words, Si Momentum
succi Limonis, vel Acidi quid injiciatur, Sacchari Consistentiam nunquam
acquiret, sed in totum perditur; and it may be further observed to our present
Purpose, that in making of Sugar, the Juice squeezed out of the Canes, is
usually first depurated in large Vessels of Copper, from whence it is removed
into Vessels of a less Size, in order to a farther Depuration; where we are to
note also, that whilst it remains in the larger Vessels, they usually add very
strong Lees to promote Depuration, and when the depurated Liquor is removed to
the small Vessels, it is the Custom to add Oil or Butter to preserve the
Liquor, and to prevent it from boiling over, which Preparation Piso takes
notice of, together with the abovementioned Author, the Words of the former
being these, Observatu dignum, si Oleum majoribus inderetur Ahenis, in quibus
Liquor primus, Caldo dictus, purificatur, Saccharo conficiendo plane foret
ineptus; vicissim si minoribus lixivium sicut majoribus infundatur, aeque
impossible Saccharum conficere. The Fluidity and Firmness of Bodies depend so
much upon the peculiar Texture of the Matter which constitutes them, rather
than on a saline Substance.

To these Authorities, for a further Confirmation of our Hypothesis, I shall
add a few Experiments of my own; and first, having prepared a Liquor not much
inferior in Saltness to Aqua fortis, and then put small Fragments of solid
Hartshorn into it, we found, that they were gradually softened, the Particles
of the Liquor insinuating themselves into the Pores of the consistent Body, and
rendering it in a few days time of the Consistence of a Mucilage: We mixed
likewise Spirit of Vinegar with Salt of Tartar, An insipid Water drawn from Sp.
of Vinegar and Salt of Tartar.
till the Ebullition wholly ceased, and by Distillation obtained an insipid
Water from the Mixture; and so successively poured fresh Spirit of Vinegar upon
the Mixture, and again extracted the insipid Water, repeating reiterated
Affusions and Distillations, till the fixed Salt was sufficiently impregnated
with the Acid Parts of the Vinegar; and then we obtained a Mixture, though made
up of pure and elementary Salts, which so far emulated a fluid Body, as to
depose its saline Form when influenced by a very moderate Heat. Camphire
dissolved in Oil of Vitriol, etc.
Again, we mixed some Pieces of Camphire with Oil of Vitriol, by which they
were presently dissolved into an Oil, and when violently agitated together,
readily mixed with the Oil of Vitriol, and seemed to constitute a uniform
Liquor for several Hours; yet by an Addition of four times as much fair Water,
the Camphire presently assumed its own Form again, and swam upon the Top of the
Liquor; where it is to be noted, That the saline Parts of the Oil of Vitriol
render the Camphire Fluid, instead of making it more Solid; and on the
contrary, that Fluid is turned into a Consistent Body again, by a Body so much
void of Saltness as Water.

And that a Body may acquire those other Qualities, viz. Hardness and
Brittleness, without an Addition of Saline Parts, is evident, from the
different Tempers that may be given to a Piece of Steel; for if it be immerged
in Water red hot, it acquires a Brittleness and Hardness, which it has not, if
leisurely cooled in the Air; yet if it be again heated till it turns to a deep
Blue, it acquires a comparative softness and aptness to bend. And that an
Alteration in Texture, is enough to render a Body more or less Solid, is
evident in Snow; for its Parts being compressed more closely together, it is
abler to resist the Impressions of other Bodies; and yet when further, by
thawing it, it is Parts are brought closer together, it has a greater degree of
Solidity and Firmness, when Froze again; the Texture being much more close and
compact, than that of the Snow.

But by some it is taught, that Induration depends on a certain inward
Principle, A Plastic power inherent in Bedies.
or a Plastic Power, called by some a Form and by others a Petrifying Spirit,
lodged in a Liquid Vehicle. And indeed, since I have observed, that some Stones
dug out of the Earth are endewed with such curious and exquisite Figures, as if
they had been the product of Art; I cannot but acknowledge a Plastic Power,
which the wise Creator of Things has implanted in certain Particles of Matter,
which produce both the determinate Figure as well as consistnce of those
Bodies: Plastic Power what?
But we disagree with the generality of those Philosophers, as to the Manner in
which this internal Principle produces its Effects; and since the Manner of it,
by them, is not intelligibly explained, it will be necessary to Consider, how
many ways Nature takes to render Bodies Solid, by which we shall be better
Qualified to Judge of the Manner which those Particles operate by, in which the
Plastic Power is said to lodge.

But to proceed; For as much as Hardness is the highest degree of Firmness, we
shall endeavor to make it appear, that an Alteration of Texture, concurring
with other dispositions of the component Parts of a Body, is enough to render
it hard without the Addition of an adventitious Salt.

The Tradition is common amongst those, that search into the Secrets of Nature,
that Coral, though a hard Substance with us, is a soft Body whilst remaining
under Water, according to that of Ovid,

Sic and Cor alum quo primum contigit Auras
Tempore durescit, mollis fuit herba sub Vndis.
Ovid. Metamorph. Lib. 15. And though Beguinus Tyrocyn. Chym. lib. 2 Cap. 10.
has urged very strong Arguments against this Tradition; yet, that it has
sometimes been found true, appears from what Gassendus lib. 4 An. Dom. 1624.
relates of an Ingenious Gentleman, who Fished for Coral near Toulon, viz. The
Plants, which were plucked up, and drawn out, were neither red nor handsome,
till their Bark was pulled off; in some Parts they were soft, and would give
way to the Hand, as toward the Tops, which being broken and squezed, they sent
forth Milk like that of Figs. To which may be added the Testimony of the Jesuit
Fournier, Hydrograph. lib. 4. Cap. 27. And I am informed by one that Practices
Physic in the East Indies, that he gathered white Coral diverse times on the
Sands of the Island Mehila (not far from that of Madagascar) which is usually
as soft as an Onion; and is observed to decay, if it is not gathered at a
certain Season of the Year. Agreeable to which Piso lib. 4. Cap. 68. making
mention of several stony Trees on the Brasilian Coast; says, E fundo erutae mox
durissimae; si insolentur in Littore, siccae niveique coloris fiunt, which may
be favored by the following Relation of Scaliger's. Ex bovillis Oppidanus
adjutus Medicamentis eminxit vitrum sane ex illa Nobili Paxagorae pituita dum
mingeretur, albuminis Mollitie, emissum vitri duritie ac splendore, Senatoris
filius ejecit, puttis modo multis, and maximos: Qui aeris Contactu, postea in
Gypseam tum speciem tum firmitatem concrevere; hic quoque nunc recte valet. And
I have been informed by a Merchant, and likewise a Chemist of Dantzick, that
several Lumps of Amber have been taken up soft upon their Coast which presently
grew hard in the Air; which I the rather believed, because I have several times
observed, both Spiders, Flys and Straws enclosed in Amber.

Observations of Indurated Bodies.
And here we may take Notice, that though it from hence appears, that some Bodies
which are soft under Water, become hard when exposed to the Air; yet it is a
Matter of difficulty to determine, how much, the Infiuence of the Air
contributes to the hardening of them: For Gassendus in Vita Piereskii. lib. 1.
says, he has observed in the lesser Streams of the River Rhosne, where he
usually washed himself, several Lumps of hard Substances, upon the same Place,
where he was wont to find the ground smooth and soft; and that some time after,
the same hard Substances remaining in the Water, as well as some which he
carried home with him, were turned into perfect Pebbles; from which relations,
and also what we have before observed concerning the Powder of Alablaster, it
appears, how much the Mechanical Textures of Bodies, together with other
Mechanical Qualities contribute to their various Forms; for besides the
aforementioned Instances I have observed, that that bony Substance, so much
esteemed by Physicians, which is usually taken out of the Deer's Heart, and is
of a hard Consistence, has appeared, in one of those Creatures which I
purposely looked into, to be soft and flexible like Cartilages.

And indeed Solidity seems so much to depend upon Texture, that it may justly
be doubted, whether the most solid Bodies have not before their Concretion been
in Fluid Forms; since amongst other Rarities I have seen, in the midst of
Stones, the exact Figures of Fishes with their Scales and Finns, etc. And I
have known, not only Wood, but several other Substances as Lead-oar, Minera
Antimonii, Marchasites, etc. found in the midst of stony Concretions; which are
strong Arguments that those Stones have been before their Indurations in the
Forms of Fluids; and from hence we may have ground to Question the Opinions of
some, who think, that Stones and such like, or more solid Concretions, have
been existent in the same Forms since the Creation; since we may with
probability enough presume, that these Concretes are the Results of Matter,
newly modified; and united after a different Manner from what they were before;
otherwise it would be impossible, that such things should be lodged in such
hard Concretes; And these Considerations and Observations may farther confirm,
what we have elsewhere noted concerning the growth and increase of Minerals.

But the most eminent Instances, to show, how much the Fluidity and Firmness of
Bodies, A very remarkable Instance to show how much Fluidity, etc. depends on
Texture.
is owing to the Texture and various Coalitions of their Parts, are in those
Waters, which when permitted to rest, instead of Fluidity acquire a stony
hardness. And it has been observed in some hollow Caves, that by the
Coagulation of a certain Humor, which issued out of the top of it, several
Concretes have been formed like Icicles; of which I have some by me now,
gathered by a very ingenious Person, which are of a perfect stony hardness,
being 8 or 10 Inches in Length, and of a proportionable Thickness; and I have
also now by me, certain stony Concretes sent me from a famous petrifying Cave
in France.

And if we will give Credit to Aventinus as well as some other Authors, he has
recorded, in his History, that several Men and Women were at once Petrified by
a Terrene Spirit, and changed into Statues; that Petrifying exhalation
operating much after the same Manner, and altering the Texture of their Bodies,
as when by Incubation and the subtle Insinuations of calorifick Atoms, the
Parts of an Egg are so newly modifyed and disposed, as to put on the Form of a
Chick. And it is Testified by Pamphilio Pixcentino, of a Woman in Venice, who
upon eating of an Apple, was turned into a very hard Stone, after she had been
hideously tortured for about 24 hours; Mixture sufficient to produce
Petrifaction.
which History together with Observations of my own, which I shall add, will be
a good Argument to prove, that even Mixture is sufficient to petrify some
Bodies; the Observation is in the following Experiment, viz. If two Ounces of
Quicksilver be mixed with two Ounces and a half of Verdigreese, together with
about an Ounce of common Salt, and put into a Frying Pan; when that Mixture
has been Boiled for a considerable time, with an equal Quantity of Vinegar and
Water, gradually infused, as it wastes by Effluviums, the Mixture, washed and
cleansed from its Salts, will afford an Amalgama not unlike Quicksilver;
which, if Dexterously prepared, may be cast into Moulds and formed into imbost
Images; and it is in this Amalgama very remarkable, that though at the first it
is so soft, as in a great Measure to emulate a Fluid Body; yet when for some
hours exposed to the Air, it becomes hard and as Brittle as Steel; where the
Induration seems to result from the Coalitions of the mixed Ingredients, and
their new Texture, rather than from any innate Principle; The Particles of the
Fluid Mercury being so entangled and interwoven one with another, as to lose
their former Fluidity, and to convene so closely as to unite into a Solid Body.
And that the Induration depends on a Mutual Combination of the Saline
Ingredients with the Mercury, is beyond doubt; since not only a true and
perfect Copper may be obtained from the Amalgama; but when it has been for
some time exposed to the Air, the Surface will be covered over with the Saline
Parts of the Verdigreese, which have freed themselves from their more intimate
commixture with the metalline Particles of the condensed Quicksilver.

But lest it should be Questioned, whether the Particles of Salt can have any
sensible Operation, when mixed with a Body so firm as condensed Quicksilver, I
shall add, that in Bodies much more firm, it has been observed, viz. in those
Stones from which Vitriol is got; for it is remarkable in them, that when they
have been for some time exposed to the open Air, the internal Agitation of the
Saline Parts, is so violent, that several of them will not only swell, but even
burst asunder. And I remember that having preser^'d a Mineral, much of the same
Nature with these Stones, in my Chamber, the Superficies was covered with a
Powder, both in Color and Taste resembling Vitriol.

And that the Motion of the Parts of this Amalgama, whilst it was Fluid, which
they might be put into, by the external force of the Fire, might contribute to
their Concretion, we have sufficient Reasons to believe, from what is related
and observed by experienced Masons, viz. That the best Mortar will not acquire
it is utmost compactness, under 25 or 30 Years, and that, after a long time, it
becomes so hard, as to be more unapt to break than the Stones it Cements.

But lastly, that the Condensation of the Parts of the Quicksilver, depends on
the Mixture of the Ingredients, and the Texture thence resulting, is evident;
since the Proportion of the Ingredients being varied, the Condensation of the
Mercury was neither so speedy, nor so firm.

And that it may appear, That Nature and Art sometimes take Measures not
unlike, in the Hardening of Bodies, I shall add a Passage from a Jesuit, named
Pierre Belleprat, who relates it as an Observation in the American Continent,
where he was sent to preach to the Indians: A Strange Sort of Earth.
The Relation is, That near the Mouth of the River, there is to be found a
Green sort of Clay, which being soft, and capable of being put into any Form,
whilst under Water, grows so hard when exposed to the Air, as not to be much
softer than Diamonds; and this, he says, the Natives usually make Hatchets of,
which they cut their Wood in pieces with. But,

A Concrete resulting from a Mixture of Spirit of Wine. and a Solution of Coral.
To conclude this Discourse, I shall add an Experiment, which will be a farther
Confirmation, That Fluidity and Firmness, depend on Texture, and the Motion or
Rest of the Insensible Parts of Matter. The Experiment is, That having made a
Solution of Coral in Vinegar, so strong, that part of it fell to the Bottom; I
poured Dephlegm'd Spirit of Wine, upon the Clear Decantated Liquor, so gently,
that it might swim upon it for some time; where it was suprizing, that upon a
violent Agitation, the two Liquors being mixed together, united into a Concrete
so firm, as not to afford the least Drop of a Fluid Liquor; yet by adding an
equal quantity or thereabouts of Spirit of Nitre, it would again lay down that
Viscidity, and become a Transparent Liquor.

And here it will not be amiss to specify, That this Experiment is so
difficult, that it scarce succeeds, without a great deal of Caution; for,
First, If the Tincture be not strong enough, or the Spirit of Wine not
rectified, the Coagulation will be but partial, and not so quick: Secondly, The
Experiment has succeeded in a Widemouth'd Glass, where it had a free access of
Air, though it would not in one which was closer: Thirdly, Upon an Infusion of
Spirit of Nitre, the Mixture must be stirred with an Instrument, made of Gold,
Wood, or Glass, lest the Menstruum corroding it, should render the Experiment
unsuccessful: And Fourthly, The quantity of each of these Ingredients is hard
to be defined, by Reason of the Difference in respect of the Strength of the
Tincture, and the Spirituousness of the Spirit; but it is rather to be learnt,
by Varying the Proportions, if the first Trial does not succeed.

Having made this Progress in the History of Fluidity, and Firmness; It might
be seasonable to pass on, and consider those other Qualities relating to it; as
Hardness, Brittleness, Softness, etc. but remembering the Advice given by some
of the Ancients, Noscenda est Mensura sui; I shall leave them for others, who
are better able and more at leisure; being content, that I have explained the
two former Qualities more Intelligibly, than some of the Peripateticks, or
Chemists; having laid open a Way to accommodate Chemical Experiments, to the
Explanation of Fluidity and Firmness, so as to deduce those Qualities, from
more Intelligible Principles, viz. Size, Shape, and Motion.

CHAP. XIV. An Essay of the Intestine Motions of the Particles of Quiescent
Solids.
The Signification of the Word Rest limited.
THE Word REST, is of so Ambiguous a Signification, that before the Question,
Whether there be in Bodies any Absolute Rest? can be answered, it is requisite
to consider, That in the Common Acceptance, it is used to denote, such a Rest
as is not perceivable to Sense; but when taken in a more Strict and
Philosophical Sense, it usually signifies such an Absolute Rest, as to intimate
a total Negation of Motion. In which latter Sense, if it be taken, I will not
affirm, That there is such a Rest, even in the Parts of Solids; since it is not
improbable, but that there is Motion, though imperceivable by Sense, even in the
most Solid Bodies. In favor of which Opinion, were it necessary, I should
offer Arguments a priori, deduced from the Doctrine of the Epicurean and
Cartesian Principles.

For should we allow the World to arise from a Casual Concourse of Atoms, and
that there were actual Motion in all of them; it would not be absurd to think,
That though in Forming Concretes, they are usually wound one within another, yet
there is a continual Endeavor to Elasticity, by which they continually strive
to disentangle themselves, and to fly away, and consequently the Result of
those Endeavors must be a Motion amongst those Atoms.

And on the other side, should we, with Cartesius, allow a Continual
Circulation of a Materia Subtilis through the Pores of Bodies, we may imagine,
That the Insensible Atoms, which constitute that Body, will be shak'd and
disturbed by it, though not so much as to be perceived by Sense: So in the
Summer, the Leaves are carried off the Trees with gentle Gales of Wind, which
are not perceived by those that stand some Distance off.

But not to enlarge upon this Point, it may appear, from several of the
Phenomenon mentioned above in the History of Fluidity, that the Particles of
Bodies may be in Motion, though that Motion is not discerned; and Particularly,
that of Water; where though its Parts be in a very Various Motion, yet to Sense
they seem to be as much at Rest, as those, which form the Glass, in which the
Water is contained. And that there may be a like Motion, in the Substance of
Silver or Iron, may be argued from what is evident to the Touch, or by throwing
Water upon them when hot, it being peculiar Properties in them when hot, to
burn the Fingers, and to set the Water a-boiling; and the like Qualities, though
not so violent, may be raised without the help of Fire, by barely Hammering of
Iron, or Silver; they not only, by that means, acquiring a Power to heat, but
likewise to raise Water into Vapors.

Argument to prove Motion in Solids.
But if to this it should be objected, That though the Motion be indiscernible;
yet the Agent that gives it that Motion is not, since we can discern how those
Qualities are added to it, and how the Alteration is wrought: I answer, That
though a Vigorous Loadstone, appears to be drawn along it is Axis, and back again,
the Alteration is not visible in the Body of the Iron; yet it certainly loses,
after it has acquired, those Noble Faculties, viz. it is Attracting and
Directing Virtues properly belonging to Magnetical Bodies: But, that there may
be in Metals a Motion, though not discernible, is further evident in a Bell;
which a long time after it has been struck with the Clapper, continues to put
the Air into an Undulating Motion; and thereby to cause very odd Sounds; which
must be an Argument, that the Partieles of that Bell are in a very nimble
Agitation; otherwise they could not communicate Motion to the Circumambient
Air, and thereby cause such a Noise in the Ear.

But I must confess there are two Difficulties, Objections answered.
which occur to what I have been offering: As First, That it is hard to imagine,
how the Internal Parts of such Solid Bodies should be worked upon, by Agents so
weak as the Air, and especially some parts of Matter more Minute, which are
dispersed through it: And Secondly, It may be questioned how any Parts of
Matter can be moved so slow, if at all, as to be so long in moving from the
Internal Parts of a Needle, to the Superficies, as our Hypothesis requires: But,

To the First, I answer, That those External Parts are not the sole Causes of
these Motions, but only assistant to the Principal; which is evident from what
has lately been noted concerning the Connate Dispositions to Motion,
attributed to Matter, according to the Epicurean and Cartesian Philosophy; and
by the Effects of a Loadstone upon the Needle, we may be taught to guess, what
lasting Changes may be produced, in the Textures of Bodies, by the Influence of
very Insensible Parts of Matter. And as for the other Part of the Objection,
viz. The Slowness of Motion, which Nature makes use of in some of her Works,
are altogether as inconceivable, as the Motion of a Shadow upon a Dial, or of
an Index upon a Clock: And Nature may upon other Accounts, and undoubtedly
does, make use of Motion in a degree yet more remiss. But not to insist upon
the Slowness of Motion, which Nature makes use of, it may be otherwise offered
against this Objection, that the Motion of the Insensible Corpuscles of a
Loadstone cannot be supposed to be in a Direct Line, since they must not only
pass through Pores very crooked and intricate, but must also meet with several
other Particles of Matter, which will oppose them; and not only drive them
back, but also make their Passage still more intricate and winding, by driving
them from one side to another, as well as several other ways, by which their
Motion may be retarded. Besides it is but Reasonable to suppose, That it is
much more easy to keep a heavy Body in Motion in its own Medium, than to remove
it from that to another.

But to decline Speculations, Instances alleged.
I shall bring Instances to confirm what I am about to prove, viz. That the
Corpuscles, which constitute Bodies, are inclinable to Motion, and that their
Motion is very slow: The first Instance I shall mention, is in a Spring made of
Steel, which, though it be pressed and squeezed together for some time, it will,
upon a Cessation of that Pressure again, unbend it self, and recover its former
Position; but if it be kept long in that compressed Posture, it will by degrees
lose that Power of Restitution, and continue in its crooked and unbended
Figure: From whence we may learn, That though Elastick Parts may be endu'd with
an Endeavor to expand themselves, yet they may be a long while in working
their Effect; since we see, that Steel being put into a Springy Form, retains
that Springiness for a long time.

The Effects of a Bar of Iron held in a Perpendicular Posture in a Mariners's
Compass.
But to confirm what I have been discoursing of, and to evince what considerable
Changes the Air may Effect in the most Solid Bodies; I shall add this
Observation, viz. That if one End of a Bar of Iron, held perpendicularly, be
applied to the Point of a Mariner's Compass, it will force it away toward the
East or West; but if the Position of that Bar be altered, it presently loses
its Magnetical Qualities: Yet it is observed, That if this Iron Bar be kept
long in a Window, it is Magnetic Qualities become much more durable and
constant; from whence it appears, That the Air together with the Magnetical
Effluvia of the Earth, may work changes very lasting upon the Particles of
Solid Bodies, by insinuating themselves into their Pores; and that the Motion,
which must needs be concerned in altering their Texture, must likewise be very
slow, since it cannot in a little time acquire such Magnetical Virtues.

But to proceed to a further Confirmation of what we have delivered, the first
Observation I take Notice of is, that it is usnally observed, That if Lignum
Vitae, which is one of the hardest Woods, be worked before it be sufficiently
seasoned, it will be very fragile, and subject to break; so that curiously
work't Vessels exposed to the Sun, have broke in pieces: And it has been
observed likewise, That several Cavities have been found in the Substance of
it, full of a certain Gum, which some People much esteem in Venereal
Distempers; to which may be added, That in the Seasoning of this Wood, for some
particular uses, it is requisite to keep it longer than others, so that less
than twenty Years will not make it fit for some uses. From whence we may infer,
That if this Wood requires so long time to acquire it is utmost Compactness, and
to evaporate its Watery Parts, the Motion of those evaporated Particles, must
not only be very lasting, and durable, but slow.

And if it be allowed, that those Gummy Parts were collected in their Cells,
after the Felling of the Tree, as it is highly probable, it will be further to
our Advantage, because it shows how the Parts of a Gross Body do permeate the
fine Pores of a very Solid and Inanimate Substance; where the Motion must need
be very insensible and slow. But what is more strange, I am informed, that the
Wood of which certain Musical Instruments are made, sometimes, tho a much
softer Wood than Lignum Vitae, requires at least forty Years Seasoning, and
does not acquire its best Resonance under Fourscore.

But further, That there is not only a Change of Texture in Solid Vegetable
Substances, but even in Stony Concretes, appears from what is observed in
Building; Observations made in Quarries.
where some Walls acquire not their Utmost Solidity under forty Years. To which
I shall add, what is further observed in somes Quarries by Masons: And First,
that there are Marchasites to be found, which being much more hard than Stones
or Marble, and which consist as well of a Metalline, as a Stony Substance; yet
have such a Degree of Motion in their Parts, as not only to burst, but, if long
exposed to the Air, to be covered over with Vitriolate Efflorescences. To this
I shall add, That an Ingenious Friend of mine had a Turquoise-Stone, in which
there were certain Spots of different Colors from the Gem it self, which were
observed to shift their places several times; which that there might be no
doubt of, I employed one to take the Picture of it with those Spots in it, at
several distant times, one after another, which Pictures, when compared,
showed, that the Spots had shifted their Places; having passed up and down
through the Substance of so solid a Gem, very slowly, in a Figure as irregular.
And I am informed by a Jeweller, that he once had one of these Stones, which
had a different Blue in two several Parts of the Stone; and that, in some time,
the one overspread the whole, and mixed with the other: And an Ingenious Friend
of mine told me, That he had observed a certain Cloud in an Agate, to move
several times from one place to another.

Motion in the Parts of Solid.
But there is not only an Intestin Motion of Parts in such Solid Substances as
these, but in Bodies looked upon to be of the Closest and most Compact
Textures; for I have now a Diamond by me, which being rubbed, will easily
become Electrical, and shine in the Dark; which Qualities cannot be added to
it, without a Change of Texture; and that in altering that Texture, there is an
Internal Motion of Parts, will easily be evinced; because, otherwise the
Texture could not be changed; and further, because a very gentle Agent is
sufficient to put the Parts of a Diamond in Motion.

And to this Relation I shall add, That I have often observed, a Dullness and
Clearness to succeed each other, in a Diamond, which I now have set in a Ring
with the Former, which Changes could be attributed to no Manifest Cause: And I
have observed no less suprizing a Change, in the several Degrees of
Electricity, which could not be effected by any Cause that I could think of:
And I have been informed, by one who had a certain Hungarian Diamond, that it
would acquire a much greater Degree of Sprightness, by lying some time in
Water: From all which it appears, That Considerable Changes may be effected in
Diamonds, by Agents, which, to Sense, Operate very gently. And if Diamonds are
generated in the Earth, as I have observed other Stones to be; it is reasonable
to think, that the Hardness of their Substance, proceeds from the Closeness of
their Parts, depending on the Intestin Motion of their Insensible Corpuscles,
by which they are brought to convene closer than ordinary: And this I am rather
Inclined to believe, because I have been told by an Eminent Jeweller, That the
Diamonds of late Years, are much more soft than those he formerly used to deal
in: And the truth of this is further confirmed, by what Egrezes a Frenchman
writes of Diamonds, P. M. 17, 18. brought from the Mine, called Gazerpoli; the
Sense of the Words is this: They are very clear, and of a good Water, but they
cannot be ground by Mutual Attrition, except with Stones of the same Mine: for
if one should employ for that purpose, the Stones of another Mine, those of
Gazerpoli would be broken in pieces: They do also easily break upon the Wheel,
and those that are not versed in the Knowledge of Stones, may be easily
deceived in them. And the same Author, speaking of another sort of Diamonds,
says, That they sweat a sort of Unctuous Substance, which being wiped off, as
often renew it is Appearance. And to these I shall add an Account of a Ruby,
which is one of the hardest Diamonds, one of which a Lady, nearly related to
me, wore upon her Finger; which would often change it is Luster, the Cause of
which could not be assigned; though these kind of Phenomenon seem to be the
Effects of some Internal Motion in their Parts, the Parts of Diamonds being
capable of having their Parts put into Motion, without much difficulty.

But though it be hence Evident, That there is such an Intestin Motion of the
Parts of Diamonds; yet it may be thought strange, to find the like in so firm
and compact a Body as Glass. But that the Parts of Glass are not always at
Rest, I am induced to believe, by the following Observations. First, That
several Plates of Venice-Glass, have cracked and broke in pieces, when no
external Agent could have any Sensible Operation on them; which I conceive to
proceed from a Redundancy of Saline Parts, which striving to fly away, break
the Glass by their violent Motion; which Conjecture I am confirmed in, since it
is commonly observed, The Parts of Glass in Motion.
That there is a Saline Substance, adhering to the Surface of these Glasses in
Cold Moist Weather. And I have observed in a Glass, into which too much Salt
was put, to make it Diaphanous, several Cracks and Flaws, which it got in the
Cold Weather: So that it rather appears to be a white, than a Glass-Cup at a
Distance. And I, as well as those that deal much amongst Glasses, have
observed, several to fly in pieces, when there was no outward Agent, to be the
Cause of such an Effect; and I am informed by an Ingenious Man, who is Master
of a Glass-House, That near a Third Part of a parcel of Glasses, flew in pieces
of their own accord, after they had been kept for about five Years packed up.
To which I might add several other Instances, to prove and illustrate the
Doctrine above-deliver'd.

For these Phenomenon may be, and are, very Naturally accounted for, by the
Corpuscular Philosophy; for supposing, the Particles of Glass to be in a
continual Elastick Endeavor to expand themselves, and fly away; and that
several of those Particles are got together, it is no wonder that they break
and dis-joint those Parts of the United Glass, which are least able to resist,
and keep them from Expansion. And to Countenance this Explanation, I shall add,
That several Alkalizate, or other small Parts of Matter, being enclosed in the
Body of a Glass, it is always apter to break, especially at that place, from
whence several Cracks spread themselves as from a Center.

But whether the Elasticity of these Parts, be promoted by any Subtle Bodies,
which penetrate the Glass, I shall not now stay to examine; but shall rather
proceed to acquaint You, That in a considerable Space of Time, the Texture of
Glass may be so altered, as to be more unapt to give a free Passage to Ether
it self, or any other Subtle Body, which could penetrate it before; and
consequently those Bodies Endeavoring to make their way, though opposed by it is
Texture, cause a Proportionable Crack, or Dissolution of the Substance of the
Glass.

Observations concerning the Intestine Motion of the Parts of Glass.
And to what we have delivered concerning Glass, these Observations are not
altogether disagreeable; viz. First, That it is a Substance, which by being
rubbed easily, becomes Electrical; which is an Argument, that the Parts of it
may without any great difficulty, be put into Motion. Secondly, The Parts of
Glass may fly asunder, if the Neighboring Parts be put into Motions
disagreeable to each other; which is evident, if a hot Glass be immediately put
into cold Water: for the Motion of it is Corpuscles, being externally checked,
those which within remain in a violent Agitation, cause a sudden Disruption.

To which may be added, That though one would think the Particles of Glass were
so fixed, as to become unfit to alter their Figure and Shape; yet their Parts
continuing in some Degree of Agitation, they may, by invisible and insensible
Agents, be so worked upon, as to be forced to alter their Shape and Size: In
confirmation of which, it may be observed, That White and pure Transparent
Glass, will in a little time, become very unfit to be put again into the Moulds
they were first cast in.

But though I have mentioned both these Methods, by which the Cracking of
Glasses, may be accounted for, to show, that which soever of them we allow,
they will be Proof of an Intestine Motion in the Parts of Glass; yet I will
neither examine or determine which of them is rather to be relied on; but shall
only observe, That the Motion of their Parts must needs be very slow; since it
is so long before it shows its Effects.

And now to conclude, though from what has been delivered, it may be expected
that I should draw Consequences, to determine whether there be absolute Rest in
Bodies, or no, I shall omit that, and only intimate, That it is not absurd to
doubt, nor improbable to think, that there is not; since it has been
discovered in Bodies, which are usually esteemed, most Quiescent.

CHAP. XV. Of the great Effects of even Languid and unheeded Local Motion.
THOUGH several Mathematicians, as well as Philosophers, Several Phenomenon
arising from unheeded Causes, Comprised under the following Propositions.
have exercised their Industry in limiting the Laws of Motion; yet since
several Qualities usually esteemed occult, may arise from a faint and unheeded
Motion of the Parts of those Bodies, to which they are attributed, I shall
consider the Extent of local Motion a little further: But before I proceed to
consider the particular Effects of languid and unheeded Motion, I shall first
premise, in general, what I have elsewhere upon another Occasion intimated,
viz. That we are not to consider Bodies, barely as so many Portions of Matter
endowed with particular Powers; but as Bodies whose Particles are variously
figured and modified after a peculiar Manner; so as to act or to be acted on by
those Bodies which are about them; yet not wholly to derive their Effects to
the Influence of external Agents, but in a great Measure from the mutual Action
of one Part of Matter upon another.

But there are several other Circumstances of local Motion, besides what we
have taken notice, which are not to be discerned; and therefore I would not be
thought wholly to attribute the Phenomenon of a Body to Motion only but to a
Concurrence of several other Causes; but to avoid tedious Preambles, I shall
take notice that the Reasons why some Men slight or overlook the strange
Effects of languid Motion may be comprised under the following Heads.

I. Prop. I.
Men are wont to overlook the great Efficacy of Celerity, in Bodies which are
very small: And especially, if the Space which they move through be but small.
What strange Effects may be derived from rapid, though undiscerned Motion, we
have a convincing Instance in Bullets, which by reason of their swift Motion,
are able to effect more than those battering Engines of the Ancients, which
were of a vaste Bulk in comparison of Bullets, which are shot out of the
largest Canons: To this I might add several other Instances, but I shall rather
proceed to allege, in favor of the second Part of the Proposition, that I
have often observed, That the Particles of Iron, which fly off Iron Rods, when
they are turned, affected my Hand with a sensible Heat, if held at a small
Distance; and it is likewise observed by those who work in Brass, That the
Particles which fly off upon turning, affect their Eyes, as well as other
Parts, with an offensive Heat; so that an experienced Workman showed me a
Blister upon his Hand, which was raised by the intense Heat of Particles of
Brass thrown off by a rough Tool. And I am further informed, That in turning of
great Guns, the Parts which fly off are so hot as to burn the Fingers of those,
who offered to take them up: Amongst which Observations it is to be noted, That
Brass acquires a much greater Heat in turning than Iron.

And to these Observations I shall add, That not only the Parts of Metals, but
Wood, will become in some Measure warm, by being put into a rapid Motion by the
Force of the Turners Engines; from which Instances it appears how considerable
are the Effects of a rapid, though a short Motion.

And we have Instances of this kind no less remarkable in Vegetables, where a
good Cane by being struck with a Piece of Flint, emits Sparks not unlike Flint
in a Moment of Time; and the like succeeds, if Loaf-sugar be dexterously
scraped, so as to put its Parts into a brisk Agitation: But what is most worthy
to be observed in Flint is, That it is Parts being put into a brisk Motion by
another Piece of Flint, will not only assume the Form of Fire, but as the
Ingenious Mr. Hook has observed, will be vitrify'd, though in Glass-houses both
an intense Heat and an Addition of some Borillia are requisite to bring Sand or
Flint to Fusion and to vitrify them: And that this Vitrification is made of the
Portions of the Flint put into a brisk Motion, I am induced to believe, because
one Piece of Flint will strike Fire upon another, without the Assistance of a
Piece of Steel; and Fire may not only be struck out of Flint, but Bodies much
harder, as Diamonds, which when grated on in a Mill have their Parts put into
such a Motion, as to constitute Flame, though the most intense Degree of Heat
will not dissolve them; and even the Parts of fluid Bodies, if put into a brisk
Motion, may have considerable Effects upon solid Bodies; for whether, the Beams
of the Sun consist of Particles, which flow in direct Physical Lines from the
Sun, or are only contiguous Matter, as the Cartesians think, put into a
successive Motion, yet it is enough to countenance what is here delivered, that
that Matter thrown into a Focus will melt Lead, Tin, or foliated Silver and
Gold, and in a little time set green Wood on Fire. And how the small Parts of
fluid Bodies will affect consistent and solid ones, will be further evident
from Instances alleged under the fourth Head.

The Effects of Lightning.
What I shall further offer here is the Strange Effects of Lightning, which, as
several Histories, etc. testify, by the Motion and Minuteness of its Parts has
melted Metals in a Moment. Nor are the Effects of the Air in a Wind-gun upon a
Bullet less to be admired; it is Parts upon the Account of their Springyness,
being put into a violent Motion; for when the Air is permitted to expand, by
affecting the Bullet no longer than whilst it passes through the Barrel of the
Gun, the Bullet acquires such a Degree of Motion, as, upon it is being shot
against a Plate of Metal, to be pressed into the Shape of an Hemisphere; and
the Particles of the Bullet will be put into so considerable a Degree of
Motion, by striking against the Plate, that I could scarce hold it betwixt my
Fingers.

II.We are inclined to think, Prop. II.
That the insensible Motion of so soft Bodies as Fluids, can scarce have any
sensible Operation on solid Bodies.
By the Motion of fluid Bodies I would be understood to mean, not that which
may be discovered by the Eye or Touch, but the unperciev'd Motion of their
insensible Parts; of the Effects of which, I might allege several Instances
from the Operations of Sounds upon solid Bodies; for upon the Discharge of
great Guns, the Sound of their Explosion is not only heard a great way; but the
expanding Gunpowder gives such a Motion to the Air, as to enable it to break
Glass Windows at a considerable distance. And though to this it may be objected,
That since the Cannon stands on the same Piece of Ground with the Houses whose
Windows are so broke* the Effect may proceed from a tremulous Motion continued
by the Soil it stands on, yet the following Instance will make it appear, That
the Parts of a Liquid being put into Motion may have such Effects; though it is
not to be denied, but that a tremulous Motion may be given to the Earth, so
violent as to be extended to a greater Distance; the Instance is, That the
Water has been put into so violent a Motion by an Engine contrived to sink
Ships, that it shak'd several Ships which were at a considerable distance, so
strongly, that those who were on the Decks could scarce stand.

And in the late great Sea Fight between the English and the Dutch, though they
engaged at several Leagues Distance from the Hague; yet the English Ambassador,
who was then Resident there assured me; that the Guns were not only heard
thither, but that his Chamber Windows were considerably shaken. And some Bodies
are so apt to receive Impressions from the undulating Motion of the Air, as to
be sensibly, though not visibly affected; of which Simon Pauli in his ingenious
Tract De Febribus Malignis p. 71. gives an Instance in these Words. Atqui aeger
ille Gallus brachio truncatus, octiduum quidem superfuit, sed horrendis totius
corporis Convulsionibus correptus; qui quoque (ut and illa addam Observatione
dignissima,) dum in Domini sui aedibus ad plateam Kiodmoggerianum, Roman,
Laniorum appellares, decumberet, ac me ac aliis aliquandiu ad Lectum illius
considentibus quidem, sed nobis non attendentibus, explodentur tormenta bellica
ex Regiis ac Praetoriis Navibus, sinistra truncum dextra brachii fovens ac
complectens, toties quoties exploderentur singula exclamabat au, au, me
miserum! Jesu, Maria, cont undor penitus, adeo permolesta and intolerabilis
illi erat Tormentorum explosio, and quidem ex loco satis longinquo, terra non
firma aut contigua, verum super salo aut mari Balthico, instituta: From whence
it appears, that a Fluid Body may operate considerably upon a Solid, though the
Motion which causes such Effects be not perceived: And of the Truth of the
foregoing Relation, I am further assured, by the like Effects produced in the
shattered Bones of wounded Men at Sea who have had sensible pain upon the
Discharge of the Enemies Cannon.

But lest in the aforementioned Instances it should be alleged, that these
Sounds are rather propagated by the Earth, which the Bodies which received the
first Impression leaned upon, than conveyed through the Air; I shall subjoyn,
that the Sound of Thunder is not liable to such Objections, since it can only
be propagated through the Air; yet the Parts of the Air are in so Powerful an
Agitation; that they have been observed to shake, not only Houses but several
Ships at Sea.

But these Effects will not be thought strange, if we reflect on what has been
observed to be produced by the Celerity of the Motion of the minute Parts of a
Body; especially if we likewise consider, that Sounds are propagated with
greater Celerity than any thing we know besides, in our Sphere. For though, as
Marsennus takes Notice, a Bullet moves 240 Yards in the sixth Part of a Minute;
yet I have observed Sounds to move 400 Yards in the same space of time. But
though (it being granted that Sounds may be conveyed through the Air,) the
Concussion of Houses or Ships at Sea might be supposed to arise from the
Impetuous Motion of the Medium, violently shaken by an intense Agitation, where
those Sounds were originally formed; yet I conceive the Effects which those
Sounds have on Bodies which are placed upon the Surface of this Globe, depend
in some measure on the Dispositions of those Bodies to be worked upon by such.

But to put an end to Instances alleged in Proof of this Proposition I shall
add an Observation made by the Experienced Platerus, which shows, that a Solid
Body may have such a Disposition as to be capable of receiving Impressions from
the languid Motion of Air; for lib. Observe. 1. p. 185. He says, Faemina quaedam
in subitaneum incidit morbum, viribus subito prostratis, se suffocari
indesinenter clamitans, etsi nec Stertoris nec Tussis aliqua essent Indicia,
maxim vero de aura quadam adveniente, si vel leviter aliquis adstantium se
moveret, quae illam opprimeret, conquerebatur, seque suffocari, si quis propius
accederet, clamitabat: Vix dum biduum in ea anxietate perseverans expiravit: To
which he adds, Vidi and alios aegros de simili aura, quae eos, si quis illis
appropinquaret, in suffocationis periculum, induceret conquerentes, quod semper
pessimum est signum deprehendi.

III. Prop. III.
Though the Number of Insensible Parts of Matter put into Motion, enable them to
perform several things, yet they are usually slighted because invisible.
The Effects of some subtle Parts of Matter are usually esteemed very
inconsiderable, by those who imagine, that these more subtle Effluvia of Bodies
only Act upon the exteral Superficies of others: But if we consider, that those
Effluvia are not only very Numerous, but of convenient Figures and Sizes to
penetrate into the inmost recesses of Bodies they work upon, we may attribute
more powerful Effects to them than Men usually are wont to do; for as the
Motion of the Effluvia are more or less strong, and numerous, they may either
disjoyn or otherwise alter the Textures of those Bodies. As in an Ant-hill,
whose Soil is full of Eggs, by the Number and Motion of those little Insects;
the Eggs which are up and down interspersed betwixt the Parts of the Earth,
will presently be separated and displaced; or as the Leaves and Boughs of a
Tree are variously bent and broken off, by the force of the Invisible Parts of
the Air which passes through it.

But to come to Instances which may more Illustrate what we are about; That the
subtle Parts of Matter whose effects are less taken Notice of, are enabled, by
their Size and Figure, to disjoyn the Parts of Bodies they work upon; we have
an evident Instance in Sugar, and Amber thrown together into Water; for the
Water presently divides the Parts of the Sugar, and totally dissolves them;
whereas the Amber continues unaltred. To which Instance may be added one of no
less Force, afforded by Chemistry; for if you pour limpid Water, upon that
consistent Substance, which remains after an abstraction of five Parts of Oil
of Vitriol from one of Mercury, and shake the Mixture, the Calx will presently
exchange it is White for a Limon-colour, the Texture of the whole Mass being
presently altered,

And how powerful the minute Parts of some Bodies are, we may further observe
in Spirit of Wine: For if a Piece of Metal be held in the Flame of it, these
subtle Particles presently penetrate the Substance of that Solid Body; and so
exagitate the Parts of it, as to put them into a Motion strong enough to Cause
a sensible Heat. And we have not a less remarkable Instance of the Force of
unheeded Agents in Animal Bodies and the Effects of those invisible Spirits
which move through the Nerves, which by such weighty Masses of Matter, as the
Bodies of some Animals, are violently moved up and down: To which may be added,
that by the bare insinuation of Moisture into the Pores of a Rope, it may be so
contracted, as to raise above sixty pound weight, above the place those Weights
were suspended at in dry Weather. And though Metals will endure the Heat of a
Red-hot Crucible, yet may they easily be melred with the Flame of a Candle, if
the Heat and Activity of it be promoted by a Blow-Pipe. And how much more able
the Parts of an Agent, are to operate upon a Body, when they are intimately
mixed with that they are to work upon, than Superficially, appears from Tartar,
which is much sooner calcined, if Nitre be so mixed with it, that upon
Deflagration, the Flame may be commix'd with all it is Parts, than if it only
acts immediately on the Outside.

The Effects of a Leadstone upon Filigns of Iron.
But to allege Instances, which will be of more Force; though the Effluvia of a
Lodestone be very minute, and the Body of Iron or Steel very solid; yet I have
seen a Magnet, whose Effluvia were so powerful, as to attract and sustain fifty
times the weight of the Stone it self. And to make it appear, how probably the
Effluvia of a Magnet may change the Texture of solid Steel, and by that means
endow it with those Qualities, which Iron usually derives from it; I placed
Filings of Steel upon a piece of Paper, holding under it the Pole of a vigorous
Lodestone, by the Effluvia of which, the Filings were presently so ranged, as
to representseveral Needles, or Pikes, made up of Particles of Iron, sticking
one upon another; and these might be moved up and down, by removing the
Lodestone, from one place to another; but as soon as the Lodestone was
removed from that place, to such a Distance, that it is Subtle Emanations had no
longer any Influence upon the Powder, the Parts of it presently lost that
order, and fell into a confused Heap, as before that Loadstone was applied.

Again, though the Particles of Water be so small, as to be Invisible, and their
Motion very weak; yet is it so powerful, that upon Freezing, the Expansion of
the Frigorifick Parts are strong enough to break Bottles, not only of Glass,
but Metal, and the Expansion oftentimes is so violent, as to exceed the Force
of any other Body in expanding (except Gunpowder) that I know of.

CHAP. XVI. Of the Propagable Nature of Motion.
IV. It is usually not sufficiently taken Notice of, Prop. VI.
how Local Motion may be propagated through several Mediums, and even Solid
Bodies.
IT is usually thought, because some Bodies when they strike against Solid
ones, commonly fly back, That the Impulse of that Body is not able to put the
other into Motion; but that the Parts of a Solid may be put into Motion, and
that that Motion may be propagated through such Consistent Substances, is
evident, if we strike a piece of Timber slightly upon one End: For by that
means, the Motion caused by that Impression, will be carried on to the other.
And I have by Experience found, that having drawn the Point of a Pin upon the
Brim of an Hemispherical Vessel, which was made of Bell-Metal, which is much
harder than Steel, I found it, from a very slight Impression, to produce such a
lasting Sound, as was an Argument, that the Parts of the Metal were not only
put into such a Vibrating Motion, as to communicate it to the Air, but to
continue it successively round the Brim of the Vessel, till the Sound ceased.
And the like Propagation of Sounds I found to succeed, though the Point of a Pin
were but struck upon that Vessel, which was seven Inches in Diameter. And
indeed the Propagable Motion of Solids, when they are acted on by Fluids, is
not less remarkable; since the Parts of a Bar of Iron, or Glass, may be put
into such a Motion by Heat, as to have it continued to some Distance from the
place where the Fire first worked upon them, though it be capable of being
propagated much further in the former of the two; which shows how much the
Textures of Bodies dispose them to be differently worked upon by the same
Agent; and how much a Convenient Texture disposes them to be worked upon at all.

And it may be further observed, That it is looked upon as a Sign of the firm
Connection of a House, that upon the Clapping of a Door, the whole shakes; and
it is likewise an Argument of the Communicableness of Motion, whether it
depends on the mutual Contact of the Door, and the Posts it shuts against, or
upon the Impression made upon the included Air by the Door; for the former
shows how a Solid may propagate Motion amongst Solids; and the Latter, how it
may give Motion to a Fluid, and Vice versa.

But further, it is asserted by Seneca, that upon the Explosion of those
Subterraneali Exhalations, which are the Causes of Earthquakes, the Tremulous
Motion of the Earth is continued above two hundred Miles: And Josephus Acosta
witnesses, That it has been continued for three hundred Leagues in the
Kingdom of Peru: And Learned Writers in the beginning of our Age (1601)
witness, that the Motion of the Earth was so violent, as to shake most part of
Europe, being propagated through most part of Asia, Hungary, Germany, Italy,
and France: And I have frequently observed, That the House I have been in, has
sensibly shook, by the Tremulous Motion of the Earth it stood upon, propagated
from some Coach or Cart, which moved at some distance upon the Ground; and some
observing Scouts say, That, by the Motion of the Earth, they can discover the
Approach of a Troop of Horse at a good Distance.

And, to conclude this Member of our Discourse, if such Disproportionate
Causes, can produce such Effects in Inorganical Bodies, well may they in those
that are Organical, where there is only wanting a small Cause to call in the
Assistance, and to determine the Cooperation of others; as the Tickling of a
Feather in the Nose, by Determining the Tendency of the Spirits, Causes
Sneezing: And I remember, being once held with such a Distemper, as deprived me
of the use of my Hands; If, in the Summer, a Hair were but blown upon my Face,
and continued there long, it would put me into Convulsions and cause me to
faint.

Motion may be propagated through different Mediums.
But to determine another Member of this Proposition, viz. Whether Motion may be
propagated, through several Mediums, or terminates at the utmost Limits of the
Medium it was begun in, I shall offer the following Experiment; viz. I caused a
Glass-Receiver to be blown with a Button, upon that part of the Internal
Superficies which was uppermost; and suspending a Watch by a Chain, which was
fixed to a Soft Body, fastened upon the Button, I luted on a Receiver, to
prevent a Communication betwixt the External and Internal Air; yet the Sound of
the Watch might be perciv'd by holding One's Ears over that place, where the
Watch was suspended. And I have often felt not only the striking of a Watch
included in a double Case, when I have worn it in my Pocket, but even the
gentler Motions of the Balances.

To the Foregoing Instances, I shall add, That upon sudden Claps of Thunder,
the very Beds have been perceived to shake, by those that lay upon them: And
Agricola, de Not. eorum quae fluunt e terra, Lib. 4. cap. 7. says, Si Animal
deijicitur in Antrum, quod est in Carelia, Regione Scandiae, erumpit, ut
perhibent, sonus intolerabilis magno cum flatu: Si leve pondus in Specum
Dalmatiae, quamvis, inquit Plinius, tranquillo die, turbini similis emicat
procella.

But there are still some who are unwilling to believe, That Motion is
propagable through Liquid Bodies; at least to any considerable Distance,
because of the easy Cession of their Parts: But the contrary easily appears, if
we allow of the Corpuscular Notion of Light; by Considering, not only how far
the Rays of Light are impelled, and propagated from a small Light, but from the
fixed Stars, which are placed at so immense a Distance.

But to proceed to Instances, not so liable to Objections, that the Parts of
Liquids, though in Motion, and Separate one from another, may communicate Motion,
and propagate it a considerable way, is evident, by casting a Stone into the
Water; which, by that Impulse, will successively propagate Motion in the Mass
of Water; which appears by the Curling and Circular Streams which flow from it:
And I am told by one who was used to Fish for Whales, near Green-Land, that
sometimes, upon the Thawing of the Ice, it would give such Cracks, as to cause
Sounds much louder than Claps of Thunder; and when huge pieces of Ice upon a
Thaw, fell into the Sea, they caused such a Disturbance in it, as at two
Leagues Distance to raise a considerable Storm.

And though some People are apt to think, That, the Air, being a Body much more
Fluid than Water, Motion is less propagable in it; I shall intimate, that even
in that Medium, a very small Sound is propagated, much further than we think
of; for though we are not able to take Notice of it, beyond the Place where we
stand, yet we may learn from Ecchos, that the Undulating Motion of the Air is
continued a good way further; and it is not improbable, that it is continued
further than the Place where the Echo is made; since the Learned Fromundus,
Professor of Philosophy at Lovain, in the Year 1627, says, That at the Siege of
Ostend, the Noise of the Cannon was heard an hundred and twenty English Miles.
To which may be added what Verenius Geogr. Genesis Lib. 1. Cap. 19. relates, as
observed by Traelichius, at the Mountain Carpathus in Hungary: His Words are
these, Explosi in ea summitate Sclopetum, quod non majorem Sonitum, primo prae
se tulit, quam si tegillum aut bacillum confregissem; post intervallum autem
temporis murmur prolixum invaluit, inferioresque Montis parts, Convalles and
Sylvas opplevit: Descendendo per Nives annosos intra Convalles, cum iterum
Sclopetum exonerarem, major ac horribilior fragor, quam ex Tormento capacissimo
inde exoriebatur; hinc verebar, ne totus Mons concussus, mecum correueret;
duravitque hic Sonus per semiquadrantem horae, usque dum abstrusissimas
Cavernas penetrasset, ad quas Herundique multiplicatus resiliit, and talia
quidem objecta concava in summitate. se non illico offerebant, idcireo fere
insensibiliter primum Sonus repercutiebatur, donec descendendo Antris and
Convallibus vicinior factus ad eas fortius impegit.

V. The Effects of the Particular Modifications of the Invisible Motions of
Fluids, Prop. V.
on Animal Bodies disposed to be worked upon by them, are not usually
sufficiently noted.
Though it may be thought strange, That the Impulse of so Slight and Languid
Parts of Matter, as those of Air, should by their Motion, produce any Sensible
Effects; yet, if we consider what a number of those Parts succeed each other,
it is less to be admired, that the Effects of their Joynt-Action should be
considerable, since we see, that a Pendulum of a Clock is continued in a
swinging Motion, by a very Languid Force, and the Air may be put into a Motion
so powerful, either by the Vibration of the Strings, or the Mechanical Form of
a Musical Instrument, or Scraping the Edge of a Knife upon Metal, as, to cause
an Involuntary Excretion of Urine upon a Body rightly disposed, as it happened
to a Knight of Gascony; or, to cause that Effect which is usually termed,
Setting the Teeth on Edge.

Besides which Instances, of the Effects of so Languid a Motion as that of the
Air, I shall add, That I had a Servant, whose Gums would presently bleed upon
tearing of Brown Paper: And Sir Henry Blount, as well as Kircherus, relates a
Story of the like Nature; the former having observed in Grand Cairo in Egypt, a
Nest of Serpents, which upon the Sound of a Citron, would presently crawl out
of their Nests; and upon a Cessation of that Sound, run away again as fast: and
the Latter tells us of a Fish about the Streights, which divide Sicily and
Italy, which will be enticed to follow the Ships which pass by that way, by the
Sound of a Musical Instrument.

And that these Effects are produced by a sort of Disposition in those Bodies,
to be worked on by such Sounds may be confirmed, by observing, That a Man is
sooner affected and awaked out of Sleep, by the Agreeable Sound of his own
Name, than any other. And the Effects of a gentle, if a Surprising Sound, are
no less Remarkable, which will raise a Body from the Ground, which could not be
so poised with some hundreds of Weights. But the most Eminent Instance is in
Persons bit by a Tarantula, who, upon the Playing of a peculiar Tune, are
compelled to dance, as long as it continues, though other Tunes have no such
Effects on them; the Truth of which Relation is confirmed both by Epiphanius
Ferdinandus, and several Others: And I was acquainted with One, who told me,
That a certain Lady could not forbear Weeping, when she heard a particular Tune
played; and I have found several times a sort of Chilness upon my self, upon
the Repetition of two Verses in Lucan, especially when I have been any thing
Feverish.

To which Instances of the great Effects of Languid Motions, may be added, what
is produced by the Subtle Effluvia, the Rays of Light causing those that come
out of a dark Place presently to Sneeze: And Colors, which are but several
Modifications of Light, have not less considerable Effects; which is evident
from the Influence Red Cloth has upon Turky-Cocks: And the Learned Valesius,
relates a Story of a Person, whose Eyes were much offended by Red Objects,
which influenced him so much, as to cause an Effusion of Humors in the
Adjacent Parts.

VI. Men do not consider the Effects of Fluids upon Inanimate Bodies, Prop. VI.
upon the Account of a Particular Texture and Modification of the Agent, and
the Patient.
That the Peculiar Modifications and Relations which Bodies have to each other,
upon that Account, may contribute much to the Effects which the Languid Motions
of the Air produce; and that upon that score, a weak Motion of it, may cause
more considerable Effects, than Louder Sounds, not so aptly modified; I shall
produce several Instances: For not to urge, That the String of an Instrument
may be made to Vibrate it self, by the Motion it receives from the Instrument,
and which that Instrument first received from another String, I shall rather
offer the following Instance; viz. That a Strong Wire being made use of amongst
other Strings on a Musical Instrument, it was observed, that the Wire would be
made to tremble, by the Impulse of the Air, caused by a Sound which was made at
a Distance, though the other Strings were not sensibly affected; but in this
Experiment it is to be noted, That a peculiar degree of Tension is requisite,
to afford the Forementioned Phenomenon.

To this Experiment it may be added, That I have not only observed, that by
making a Determinate Sound at some Distance from an Hemispherical-Glass, it
would sensibly ring; but I have likewise taken Notice, That having screwed
several Strings of a Musical Instrument to a different Degree of Tension, and
likewise placed several Glasses at some Distance, those Strings being put into
a strong Degree of Tension, would cause one Glass to ring without affecting the
other; and if the Tension of that String was altered, it would affect another
Glass, but not the same: And what is more Remarkable, is, That though a String
wound up to a Determinate Degree of Tension, would affect such a Glass; yet if
the Foot of the same Glass were a little broke, it would not till it is Tension
was altered.

And I have taken notice, That upon the Opening of some Stops in an Organ, the
Sound has been so considerable, as not only to cause the Organist's Seat to
tremble, but a Seat in the Church, which was at a considerable Distance; and I
could easily discern with my Fingers, that the Sound not only caused the Seat,
but the Borders of my Hat to tremble: Which Instances show, that the Effects of
that Sound are not so much to be attributed to the Violence of it, as to the
Dispositions in such Bodies to be acted on by it.

And to prove, That Languid Motion may have considerable Effects upon Bodies,
both Solid and of considerable Bulk, I shall bring the following Instances: The
First is, That an Ancient Musician affirmed to me, that playing upon a
Basse-Viol, he found, that when he struck a certain Note, it had always such an
Effect upon a Casement, in the Room where he played to one of his Scholars, as
to cause a Jarring Noise. A Second Instance is, That I observed in a certain
Vault, that though a Musician varied his Notes on purpose, to make Trial whether
they would resound in the Arch, it would answer to but one Note; and I am told,
that there is the like peculiarity in most Vaults.

VII. Some Bodies are thought to have their Parts in an Absolute Rest, Prop.
VII.
when they are only in a state of Tension, or Compression.
Though the External Superficies of a Body, seems to argue, That it is Parts are
at Rest, since it retains it is Proper Figure and Dimensions; yet it is not
improbable, but that those Corpuscles which compose it, are variously moved
amongst themselves, or in a Tendency to Motion; An Instance of the First of
which, we have in heated Iron, whether made hot by Actual Fire, or Hammering:
For though the Eye can discern no Motion at all amongst it is Parts, yet the Touch
perceives it manifestly hot: And though the Lath of a Crossbow, or the String of
a Bow, be looked upon, when bent, as Bodies at Rest, yet the Springiness of the
former, and violent Separation of the Ends of the Latter, when cut, manifestly
demonstrates, that they were only in a state of Tension: To which might be
added several Instances, taken as well from Nature as Art.

Of the Latter sort I have observed, That amongst Glasses, which to all
appearance were well baked, several Months after they were made. some of them
flew in pieces of their own accord, which they scarce ever fail to do, if they
be taken from the Fire, and suffered to cool suddenly. The like to which I have
observed, in a Metalline Glass of my own Preparation, which would shrink so
much when removed from the Fire, as, if suddenly cooled, to fly in pieces.

And if a piece of Copper heated to a Redness, or a Whiteness, be, upon
Cooling, held over a piece of Paper, several Fleaks will presently fly off it;
which seem to be Vitrify'd Metal, which, upon their shrinking, when exposed to
cool, fly asunder, like the Strings of a Musical Instrument in moist Weather.

And upon this Occasion, to show how much Metals may shrink, I shall add, That
I have found, that though a piece of Iron, when hot, would not go into a Cavity
made in a Metalline Body for that purpose; yet when exposed to the Air, and
cooled, it would shrink so much, as to be able to enter it: And to this, I
shall add two Notable Observations; viz. First, That a certain Artificer,
having cast a number of Metalline Concaves, found, that though he took care to
keep them from being exposed to the Air, whilst cooling, and though they were of
a considerable Thickness, and much harder than Iron; yet when they were
leasurely cooled to a certain degree, they would crack with a great Noise. The
Second Observation is, That an Expert Artist, having cast a quantity of
Bell-metal, and permitted it to cool about 12 Hours, upon the Area of an Iron
Instrument, he found it considerably shrunk from the Instrument, and cracked in
several places: And the like Accident has happened in Brass: for an Artist
assured me, That having cast a Ring of Brase, about a Cylinder of Iron, upon
cooling, it was so much shrunk, as to leave a Crack quite through on one Side.

From which Experiments it seems reasonable to infer, That a Body may be
brought to a state of Tension, as well by being expanded by the External Force
of the Fire, as any other external Agents; and also, That the Preter-natural
states of Bodies, which they are brought into by some Agents, are to be looked
upon to depend on their Previous Dispositions, since though the Moisture of the
Air will not cause a String of an Instrument to crack, which is moderately
wound up, yet if it is Tension be much stronger, it presently flies in pieces:
So likewise, if a Piece of Glass be hot in one Part, and cool in another, though
cold Water dropped upon the hot Glass, will crack it, yet it will not have the
same Effect on the Cool part of the Glass.

From which and the rest of the Experiments contained in this Capter, it is
apparent, that the Parts of Solids are not so much in a state of Rest, as of
Tension, and Compression: To confirm which I shall add, That an Experienced
Artist showed me a Lump of Matter, consisting of a great many Agats lodged in a
Cement much harder than ordinary Stones; which Agats, he affirmed would
sometimes, when taken out of the Cement, endeavor to expand themselves so
powerfully as to fly in pieces, in a little time after.

VIII. The Reasons why Languid Local Motion, Prop. VIII.
and it is Effects, are so much overlooked, is, because we are too apt to take
notice only of the Visible Impressions of one Body against anowithout observing
the Intestin Motions of Minute Parts.
To prove this Proposition, I shall offer the following Experiments: And First,
Having turned a Key in a Brass stop Cock, a considerable time, till the Metal,
by frequent Attritions, became hot; I observed it at the last so to swell, as
to stick fast like a Wedge, so that it could not be moved, till the Metal was
again cool: And an Experienced Workman has informed me, that in making such
Instruments, before the Key could rightly be adapted to the Cavity it was to
fit, he was forced to cool it several times in Water, to take down the
Expansion effected by the Heat.

To this Experiment, it may be added, That the Parts of a Drinking-Glass, will
be put into Motion, by drawing One's Finger round the Brim; and that so
violent, as to toss several Drops of the Water contained in it, a considerable
height into the Air; and a Drinking-Glass Artificially cut by a spiral Line,
being dexterously inverted and shaken, will have its Parts so manifestly
vibrated up and down, as to acquire a quarter of an Inch in Length, without any
evident injury to the Glass. And it has been observed, by one who made use of
hardened Steel Instruments to turn Iron, and shake off the Protuberances of
that Metal; that in a little time it would acquire such a Heat and so lose it is
Temper, as to look blue or yellowish, if it was not timely dipped in a convenient
Liquor, to keep it cool. To this I shall add, That having two or three times
bent a Bar of Tin in my Hands, backwards and forwards, I found, upon the
Breaking of it, that the internal parts had acquired a considerable degree of
Heat.

From which Experiment it appears, that Attrition of Parts, without a manifest
Percussion, is able to cause a sensible Heat; and that not only hard, but soft
Bodies, may do so too, I shall add the following Experiments, to evince, which
is that an Artist having only rubbed Optick-Glasses with Putree, upon a piece
of Leather, to polish them, told me, that they acquired such a degree of Heat,
as sometimes to crack; though I am not unapt to think, that such an Effect might
as well be attributed to a peculiar Motion of the Parts of Glass, which were
too violent; since from the aforementioned Vibration of the Parts of a
Drinking-Glass, it appears, That they may be put into a considerable degree of
Motion, without Heat: And that, by a very easy Friction, such Bodies may
acquire a Tremulous Motion, appears from the following Experiment, viz. having
suffered melted Brimstone to cool, in a Vessel whose Cavity was concave, I
rubbed the unequal Superficies of the Brimstone, upon a Cushion for some time,
and found, by applying my Ear to it, that the Parts of the Brimstone were put
into such a Vibrating Motion, as to continue a crackling Noise for some time,
after the Friction was discontinu'd. To which I shall add, That having rubbed
two Stones taken out of the Bladder together, I found them to yield a strong
Urinous Smell: And not only Sulphur will emit Sulphurous Steams, by rubbing it
upon Cloth, but Diamonds themselves will acquire a considerable degree of
Electricity; and I have one by me, which, if rubbed, will appear Luminous in
the Dark.

And that it may further appear, that a peculiar Modification of Motion, may
contribute to the various Effects produced by it, I shall observe, That those
Stones which Italian Glass-men make use of, afford Sparks of Fire by Collision;
but if moderately rubbed together, they emit faetid Exhalations; from whence
probably proceed those offensive Steams, emitted by Glass; and what is most
remarkable, and to our purpose is, though Glass when Red-hot emits no such
Effluvia; yet if two pieces be dexterously rubbed together, they will send
forth Steams copious enough and faetid.

And to show how brisk the Motions of the Parts of inorganical Bodies are, and
how soon they communicate Motion to one another, we need but consider, how the
Tremulous Motion of a Bell is continued successively round it; and how, all
that time, it communicates that Motion to the Air about it; for that the Parts
of it are so successively kept in Motion, appears from that Trembling Motion,
which may be perceived by one's Finger: And it is further confirmed, because a
Solution of the Continuity much deadens, and causes the Sound to be much
shorter: And that the Air receives its Undulating Motion from the Impress of
the Bell all that time, appears, if One's Finger, or some other Body be applied
to it, which stops that Tremulous Motion. And that the Motions in the Parts of
the Bell are very brisk, is evinced from what is generally affirmed, viz. That
if a String be tied about a Bell, so as to check the Tremulous Motion upon the
striking of the Clapper, it would break, some Parts being more agitated than
others; so that the Disproportionate Motion compared with the Motion of the
other Parts surmounting their Cohesion, they must consequently fly asunder: And,

As a further Argument, that the Parts of the Bell are so agitated, I put
Filings of Steel, and Drops of Water into a Hand-Bell, and observed, That, upon
the Impulse of a Key, the Water shivered, and the Filings had likewise such a
Motion given to their Parts, as enabled them to dance up and down.

But to put an end to these Observations, I shall only intimate, That from what
has been said, it may appear, what considerable Effects may be caused by the
Unheeded Motions of Invisible Parts of Matter, which are wont to be ascribed to
other less Intelligible Causes.

CHAP. XVII. A Supplement to the former Chapter of the Great Effects of
Languid, and Unheeded Local Motion.
TO illustrate what has been delivered in the former Chapter, I shall add the
following Observations: And First, That the Motion of the Air may act on Bodies
duly predispos'd, at a great Distance, appears from what the Learned Borellus
De vi Percussionis, Prop. CXI. relates, viz. That being at Tauromenium in
Sicily, about thirty Miles from Mount Aetna, when it first broke out, it was
observable, that the Houses in that Town apparently shook, especially those
which were most directly situated toward the Gap; which, as that Author
observes, must needs proceed from the Impression of the Air upon the Houses:
for had it been the Effect of a Tremulous Motion in the Ground, all the Houses
would have shook alike, which was otherwise.

To prove that Motion may be propagated through different Mediums, besides what
has been before delivered, I shall add, That the Eloquent Famianus Strada, De
Bello Belg. Dec. 2. lib. 6. vel 7. says, That a very Stupendous Work being
raised by the Prince of Parma, to prevent the City of Antwerp from being
relieved by the River Scheld, an Engineer contrived to blow it up, though with
Success not a little Tragical, by a Boat fraught with Gunpowder, etc. for it
raised such a Commotion, that the Earth shook to the Distance of 36 English
Miles; and the deep River was so agitated, as first to discover it is Bottom,
and afterward to overswell the Banks; the Castle, together with Men, Cannons,
etc. being violently tossed into the Air, together with a vast number of other
Accidents horrid and dreadful.

And to illustrate further what has been delivered in the foregoing Chapter,
concerning the Effects of Music on Bodies duly disposed to be worked on by it;
I shall add, that an Experienced Traveller told me, That in the East Indies he
saw Tame Serpents, which would raise themselves erect in the Air, except 3 or 4
Inches of their Tails, which they rested upon: And he added, That upon the
Playing of some Parts of the Tune, they would be put into very brisk and
surprising Motions, whereas when another Part of it was a-playing, they seemed
to be half a sleep, and dissolved in Pleasure.

Another Instance, which shows how much the Peculiar Textures of Bodies
contribute to their Effects, is published by the Learned Marhofius, who
relates, That Nicolaus Petterus had found out a Note, which, being loud and
lasting, would, without visibly touching the Vessel, cause a Glass-Romer to
tremble and burst; but if the Note were raised either too high, or depressed
too low, it would have no such Effect.

A further Instance of the Efficacy of Languid Motion is, That I once obtained
several pieces of Glass, the Textures of which were so peculiar, that if the
internal Superficies were gently scratched obliquely with a Pin, they would fly
in pieces, though 6 or 7 times thicker than common Drinking-glasses.

To show how much Motion, even in Solid Bodies, may be promoted by the Strokes
of very weak Agents, I shall here relate, that several Urinals whose Parts were
of a peculiar Texture, being rubbed with Sand and Water, had their Parts put
into such a Degree of Motion, as, in a little time after, to break without any
Cause to be observed, except that precedent Attrition of Sand.

To make it evident, that the Parts of Solid Bodies, which seem to be at Rest,
may have very powerful Effects, I shall add the following. Observations.

First, That I have been informed, by a Famous Jeweller, That when he ground
Rubies or Saphires, or other Precious Stones upon a Mill, their Parts would
acquire such a degree of Heat, as to afford Light like Fire; the Light flowing
from each being of the same Color with the Gem it came from: And I am likewise
informed by another, that when they have acquired a certain degree of Heat, the
Edges would gape; and if the Motion of the Mill was continued, the Gems would
fly in pieces; but if it was stopped, the cold Gem would be whole and entire.
To this Observation it will not be amiss to add, That, I once placed a Bottle,
to which was adapted a Glass-stopple, in my Window, and about a twelve Month
after, as I was sitting in the Room, the Top of the Stopple flew off, of its
own accord, leaving the other Part fast in the Glass; but the Parts of Solid
Glass will not only fly in pieces of their own accord, but I have been
informed, that sometimes, in the East Indies; Diamonds themselves, are observed
to burst asunder, without the Impression of any Visible Agent.

THE WORKS Of the HONORABLE ROBERT BOIL, Esquire EPITOMIZED.
BOOK II.
CHAP. I. Of the Systematical, or Cosmical Qualities of Things.
Qualities proceeding partly from the Influence of outward Agents; as well as
the Primary Affections of Matter
CONSIDERING that the Particular Qualities of Bodies, depend on a certain
Relation, which they have one toward another, by which they are adapted to Act
or to be Acted on; I the rather choose to call the Qualities considered in this
Chapter, Systematical or Cosmical Qualities; they not being the Effects of
those primary Affections of Bodies considered barely as such, viz. Motion, Size
and Shape; but of Bodies so diversified by those primary Affections, Acting
mutually on one another: As Quicksilver is endew'd with a Power to dissolve
both Silver and Gold, and an Aptitude to be dissolved in Aqua fortis. So that I
would not be understood to mean, by Cosmical Qualities, such as may be
attributed to the mutual Actions and Passions of Bodies, placed in some
imaginary Spaces beyond the World, but placed in the Universe, as now
Constituted, with a vast Variety of Bodies about them.

This I have already hinted in the foregoing Chapters of Forms and Qualities;
and therefore my design in this Chapter, is, to consider what Qualities a Body
may Aquire, by the Impressions or Influence of Agents whose Effects are
unknown, or not taken notice of.

And though all these Phenomenon, which are usually attributed to the Laws of
Nature, might properly be considered, in a Chapter that bears this Title; yet
since those Agents most concerned in the Effecting of these Phenomenon are
either the Stars, the subterraneal Parts, or the Ether and Atmosphaere we live
in; I shall wave those, and only here consider, what is requisite to prove,
that there are such real Qualities, depending on unheeded Agents, and the
Ordinary Course of Nature; Our Notion of Cosmical Qualities grounded on the
three following Propositions
but before I proceed, I shall briefly intimate, that our Notion of Cosmical
Qualities is grounded upon these three Propositions.

1. That some Bodies are altogether inactive, till they are acted on; and that
others, are put into Action, chiefly by the Influence of these Catholic and
unheeded Agents. 2. That there are several Bodies, which when put into Action,
are subtle enough to insinuate themselves into the Pores of other Bodies, which
they are by the Established Laws of Nature forced to act on. 3. That an
Alteration of the Mechanical Texture of the Body, is enough to dispose it, or
render it unapt to be worked on, by those unheeded Agents. And these three
Propositions I shall endeavor to make out by the following Phenomenon and
Experiments.
To begin then with the first Proposition, viz. That some Bodies are altogether
inactive, till they are acted on; and that others are put into Action,
Proposition the first.
chiefly by the Influence of these Catholic and Vnheeded Agents.

The first Part of this Proposition, I presume undeniable, if we consider, That
till a Hammer, or some other Body be struck upon a Wedge, it wants the Power or
Faculty of cleaving Wood, but when forced by the Impulse of that Body, which
strikes upon it, the Wedge presently insinuates it self betwixt the Parts of
that Solid, and divides them; As also, that a Knife is altogether unable to
attract a Needle, till it has received that Power from a Loadstone.

But to proceed to the second Part of the Proposition; I shall, to what I have
elsewhere observed ( viz. That the Property of a Burning-Glass, in respect of
it is Effects, does not proceed from the Unequal Figure, considered as such, but
the Rays of the Sun cast into a Point) add the following Instances. The first
is, That a Bar of Iron, by standing a considerable time in a Window, in a
perpendicular Line, will acquire a considerable degree of Magnetism, by the
Influence of Invisible Agents; and several Magnetical Qualities which it had
not before. Secondly, That though a flat Piece of Marble, considered barely as
such, has not a Power to raise any Body by a bare Contact; yet if it be
applied to another, whose Superficies is adapted to it; by virtue of the
Constitution and Fabric of the World, and the concurrent Causes of Bodies
about it, it may acquire such a Faculty, the lower Stone being boyed up by the
Weight and Pressure of the ambient Air; yet, if these two Stones were contained
in a Vacuum, they would not have such a Power to lift up one another. But to
proceed to

The second Proposition.
The second Proposition; which is, That there are several Bodies, which, when
put into Action, are subtle enough, to insinuate themselves into the Pores of
other Bodies, which they are, by the Established Laws of Nature, forced to Act
on. And here, though some of the Experiments to be related, might be also
alleged in favor of that Ether or Materia coelestis, which some Philosophers
have supposed to be dispersed throughout the World; yet the Invisible Agents,
which are here to be mentioned, are only such as the Magnetical Effluvia of the
Earth, and also the Air, in reference to it is Spring and Weight.

And first, Tho a Bar of Silver, and another of Steel, be exposed to cool, when
red hot, with their ends directly North and South; yet the Textures of these
two Metals being different one from another, the Pores of the Steel, being
opened, and the Metal made pliable, it is by the Insinuation of Terrestrial
Effluvia, endued with several Magnetical Qualities; and particularly, when
poised, to point North and South; whereas Silver acquires no such Properties.
And that it may be less strange, that the Earth should afford Magnetical
Effluvia, which are imagined by some to be very spirituous Ones, I shall add,
that having heated an Oblong Loadstone, and exposed it to the Air to cool, with
it is Ends pointing North and South, and so deprived it of it is Magnetical
Qualities; I could make either End to tend to the Southern or Northern Pole,
as, upon Ignition, I suffered it to cool with one end directed either North or
Southwards.

To this it may be added, That if the Air be exhausted in some measure out of a
Vial with an oblong Neck, and, upon it is Immersion in Water, ones Finger, which
prevented the retroadmission of the Air, be presently taken away; the Water
will contrary to the Tendency of it is own Gravity, presently fly up in the
Bottle, being squeezed in by the External Pressure of the Air, lying upon the
Surface of the Water, the Spring of the Internal Air, being so weakened, as not
to be able to oppose the force of it; whereas in a Vacuo the Water would not be
so raised, having no external Agent to boy it up.

The Expansive force of Beans soaked with Water.
Again, being desirous to know the Causes of Germination, and from what Causes,
that powerful Intumescence of Seeds, when sown, proceeded, I filled several
Vessels of Glass, as well as Earth, with common Beans, filling up the Intervals
with Water, and tying the Corks fast with Strings; which being done, when the
Beans had imbibed Water enough, their Intumescence was so powerful, as not only
to break several of the Vessels, but a great many of the Strings which hindered
the raising of the Corks. But that I might be more exact in estimating the
Power of that Expansive Force, I put a sufficient Quantity of Beans and Water
into a Brass Cylinder, whose Diameter was two Inches, and it is Length six;
which being done, and the Orifice of the Cylinder being likewise fitted exactly
with a Plug, a Trencher was placed upon it, which was broad enough to bear a
half hundred weight of Lead: In which Experiment it was to be observed, that in
two or three days, the Expansive Force of the Beans had raised the Plug a
considerable Height. And it may further be noted in such Trials, that as the
Diameter of the Cylinder is larger, so the Expansive Force of the Beans are
able to raise a more considerable Weight.

How far these Experiments may confirm the Corpuscularian Philosophy, or
whether that Force may be Mechanically explained by it, I shall leave the
Reader to consider, and shall here only observe, That the Air, together with
the Ether, may in a great Measure concur to the producing of some of the
Phenomenon of Nature, which we imagine it very little concerned in; for besides
the Effects which may be ascribed to the Pressure of the Air, it contributes to
the producing of some upon another Account; it being easy to be observed, that
Flesh may be preserved longer from Putrefaction, by being secluded from the
Contact and Influence of the Air; and also, that the Light which flows from
rotten Woods, and some putrefyed Fishes, will appear and disappear upon the
Contact or Separation of ambient Air.

Several Phenomenon produced by Virtue of Motion in the Parts of the Air.
But for a further Proof, that the Air may effect several things, besides what
it produces by virtue of it is weight by the Insensible Motions of it is Parts; I
might add, that whereas a Piece of Paper being wet with Oil, has it is Pores so
altered, as to be capable of transmitting more easily the Rays of Light; and
the Air being impelled, by the Laws of Nature, presently acts upon it, and
represents a great many Objects, by being reflected from those Bodies beyond
it, which could not appear through it before.

And if a large Box be so contrived, as to have one end of it open, and a Hole
in the other end, covered with a Lenticular Glass; if the open end be made up
with a fine sheet of Paper, and a small Hole be likewise made upon the Top of
the Box; by placing ones Eye to the Lenticular Glass, one may discern upon the
Paper the Lively Representations of External Objects, and their various Motions
as well as Shape and Colors; which Phenomenon could by no means be exhibited,
were not either some Insensible Corpuscles, transmitted in the Form of Effluvia
from those Objects, or some other subtle Particles of Matter, directed by Local
Motion from the Object to the Paper, and from thence to the Eyes.

The Established Laws of the Universe Contribute to the producing of several
Phenomenon.
From whence it appears, that the Established Laws of the Universe, in a great
measure, contribute to the producing of several Phenomenon, which arise from
the Operations of insensible and unheeded Causes: For a further Confirmation of
which I shall add, That if a Bar of Iron be held in a perpendicular Line; so
that the lower end of it touch the Northren Point of a Magnetical Needle, it
will presently drive it away; whereas, if the Position of that Iron Bar be so
altered, as to touch that Point with the other end, it will, by a contrary
Faculty, attract it, except the Iron Bar has stood a considerable time in a
Perpendicular Posture, exposed to the Air and the Magnetical Effluvia of the
Earth, or has lain a considerable time, pointing North and South, and so has
acquired a more durable Verticity. And if it should be asked; How a Bar of Iron
acquires Magnetical Qualities.
why, by such Postures, the Magnetical Qualities of Iron should be so much
increased? it might probably be answered, that it proceeded from hence, viz.
Because the Pores of the Iron, by lying nearer the Magnetical Effluvia of the
Earth, have their Pores rendered more apt to receive and transmit the Effluvia
of the Needle; so that consequently, that Part of the Iron which is most
affected by those Steams, must become the stronger, and consequently the North
Point of the Needle; for which reason, it must drive away the North Point of
the Needle, and attract the South. But if on the contrary, the other end of the
Bar be applied to the Needle, by a contrary reason, it being less Magnetical,
it must attract it. But not to insist upon this Explanation of the Magnetical
Qualities of a Bar of Iron, I shall only observe, that it is necessary in order
to acquire a durable Magnetical Virtue, that the Iron should stand long in that
Perpendicular Posture, which is sufficient to prove what I contend for, viz.
That the established Laws of Nature are requisite for the Production of several
Phenomenon, which would not be effected, were not those Laws observed.

The Third Proposition.
But to proceed to the third and last Proposition, viz. That an Alteration of
the Mechanical Texture of a Body is enough to dispose it or render it unapt to
be worked on by those unheeded Agents. This is evident from what is practiced
at Sea, it being the usual Custom for the Seamen, to throw Water upon their
Sails to quicken the Motion of their Vessels, when pursued by Pirates; for the
Threeds of the Sails being swelled with Water, and the Pores by that Means made
less, the Wind, not finding so free a Passage through them, must consequently
have the greater Force upon the Sail-Clothes, and so drive the Ship forwards
more swiftly. Another Instance of considerable Effects succeeding a very slight
Alteration in Texture may be observed, when, on a windy day, a Chamber-Window
is left open; for the Wind, which before only shook the Glass, will presently
blow the Curtains about and other things in the Chamber, which are in a
Disposition to be easily moved, as Dust, Papers, etc.

But to proceed to Examples altogether not so gross, we may take notice, That
though common Tartar will neither dissolve in the Air, nor easily in Water, yet
when Part of it is driven away by Calcination, it readily dissolves and runs
per Deliquium in a moist Air. To which may be added, that though a Loadstone by
being heated in the Fire and cooled again, underwent no visible Change as to
Shape or Size, nor for as much as could be perceived by the Eye, lost none of
it is Parts; yet, by an invisible Change of Texture, effected by the Magnetical
Effluvia of the Earth, it may alter its Verticity according to the different
Postures it is permitted to cool in: And the like Change I have observed in
Iron, whose Verticity was altered by a Change of Texture, wrought by so weak an
Agent as the Earth.

To these we may add several Instances in liquid Bodies; and first, That, though
Honey and Water mixed together in an undue Proportion, reserve each their
distinct Natures; yet if four or five Parts of Water be added to one Part of
Honey, by some subtle Agents or other, they are presently fermented, and unite
into one common Mass; and I am assured, by a Merchant who lived several Years
in the Canary Islands, That if a Hogshead of Wine close stopped be violently
rolled along; the Texture of the Liquor would be so changed, that, if it were
but about a Month old, one of the Ends would be burst out, and the Liquor lost.
Another Instance in which the Texture of the Body disposes it to be so
powerfully worked upon, we have in Glass, which upon a sudden Removal from the
Fire into cold Water, is subject to fly in Pieces.

But an Instance which is more remarkable is, That a hot Plate of Copper being
permitted to cool upon some which were more moderately hot in the Fire, and
thence removed upon a Plate; several Pieces like Scales would fly off it, when
exposed to the Atmosphere; and

To conclude this Chapter, I shall add, That the Bolonian Stone acquires such
an admirable Quality by Calcination, that, by being placed in the Sunbeams for
some time, it gets such a Degree of Luminousness, as to retain it a
considerable time, when removed into the dark.

CHAP. II. Of Cosmical Suspicions.
THE World about us being stocked with such a Variety of Objects, and other
things, too small or subtle to be discerned; it may not be unuseful, upon some
Accounts, to propose Conjectures, where the Subject considered admits of no
clearer Discoveries.

Suspicion the First.
And First, it is not without Reason I suspect, that, besides those uniform
Parts of Matter, of which the Ether, by some Philosophers, is thought to
consist, there are also several other Parts of Matter, which are differently
disposed to work upon Bodies, according to the various Textures of those Bodies
they chance to work upon; or according to the different Agents they chance to
work concurrently with: And this Suspicion is not improbable, since the
inquisitive Gilbert has not only discovered the Magnetical Qualities of the
Earth to be diffused on every side, but also it is commonly known that upon the
Hunting of a Deer, several subtle Effluvia are left behind in the Air; which we
should pass by unobserved, were there not such Creatures as Bloodhounds,
endowed with Organs fitted to receive those subtle Steams.

A Second.
And it is not a little strange, that several Persons should have such peculiar
Temperaments, as to be able to discover Pestilential Steams in the Air, for a
considerable time before they are disposed to affect other Men; and that those
Constitutions should be so disposed to be worked upon by Effluvia, by others
not in the least discerned. And that there are such Bodies, as well as unheeded
Effluvia, may be evinced by several Instances; as one which was remarkable in
the Year 1665, in which, a certain Man, three Months before the beginning of
the Plague, was taken with a Swelling in his Groin; which he had likewise as a
Forerunner to several other Plagues. And Fabritius Hildanus relates a Story no
less remarkable of himself; who, when, in his Youth, he had had the Plague,
could never pass any House infected with it without a sensible Pain in that
Part. To which may be added, a third Instance from that Curious Physician, who
observed the various Phenomenon of Distempers at the Siege of Breda, and says,
Annotandum hic merito Naturae Facultatem ad Pestis Praeservationem Momenti esse
maximi: Observavi in meipso contaminatos invisente statim inguina olere vel
axillas; afficiebatur aliquando Caput, noctu inde Sudor, and secessus tres
quatuorve; hoc and aliis accidit, qui fideliter mihi retulerunt. And these
Testimonies I am rather inclined to depend on, because delivered by Men of
Judgment and Credit.

Another Suspicion which I am about to relate, A Third.
is, That the Laws of Nature, which contribute to the producing of several
Phenomenon, are not only of larger Extent than what we are used to imagine; but
likewise concur to the Production of a greater Variety of Effects: For not to
spend much time in observing, That several Industrious Astrologers and
Geographers, have, instead of Physical, given us Mathematical Hypotheses;
having taken pains to describe the Situations and Motions of the fixed Stars
and Planets; and likewise, that they have been Industrious in discovering the
four little Planets, which move about Jupiter; as also the little Moon, which
runs about Saturn, as well as several Phenomenon relating to Comets, without
considering the Frame and Constitution of those Bodies, which compose our
Globe; I conceive it not impossible to make it out, That there is a Commerce
betwixt them and our Globe; as well as several Laws or Customs of Nature even
in our own Globe not taken notice of by Scholastical and Mathematical Writers.

The Fourth.
And I am, not without Reason, induced to suspect, That this Globe of ours has
undergone several considerable Changes, not only in several Countries, but the
internal Parts of it; That which is called the Mariners Compass, having been,
in several Places, observed to vary considerably, in its Declension from the
true North Pole; as for Instance, about London in the Year 1580 it declined
eleven Degrees; in 1612 about six; and in the Year 1633 about four Degrees. And
I have my self, at one time, observed little or no Declension, whereas at
another I observed it to decline near half a Degree. And I am informed by one
who often observed the Variation of the Compass at the Cape of good Hope, that,
when he was a young Man, he observed it to decline two Degrees Westward;
whereas of late, he found the Variation to be six Degrees and about forty eight
Minutes; so that, by his Observation, it had varied little less than five
Degrees, in the times he has sailed past that Place. From whence we may have
Reason to think, That there are certain Agents very powerful, though not to be
taken notice of, which may work several, and very considerable Changes, even in
the Terrestrial Globe it self; which whether regulated by any certain Laws of
Nature, we know not.

And besides these, there are several other unheeded Phenomenon, which we have
troubled our selves very little to consider about; as the different Weight of
our Atmosphere, and the Causes of that Difference; we having only noted that
they proceed from some subterraneal Effluviums mixed with the Air; but what
other Effects those Effluviums may have upon other Bodies has been scarce
discovered.

Considerable Variations in the Temper of Climates.
And it is not a little strange, what Monsieur de Rochfort relates, concerning
those Hurricanes observed in the American Islands; for, whereas, for a long
time, they were observed to come but once in seven Years; yet in a short time
they grew so frequent, as to return two or three times in the same Year. And I
have been informed by an Ingenious Gentleman, that, having lived in New
England, he observed a considerable Alteration in the Temper of that Climate;
it being much less cold and more temperate than formerly. And Mr. W. Wood, in
his Prospect of New England, takes notice of no inconsiderable Alteration; who
says, That since the English Inhabitants settled there, the Showers of Rain are
much more moderate, though more frequent.

An Observation concerning Manna.
And the Learned Magnenus observes, in his Tract de Manna, That about three
hundred Years ago there was no Manna to be found in Cenotria; and it is not
above two Ages since Manna has been found in Calabria, a Country so famous for
it. And the Ingenious French Writer in his History des Isles Antilles Lib. 4.
Cap. 6. says, That if the Juice of a Fruit called Acajou, falls upon a Cloth,
it presently stains it red, which continues till the Tree bears Flowers again;
which Phenomenon will be the more to our Purpose, if it may be doubted,
whether it proceeded from the Temper of the Air or Length of Time.

Another Suspicion
But besides these Phenomenon, when I observe the exact time, that the ebbing
and flowing of the Sea keeps; and how exactly coincident with the New and Full
Moon Spring-Tides happen; as also what vast Spring-Tides are constantly
observed every Equinox; together with those various Phenomenon, which may be
observed in Seawater, which, in some Places and upon the blowing of some
Winds, appears to be luminous, whereas other Parts are, at the same time,
neither luminous, nor in the least affected, so as to become luminous by those
Winds at any other time; I am very apt to believe, That these Phenomenon
proceeded from some Cosmical Law of Nature; or that the Planetary Vortex was
not a little concerned in producing these Effects.

Another Suspicion.
And I am not unapt to believe, but that all those Distempers, which are either
Endemic or Epidemic, proceed from a certain Influence, which those Globes which
move about us, may have, together with some Terrestrial Effluvia, which are
different in several Countries.

But not to engage in so fertile a Discourse as the Phenomenon, which every
particular Region affords; I shall only add two Suspicions more, which may be
further Instances of the Established Laws and Customs of Nature.

A very considerable Phenomenon relating to the Sun.
And first, it is a Question, whether those Planets, which move about our Globe,
keep such constant Bounds in their Motion, and move in such Lines as
Astrologers teach they do. And if we consider the vast variety of Bodies,
contained in and about our Globe, it can scarce be imagined, that Nature should
always keep to one constant and regular way of Acting, but that in several
Particulars, she must deviate and operate variously; for not to mention, that
Astronomers have observed, even Natural Days to vary in Length; and have
disputed much concerning the Anomalic assigned to the Motion of the Sun's
Apogeum; The Sun it self has been sometimes observed, to be even obscured by
opacous Matter, as in Caesar's time, and at the beginning of Augustus his
Government; when the Sun was for near a whole Year obscured. To which we may
subjoyn the Number, Duration, and Vastness as well as Motion of some Comets.

And I am informed, that in the Northern Hemisphere, in that part of the
Galaxy, which is not to be discerned by us, there are certain black, and near
the Northern Pole, white Clouds, which move along with the Galaxy in twenty
four hours; and these may be discerned by those that sail 18 Degrees South
Latitude; but I shall not insist upon these as Arguments, since I suspect those
black Clouds to be nothing but the Azure Sky appearing through the Galaxy, and
those white ones, to be only Constellations, like those of the Galaxy or the
Belt of Orion.

Nature may not always be exact in her Laws.
But having hinted, that Nature may not always be exactly regular in the Motion
of Planets, etc. I shall here intimate, that sometimes we may think, those
Motions which are Periodical and return at set times, irregular; because we
live not long enough to observe the frequent Returns of such Changes, as we
usually esteem Prodigies in Nature; for it would as much be thought strange, to
see Trees blossom, and Fruit in the Summer, to a Man that lived but one Year,
as several other Phenomenon are strange to us, who have not lived long enough
to have observed such Phenomenon in their Periodical Turns before: So before
the different Appearances of Saturn had often been observed, they were thought
Prodigies.

But it is most remarkable, that several Stars have Periodically appeared and
disappeared several times in the same Place, as has been observed in the
Girdle of Andromeda, and about the Swans Breast, and another amongst the fixed
Stars in the Whales Neck. These I say are most remarkable, because they not
only confirm what I have been saying of the Periodical Appearances of some
Phenomenon; but invalidate the Philosophical Systems of some, who allow of no
Vortices beyond the concave Surfaces of the Firmament: Vortices beyond the
Concave Surfaces of the Firmament.
But if rather than to allow of Vortices beyond the Surface of the Firmament,
we would imagine the Stars, which appear and disappear, to have dark and light
Hemispheres, which Periodically turn toward our Globe; it will still be an
Argument to question the Uniformity of the Motions of some of the Globes of the
Universe; since at so vast a Distance, such considerable Alterations are
observable.

But to conclude this Chapter; It may be a question, whether such prodigious
Changes as are sometimus observed, may not by being frequently repeated, become
a Custom, and have a Right to be reckoned amongst the Laws of Nature.

CHAP. III. Of the Temperature of Subterraneal Regions as to Heat and Cold.
FOr some Reasons, having been unable to examine into the Temper of the Air in
subterraneal Regions my self, I shall rather give such an Account of it, as I
have received from several Persons.

The Temper of the Air in Groves.
And first, I shall relate a Story of the Temper of the Air observed by a
Chemist, who purposely traveled into Hungary, which was the following: That
going down into a Grove, at the first Entrance of it, he perceived the Air
sensibly warm; but presently after for a quarter of an hour in his descent, he
felt it considerably cold; which cold Region being passed, he began to perceive
it sensibly warmer, and the lower he descended the hotter it grew; so that, in
the lower Veins, it was hotter than the Air above ground is usually in Summer:
And this Relation was confirmed by a like Observation made by a Physician, who
told me, that in a Mine, whose descent did not much exceed an hundred Fathom,
the cold Region was extended near to the bottom of it. And this Relation is
agreeable with what Morinus affirms, viz. That the Cold Region, in an Hungarian
Mine, which he visited, was extended 80 Fathom, after which the Heat sensibly
increased, the lower he descended; and the same Author affirms, that besides
the different Tempers of those Regions, there is likewise observed, a different
Degree of Heat, in the hot Region, correspondent to the different Seasons of
the Year, viz. Winter and Summer.

The Temperature of Subterraneal Regions considered under certain Propositions.
Prop. I.
These things premised in General, I shall now proceed to consider the
Particular Regions of the Earth in the four following Propositions.

PROPOSITION I.
The Bounds as well as Temperature of the first Region are very different. The
Reason of both Parts of which Proposition are plain; since the Sun Beams must
not only penetrate deeper in the Summer than the Winter; but also, because the
solidity or porousness of several Parts of the Earth may dispose the Soil to
Heat or Coldness.

But to proceed, it is remarkable, that the uppermost Region is much more
temperate, because both the violent Impressions of Sun Beams, and rugged Winds,
are kept off by the sides of those Subterraneal Cavities. And that the Power of
the Sun Beams is much weakened by those sides, is plain; since, by such like
means, the Heat of the Sun may be so broken, as to preserve Ice from thawing
all Summer; and not only so, but if those subterraneal Cavities be sufficiently
guarded with a Cover of Brick, well clayed over; and be, by that means,
preserved from any Intercourse with the External Air, it may be preserved
without digging deep into the Ground, as is observed in the South Part of
France; so that, though the Coldness of Subterraneal Cavities may conduce, yet
it is not altogether requisite to preserve Ice from a Thaw.

But the subterraneal Regions are not only preserved from excessive Heat, by
preventing the Intercourse of the Internal and the External Air, but may be
considerably lessned in such Cavities as are considerably exposed to the open
Air: as I my self have observed in an Iron Mine not above twelve foot deep.

As as it is to be observed, that this cold Region of the Air is not apt to be
influenced by external Heat in the Summer, so neither is the hot Region subject
to be altered much by the external Cold in Winter; which appears from the
smoking of some Springs in Winter, which are supplied with Water, which had
run a considerable depth in the ground, or passed through some Earth that was
fitly disposed to warm it in it is Passage.

But further, that Winters Cold is much more disposed to influence the
superficial Region of the Earth than the hot one which lies under it, appears
from Reason it self, and may be further confirmed by observing, that even Water
in freezing los^^ it is Fluidity, and puts on the Form of Ice, first in those
Parts which are most contiguous to the Air, and subject to the Influence of
External Cold: And it is observed, not only in England, but also in Russia,
that if Wine or Beer be kept in a Cellar well roofed over, and about twelve
foot deep, it may be preserved from freezing, notwithstanding the Violence of
external Cold; where it is to be observed, that the Warmth of those Vaults,
does not only depend on the Exclusion of External Air, but also on the Steams
of those fermenting Liquors, together with some subterraneal Steams, which are
gathered there, and hindered from flying away.

PROPOSITION II. Prop. II.

But to proceed to the Second Proposition, which may be comprised in the two
following Members; As first, Member the first.
That the Temper of the Second Region of the Earth seems to be colder than that
above or that below it. This is both confirmed by Observations already cited,
and also by Reason; by the latter, because the Earth, being a Body compounded
of Parts less agitated than those about our Sensory, they must consequently
cause a Sensation of Cold; Why the Middle Region is coldest.
and why that Region should have it is Parts less agitated, than those about it
is plain, because it lies remoter both from the Influence of External, as well
as Subterraneal Heat.

But here it is to be noted, That though I say, the middle Region is coldest,
yet I would only be understood to mean a comparative Coldness; for I by no
means think that Region to be possessed with the most intense Degrees of
Coldness, since neither Ice or Snow have been ever observed to be found in it:
And though it be comparatively colder than those Regions about it; yet, that it
is not the coldest may be hence argued, because it is observed in the Summer,
that the Exhalations which steam from the middle Region are sensibly warm at
the Orifice of the Grove; which they could not be, were the middle Region
through which they passed extremely cold.

The second Member of the second Proposition.
But to pass to the second Member of this second Proposition; It is observed,
That in several Places, which may be referred to this middle Region, the
Temperature of the Air is different at the same Seasons of the Year. Which is
evident both from Reason and Experience.

And first, from Experience it has been learnt, by those who have often been
in those Hungarian Mines, as well as some here in England. And indeed if we
consider the different Heat in different Climates; but more peculiarly the
Difference in Soils, it will not be less consonant to Reason; for the Soil may
be more or less porous and compact; The different Temper of Subterraneal
Regions may be varied by the Soil.
and may have different Substances mixed with it, or run through it, which may
alter the Temper of it; for there is not always that Regular Order in Nature,
which is in our Thoughts of her; since Salts, Marchasites and Minerals are
dispersed through the middle as well as the lower Regions of the Earth; and
may, by impregnating those Fluids which run through the Earth, cause different
Refrigerating Effluvia to affect various Parts of the same Region; as if, in
one Place, it be impregnated with Nitre, and in another with Marchasitical
Earth; the Coldness of the former must render that Part of the Region the
colder of the two. Besides, the Temper of them may differ upon the account of
the Soil it self, which varies according to the several Degrees of it is
Maturity; so that for these Reasons, the Temper of Effluvia may be different in
the same Place at one time from what they are at another in the same Place; not
to mention those Differences which it may undergo by several other Accidents,
and the Subterraneal Effluvia, which ascend more or less from the lower Regions.

And before I leave this Proposition, it may be necessary to advertise, That
the different Degrees of Heat or Cold, in the several Regions of the Earth, are
not easily discovered by those Thermoscopes, which are usually made use of, to
distinguish such Differences; because the Pillar of Air, which presses upon the
Liquor may differ in it is Pressure, according to the Length of it; it being
longer, and consequently heavier, the lower it descends.

But to pass to the Third Region comprised in the following Proposition, Prop.
III.
viz. That the Temper of the Third Region is warm, which Warmth varies in
several places. That it is Warm, and that that Heat varies in several places, I
think is sufficiently attested, by the several Persons that have gone down into
those Mines; but as for the Causes of it, those are not so easily discovered:
for I am not a little inclined to suspect, That considering the Closeness of
those Cavities in which they work, the Effluviums of their own Bodies, and of
the Metal they work in, may in some measure contribute to it.

The effects of Subterraneal Fires.
But to pass by this Suspicion, I shall rather briefly intimate, That I conceive
the Earth to be stocked with store of Subterraneal Fires; and that several
Calorifick Qualities, being carried up through Clefts and Veins in the Earth,
cause a Sensible Heat to be diffused through the whole. And that there are such
Steams, appears manifestly from those Damps, which are often observed in
Groves; not only in England, but Germany, Bohemia, Hungary, etc. which are
sometimes so Bituminous and Sulphurous in Smell, as to be apt to take actual
Fire.

But one thing I must intimate here, which is, That though I am induced to
believe, for some Reasons, this Argument valid; yet, I am not without a
Suspicion, that notwithstanding the Aptness which these Exhalations have to
take Flame; yet, even several cold Steams may rise from the lower Parts of the
Earth, which may acquire Heat in the Upper Regions; for we see, that several
Substances, which are apt enough to take Flame, have not the least sensible
Heat in their Parts before; nay, are so far from that, that Saltpeter, which
is so apt to flame, will, by being dissolved in Water, add a considerable
Degree of Coldness to it: And the like may be observed in Spirit of Wine, whose
Spirit, though easily inflammable, affects not the Touch with the least Heat, if
raised in the Form of a Vapor.

But that which inclines me to be of the Opinion just now mentioned, is, That
not only Morinus, but several others have observed, the Exhalations of Mines
considerably hot in Summer time. And the Experienced Agricola has oserv'd,
That the Mineral Steams which pervade the Earth, are so powerful, as not to
permit a Hore-frost to lie upon the Ground which they lie under; and the like
has been observed upon Coal-Mines: And I remember, that an Acquaintance of
mine showed me a piece of Land, which was so powerfully penetrated with warm
Effluvia, that Snow would not lie upon it above two Days, were the Weather
never so cold, which has been confirmed by frequent Observations; except where
Layers of Rock, or some other Stony Concretes, obstructed the Passage of those
Mineral Steams. To which may be added, That the Steams near Gold-Mines are so
copious in Hungary, as to give the Leaves of the Trees a Golden-Colour.

But notwithstaning these Instances, I am apt to doubt, that there are several
Parts of the third Region, which by reason of their Remoteness from such
Subterraneal Fires, have not that Heat. But since these things are but
uncertainly guessed at, none having so great Curiosity, as to be at the Charges
to dig deep enough without prospect of Gain, I shall rather proceed to
consider, That, Whence the Unusual Heat in some Mines proceeds.
besides the forementioned Causes, there is in some Mines such a degree of
Heat, as cannot be accounted for without another Cause; the Incalescence being
so great, as not to be produced without the Concourse of some other
Mineral-Steams, or Water to work upon, and promote the mutual Actions and
Operations of the Volatile and Active Parts of those Mines. And that such
Incalescenses may be produced in the Bowels of the Earth, I have elsewhere
observed: And further, That Immature Minerals, such as Marchasites, whose Parts
are impregnated with Vitriol and Sulphurous Parts, may, by reason of their
Aptness to be dissolved, be able to cause such Effects, we may be induced to
believe, because Vitriol has not only been found in several Mines in Hungary;
but likewise such Strong and Corrosive Effluviums, as were very offensive to
Respiration, and in a little time fatal to those that ventured to work in them.
And there is one thing further Remarkable, That several pieces of Vitriol,
which were found in the Bottom of some of those Mines, of a soft Consistence,
presently, when brought up and exposed to the open Air, grew hard, retaining
several Golden Streaks in it.

But there is one thing here to be noted, which is, That, in Groves which are
very deep, the Air is so unfit for Respiration, as to want a frequent
Ventilation; so that the Miners are wont to sink an Air-Shaft, as they term it,
some Paces off the Grove, that the Air passing from the Grove to that, by a
short of Channel, or Ventiduct, (which Agricola lib. v. and vi. de re
Metallica, calls Cuniculus) might keep the Internal Air in such a Temper, as to
make it fit to breathe in; though the Mines were 200 Yards deep.

And Agricola, in his Book de re Metallica, gives further the following Account
of the Course of the Air in these Cuniculi, or Air-Shafts, in these Words: Aer
autem exterior se sua sponte fundit in Cava Terrae, atque cum per ea penetrare
potest, rursus evolat for as. Sed diversa Ratione hoc fieri solet; Etenim Vernis
and Aestivis diebus in altiorem puteum influit and per Cuniculum vel Fossam
latentem permeat, ac ex humiliori effluit similiter iisdem diebus in altiorem
Cuniculum infunditur, ac interjecto puteo defluit in humiliorem Cuniculum atque
ex eo emanat. Autumnali and Hyberno Tempore contra in Cuniculum vel Puteum
humiliorem intrat and ex altiori exit: Verum ea fluxionum Aeris Mutatio in
temperatis Regionibus fit in initio Veris, ac in fine Autumni; in frigidis
autem, in fine Veris, and in initio Autumni: To which he adds, Sed Aer utroque
tempore antequam cursum suum illum consuetum constanter teneat, plerumque
quatuordecem dierum spatio crebras habet mutationes, modo in altiorem Puteum
vel Cuniculum influens, modo in humiliorem. And these things may give us some
Reason to believe, That there are in the Earth several Periodical Changes in
the Temperature of those Regions, which deserve our Consideration. But having
several times enquired about these things, I am informed that the Air generally
goes in the same way, both Winter and Summer, entering the Air-Shaft, and coming
out of the Perpendicular Grove.

But to conclude this Chapter: From what has been said, it may appear, That
though in some Mines, the Earth seems to be distinguished into three Rgions, yet
generally the Temperature of the whole is various and uncertain: And much more
uncertain is it, what is the Constitution of the Central Parts of it; and
whether that be divided into Distinct Regions, or what is the State and Texture
as well as Consistency of its Parts, we must be content to be ignorant of;
since one of the deepest Mines we have heard of, being mentioned by Agricola,
in his Book called Bormannus; Cap. 12. was at Cotteberg, which exceeded not 500
Fathom; and if, according to Gassendus, the Semi-diameter of our Globe be 4177
Italian Miles, what a Superficial Knowledge must we have of it, who have not
been able to make our Observations above 500 Fathom; and that too, in but a
small Part of it is Orb.

CHAP. IV. Of the Temperature of the Submarine Regions, as to Heat and Cold.
THE following Chapter relating to the Temper of Submarine Regions, I would be
supposed to mean, by that Term, not such as are beneath the whole Ocean, but
only such as are beneath its Superficies; concerning which, I shall not relate
what follows, as upon my own Observation, but only as received by Information
from others, who have dived into them.

Submarine Regions two.
And First, I shall only assign to this Element two Regions; the One bounded by
the utmost Penetrations of the Rays of the Sun, and other Calorifick Causes;
the other extending it self to the utmost Depth of the Water.

The Temperature of the Uppermost.
According to which Division it will follow, that the Upper Region must vary in
it is Extent; according to the Difference of the Climate, and the Heat of the
Sun, (supposing the Warmth of it not to proceed from Subterraneal Effluvia;)
and not only in the Extent, but the Temperature of that Region; which may not
only be varied by the Influence of the Sun, but also, by the different Nature
of the Soil about the Shores, being either Nitrous, or Marchasitical; as also
by the Shallowness of the Water, which may contribute to the Warmness of it,
the Rays of the Sun being refracted by the Subjacent Sands. To which Causes may
be added the Influence of Subterraneal Fire: An Observation favoring which,
has been made by Monsieur de Ponts, in his Voyage to New France; in the way to
which he observed, That in one Place the Water was very warm, as well as the
Wine, which lay in the Boat, though there was no sensible Alteration in the Air;
and that this continued for three Days; whereas, on the 21rst of the same
Month, it was for 2 or 3 Days observed to be as cold.

The Temperature of the Lower Region.
These things in short being premised, concerning the Upper Region, I shall now
proceed to the Lower, which is Cold; the Parts of Water being in a less violent
Agitation than our Sensory: And that the Lower Region is sensibly cold, is not
only consonant to Reason, but also confirmed by the Observation of those, who
have dived a considerable Depth, not only in the Northern Seas, in Africa and
America; but it is also further evinced, by what is commonly practiced at Sea,
viz. to let down Bottles of Wine into the Sea all Night; which, by being
immersed in the Water, will acquire a considerable Degree of Coldness. And I am
also informed by an Observing Traveller, that having let down about 400 Fathom
of Line, with about 30 pound of Lead at it, thirty five Degrees North Latitude
beyond the Line; the Lead, when drawn up, was as cold as Ice.

From which Instances it appears, that the Air and Water so far agree, that the
Parts of them being put into Motion, by External Causes, they acquired each a
considerable Degree of Warmth; but, being removed and separate from those
Causes, put on a contrary Quality; so that the Air and Water seem chiefly in
this respect to differ, viz. in their inverted Order.

But further: From what has been delivered, it appears, That though the
Submarine Regions be sensibly colder, the nearer the Bottom; yet their coldest
Region does not, by any of the aforementioned Phenomenon, appear to be the
Summum Frigidum; for though I have several times frozen Saltwater, yet it does
not appear, that there is the least Ice generated in the Bottom of the Sea;
since from the Bottom of the great Ocean 35 Degrees South Latitude, Gray Sand
has been brought up, where the Water was no less than two hundred and twenty
Fathom deep: But yet there is one Caution to be added, which makes this
Observation the less to be relied on; which is, That one Reason why no Ice is
to be found in the Bottom of the Sea, may be the Unaptitude of Salt Water, more
than of Fresh, to be congealed; it requiring a much greater degree of Cold to
freeze Salt Water, than Fresh.

CHAP. V. Relations about the Bottom of the Sea.
The Bottom of the Sea very Rough and Unequal.
THAT the Bottom of the Sea is usually Salt and Cold, is a very common
Observation; but being desirous to be more nicely informed, about what occurs
in that Region; I have been told by several, who have in long Voyages, fathomed
in several places, that the Bottom of the Sea is rough, with considerable
Inequalities, and Precipices; so that in a small Space a little Depth of the
Sea has increased to a hundred Fathom, and decreased as suddenly: There being
likewise found several other Inequalities and Hills, observed in Places about
30 or 20 Fathom deep; where a Line of 16 Fathom, would upon the next Cast
require 35 or 40 to reach to the Bottom of the Sea; and the like Observations I
have received from several Experienced Mariners: Amongst which, I transcribed
the following Account, from some Notes left in England, by one who had made a
Voyage to the East Indies: The Account was this.

February 12. After our Observation, seeing the Ground under us, we heaved the
Lead, and had but 19 Fathom Rocky Ground, then haled by N.N. E. the Wind at
N.W. and found our Water to shoal from 19 to 10 and 8 Fathom, hard Coral
Ground; then suddenly deepned again from 8 to 20 and 22 Fathom Sandy Ground;
and then suddenly saw Rocks under us, where we had but 7 Fathom, and the next
Cast 14 Fathom again; and so having run N. N. E. from 6 in the Morning, till 12
at Noon, about 19 Mileswe deepned our Water from 16 to 25, and the next Cast no
Ground with 35 Fathom of Line.

The Gravitation of the Water.
But besides the Inequalities to be taken Notice of at the Bottom of the Sea,
there are several other Things to be observed; amongst which the Gravitation of
the Water, is remarkable; and though it be disputed amongst Philosophers, whether
there be such Gravitation or not; yet that there is, appears from several
Experiments.

And First, If a Glass-Cylinder, with one End open, be immerg'd in a
Glass-Vessel, it may be observed, That as the Cylinder is pressed lower, the
Air by the Pressure of the Water, will be squeezed higher and higher, the water
rising gradually below it in the Cylinder. And the like has been observed by
several Persons, who have dived in a Diving-Bell, not only in the Northern Sea,
but upon the Coast of Africa; where as the Bell went deeper and deeper, the Air
became more compressed, and the Water accordingly rose higher and higher in the
Bell. And sometimes the Pressure has been observed to be so powerful, that I
have been informed by one who let down a Glass-Vial into the Sea, near the
Straight's Mouth, that, having let it sink about 40 Fathom, it was burst in
pieces, by the outward Pressure of the Water; to which he added, That, having
let down an Aeolipile of Metal, and sunk it about 60 Fathom, he observed when
it was drawn up, that the sides were in several places bruised and compressed
by the violent Pressure of the Water.

The Bottom of the Sea not disturbed in Storms
Another thing observable in the Bottom of the Sea, is, That though the Violence
of Storms may disturb it, where it is shallow; yet where it is considerably
deep, the nearer the Bottom, the more calm and undisturbed it is. And this has
been confirmed by the Observations of Diverse, who have taken Notice, That though
the Waves were six or seven foot high, yet, at fifteen Fathom deep, the Water
was very little disturbed, only the Mud was raised, which made the Water dark;
and what is very remarkable, is, that the Person that dived informed me, that
having stayed a considerable depth for some time, he found, when he came up
again, a Tempestuous Storm, which had risen when he was in the Water, without
being taken Notice of by him below. And the like has been observed, near the
shore of Manar, in the East Indies, where they dive for Coral, in a Sea, that
lies betwixt the Island of Ceylon, and the Cape of Comori, which is usually
very much disturbed; inasmuch as it lies near the Indian Ocean, and the Gulf of
Bengala, formerly called Sinus Gangeticus. And it has elsewhere been observed,
That, in considerable Storms, the Seas have not been disturbed over the Depth
of 4 Fathom.

The Water at the Bottom of the Sea almost stagnates.
And to these Observations I might add, had I sufficient Evidence to build upon,
That, having inquired, whether upon Ebbing and Flowing of Tides, the Motion of
the Water was continued to the Bottom; I have been told by some, that it does
almost stagnate, and by others, that the Current of the Water above, is
different from the Tendency of that below. But not to rely upon these
Relations, I have been informed, by a Person who made his Observations beyond
the Cape of Good Hope, in the Southern Sea, that, having let down his Plummet,
about an hundred Fathom, he found, that the Plummet being suspended in the
standing Water, made the Boat turn to the Tide, as if it lay at Anchor. And
that there is such a Stagnation of Water at the Bottom of the Sea, has been
likewise confirmed to me, by Observations made near the Coral Fishery, in the
East Indies.

CHAP. VI. Further Relations about the Bottom of the Sea.
THAT the Air, is not only necessary to the Preservation of Animals, but also
promotes Vegetation, and the Growth of Plants, I have elsewhere observed; but
since several Trees and Plants are observed to grow under Water, I shall
further observe what Informations I have received concerning them.

Observations relating to Coral.
And First, To what has elsewhere been delivered concerning the Growth of Coral
under Water, I shall add, That I am informed by one, that saw it near Algiers,
that Coral, when first taken up, is not only soft and flexible, but very pale;
yet when the Bark is taken off, and it is exposed to the Air, it is Natural
Redness presently appears: To which he added, That having broke several Pieces,
he found it much paler within than on the outside; and that there were several
black Knobs on the extreme Parts of the Twigs; the place from whence this Coral
was taken, being about nine or ten Fathom deep. And I have been further
informed by one that sailed to the East Indies, that upon a certain sort of
Coral he has observed, certain round Berries of a very pleasant Color.

Trees under Water.
To these Relations I shall add, That Diverse have not only observed Trees to
grow under Water, near Manar, which bore Leaves like those of a Laurel, but
that not far from the Coast of Mosambique, in Africa, several Trees are
observed to grow under Water, whose Fruit and Leaves are like those of the Tree
in America, which bears a Fruit called Acayu.

But an Observation more Valuable, is concerning the Maldavian Nut, called
Coco, which by experienced Diverse, are found to be the Fruit of a Tree, which
grows at the Bottom of the Sea, which are either gathered by the Diverse, or
torn off by the violent Agitation of the Water: In which Fruit it was observed,
that, whilst it was under Water, it was very soft; but when it had been exposed
a considerable time to the Air, it became very hard.

CHAP. VII. Observations and Experiments about the Saltness of the SEA.
The Invalidity of the Cause assigned by the Peripateticks.
THE Saltness of the Sea, by several Peripateticks, has been judged to proceed
from the Influence of the Beams of the Sun upon the Water; but with what little
reason may easily appear from those standing Lakes and Ponds, whose Water,
notwithstanding the Influence of the Sun, continues fresh: And that it neither
proceeds from the Influence of the Sun, nor any other external Heat may be
argued, since though some fresh Water be drawn off by Distillation, and
consequently undergoes as great a Degree of Heat, as it can be supposed to do
from the Sun Beams, it yields not so much Salt as is to be found in some Water,
never exposed to such Heat; which Salt differs very little from Sea Salt, only
that it is whiter, being more clear of it is faeces, and free from a Mixture of
earthy Parts.

And though some alledg in favor of Aristotle's Doctrine, That Scaliger affirms
the Sea Water to be saltest in it is upper Region; yet it will appear, by
comparing the Saltness of the superficial Parts of the Sea with the bottom,
that the Observation was ill made, and does not generally hold; neither will it
favor his Doctrine, should it be alleged, that Sea Salt dissolved in Water,
otherwise than common Salt christalizes at the Top of the evaporated Solution;
for considering how much Salt Water must be impregnated with; and that the
Quantity of Salt in Sea Water has been observed by a Dutch Geographer to be
only as One to Forty; The proportion of Salt to Water.
it is Disposition to crystalize can be no Argument of the swimming of Sea Salt
more on the top of the Water than the other Region.

But though I differ in this Point from the Peripatetick Philosophers; yet I do
not believe, on the contrary, with some, that the Gravity of Salt makes them
sink the more to the bottom; since the intestin Agitation of the Parts of the
Water continually shifting Places must consequently carry it along with them;
which Consideration joined with another, which is, that I have not usually
observed, Metalline Tinctures stronger at the top than bottom, might perhaps
give a suspicion to some, that the present Argument is less cogent,
notwithstanding the specific Gravity, betwixt Metals and their Menstruums does
much exceed that betwixt Salt and Water.

But further in behalf of the Peripatetick Doctrine, it is urged out of
Linscotten, that, at Goa in Portugal, it is usual for their Slaves to dive, and
fetch fresh Water from the bottom of the Sea; but though this Matter of Fact were
true, yet no general Rules could be drawn thence; because Experience tells us,
that in other Places it is contrary. Besides it might be probably guessed,
that, Springs in the Bottom of the Sea.
were it true, that fresh Water might rise by certain Springs covered over with
Sea Water, as well as that several Springs in other Places should be under
Water upon the flowing of the Sea: And that there may be such Springs is so far
probable, that the curious Hungarian Governor de admirandis Hungariae Aquis,
says, That in the River Vagus, near the Fortress Galgotium, Veins of hot Water
rise up in the very bottom of the Water; his Words are these, Neque in Ripa
tantum eruuntur calidae, sed etiam intra amnem, si fundum ejus pedibus
suffodias; calent autem immodice, etc. And the like has been observed upon the
Neapolitan Coast.

But not to urge these Relations, I shall intimate briefly, That an ingenious
Acquaintance of mine, who lives in that City, has informed me, that that fresh
Water is not fetched so deep as to be suspected to rise from such Springs; but
that it is rather the fresh Water which runs into the Sea from a River not far
off, before it is mixed with the Salt Water; which Conjecture I the rather
believe, because near Mouths of Rivers it has elsewhere been observed, that
fresh Water has for some time floated together, without being perfectly mixed
with the other Stream.

And as for Scaliger's Opinion, it might be urged against it, that by a Vessel
so artificially contrived, that it might be opened at the bottom of the Sea to
take in Water, the Water drawn up has been found to be Salt. But since it may
be urged against this, that the Salt Water being heavier than the fresh, as it
was drawing up might be mixed with it, by pressing into the Vessel; I shall add
Instances not liable to such Objections; for it has been observed, not only at
the Cape of Comori, but elsewhere, by Diverse, that the Water is as Salt at the
bottom as at the top; and I am informed, that Diverse have not only under the
Torrid Zone observed the Water exceeding Salt, but have brought several Lumps
of Salt from the bottom with the Sea: And the like Saltness of the bottom of
the Sea has been discovered near the Straights of Gibralter's Mouth: And
further, that I might not only be sure, that the Sea was thus Salt at the
bottom, I procured two Quarts of Sea Water, the one taken up at the bottom of
the Sea and another at the top; in which, though there was some Difference in
Color; yet being Hydrostatically tried, there was no sensible difference in
the specific Gravity of them.

But to make out what I have before intimated, viz. That the Freshness of the
Water in the bottom of the Sea near Goa might be produced by the Rise of some
Springs under Water; though it may be objected, that the specific Gravity of
the Salt Water, would in some measure obstruct the Rising of fresh Water: Yet
this Objection will easily be answered, if we consider, that according to what
we have delivered in our Hydrostatical Paradoxes, and also what Stevinus has
observed, let the Quantity of Water be never so great, no more can resist the
Rising of such Springs, but that Pillar of Water which lies over them in a
perpendicular Line; and if the Spring takes it is Rise from some high Place, so
that the Weight of that Water which lies in the Vein, be heavier than the
perpendicular Pillar of Sea Water, the Rising of it can by no means be hindered
by the Pressure of that incumbent Water.

But to explain and confirm this Paradox, I shall add, that having procured a
long Glass Siphon, part of it being inverted so as to form a short Leg, I
filled it with Claret, stopping the Orifice of the longer Leg with my Thumb,
which Siphon, being immersed in Salt Water contained in a Glass Vessel, and the
Orifice of the longer Leg being opened, the Claret, notwithstanding the
Pressure of the Salt Water, presently rose up in it in the Form of Clouds,
which lasted till the Liquor in the Pipe was brought to a just Aequilibrium
with the incumbent Pillar of Salt Water.

The Reason of the Saltness of the Sea.
But to pass on to the Cause of the Saltness of Sea Water, I deny not what
Gassendus and other Moderns teach; but grant, that the Saltness proceeds from a
Solution of Salt in the Water; yet I am apt to suspect, that that Saltness is
not only supplied by those Salt Rocks, which may be contiguous to, or near the
Water; but that the Sea is in a great Measure supplied, by Salt washed away and
carried into it, by Springs and Rainwater, which float into the Ocean. And I
am the more confirmed in this Suspicion, because several Chemists have not only
found Salt in some Waters; but have obtained a good Quantity of common Salt
upon refining of Saltpeter, which according to Sir Francis Bacon, is in most
Soils, which are not spent in Vegetation, or washed and consumed by the Sun and
Rain.

But not to insist too long on these things, it is not only probable, That the
Salts in the Earth, may, by this Means, contribute to the Saltness of the Sea;
but that, from what has been before delivered, such Salts may be communicated
to it by latent Springs, not to be taken notice of or discerned by us. And
further, That such Salt as abounds in the Earth, may supply the Sea with most
of the Salt which is perceived to be in it; we are to render it further
probable, to consider, That the Sea Salt, and that, are agreeable in the main,
with each other; since they have almost the same Shape and Taste, etc. the
former of which will appear by Evaporation and Crystalizing them; and as for
some small Difference to be perceived betwixt them, that may easily arise from
those Bituminous and other, as well as Nitrous Bodies, which flow into the Sea,
and which may be mixed with them, both by the internal Agitation of the Parts
of the Water, as well as the outward Action of the Sun and Air.

And that there is such Salt dissolved in Seawater, might be probable, if it
were possible so to raise the fresh Water it was dissolved in, by Distillation,
as to leave the Saline Parts behind; but not now to mention, that not only I,
but the Judicious Sir John Haukins, in his Voyage to the East Indies, have, by
distilling of Salt Water, obtained from it a wholesome fresh Water; I shall,
without making a long Digression, proceed to answer an Objection, which is
urged against what I have delivered, viz. That if the Springs acquired such a
Saltness by running through the Earth, it would be discernible before they
emptied themselves into the Ocean. To this I shall answer, That besides those
fresh Springs which are visible to us, there may be several others which lie
too deep for us to take Notice of: But here it may be requisite to take Notice,
That I do not say, That the Saltness of the Sea wholly depends on such
Supplies; but that they contribute to the Saltness of it.

The Bitterness of Sea Water, whence.
Having said so much of the Saltness of the Sea and its Causes; it may be now
seasonable to observe, from whence proceeds that Bitterness remarkable in some,
if not most Seawater; which, we conceive, may proceed, partly from the
external Power of some Catholic Agent, and partly, from those Bituminous
Bodies which are carried along with Spring Water into the Sea, which has been
visibly apparent in the Island Barbados, where that which they call Barbados
Tarr, has been seen to flow from the Rock into the Sea; and to these Causes
may concur some Subterraneal Exhalations and Effluvia, which I have elsewhere
taken notice of to flow from and pervade the Earth. And as for those different
Tastes which are perceived in the Sea at several Places, it is no less
probable, that they proceed from other adventitious Bodies mixed and
incorporated with the Seawater; for that the Sea Salt which is dissolved in
it, is not a simple Salt, but a compound, I have been induced to believe by a
Salt which I obtained from it.

And that some Catholic Agents may work Changes in the Saltness of the Sea,
which it would not otherwise have, by a bare Solution of those adventitious
Bodies that are mixed in it, I have Reason to believe, since I have found, That
by keeping the Parts of Seawater in Agitation, by a continued digestive Heat,
it has considerably differed in Taste, from a bare Solution of Sea Salt in
Water. And for a further Confirmation, That the Saltness of the Sea is varied
in several Places, I shall barely intimate those several Colors, different
Qualities, and stupendous Multitudes of adventitious Corpuscles which are
mixed with it.

Agitation requisite to preserve Sea Water from stinking.
But to proceed, amongst the various Observations to be made about Seawater, it
is worth our Notice, That if it be kept from Agitation, it will in a short time
stink; which I have not only observed, by keeping some of it in a Runlet for
some time; but also, I am informed by one, who, in a Voyage, was for some days
becalmed, that the Sea, for want of Agitation, stunk so much in twelve or
fourteen days, that the Smell was almost intolerable; which continued till the
Winds put the Water into Agitation. Which agrees with what Sir John Hawkins
has observed, who relates the following Story: Were it not for the Moving of
the Sea, by the Force of Winds, Tides and Currents, it would corrupt all the
World. The Experience of which I saw Anno 1590, lying with a Fleet about the
Islands of Azores, almost Six Months, the greatest Part of the time we were
becalmed, with which all the Sea became so replenished with several sorts of
Gellies, and Forms of Serpents, Adders and Snakes, as seemed Wonderful; some
green, some black, some yellow, some white, some of diverse Colors, and many of
them had Life, and some there were a Yard and a half, and some two Yards long;
which had I not seen, I could hardly have believed; and hereof are Witnesses
all the Company of the Ships, which were then present, so that hardly a Man
could draw a Bucket of Water clear of some Corruption. In which Voyage toward
the End thereof, many of every Ship fell sick of this Disease, and died apace,
but that the speedy Passage into our own Country was a Remedy to the Crazed,
and a Preservative for those that were not touched.

The Saltness of the Sea differs.
As for the different Degrees of the Saltness of the Sea, I shall deliver what I
have been informed of, as briefly as I can. And First, It has been observed,
by one to whom I gave a Glass conveniently shaped to try the specific Gravity
of the Water, that it grew heavier and heavier as he came nearer the Line, till
within about thirty Degrees Latitude; from whence to Jamaica he observed no
Alteration in the specific Gravity in the least. And in Confirmation of this I
am likewise informed, by one, who for his own Satisfaction weighed the Water,
both under the Aequinoctial and at Cape of good Hope, and found that the Weight
of both was the same. To which may be added that it is commonly observed at
Mosambique, one of the hottest Places in the World, that the Sea is so salt
there, that it bears up the Ships a considerable Height out of the Water, more
than in other Places; and that the Water may be much salter in one Place than
another, by having more Salt dissolved in it, does not only appear from what
has been said, but also from what is frequently observed in the different
Strength of Brine-Pits.

But to pass from what I have learnt by Information, to what I have observed my
self concerning the Proportion of Salt to the Water it was dissolved in, which
I have observed in Seawater, betwixt England and France.

The Proportion of Salt in Seawater.
The first Experiment I made to discover the Quantity of Salt was this, that
having, in a Viol, weighed an equal Proportion of Seawater taken up at the
Surface of the Sea, with common Water, the Weight of the former exceeded the
latter of forty fifth Part; but these Liquors being more Hydrostatically tried,
by weighing Sulphur in them, that which in the Seawater weighed ss + 10 gr. in
Seawater, fetched from the bottom, balanced the same Weight; but being
weighed in common Water, it weighed ss + 15 gr. so that the Seawater was a
Fifty third Part heavier than the fresh; the Difference in which way of trying
it, from what was observed in the former Trial, I could attribute to nothing,
but some grosser Saline Parts mixed with the common Water, or some evaporated
Parts of the Seawater.

Another way we made use of to try the different specific Gravity of these
Liquors, was, by Distillation ad Siccitatem in a digestive Furnace, in which a
Pound Averdupoise Weight yielded ss 10 gr. of Salt; so that the Proportion of
the Salt to the Water was as 30 and 12/100 to one, being near the Thirtieth
Part.

But suspecting that the Quantity of this Salt was much increased by imbibing
Moisture from the Air, I caused it to be dried in a Crucible, and found it
weighed iij + ss, which is about a Thirty sixth Part.

How so much a greater Quantity of Salt should be obtained by Distillation, is
difficult to conjecture; yet I am apt to think, that it might proceed from some
Parts of the Water detained from flying away, by being enclosed amongst the
cubical Salts; and this I am apter to believe, First, Because I have elsewhere
prepared a Salt, which would coagulate and embody it self with Water; and
Secondly, Because I am told, That a Sort of Salt is brought from the Coast of
Spain, which being here purified and dissolved, will yield a double Quantity.

The Seawater salter sometimes than at others.
Whether the Seawater may at some times be more impregnated with Saline Parts
than at others, I conceive probable, if we consider the Supplies that it
receives both from the Earth, which are carried to it along with Springs, and
also, the sudden Additions it may receive from Subterraneal Exhalations; but
these Observations being very nice, it most commonly requires other Measures
than what Hydrostaticks afford; for it may be observed, That several volatile
Salts which are of no considerable Weight above common Water, may be mixed with
it without being perceived; so that one may easily be deceived in judging of
the Saltness of the Sea altogether by Hydrostaticks; because, that which
violently affects the Taste, may have but a small Influence in the Balance: To
confirm which I shall add, That a Bubble of Glass, having Metal in it, weighed
iij 51 gr. in Spirit of Sal Armoniack, and but iij 45 in common Water. But
further, I weighed in the same Liquor an equal Proportion of Sea Salt brought
from the torrid Zone and Sal Armoniack, and found, that the Bulk of the former
was, to an equal Proportion of that Liquor, as two and a quarter to one,
whereas the Sal Armoniack was not above a hundredth Part, above one, and 7/10
to one, which is the more strange, because Part of the Composition of Sal
Armoniack is Sea Salt.

But that I might be satisfied what was the greatest Degree of Saltness, that
Water would be impregnated with; I shook a Lump of Salt in Water, till it would
dissolve no more; and found that a Brine might be made so strong, that the Salt
would be dissolved in five times its weight of Water.

To conclude this Discourse, I shall add one thing which has not been taken
notice of by Hydrostaticians; which is, the weight of the Sea Salt to its Bulk
of Water, which I have found to be almost as two to one; and I likewise found,
that a piece of Sal Gemm, which is more pure and weighty than Sea Salt was to
its Bulk of Water about as 2 2/8 to 1.

CHAP. VIII. Memoirs for the Natural History of Mineral Waters.
THE Use of Mineral Waters are so Universal, and the Methods which some
Physicians take to try them so slight; that, though I am satisfied it is
difficult, without Experience to Ascribe Virtues to them a priori, by Reason of
the Great Variety of Minerals, which may impregnate them with Particles of
various and very different Natures; I cannot but think, but that if we were
furnished with a sufficient Number of Quaeres, and several Methods in order to
a Discovery of them, more nice Trials might much Contribute to the clearing up
of a Natural History of Mineral Waters; since by a competent number of
Experiments it might be hoped, that the Nature of those Metalline Salts, with
which Mineral Waters are Impregnated, might be discovered.

Wherefore I have laid down such sorts of Experiments, that might be most
easily tried, viz. chiefly Chimical Ones, which may be made at home, without
the Inconveniences of attending those Mineral Fountains from whence they
spring.

And because my Design is rather to improve Physic by the following
Observations, than to entertain Speculative Naturalists; I have chiefly made it
my Business in the following Papers, to consider those Waters called Acidulae,
rather than the other termed Thermae, because the former are of more general
Use.

The danger of an ill use of Mineral Waters.
But perhaps some may think that the Quares hereafter propounded may be too
troublesome, and more than requisite; since the Use of Mineneral Waters are
thought so innocent, as to be of no ill Consequence if Unsuccesful. To which it
may be answered, that though when skilfully given, they do a great deal of good;
yet they are as prejudicial if unskilfully prescribed; and therefore, since
there cannot be too much Caution, we cannot be too inquisitive to inform our
selves of their Virtues; for there may be a great many hidden Qualities in
them, and they may be impregnated with several Metalline Properties, which may
not be discovered to the Eye or by common Trials.

Besides, were such Experiments industriously prosecuted, they might help to
discover several other Qualities in Mineral Waters, which are as yet unknown;
for from the following Experiments it is evident, that the Earth, which abounds
with Minerals of a Martial Nature, may be more apt to impregnate subterraneal
Waters than we can otherwise imagine; for upon pouring of a Tincture of Galls
filtrated through Cap-paper upon filings of Steel, The Effects of filings of
Steel, in a Tincture of Galls.
the Liquor in half an hour became Opacous, and almost as black as Ink: The
like Phenomenon to which were exhibited by Steel in an Infusion of Brasil or
Log-wood made in common Water. To which we may add, that several Waters have
been discovered under ground of very different Tastes; some of which have been
found to be corrosive, and others as harmless, being endowed with several
Medicinal and Useful Qualities; and I am informed more particularly of one,
which is a Mine of Coral in Devonshire about 360 foot deep, in which was found
a Water very thick and red, yet cool and Diuretic, and not in the least
nauseous to the Taste.

CHAP. IX. Titles proposed for the Natural History of Mineral Waters,
considered whilst in their proper Channel.
Quaeries in order to a discovery of the Virtues of Mineral Waters.
IN order to a natural History of Mineral Waters, they ought to be consider's in
three different Capacities: First, as they are found in their natural
Receptacles; Secondly, when drawn up for use; and thirdly, with Respect to
their Effects on Human Bodies. To the first of which Heads the following
Quaeres may be referred.

1. Within the Precinct of what Climate or Parallel, and in what degree of
Latitude the Mineral Waters are to be found? 2. To what point these Waters lie
open most in their Receptacles? 3. Whether the Ground in which they are found
be a Plain, or how much it differs from a Plain? 4. If the Ground be upon an
Ascent, how far they are from the botttom of that Ascent? 5. Whether a
Recrementitious Substance adheres to Stones long contiguous to these Waters? 6.
Whether subterraneal Fires be near such Waters, and what Phenomenon such
exhibit? 7. Whether Brimstone or Sal-Armoniack, etc. be found about the Vents
of such subterraneal Fires? 8. Whether instead of subterraneal Fires, there are
other adjacent Aestuaries? and whether such be constant or intermitting? and if
so, whether periodical or irregular? 9. Whether Mineral Fumes of particular
colors or smells arise from such Aestuaries? 10. Of what Temper the
neighboring as well as the Soil they pass through is of? 11. Whether and of
what Nature those Minerals are of which they pass through? 12. Whether the
Mineral Waters be originally fresh, and derive their Virtues from the Soil they
afterward pass through? 13. Whether if it acquired its Virtues so, there were
upon the Impregnation any Effervescence? or whether any such Effect succeeded
its Mixture with another Liquor? 14. Whether there be a Spring of a contrary
Nature near it, viz. as to Heat and Cold, as it is observed in France. 15.
Whether an oily or bituminous inflammable Substance float in it? 16. Whether
the Seasons of the Year, or Temperature of the Weather alters them? and what
Qualities they lose or acquire by such? For after Rain I have observed such
Waters incapable of turning a Tincture of Galls black: But as to its Medicinal
Virtues, I have found that Rain after long Droughts, has rather increased than
diminished their Strength, by dissolving and diluting those Salts, which were
fixed in the Earth for want of a Vehicle; but if the Waters be weak, and the
Rain much, those Salts being the more diluted, render the Waters less
Effectual. 17. Whether the Qualities of the Waters may be Chymically and
Mechanically discovered? as also of what Color and Weight, and with what
Menstruums their Salts may be mixed? and likewise what Substances they will
yield when exposed to different Degrees of Fire, and what other Chimical Trials
those as well as the Caput Mortuum may undergo?
CHAP. X. Containing Titles for the Natural History of Mineral Waters when
drawn out of their Receptacles.
A Continuation of Qeaeries.
1. WHether the Mineral Water proposed be actually Hot or Cold? From whence we
may judge from what Depth those Waters rose? and whether they were impregnated
with a Saltpeter or Sal-Armoniack in their Ascent? And the several Degrees of
Heat or Cold may be either tried by immerging a Thermoscope, or by trying
whether they will Coagulate Oil of Aniseeds or melt Butter?

2. Of the specific Gravity; which, being compared with that of common Water,
will show what Quantity of Mineral Substance the Water has dissolved in it;
and whether Metalline or more Volatile, as it is heavier or lighter; where we
are to observe, that Mineral Waters are sometimes lighter than common Water;
partly, because they are impregnated with Volatile Parts; and partly, because
they are void of Saline Parts, which makes common Water something heavier. But
to discover the different Weight of several Mineral Waters, I caused a
Glass-Viol with a flat Bottom and a long Neck, three Inches long, to be blown,
which was so light, as to weigh but vi + 42 Grains; though it was capable of
containing iij ss and 43 Grains of Water; which made it more proper for a Nice
Balance, by which I found the following Mineral Waters to differ thus in
Weight.

Waters Ounces Drachms Grains Common 3 4 43 Common distilled 3 4 41 Acton 3 4
48 Epsom 3 4 51 Dulwich 3 4 54 Staton 3 4 55 Barnet 3 4 52 North-Hall 3 4 50
German-Spaw 3 4 40 Tunbridge 3 4 38 Islington, from the Musick-House. 3 4 36
Islington, from the Vault with Steps. 3 4 39 Islington, from the Cellar. 3 4 39

3. Of their different Degrees of Transparency or Opacity.

4. Whether without being exposed to the Air, it will afford a Pracipitate. By
which Observation the different Soils through which they pass, will not only be
discovered, but hence we may learn to distinguish such from the true Caput
Mortuum of the Water. German Spaw Water yielded a good Quantity of yellowish
Oker. N. B. the Water so tried must not be exposed to the Air, for if it be the
Air will precipitate a considerable Quantity of Matter in most Waters.

5. What Microscopes can discover in Mineral Waters?

N. B. those moving Corpuscles discernible in a Solution of Pepper, etc. in
Water, are Animalcula, and not Portions of Inanimate Matter, which swim up and
down such Liquors; which is apparent if those little Animals be touched with
Spirit of Salt, for being killed by it, they move much more slowly.

6. Whether there be any variety of Colors in several Mineral Waters?

7. Of their different Odours. These are to be perceived at the Spring-Heads,
where not only a Bituminous and Sulphurious Smell may easily be perceived; but
I am informed, that there is a Mineral Spring in France which has a manifest
vinous Odor.

8. Concerning the different Tastes of Mineral Waters.

9. Whether taking it up, or keeping it stopped or unstop'd? or whether freezing
or thawing it will alter the Color, Smell or Transparency of it?

For though some Waters retain their Purgative Virtue a good while; yet, I have
observed an Exhalation of some fugitive Parts from those which are lighter than
Water, and abound with Spirituous Parts; so that, though they were carried but a
little way from the Fountain, they presently lost their Power of turning a
Tincture of Galls into a Purple, and instead of that, turned it red; and even
the Strongest Waters, if kept unstopp'd, or not kept close, presently lose that
Property.

10. Concerning the different Consistency of such Waters.

11. Whether they be more apt to Expansion and Condensation, or Heat and
Coldness, than Common Water?

12. Whether they are apt to Putrify, and how soon, and what Phenomenon they
afford?

13. What Alteration in Colors ensues the Mixture of Astringent Juices with
them, as also their Mixture with several Juices of the Body.

N. B. in trying of Mineral Waters, it is usual to make use of a Tincture of
Galls, without considering the Alterations which may be made in the Trial, by
an Uncertain Proportion of Galls: Wherefore I usually make use of a settled
Proportion, as 5 Grains to an Ounce; though Mineral Waters may be tried with much
more Expedition, and Certainty, by making use of the Powder it self, suspending
about three Grains of Powder in an Ounce of the Waters; and I have found by
Experience, that so small a Quantity as a Grain, has given German Spaw-Water a
deep Purple Color. But it is not always necessary to make use of Galls in such
Trials, since Rose Leaves, or the Flowers and Bark of Pomgranates, will have
much the same Effect, affording a Cloudy and Blackish Tincture.

And it is further to be noted, That I made it one Part of this Quaere, what
Colors would be produced by a Mixture of Mineral Waters with Animal Juices;
because I have observed the Root of the Tongue sometimes Blackish upon the
taking of Large Doses.

But to return to what I have observed concerning the trying of Mineral Waters,
by an Infusion of Galls; I not only doubt whether all Martial Waters will turn
a Tincture of Galls black, but whether all liquors which will, are to be
esteemed Martial; for I have found that a Mineral of a Different Nature from
Steel, would give it a Black Color; and that a Liquor, which was a Preparation
of Steel, would not; which induced me to think, that such a Tincture was rather
the Effect of some Acid Fumes, which had worked on the Mars, with which those
Mineral Waters are Impregnated.

To which it may be added, That I have found, that if a Vitriolate Water be
impregnated with Copper, instead of Iron, instead of turning a Tincture of
Galls Blackish, it only would render it Muddy and Thick. And I had a sort of
white Earth, which I found by Trials to be Lead, that would turn a Tincture of
Galls Blackish, though it was altoger void of Martial Parts, and probably would
have very bad Effects, if taken inwardly. To which I might further add, That a
Tincture of Gold in Aqua fortis, likewise turned an Infusion of Galls Black.

And those Observations I have been the willinger to lay down, because, though I
would not be thought by them to slight the Use of Galls, in such Trials, yet I
would thence urge them to make such Trials to be more warily made.

Observations requisite in Trying Mineral Waters.
And because it may be of some Use to observe the different Colors exhibited by
such Trials, I shall add, the following Considerations, as Requisite to be
thought on by him, who designs to make such Experiments.

1. That he ought to observe the Changes of Colors, made by such Tinctures, in
a good Light; which may help a Curious Observer to distinguish what Minerals
such Tinctures are impregnated with. 2. It way be of Use to vary the Shades of
Colors, produced by Mineral Waters, either by dropping such Waters upon Paper,
whose Pores are saturated with Vitriol powdered, or tinged with a Decoction of
Log-wood: Several Variations in Colors may be also made, by dropping other
Medicinal Liquors, either into the Mineral Waters; or the Infusion of Galls,
before Mixture, or after. 3. I would recommend, for such Trials, not only the
Parts of Astringent Plants, but also Animal, and especially Mineral Substances:
For, besides the Astringents, I have contrived a certain Substance, which would
not only turn a Vitriol Water impregnated with Iron black; but also One
saturated with Copper; a Succedaneum, to which may be made, by adding to
Sulphur as it melts over the Fire, and equal Proportion of Salt of Tartar
finely powdered, stirring them till they incorporate, and become red: Which
Mixture, being put into a Glass Retort, with half it is weight of Sal-Armoniack,
dissolved in Water; let it be distilled in Sand, shifting the Receivers as the
Liquor drawn off, is tinged more or less; so that the strongest may be
preserved by it self.

And such Trials as these will be of more use, than those usually made with a
bare Tincture of Galls; since there are several Mineral Substances and other
Bodies, which Mineral Waters may be impregnated with, which discover not
themselves in an Infusion of Galls: As Sulphur or Copper, may be so locked up
in these Waters, as not to be perceived, till the Body of the Liquor is opened
by some proper Additament. And even Arsenick it self, may be so disguised, as
not to be perceived, when mixed with the Waters; yet if Spirit of Urine, or Oil
of Tartar; per Deliquium, be dropped into a Solution of it, it presently
precipitates in the Form of a white Powder; and so likewise, if a Solution of
Sublimate be added to it. Whether Mineral Waters have Arsenick dissolved in them
But to discover, whether Mineral Waters be impregnated with Arsenick or not, I
put Dantzick, or English Vitriol into a Solution of it, either of which caused
a dark precipitate gradually to subside.

14. Whether Spirituous Acids, volatile Alkalys, or Lixivial Salts will
precipitate such Waters?

15. The Manner of Extracting Salts from such Waters, and what Quantities may
be extracted? Guesses may be made concerning the Saltness of these Waters, by
trying whether they will Lather with Soap? and if not, what Quantity of Curdled
Matter they will yield? I have observed that even the lightest Waters will
yield a small Quantity of common Salt.

16. How to discover what Acidity is to be found without Evaporation. Having
taken a peculiar Method to try the Acidity of Mineral Waters, by mixing them
with an Infusion of Lignum Nephriticum in simple Water, I found, that though
German Spaw, yielded a small Quantity, yet in that of Action, there was none
discernible.

17. What may be observed by Distillation in Balnco?

18. What, and whether the same Quantity of Caput Mortuum, be afforded by
Evaporation, and Distillation?

19. Whether Mineral Waters will acquire the same Qualities and Texture, by a
Reunion of their Caput Mortuum, when distilled to such a Consistence, in
Glass-Vessels exactly luted, which they had before?

20. What Changes, if any, Mineral Waters undergo by being boiled in Water, in
a Glass Hermetically sealed? From whence might be learned whether a Change of
Qualities would succeed an Alteration of Texture, without a manifest loss of
Parts? And whether an Agitation of Parts, without the Influence of the Air,
would precipitate any thing, or deprive it of it is Power to turn a Tincture of
Galls Purple?

21. How much the Mineral Waters exceed their Caput Mortuum in Proportien?

22. What Parts are contained in the Caput Mortuum, and whether dissoluble in
Water?

23. How much the Saline and Terrestrial Parts differ in Proportion?

24. Whether in strong Fires, the Salts be Volatile or Fixed, and to what
Degree?

25. Whether the Salts will Crystallize per se, or with other Salts, and what is
the Figure of the Genuine, or Compounded Crystals?

26. Whether Acid or Alkaline Qualities are most predominant? The Acidity will
either appear to the Taste or Smell; or may be discovered by turning Syrup of
Violets red; as also, by making use of an Infusion of Lignum Nephriticum, which
upon a Mixture of Acids loses it is Blue Color: Their Acidity may likewise be
discovered by trying, whether they will be precipitated by Alkalys, or ferment
with them. And if Alkaly be predominant, it, on the contrary discovers it self
by a Lixivial Taste and Smell; and may be discovered, by turning Syrup of
Violets Green, or precipitating a Solution of Sublimate, or Fermenting with
Aqua fortis; or lastly, by increasing the Color of a Tincture of Brasil or
Log-wood in Common-water? And though we have no such Springs here in England, as
afford Alkaline Salts; yet without question, in Egypt such may be found, since
their Latron, or the Egyptian Nitre, abounds with a Salt of an Alkaline Nature:
and I have obtained such an Alkaly, from that Famous Water of Bourbon in
France, which would turn Syrup of Violets green, and ferment with Volatile
Acids. If such Waters abound with Vitriol, they will turn an Infusion of Galls
black, and Vomit those that drink them; and, if an Alkaly be added, will yield
a yellow Precipitate, upon dropping of Spirit of Urine, or Salt of Tartar into
them.

I have not found any of the Waters about London, to be impregnated with
Vitriol; and I am told, that in France the Mineral Waters are so far from being
impregnated with Vitriol, that there is (...) a Vitriolate Spring in that
Kingdom. As for the Nature of the Salt, which most Mineral Waters are
impregnated with, I think that it is not to be referred to any Glass, but is
either sui generis, and a peculiar one, or a Compound Salt, made up of such as
the Water is impregnated with, in it is Passage through the Earth; and that
Purgative Salts may, by a Change of Texture, be made of Salts not at all
Purgative, I the rather believe, because I have been told by an Ingenious
Emperick, That a Salt which I made of Salt of Tartar, and Common Sulphur mixed
together, had a gentle Purging Virtue.

27. In what Menstruums the Caput Mortuum may be dissolved? and in what it may
not? Whether Volatile or Fixed, and what Qualities it has in Respect of Color
or Smell?

What Proportion of Salt Mineral Waters afford.
It is to be admired, what a great deal of Caput Mortuum some Mineral Waters
yield in Comparison of others; since those Waters: which are purely Diuretic
have very little, if compared with the Caput Mortuum of Purging Waters: For
though a pound of Barnet Waters, yielded a Dram, yet the same weight of
Tunbridge afforded but a Grain. And,

It is not a little strange, that so small a Quantity of a Mineral should
impregnate so much Water, as I have, by Trial, found a Grain of Iron Stone did,
enabling it to Tincture an Infusion of Galls, deeper than Tunbridge or German
Spaw Water would. And I have tried, that half a Grain of Marchasite, dissolved
in Spirit of Nitre, communicated a Tincture to 61440 Parts of Water; though Part
of that Marchasite was Sulphur, and Part of it Caput Mortuum.

And here it may be seasonable to take notice, That if so small a Portion of a
Metalline Substance would, when grossly dissolved, impregnate so large a
Quantity of Water; how much more may it, when raised in the Form of a Subtle
Mineral Fume? and as in such a Form, it may impregnate a larger Quantity of
Water, so will it be more apt to fly away, when exposed to the Air. And that
Vitriol may probably rise in the Form of a Vapor, without losing it is
Qualities, is evident in Sublimate, which consists of Mercury, changed by an
Addition of Salt and Vitriol; for some Vitriolick Parts being carried up in the
Preparation, turn Opacous upon an Affusion of Spirit of Sulphur.

But further, to make it evident, that the Particles of Iron may be
considerably expanded, I dropped four Drops of a Vitriolick Liquor, made use of
in Copperas-works, into twelve Ounces and a half of Water, and found, that it
so much impregnated 1500 times it is Proportion of Common Waters, as to make it
strong enough to turn a Tincture of Galls Purple, though by Evaporation we found
that 3 Parts of 4 of that Liquor were Water.

28. What Alterations the Earthy Parts of Mineral Waters undergo by Ignition;
and whether they may be Vitrify'd per se? as also what Colors they impart to
Venice Glass, if mixed with the Powder before Fluxion?

29. Of what use they are in Baking, Brewing, Tanning, or Dying of Colors, etc.

30. How many ways they may be made Artificially, and with what Proportion of
Ingredients?

CHAP. XI. Titles for the Natural History of Mineral-Waters, considered as a
Medicine.
IT may be worth Observing, in order to a more Complete Natural History of
Mineral-Waters, what Constitutions they agree with, and in what Distempers they
are Proper or Dangerous: What Sensible Operations they have; and whether their
Effects be altered by Drinking them Hot or Cold; at the Well, or at a Distance
from it: Whether Exercise, or the Warmth of a Bed, promotes their Operation:
Whether they have any Occult Qualities.

It may likewise be requisite to observe; What good Effects may succeed a due
Preparation of the Body that drinks them, and what Advantage it may be to drop
some Strengthening Stomachick into the First Dose: What Quantity is enough for
the First Dose, and how it must be varied: How long they may be Drunk, and
whether constantly, or with Intervals; whether Purging sometimes may contribute
to their good Effects: What Regimen in the Six Non-Naturals is to be observed,
whilst they are a-taking: Which are the Signs that denote the kindly Operations
of them; or their future ill Effects. What ill Accidents attend the taking of
them, and how they may be Remedied, or Prevented. Whether it be proper to Purge
after the Taking of them.

What Effects they will have by Mixing other Liquors with them; or, by Boiling
Meat in them; Whether a Salt extracted will be of Equal Effect, when Diluted in
Fresh Water. What External Effects they will have, and of what use their
Sediment is when Externally applied: What Effects they will have on Dogs, if
injected into their Veins, or if they be kept with such for constant Drink.

CHAP. XII. Of the Natural and Preternatural States of Bodies; especially the
Air.
IT is the General Consent of most Men, that the Determinate States of Bodies
are not only first framed by what they call Nature; but that they are likewise
preserved in those States, by the Superintendency of that Power; and that
whenever they lose that State, they are said to be put into a Preternatural
One. But if we consider, that such Changes proceed from Natural Causes, and
that those New States depend on the like Catholic Agents, The Common
Distinction betwixt Natural and Preternatural States ill grounded
and the Established Laws of Nature; it will appear, That the Distinction Men
usually make betwixt the Natural and Preternatural.* States of Bodies, is but
ill-grounded; and that Preternatural, is only a Relative Term, intimating that
that Body has undergone a Change, either by the Operation of some unheeded or
more noted Agent. For Matter being altogether void of Sense and Perception, and
not affecting one State more than another, the Changes it undergoes, depend on
the Alteration of it is Textures, and New Position of it is Parts, altered
afresh, by that Agent, which such a Body was last exposed to. As a piece of
Wax, is put into a New Form, by the last Impression, made by another Body upon
it, without affecting one Form more than another it self.

Ice a Natural State in some Places.
And that the States of some Bodies, which are said to be Preternatural, as
truly depend on Natural Causes, and the Established Laws of Nature as others,
is evident in Ice and Water: In which Bodies, the Forms of each depend upon the
Effects of External Agents; for, though in these Hotter Climates Water is
Esteemed a Natural, and Ice a Preternatural State of that Substance; yet I am
informed, that in Siberia, a Province belonging to a Russian Emperor, Water is
froze most part of the Year; and at a small* Depth, from the Surface of the
Earth, the Soil is froze throughout; where Ice is looked upon to be the
Natural, and the Alterations made by a Thaw, and the Influence of the External
Temperature of the Air, and the Sun Beams, are esteemed Preternatural States of
Bodies. And further, though Butter in our Clime be sold in a consistent Form, and
when it is melted, is looked upon to be in a Preternatural State; yet I am
informed, that amongst the Europeans it is fluid, and is sold by Measure, and
not by Weight, as here in England. And it is further observed, That several
Substances, as Rosin of Jalap, Gum Lacca, and even Aloes it self, are
considerablely softened in their Consistence, by the Temperature of the Air,
and the Force of External Heat, whilst they pass under the Torrid Zone; so that
I am told, that the former of the aforementioned Drugs was melted into a sort
of Balsam, whilst it continued in Africa, but when it was brought to Spain, it
put on a Consistent Form again: And though Aloes was soft whilst carried through
America, and those hotter Climates, yet when it approached our Climate, it
presently became hard.

But to bring further Instances concerning the Natural and Preternatural States
of Bodies, I shall observe, That according the Received Notion of Natural and
Preternatural States, it is very difficult to determine the Natural State of
the Air; for, not to insist on the different Temperature of the Air, as to Heat
and Cold, in different Climes; It may be demanded, Since Heat and Cold, rarifie
and expand the Air, what is to be esteemed the Natural State of it, in
Reference to Rarity and Density? And it is no less Questionable, what Place is
most fit to determine it is Natural State, since the State of it is not only
different in several Countries; but in those Places at different Times: And
that the Changes, as to the Density or Rarity of the Air, are very frequent,
appears by the several Degrees of the Atmosphere's Gravity, evident in the
Torrecellian Experiments, hereafter to be delivered.

A forced State, the Natural State of the Air.
But further: Except the States of the Air be said to be Preternatural, only in
a Relative Sense, with respect to the State it was in, before it underwent the
last Change, it is not impossible to make it out, That the Air is always in a
Preternatural, because always in a Forced State; the Lower Parts of the Air
being constantly pressed upon, and by the Weight of Incumbent Air, kept from
expanding it self; but if the further it recedes from a forced State, the
nearer it approaches to a Natural One, then the Force of the Fire must by
Rarifying it, contribute to the Destroying of it is Preternatural State; and by
the same Reason the Air contained in our Pneumatical Receiver, when Part of it
is drawn out, must approach to a Natural State, the Remaining Part having
further Liberty to expand it self.

To conclude this Chapter: From what has been said, it appears, That that is
truly the Natural State of a Body, in which it is preserved by a Natural
Concourse of External Agents: And likewise from what has been said, we may
infer, That it is a common Error, That nothing Violent is Durable; since it is
evident, that the Atmosphere we live in, is always in a Forced or Compressed
State.

CHAP. XIII. The Description of the Pneumatick Engine, and it is Use.
Physico-Mechanical Experiments touching the Air, in a Letter to the Right
Honorable Charles, Lord Viscount of Dangarvan.
My Dear Lord,
PErceiving that several of the Virtuosi at Paris, intent in Examining, how far
the Air was concerned in hindering the descent of Quicksilver, in the
Torrecellian Experiment, concerning a Vacuum; I thought it seasonable to
promote that Experiment; and to acquaint Your Lordship with my Attempts on that
Subject, which may afford some Hints at least toward the Advancement of that
Philosophy.

A Subject which I the rather make Choice of; because, the Air being of so
general use in Respiration, and, by it is almost Perpetual Contiguity, as well
to our own Bodies, as those we are here concerned with, having Considerable
Effects, in Producing those Various Diseases incident to Crazy Bodies, upon
Changes of Weather, a Discovery of it is Nature may be of Moment; and likewise,
because it may show us how far it concurs in Exhibiting several other Phanomena.

But before I present Your Lordship with the Experiments, it will not be
improper to give Your Lordship an Account of the Engine concerned in the making
of them.

A Description of the Pneumatical Engine.
It consists then of two Principal Parts; a Glass Vessel, and a Pump to suck out
the Air contained in it. The First of which is a Glass, furnished with a Hole
at the Top, to which a Cover is adapted, and also a Stop-Cock, fitted to the
Extremity of it is Neck below; the Cavity of it being large enough to contain
about 60 lib. of Water, allowing xvi. to each Pound.

The Diameter (B C) of the Top of the Vessel (A) is about four Inches, which is
encompassed with a Lip, almost an Inch in Height; the Use of which is for the
Cover to rest on; which is described in the second Figure, where (D E) denotes
a brazen Ring, which is to cover and to be closely cemented on the Lip (B C) of
the first Figure. To the Internal Orifice of this Ring is adapted a Glass
Stopple, so exactly, as to prevent any considerable Access of external Air: In
the midst of this Cover there is a Hole (H I) about half an Inch Diameter
incircl'd with a Ring or Socket, to which is adapted a brazen Stopple (K) so
exquisitely, that it may be turned round without admitting in the least Air.
Through the lower end of it there is a little Hole (8) made for the Passage of
a String (8, 9, 10) which is likewise to pass through a small brazen Ring (L)
fixed to the bottom of the Stopple (F G) the use of which String is to move
what is contained in the exhausted Vessel, when stopped.

That the Stop-cock (N) in the first Figure, might more exactly exclude the
Air, a thin Plate of Tin (M, T, V, W) was soder'd on the Shank of the Cock (X)
of a Length proportionable to the Neck of the Receiver, which was cemented,
with a Cement made of Pitch, Rosin and Wood-ashes, poured hot into the Cavity
of the Plate; and to prevent the Cement from running into the Orifice (Z) of
the Shank (X) it was stopped with a Cork, to which was fixed a String, that it
might be drawn out of the upper Orifice of the Receiver, and then the Neck of
the Glass Receiver being pressed moderately hot into the Cement, it filled the
Interstices betwixt the tin Plate and the Receiver, and also, betwixt the
Receiver and the Shank of the Cock.

The lower Part to be described is made up of an Air-pump, supported by a Frame
of Wood with three Legs (111) so contrived, that, for the freer Motion of the
Hand, on one side it may stand perpendicular; across the midst of the Frame, a
Piece of Board is nailed (222) to which the Pump is fixed.

The Pump is made up of four Parts, viz. An exact and strong Cylinder, endued
with a Cavity about three Inches cross; to which a Sucker (4455) is adapted,
made up of two Parts; one of which (44) being not so large in Diameter, as the
Cavity of the Cylinder, a thick Piece of tanned Leather is nailed on it, by the
Addition of which, it closes so exactly to the Cylinder, that the Air cannot
insinuate; The other Part being a thick Plate of Iron (55) is firmly joined to
the middle of the former Part; it is a little longer than the Cylinder; one
Edge of it being smooth, and the other indented, to the Interstices of which
the Teeth of a small Jaton Nut (a b) are to be adapted, which is fixed by two
Staples (22) to the under-side of the Board nailed transverse (222;) on which
the Cylinder resting, it is turned by the Manubrium (7.) The last Part of the
Pump is the Valve (R) being a Hole at the Top of the Cylinder, which is taper
toward the Cavity: To this is fitted a brass Peg, to be put in or taken out,
as Occasion requires.

The Engine being thus delineated, the Stop-Cock must be well oiled with Sallad
Oil, to stop the Intervals of the Internal Surfaces of its Parts, and also,
that it may with less difficulty turn the Key (S) at Pleasure; for the like
Reasons the Sucker as well as the Valve is to be oiled also. And here it is as
much strange as to be admired, That when Oil or Water separate, have failed in
effecting our Design, a Mixture of both has proved effectual. Lastly, That the
Ingress of Air betwixt the brazen Cover and the Ring, may be likewise
prevented; it will be convenient to plaster the Edges with the former Cement,
laid on with a hot Iron, that it may the better fill the little Cavities.

Things being thus ordered, That no Air may remain in the Cylinder, the Handle
is to be turned till the Sucker rises to the Top of it; and then, the Valve
being shut, it is to be drawn down to the bottom; by which Means, the Air being
driven out of the Cylinder, and a Succession from without being prevented, the
Cavity of the Cylinder must be emptied of Air, so that the Turn-cock beng
turned so as to afford a Passage betwixt the Receiver and Cylinder, Part of the
Air before lodged in the Receiver will be drawn down into the Cylinder, which,
by turning back the Key, The Method of Managing the Pump.
being prevented from flying back into the Receiver, may, by opening the Valve,
and winding up the Sucker, be forced into the open Air; and so, by reiterated
Exsuctions of the Air out of the Receiver, and Expulsions of it again out of
the Cylinder, it may be exhausted as the Nature of the Experiment requires.

Having thus given your Lordship a Description of the Engine, and Cautions for
the Prevention of the Ingress of Air, necessary in some more curious
Experiment; I shall in short acquaint your Lordship, That the Experiments I
proceed to entertain your Lordship with, are such, as require not such
Exactness in the forementioned Cautions, provided the Pump be well plied and
the Crannies not considerable.

EXPERIMENT I. The Manner of Pumping out the Air. A Digression concerning the
Spring and Elasticity of the Air, in Order to a more clear Apprehension of
subsequent Experiments.
FROM what has been delivered it appears, that, the Sucker being wound up,
and, upon stopping the Valve and turning the Key, drawn down again, the Air
will be equally expanded both in the Receiver and Sucker; and upon returning
the Key, and opening the Valve, near a Cylinder full of Air will be expelled;
but the Receiver, by reiterated Excursions, being more and more exhausted, less
proportionably is forced out; so that at the last, before you need to open the
Valve, the Sucker will rise almost to the Top of the Cylinder; and if, when it
is so exhausted, you let go the Pump, and the Valve be stopped, the Sucker,
merely by the Force of external Air, overpowering that more rarified Air
within, will be forced up to the Top of the Cylinder; where we may observe,
That as the Sucker is pressed higher by external Air, so it is an Argument of
the Receiver's being more or less exhausted; the Air in the Sucker being
accordingly more or less able to resist the external, as it varies in Quantity:
We may observe also, That whilst the Receiver retains any considerable Quantity
of Air, there is a brisk Noise upon turning the Key.

A Springiness in the Air.
But to render these Experiments more intellible, I shall take Notice to your
Lordship of a Notion, which may explicate them; which is, That the Air consists
of certain springy Particles, which, being bent and pressed together by
incumbent Bodies, always endeavor to remove that Pressure, and to dilate
themselves; which Notion may be confirmed, by considering, that the Air
consisting of Parts incumbent on one another, the uppermost, by their weight,
must needs compress the lower; which compressed Parts must consequently have a
Power of self-Dilation: So when a Fleece of Wool compressed, upon the Removal
of that Pressure again expands it self, the Springiness of the Air may likewise
be explicated by supposing with the Ingenious Des Carts, that the Air is a
Congeries of flexible Particles, of various sizes and very irregular Figures,
raised by the Heat of the Sun, and swimming in that Matter, which encompasses
the Earth; which being, by that Ether that floats about them, kept separate
and in a violent Agitation, acquire that Springiness which they would lose in
some measure by being compressed.

By both these ways the Springiness of the Air may be explained; yet by which
with most Reason I shall not now dispute, being not so much concerned about the
adequate Cause of that Springiness, as to manifest, that it has a Springiness,
in order to show the Effects of it; for I am not satisfied, whether either so
far explains it is Nature, as to make it intelligible.

But in opposition to this Notion it may be alleged, that tho it were granted,
that the Air is made up of springy Particles; yet, it would only account for
the Expansion, and the Dilatation of the Springs of the Air, when apparently
compressed in Wind Guns and other Pneumatical Engines; whereas from these
Experiments it does not appear, that there was any Compression before the Air
was included in those Guns. To remove this Difficulty, there are several
Experiments which prove, that our Atmosphere is not light, but heavy, in
respect of some Bodies, one of which I shall mention here, which is this, that
a Lamb's Bladder dried, whose Cavity contained two thirds of a Pint, being
pressed together, and counterpoised in a very nice Balance, and being pricked,
upon the avolition of the Air contained in it, lost a Grain and an eighth Part
of what it weighed before; from whence, if we may conceive, that it has
weight, it follows, that a Column of Air of many Miles high leaning on those
below, is enough to compress and bend their Springs; as when Wool is heaped to
a considerable height, that which lies under is compressed by that which lies
upon it; and if upon a Parcel of Air, so large a Quantity lies, no wonder, that
upon the Removal of that Pressure, it powerfully expands.

As for the Objection, that Water varies not in it is Weight in the lower from
the upper Part, it may be answered, that the difference betwixt Air and Water
is very considerable; the last not being capable of Compression; whereas Air
is. To which may be added the Experiment tried by Monsieur Pascal (the Son) at
the foot, the middle and top of that high Mountain (in Avergne) called Le Puy de
Domme, Why Mercury is suspended higher at the bottom than the top of a Hill.
where the Mercury subsided above three Inches more at the Top than the bottom;
the Reason of which is, that the Air less vigorously pressed against the
Quicksilver at the Top, and so was less capable of bearing it up.

And if it be objected against what has been proposed, that if it were so
compressed, it would not be so ready to yield to the slight Force of Flies, and
even Feathers, it may be answered, that as a Piece of Wool squeezed together,
makes a manifest Resistance to the Pressure of the Hand; so the Air does to
those Bodies, tho it is Resistance is not strong enough to overpower their
Motion, the Parts of it being in a continual Disposition to yield to solid
Bodies, upon the Account of it is Fluidity, and the perpetual Motion of it is
Parts, occasioned by their continual Endeavors to expand and unfold themselves.

EXPERIMENT II. Of the Pressure of the Air against the Sides of the Bodies it
encompasses. The Pressure of the Air included within an Ambient Body explained.
The Air presses upon the sides of Bodies it encompasses.
IF, when the Air is almost drawn out of the Receiver, one endeavors to lift up
the Brass Key which is placed in the middle of the Brass Cover; it will be as
difficult to raise it, as if a considerable Weight were tied to it; for the
Spring of the Air included in the Receiver being weakened, and not able to bear
up strong enough against the bottom of the Stopple, as powerfully as before;
whoever lifts up the Stopple, must likewise bear up the whole Pillar of
External Air, which presses upon the top of the Stopple: But if the Air be
gradually permitted to get into the Receiver, the Internal Air being more
compressed, and its Spring increased, it bears up against the Stopple more
powerfully, and the Pressure of the Internal and External Air being brought
nearer to an Aequilibrium, the Stopple may proportionably be lifted up with
less difficulty; till at length, the whole Cavity of the Receiver being filled
with Air, it may easily be taken up.

But it is thought strange by some, how the Pressure of the Included, can be any
ways proportionable to the Pressure of the External Air; since it is so
encompassed by the sides of the Receiver, that those Pillars of Air, which
would press upon it, if open to the Air, are only icnumbent on the External
Superficies of the Receiver; but to unfold this Difficulty, The Air enclosed in
the Receiver Acts by virtue of its Spring.
we may consider, That as a piece of Wool^ squeezed in ones Hand, and so
enclosed in a Box, is kept from expanding equally by the sides of the Box, as
if it remained in ones Hand; so the Air compressed by the Incumbent Asmosphere,
and conveyed in that compressed State, into the Receiver, is equally kept
from expanding it self by the sides of the Receiver, as if it were still
squeezed together by the weight of the Atmosphere: And if it should further be
objected, that if the Air included in the Receiver were so confined by the
sides of it, it is continual Endeavor to expand would break the Glass: It may
easily be answered, that the expansive Force of the Internal Air, is
counterpois'd by the Compressure of the External, and consequently there being
an equal Pressure on both sides, it is preserved entire; for a like Reason
those slender Bubbles, which Boys usually blow up with Soap and Water, continue
whole for a good while, the Internal and External Air, being compressed to a
just Aequilibrium.

EXPERIMENT II. Concerning the Force requisite to draw down the Sucker: The
Opinion of a Modern Naturalist examined.
What Weight is requisite to draw down the Sucker.
THough the Sucker may be easily drawn down, by the help of the Manubrium* yet
without that it will require a Force capable of raising so much of the
Atmosphere as presses upon it: The Reason of which is evident, from Mercury
suspended in a Tube; for though the Weight of the Atmosphere is able to balance
and keep it up to twenty five Digits; yet if the suspended Mercury exceeds that
height, it presently over-powers the Pressure of the incumbent Atmosphere, and
subsides to its just height. And as from hence we may learn, why it is so
difficult to draw down the Sucker; so it likewise teaches us, for what Reasons
the Sucker, when so violently forced down, upon a Relaxation of that Force
rises up again; for the Spring of the Air included being weak, it must
consequently be buoyed up by the Pressure of the External, till that which is
contained in the Receiver be equally compressed, so as to be able to resist the
Pressure of the Atmosphere. There is one Thing more remarkable in this
Experiment, which is, that if the Valve be stopped close, when the Sucker is
raised to the Top of the Cylinder, it finds an equal Resistance by the Pressure
of the Atmosphere when first drawn, as when nearer the Bottom of the Cylinder;
from whence we may gather, that what an Eminent Modern Naturalist delivers
concerning the Reason of the violent Ingress of exhausted Air, viz. That it is
increased by the Addition of that Force, which it receives from the Air sucked
out, is a mistake; for were it so, it would be more difficult to draw down the
Sucker, when it is further from the Receiver, a greater quantity of Air being
exhausted. But from what has been premised in the first Experiment, it is
evident, that the weakened Pressure of the Internal Air, is sufficient to
account for the more violent Ingress of the External.

EXPERIMENT IV. Concerning the Swelling of a Bladder, The Opinion of a Learned
Author Examined.
The Expansion of Air in a Lamb 's Bladder in our Receiver
HAving conveyed into the Receiver a Lamb's Bladder, well dried and limber,
and half full of Air, the Cover being luted on, and the Pump set on work; we
observed, that as the Air in the Receiver was gradually exhausted, that in the
Bladder was accordingly expanded, till the Receiver being near fully exhausted,
the Bladder seemed very much distended, with the included Air. And to confirm
our Guess, that the Expansion of the Air in the Bladder, proceeded partly from
the weakened Pressure of the ambient Ai, rwe gradually left in the external
Air, and found, that the Bladder by degrees subsided till it became as empty as
before: But one thing Remarkable in this Experiment was, that the more the
Receiver was exhausted, the more sensibly the Bladder was distended.

And lest in this Experiment it should be doubted, whether the Distention of
the Bladder did not rather proceed from the Fibers of the Bladder, returning of
their own accord, to their natural Extension upon the removal of the external
Air, we put in two empty Bladders along with the former, and found them very
little extended upon the Exsuction of the Air. And the like Phenomenon were
afforded, by repeating the Experiment with a Bladder, which was half empty, and
half filled with Air, the empty Part being parted from that which contained the
Air, by a Ligature.

EXPERIMENT V. Concerning a Bladder which burst in the Receiver, and another by
Heat.
The Force of the Airs Expansion.
HAving put a Bladder moderately Blown into the Receiver, before the whole Air
was drawn out, the Air presently expanded and broke the Bladder with a
considerable Crack; and tho this Experiment frequently succeeds, yet if the
Bladder be one that is too dry, it is hard to tie it so fast, but that some of
the included Air will get out, and so frustrate the Trial. But to be fully
informed whether the Air is out or not, we may be satisfied, by admitting Air
afresh into the Receiver, which will, if the mentioned Accident happens,
compress the Bladder more than when it was first put in. But it is not only
possible, that the Air should expand it self so powerfully in an exhausted
Receiver; but if a Bladder well blown, be brought near a good sire, the
included Air will burst the Bladder with a considerable Noise.

EXPERIMENT VI.
The Airs Expansion measured.
TO try how much the Air was capable of being expanded, we fixed the Neck of a
wet Lamb's Bladder to the Neck of a Viol; which being conveyed into the
Pneumatical Receiver, upon the Exsuction of the Air, we observed, that the Air
which was contained in the Cavity of the Viol was so far expanded, that though
the Viol was able to contain above five Drachms of Water, if filled and
distended the empty Bladder, which was large enough to hold five Ounces and
half a Dram. In which Experiment, the expanded Air possessed nine times as
much space as it did before Expansion.

But to measure the Air's Expansion more nicely, we fixed a Glass Bubble to one
end of a Cylindrical Pipe, hermetically sealed; the Diameter of whose Bore was
about a quarter of an Inch; and having pasted a Piece of Parchment upon the
outside of the Tube, which was divided into twenty six equal Parts, and marked
with black Lines, we filled the Cylinder almost full of Water, so that, after a
few Trials, by inverting the Cylinder, and stopping the open End with one's
Finger, we could perceive, that as much Air might be permitted to rise up to
the Bubble, as was equal in Extension to the Breadth of one of those twenty six
Divisions; When this was done we fitted the open end of the Cylinder to a Glass
Viol, which was filled with Water to the Height of half an Inch; all which
being put together into a Pneumatical Receiver, after a few Exsuctions, the
included Air was so much expanded, as to extend it self to the Surface of the
Water; in which Experiment the expanded Air took up thirty one times as much
Space as before.

And this Experiment being repeated in a Cylinder, which afforded a larger
space for the Air's Expansion, it took up above sixty times the space it did
before. And repeating the like Experiment with a Glass Pipe thirty Inches long
(part of it having a Hole in the Cover to stand out through) by weighing the
Water in a nice Pair of Scales together with the Pipe, first with the Bubble of
Air included, and after when the Tube was wholly filled with Water, we found,
That the Air which possessed but the Space of one Grain of Water had been
expanded, in the exhausted Receiver so much by its own (...), as to take up 152
times its Space before Extension.

And since Marcennus affirms, That the Air may be so expanded by Heat, as to
take up seventy times its Space, I conveyed a Cylinder of the former Magnitude
into the Receiver, and found, That upon the Exsuction of the Air in the
Receiver, that in the Cylinder descended down almost to the bottom of it, the
lower Surface of it being very unequal, and seeming several times to knock upon,
and rebound from the bottom of the Viol; which was an Argument of the expansive
Force of the Air; since the Water it depressed, upon the drawing out of the
Air, was much below the Surface of the Water contained in the Viol.

EXPERIMENT VII. What Figure best resists the Pressure of the AIR.
HAVING got a thin Glass Bubble, which was large enough to hold about five
Ounces of Water, to which was fixed a slender Neck, about the Bigness of a
Swan's Quill, we moderately exhausted the Air out of the Receiver, and then
taking it out of the Pump, we joined the Neck of the Bubble to the lower
Orifice of the Receiver, stopping the Crannies with melted Plaster to prevent
the Ingress of the Air; and though the Glass was as thin as Paper, yet upon
turning the Key of the Stop-Cock, and giving the Air included in the Bubble
Liberty to expand, the Bubble sustained the Pressure of the whole Atmosphere,
without being broke.

EXPERIMENT VIII.
The former Experiment illustrated.
WE took a Glass Alembick, which was large enough to hold about Three Pints,
represented by the Seventh Figure; The Rostrum (E) being hermetically closed:
In the Top of the Rostrum was a Hole, into which, one of the shanks of a
Stop-Cock of an ordinary size was cemented, the other being fixed with Cement
in the upper Part of the Pump; which being done, and the upper Orifice of the
Alembick being covered close with a Plate of Lead exactly adapted to it, upon
drawing the Air out of the Receiver the Glass presently cracked; which Crack is
represented by the Line (a, b) and this Flaw extended it self further
accordingly as the Air was more exhausted, yet this Glass Vessel was near
twenty times thicker than the Bubble.

And that the Figure of the former Glass enabled it so much better to sustain
the Atmosphere, was further confirmed by suspending one of the Bubbles
hermetically sealed in the Receiver, which so strongly resisted the Expansion
of the Air contained in it, as to continue whole, when the Receiver was
exhausted.

EXPERIMENT IX. A Confirmation of the former Experiment: An Experiment to show
that these Phenomenon exhibited in Vacuo Boyliano proceed not from a fuga
Vacui, etc.
A Confirmation of the former Experiment, etc.
HAving put the end of a slender Glass Pipe into a Viol, which was large enough
to contain four Ounces of Water, and fixed it to the Neck of the Viol with a
Cement of Rosin and Pitch, so that the end of the Pipe almost touched the
bottom of the Viol, as in Fig. 6, this Viol was conveyed into a small
Receiver, as much Water being put into it, as wrought a little above the bottom
of the Cylinder; the upper End of the Pipe being most of it without the Vessel,
a Hole having been purposely made for it in the Top of the Receiver: The Event
of which Trial was, that upon drawing the Air out of the Pump, the Weight of
the Atmosphere internally pressing into the Pipe, and the Spring of the Air
within the Receiver, not equally pressing against the sides of the Bottle,
which were exposed to it, a Piece of the Bottle burst out of the side of it,
with such a Force as to crack the Receiver in several Places; and having
reiterated the Experiment with a round Glass Bubble, the Leaden Cover of the
Receiver was not only depressed, by the Weight of the Atmosphere, so as to
thrust out one side of the Receiver, but the Glass Bubble was cracked into
Pieces with such violence, as to tear a Bladder, which it was encompassed with
to keep it from breaking the Receiver, in several Places.

Before I proceed to the next Experiment, it may be requisite to advertise,
That though the larger Receivers are apt, upon some Trials, to crack; yet, they
are not rendered altogether useless, since when the Air begins to be exhausted,
the ambient Atmosphere compresses the Lips of the Glass closer together. But if
the Crack be considerable, it may be cemented with a Plaster made of Quicklime
and Scrapings of Cheese ground together very finely in a Mortar, and made into
a Paste with a little Water, which being spread upon a Cloth about three
Inches broad, must be applied to the Crack.

EXPERIMENT X.
Of the Flame of a Candle in a Receiver.
HAVING suspended a Tallow Candle in our Receiver, we found, That upon an
Exsuction of the Air, it was presently extinguished; but another being
suspended there without pumping the Air out, it burned a little longer, the
Flame of both before they went out gradually contracting and ascending almost
to the Top of the Wieck with a blue Flame. In which Experiments it was
observable, that when the Air was drawn out, the Wieck was presently
extinguished, emitting very faint Effluviums, which rose a little Height, and
dispersed themselves in the Receiver very faintly; whereas when the Air
remained in the Vessel, the Smoke ascended in a. Cylindrical Stream, very
briskly and recoyl'd from the Cover. To try what difference there would be in
the Phenomenon exhibited by a Candle made of Virgin's Wax, and the former, I
suspended several small ones, stuck together, and found, that they would be
immediately extinguished before the Cover could be cemented on; but having let
down one of them alone, we observed, that upon the Evacuation of the Air, it
continued to burn about a Minute; but if the Air was not pumped out, the Flame
continued more vivid and lasting: And, as in the Former Experiment, the Flame
gradually rose to the Top of the Wieck; so in the Latter, it was depressed
nearer the Bottom, before it was extinguished.

EXPERIMENT XI. Concerning the Burning of Coals, and the Continuance of the
Heat of a piece of Iron in Vacuo Boyliano.
HAving suspended a Screw made of Wire in the Receiver, such as Fig. 10.
represents, it being first filled to the height of five Inches, with live
Wood-coals; upon the first Exsuction made by the Pump, they grew dim, and the
Pump being plied for three Minutes, they were quite deprived of their red
Color, and seemed extinct; but when they were taken out of the Receiver, they
were re-kindled again; and being let down into the Receiver afresh, without
Pumping out the Air, they continued red for a Minute longer than before; but a
like quantity of Live-coals, continued to burn half an Hour, in the open Air.

But a piece of Red-hot Iron, being suspended in the same Wire, upon an
Exsuction of the Air, it seemed not to be sensibly altered; but continued red
for 4. Minutes; neither was it altered by re-admitting the Air into the
Receiver, though Fumes, which were raised from some Wax, which stuck to the Wire,
were much more expanded, when the Air was pumped out, than upon it is
re-ingress. But one thing observable, was, that whether the Air was sucked out,
or not, the sides of the Receiver were considerably heated by the Effluvia
trasmitted from the Iron.

EXPERIMENT XII.
Concerning the Burning of a Match.
HAving suspended a lighted Match in the Receiver, it presently filled the whole
Cavity with Smoke; which, together with Air, being pumped out, we could discern
the Match to burn still more languid, till at the last it seemed to be totally
extinguished; yet some time after, upon a fresh ingress of Air, it renewed it is
Fire, being blown up a-fresh by the Access of that Aerie Body.

EXPERIMENT XIII
The Reason of the aforementioned Effect.
HAving suspended a lighted piece of Match, together with a Bladder, to try
whether the Smoke would hinder the Distention of the Bladder, as also whether
the Light of the Match would be put out by it is own Smoke; I observed, that it
afforded the same Phenomenon mentioned in the foregoing Experiment, except that
after Successive Re-admissions of the Air, it being excluded for some time, the
Fire was totally extinguished.

Besides which, the following Phenomenon were to be observed: First, That upon
the turning of the Stop-Cock, the Cavity seemed immediately darkened, as if it
proceeded from a Change of the Position of the Parts of the Smoke. Secondly,
That a kind of Halo, consisting of some Exhalations hovered about the Flame.
And Lastly, It was observed, that the Fumes did not in the least obstruct the
Distension of the Bladder.

Having tried the Former Experiment with a lighted Match, in a small Receiver,
I found, that the Fire was quite extinguished with it is own Smoke, before the
Cover could be cemented on, except the overplus of Smoke was successively
pumped out, and a Supply of Fresh Air was let in at the Stop-Cock; which Method
would contribute to the Preserving of it.

EXPERIMENT XIV. Of the Striking of Fire, and Explosion of Gunpowder in Vacuo
Boyliano.
Gunpowder exploded in Vacuo Boyliano, etc.
HAving fastened a Pistol to a Prop, which was placed in a Perpendicular
Situation in the Receiver, and having tied a String to the Tricker, the other
End of which was fixed to the Key abovementioned, in the middle of the Cover,
we turned the Key round, to shorten the String; by which means the Tricker
being checked, and the Flint as it is usual, falling upon the Steel, it struck
Fire, though the Receiver was exhausted, as a Pistol usually does; though by the
strongest Collision we could contrive, we could not, in our Engine, strike Fire
with two pieces of Steel, striking one upon another.

But we observed, That having endeavored several times, without Success, to
fire Gunpowder, we, but once or twice, met with the desired Effect: Where we
observed, That the Flash was more expanded, than if it had been exploded in the
open Air; and that when the Flash was extinguished, the Receiver was full of
Smoke, the Parts of which moved up and down very briskly, but much swifter,
when Air was permitted to return into the Cavity of the Receiver.

EXPERIMENT XV. The Vnusefulness of Kindling Bodies enclosed in Vacuo Boyliano,
with a Burning-Glass.
HAving conveig'd some Black and Dark Combustible Matter, into a small
Receiver, and placed it in the Sunshine; a Good Burning-Glass threw the Rays
of the Sun so powerfully upon it, as to make it smoke, and fill the Receiver;
but the Air getting into the Cavity of it, we could not prosecute the
Experiment. And having repeated the Trial in our Large Receiver, we found the
Glass so thick, that it broke the Rays of Light, and scattered them so much,
that when they fell upon the Combustible Matter, they were altogether incapable
of working any considerable Effect upon it.

EXPERIMENT XVI.
The Operation of a Lodestone.
HAving placed a piece of Wood in our Receiver, with a piece of Iron, in a
Perpendicular Line, upon it; and fixed a well-pois'd Needle upon that, we
pumped out the Air, and then applied a Needle to the outside of the Receiver;
and observed, That the Lodestone drew or repelled the Needle, as a Lodestone
usually in the open Air; and the Needle, upon a Removal of the Lodestone,
after some tremulous Vibrations, pointed North and South again.

EXPERIMENT XVII. The Gravity and Rarefaction of the Air examined, by the
Torrecellian Experiments; together with Considerations concerning a Vacuum, etc.
The Gravity of the Air, etc.
COnsidering that it would be a very probable Method, to inform us, how far the
Pressure of the Atmosphere, contributes to the buoying up of Mercury, in a
Cylinder, so many Digits above the Surface of the Mercury it leans on, to try,
whether in our Engine, as the Air was more or less exhausted, the Mercury in
the Tub would accordingly subside; we filled a Glass-Cylinder Hermetically
sealed with Mercury, whose Bore was about a quarter of an Inch Diameter, and 3
Foot long; which being inverted in an oblong Box, and carefully let down into
the Receiver; and the Cover lutedon, the Tube came through the Hole in the
midst of the Cover, the Cranies being filled with melted Diachylon; where it
was observed, That the Mercury remained elevated to the same height, as if the
Foot of the Tube had been pressed upon, by the Atmosphere, the Air included in
the Receiver being in a compressed State, and acting by Virtue of it is Spring.

The Cylinder of Mercury being thus placed in the Receiver, we caused a
Cylinder of Air to be pumped out, and after that, another, observing the
Mercury after each, gradually to subside; till at the last, it subsided a
considerable way in the Pipe, down into the Body of the Receiver: and to put it
beyond dispute, that the Subsiding of the Mercury, depended upon the weakened
Spring of the included Air, and the Aequilibrium betwixt the Pressure of that,
and the Gravity of the Mercury; we turned the Key, and permitted Air gradually
to re-enter; and observed, That the Mercury accordingly rose in the Pipe,
almost to the height which it was first suspended at; and the Reason why it was
not raised quite so high, was, because several Bubbles of Air, which were
before mixed with the Mercury, rising above it, depressed, and kept it from
ascending, by taking up more room in the Top of the Cylinder.

In trying of which Experiment, having once made use of Diachylon Plaster, to
stop up the Top of the Tube, we found, that though the Mercury subsided
considerably upon the Operation of the Pump; yet the Air so powerfully
insinuated it self through the Diachylon Plaster, that it sunk in the Pipe
insensibly of it self.

Another thing observable in this Experiment, was, that if, when the Air was
exhausted, it were again permitted to run in too fast, it would go near to
break the Cylinder, by forcing the Mercury up too quick.

Besides we observed, as we have before intimated, That though upon the First
Exsuctions, the Mercury subsided above an Inch; yet when it was low in the
Receiver, it would not subside over the Breadth of a Barley-corn; besides, by
reason of the Parts of the Air, tending to a Restitution of their Springs, it
checked and caused the Quicksilver after it is descent, to fly back again a
little after each Exsuction.

Another thing remarkable in this Experiment, is, That having tried it in one
of our small Receivers, we found, that at one Exsuction it fell 18 Inches and a
half, and at another time 19 and a half; from whence we may infer, that it
might be of no small use to consider, the various Phenomenon afforded by the
different Magnitude of the Receivers, in which these Experiments are made; and
also the various Bores of the Cylinders, which contain the Mercury; for thence
one might probably guess at the Quantity of Air extracted out of the Receiver,
by the Subsiding of the Mercury in the Tube.

To the foregoing Observations, we shall add, That having once tried the
Experiment, in a Tube about two foot long, I found, that upon the first
Exsuction, the Mercury fell above a Span, and afterward subsided by degrees,
till the Air was readmitted, and then it was raised near to the top of the
Tube again.

Lastly, It has been observed, That when, by the help of the Pump, more Air
has been squeezed into the Receiver, than what was forced in by the Weight of
the Atmosphere, the Mercury would rise above 27 Digits in the Tube, and would
be suspended at that height, till the Air was again let out.

Concerning a Vacuum.
Having said thus much of the Torrecellian Experiment, and the several
Phenomenon observable in it, perhaps it may be expected, that I should say
something, concerning that Controversy, Whether or no there be a Vacuum in the
Receiver, when the Air is pumped out: But being unwilling to take it upon me to
determine so nice a Controversy; I shall only intimate, that were the Cavity of
the Receiver void of Matter, it would be a difficult thing to conceive, how we
should have visible Idea's of things contained in it; since they must either be
conveyed to our Sensory by the reflected Rays of Light, or they must proceed
from some sensible Emanations from the Bodies themselves. And from the
foregoing Sixteenth Experiment, it appears, That the Effluvia of a Lodestone
do permeate the Cavity of the Receiver, which makes it probable, that the
Magnetical Steams of the Earth do so too.

But on the other hand, it may be alleged, That since the Effluvia of a
Lodestone may be admitted into the Receiver, when it seems full of Air, it may
be urged, that the subtle Emanations of that Substance are only dispersed
through the Vacuities of the Air; and consequently when that Air is exhausted,
the Spaces which the Air possessed before, may be left void of Matter; for from
the Thirteenth Experiment it appears, that Matter, which, if closely pinned up
together, takes up but a small Space, may be dispersed throughout the Receiver,
a very small Portion of the Match being able to fill the whole Cavity of it
with Fumes. And as for the Arguments before alleged in favor of a Plenitude;
they rather seem to argue, that it may be, than that it really is; and the
Consequences usually drawn in Proof of such a Plenitude, are rather grounded on
the Cartesian Notions of a Body, than on Substantial Experiments; for they
thinking it a Contradiction in Adjecto so say, a Space can be void of Body,
since they make Body and Extension inseparable; they therefore in favor of
their own Doctrine draw Inferences from their own Positions to argue for a
Plenitude.

But to leave so Nice and Doubtful a Dispute, I shall proceed to lay down the
following Advertisements: First, That the Difference which sometimes happens
betwixt the rising of Mercury here in England, and beyond Seas, being about two
Digits, it rather proceeds from the Shortnese of our English Inches, compared
with those beyond Seas, than any such considerable Difference in the Weight of
the Atmosphere. Another thing to be advertised is, That except more than
ordinary Care be taken, when the End of the Cylinder is immersed in the Vessel
of Mercury, several Bubbles of Air will rise to the Top of the Tube, which,
being condensed with Cold, will permit the Mercury to rise higher in the Tube;
but being expanded with Heat, would sensibly depress it. And,

If it should be demanded, What Methods are to be taken to prevent the
Intrusion of the Air, the following Requisites are to be observed: First, the
lower Orifice of the Cylinder must be smooth, and so much inverted on each
side, as not to exceed a quarter of an Inch in Diameter. Secondly, the Tube
must be filled so full, as not to admit of any Air, betwixt the Finger and the
Mercury. Thirdly, before the Tube is quite filled, it will be requisite to
invert the Tube, that the Air included in it, may, by ascending to the Top, and
upon a Re-inversion back again, gather all those little Bubbles of Air, which
are dispersed through the Mercury, as it passes from one end of the Cylinder to
another; and to drain the Mercury more exactly you may, by applying a hot Iron,
cause those less Bubbles, which are not excluded by the former Method to break
forth, which will be promoted by shaking the Vessel upon every Drop of Mercury,
put into the Pipe. By which Method, having in a great Measure cleared the Tube
of Air, I have, in one, that was pretty short, raised the Mercury to no less
than 30 Digits and an eighth.

EXPERIEMINT XVIII. The Variation of the Rise of the Mercury in the
Glass-Cylinder, and the Reason of it considered.
HAving filled a Tube about 3 foot long, with Mercury, and placed it in a
wooden Frame in the Window, I observed, the Mercury was sensibly depressed in
hot Weather, by the Expansion of the Air, which swam about it, and raised again
in Cold; the Altitude very often varying without any manifest Cause: So that in
five Weeks time it had ascended and descended about two Inches; the utmost
descent below the Altitude of it is first Suspension, being 9/16 of an Inch; and
it is utmost Descent being 7/16, and it is not improbable, but that the
Variation of the Altitude of the Mercury, would have been more considerable,
had the Experiment been tried in a longer Tube, and in the open Air.

And here it may be seasonable to take notice, that could there be any sensible
Variation, observed in the Altitude of the Mereury upon the Ebbing and Flowing
of the Sea; it would be of no small Moment in determining whether the Pressure
made upon the Air, by the Moon, were any ways concerned in causing the Ebbing
and Flowing of it, and such like Phenomenon.

But to return to what we observed further: Having taken the Cylindrical Tube
out of the wooden Frame, on a snowy day we observed, that the Mercury was
raised Twenty nine Digits and three Quarters, above the Basis which it leaned
on.

If it should be asked, from whence these Variations in the Altitude of the
Mercury. proceeded? I shall offer the following Considerations.

The Reasons why Mercury is not always equally suspended.
First. That the Air above the Mercury, being very weak, and not able to make
any strong Resistance to the Rising Mercury, it may be esteemed a Cause, why it
rises no higher, because the Asmosphere is able to sustain no more of it;
forasmuch as the Mercury and the Atmosphere are balanced in an Aequilibrium;
for the Resistance which the Air above the Mercury can make, is so small, that
it would rise but very little higher, were there none at all in the Top of the
Tube. Secondly, We may consider, that the External Air is subject to many more
Alterations and Changes, than the Internal contained in the Top of the Tube,
the latter being subject to be wrought on only by Heat and Cold: But the former
is subject to many and considerable Alterations, besides those observable in
this Experiment, the Effect of its fainter Changes being evident by their
Effects on bruised and feeble Bodies. And that there are considerable Changes
in the Air, Considerable Changes in the Qualities of the Air.
is further evident from what Kircherus, during his Stay in Malta observes
concerning Mount Aetna, which he could see from that place on some days, though
on others, which seemed clear, the Air was so condensed, that he could not
discern it; and thet the like Changes of the Air have sensibly altered the
Prospects of several Places, is too commonly known to need further Instances:
And we our selves have often taken Notice of plentiful Steams and Exhalations
in the Air, by the use of Telescopes, which could not otherwise be taken notice
of, which after a Shower of Rain would presently disappear: And that such Steams
do rise from the Earth, has been observed by Miners, who are often too
sensible of Damps, which except timely prevented, make the Air so thick and
muddy, as to put out their very Candles. And that the Thickness of the Air may
contribute to the raising of the Mercury in the Pipe, appears from what has
been before observed in the Torrecellian Experiment.
And since the External Air is liable to be altered so many ways, by the
Mixture of insensible Corpuscles of Matter, its Rarity and Density are
sufficient to account for the several Variations in the Height of the suspended
Mercury; since accordingly as the Air is Rarifi'd, its Pressure in Bodying up
the Mercury must accordingly be varied.

EXPERIMENT XIX.
The subsiding of a small Cylinder of Water.
TO try whether a Cylinder of Water would subside in our Receiver as the
Cylinder of Mercury did, we filled a Cylinder of four foot long with it, which
being inverted, and the lower end placed in a Glass Vessel, we let it down in
the Receiver and closed it up; which being done, and the Pump set on work, we
found that it did not in the least subside till such a Quantity of Air was
exhausted, as to leave the included Air so much weakened in its Spring as to be
worked upon, and overpowered by the weight of the Water; and then, upon every
Suction, it sensibly subsided, though not so much as the Quicksilver; for whereas
the Quicksilver subsided till it fell within an Inch of the Basis, the expanded
Air remaining in the Receiver, was able to bear up the Water a Foot high. But
the Experiment being tried in a small Receiver, the Quantity of Air included in
that, coming nearer to an Aequilibrium with the Cylinder of Water, it sensibly
subsided upon the first Exsuction; and much lower upon the second, and
sometimes not much less than two foot; and the Water in this as well as the
former, upon a reingress of Air rose to the Top of the Cylinder, but with more
Speed than the former.

EXPERIMENT XX.
Conceening the Elater of Water.
TO evince that Water has, besides a notable one, a languid Elater, we filled a
Glass Bubble with a long Neck, termed by the Chemists a Phylosophical Egg,
about a Span above the Bubble, with Water; where fixing a piece of Paper, we
conveyed it into the Receiver, and found, that, after part of the Air was
pumped out, the Water sensibly rose upon every Exsuction, the breadth of a
Barly-Corn; and upon the ingress of the Air presently subsided to its former
place. Another Instance of the Air's Expansion, I obtained by filling a round
Pewter Vessel with Water at a small Hole, which being stopped with Soder, and
the Vessel bruised in several places, to compress the Water, the Vessel being
perforated with a Needle, it spun out with Force enough to raise it a
considerable height into the Air.

EXPERIMENT XXI.
Concerning the same.
HAving filled a Glass Viol with Water, which contained something above a Pound,
I took a Glass Pipe, about as thick as a Goose Quill; and having put one End of
it into the Neck of the Bottle, and closed it with Cement, I filled the Pipe
half full with Water, sticking a piece of Paper at the Superficies of the Water
on the outside of the Pipe, which being placed in the Pump, after the Air had
been pumped a while; above sixty Bubbles of Water as big as Pease rose out of
the Water, one after another; and the Water in the Bottle so far expanded, as
to rise quite up to the Top of the Pipe; and being permitted to subside,
several Bubbles of Air rose out of it afresh, as soon as it renewed its
Expansion as before; but upon a reingress of the Air, it presently subsided
almost to the Bottom of the Pipe.

Besides which, the following Phenomenon were observable: First, That those
Bubbles, which ascended last, were much larger than the former, either, because
their Parts were more expanded than before, or because more Bubbles of Air were
united together, but whatever was the Cause of it, we observed, that they
ascended much slower than before.

Another thing to be observed was, that though Bubbles are usually wont to rise
above the Surface of the Water, encompassed with a thin Film; yet, in this
Tube, the Surface of the Water being Unequal, the less protuberant Parts of the
Bubble were covered with Water.

Another Observation which occurred was, that whereas those Bubbles which rose
at the Beginning of the Operation, divided the Water which they passed through,
in their Ascent; these latter expanded Bubbles, filling up the Cavity of the
Cylinder in their Passage, raised the Water before them; till the Air was again
permitted to re-enter the Receiver, and then they wholly disappeared.

From which Observations it may Naturally be inferred; First, Bodies under
Water may be pressed upon by the Atmosphere, as well as incumbent Water;
Secondly, It cannot be hence inferred, that the Intumescence of the Water
proceeded from any Elasticity in it; since, it might more probably proceed from
the Elasticity of the Air lodged in the Pores of the Water. And to make it
probable, that those Bubbles proceeded from small Particles of Air, dispersed
through the Pores of the Water, and not from any spirituous Parts of the Liquor
expanded, I shall subjoyn the following Experiment.

EXPERIMENT XXII. The Bubbles proved to be Aerious, and not Watery, by
observing the like Bubbles in i Mercury: To which is subjoined a Digression,
whether the Air is generated de Novo, etc.
THOUGH it be generally alleged, that the Bubbles which rise in the Cylindrical
Tube, in the foregoing Nineteenth Experiment, are Particles of Water expanded,
upon a Diminution of the Incumbent Weight of the Air; Yet I am apter to believe
them really Parts of Air dispersed through the Water; because, upon the
re-entring of the Air, the Water was not impelled quite to the Top, but was
depressed, by the Air lodged above it, almost an Inch, which, being collected
together, was able to resist the Pressure of the Air.

The Bubbles which rise in Water, Aerial, proved.
But in order to a further Discovery, whether the aforesaid Bubbles were Water
or not? We tried the Nineteenth Experiment in a small Receiver, and upon
drawing out the Air, the Water subsided; upon which, several Bubbles rising to
the Top of the Cylinder, prevented the Rising of the Water, half an Inch, being
possessed by the Bubbles of the Air, collected at the Top of the Cylinder: And
we were further persuaded, that those Bubbles were Aerial, because the Air,
being a second time exhausted, the Water contained in the Tube, was, by the
Spring of that Air contained in the Cylinder, depressed below the Surface of
the Water which was without the Tube, having a Unequal Superficies, as Water
exposed to Air in such Tubes usually has, but rather more protuberant: And to
demonstrate, that those Bubbles were really made up of Aerial Particles, when
the Air was almost exhausted, and the Water had subsided near as low as the
external Water, by applying Water to the Tube, which contained the Air, we
observed that it was so far expanded, as to depress the Water down to the
Bottom of the Tube, several Inches below the External Water: So that the Air,
which was before expanded to near a hundred times it is extent, was capable of
being further expanded by Heat.

But I was yet further confirmed in my Opinion, that those Bubbles were nothing
but Air, lodged in the Pores of the Water, because the Air being exhausted out
of the Receiver, the subsiding Water yielded not Bubbles as before, except a
few small ones, when it was near pumped out. And what I took for a stronger
Argument was, that the same Experiment being tried with Mercury, several
Bubbles likewise rose to the Top of the Cylinder; and the Mercury subsiding a
second time, upon the Exsuction of the Air, several Bubbles appeared in the
Bottom of the Cylinder; which grew bigger and bigger as the Surface of the
Mercury descended lower. From whence it appeared, that a Body, The Expansion of
Water depends on the Elater of the Air lodged in its Pores.
more ponderous than Water, might contain Aerial Particles in it is Pores,
capable of expanding themselves, when the Cause of their Compression is taken
away; so that we have Reason to believe, that the Intumescence of the Water,
not only in these Experiments, but also the (...) of the Water, contained in
the Pewter Globe before mentioned, proceeded from the Expansion of the Aerial
Particles contained in the Pores of the Water, rather than from any Elasticity
in the Water it self.

These things being premised, it would be a Matter of some Importance, and of
no small Consequence, Whether Air be a primogeneal bedy or not?
to determine, whether what we have said of the Air be true, to consider
whether Air be really a Primogenial Body, and inconvertible into Water, and
Vice versa, or not: But it being as difficult, as requisite, we shall rather
choose to offer what may be urged of either the Affirmative or the Negative.

And first, in favor of the inaptitude of Air to be turned into Water, or of
Water into Air, it may be urged; that besides, that it has been the Opinion of
several Philosophers, it has likewise been found impossible by Experience to
effect such a Change in either of them; And the diligent Schottus Mecham.
Hydraulicopneumat. Part 3. Class. 1. relates, that in the Musaeum Kircherianum,
Water has been hermetically sealed in a Glass with a long Neck, and kept there
this forty Years, without undergoing any Change: Nor, indeed, do we perceive
the least alteration in the Nature of Air, Hermetically sealed in Glasses for
Chemical Uses, though it may acquire several Degrees of Heat in them: And it may
very plainly be seen, that though Water is divided into smaller Parts, and raised
in the form of Vapors, by Heat; yet it is so far from being turned into Air,
that in Chemical Distillations, it falls down into the Receiver in the form of
a Liquor. And likewise Volatile Spirits and Salts, though their Parts swim up and
down in the Receiver for some time, yet the former presently condense into a
Liquor, and the latter, into Salts.

And further it may again be urged, that though the Parts of Water may be put in
such an Agitation, as in some measure to counterfeit the form of Air, yet since
the quick Coalition of those Parts into a fluid Form, argues the impossibility
of giving them a due Texture, requisite to add to Air the Springiness
observable in it; it is a strong Argument against the Possibility of effecting
such a Change. And that a bare Motion and Agitation of Parts is not sufficient
to add Springiness to a Body, appears from the foregoing Experiment concerning
a piece of Match, included in our Receiver; where the Agitated Parts of Smoke,
were by no means capable of hindering the Expansion of the Bladder contained in
it.

And though Josephus Acosta tells us, that Grates of Iron have been so much
corroded in the Air, as to be turned into a Substance which would crumble into
Powder like parched Straw; and though the Accurate Varenius has observed in the
Issands called Azores, that by the Sharpness of the Air even the Tiles of the
Houses have been corroded; yet are they no Arguments, that such corrosive
Humors may put on the form of Air; since such Phenomenon may be accounted for,
by the Mixture of corrosive Steams mixed with it; which are so far from being
endowed with the true Qualities of Air, that they may, notwithstanding they are
mixed with the Air, retain their own Natures; which is evident in subliming of
Sal Armoniack. And I have had a subtle Saline Body, which would not only rise
it self, retaining it is own Nature, but would also raise the Substance of Gold
along with it, whose Parts would also retain their own Natures, and stick to
the Top of the Receiver like pure Gold.

I remember that once having tied a Bladder to the Neck of an Aeolipile, when
the Water was forced out into it, so as to distend it, we slipped it off, and
having tied it close, put it into our Receiver; where we observed, that upon
the Exsuction of the Air, it was considerably expanded: And though the Bladder,
when taken out of the Receiver, continued in the Cold for some time; yet the
included Substance continued near as fully distended: But notwithstanding the
Plausibleness of this Experiment, I could not but suspect, that the Distension
rather proceeded from the Air, which upon the first working of the Aeolipile
came out with it, than from any parts of the Water converted into Air.

But to proceed to what may be alleged, to Countenance the Change of Water
into Air; If a good Aeolipile be placed upon hot Coals, the Water will
sometimes spring three or four foot high into the Air; and when taken off the
fire, will continue to emit copious Streams: And if, when it is taken from the
fire, almost empty, the Neck be immersed in Water, as soon as it begins to suck
in Water, it will raise Store of Bubbles, which seem to proceed from Water too
much expanded by the Heat of the Aeolipile; and if, when that Aeolipile is
almost full of Water, a live Coal be held before the Neck, it will manifestly
be kindled, by very vehement Steams which flow out of it, which will have the
more powerful Effects, the nearer the Coal is held to the Mouth of the
Aeolipile.

But since by holding a Knife before these Steams, they will be condensed upon
it into Water; and thence appear not so much to have acquired the Nature of Air
as to have their Parts put into a violent Motion, I shall add a Relation from
the Industrious Kircher, of a Famous Hudraulick Engine, See Figure the 15th.
which he made by the Order of Innocent the Tenth. The Account of it, in his
own Words, is the following, Cum eodem tempore quo haec scripsi, Summi Pont.
Innocentii X. Mandato Organi Hydraulici in Horto Quirinali constituendi Cura
mihi commendata esset, Aeoliam Cameram insigni sane Successu construi jussimus,
ea quae sequitur Ratione.

Erat Longitudo seu Altitudo Camerae (A H) quinque Pedum, Latitudine tres fere
ex Lateribus, constructa, in Medio duo continebat Diaphragmata (C D) and (E F)
in Modum Cribri pluribus Foraminibus pertusi. Paulo infra Canalis (G) Aquam
advehens inserebatur in (H) eidem Epistomium parabat Exitum. Aqua itaque per
Canalem (G) maximo Impetu ruens vehementissimum Ventum mox intus excitabat; qui
Ventus nimia Humiditate imbutus, ut purior ^xiret sicciorque Diaphragmata illa
in Cribri Modum pertusa, ordinata sunt. Intra haec enim Aquae vehemens
Agitatio, rupta fractaque Aerem puriorem per Canalem (A) subtiliorem emittebat:
Verum cum postea inventum sit Aerem plus aequo humidum interioribus Organi
Meatibus maximum Detrimentum infer: Hinc, ut Aer aquosus siccissimam
Consistentiam acquireret, ordinavimus Canalem plumbeum (Q R) in Haelicem
contortum Vasi (S) aliquantulum capaciori in modum Vrnae efformato, insertum.
Intra Vrnam enim plumbeam and Canalem tortuosum illisus Aer humidus, ita ab
omni Aquositate defaecabatur ut ex Furno in Organum derivatus dici potuerit.
Vrna (S) Canalis tortuosi (Q R) ultimum Orificium (Z) inseritur Anemothaecae
Organi. Et hunc Modum Organis Hydraulicis omnium aptissimum reperi.

And I rather cite this Account, because it is delivered as Kircher's own
Observation; and had I, when I was at Rome, taken notice of these Engines; and
found that the Effluviae which blew the Organs, were not again condensed into
Water, I should be apt to believe it not impossible to turn Water into Air; it
being altogether impossible, That the Air lodged in the Pores of the Water,
should supply so large a Quantity of Air, as is requisite to blow the Organs: I
therefore was induced to think, that it might proceed from some Parts of the
Water put into a very brisk Motion, since I had observed, as I passed betwixt
Lions and Geneva, that the River of Rhone, being on a sudden straightened betwixt
two Rocks, which are so near, that a Man may stand with one Foot upon one, and
the other Foot upon the other, some Parts of the Water were put into so violent
a Motion, as to be raised into the Air a considerable Height, and at a distance
to appear like a Mist; though I must confess it difficult to conceive, how such
Vapors should pass through a leaden Pipe of such a Length, since we see that
Vapors are condensed into Liquids, in a much less time, in the Heads of
Alembicks, and the Necks of Aeolipiles, when once the Motion of their Parts are
checked by Cold.

But leaving this plausible, though not satisfactory Experiment, I shall proceed
to another, which is this; Having filled a Glass Bubble, capable of containing
about three Ounces, with near equal Parts of Oil of Vitriol and Water, half a
dozen Iron Nails being cast into it, we stopped the Cylindrical Neck of the
Tube with Diapalma, so close, as to exclude the Air altogether; which being
done, we immersed the Neck of this Bubble into a Glass Vessel full of the same
Liquor, and in a little time perceived Bubbles to rise to the Top of it, being
raised by the Heat produced by the Action of the Oil upon the Nails; and this
Air was so much increased, in a little time, as to depress the Water quite out
of the Bubble into the Cylindrical Neck of it: But lest that Pressure should be
thought to proceed from the Agitation of those insensible Parts of Matter, we
observed, That though the Vessels were exposed to the Air for four days, to give
the Motion of the Parts time to cease, had the Effect proceeded from them; we
observed, That the Liquor, all that time, continued depressed, the Space
beforementioned being filled with Air. And, what was worthy to be noted, Upon a
small degree of Heat approaching the Bubble, the included Air was further
dilated. And the like Phenomenon succeeded upon a Trial with Nails corroded in
Aqua fortis; From which Experiments, it might be inferred, That if Water be not
convertible into Air; yet it seems probable that it may be generated anew.

And that Air and Water are mutually convertible into each other might further
be urged, as nothing but what the Aristotelians teach and allow of. But we
shall rather urge, That if what Democritus, Lucippus and Epicurus, together
with other Naturalists teach be allowed of, viz. That the Qualities of Bodies
depend on the different Figures, Shapes and Textures of the Parts of Matter,
they consist of; it will be reasonable enough to think, That the Texture of the
Parts of Water being altered, they may acquire the several Qualities of Air;
since it is certain, That the Parts of Matter may, by a lucky Concourse of
Causes, become springy: So Silver by being beaten with a Hammer acquires
Springiness, which it loses by being heated in the Fire, and becomes flexible.

EXPERIMENT XXIII.
The Subject of the former Experiment prosecuted.
IN Prosecution of what was delivered in the foregoing Experiments, We filled a
Glass called a Philosophical Egg with common Water, about a Foot and a half
high; it being large enough to contain about nine Ounces, and the Diameter of
the Neck being, at the Top, half an Inch, and at the Bottom an Inch; this being
put into the Receiver, and the Pump plied, when the Air was pretty well
exhausted, several Bubbles rose to the Top and broke; but all of them finding
an easy Passage through the Water, did not elevate it as when they ascended in
a narrower Cylinder; but upon an Admission of Air into the Receiver again, the
Water was sensibly depressed.

To try whether distilled Water was more subject to expand than common Water; I
put two Ounces of it into a Glass Bubble, which wrought to the Middle of it is
Neck; but it neither swelled nor yielded Bubbles upon an Exsuction of the Air.

But having put distilled Water into two distinct Philosophical Eggs, the Neck
of the former being straightened with a Glass Tube, we placed them in the
Receiver, and found a manifest Difference upon the Exsuction of the Air; for in
that which was straightened, the Air manifestly elevating the Water, several
Bubbles were gathered about the bottom of the Glass Tube; whereas in the other
Egg, the Water was not in the least elevated; and though the Bubble in the
last-mentioned, disappeared upon the Re-ingress of the Air, those above the
Tube continued visible, only a little contracted, for a considerable time; the
Surface of the Water, which was before elevated, being depressed lower than
when first put into the Egg.

And after a days time having again plied the Pump, we observed, That the
Bubbles were so much drawn out before, that we could scarce discern a Bubble in
either; but that in which the Cylindrical Tube was placed, swelled the Breadth
of a Barley Corn, though the other did not; yet, in the former, upon a Re-ingress
of Air, it subsided again, and whether that Swelling was caused by the
Rarefaction of the Water, or the Spring of some latent airy Parts, is not easy
to determine.

EXPERIMENT XXIV.
The former Experiments prosecuted with other Liquors.
HAVING put Sallad Oil into a Glass about the Size of a Turkey's Egg, whose Stem
was near of an Inch in Diameter, the Liquor reaching up to the Middle of the
Stem, we placed it in the Receiver, together with the like Vessel filled to the
same Height with Water; and upon drawing out the Air, the Bubbles were not only
more copious than those of the Water, but rose much sooner as well as longer,
continuing till the Pumper was quite tired with Pumping; and what was very
remarkable in this Experiment was, that when the Oil was put into the Receiver,
before the Receiver could be closed, and the Pump put into Action, it subsided
near half an Inch in the Stem.

Having put Oil of Turpentine into a Glass Bubble, we observed, That it
afforded a good Quantity of Bubbles, which expanded themselves in their Ascent,
and would sometimes raise the Oil in the Tube so much as to make it run over.

But besides the foregoing, we tried the like Experiments with other Liquors,
amongst which, a strong Solution of Salt of Tartar afforded very few Bubbles,
and those much later than other Liquors: Spirit of Vinegar likewise yielded
very few. Red Wine afforded Bubbles pretty plentifully, which changed Places by
moving in an oblique Ascent, and formed a sort of Froth near the Top, which
presently disappeared: Milk afforded plentiful Bubbles, which elevated that
Liquor more than common Water.

We likewise put Eggs into the Receiver, to see whether the Substance contained
in the Shells would break them; leaving the Film within it whole, as that
Substance frozen had done; but it succeeded not.

We put Spirit of Urine into a Glass Egg, filling another up to the Middle of
the Neck with common Water; to which we added as much Spirit of Wine as raised
it half an Inch higher; and into a Glass which differed from the former only in
having a flat Bottom, we poured rectified Spirit of Wine, till it rose to of
the Neck: And the Edges of these three being marked, we put them into a
Receiver. Upon the Exsuction of the Air the Mixture of Water and Spirit of Wine
afforded very few Bubbles: The Spirit of Urin swelled near an Inch and a half
above the Mark, affording Store of Bubbles, which formed a Froth, upon which
several larger Bubbles lay, which were placed one above another, to the Top of
the Tube: The Spirit of Wine afforded Bubbles till we were weary of pumping,
which ascended very swiftly, and immediately disappeared at the Top, first
lifting up the Surface of that spirituous Liquor so as to form a thin Film. And
it was further observable, That the Motion of these Bubbles in their Ascent,
was in a strait Line; whereas those of the Water and Wine made a Line, which on
each side appeared like the Teeth of a Saw: And lastly, in this Spirit we took
Notice, That the order which these Bubbles ascended in, was in Lines parallel,
and of an Equal Distance from each other; the Bubbles likewise following each
other, in such an order, as to form a sort of Bracelet, one end of which seemed
to rise from a certain Point at the Bottom of the Glass.

When Air returned into the Receiver, the Bubbles on the Spirit of Wine
gradually subsided; yet neither that, nor the Mixture of Water and Spirit were
depressed below the Mark: But the Spirit of Wine continued expanded, near half
an Inch, which I found to succeed upon several Trials.

EXPERIMENT XXV.
Concerning the Air's Gravity, and Expansion under Water.
HAving filled a Wide-mouthed Jar, with about half a Pint of Common Water; we
sunk two Glass-Viols, whose Shape and Size is represented by the Eighth Figure,
one of which contained just so much of a Ponderous Mercurial Mixture, as was
requisite to sink it, when covered with white Wax; the other being weighed down
by Water, and the Mouths being downwards; the Quantity of Water contained in
the former, filling three Parts of four of the Glass, the Air contained in the
latter being equal in Dimensions to a Pea.

These being let down into the Receiver, upon plying the Pump, at the last so
many Bubbles rose up to that which swam upon the Water, as were able, by
expanding themselves, to cause some of the Water to fly out, and make the Viol
emerge to the Top of the Water contained in the Jar; where at every Exsuction
it continued to expand, till it was able to raise up the side of the Viol, and
in part to evacuate it self; upon which it presently swam upon the Water, as
before, and eight times after discharged a Bubble of Air about the Size of a
Pea; but, when we permitted the Air to enter in again, it presently subsided to
the Bottom. As for the other, it continued at the Bottom all the while. But
some time after, the Pump being plied, it raised it self considerably; but
about sixty Parcels of Air as big as Peace, finding vent, and getting out, it
presently subsided; though upon a further Expansion of the Air, it rose again,
and subsided, which successive Ascent and descent, it continued Nine times
after after the Pump ceased working; but when the Air was again let in, it was
presently fixed at the Bottom. From which Experiment, that Hydrostatical Rule,
That a Body will swim in the Water, if it be lighter than its equal Proportion
in Bulk, will appear to be likewise true, when the Weight of the Atmosphere is
taken off.

EXPERIMENT XXVI.
Concerning the Vibrations of a Pendulum.
IT being usually taught, That the Motion of a Pendulum is something quicker,
accordingly as the Medium it moves in, is thinner; we suspended one, which
weighed about twenty Drachms in our Receiver, fixing it to the Cover by a piece
of Silk; and having fixed another of an equal weight without the Receiver, we
gave them both an equal Motion, and observed, that whilst the Latter made
twenty Vibrations, the Former counted twenty; but the Pendulum, being
afterward put into Motion in the exhausted Receiver, and likewise in the same
Receiver, before it was exhausted, continued it is Vibrations to an equal space
of Time in both; so that from what we could observe, the Difference of the
Vibrations in Air, and that more rarified Medium, viz. the exhausted Receiver,
was scarce sensible.

EXPERIMENT XXVII.
Concerning the Propagation of Sounds.
IT has been the received Opinion of the Schools, That the Air is the Medium,
through which Sounds are conveyed: But the Industrious Kircher having
observed, that if a Bell be fixed in the upper end of a Tube, and, upon making
the Experiment de Vacuo, be left there, a Lodestone applied to the side of the
Tube, will attract the Steel-clapper; which, upon a Removal of that Lodestone,
will fall upon the other side of the Bell, and cause an Audible Sound: He
thence infers, That the Medium through which Sounds are conveyed, must be
much more subtle than the Air. But to evince the contrary, we suspended a Watch
in our Receiver, by a Packthred, and observed, That the Sound was not only
audible at the sides of the Receiver; but that that which was likewise
perceived by the Ear, held near the Cover, was different from that which we
heard at the sides of the Receiver; but the Air being drawn out, we could not
perceive the least Sound, though the Motion of the Minutes assured us, that the
Pendulum continued it is Motion; yet upon admitting of Air again into the
Receiver, the Sound was again renewed; which Experiment seems to evince, that
the Air is the Chief Medium, through which Sounds are conveyed: Yet it is not
a little strange, that so slight a Stroke as that of the Pendulum, should give
such an Impulse to the Ambient Air, as to enable it to communicate a Motion to
the sides of the Receiver, strong enough to put the External Air into an
Undulating Motion.

But having supported a Bell in the Middle of our Receiver, by a large Stick,
which reached from one side to the other, the Diameter of the Bell, being about
two Inches, we observed, that though the Sound in the Receiver, was not equally
as sharp as in the open Air; yet there was no considerable Variation, when the
Air was drawn out; which evinces, that a subtler Medium than the Air, is not
altogether incapable of propagating Sounds, no more than Air; however, in the
foregoing Experiment tried with a Bell, suspended in a Glass-Tube, it may not
without Reason be suspected, that the Cavity of the Tube was not wholly void of
Air, since Experience informs us, that it is impossible to fill the
Glass-Cylinder, so as to keep the Upper Part of the Tube void of Air, since the
Aerie Parts lodged in the Pores of the Mercury, fly up into it.

And further on this Occasion, to show how far the Air is the Principal Medium
of Sounds, we might allege, that it was observable in a former Experiment,
that though upon the striking of Fire, with the Lock of a Pistol in our Receiver,
the Sound is audible; yet it is much more dead, than when made in the open Air:
And the like Variation is observable in all other Sounds made in our Receiver.

EXPERIMENT XXVIII.
The Eruption of Bubbles from Water, upon the removal of the Air.
FOR a further Confirmation of what has been delivered in the XXth Experiment,
viz. That the Air included in our Receiver, makes as strong a Pressure upon
Bodies encompassed by it, as if they were exposed to the Pressure of the
Atmosphere; we put a Viol, filled with Water, and well stopped, into our
Receiver; and, upon an Exsuction of the Air, found no sensible Alterations; but
another, which was not so close stopped, being put in, we observed that the Air
included in the Bottle, upon the Surface of the Water, making it is way out,
several Bubbles presently appeared in the Bottom of the Water: from which
Trials, it appears, That whilst the Air was included, the Water appeared as if
pressed upon by the Atmosphere. But in order to a further Prosecution of our
Design in this Experiment, we filled a Glass-Egg with Water, and suspended it
by a String to the Cover; so that, by turning the Glass-stopper in the middle
of the Cover, we so screwed up the Neck of the Egg, as to break it, and thereby
make way for the Exclusion of the Air; upon which a number of Bubbles presently
rose in the Water, so as to represent a Shower of Rain inverted. But this
Experiment may be tried with less trouble, in one of our little Receivers,
where the Exsuction of the Air is more expeditious. In one of which the
Experiment being made with red Wine, instead of Water, it appeared immediately
frothy, like Bottle-Ale, though opened less cautiously.

EXPERIMENT XXIX.
The reason of the Ascent of Fumes and Vapors.
TO show, whether the Ascent of Fumes and Vapors, was rather promoted by the
Ambient Pressure of the Air, than that their Ascent depended on their own
Positive Lightness; I conveyed a Certain Liquor which I had formerly made for
other Purposes, into our Receiver; it consisting of Metalline Ingredients,
which upon Unstopping of the Bottle, would emit copious Steams, like the Powder
of Alablaster; but upon stopping of it again, the Upper Part of the Bottle, as
well as the Liquor, became Transparent; and this Liquor being conveyed into
our Receiver, with a Weight affixed to the bottom of the Viol, to keep it from
rising up, when the Cork was pulled out, we tied a String to the Cork, and the
other End to the Receiver; and having closed it up, and pumped out the Air, we
screwed the Cork out of the Bottle, and observed, that though some Parts of the
Air included in the Bottle, raised a few; yet the Fumes did not rise as when
exposed to the open Air, but lifting up themselves by their own Agitation, rose
to the Top of the Viol, and no higher, but ran down the outside of the Glass in
Streams; which continued till the Ingress of Air was permitted to put a stop to
that Phenomenon; but as soon as the Bottle was taken out into the open Air,
Fumes plentifully rose as before: From whence it appears, that Steams in a
Medium thinner than themselves, may tend downwards.

EXPERIMENT XXX.
The Nature of Fluid Bodies illustrated by Smoke.
TO show how much the Ambient Atmosphere, emulates the Nature of a fluid Body;
We enclosed a light Match, in our little Receivers; and when it was filled with
Smoke, we took the Match out, leaving the Smoke behind, closing the Receiver
again, to keep it from flying away; upon which, we observed, that the Smoke
settling it self in the lower Part of the Receiver, so far emulated a Fluid, as
to change it is Horizontal Superficies, as the Glass was variously inclined. As
also upon a more violent Agitation of the Vessel, it was put into a Vibrating
and Undulating Motion, as Liquids usually are, which it lost again by degrees.
When the Key of the Stop-cock was turned, Part of it would flow out like Red
Wine, out of a Bottle, when the Neck is inverted and immersed in Water; the Air
gradually ascending into the Receiver in it is Room: Besides which Phenomenon it
was remarkable, that a hot Iron being held near one side of the Vessel; the
Smoke was presently raised in a Stream up to the Top of the Receiver, keeping
distinct Superficies, from the Air included in the Receiver, yet nevertheless
upon a Recess of that Heat, it would again subside. And these things being
considered, as likewise that there is a manifest Difference in the Weight of
Proportionable Quantities, as to Extension, of other Liquors, it may not be
absurd to mention the Atmosphere, amongst others Liquids; especially since,
besides what we have already taken notice of, we may rationally suppose, that
there are several Inequalities upon the Borders of the Atmosphere, as well as
upon the Surface of that Smoke; since the Inequalities of it is upper
Superficies are not altogether indiscernible, if we look upon the Setting-Sun,
with a good Telescope; for by that means, we may perceive the Surface of it
rough, with several Inequalities, which curl along like Waves in the Sea.

EXPERIMENT XXXI.
Concerning the Cohaesion of Flat Bodies.
TO try the Strength of the Air's Spring, when rarified, in a great Measure, by
Exsuction, in our Receiver; we tried an Experiment, formerly more fully taken
notice of, with two flat polished Marbles: For having fastened a Weight of
about four Ounces to the lower, and wet the flat Superficies of them with
Spirit of Wine, to keep the Air from getting betwixt them, we put them into our
Receiver, and found that the Spring of the Air, after several Exsuctions, was
strong enough to bear up the Understone, and to keep it from falling. And how
strong the Cohaesion of Flat Bodies may be, we have a Notable Instance related
P. Nic. Zucchius, apud Schot. Part. 1. Mec. Hydraulopneum, who says, Juveni
lacertorum suorum robur jactanti proposita semel est laminea aerea, per ansam
in medio extantem apprehensam elevanda e Tabula Marmorea, cui optime
congruebat: Tum instantibus amicis manum utramque admovens, cum luctatus diu
harentem removisset, excusavit impotentiam objecta peregrini and potentissimi
glutinis Interpositione, quo fortissime copulante nequiret divelli; donec vidit
ab alio per tabulam facillime laminam deduci, and ad extrema productam, and
actam in transversum inde deportari. But to make it evident, that two Bodies
may stick together, by having their Surfaces Contiguous only in a small
Compass, I shall subjoyn an Experiment made in our Receiver.

EXPERIMENT XXXII.
The Pressure of the outward Air, on a Valve fixed to the External Orifice of
the Stop-cock.
HAving exhausted our Receiver, and taken it off the Pump, we applied a tapering
Valve of Brass, such as the Ninth Figure represents, the taper End being put
into the Orifice of it, and the Chink betwixt the Stop-cock and the Glass,
being filled up with Diachylon. To the lower Superficies of the Door of that
Valve, was fixed a Button, to which a Scale was hung, to hold Weights in; and
then, the Key of the Stop-cock being turned, the Atmosphere made such a strong
Pressure to get in, as to keep the Valve close to the Orifice, till a
considerable Weight was put into the Scales, and then the Weight of the
Atmosphere being overpowered, it was presently drawn down. In which Experiment
it was to be observed, That though the Receiver was but moderately exhausted, and
though it leak'd considerably; yet the Weight supported by the Pressure of the
Atmosphere, amounted to ten Pound: Nor indeed is it strange, that it is Pressure
should be so considerable, if we do but think, how large the Cylinder of Air,
that recoiling from the Ground, presses against it, is, being extended to the
utmost Superficies of the Atmosphere.

EXPERIMENT XXXIII. Concerning the Pressure of the Air against the lower
superficies of the Sucker, what Weight will draw it down, and how much it is
able to raise. A Discourse concerning the Nature of Suction, etc.
The weight of the Atmosphere considered.
TO compute more exactly the Weight of the Incumbent Atmosphere, we impelled the
Cylinder to the Top of the Pump, taking off the Receiver, and fixing just such
a Weight to one of the Teeth of the Sucker, as was able to bring it down to the
Bottom of the Cylinder; which being done, and the Sucker impelled up again to
the Top of the Cylinder, the upper Orifice of it was exactly stopped; and a
pair of Scales being fixed to the Iron-Sucker, by casting in so many Weights,
as were able to draw down the Sucker, we were truly informed of the Weight of a
Pillar of the Atmosphere of an equal Diameter with the Bore of the Cylinder. By
which Method we found, that the Sucker, which required 28 Pound of Lead to draw
it down, was not drawn down with less than the Addition of an hundred Pound,
when the upper Orifice of the Cylinder was stopped; though upon turning of the
Key of the Stop-cock, and letting in Air, it would readily fall without that
Weight; which was an Argument, that the Descent was hindered by the Pressure of
the Air, which buoyed up against the lower Part of the Sucker.

What weight the Atmosphere is able to raise, suspended at the Sucker.
This Experiment being tried, and the Sucker being forcibly drawn down to the
Bottom of the Cylinder, whose Diameter was about three Inches; the Pressure of
the Atmosphere was so considerable, as to be able to raise above a hundred
Pound weight; besides the weight of the Sucker, which was not a little admired
by the Standers-by, because they saw no Force used to lift it up.

And though by such Trials we may not be able to discover exactly the weight of
the Atmosphere; yet, as a Famous Poet says,

Est quoddam prodire tenus, si non datur ultra. But were this Experiment Tried
at several Seasons, in the Year, and in several Climes, as well as in Cylinders
of a different Diameter, it might render our Guesses more certain as to the
Height, and Gravity of the Atmosphere, and whether it varies considerably at
such distant times: For the Place where the Foregoing Experiment was tried, was
about 51 Degrees Latitude, being tried in the Winter, and about the Change of
the Moon.

But, not to spend so much time, as would be taken up with all the Reflections,
that might be made on the Foregoing Experiment; I shall consider some few
Inferences, which may be drawn from them.

And First, From the Rising of the Sucker, and the Weights fixed to it, we may
call in Question, what some teach concerning Suction, viz. That there is a sort
of Endeavor, to draw the Body sucked, in the Parts of that Body which is said
to suck; for though when we suck a thing with our Mouths, there is a Manifest
Endeavor of our Mouth to draw the Body sucked; yet the Cavity of the Cylinder
is not so disposed by any Endeavor in the Glass-Tube. Nor can the Ascent of
the Sucker be attributed to any sucking Force of every Part included in the
upper Part of the Cylinder, since it appears not, how such Aerie Particles
should be hooked in the Pores of the Sucker, or how they should be able to
raise such a Weight: Nay, that those Particles of Air do not draw it up, is
further evident; since by admitting more Air in, that supposititious sucking
Quality is diminished, and not increased: And for the same Reason it is
evident, that it cannot proceed from a fuga Vacui; for there is the same Reason
for an Endeavor to prevent a Vacuum, though a little more Air be let in, as
there was before; since there still remains a Vacuity. Nor can the weakened
Attraction, upon letting in of Air, be attributed to the Resistance of the
Vacuity, but rather the Spring of the included Air; since when in the former
Experiment it was plain, that the rising of the Sucker and Weights, was not
obstructed by the Cavity of the Cylinder, when void of Air.

Considerations concerning a Vacuum.
But to proceed: From hence further we may be directed, what to think of
Nature's Abhorrency of a Vacuum, which has been so long held as an Axiom in
the Schools: For besides, that the Insensible Parts of Matter, can neither have
Sense to perceive any ill consequences in the Universe, which would ensue a
Vacuum, nor be able to know how as Intelligent Parts of Matter to prevent it;
(for if they did, Nature may be said in a great many Cases to act very
irrationally to effect her Designs, since in the XXXIId Experiment, instead of
rushing into the Receiver, she less cautiously raised up the Valve, and kept
her self out. But, I say, besides the Insensibility of Matter, it may farther
be urged against that Axiom, that the Endeavor which those Bodies may seem to
have, rather is to fill than to prevent a Vacuum; since upon the drawing down
of that Valve, the Air which rushed in, could not prevent what was already in
Being. Besides in our XIXth Experiment, it might be demanded, Why the Water
which descended into the Tube, upon the Exsuction of the Air, did not rather
keep it is place to prevent a Vacuum, or why for the same Reason it did not
ascend before the Re-ingress of the Air.

Moreover, the Air may rather be said to rush in again, as being impelled by
the Spring of the Neighboring Air, than a Design to fill the Vacuities, since
from our XVIIth Experiment, it appears, That when the Receiver was supposed to
be full, we could by the help of the Sucker, find the Spring of Subsequent Air
impelled by it, still force more into it; and even in Wind-Guns it is manifest,
that the Air compressed as much as it is in our Receiver, may be squeezed into
half the Room.

And from the forementioned Experiments, it may further be deduced, That the
Reason, why Metaphorically speaking, Bodies may seem to forget their own
Natures, to shun a Vacuum, seems to consist in this, viz. that the Weight of
the incumbent Water, or the Pressure of the subjacent Air were not strong
enough to press down or buoy up one another; for from our Nineteenth Experiment
it appeared, that when the Pressure of the Air was taken away, the Weight of
the Water it self was sufficient to make it subside, tho it left no Air behind
it: But further, from this last mentioned Experiment it appears, that it is
possible, Even by Weights, to measure how far Nature is disposed to prevent or
fill Vacuities; since a small difference in Weight determined, by depressing or
permitting the Sucker to rise, how far Nature's Abhorrency of a Vacuum depended
on the Causes we have so often mentioned.

But here it may be requisite to advertise, that by Vacuities, I do not mean
Spaces altogether void of Matter, but void of such as may be perceived; so that
I take the Word Vacuum in the Common, not the strict and Philosophical Sense of
the Word.

But lastly, from this XXXIII Experiment it appears, that the Weight of the
Atmosphere we live in, is stronger than what Men usually think it is; And
probably, near the Northern Pole, it is much stronger: Since, if what Varenius
observes, the Air is so condensed in Nova Zembla, as to hinder the Motion of a
Pendulum, except moved by a heavier Weight than what is usually made use of in
our Climate.

EXPERIMENT XXXIV.
Attempts to weigh light Bodies in our Receiver.
TO try whether the Aequilibrium of two Bodies, of an equal Weight in the Air,
but of unequal Dimensions, would be lost in our Receiver, as it usually is in
Water, by Reason of a greater Quantity of Water buoying up against that whose
Dimensions are most extensive, I took a Bladder half full of Air, and tied it
to one end of our Balance, which turns with the 32 part of a Grain; which being
counterpois'd with a Weight in the other Scale, we let it down into the
Receiver, and having closed it up, upon an Exsuction of the Air, we found the
Bladder to dilate and manifestly to preponderate; but upon admitting the Air
into the Receiver again, the Bladder was over-pois'd by the Weight; but leaving
them in the Receiver all night, the Bladder imbibed so much of the External
Moisture, as to weigh that end of the Balance down a good way; yet the Bladder
being dried a little, they were both brought to an Aequilibrium: And the like
Experiment we tried with a piece of Cork instead of the Bladder, and observed,
that, the Receiver being Evacuated, as well as upon a reingress of the Air, the
Cork manifestly preponderated.

EXPERIMENT XXXV. Of the Cause of Filtration, and the Rising of Water in the
Siphons, etc.
The Cause of Filtration.
TO try whether in Filtrations the rising of the Water might not proceed from
the Impulse of the Air; we made use of a Siphon of Glass, represented by the
Third Figure, which is made of two strait Pieces, and a crooked one, which
joins the other two together, the Junctures being well closed. The longer Leg
of the Siphon was pervious only at the small End, so as to suffer the Water to
pass through it; but both the ends of the shorter Leg were equally pervious,
the Diameter of their Bore being of an Inch. The length of these two Pipes was
about a Foot and a half, that the Rarifi'd Air in the Receiver, when it was
pretty well exhausted, might not raise the Water included in the Pipe too high.
The shorter Leg of the Siphon being immersed two or three Inches in a Vessel of
Water, the other end was fastened to the Cover; which things being done, and the
Receiver closed up, we began to pump. The Result of which was, that the Water
dropped out of the lower Leg of the Siphon, as if it had been exposed to the
open Air; till the Receiver was in some measure exhausted, and then several
Bubbles rising in the Water, gathered together at the Top of the short legged
Siphon, where expanding themselves, they stopped the Course of the Water; that
in the longer Leg being suspended in the Tube and ceasing to drop; and the
Water in the shorter Leg, was so far depressed, as not to be above a Foot high:
But as soon as the External Air was let in again, it entered in at the small
Orifice of the longer Tube; and, ascending through the Water contained in the
Pipe, joined with the former, which was lodged in the upper Part of the short
legged Tube.

But, to prevent what Inconveniences ensued the rising of these Bubbles, the
two forementioned Tubes, were placed so, as to meet in the middle of a Glass
Viol, the Neck of the Viol being closed up with Cement; and the Tubes being
thus fixed, and they, as well as the Viol, filled with Water, the Siphon
represented by the Fifth Figure was placed in the Receiver with its shorter Leg
in a Vessel of Water, upon which the Pump being plied, the longer Siphon
continued to drop much longer than before; but at the last, the Bubbles which
rose in the Pipes, were so dilated in the Viol, as to press down into the Ends
of the Tube, and interrupt our Experiment, though what we observed gave us Reason
to believe, that the Air contributed to the Motion of the Water through the
Siphons.

And here, I shall subjoyn, that I once had a very slender Pipe, which when
held upon the Surface of the Water in a Perpendicular Posture, the Incumbent
Atmosphere pressed so much more on the Surface of the External Water, than that
contained in the Tube, that the Water was raised in the Tube; and this Pipe
being bent into a Siphon, and placed with the shorter Leg in Water as Siphons
usually are, the Water, of its own accord, rose up in the shorter Leg, and ran
down the other; and this Siphon being placed in our Receiver, to try what
Alteration of the Phenomenon would appear there, we could not discern any
sensible one. But though in this Tube just now mentioned, the Water rises of its
own accord; yet, if such a Tube be thrust a little way into the Mercury,
instead of rising, the Mercury in the Tube will be below that which is without
it.

EXPERIMENT XXXVI. The Weight of Air in the Exhausted Receiver. The subtle
penetrating Power of some Spirits above that of the Air. The Cause why Air will
not enter the Pores of some Bodies which Water will. The Weight of the Air,
examined by an Aeolipile. The Proportion betwixt the Gravity of Air and Water:
Betwixt Water and Quicksilver. Conjectures concerning the Weight of the
Atmosphere.
The Weight of the Air.
NOtwithstanding the several Methods propropos'd by Galileo, and others, to try
the Weight of the Air; being willing to be further satisfied, we caused an Oval
Glass with a small Tube at one End to be blown at the flame of a Lamp. And this
Glass Bubble, being of the size of a Hen's Egg, was fixed to one End of a
Balance, being counterpois'd by a Weight at the other End, which being
suspended in our Receiver, and the Pump set on work, the Bubble, after three
Exsuctions, continued to preponderate more and more, till the Air was let in
again, and then the Balance was reduced to its former Aequilibrium. But having
repeated the Experiment with an additional Weight of three Quarters of a Grain,
in the Scale opposite to the Bubble, the Weight of the Air included in the
Bubble brought the Balance to an Aequilibrium, when the Air was drawn out;
which Aequilibrium was again lost upon a reingress of it; so that had the Air
been wholly exhausted, the Air contained in the Bubble might probably have
weighed a whole Grain; and to prove that the Weight of the Air did really
depress the Balance to which the Bubble was fixed, we exhausted the Receiver
when the Neck of the Bubble was open; and did not perceive that End of the
Balance in the least to preponderate: But a Lamb's Bladder being equally poised
with a correspondent Weight, manifestly weighed down the Balance, tho the Air
included in it, was considerably expanded when the Air was pumped out of the
Receiver.

The Penetrating power of some Spirits above that of the Air.
But once having caused the Pump to be plied longer than ordinary, the Air
contained in a Glass Bubble expanded it self so powerfully, as to cause the
sides of it to fly in pieces; which is a strong Argument of the Closeness of
the Pores of the Glass, which are too fine to permit the Air to pass through
them. And for a further Proof of the imperviousness of Glass, even by so minute
Particles as those of the Air, I shall add; that in all the Trials I ever made,
I but once found that a Spirit whose Parts are much more subtle and volatile
than Air; I say, I but once found that a Spirit drawn from a Substance
abounding with volatile Salts, and subtle Spirits, made way through the Pores
of the Receiver, which unusual Phenomenon probably depended on the brisk
Agitation of those spirituous Parts, increased by the more than ordinary Heat
with which they were raised; for the Motion of them was so violent, as to fill
the Receiver, and almost burst it with their impetuous Steams; so that the
Pores of the Glass being opened with the violent Heat, several of them
penetrated those Pores, and appeared on the outside of the Glass.

Why the Parts of the Air are more indisposed to pass through the Pores of some
Bodies than others.
But though by some, the Particles of the Air are thought to be able to penetrate
Glass; yet by others, they are thought to be Grosser than Water; since from the
following Experiment it appears, that Water is capable of penetrating Bodies,
and of being compressed into their Pores, which Air is not: For having
conveyed a small Bubble of Water into the longer Leg of a Siphon, whose
Orifice was as small as a Pin, that Air being incapable of passing through so
small a Pore, kept the Water above it, suspended in the Tube; but as soon as
that Bubble, by blowing into the wider Orifice of the short Leg, was compressed
and squeezed out, Water passed through that small Orifice without any other
force than the Weight of that which lay upon it. And the Inability of Air to
pass through such Pores, which Water will readily enough, will be further
evinced, by holding Water in a Tube, the lower End of which being very narrow,
and perforated with a Pore no longer than a Hair; for the Water will readily
pass through it; but if the Tube be inverted, the Water in the narrower End of
that Pipe will be suspended, as if the End were wholly unperforated; the Air
not being able to get through so small a Passage: And that Water will pass
through Pores, which Air will not, may be further evinced, by putting a little
Alkalizate Salt into a Lamb's Bladder; for by wetting the End of the Bladder on
the outside, the Water passing through it is Pores, will presently dissolve that
Salt.

The force of the Air's Expansion.
But to return to what we have hinted before, concerning the Expansion of Air in
a Bubble, so violently, as to break it; the Learned Jesuit Cabaeus says, he saw
a Pillar so thick, that three Men could not grasp it, and that 1000 Yoke of
Oxen could not tear it in Pieces; yet the Air included in the Crannies of it,
so violently expanded upon the burning of a Fire near it, that it flew in
pieces, though the Pillar was made of so solid Stones as Marble. And as for the
Reason why sometimes the Bubbles included in our Receiver, did not break as at
others, it probably proceeded from the Air's Expansion by Heat, when they were
sealed, the included Air, upon a Removal of that Heat, contracting it self, and
losing part of it is Springiness; but this Guess we cannot wholly rely on. But,

The Weight of the Air.
To determine more exactly the Weight of the Air, we heated an Aeolipile of
Copper, as hot as we could conveniently; and removing it from the Fire, we
stopped the Neck with hard Wax, to keep out the Air; which being Weighed, when
cold, counterpois'd six Ounces, six Drachms and Thirty nine Grains; but the Air
being permitted to rush in, by perforating the Wax with a Needle, the Aeolipile
and Wax balanced an additional Weight of 11 Grains; so that the Weight of so
much Air as filled the Cavity of it, weighed half a Scruple and a Grain. And
though Mersennus affirms, that he had rarifi'd the Air to seventy times its Bulk
in an Aeolipile, yet I must confess it seems impossible to me, except the Metal
his were made of, would bear a much greater Degree of Heat, without melting,
than ours would, to rarifie, and expel the Air contained in them: Besides, the
Method he took seems much less exact than ours, since he weighed the Aeolipile
whilst hot; which might throw off a Considerable Quantity of Scales, as we have
often observed; the Weight of which, in weighing so light a Body as Air, might
be considerable.

Proportion betwixt the Weight of Air and Water, etc.
As for the Difference in the Weight of an equal proportion of Air and Water,
though Ricciolus and Galileo have, by different Methods, made very different
Computations; and Mersennus has asserted it to be as 1300 to 1. Yet by the
most accurate Computation we could make in our Aeolipile the difference
appeared to be, no more than as 1 to 938. I shall not wholly reject what
Mersennus relates, but rather endeavor to reconcile the Difference, by
representing, that my Observations were not only made in this Climate in
London, where it is much colder than at Paris; but also at a time, when the Air
was condensed by the Winter's Cold; at which time it may be supposed to be a
fifth Part heavier than at Paris, when Mersennus made his Observations.
Wherefore it would be of no small use, to make such Observations in several
Countries and at several Seasons of the Year.

Conjectures concerning the Height of the Atmosphere.
Having said thus much about the Weight of the Air, it may perhaps be expected,
that I should, by the Assistance of the Observations already delivered,
determine the Height of the Atmosphere, from whence the Pressure of the Air
proceeds: But though it may be no difficult Task to show, that the Accounts given
by others are false; yet it is not altogether easy to determine a
Controversy, in which the Truth is so hard to be assigned; and therefore, I
shall only lay down something in order to the Elucidation of it.

And first, it is necessary to take Notice, that the Weight of an equal
Proportion of Air and Water about London is agreed on to be as 1000 to 1.

In the next place it will be requisite to consider, the Difference in Weight,
of an equal Proportion of Air and Quicksilver; to discover which, I took a
Glass Pipe, such as is represented by the Sixteenth Figure, See Plate the First.
which being partly filled with Quicksilver, and held in such a Posture, that
the Superficies of the Quicksilver in each Leg was in a Horizontal Line, E. F.
I. poured Water into one Leg, till it was filled up to the Top, by the Weight
of which, the Surface of the Mercury was weighed down from E. to B. the Surface
of the other being raised from F. to C. so that measuring the Height of the
Tube of Mercury D. C. which was buoyed up by the Water in the other, we found
it to amount to 2 13/54 Inches; the Height of the Cylinder of Water B. A. which
counterpois'd the Mercury being 30 45/54 Inches, and the whole Numbers with the
Fractions, being reduced to improper Fractions of the same Denomination, the
Proportion was as 121 to 1665, or by Reduction, as one to 92/121.

Besides this, we took another Method, to discover the Proportion of these two
Liquors, by weighing them in a Glass Bubble; by which we found, that it was as
1 to 13 19/28; and because Spirit of Wine is usually esteemed the lightest of
Liquors, and Quicksilver the heaviest, I weighed that likewise, and found the
Proportion of Quicksilver, and it, to be as 1 to 16 641/1084. So that the
difference betwixt Spirit of Wine and Water was as 1 44/171; And here it may be
necessary to observe, that I the rather weighed these Liquors in a Bubble;
because, when they are weighed in open Vessels, the Protuberant Surface of the
Mercury, and the Concave of the Water, makes it a difficult Matter to
proportion them exactly, if the Superficies be large.

The Weight of an equal Proportion of Air and Mercury.
But to return to the Atmosphere. Having laid down the Proportion of Air to
Water, and of Water to Quicksilver, it will be no very difficult thing to find,
the Proportion betwixt Air and Quicksilver. And since from the Torrecellian
Experiment, it appears that the Cylinder of Mercury is buoyed up by the
Pressure of the Air, it consequently follows, that the Proportion of Air to
Quicksilver is as 14000 to 1; so that a Cylinder of Air, that is able to buoy
up Mercury two Foot and a half, must amount to 35000 Feet of our English
Measure, or seven complete Miles; supposing the Air to be equally compressed
above, as here below; but this Computation is not to be accounted so exact,
since not only Seneca Not. Quaest. lib. 4. cap. 10. says, Omnis Aer, quo
propior est Terris hoc crassior; quemadmodum in Aqua and in omni humore Faex
ima est; ita in Aere spississima quaeque desidunt, but it likewise is a
Consequence of the Air's Spring; since it must needs be considerably compressed
by the Weight of what lies upon it; besides, if we consider, that the Air may
be expanded by Heat, to near a hundred and fifty times its Bulk, it may not be
improbable, but that the utmost extent of the Atmosphere, may reach to some
Hundreds of Miles.

And this Conjecture may enable us to guess at the Height to which some Vapors
may ascend, allowing what Emanuel Magnen a diligent Mathematician observed at
Tolouse in a clear Night in August; for as Ricciolus records it, Vidit ab Hora
undecima post Meridiem usque ad mediam Noctem Luna infra Horizontem posita,
Nubeculam quandam lucidam prope Meridianum fere usque ad Zenith diffusam, quae
consideratis omnibus non poterat nisi a Sole illuminari; ideoque altior esse
debuit tota Vmbra Terrae: And the same Author further says, Addit simile quid
evenisse. Michaeli Angelo Riccio apud Sabinos versanti, nempe viro in Mathesi
Eruditissimo.

But to conclude; It would be of no small Use in estimating the Height of the
Atmosphere, were Observations of the Density and Rarity of the Air made upon
several Parts and on high Mountains; but till by some Means or other, we can
arrive at some degree of Certainty, as to the various Degrees of it is
Rarefaction above, it will be a hard Matter to determine the Height of it.

EXPERIMENT XXXVII. Concerning Flashes of Light in the Receiver.
AT the first when our Engine was made, we observed, upon drawing down the
Sucker, and turning the Key, several Flashes of Light in the Receiver; which
would not appear, if the Window which faced Northward were darkened; and this
Phenomenon depended on so unknown Causes, that upon often repeated Trials, I
found, that sometimes it would appear and sometimes not; though for as much as
I was able to perceive, there was not the least Difference in the Circumstances
of these Trials; which made it difficult to bring our Observations to any Rules
about it, or to frame an Hypothesis to Account for the Cause; though the Validity
of some Conjectures that have been made may be afforded by the following Trials
and Observations. For,

First, We found, That the Phenomenon might as well be exhibited by a
Candlelight or Daylight, and however situated, so that the Rays of Light could
but fall upon the Receiver.

Next, The Flash appears just when the Key is turned to let the Air out into
the Cylinder; but the same Phenomenon would appear in a small one upon drawing
the Sucker hastily down, though the Key was turned before; and it was further to
be observed, That the Flashes, which appeared when first the Receiver began to
be exhausted, were much stronger than when it was further evacuated.

And it was besides observable, That when the Experiment was made in the small
Receiver, and the Sucker had not been long before well oiled; the Oil, upon the
drawing of it down, being put into Agitation, and divided into small Parts by
the Attrition of the Pump, would rise into the Receiver like Smoke; which would
likewise flow out of the Valve, when it was opened on purpose; and these Fumes,
if the Glass was held in a light Place, would in some Measure appear luminous.
And what was further to be admired, was, That when the Flash was considerably
great, upon the Disappearance of it, the Receiver would become opacous, leaving
white Steams upon the internal Superficies of the Receiver.

And now if it should be asked, Whence all these Phenomenon proceeded? We
should propose the following Conjectures, viz. First, That had the Phenomenon
constantly succeeded, we should have suspected the seeming Light to proceed
from some Refractions from the Glass darkened within by those white Steams.
Secondly, That, since the Air abounds with Parts gross enough to appear in the
Sunbeams, and to reflect the Rays of Light, which rise from Bonfires, the
Reflection might proceed from some gross Airy Parts within the Receiver.
Thirdly, The Whiteness seemed to proceed from the various Surfaces of the airy
Parts, reflecting one upon another like Looking-glasses, so as to represent
each other contiguous; so Water or Eggs beaten to Froth, lose their
Transparency, and appear white: But further having immersed the Neck of our
Receiver in Water, and set the Pump on work; the Water being drawn in through a
small Hole, had its Parts so broken, that the Receiver appeared full of Milk
rather than Water: And if a Piece of Crystal be thrown very hot into cold
Water, it will crack, and having so many new Surfaces within appears white.

Which Things being considered and weighed, it may not be an improbable Guess,
That the aforementioned Phenomenon proceeded from the Parts of the Air
displaced as to their Posture and Situation, as, whilst in that Motion, to
disturb their former Continuity and Transparency.

And this Conjecture may be made probable by observing, That the more Air was
included, the more conspicuous was the Whiteness; but more especially by this,
viz. That having exhausted the Receiver, and applied a Glass Bubble to the Hole
in the Stop-cock, so that there might be a Communication betwixt the Cavity of
the Receiver, and it, upon the Exsuction of the Air out of the Receiver, the
Air in the Bubble was so disordered, by so sudden a Disilition of it is Parts,
that it appeared like Milk; but upon a sudden Re-ingress of the Air, became
transparent again.

But if it should be objected, That the Whiteness in Water turned into Bubbles
may proceed from the Interposition of so Heterogeneous a Body as Air; I should
answer, That I have in another Place mentioned two volatile Liquors, which
being mixed produce a white consistent Body, though both the Ingredients were
transparent.

But having conveyed some Smoke into our Receiver, and observed upon plying of
the Pump, That the Air remaining in the Pump, became opacous; we suspected,
that the Reason why the former mentioned Light sometimes appeared and sometimes
did not, might proceed from some Parts of Matter swimming in the Air more at
one time than another, which was disposed, more to cause such Reflections of
the Rays of Light as to afford the forenamed Phenomenon; which is rendered
probable by observing, That the Receiver appeared opaque when the Smoke settled
about the Sides of it; and it may further be illustrated by what we mentioned
before of our smoking Liquor, where the Corpuscles of it being put into a new
Motion became opacous instead of transparent.

And if it should be asked, How the Air should abound with such various Parts
of Matter? I must answer, That it is not an unusual Observation, That the Air
undergoes several and very frequent Changes; for besides several Instances
which might be added, the Learned Josephus Acosta observes, That in America,
There are Winds which naturally trouble the Water of the Sea, and make it Green
and Black; others, clear as Crystal. Besides we observed, That the Pendula as
well as Scales suspended in our Receiver, lost a great deal of their
Brightness, upon drawing out and letting in the Air. And I once made a Tincture
of a certain Metalline Substance, which would become turbid and clear
successively, for several times, for which strange Phenomenon no Reason could
be given.

EXPERIMENT XXXVIII.
Of the freezing of Water and it is Expansion.
HAVING conveyed a Glass Vessel into our Receiver, in the midst of which was
contained a Cylinder filled with Water, and enclosed with Snow and Salt, upon
plying of the Pump, the Snow began to melt a little faster than we expected;
and the Receiver being pretty well exhausted, the Water in the Cylinder began
to freeze; so that, in a little time, the Surface of the Ice was above that of
the Water, in which the Snow and Salt was dissolved, and which swam about it.
The Superficies of the Water was concave, and being held betwixt the Eye and
the Light, appeared full of Bubbles.

And it is not a little strange, That there should be so powerful an Expansion
in Water froze, as not only to burst Bottles in the Wintertime, but, as I am
informed, to separate the solid Parts of Metals; so that Bell-Metal having been
exposed to the Wet, and that Wet froze in the Pores of the Metal, it would fly
in Pieces; and Cabeus in lib. 4. Meteor. Aristot. relates a no less memorable
Account of Vessels made of Stone, which would fly asunder, upon the Expansion
of the Moisture lodged in their Pores, and froze there. Where it is not a
little strange, That Cold should by freezing Water, cause it to swell, whereas
the Effect it has upon the Air is manifestly to condense it.

EXPERIMENT XXXIX.
A Phenomenon taken notice of in the exhausted Receiver.
HAving put the End of a Glass Tube into an Oval Glass, so that it almost
touched the Bottom, we cemented it to the Neck of that Oval, and then,
conveying about six Spoons full of Water into the Egg, we blew it so full of
Air, as to force the Water into the Pipe, and to keep it suspended betwixt that
Air shut up in the Viol and the external Air; this Weather-glass represented by
the Fourteenth Figure, was placed in a small Receiver, at the upper End of the
Tube, which was small, being permitted to stand about five Inches above the
Cover, the middle of which it penetrated.

Upon pumping out the Air, it was to be observed, That the Water in the Pipe
manifestly descended; which was an Argument that no Sensible Heat was produced
in the Receiver, by the Action of the Pump; since by barely applying my Hand to
the outside of the Receiver, that gentle Warmth so far rarified the Air in the
Egg, as to enable it to raise the Water in the Tube, much higher than it was
depressed, upon the Exsuction of the Air: Though we will not thence infer, that
the Cavity of the Receiver, was colder after than before the Air was pumped
out; since the Pressure of the Air in the Egg, together with the Weight of the
Incumbent Atmosphere might, in some measure, cause the sides of the Glass to
give way, for want of an equal Pressure of the Air on the Unequal, and external
Superficies of it; which Guess may seem the more probable, not only because the
Springiness of Glass might contribute to the bending of it; but likewise since
upon a Re-ingress of Air, the Water was raised up to it is former Height again.

But to return to our Experiment: From hence it appears, That if there be no
Vacuum betwixt the concave sides of the Receiver, and the Superficies of the
Bubble, every Substance fine enough to penetrate the Pores of Glass, has not
it is Parts in an Agitation, strong enough to produce Heat and Fire.

Besides the Former Experiment, having tried what Effect the Exhausted
Receiver, would have on Camphire, whose Parts are so fugitive as to fly away
when put into Motion, by the Action of Ambient Air, we found that it was not in
the least altered.

EXPERIMENT XL.
Whether Rarified Air will sustain Flying Insects.
HAving conveyed a Flesh-Fly, a Butter-fly, and a Humming-Bee into our
Receiver; the former presently dropped down from the Place she was walking on;
and after a few Exsuctions, the Butter-Fly, which before fluttered up and down,
dropped down void of Motion, except a Tremulous one in her Wings. And the Be
in a little time, was wholly deprived of Motion: But whether the Falling of
them depended on the Thinness of the Medium, which was unapt for them to swim
in or not, will appear from the following Experiment.

EXPERIMENT XLI.
Concerning Respiration.
HAving conveyed a Lark into our Receiver, and closed it up; upon plying the
Pump, the Bird presently began to droop, and when the Receiver was further
exhausted, being first taken with violent Convulsions, and Tossing up and down
the Cavity of the Vessel, it died with it is Back contiguous to the Receiver;
it is Head directed down toward the Stop-cock, and it is Neck awry: And though at
ten Minutes Distance, after this Bird was closed up, the Air was again let in
at the Stop-cock, yet did it not recover again. And the like succeeded upon
Enclosing a Hedge-Sparrow, except that the Air being let in again, at the end
of seven Minutes, it recovered by degrees; but when it seemed able to fly away,
the Receiver being again exhausted, it died in five Minutes Time.

Having enclosed a Mouse in our Receiver, it continued to leap up for some Time
after the Air began to be exhausted; but in a little Time after that, it
appeared sick and faint, and very giddy, and at the last fell down dead; yet
upon a Re-ingress of Air, presently recovered; but the Air being again pumped
out, in about ten Minutes, it died moderately convulsive. And it was not only
observable in this, but all the other Experiments of this Nature, that I tried,
that the Included Animals died convulsive.

And to make it appear, that in the Forementioned Trials, the Animals died for
want of Air, and not by being chok'd up with Fuliginous Recrements; I enclosed
another Mouse in our Receiver, which, the Air not being drawn out, lived 3
Quarters of an Hour; but upon pumping out the Air, in ten Minutes, died
convulsive. And another being left in all Night, was alive the next Morning,
and had eat Cheese, which was, for Tryal's sake put in with him,

A Digression containing some Doubts touching Respiration.
HAving made these Experiments relating to Respiration, it may perhaps be
expected that I should say something concerning the Usefulness of Air in
Respiration. In doing of which, it is not requisite that I should take Notice
of the Structure of those Parts, since they have been sufficiently described
already. Nor shall I any further engage in that Controversy, Whether the Motion
of the Lungs depends on the Motion of the Thorax, or not, or how the Lungs are
distended by the Air, any further than it may be Illustrated by our Engine.

As for the First Part of the Controversy, it seems to be determined in favor
of the Affirmative, by what the Learned Dr. Highmore, and Bartholinus have
observed; the former having taken Notice, That the Lungs subside, if the
Intercostal Muscles be so wounded, as to lay the Thorax open; and the latter
having observed the same upon a Division of the Diaphragm: But what it is that
conveighs the Air into the Lungs, is yet undetermined; since some think it to
proceed from the Dilatation of the Thorax impelling the Air contiguous, and
what it contiguous to that, successively into the Lungs: But this Supposition
is fairly answered, since it is possible to breathe out of a Glass, where the
External Air pressed on by the Thorax, can only press on the outside of the
Bottle. But a more easy Solution may be taken from our Engine, since it appears,
That if the Lungs be dilated by the Thorax, the Spring of the Air is sufficient
to force it in, there being less Resistance made by the Rarified Air in the
Lungs, than that in the open Atmosphere. And though there are some Observations,
which testify, that when the Diaphragm has been considerably wounded, without
damaging Respiration, yet since the Lungs are void of Musculous Parts to dilate
themselves, we are rather inclined to believe that they are dilated by the
Expasion of the Thorax, and filled by the Gravity, and Pressure of the
Atmosphere.

But to proceed to the Use of Air in Respiration, besides the Usefulness of it
in Modulating Sounds, and the Conveying of Odours, it is beyond Doubt, That it
is in a great Measure necessary to the Preservation of Life, though as to the
Manner of it is Contributing to the Continuance of Life, several disagree; since
it is by some thought only to keep the Blood from growing too hot in the
Ventricles of the Heart. But that this is not all that the Air, in Respiration,
performs, is evident, since not only Old People, but several Creatures, have no
need of Cooling their Blood and Humors being cold enough without it, yet they
cannot live without Respiration.

Others hold that the Air being conveyed into the Left Ventricle of the Heart,
contributes to the Generation of Spirits; but since there appears no such
Passages, as are fit for it is Conveyance, we shall not here recite what other
Arguments might be alleged against it.

But others, as Moebius and Gassendus, are of Opinion, that it chiefly serves
to Ventilate and Carry off the Excrement of the Blood; for as a Candle may be
extinguished by it is own Smoke; so the Heat of the Blood might be prejudiced,
were not it is Fuliginous Recrement carried off, by mixing with the Air upon
Inspiration. Which is Congruous enough, to what has been observed by several
Travelers; viz, That there is a certain Consistence requisite in the Air, to
carry off such Fumes; for it is observed, That if the Air drawn in, be too much
impregnated with Vapors, as in some Cellars, when Damps arise in Mines, it
becomes so unfit to Breathe, as to stifle those that do not avoid the Latter,
or use some Method to rarify it, as by holding a Chaffing-dish of Coals near
their Faces, to disperse and scatter those Fumes. And to confirm these
Observations, I shall add, That having closed a Bird in our Receiver, I
observed, that the Air being thickened by frequent Respirations, it began in a
little time to pant and gape, and at the last grew so sick, as to throw foul
Matter off it is Stomach; and in 3 Quarters of an Hour to be ready to die: And
that the Receiver should be so filled with Steams, needs not seem a Wonder, to
any one that considers, what Sanctorious has observed, viz. That the greatest
Part of our Aliment is carried off, by Insensible Transpiration.

And as these Instances show, how unfit an Air too gross, is for Respiration;
so that an Air too thin is likewise prejudicial, appears from the Experiments
already tried in our Receiver; so that it is not Improbable that if a Man were
removed to the Top of our Atmosphere, he would die for want of Breath.

In favor of which Conjecture, I shall add, That the Learned Josephus Acosta,
tells us, that going up a high Mountain in Peru, called Pariacaca, which was so
high above the Alps, as to make them appear only as high Towers, he and his
Companion were taken with excessive Vomiting, together with Blood, which lasted
till he came to a Region more convenient for Respiration; and he likewise says,
to our present Purpose, That the Element of the Air is so subtle and delicate
there, that it is too fine for a Man to breathe in; the Action of Respiration,
requiring a grosser and more temperate Air.

But though from hence it appears, that the Air contributes to Respiration, in
carrying off the Recrements of the Blood; yet it is scarce probable, that those
Recrements should so soon kill an Animal, as to cause Birds enclosed in our
Receiver, to die in a few Minutes, for want of being carried off. And it would
not be harder to account for such Effects, should we allow with Paracelsus,
That Air contributed to the Geneneration of a Vital Spirit; since the
Interruption of it is Generation, for so small a time could scarce be fatal.

Yet I shall add on this occasion, That I have been told, that Cornelius
Drebellus, made a Boat for the Learned King James, which would swim under
Water, in which, to make the Air included fit for Respiration, he was wont to
open a Vessel which contained a Liquor, which added such a Vital Spirit to the
Air, as purged it of the grosser Exhalations, and condensed them. Wherefore I
am the more favorably inclined to think that the Air may conduce to the
Preservrtion of Vital Spirits; and that it contributes to the Preservation of
Life, as Air to Flame; for having conveyed rectfy'd Spirit of Wine into our
Receiver, we found, that it would not continue long, no more than the Vital
Flame of an Animal, if the Air was exhausted.

But not to insist upon these things, we shall add, That having dissected a
Bitch, and taking out one of the Whelps, though we opened his Abdomen, and
Thorax, and divided the Diaphragm; yet having once began to breathe, his Heart
continued to beat above six Hours; whereas three more, which were involved in
the Secundines, in the mean time, were all dead; though they were neither
wounded, nor had ever breathed. How far this may serve to illustrate the
Problem proposed by Dr. Harvey, viz. Why a Foetus may live longer before it
has breathed, if involved in the Secundines, than if, when it has once
respired, Respiration be stopped, we leave others to judge.

Whether Fishes breathe or not, under Water, especially those that want Lungs,
I cannot now determine; but that Air is necessary to the Preservation of their
Lives, seems to be evinced, by observing, that if Fishes be enclosed in a
Bottle, which is close stopped from the Air; or if they be kept from the Air by
the Freezing of Water, they presently die. And indeed, considering how many
Particles of Air are interspersed in the Pores of Water, it may not be
altogether improbable, that part of it is separated, as it passes through their
Gills, or some other way: And I am the rather inclined to believe it, because
having put a large Eel into our Receiver, upon exhausting the Air, she turned
up her Belly, and lay as dead, till the Receiver being unstopp'd, and the Fish
taken out into the open Air, satisfied us of her Recovery, by very brisk and
vivid Motions. But what is not a little to be admired, having put a Gray Snail
into our Receiver, we perceived not the least Alteration, when the Air was
drawn out; but whence these Phenomenon proceeded, we shall not now stay to
determine.

Nor are we now at leisure to examine any further, whether the Paradox which
some hold, be true, viz. That the Child respires in the Womb; only we shall say
that it is not altogether Fabulous, That the Foetus has sometimes been heard
to cry in the Womb; and Chickens have been observed to pip in the Egg-shell,
before it was broke; which may be Arguments of an obscure Respiration, except
it can be made to appear, That such Sounds may arise from Halituous Vapors in
the Larynx; and that they may, will not be a little favored, by observing what
audible Sounds arise from the Halituous Vapors of an Aeolipile forced upon the
Blade of a Knife, held in various Postures.

But to proceed, the Necessity of Breathing, though those that are not well are
accustomed to want it, may appear, from the small time, that such Men are able
to stay under Water; but may further be illustrated by the following
Experiments: For having conveyed a Humming-Bee, a Flesh-Fly, and a Palmer-Worm,
into our Receiver, upon the Exsuction of the Air in a Minute's Time, they all
seemed dead; but presently recovered by the Re-ingress of Air; yet when the Air
was again drawn out, they appeared dead, which is a strong Argument to induce
us to believe, that the Bodies of Animals are but so many Curiously-contriv'd
Engines, except those of Men, whose Wheels are set on going, by the Influence of
External Agents; for even those Flies, which presently die in our Receiver,
will crawl about, even when their Heads are cut off. And it is not unworthy our
Observation, That Insects which want Lungs, are no less sensibly affected upon
the Exsuction of Air, than some that have them, which may be Grounds for a
Suspicion, that the Particles of the Air enter in at their Pores, and that it
keeps them alive by a Universal Perspiration.

But to put an End to this Digression: Though the Forementioned Experiments have
given me cause to suspect, that the Depuration of the Blood, is the chief Use
of Respiration; yet since I believe it has some other Uses, which are not yet
explained, I shall conclude with that Saying of St. Austin's; Mallem quidem
eorum quae a me quaesivisti, habere Scientiam quam Ignorantiam: sed quia id
nondum potui, magis eligo Cautam Ignorantiam confiteri, quam falsam Scientiam
profiteri.

EXPERIEMINT XLII.
The different Operations of Corrosives in, and without our Receiver.
HAving filled the third part of a Long-neck Viol, with ten Sprigs of Coral, and
as much Spirit of Vinegar, as swam about an Inch over them, we placed it in our
Receiver; and though at the first there appeared but very few Bubbles, yet upon a
few Exsuctions of the Air, they rose so plentifully, as to make the Menstruum
appear white, the whole continuing to boil and ferment, as in a Seething-pot,
as much Froth standing upon the Liquor, as answered the Depth of it, in the
Viol: Yet upon letting in the Air, the Froth presently disappeared, and the
Liquor became transparent again. And these Phenomenon successively followed
each other, no less than five times, as the Air was drawn out, or let in again;
and the Ebullition in those Trials, upon the drawing out of the Air, was so
great sometimes, as to run over the Top of the Glass; and that those numerous
Bubbles might not be suspected to arise from the Spirit it self, we cleared it
of those, before the Coral was put in, but the same Phenomenon, still
succeeded: nor was there any considerable Difference, when the Trial was made
with Powder of Coral, except that the Liquor was obscured by several Parts of
it carried up along with the Bubbles. But one thing in the Foregoing
Experiments, was remarkable, That though the Ebullition was so violent, yet the
Viol immediately taken out of the Receiver, did not affect our Hands with the
least sensible Heat.

EXPERIMENT XLIII.
Of the spontaneous Ebullition of warm Liquors.
HAving closed in our Receive a Viol of four Ounces filled with hot Water, which
had been freed from Air by boiling, we pumped out the Air, and observed, That
upon the fourth Exsuction, it began to boil, as if it had been over a hot Fire,
so that part of it ran over, and continued boiling in our Receiver. And what
was more remarkable, was, that as often as the Air was let out of the Receiver
into the Pump, the Ebullition was again renewed, the Fiery and Agitated Parts
of the Liquor, upon a Removal of the Air's Pressure, having more Liberty to
expand themselves. And that the Phenomenon was promoted by the Removal of that
Pressure, we may guess, because the Ebullition was only in the Top of the
Liquor; and that it was renewed upon a Removal of that Pressure. But
especially, because Sallet-Oyl, whose Parts adhere, by Reason of their
Clamminess, would not ferment; yet Oil of Turpentine, or Wine would, whose
Parts are not so tenacious; the former rising five times its Height, and near
four Parts of the latter running over into the Receiver.

From all which Experiments it appears, that the Air may have a considerable
Influence on a greater Number of Phenomenon than Men usually think of,
especially where the tumultuous Agitation of the Parts of a Body are concerned;
so that were a hot Body conveyed above the Atmosphere, the Effects of it would
be different from what they are here below, and the Parts of it would have more
Power to dissipate themselves.

Having thus far, My Dear Lord, given you a faithful Historical Account of the
Productions of your Lordship's Commands, if they may invite you or your Friends
at Paris to a further Prosecution of what Discoveries may be made by that
Engine, I hope they may afford your Lordship as much Pleasure as they did me in
endeavoring to express my self,

Your Lordship's Most Obedient Servant, etc.

CHAP. XIV. The Doctrine of the Spring and Weight of the Air defended against
Franciscus Linus.
THIS Chapter containing the Honorable Author's Vindication of his own
Hypothesis, concerning the Weight and Spring of the Air: It will not be
requisite here to lay down, all the trivial Objections of Franciscus Linus;
which are easily answered, by any one that has but read and considered the
Author's Hypothesis, and will at the first sight appear to be ill-grounded or
invalid Arguments, or rather false Criticisms: But, it being more consistent
with the designed Epitomy, I shall only take notice of such, as may serve to
illustrate the Hypothesis already laid down, and think it unnecessary to fill
an Epitomy with, what our judicious Author did not repute as Arguments against
his Doctrine: And especially, because the Learned World, by their General
Consent have agreed upon what the Honorable Author has taught: Wherefore I
shall lay down only those Objections which may seem considerable, and annex
their Solutions.

The first Argument of Franciscus Linus Answered.
The first Argument alleged by Franciscus Linus, is, That, did the Suspension
of the Mercury in the Cylinder, depend on the Aequilibrium of the Weight of the
Atmosphere; when a Cylinder is filled full and inverted, upon an Inversion of
the Tube, and a Subtraction of the lower Finger, the Mercury would not subside,
were its descent not promoted by the Dilatation of the Air above the Mercury;
for if it were, that Expansive Force would raise the Finger upon the upper
Orifice of the Cylinder.

To which is answered, That the included Air may depress the Mercury by it is
Expansion downwards, without raising the Finger; for the Weight of the whole
Cylindrical Pillar of the Atmosphere, which presses upon the top of the Finger,
being too strong to be overpowered by the weak Expansion of the Air in the
Pipe, it must consequently press downwards, where the Weight of the Mercury is
ready to join with it to over-balance the Pressure of the Air, which before
buoyed it up: And that the Weight of the Cylinder of Mercury disposes it to
spend its expansive Force downwards, appears from a Cylinder of Water suspended
instead of Mercury; for the Weight of that being not able to resist the
Pressure of the Atmosphere downwards, equally as the Mercury; the Air in the
Top of the Cylinder does not press it down near so far: And though the Objector
says, that if Water instead of Air be above the Mercury, it will not subside;
the Reason of that is only, because the Water wants a Springiness to expand it
self: And as for the Reason why the Pulp of the Finger seems to be drawn down
into the Tube, that only happens, by Reason of the Weight of the Incumbent
Atmosphere, the Rarifi'd Air within, not being able to make an equal Resistance
to prevent the Finger from being pressed into the Pipe: And tho the Objector
further urges, that he cannot conceive how the Air can be so expanded without
possessing a greater Space, we have sufficiently cleared that, by comparing the
Expansion of the Air's Spring to a piece of Wool squeezed together, which when
it is no longer Compressed, dilates it selt by Virtue of its springy Parts.

A snd Objection.
The second Objection is, That if Mercury be suspended in a long Pipe, about 40
Inches long, when the Tube is inverted, and the Finger is taken from the lower
Orifice, it falls down till it comes to its usual Station; and the Pulp of the
Finger is equally depressed into the Tube; which evinces, that the Mercury is
suspended by a Funiculus, which draws down the Pulpy Part of the Finger.

But, what Answer is to be given to this Objection, Mercury subsiding, till it
came to an Aequilibrium with the Atmosphere; the Air above it being very much
Rarifi'd, and unable to buoy up against the Finger; the Depression of the Pulp
of it must proceed from the Weight of the incumbent Atmosphere, though the
swelling of the Pulp in the Pipe might perhaps partly proceed from an Expansion
of the Humors within the Substance of it, the Weight of the Atmosphere being
prevented from squeezing upon it by the Equivalent Weight of the Mercury.

A third. Objection answered.
Another Objection is, That if a Tube twenty Inches long, be immersed in
Quicksilver, and when it is full, the upper Orifice of it be stopped with ones
Finger, as well as the lower, upon taking away the lower Finger, the Pulp of
the upper will be drawn down, though the Weight of the Atmosphere is said to be
able to buoy up a Cylinder much longer; So that this is a plain Demonstration
of the Suspension of the Mercury by a Funiculus, and that it is not buoyed up
by the Pressure of the Atmosphere according to the Elaterists.

But though this Objection may seem to represent some Difficulty, yet it will
easily be answered, by thus explaining the Phenomenon, viz. Though when the Tube
is stopped at both Ends, the Finger upon the Top of the Tube be equally pres'sd
upon on both sides; yet, upon a Removal of the Finger below, though the Pressure
of the Air upon the Finger continued to be the same, yet the Pressure of the
Mercury is by two Thirds less, against the Pulp of the Finger, its Gravity
pressing upon the subjacent Air; for notwithstanding the Air is able to buoy up
a greater Quantity, yet that in Part takes off the full Pressure of it, so as
to make the Pressure upwards, disproportionable to that which tends downwards:
And though the Objector urges, that the Mercury is equally suspended upon a
Removal of the Finger, as before; I answer, that the Finger presses it up much
more strongly, to prevent any of it getting out; whereas the Pressure of the
Air only depends on the Weight of it, which cannot be intended or weakened, as
that of the Finger may, which is capable of raising a much greater Weight.

Another Objection answered.
Another Objection alleged by the Author is, that were the Mercury buoyed up by
the Weight of the Atmosphere, it would be as easy to suck up Mercury in a Pipe
as Water, nothing more being requisite but to draw away the Air.

But this may easily be taken off by considering, that the Dilatation of the
Lungs depending upon an Ingress of Air upon the Motion of the Diaphragm and
Intercostal Muscles, and that Air being pressed in by the Gravity of the Air
and it is Spring, it will follow, that that Gravity or Spring being more
powerfully resisted by the Cylinder of Mercury than Water, the Lungs cannot so
powerfully dilate; nor can the Mercury be raised with equal ease, because, that
Air in the Lungs, together with the Weight of the Mercury, brings the External
Force of the Atmosphere nearer to an Aequilibrium. Besides, the External Air
pressing upon the Thorax, and keeping them from dilating themselves, the Air
contained in them, pressing against the Superficies of the Mercury in the Tube,
is a further Cause, why it rises not so high; which Explanation is confirmed by
observing, that as the Lungs are more violently dilated, the Mercury rises
higher in the Tube; and it will be further Probable, by considering, how much
greater a Pressure may be made upon so large a Superficies as that of the
Thorax, than can be resisted by the Rarifi'd Air in the Lungs. And as for the
Funiculus, which our Author supposes to raise the Mercury, by contracting it
self; it would not be a little strange, that it should raise such a Weight as a
Cylinder of Mercury, without tearing off the thin Membranes of the Lungs to
which such a Funiculus must, at one end be joined.

To these Objections the Author adds an Inference, that if the Spring of the
Air be of no Force, in loco aperto, no more can be effected by it in loco
Clauso; but the Place which the Objector takes to be in loco Clauso, appearing
to be only in a Room; It is answered, that whereas the former Objectoins appear
to be invalid, the Inference must be so too; because there being a
Communication betwixt the Air in a Room and the External, by some Holes or
Crannies, or otherwise, the included Air will be able to do as much by its
Spring, within as without.

CHAP. XV. The Funicular Hypothesis Examined.
THE Hypothesis laid down by our Adversary, and which is now to be examined,
Arguments in favor of the Funicular Hypothesis examined.
is, That what we ascribe to the Spring and Weight of the Air is done by a sort
of Funiculus, consisting of a thin Substance powerfully expanded, which being
betwix two Bodies, endeavors to contract it self, and to bring those Bodies
together, ne detur Vacuum.

The first Argument alleged, is, That the Finger would not be so drawn down by
the Descent of the Mercury, were there not a Funiculus; and that were there not
a thin Substance there extended, there would be a Vacuum,

As to the first Part of the Argument, it has already been answered in the
foregoing Chapter. And though he alleged the Necessity of such a Funiculus from
Nature's Abhorrency of a Vacuum; the first Argument he offers, being deduced
from the Suction of the Pulp of the Finger upon the Descent of the Mercury, It
is likewise already Answered by what has gone before in Explaining that
Phenomenon. But another Argument he alleges against a Vacuity is, the
Diaphaneity of that Part of the Tube; for were there a Vacuum, he says it would
be like a black Pillar, neither capable of affording any thing visible, nor of
permitting visible Objects to appear through it: But the Invalidity of this
Argument will appear from the Doctrine of the Epicureans and Atomists, who
Teach, that Light is made up of such subtle Emanations, as are capable of
penetrating Glass it self, and though the Cavity of the Cylinder may seem full of
Light; yet no doubt, but were the Parts of luciferous Matter condensed into a
Lump, they would not fill half the Cavity; since the Smoke which filled up the
Cavity of our Receiver, so as to make it appear Opacous, was but capable of
filling a small part of it, when condensed. Besides, should the Torrecellian
Experiment be made in the Dark, a Vacuist might argue, that the Matter, which
upon an Access of Light was visible, was not in the Receiver before, but
proceeded only from the Rays of Light darting through the Glass: And though Light
should not be caused by a Trajection of such luciferous Beams, but from an
Impulse of luciferous Bodies; yet would it not thence follow, that the Tube was
full; since from our seventeenth Experiment it appeared, that when the Receiver
was in a great measure exhausted, there remained a sufficient Quantity of
Matter behind, to communicate a tremulous Motion to the External Air: And though
it should be allowed, that the Cavity of the Tube were filled with the
Cartesian Materia subtilis; yet, since they allow that capable of passing in
and out upon the Access of a grosser Body, it would not be any more to his
Purpose, in maintaining his Funicular Hypothesis or opposing Ours, because such
a Body as so easily passes in and out, will be as ready to give way to the
Motion of a more gross Body, and consequently to the rising or subsiding of the
Mercury.

Another Argument alleged in Favor of the Funicular Hypothesis, is, that when
the Mercury is subsided to its wonted Station, it gravitates no farther. But it
being already shown, why it does not, viz. because it is counterbalanc'd by an
equal Weight or Pressure made by the Atmosphere, what has gone before has
been a sufficient Answer. And if it should be asked, why, when the Finger is
pressed upon, by a Cylinder of the Atmosphere, and at the same time by a
Cylinder of the Mercury on the other fide, it feels no sensible Pain; it may be
answered, that the Pressure being equal on each side, the Sense of Pressure is
the less perceptible; which is confirmed by what diverse observe at a
considerable depth under Water, viz. that they are not sensible of it.

And if it should be further asked, why upon the Descent of the Mercury, it, at
the first, falls something below its wonted Station, and presently rises up
again, it may be answered, that that proceeds from an Impetus acquired by its
Descent, which at the first partly overpowers the Spring of the Air below it;
but that Impetus being quashed, the Spring and Weight of the Air presently
weighs it up again to its usual Station; and having been put into a little more
than ordinary Compression, raises it something higher; so that the Impetus upon
a second Descent brings on a successive Elevation, till at the last the Impetus
on each side gradually is lost, and discontinues that vibrating Motion; and
this may not only be illustrated by the successive Vibrations of a Pair of
Scales put in Motion by depressing one and elevating the other; but was farther
confirmed by Mercury in a Glass Tube, made use of in our 36th Experiment, for
having put a Quantity of Mercury into it, and by inclining of it permitted it
to run into one Leg, I stopped the Orifice of the other with my Finger, upon
which, the Tube being erected, the Air contained in the Siphon, which was
stopped at the Top, depressed the Mercury in that Tube; but as soon as it was
unstopp'd, the vibrating Motions of the Mercury began and continued to rise and
fall successively for some time.

CHAP. XVI. A Continuation of Objections against the Funicular Hypothesis.
BESIDES the forementioned Objections, there are several others which perplex
the Funicular Hypothesis: As first, How the superficial Parts of two solid
Marbles, which adhere together, when exactly polished, can be drawn out into a
Funiculus; a Difficulty which does not at all perplex our Doctrine. Besides,
were the Funicular Hypothesis allowed, it might be questioned, How it comes to
pass, that Liquors whose Parts are not equally liable to be extended into such
Funiculus's should exactly subside till Aequiponderant to 29 Inches of Mercury,
and no further; an Objection which our Doctrine admits not of, since not only
from Wind-Guns, but our former Experiments, it appears too manifestly to doubt
of the Air's Spring and Gravity.

Nor is the Author's strange Method of producing his Funiculus less
exceptionable; for he says, When the Mercury touches the Top of the Tube, upon
it is Descent, it leaves it is Superficies to stick to the Top of it, which is
extended by the Weight of the Mercury, till it leaves another Superficies
joining to that; where it may be objected, That neither Sense perceives any
such Thing, nor can it be made probable by Reason; it being impossible to
conceive, How the Superficies of a Body can be so extended as to become a Body
it self: And should it be allowed, that the Funiculus might be turned into so
subtle a Body, it would be altogether inconceivable how it should be so firm
and strong, as to suspend the Weight of a Cylinder of Mercury; and that it
should have such an admirable Property as to extend without being made thinner,
contrary to the Nature of all Ropes.

Besides, the Method he takes to illustrate his Generation of the Funiculus, by
comparing it to the Flame of a Candle, does not enforce the Belief of it any
more; for not to urge, That the Parts of a Candle, are by Agitation, and a
powerful Motion amongst each other, kept at such a distance, as to leave
several and a Multitude of Vacuities betwixt their Parts; if the Rarefaction of
the Mercury in the Funiculus be like that, when it is raised in the Form of a
Vapor, it would be too slight to suspend a Tube of Mercury. And it might be
further demanded, How the Funiculus came by such Hooks, as to take hold of
every Body contiguous to them, so firmly, as to be able to break strong
Glasses, by drawing their sides inwards; and how Fluids should be so suspended,
as to appear one entire Piece, contrary to what their Fluidity disposes them to
do. Nor is it less strange, That our Objector should allow this subtle Body a
Spring which he denies to be in Air; since Nature's Abhorrency of a Vacuum
cannot be the Cause of it, in as much as a Vacuum would not ensue, according to
his Doctrine, though it were not contracted.

Moreover, it would not be a little hard to conceive, were such a Funiculus
allowed of, how the Surfaces of Marbles extended, could contract into Marbles
again; and how in the Cylinder of Mercury, the Funiculus is so easily relaxed,
upon an Admission of Air into it, since, it filling up all the Space above the
Mercury before, it cannot easily be conceived how it should be dispossessed of
that Space, without being thrust into another.

Again, I should be glad to know, if the Cavity of our Receiver, upon an
Exsuction of Air, were filled with such stretched Strings, it would be possible
for a Pendulum to move in it without breaking them; but our Author's Funiculus
being made up of Strings, endued with peculiar Qualities, we shall decline
making any more Objections, since these Peculiarities may be sufficient to
distinguish it from Truth.

CHAP. XVII. The Aristotelian Rarefaction Examined.
The Aristotelian Notion of Rarefaction rejected.
BESIDES the former Objections which render the Funicular Doctrine
unintelligible, there are yet others, upon the Account of the Doctrine of
Rarefaction employed in the explicating of it.

For the Doctrine of Rarefaction made use of by our Author, supposing a Body
not only to fill up a larger Space, when rarefied, but likewise so to fill it,
as not to leave the least Vacuities betwixt it is Parts; it will be very hard to
conceive, How a Hundred Parts of Matter, which are circumscribed by so many
Spaces of the same Extention with themselves, should be capable of filling up
more Space adaequately than they are circumscribed by, without the Addition of
other Matter; and it seems strange, That without the immediate Act of
Omnipotence, Matter should be so extended as without any Addition to alter it is
Dimensions.

And though our Author takes two Ways to explicate his Notion, either upon a
Supposition of the Parts of Matter being indivisible or divisible in infinitum;
yet, since he explicates it neither of those ways so clearly, as to make it
intelligible, I must confess, I cannot acquiesce in them; nor are the
Difficulties at all made less by asserting, That Matter may be virtually so
extended as to possess more Space than is circumscribed by it; since a virtual
Extension is as unintelligible as Extension without the Term virtually joined
with it; for since he seems to allow the Parts of Matter to be indivisible, it
rather prejudices the Doctrine of Rarefaction as taught by Aristotle, than
explains it; since it is inconsistent to think, That a Body, whose Parts are
circumscribed by a certain Space, should fill a larger Space, without being
divided and removed out of the former.

Nor does it at all explain or render the Aristotelian Doctrine of Rarefaction,
to say, That Matter may, by Omnipotence, be so ordered, as to possess
adaequately double the Space it did before; since in Natural Philosophy it is
not disputed what GOD can do, but what he has done.

But besides the Difficulties in our Author's Doctrine of Rarefaction, there are
no less in the Condensation which his Funiculus supposes; for since he allows
of no Vacuities in it, it is impossible the Parts of it should be brought
nearer than to touch one another, without a Penetration of Dimensions, which is
wholly disallowed of, and by no means to be admitted in Nature; for were that
allowed, two or three Thousand Bodies might be contained in a Space, which
every one of them by it self would fill; which is altogether unintelligible.

CHAP. XVIII. A Consideration concerning some Trials of the Torrecellian and
other Experiments' at the Tops and Feet of a Hill.
The Height of Mercury suspended at the Top of a Hill.
FOr a further Proof against Our Adversaries Doctrine, and for a Confirmation of
ours, I shall add the following Experiments.

And First: The Famous Pecquet mentions an Experiment, made by Monsieur Pascal,
at the Foot of a Mountain 3000 Foot high; where when he ascended, 150 Fathom,
the Mercury in the Cylinder was not buoyed up so high, as at the Bottom, by two
Inches and a Quarter; and at the Top of the Hill, it wanted 3 Inches of that
Station, which it was suspended at, at the Foot of the Hill; which is a strong
Argument against our Adversary; the Difference plainly appearing to depend on
the different Length of the Atmospherical Cylinder, which was abler to weigh up
the Mercury at the Bottom, than the Top of the Hill.

And Gassendus, Tom. 1. P. 211. relates, that the like was observed 5 times on
the Hills at Auvergne. And a very Noted Virtuoso, Mr. J. Ball, as well as that
Ingenious Gentleman Mr. Townley, have observed the like in England. And it was
by the last named, likewise observed, that the Mercury included in the Top of
the Cylinder, was not able to depress the Mercury, near so much at the Bottom,
as at the Top of the Hill.

But to discover the weight of the Air, and it is Spring, without going up to
the Top of such high Mountains, we made use of the following Weather Glass,
suspending Water in the Pipe, instead of Mercury. The Instrument was a Glass
with a broad Foot, and a narrow Neck (A B), and a slender Pipe of Glass (C D),
which was open at both Ends; and so placed, that the lower End was not far from
the Bottom (A B), and was so closely cemented at the Neck (A), See Fig. the
First, Plate the Second.
as to prevent the Internal Air (I I) from communicating with External (K K),
unless it were through the Pipe (C D). And having conveig'd Water (H H) into
the Glass (AB), which was pretty large, and having blown so much Air into the
Bottle, as to raise the Water in the Tube above the Vessel, upon the Leads of
Westminster Abbey. When the Air was thought to be equally Cold and Condensed
within the Bottle, as without; we marked the Station of the Water (F), and
letting it down by a String to the Ground, the Water subsided an Inch, where
it is Station (E), being marked, and the Vessel drawn up again, the Water was
raised to the Mark (F) again. Which Experiment being again tried, had the like
success. And afterward the Top of the Tube being broke, we let it down within
the Church, the Surface of the Water in the Pipe being at (G) an Inch above the
Water in the Glass; where I observed, that the Air so depressed it, when it
came to the Bottom, as to force the Water out of the Pipe into the Glass,
several Bubbles breaking through into the Capacity of the Glass, and this Glass
being drawn up to the Top of the Church again, the Water was manifestly raised
in the Tube again; from whence it appears, that the Atmosphere gravitates more;
Caeteris paribus, the nearer the Surface of the Earth; for the Experiment being
repeated, we found that as the Height, at which it was tried, varied; so the
Elevation or Depression did.

Another Particular which may be a further Confirmation of our Hypothesis, is,
That which is mentioned by Monsieur Paschal, viz. That a Football being weakly
blown, and carried to the Top of a Hill, swelled more and more, as it was
carried higher; and as gradually grew lank, when it was carried down the Hill
again: From whence it appears, That as the Atmosphere is longer or shorter, it
makes a greater Gravitation and Pressure upon the Bladder.

To this I shall add an Experiment, sent to Dr. Croon, by a Learned Professor
of Gresham College, See Fig. the Sec. Plate the Second.
which is the following: Having Observed that in the Weather-Glass (A B),
represented by the Second Figure, which was about two Foot long; the Water was
suspended in the Pipe, about thirteen Inches above the Superficies of the
External Water, at the Bottom of Hallifax Hill; but being carried to the Top of
the Hill, it subsided an Inch and a Quarter, to the Point (D). The Internal Air
(A C), which was taken in at the Bottom, dilating it self at the Top further by
(C D). In which Experiment, the Descent being much more considerable than what
it ought to be in such a small Ascent, by the bare Pressure of the Atmosphere
diminished, the Reason appears to be, the Expansion of that Air included in the
Top of the Weather-Glass; as well as the Shortning of the Atmospherical
Cylinder.

CHAP. XIX. Experiments concerning the Measure of the Force of the Spring of
Air, compressed and dilated.
TO make it evident, That the Spring of the Air is able to do much more, than
we have attributed to it, upon the Account of its Spring and Weight, we tried
the following Experiments.

The Air's Condensation measured.
Having poured Mercury into a Glass-Tube, which consisted of a Long Leg, and a
Short One, which were so bent as to lie Parallel almost to each other; we
pasted Papers upon each, which were divided by Marks into Inches, and each of
those Inches into eight Parts; and upon pouring Mercury into the Longer Tube,
we observed, That the Air contained in the Shorter, which was Hermetically
sealed at the Top, by twenty nine Inches of Mercury, was condensed into half
the Space it possessed before; from whence it appears, that if it were able in
so compressed a State, by Virtue of it is Spring, to resist a Cylinder of
Mercury of 29 Inches, besides the Atmospherical Cylinder incumbent upon that,
it follows, that it is Compression in the open Air, being but half as much, it
must have but half that weight from the Atmosphere, that lies upon it, in that
Compressed State.

But to be more exact, See Fig. 4. Plate 2.
we took a Tube represented by the Fourth Figure, pasting upon the Shorter Leg
a Paper, divided into twelve Inches, and each of those into Quarters; and
another upon the Longer Leg, which made up several Feet, which were likewise
divided into Inches, and those subdivided again into Quarters. The Tube being
thus Marked, the Lower End was placed in a Wooden Box, that the Mercury might
run into it, if the Pipe chanced to break: And one being assigned to pour in
Mercury at the Top of the Tube, another was placed to observe, when the Mercury
in the small Tube, rose up to each of the Divisions, abovementioned; and to
take notice likewise, how high it stood in the Long Tube, at the same time,
where the several Observations were set down, and are contained in the
following Table.

A Table of the Condensation of the Air.
A A B C D E 48 12 00 Added to 29, makes 29 2/16 29 2/16 46 11 01 7/16 30 9/16
30 6/16 44 11 02 13/16 31 15/16 31 12/16 42 10 04 6/16 33 8/16 33 1/7 40 10 06
3/16 35 5/16 35 -- 38 9 07 14/16 37 -- 36 15/19 36 9 10 2/16 39 3/16 38 34 8 12
8/16 41 10/16 41 2/17 32 8 15 1/16 44 3/16 43 11/16 30 7 17 15/16 47 1/16 46 28
7 21 3/16 50 5/16 50 -- 26 6 25 3/16 54 5/16 53 10/13 24 6 29 11/16 58 13/16 58
2/8 22 5 34 15/16 64 1/16 63 6/11 21 5 37 15/16 67 1/16 66 4/7 20 5 41 9/16 70
11/16 70 -- 19 4 45 -- 74 2/16 73 11/19 18 4 48 12/16 77 14/16 77 17 4 53 11/16
82 12/16 82 4/17 16 4 58 2/16 87 14/16 87 15 3 63 15/16 93 1/16 93 1/^ 14 3 71
5/16 100 7/16 99 6/7 13 3 78 11/16 107 13/16 107 7/13 12 3 88 7/16 117 4/16 116
4/8

A, A, The Number of Equal Spaces in the Shorter Leg, which contained the same
Parcel of Air differently Expanded. B, The Height of the Mercury in the Long
Tube, by whose weight the Air in the Short one, was compressed. C, The Height
of the Mercury, which counterpois'd the weight of the Incumbent Atmospere. D,
The Aggregate of the Columns B and C, showing what Pressure was sustained by
the Included Air. E, What that Pressure should be, allowing the Pressures, and
Expansions, to be Reciprocal Porportions.
But in Trying this Experiment, whoever pours in the Mercury, he must do it by
degrees, and according to the Directions of the other, that takes notice of the
Ascent of the Mercury below; for if it be poured in without Caution, it may
rise up above the Marks placed on the Outsides, before due Observations can be
made.

Having, by the weight of so vast a Cylinder of Mercury, compressed the Air
into a Quarter of the Space it possessed before, we observed, though it could not
be sensibly condensed further by Cold, yet the Flame of a Candle brought near
it, gave us reason to think, that a greater degree of Heat would have expanded
it; but fearing the Cracking of the Tube, we durst not try it.

From the Experiment it appears, That as the Air is more or less compressed, so
it is able to counterpoise a Heavier or Lighter Cylinder of Mercury. And that
the Mercury was born up by the Spring of that condensed Air, appeared by
sucking up the Air out of the Tube, when the Mercury was 100 Inches high in the
Pipe; for the Pressure of the incumbent Pillar of the Atmosphere, being by that
means taken off, the Mercury was raised in the Long Tube, by the Expansion of
the Air in the Short Leg: And not by any Funiculus, since the Objector
confesses, that cannot raise more than a Cylinder of 30 Inches.

The Air's Rarefaction considered.
But, together with what has been said, it may not a little illustrate our
Doctrine of the Spring of the Air to observe, how much it is Spring is weakened,
accordingly as it is differently Expanded, and Rarified.

A Table of the Air's Rarefaction.
A B C D E 1 00 0/9 Subtracted from 29, leaves 29 29 1 10 19 19 2 15 14 14 3
20 2/8 9 4/8 9 15/12 4 22 7 7 7/16 5 24 5 5 19/20 6 24 4 4 23/24 7 25 4/8 4 2/8
4 8 26 0/0 3 0/8 3 23/32 9 26 3 3/0 3 11/36 10 26 6/3 3 0/0 2 39/40 12 27 2 2
23/48 14 27 4/8 2 2/8 2 16 27 ^/8 2 0/0 1 55/64 18 27 1 1 47/72 20 28 -- 1 6/8
1 9/80 24 28 1 4/8 1 22/96 28 28 1 1 1/16 32 28 4/8 1 2/8 0 110/128

A, The Number of Equal Spaces at the Top of the Tube, which the same Parcel of
Air was contained in. B, The Height of the Mercury, which together with the
Included Air, counterpois'd the Pressure of the Atmosphere. C, The Pressure of
the Atmosphere. D, The Aggregate of B to C, representing the Pressure
counterpois'd by the Included Air. E, What that Pressure should be, according
to the Hypothesis.
In which Experiment it is to be Noted, First, That we made use of a
Glass-Tube, about 6 Foot long, sealed at one End.

Secondly, We had in Readiness a Glass-Pipe, about the Diameter of a Swan's
Quill, which was marked with a Paper stuck upon it, divided into Inches, and
half Quarters; which being immersed in the other Cylinder of Mercury, and open
at both Ends, that the Mercury might rise in it, it helped to fill the other
up. And about an Inch of it is standing above the Mercury, the Orifice was
sealed up; so that an Inch of Air was contained in the Tube, which, by lifting
up the Tube, was gradually expanded to several Inches: It being noted, in the
mean time, how much the Mercury in the small Tube, was, by the Expanded Air, in
several Stations, permitted to rise above the Surface of the Mercury in the
other Tube: By which Method, the former Observations being made, we inverted
the Large Tube, and found by trying the Torrecellian Experiment, That that Day
the Air sustained the Mercury at 29 Inches; where it was observed, That in
making the foregoing Observations, the Difference betwixt the Account which
answers our Hypothesis and the other, probably proceeded from a new Access of
Air, to that included Inch; and indeed, by immerging the Tube, when the
Observations were made, we found, that it had gained about half an Eighth;
which we judged might arise from some Bubbles lodged in the Pores of the
Mercury. From which Experiment it appeared, that the Inch of Air expanded to
double it is Dimensions, was able with a Cylinder of Mercury abuot 15 Inches, to
counterpoise the Pressure of the Atmosphere, which would raise the Mercury
eight and twenty Inches, when the Spring of that Air was lost, by a further
Expansion: So that the Atmosphere here below, must consequently be as much
compressed, as if twenty eight Inches of Mercury gravitated upon it.

CHAP. XX. Objections against Particular Phenomenon answered.
The reason why Air condensed by Cold, does not raise Mercury equally, as when
condensed by Pressure.
WHAT our Author says in the Vindication of Particular Experiments, being only a
Repetition of what he had said before against the Objector's Funicular
Hypothesis, there is no need now to make a Repetition; since the Funicular
Hypothesis, being already confuted, it consequently follows, that the
Explications are Erroneous.

I shall therefore only take Notice of what has not yet been delivered, or not
so fully explained.

And First, The Reason why the Air condensed in Winter, by Cold, does not buoy
up the Mercury equally, as when the Air is condensed in a Vessel, is because
that condensed Air adds no greater a Weight to it; but as a pound of Feathers,
it is as heavy when compressed, as before that Compressure; but when expanded
Air is condensed in a Vessel, it acts more Powerfully by Virtue of it is Spring.

Mr. Boil has taken a great deal of Pains in his Explications, to show several
Absurdities in the Objections; but those being neither Useful, nor Instructive,
especially considering the Objector's Hypothesis is wholly laid aside, and our
Author's Received, it will be needless to take notice of what will be of no Use
in Explicating the Phenomenon before delivered.

CHAP. XXI. An Explication of Rarefaction.
IT being objected by the Author of a Book, De Corporum Inseparabilitate, that
the Spring of the Air cannot be made out, whether we allow a Vacuum, or a
Plenum. Waving the Forms which he lays his Objections down in, and a particular
Answer to his Ways of Arguing, I shall take the following Method, to explain
the Air's Spring. For supposing the Particles of the Air to consist of Matter,
extended into thin Laminae, and those wound and folded up, like the Spring of a
Watch; and that these Parts of Matter so wound up, are in a Continual Circular
Motion, it will follow, that the Laminae in this Motion will endeavor to
extend themselves, and to recede from the Axis or Center of their Motion, till
hindered by the Opposition of each other, or some adjacent Bodies: and this
Expansive Endeavor will be proportionably increased, as the Circular Motion of
those Particles is quickened. And these Springy Corpuscles thus shaped, and
thus Mechanically moved, are sufficient to account for all that we ascribe to
the Spring of the Air. For supposing the Diameter of those Parts of Matter next
the Surface of the Earth, compressed by the whole Weight of the Incumbent
Atmosphere, to be 1/1000000000000 of an Inch, See Plate the Second.
and to be represented by the Third Figure A B C D; it will Naturally follow,
that Part of the Incumbent Weight of the Atmosphere, being taken off, they will
expand themselves so as to be 10/1000000000000 of an Inch in Diameter, as
represented by E F G H. so that these Zones whirling round, will take up a
space 1000 times bigger than before. And as from hence the Rarefaction of the
Air is naturally accounted for; so the swelling of a Carp's Bladder, upon
taking off the Pressure of the Atmosphere, is explained by the same Reason. And
as the spontaneous Rarefaction of the Air is hence naturally explained, so it is
Forced Rarefaction by Heat, is; for if the Particles of Heat penetrating the
Interstices of these Aerie Particles be in a violent rapid Motion, by increasing
the Motion of the former Particles, they increase the Motion of the latter, and
consequently strengthen their expansive Virtue; And if these Rarifi'd Parts of
Matter, by expanding themselves, leave larger Interstices betwixt their
Laminae, they must consequently be more pervious to the Rays of Light. So that
granting this innate Motion in the Parts of Matter, and such a Configuration as
I have mentioned, it naturally follows, that all the Phenomenon belonging to
Rarefaction and Condensation, may easily be explained by it.

Rarefaction according to the Doctrine of the Plenists.
Nor will it be impossible to explain the Rarefaction and Condensation,
admitting of a Plenum, if we suppose with Cartesius, That the Air consists of
Parts which are long, slender and flexible; for supposing with him, that these
are whirled round by the Rapid Motion of the Globuli Coelestes, those that lie
next the Surface of the Earth, must needs be compressed and hindered from that
expansive Motion, more than those that have less Weight upon them; and
consequently, when that Compression is taken off, the expansive Force being
increased by it, they will consequently be expanded more Powfully; and by
whirling round, acquire longer Vortices: And for the like Reason the Air
contained in the Carp's Bladder, will extend it self when the Pressure of the
External Atmosphere is taken off; and consequently, when the External Pressure
is again admitted, those springy Parts being again compressed are less able to
maintain their new Vortices, but being wound up together again become more
condensed, that Pressure resisting the Force of their Spring. And as for the
Reason why Water flows into the Receiver again in the Magdeburg Experiment, so
impetuously; it hence evidently appears to proceed, from the Weakness of the
Spring of the included Air, not being able to resist the more violent Pressure
of the External; and for the same Reason likewise, the Carp's Bladder upon a
reingress of that Air, is presently compressed into its former
Inconspicuousness.

Elasticity explained by the Cartesian Hypothesis.
Nor will it be a less Piece of difficulty to explain the Aptness of Explosion
in Gunpowder, by the Cartesian Hypothesis; for the Parts of that Combustible
Matter of which it is made being shattered and broke into Pieces, consequently
become more apt to be whirld about by the Materia Subtilis, and justling
against each other, take up 1000 times as much space as before; and these Parts
being thus agitated whatever Gunpowder they fall upon, they presently shatter
its Parts so as to put it in a Capacity to be agitated by the Materia Subtilis:
and consequently, the Globuli secundi Elementi, being expelled out of the Place
which contained the Gunpowder, and the Parts of it being impetuously moved in
that, they not only burst the Vessel they are contained in, but drive every
thing out of its Place which stands in their way, and is not able to resist
them.

CHAP. XXII. An Explication of the Rota Aristotelica.
NOT to mention all those Absurdities which Mr. Boil has showed in the
Author's Explanation of the Rota Aristotelica, See Plate the second Fig. 5.
I shall pass on to lay down what Explanation Mr. Boil himself gives of it;
for Mr. Boil conceiving no such Difficulties in it, as our Author would
represent, says, that it is so far from containing any Obscurities in it, that
it is plain and easy. For if the Wheel A B C D. be moved in a direct Motion
from A I C. to K L M. each of the Points A E I G C. will either on a Plain, or
in the Medium it passes through, form so many parallel Lines to I L. But if
instead of that direct Progressive Motion, it have a Circulation, each Point in
one Revolution, whilst moved from G to L. will form a Cyclorid. Besides, each
Point of the Circle acquires various Degrees of Celerity in its Progression by
this complex Motion, according to its various Position to a Point, which is
always to be found in some part of the Line, drawn from the Center of the
circular Motion Perpendicular to the Progressive; for as the Circumference to
the Radius, so is the Line of the Progressive Motion to the distance of the
Point from the Center; because the Line of Progression is equal to the Circle,
described on that distance as Radius; and therefore, each Point of the smaller
Circle, when it touches the Perpendicular, will in respect of its Progressive
Motion stand still: This Point therefore, will be the Center of the complex
Motion.

Our Author's Explication of the Rota Aristotelica.
But since it may sufficiently explain the Rota Aristotelica, if we only
consider those Points which pass across the Perpendicular, we shall suppose in
our Example that A is the Center or immovable Point; and then the
Circumference A B C D will be equal to I L or A K by our Hypothesis. And since
the Point I has only one motion, viz. that of Lation, the Point C which has
two Motions, must have double the Velocity of I, and the Point F having the
same Degree of Lation with I, and put half the Distance of C from the Center I,
it must have one Degree of Motion and a half.

And further, the Point E having the same Progressive Motion with I, and being
moved backwards with half the Velocity, loses half the Progressive Motion
forwards. And the Point A being by its Progression moved forwards, with an
equal Velocity with I, and by its Rotation (the Circle A B C D being equal to
the Line I L) being carried back with equal Celerity, must necessarily stand
still as to the Progressive Motion.

Now from hence it appearing, that the Point A, (being at Rest, by reason of
its two opposite Motions) only touch a Point of the Line A K, without being in
the least moved upon it, and that the Point E, (moving forwards as fast again
as it is carried backwards by its Rotation, and consequently moved half as fast
as the Point I) not only touches the Line E K, but is moved upon it with a
progressive Motion, half as quick as that of I, it will consequently follow,
that each Point in E must make a small Line, which is a Part of the whole E C;
so that the Contact of the former, and the Contact and the Progression of the
latter, being performed by an infinite Succession of Points, in an infinite
Succession of Instants, the Difficulties represented by our Author's Explaining
it, are taken off, all that he says coming to no more, than that in such a
determinate Moment or minutes Space of time, such a determirate minutes
Corpuscle, will successively pass over such a determinate Space or Length.

CHAP. XXIII. An Abstract of what is further contained relating to the Weight
and Spring of the Air in the Examen of Mr. Hobbs his Dialogus Physicus.
IN this Chapter I shall not take notice of what Absurdities the Author has
showed Mr. Hobbs guilty of, but shall only extract what may tend to a further
Illustration of the Doctrine of the Air's Weight and Spring.

And first, from what has been before delivered concerning the Weight and
Spring of the Air, it appears, that the Reason why the Water in a watering Pot,
is prevented from descending through the Holes of the Bottom, by stopping the
upper Orifice, is no other than the Pressure of the Atmosphere; which making a
stronger Resistance than a Cylinder of Water of such a Length is able to
resist, it must consequently be suspended in the watering Pot: and that this is
the true Reason, appears from what has been delivered in the nineteenth
Experiment; where it was made evident, that if the Pressure of the Air was
weakened by extracting the Air out of the Receiver, as soon as the Water in the
Tube was able to out-balance the Spring of the included Air, it began to
subside.

CHAP XXIV. The Weight and Spring of the Air asserted.
THE Author having proved the Weight of the Air, by weighing it in an exhausted
Receiver in a Lamb's Bladder, and a Glass Bubble, and likewise in an AEolipile:
And the Air's gravity being further confirmed, by weighing the Receiver before
and after it had been exhausted in the Magdeburg Experiments: All that Mr.
Hobbs objects, relating to the Bladder weighed in the Receiver, only intimates,
that the Air being blown into the Bladder, the Weight proceeds from Atoms which
swim in that Air, or the Haltius which pass into the Cavity of the Bladder
along with the Air: But since this denies not the Weight of the Air, but rather
questions the Cause; we think it sufficient to account for what we aimed at, to
prove, that Air does gravitate, though the Cause of Gravitations be not known.

The Spring of the Air proved.
As to the Spring of the Air, waving what trivial Objections Mr. Hobbs makes, I
shall add the following Experiments to evince it.

The first, is, That if a Cylinder of Mercury be suspended at the usual Height,
in the Torrecellian Experiment, by stopping the upper Orifice of the Tube, and
lifting the lower End above the Basis it rested on before; we may observe, that
the Finger can discern no Gravitation of the Mercury in the Tube; but if it be
inverted, and the External Air let in, the Mercury which before did not
gravitate upon the Finger, will be so depressed by the Spring of that Air, as
to cause it to weigh considerably upon it; and if the lower Orifice be
unstopp'd in the restagnant Mercury, the included Air will depress that in the
Tube, below its former Stations: And if the Experiment be made in a Tube not so
long, and both Ends be stopped with ones Finger, upon the removing of the
uppermost, the lower will perceive the Weight of the Incumbent Pillar of the
Atmosphere, which before depressed the Pulp of the Finger into the Cylindrical
Cavity of the Tube; so that this Experiment proves both the Spring and Gravity
of the Air.

The other Experiment is the Fourth in the Epistle, where it was evident, that
a Bladder suspended in the Receiver, subsided or swelled as the Air was let in,
or drawn out: And though Mr. Hobbs teaches, that the swelling of the Bladder is
effected by the Air, per vim incussus, which getting into the Bladder, presses
against the Internal Superficies of it in their circular Motions; yet, since
from several Experiments it appears, that Bladders are impervious to Air, to
deny that the Ingress of it, is a sufficient Answer to his Explanation: But
further, were the Bladder so pervious to Air, it might as readily get out of
the Bladder, as in, without breaking it.

And whereas Mr. Hobbs endeavors to explicate all the Phenomenon afforded by
our Engine and Wind-Guns, by the Motion of the Aerie Parts, which Motion they
acquire by the Force of the Engine; yet, that the Air has parallel Effects
where it acquires no such Motion, appears from the Experiments formerly
mentioned made in the open Air, at the Top and Bottom of Hills; the Mercury
being not near suspended so high at the Top, as at the Bottom of those Hills.
And though he endeavors to Explain the difference, by supposing the Motion of
the Air brisker at the Bottom than the Top of the Hill; yet, since it can only
keep the Mercury from subsiding, by virtue of its Pressure, that Pressure must
either proceed from its Spring or Weight; and since it is highly improbable,
that the Pressure of so few Parts of the Air, as are contiguous to the Mercury,
should be able to keep it from subsiding, it must do it by virtue of the whole
Atmosphere which is equiponderant to it.

But to evince the Spring and Pressure of the Air further, I shall add, that a
Thermoscope being carried to the Top of a Hill, the Air contained in it not
finding so strong a Pressure from the Water, which there receives a less
Impression from the Atmosphere, visibly expands it self by virtue of its Spring.

CHAP. XXV. Mr. Hobb's Principal Explications of the Phenomenon of the Engine
Examined
BEfore Mr. Hobbs sets about an Explication of the Phenomenon exhibited by our
Engine, he lays down an Hypothesis, which he endeavors to explain them by;
supposing that a great many earthy Particles are interspersed in the Air, which
have a congenite circular Motion of their own; and that there is a greater
Quantity of them nearer, than further from the Earth: But besides that it may
be questioned, how such Particles can move in so exact an Order, without
knocking against, and disturbing each others Motion: It is as unintelligible
how Matter should have its Motion congenite: But to leave Mr. Hobbs to dispute
these things with other Adversaries, I shall proceed to his Explications.

The exhausted Receiver void of Air.
And first, to prove that there is no Vacuum in our Receiver, he says, that the
Air being removed by the Pressure of the Sucker outward, it gets into the
Receiver again betwixt the Unequal and Concave Surfaces of the Sucker and the
Cylinder, which if. true, it would follow, that there was a Vacuum for some
time, viz. till the Air had time to get into the Receiver again. But that the
Air is in a great Measure drawn out, and that the Receiver is, in respect of
Air, empty, not only appears by those Bubbles of Water which pass through the
Water, when the Receiver is encompassed with it; but it further appears, by
weighing the Receiver when exhausted, which is considerably lighter than
before. As also, by observing, that if the Receiver be ill shaped, so as not to
be able to resist the Pressure of the outward Air, it breaks inward upon the
Action of the Pump. But a further Argument is, that the Receiver being
exhausted, and the Cocks turned when the Receiver is encompassed with Water,
several Gallons will be impelled into it, which could not be without a
Penetration of Dimensions, except the Receiver was empty. And even in the
Common Experiment its evident, that the Air, upon turning of the Stop-Cock,
rushes in with a considerable Noise.

But if Mr. Hobbs should say, that the Purer Air only flows into the Receiver;
I shall demand, how it is possible for that to flow in, when the Receiver is
exhausted in Water; where we might expect, that it should as well raise Bubbles
in its Passage through it, as that such Bubbles rise in the Water in the
exhausted Receiver.

And though Mr. Hobbs affirms, That this Air getting into the Receiver moves up
and down violently I know not how; to prove that it does not I shall intimate,
That were it so, the Smoke as well as the Bladder contained in the Receiver in
the forementioned Experiments, would be disturbed by that Motion; since upon
the Admission of the Air into the Receiver, it appears, That it puts them both
into a very violent Agitation.

And, That in the Torrecellian Experiment, the Tube above the Mercury is void
of Air, may be evinced, by reciprocally inverting the Tube; for by that Means,
the Mercury will move backwards with a much greater degree of Swiftness and
Force, than if Air be let into that Part of the Cylinder which is not filled
with Mercury.

And indeed, were it not allowed, That the Air is drawn out of the Receiver,
for any thing that Mr. Hobbs has offered, the Reason of the Ascent or Descent
of the Mercury, as the external Air is let in or drawn out, would be difficulty
understood, if not altogether unexplain'd, without admitting the Weight and
Spring of the Air.

The next Phenomenon Mr. Hobbs offers to explain is, why the Sucker rises up
when the Receiver is exhausted, though a hundred Pound Weight be suspended at it;
the Reason of which he attributes to the swift and violent Repercussion of the
Air, which was thrust out, which finding not room enough in the World, must
conseuqently press the Sucker before it into the Space which contained it
before; but if the Air be so swiftly repelled, I cannot understand, why it
should not resist the Egress of Air, or raise the Sucker when a greater Weight
is hung at it. But further, that the return of this Air does not depend on the
swift Repercussion of the external Air is hence manifest; since if the Sucker
be held down till the Air about it seems to be settled, and as calm as before;
it will nevertheless rise when the superfluous Weight is taken away. And as for
an Internal Conatus of the Included Air, were such allowed, as Mr. Hobbs
contends for, it would rather hinder than promote the Rising of the Sucker; for
were that Included Air forced out so violently, as he supposes, and were it
strong enough to cause a violent Repercussion in the Air, the Internal Force
counterpoizing the External, the Rising of the Sucker would not thereby in the
least be promoted: But since from our Experiments it appears, That the Receiver
is, for the greatest Part, void of Air, and that such an Impetus would be of no
Force, in causing the Phenomenon he endeavors to explain by it, it is more
Natural to belive, that the External Pressure of the Atmosphere raised it.

CHAP. XXVI. Several scattered Explications, and Passages in his Dialogue,
considered.
WHEREAS we have in the XXXXVth Experimenti, mentioned an Experiment, wherein
the Water Rose up into a long slender Tube, which was placed in a Perpendicular
Line; the Water in the Tube, being above the Surface of the Water, without the
Tube; Mr. Hobbs endeavors to explain this, by the Impulse of the Particles of
Matter, swiftly agitated in the Air; but since the same Agitation of Parts
within the Tube, might also depress that to an equal Surface, with the
External, the Account he gives of it, is the less satisfactory.

The Reason which he assigns for the Difficulty in drawing up the Stopple, when
the Receiver is exhausted, is, a Violent Conatus, proceeding from the Motion of
the Particles within; but were the Impetus so great, as to cause so great a
Repercussion, as Mr. Hobbs before supposed able to repel the Sucker, it should
rather raise the Stopple; and if that Motion contributed to the fastening of it,
it would continue upon a Readmission of the Air; since the Air in the Cavity
runs about, and is in Motion for a good while: Nor could the Plentitude he
supposes, cause the Phenomenon, because he supposes the World to be equally,
and at all times full. But that the close Connection of the Stopple to the
Socket, depended on the Pressure of the External Air, appeared by closing the
Hole in the Cover with Cement, instead of that Stopple; for when the Air was
drawn out of the Receiver, the External Air was drawn out of the Receiver, the
External Air would press so violently upon it, as to make the upper Superficies
Concave, and sometimes to force it down into the Receiver with a Noise, and
great Violence.

He further assigns the Boiling of Water in our Receiver, to the Motion of the
Air included; but since I have made it appear, That there is no such Motion,
our Explanation is the more probable; since the Parts of the Liquor being
agitated by Heat, will be apt to to expand more powerfully upon a Removal of
that Pressure.

And though he says the Parts of the Water could not be moved, except a Movente
contiguo, A Contiguous Body in Motion; yet since he allows, that the Motion of
his Earthy Parts, which swim in the Air is innate, and consequently depends not
on any Contiguous Body, I shall leave that to answer what he here delivers; and
shall only intimate, That the Parts of the Water being agitated, when put into
the Receiver, is enough to account for the Phenomenon, when the Pressure of
the Air is taken off.

Why Animals die in the Exhausted Receiver.
The sudden Death of Animals, which I ascribe doubtingly, though not without
Probability, to the Exsuction of the Air in the Receiver, he attributes to the
Circular Motion of the included Air, and it is Tenacity; but since I have
already made it appear, that there is no such Motion, that is a Sufficient
Answer. And as for the Air, being thicker in the Exhausted Receiver, than
before, the contrary appears in the Magdeburg Experiment; where the Exhausted
Receiver weighed much less than before; but from the Breaking of Bubbles
outward it further appears, that it is not a thicker, but a lighter and more
yielding Body: And though Mr. Hobbs from his supposition of the Air's Thickness,
endeavors to Account for the sudden Extinction of Flame in our Receiver; yet
thinking it a Matter of Difficulty to explain, the true Cause of the Extinction
of Flame, it may suffice, that I have made it appear, that the Air is not thick
as he supposes.

CHAP. XXVII: Several other Passages in Mr. Hobbs's Dialogue, examined.
IN this Chapter Mr. Hobbs objects against what our Author delivers, concerning
the Cause of the Coliesion of two Marbles; but all that is contained in what he
here offers, being obviated by what has been delivered under the Title of
Fluidity, and Firmness; For a further Confirmation of the Doctrine there
delivered, I shall add the following Experiments: And,

The Pressure of the Air upon Bodies contained in it, proved.
First, If an Aeolipile freed from Air, be, whilst hot, stopped with Wax, upon a
Perforation of that Wax, the Air will be pressed in to the Cool Aeolipile,
whether the Orifice be held down, or Horizontally; which shows, that the Air on
each side may press upon the Lower Superficies of the Marble, as well as the
Subjacent Pillar of Air, and that the Air is not impelled against it only in a
Pyramidal Figure, as he would urge, viz. because Lines drawn from the
Circumference and Borders of the Stones, to the Center of the Earth, must form
Pyramids.

To which it might be added, That Part of the Air being drawn out of a large
Glass, and a Book clapped upon the Orifice, the Pressure of the Subjacent
Atmosphere, kept it suspended there.

And the Author of the Magdeburg Experiment says, That two Plates of Copper,
whose Diameter was about half an Ell, stuck so close to each other, that six
Men could not pull them asund.

See Fig. 6. Plate second
And it appears from an Experiment made in a Glass Viol, anon to be described,
that if the Tube be so immersed, that it is Lower Orifice just touch the Water,
the oblique Pressure of the Atmosphere, will raise the Water in the Tube, a
considerable Height, as the Air is sucked out of the Tube.

Mr. Hobbs objects against the Author's Explications of the Rising of: Water in
Glass Fountains; and says, That it cannot be accounted for by the Expansion of
the Air, since the Parts of the Air expanded, take up no more room after they
are expanded, than before; but since he means so as adequately to fill more
Space; and we only mean such an Expansion, as is before explan'd, by instancing
compressed Wool; it appears, that in our Sense it will take up more Space, so
as to keep the gross Parts of Water from getting betwixt them.

There are other Objections mentioned in this Chapter, as well as some other
Particulars, relating to the Royal Society; but since the Author finds no
weight in them against any thing he has taught; I shall only further take
Notice of what Mr. Hobbs and Gassendus teach, concerning the Rise of Water in
Siphons; viz. That it is performed by Suction. But not now to mention what has
elsewhere been delivered to prove the contrary, I shall only add the following
Experiment: Having taken a Glass Vessel, which was large enough to contain
about a Pound of Water, I caused a Glass Pipe to be fixed in the Neck of it; so
that the Air within was kept from having any Intercourse with that without, the
Lower End reaching almost to the Bottom of the Vessel: The Pipe being thus
fixed, we conveyed Water into the Bottle, till it rose something above the
Bottom of the Pipe, and then having inclined the Bottle to give a due
Intercourse betwixt the Internal and External Air, I sucked the Air out of the
Tube, till the Water rose into my Mouth, and till the Spring of the Included
Air, was able no longer to lift up the Water; which would not have done, been
were the Common Notion of Suction allowed, viz. That it is effected by the
Pressure of the Air, thrust away by the dilated Chest of him that sucks, and
thereby drawing the Water into the Pipe at which he sucks.

But besides the Preceding use made of this Experiment, I poured out the Water,
till the lower End of the Pipe was but just immersed in it; and upon Suction,
it rose almost to the Top of the Pipe; but the Spring of the Air being too much
weakened to raise it higher, several Bubbles of Air broke through the Water;
but as soon as I left off sucking, the Pressure of the External Air so
compressed the Rarified Air within, as to bring it to it is wonted Station,
several Particles breaking into the Bottle through the Water, till that
Internal Air was equally pressed with the External.

CHAP. XXVIII. What Mr. Hobbs teaches concerning Fluidity and Firmness,
examined.
Motion the Chief Qualification in order to Fluidity.
THE First Particular examined in this Chapter, is a Mistake of Mr. Hobbs,
concerning the Author's Opinion of Fluidity; the Objector making the Author's
Notion of Fluidity to consist in the Size of the Parts of Liquid Bodies;
whereas our Author assigns Motion, as the Chief and Principal Qualification;
since a Coagulum of pure Spirits of Urine and Wine, may by bare Digestion, be
turned into a Permanent Liquor; and Quicksilver, though fluid, may be turned
into a Permanent Powder, by stopping the Motion of it is Parts. And though Mr.
Hobbs further asserts, That Fluid Bodies consist of Parts Divisible into
Fluids, as Quantity into Quantity; yet, since I have made it appear, That
Fluidity depends on the Shape, Size, Texture, and Motion; and Firmness, on a
Rest amongst the Parts of Solids; and likewise, that Fluids are not divisible
into Fluid Parts, as Quantity into Quantity, it is needless to repeat what is
there delivered.

As for the Explication of Fluidity and Firmness, which Mr. Hobbs Substitutes,
it teaches, That the Parts of Fluids may move whilst the whole is in Motion,
and that Solids may have their Parts in Motion, though the whole lies still: As
also he says, That the Parts of a Fluid may be rendered less fluid, by being
compressed; but since he has asserted these things, and not proved them; and
since the Hypothesis he goes upon, is sufficiently invalidated before, the
Author thinks these require no Particular Answer: And though he further makes an
Objection against the Size of the Parts of Matter contributing to Fluidity and
Firmness; yet since our Author makes Motion or Rest the Chief and Principal
Requisites, what has been delivered in the History of Fluidity and Firmness,
may suffice for an Answer: For that there is Motion in the Parts of Fluids,
appears, if a Lump of Salt be put into Water, the Parts of which will be
presently dissolved, and carried up to the Top of the Liquor, which could not
be without Motion; and that Rest contributes to Solidity, is evident, since
Water froze, becomes Ice; and on the contrary, that, as well as Metals, by
having their Parts put into a violent Motion by Heat, become Fluid.

CHAP. XXIX. An Explanation of the Engine made Use of in the following
Experiments.
See Plate the Third and Fourth.
THE Structure of our Engine being such, as not to admit of an Alphabetical
Explanation, so as to make it intelligible, to those that are unacquainted with
Mechanical Structures; and it being easily enough understood by those,
especially that are acquainted by our First Engine, we thought it sufficient in
our Plate, to represent the Engine just ready to be set on Work; and in the
Fourth the Parts, which it is made up of. Only there are two things, which may
deserve to be explained: First the Sucker being always covered with Water; and
the Perforation (p q), which goes through it in a Perpendicular Line, and
together with the Stick (r s), supplies the Place of a Valve, being to be
stopped at the Bottom of the Cylinder (n o), when filled with Water, it was
necessary the Stick (rp) should be of a considerable Length. Secondly, The Pipe
(A B) lies in a Gutter, made purposely in the Board (c d e f), which Board is
laid over with Cement, and a piece of Iron laid upon that, to keep it from
warping: In which Iron-plate is fixed a Lip, which rises up about the End of
the Pipe (B), which is bent up, to prevent the Water which comes from the
Receiver from being Spilt; and notwithstanding the Stop-cock (G H I K), might
be inserted into the Cylinder (L M N O), at (I) with Soder; yet it is much more
convenient to have the Branch (I) made like a Screw; so that being screwed into
the Barrel, it may more easily be mended, when any thing is amiss; Whether it
be that the Air gets in betwixt the Plate and the Wood, or the Cement be drawn
into the Pipe, where the inverted End is united to the Receiver; and lest the
inward Orifice of the Pipe should be stopped with any thing, contained in the
Receiver drawn to it, there is fixed at some Distance from it a Tin Plate, so
contrived as to give free Passage to the Air.

The Wooden Part represented in the Plate, and which contains the Cylinder, is
always so full of Water as able to overtop the Cylinder, and to make the Sucker
soft and plump, by which means it is more exactly fitted to the Cylindrical
Cavity.

And as for the Iron Plate abovementioned, it has this Convenience, that it
excludes the Air, better than if the Receiver had a Stop-cock, in most
Experiments, though in some it is less servirceable.

But most of the following Experiments may be tried in our First Engine, if the
following Alterations be made. And First, If a square Board, and a suitable
Iron Plate, such as is made use of in this Engine, be fastened opposite to the
Iron Rack, to the Upper Part of the great Cylinder, and a Glass Tube, like that
just now described, be fixed to the Lower Branch of the Stop-cock, with a
Cement, made with near an equal Proportion of Wax and Turpentine, in Winter,
and three Parts of Wax to two of Turpentine in Summer; for the Ingress of Air
being thus prevented, upon drawing down the Sucker, the Air, by Virtue of it is
own Spring, will force it self out of the Receiver.

CHAP. XXX. A Continuation of New Experiments concerning the Spring and Weight
of the Air and their Effects, by way of Letter to the Right Honorable the Lord
Clifford and Dungarvan.
My Dear Lord,
HAving already given your Lordship an Account of the Design and Scope of our
Mechanical Experiments, without any further Preface, being encouraged by your
Acceptance of my last, I shall proceed to a Continuation.

EXPERIMENT I. Concerning the Raising of Mercury a great Height in an open
Tube, by the Spring of a small Quantity of included Air.
IN order to make an Estimate of the Force of the Air's Spring, in it is several
Degrees of Expansion; We filled the fourth part of a Viol with Quicksilver, the
Neck of which was none of the largest, in which we fixed a Glass Tube with hard
Wax, the lower End reaching almost to the Bottom of the Quicksilver, and the
upper almost a Yard above the Viol, which being conveyed into a Receiver (
See Plate 5. Fif. 1.) which was pretty Tall, See Plate 5. Fig. 1.
upon an Exsuction of the Air in the Receiver, that in the Viol expanding it
self, raised the Mercury 27 Inches in the Tube; yet when the Air was again
admitted into the Receiver, it subsided so far as to be almost; if not quite
equal with the Surface of the Mercury in the Viol: And this Experiment was
tried before the Famous Savilian Geometer Dr. Wallis, though it does not
constantly succeed alike, it sometimes rising higher than at others.

In which Experiment the following Observations were to be made. First, That so
much Air being blown into the Viol, to try whether it was stanch, as was able
to raise the Mercury three Inches in the Pipe, upon the Exsuction of the
External Air in the Receiver, the Mercury rose 30 Inches above that in the Viol.

Secondly, When the Mercury is taken out of the Receiver, it does not suddenly
subside as low as before it is Ascent, the Air being a little more Expanded by
the Heat of the Cement when melted with an Iron.

Thirdly, Whilst the Air included in the Viol retains any considerable
Springiness, after each Exsuction the Mercury will be raised by the Force of
its Expansion, a considerable Height above what that Air is able to suspend it
at, and makes several Vibrations before it settles.

Fourthly, Upon the first Exsuction the Mercury rises near of the whole Weight
that the Expansion of the included Air is able to raise it, and continues every
subsequent Exsuction to rise less and less as the weight of the suspended
Mercury increases, and the Spring of the Internal Air grows weaker, and as the
Mercury rises less every Exsuction than it did before, so are the Vibrations
less considerable.

Lastly, Having observed the Weight of the Air in a good Barometer, when it was
but light, the Mercury was raised to 29 and though soon after the Trial it was
but 29 Inches high.

To make an Estimate of the Quantity of Air which raised the Mercury to the
usual height, we counterpois'd the Viol, and then filling it full of Water, we
found it to weigh about 5 Ounces 2 Drachms, and about 20 Grains; but so much
being poured off, that the remaining Water only filled the Space which the
Mercury was before contained in, it weighed 1 Ounce 2 Drachms 14 Grains, so
that the Air which by it is Expansion elevated the Mercury, filled the Space of
no more than 4 Ounces and a few Grains: The Diameter of the Pipe employed in
this Experiment was no more than the of an Inch.

An Argument against a Fuga vacui.
But besides the Spring of the Air, from this Experiment we may learn, what is
to be thought of what some Learned Men teach concerning the Suspension of
Quicksilver by a Funiculus, and, it is rising to avoid a Vacuum; for were the
first true, it might be demanded, why that Funiculus raises it not above 27
Inches; and as for the latter it is objected, that the Mercury being unable
adequately to fill up more Space by rising, than if it rose not, the Reason
must be invalid.

EXPERIMENT II. A good Quantity of Air raised the Mercury in an open Tube, no
higher than the Weight of the Atmosphere does in a Baroscope.
HAving put a sufficient Quantity of Mercury into a large Bottle, capable of
containing about ssij, we immersed the one End of a long slender Tube, below
the Surface of the Mercury; and having closed the Neck of the Viol with Cement,
it was conveyed into a Receiver different from the former in nothing but
Size; where we observed, that the Quantity of Air being greater in this Viol,
than that made use of in the former Experiment, it was capable of expanding
further, and of raising the Mercury to about 29 Inches and about out of which
half an Inch being deducted, for the height it was elevated to by Air injected
to try the Stanchness of the Bottle, the Spring of the Air included in the
Bottle, raised it to 29 Inches and about; The Weight of the Air in a Baroscope
at the same time, elevating the Mercury 29 Inches and, which was higher than
the elevated Mercury in the Receiver. But having continued to ply the Pump
still longer, we learned, that the Spring of the included Air was incapable of
raising it higher, than the Weight of the Atmosphere did in the Baroscope.

This Experiment was several times repeated with the like Success, but once,
the Pump being plied more than usually, the Air contained in a Green Glass
expanded so violently, that though it could not raise the Mercury higher, it
broke the Glass with such violence, that the Piece which flew off cracked the
Receiver.

EXPERIMENT III. The Spring of the included Air, will elevate Mercury almost to
an equal Height in Tubes of a different Bore.
IN order to try, whether the same Quantity of Air would by it is Expansion
raise the Mercury to the same Height in a narrow, as in a Cylinder of a larger
Diameter, we repeated the former Trial with a Pipe of the same Diameter, but
much longer; in which the Spring of the Air raised the Mercury to 28 Inches
and, the Mercury in the Borometer, being 29 Inches and high at the same time.
So that the Air was able by its Spring, to raise the Quicksilver within an Inch
as high in a large Tube, as in a smaller: And when the Spring of that Air was
no further able to expand it self, the Parts of it being put into Motion by
Heat, the Spring of it was so much increased, as to raise the Mercury of an
Inch higher.

EXPERIMENT IV. A new Hydraulo-Pneumatical Fountain made by the Spring of
uncompress'd Air.
HAVING put a Quantity of Water into a Bottle, and immersed the End of a Glass
Tube a little below the Surface of it, which was about 3 Foot long, the
Interstices betwixt the Neck of the Bottle and the Pipe were filled with Cement
( see Plate 6. Fig. 2.) and the whole was conveyed into a Receiver. See Plat.
6 Fig. 2.
And because the Pipe was too long to be contained in the Receiver, another
made of White Glass was Cemented upon the former, to the middle of whose
Cavity, the upper End of the Pipe extended, so that the Motions of the rising
Water had more Space to move in, when the Pump was set on work; where it was
observable, that upon the first Exsuction the Pressure of the external Air
being taken off, that contained in the Bottle, expanded it self so powerfully,
as to raise the Water in the Tube with such Force, that it flew violently
against the Top of the Receiver; but as the Air in the Bottle was leasurely
expanded, and came nearer to an Aequilibrium with that in the Receiver, the
Spring of that in the Bottle, being less powerful, the Water in the Tube
gradually ceased in its Ascent, unless the Pressure of the external Air was
taken off by a fresh Exsuction

In which Experiment, the following Particulars were to be noted; First, that
as the upper Orifice of the Tube was narrower, the Water would rise slower, and
the Experiment would be longer continued. Secondly, If a Pipe be Cemented upon
the Top of the Tube, and branched out into several small ones, with Pinholes in
the Ends of them, the Water will fly out, as out of Artificial Fountains in
Grotto's. Thirdly, If the Bottle to whose Neck the Tube was Cemented, was
larger, the Water would rise so much the longer; and the Experiment might be
reiterated by first letting in the Air again, and then exhausting the Receiver
by pumping it out afresh.

From the Phenomenon exhibited by this Expement, it appears, that the Spring of
the Air was able to raise the Water in the Tube to a much greater Height than
the Pipe we made use of. Secondly, From hence it appears, that Water contained
betwixt two Parcels of Air, may be put into Motion by its Spring, without the
Concurrence of adventitious Heat. Thirdly, we observed, That when the Air was
in a great Measure exhausted, the upper Receiver being taken off, the external
Air pressed the Water quite down to the Bottom of the Tube, and several Bubbles
getting through the Water, joined themselves with the Air in the Bottle: But
what was more strange was, that when the Receiver had been taken off a
considerable time, several Bubbles of Air continued to make their way through
the Water, as if the Spring of the Included Air, being before expanded, could
not be brought again to its former State of Compression; but like a Balance put
in Motion, continued several successive Vibrations, resisting each Impress of
the Atmosphere.

But the Chief Remark in this Experiment was, that the Salient Water in the
Receiver, formed several large Lines, some of which were Parabolical, when the
Receiver was pretty well exhausted.

EXPERIMENT V. About the Production of Heat by Attr^^tion in the exhausted
Receiver.
IT being the Opinion of some Learned Men, that the Incalescence of solid
Bodies depends on the Attrition, or violent Agitation of the intercepted Air;
To try how far this might be true, I caused a strong Spring of Iron or Steel (
See Plate the Sixth, See Plate 6. Fig. 3.
Fig. 3.) Figured much like the Lathe of a Cross-bow, to be fixed to a staple
Trencher: On the upper Part of the Spring was fixed a Concave Piece of Brass,
like a Burning-Glass, about 2 Inches Diameter, and moderately slender; to the
Concave Superficies of which, was fixed a Unequal Piece of the same Metal; which
had a square Handle on the upper Part, to which was fixed a square piece of
Wood, the other End being fixed to the Basis of a Wooden Pillar, made use
instead of our Vertical Cylinder; and the upper End of this Pillar was fixed to
the Turn-Key, being of such a Size, that when the Stopple was depressed into
the Socket made in the Brass Cover, the Concave and Unequal Superficies of the
two Pieces of Brass, contained betwixt the Wooden Pillar and the Spring, were
squeezed together, and the Spring in some measure expanded.

All things being thus provided, and a Mercurial Gange conveyed into the
Receiver, a Wimble was fixed to the Top of the Stopple, which being turned
round for some time, and the Air being exhausted out of the Receiver, we
presently took off the Cover; and perceived, that the contiguous Superficies of
the Pieces of Brass, betwixt which we had laid some powdered Amel to make them
move more easily one upon another, were sensibly warm.

And the Experiment being repeated a second time, and the Air so far exhausted,
that the Mercury was no further depressed, they grew so hot, that I could
scarce endure to touch them; and a considerable Degree of Warmth succeeded,
when the Experiment was tried with two Pieces of Wood, the one of Oak and the
other of Beech.

From which Experiment it appears, that Attrition of Solids may cause a
considerable Warmth, when the Air betwixt their Superficies is exhausted.

EXPERIMENT VI. About the disjoyning of two Marbles (not otherwise to be
separated without a considerable Weight) upon a Removal of the Pressure of the
Air in the Receiver.
HAVING several times suspended two flat Polished Marbles, whose contiguous
Superficies were moistened with Oil, to keep the Air from getting in betwixt
them, upon a considerable Exsuction of the Air, they would sometimes fall
asunder in the Receiver, at the eighteenth Suction, and sometimes at the
eighth; though a Pound Weight was only suspended at the lower; yet in the open
Air, where they were compressed by the ambient Atmosphere, they were able to
sustain 80 Pound without separating.

But having provided a Receiver with a Brass Conver ( See Plate 6. Fig. 4.) and
suspended two Contiguous Marbles in it, See Plate 6. Fig. 4.
with a Weight of a few Ounces at the Bottom of the lowest, the String which
suspended them being fixed to the Bottom of the Brass Stopple in the middle of
the Cover by turning the Stopple, and by that means shortning the String, the
Marbles were raised up in the Receiver, but upon drawing out the Air, they
presently fell asunder; yet having so contrived the Matter, that the lower
should not fall too far, the other was let down to it, and upon the
Readmission of the Air, they were so closely compressed together again, that
they could not be separated as easily as before: Yet if by turning the Stopple,
the uppermost was raised before the Air was let in, it would leave the
lowermost behind it.

EXPERIMENT VII. A way to break Flat Glass speedily, by the Weight of the
Atmosphere.
TO make it appear, that the round Figure of a Body enables it to resist a more
violent Pressure from the Atmosphere, than Bodies otherwise shaped; We made use
of a Brass Hoop, about 3 Inches high, and 3 Inches and 2/10 in Diameter, and
Cementing a round Piece of Glass upon the one Orifice, the other was joined to
the Receiver with Cement; and upon drawing out the Air, the Atmosphere pressed
so strongly upon the Glass, as to burst it asunder with a considerable Noise,
like that of a Pistol. How far this may contribute to account for the Noise
which accompanies the Explosion of Gunpowder in Pistols, we leave others to
consider.

EXPERIMENT VIII. The breaking of the Glass Plates in the foregoing Experiment
may be accounted for without a Fuga Vacui.
THAT the breaking of the Glass Plates did not depend on Nature's Abhorrency of
a Vacuum, appears hence; for if instead of the former Brass Hoop, we make use
of a Vessel Figured like a Conus Truncatus, or a Sugar Loaf, the Cone being cut
off; if the lower Orifice be large, and the upper not above an Inch Diameter,
the Glass Plate Cemented to the larger Orifice, will break when the Receiver is
exhausted; but if the smaller Orifice be upwards, the Glass Cemented to it will
be whole; whereas did Nature's Abhorrency of a Vacuum cause the former, it
would have the same Effect in the latter: Wherefore I rather think the Reason
why the latter did not break as the former, was because a small Basis of the
Atmosphere presses upon it, which it is. abler to resist than a larger Plate of
Glass.

EXPERIMENT IX.
A Bladder burst by the Spring of the Included Air.
NOT to mention, of what Advantage it might be, to have a Good Method to break
Bladders filled with Air, in our exhausted Receiver, by supplying it with Air
speedily, and without danger of letting in too much from without; I shall
intimate, That if a blown Bladder be contained in an exhausted Receiver, the
Internal Air will be so powerfully expanded, as to distend the Bladder, and
stretch it is Fibers, which when taken out again, and the Bladder at the Neck,
being tied something nearer than before, the Bladder so distended with Air, and
not liable to give way a second time to the Spring of the Included Air, the
next time it is put into the Receiver, it is apt to burst.

EXPERIMENT X. A Considerable Weight raised by the Spring of the Air included
in a Bladder.
TO show that the Force of the Air's Expansion is so great, that of a Bladder,
being filled with it, is able to distend it so powerfully, as to swell it up,
though a considerable Weight be tied to the Bottom of it, to keep it from Rising;
we filled the fourth Part of a Bladder with Air, and tying the Upper Part of it
to the Stopple, it was suspended in our Receiver, with a Weight suspended by a
String, which was tied to the Bottom of it; where we observed, That upon the
Exsuction of the Air, the Included Air expanded it self, and distending the
Bladder shortened it so, as to raise 15 pound weight.

And another Bladder, having both Ends tied to the Stopple, and a Weight
suspended at the Middle, of no less than 28 pounds, the expanding Air raised
that an Inch from the Bottom of the Receiver; but when the Air was again
admitted into the Receiver, it fell down again.

EXPERIMENT XI.
Bubbles Hermetically sealed, broke by the Air included.
HAving closed a Glass Bubble Hermetically sealed, in our Receiver, and pumped
out the Air more than usually in such Experiments, about four Minutes after the
Pump ceased to work, the Bubble unexpectly flew into so many pieces, and with
such force, as to be broke against the sides of the Receiver, into a Powder as
small as Sand: But this sort of Glass being capable of stretching a little
before it breaks, may be a Reason why the Experiment does not always succeed,
the Spring of the Air contained in it being weakened by that Expansion of the
Bubble.

EXPERIMENT XII. Trials representing the Force of the Spring of Vncompress'd
Air upon Staple Bodies.
The I. TRIAL.
HAving cemented a Glass Plate upon the Brass Hoop, mentioned in the Seventh
Experiment, and joined the other Orifice of the Hoop with Cement to the Pump,
upon that, a Large Receiver was fixed: So that the Hoop supplied the place of a
Receiver, and the Receiver kept the Atmosphere from pressing upon it; yet, upon
an Exsuction of the Air out of the Hoop, the Spring of that contained in the
Receiver, broke the Glass Plate into an hundred pieces.

The II. TRIAL.
AND a Receiver shaped like a Tumbler, which was capable of containing only a
sixth part of what the Large Receiver did, being made use of, the Spring of so
small a Quantity of Air, presently shattered the Glass Plate in pieces.

The III. TRIAL.
The Force of the Air's Spring.
BUT a Large square Glass capable of holding a Pound, being made use of instead
of the Hoop and the Glass Plate, upon the Exsuction of the Air, it was broke in
pieces, both when the Large Receiver was whelmed over it; and likewise, when a
Receiver not much higher than it self was made use of.

In which Experiments we observed, That the Air making a greater Pressure on
the Sides of the Bottles, than the Top, first broke them. And it was further
observed, in the last Experiments, that the Glasses did not fly in pieces, till
some time after the last Exsuction.

But lest it should be questioned, Whether the Glasses were broke by the
Pressure of the Air in the Receiver, we repeated one of the former Trials, with
the Brass Hoop, leaving a communication betwixt the Receiver, and the Cavity of
the Hoop, a small Tube, whose Cavity was no wider than the Diameter of a Hair,
being lodged in Part of the Cement; and upon plying the Pump, we found, that
the Air, having a free though a small Vent out of the Receiver, did not break the
Plate as before.

Yet notwithstanding, if the Air be sucked out of the Hoop too fast, that in
the Receiver, not finding quick Vent, will break the Glass Plate, the Pressure
of the Air in the Receiver, being too strong to be balanced, by the Resistance
of the Air in the Hoop: And for a like Reason a slender Pipe, blown at the
Flame of a Candle, upon it is first Removal into the Cold, has it is sides, if
thin, squeezed nearer together, the Pressure of the Outward Air being greater
than the Resistance of the Internal.

EXPERIMENT XIII. Suction is able to raise Mercury no highier in Pipes than the
Weight of the Atmosphere impels it.
HAving fitted one End (see Plate 5. Fig. 2.) of a Brass bent Pipe to a
Stop-cock, See Plate the 5. Fig. the 2.
and the other End to the Top of a Cylindrical Glass Pipe, near 50 Inches long,
the lower End of it was immersed in a Glass of stagnant Mercury: And though the
Pump was set on work, yet was it not able to raise the Mercury above thirty
Inches, by frequent and reiterated Suctions. But Water being substituted
instead of Mercury, it rose, at the first Exsuction, to the Top of the Pipe;
and when the Stop-cock was opened, it would run down through the Exhausting
Brass Siphon. From whence it appears, that the Rise of Mercury depends not on
Suction, or a Fuga vacui, whatever some Learned Men teach; but is raised by the
weight of the Atmosphere; since a Baroscope consulted at the same time, made it
appear, that the Atmosphere was able to suspend it at such a Height.

And as this is an Argument against those that dispute for a Fuga Vacui; so it
is against those that hold, that it depends upon the Attraction of a Rarified
Substance in the Top of the Pipe; for though we could rarify the Air further, by
continuing the Action of the Pump; yet the Mercury would not rise one jot
higher.

ANNOTATION.
BUT the Siphon, here mentioned, being elsewhere made use of, it may be
requisite to Observe: First, The Pipe which bends so much, is made of Metal, to
make it less subject to break: Secondly, The End of it, which is joined to the
Stop-cock, must be a little wider than any other Part, to admit the Shank of
the Stop-cock: Thirdly, The Cement which joins the Brass Pipe and the
Stop-cock, being apt to be loose; I rather make choice of one, to which a
Stop-cock is fixed, together with a Glass Siphon, about 10 Inches high, (see
Plate 5. Fig. 2. where the whole is represented). And though this Additional
Glass makes the Experiment longer, and more tedious, yet it is more useful and
secure.

EXPERIMENT XIV. The different Heights to which the Liquors may be elevated by
Suction, accordingly as their Specific Gravity varies.
See Plate the Fifth, Fig. the Third.
FROM Experiments already laid down, it appearing to what Height Mercury may be
raised in a Tube; we may guess at what Height Water might be suspended, by
considering that it is 14 times lighter than the former. But to be further
satisfied, I caused a small Pipe, which branched it self into two (see Plate
the 5th Fig. the 3d) So that a Cylinder being fixed to each Branch, the Liquors
contained in the Vessels, in which the lower End of the Pipe was immersed,
would rise proportionably as their Specific Gravity enabled them to resist the
Pressure of the Atmosphere; which being done, and the Pump set on work, Water
rose in one of the Cylinders to 42 Inches, and the Mercury in the other Tube
not above 3 Inches; so that the Water was fourteen times higher than the
Mercury. And to make the Experiment more satisfactory, we let Air into the
Receiver, till the Water subsided to fourteen Inches, and at the same time the
Mercury was sunk to about an Inch; for in this Experiment it was observed, That
the Proportion was not so exact as 1 to 14 precisely Specifies, but thereabouts.

From this Experiment, we may draw Arguments, not only against what is taught
concerning Nature's Abhorrency of a Vacuum; but it may likewise more nicely
inform us of the Specific Gravity of Liquors: For having put into one of the
Vessels, under the Glass Tubes, Fresh Water, and into the other Salt Water;
when the Fresh Water rose to 42 Inches, the Salt Water was but 40 Inches high.
But having made use of a Brine, made of Sea Salt, melted in the Air, instead of
Salt Water, when the Fresh Water was raised to 42 Inches, the Brine did not
exceed seven. I likewise put into one of the Vessels, when this Experiment was
over, a Solution of Potashes, and Common Water into the other, and when the
Water rose to 42 Inches, the Solution was raised but to 30.

EXPERIMENT XV. To what Heights Water and Mercury may be raised proportionably
to their Specific Gravities.
HAving put Mercury into a Bottle, and poured Water into the Bottle upon the
Mercury, we immersed one Pipe so low, as to have it is End in the Mercury; and
another Pipe was likewise immersed in the Water only; which being fixed by the
help of a Cement in the Neck of the Bottle, the whole was conveyed into the
Engine, and the Pipes being each divided into Inches, by hard Wax, with which
they were marked, we observed, that the Water rose 15 times as high as the
Quicksilver.

EXPERIMENT XVI.
The Former Experiment Illustrated.
HAving put Mercury into a short Tube, and Water into one that was longer; both
of them being Hermetically sealed at one End, we inverted them both, the End of
each resting in a Distinct Vessel; which being conveyed into the Receiver, the
Water in the Cylinder did not in the least subside, till by Pumping out the
Air, the Mercury subsided within 3 Inches of the Bottom, which was sooner than
it ought, according to Statical Rules, which we conceived to proceed from some
Aerie Parts, lodged in the Pores of the Water, which rising to the Top of the
Cylinder depressed it by their Spring; yet the Water, when the Mercury subsided
to the Height of an Inch, was near as high as before.

EXPERIMENT XVII.
The greatest Height to which Water may be raised by Suction, etc.
TO try how high Water might be raised by Suction in a Pump, I provided a long
Tube, about thirty Foot long, being made of several Tin Pipes, closely joined
together with Soder, and covered over with a Black Cement; which, to keep it
from sticking to our Hands, we covered with Plaster of Paris: To the upper End
of this Pipe, was fixed a Glass Tube, about three Foot long; and to the Top of
that was fixed another Pipe, consisting of two pieces, which made a right Angle
with each other, part of which was Parallel to the Horizon, See Plate the
Seventh. Fig. 1.
and the other Perpendicular; the lower End being fixed to the Engine, which was
placed upon a Flat-roofed House: And a Vessel filled with Water, being put
under the End of the Pipe below, the Pump was set on work; and the Water, after
a few Exsuctions, was raised to the middle of the Glass Tube, emitting several
Bubbles, which proceeded from the Air, formerly lodged in the Pores of the
Water.

But the chief Aim of our Experiment, being only to try to what Height the
Water could be raised, I caused the Pump to be nimbly plied, till the Water
could rise no higher; which being done, and the Height of the Water measured by
a String, we found it to be 33 Foot, and about six Inches; Quicksilver in a
Baroscope, at the same time, standing at 29 Inches, and about 3 eights of an
Inch; so that the Water was near fourteen times as high as the Mercury.

In which Experiment, that the upper part of the Tube was sufficiently
exhausted, appeared from several Circumstances; as First, If any Air got in at
Crannies in the Pipe, it would rise in Bubbles, easily to be distinguished,
from those which rose from the Pores of the Water; and though the Quantity of
those Bubbles was considerable, yet more Air being thrown out by the Pump, than
could get in, it must needs be empty enough. But,

In this Experiment, it was to be noted, That when first the Water appeared in
the Glass Tube, they would be very numerous, and form a Froth; yet, when the
Pumping was further continued, they grew less and less: Secondly, we observed,
that the Water made several Vibrations in it is Rise; which, though near a Foot at
the first, grew less and less. Thirdly, it may be observed, that the Baroscope,
consulted before, some time after, was noted to have risen considerably; so
that had the Experiment been repeated again, the Water would have been buoyed
up a good deal higher.

Now from this Experiment it appears, how improbable it is, what some Men teach
concerning the Rise of Water, in Spiral Pipes, up to the Top of high Mountains;
since it is evident, that it cannot be drawn higher than 36 Foot, by a Sucking
Pump:

EXPERIMENT XVIII. About the Bending of a Springy Body, in the Exhausted
Receiver.
TO be satisfied how much the Elasticity of Bodies depends on the Influence of
the Air, I fixed one End of a Whale-bone in a Trencher, and tied a Weight to
the other, by which it was bent, so low, as almost to touch the Plane under it.
This being conveyed into our Receiver, upon the Exhausting of the Receiver, I
could not perceive any Alteration.

EXPERIMENT XIX. Concerning the making of Mercurial Gauges, whereby to estimate
how much the Receiver is exhausted.
SEveral Gauges have been made use of to discover, when the Receiver is well
exhausted, as by suspending a Bladder, which is almost empty of Air, or by
inverting a small Tube in which Spirit of Wine was contained; but the former
taking up too much Room in the Receiver, and the latter not discovering whether
the Receiver was exhausted, or not, till the Air contained was too much
Rarefi'd, for any Considerable Observations; Therefore, to enable me to make
more Observations in the several Degrees of the Receiver's Exsuction, I took a
slender Pipe of Glass, about 10 Inches long, and as small as a Goose Quill, and
having melted it at a flame, so as to soften it, and make it apt to be bent; I
caused it to be put into the Form represented by ( Plate 5. Fig. 4.) so that
about an Inch of the lower Leg being filled with Air, See Plate 5^ Fig. 4.
and the rest of that, as well as the greatest Part of the short one, being
filled with Quicksilver, the Expansion of that Air might easily be perceived,
by pasting a Piece of Paper upon that Tube, divided into several exact Parts;
for as the Receiver is more or less expanded, the Air in the longer Leg of the
Gage, will be extended to some of those Marks; and if when the Air is so
expanded, the Experimenter desires to know, at each of those Marks, how much
the Receiver is exhausted, it will appear by letting in as much Water as the
Capacity of the Receiver is able at that time to hold; so that if when the Air
is at any determinate Mark, the Water be let in, and it appears, that the Air
in the Receiver was so far Evacuated, by observing how much Water will be
admitted, when the Air is expanded to each Mark; the Gage, for the future, will
not only inform us, how much the Air is exhausted; but by the help of the small
Gage, a larger may be made, by putting both into an exhausted Receiver at once,
for by observing, when the Air is expanded to each Mark in the little one, how
far it is expanded in the large one; we may learn, how much the Receiver is
exhausted, for the future, by taking notice of the Expansion of the Air in the
Leg of that larger Gage. And,

This Gage is much more useful than some others: First, because the Mercury
being a heavy Body, the Air, by expanding it self, is less apt to make it run
over, or to make it is way in the Form of Bubbles through the Mercurial
Cylinder, as it would if other Fluids were made use of instead of it. Secondly,
The longer Leg of the Gage is to be marked, by sticking Wax or Knobs of Glass
to the Pipe, every Tenth being of a different Color from the rest, at equal
Distances from each other, which Divisions will be less subject to be rubbed
off than Papers, which are also subject, in some Experiments, to be wet.
Thirdly, The Leg of the Siphon in which the Air is included, may be either
sealed up, before it is divided by the aforementioned Marks, or after, by
drawing out the End of the Tube into a small Apex; and when about an Inch of
the Pipe is filled with Air, it may be sealed up by blowing a Lamp Horizontally
upon the Apex. Fourthly, Where very Nice Observations are to be made, and the
Receiver admits of a longer Gage, instead of Mercury we may make use of a
Tincture of Roses, or of Spirit of Wine with Cocheneel; in which, the Exsuction
of the Air will be more nicely represented. Fifthly, We may vary the Mercurial
Gage, by ordering the shorter Leg, so that it may have a Bubble about half an
Inch Diameter, at an Inch distance from the Basis of that Leg, which Bubble
must have a Pipe upon the upper Part of it to give way to the Air; which Bubble
has this Advantage above the other, that less Air may be contained in the Top
of the longer Leg; since the Mercury not being capable of being raised so high,
the Rarefaction of the included Air will be rendered more apt to be estimated
by the Eye. Sixthly, This Gage is much more useful than those mentioned by
other Authors, because it gives us an Account of the several Degrees of the
Air's Rarefaction.

EXPERIMENT XX. An easy way to make the Pressure of the Air sensible to the
Touch.
The Pressure of the Air sensible to the Touch.
THE Pressure of the Air will be made sensible to the Touch, if a Tapering Tube
of Brass, whose Cavity at one end is an Inch, and the other two Inches and an
half wide, be fixed to the Pump instead of a Receiver; for if when the larger
Orifice is Cemented on the Pump, one presses the Palm of ones Hand upon the
smaller Orifice, and the Pump be set on Work, it will be a difficult Matter to
take off ones Hand, and not a little painful; but the Pressure of the Incumbent
Atmosphere will have a much more sensible Effect, if the larger Orifice be
upwards instead of the smaller.

EXPERIMENT XXI, About the subsiding of Mercury in the Tube of the Torrecellian
Experiment, to the Level with the Superficies of the Stagnant Mercury.
THE lower Part of the Ball of a Bolt-head being circularly cut off, we made
use of it for a Receiver, including a Baroscope in it, and upon the first
Exsuction, the Mercury subsided from 29 Inches to 9 or 10, and by three
Exsuctions more, would be brought to a Level with the Stagnant Mercury, but
would rise to it is first Station again, as the Air was admitted in flower or
faster.

In which Experiment it is to be noted; First, that upon the first Exsuction,
the Mercury was brought within an Inch of the Bottom, and continued several
successive Vibrations before it settled at 10 Inches high. Secondly. If instead
of drawing any out, Air be forced into the Receiver, it will raise the Mercury
higher than it is former Station: Thirdly, The Receiver was so far exhausted, as
to make the Mercury subside to a Level.

EXPERIMENT XXII. In Tubes open at both Ends, when Nature's Abhorrency of a
Vacuum cannot be pretended, the Weight of Water will impell Quicksilver no
higher in slender than in larger Pipes.
The suspension of Quicksilver equal in small and wide Pipes.
TO prove that the Weight of the Atmosphere, may buoy up Mercury equal in large
as in smaller Tubes, I shall add the following Trials.

The I. TRIAL.
Having put as much Mercury into a Glass Tube, about two Foot and a half long,
as reached 3 or 4 Fingers, the one End being sealed Hermetically; we hung two
Tubes by Strings to the Top of the former, so that the lower Ends of them were
immersed in the Mercury; which being done, we poured Water upon the Mercury,
and observed the Mercury to be equally raised in the great Pipe, as in the
little one, and the Water being sucked out, it proportionably subsided in each.

The II. TRIAL.
Having poured a Convenient Quantity of Quicksilver into a Tube of Glass, near
a Foot long, and filled two Pipes of Mercury of an unequal Bore, the one End of
each being Hermetically sealed, we immersed them in the large Tube, contriving
to open the lower Orifice, when below the Stagnant Mercury; and I observed,
that they not only both of them subsided to an equal Station; but Water being
poured upon the Stagnant Mercury, the Weight of it buoyed them up both alike in
the Tube, and the Water being successively sucked out, and put in again, the
the Mercury in the Tube, proportionably fell and rose equally in both; no
difference proceeding from the Wideness of their Diameters, in the Height of
the Mercurial Cylinders.

EXPERIMENT XXIII. At what Height Mercury Amalgamated with Tin, as well as pure
Mercury, will be suspended.
HAVING filled a Glass Tube with Mercury Amalgamated with Tin, and inverted it,
it did not fall below 31 Inches. In trying this Experiment, the following
Particulars are to be noted: First, That if the Amalgama be too thick, it will
be apt to stick to the Tube, and will likewise hinder several Aerial Corpuscles
from flying away. Secondly, From hence it may be observed, that as the
Aequilibrium of Mercury, and the Atmosphere varies; so does it is Ascent in such
Tubes. Thirdly, It would not be amiss here to consider, whether these two
Metals penetrate each others Dimensions, as I have observed Copper and Tin to
do; and by forming a new Metalline Substance to render the Composition heavier
than the Weight of the two single Ingredients.


EXPERIMENT XXIV. A Method of making Barometers, which may be carried to
distant Countries.
TO make a Portable Barometer, we took a Cylinder about 4 or 5 Foot long, and
having bent one End at the Flame of a Lamp, so as to make the shorter Leg about
a fourth Part as long as the other, sealing up the End of the longer Leg, we
injected Mercury into the shorter Leg by a Tunnel, till it was raised about 3
Inches in both Legs; which being done, and the Orifice of the shorter Leg being
stopped with the Finger, we inclined the longer Leg, and so by successively
filling the short Leg, and inclining it so as to make it run into the longer,
we filled the longer Leg quite full of Mercury, and by inclining it several
times afterward, and permitting the Bubble of Air, which usually lies at the
Top of the sealed Head, to run through the Mercurial Cylinder backwards and
forwards, we freed it from those Bubbles, which are usually in it is Pores. But
besides this way of filling the Pipe, we have, with less Trouble, done it by
making use of a Tunnel; which, when the Pipe is a little inclined, reaching a
little above the Flexure of the Siphon, will fill the Tube without much
trouble: And the Pipe thus filled with Mercury may, by often erecting of it,
and shaking the Pipe so erected, be freed from those Aerie Particles which
commonly lodge in the Pores of the Mercury.

See the whole Barometer, Plat. 7. Fig. ig. 2.
The Barometer being thus ordered, we contrived a Frame to carry it in, which
was made of a Piece of Wood, in which a Gutter was cut for the Pipe to lie in;
the lower End of the Frame being likewise so contrived, as to contain the short
Leg of this Tube: The Pipe being lodged in this Gutter, we fixed a Cover to one
side of the Frame, with little Highes; the other, when occasion required, being
fastened with Hasps.

And because the Motion the Mercury would be put into, would be apt to break
the Pipe, were there too much Liberty given it to move in, or were there any
Interstices betwixt the Pipe, and the Gutter it is lodged in; we took Care to
lay Cotton both betwixt the Pipe and the Concave of the Frame, and betwixt the
Cover and it; and that the empty Space which is usually above the Surface of
the Mercury in Barometers, might not be prejudicial, we took Care to invert the
Tube, and to fill the remaining Space unpossess'd with Mercury either with an
Addition of Mercury or with Water, sealing up the Orifice of the shorter Tube
Hermetically, till it came to be used again; and then, the Superflous Mercury,
may be taken away by immersing a small Pipe in it; which, if the upper Orifice
be stopped with ones Finger, will take away so much as the Cavity of the
immersed Tube had received into it: But if Water be made use of, instead of
Mercury, it may be licked up with a Sponge. And if by shaking of this Barometer
in long Journeys any Particles should get out of the short Leg into the larger,
by successively inverting the Tube, and permitting the Bubble of Air to pass
backwards and forwards, the Mercury in the long Tube may easily be freed from
Bubbles.

Of what Use this Barometer may be, in discovering the Weight of the Atmosphere
in long Journeys, both at Sea and at Land, I shall leave to others to consider;
only I shall annex this Advertisement, that sometime after I made this
Barometer, having carried it about 33 Miles I observed, that it did not rise by
of an Inch as high as it did before; but whether it might be imputed to the
narrowness of the Pipe, or any other Accident, I cannot yet determine.

EXPERIMENT XXV. What Height the Mercury in Barometers will be suspended at, at
the Top of Hills. Some Observations of the Height of Mountains, especially, the
Pic of Teneriff.
HAVING observed the Height at which Mercury was suspended at the Bottom of a
Hill, and compared it with a Barometer made the ordinary ways; it was observed,
that the Height it was suspended at, at the Top of the Hill, was part of an
Inch below the Mark it reached at the Latter; and as the Barometer was brought
lower, the Mercury in the Pipe rose higher and higher: But if such Observations
could be made at the Top and Bottom of the Mountain Teneriff, the Experiment
would afford further Proof of our Hypothesis concerning the Air's Spring and
Weight.

An Appendix about the Height of Mountains.
The Height of Mountains.
NOtwithstanding some Ingenious Men have taught, that the Height of the
Atmosphere is of stupendous, and others confine it to narrower Dimensions;
yet, I shall add some Observations, which may confirm what we have taught
concerning it; and though, as Ricciolus takes notice, the Jesuit Rector Melensius
says, that of all the Clouds, whose Height he measured, they did not exceed
5000 Paces, yet if we allow Meteors and Comets to arise from Terrene
Exhalations, and that the Height of Clouds varies according to the different
Degrees of the Air's Rarefaction, it will follow, that the Height of most of
them exceeds what Carden and Kepler allow.

But to proceed to what I have to relate concerning the Height of Mountains; I
shall relate, what I have learned by Information. And first, the Ingenious Mr.
Sydenham told me, that the Mountain Teneriff is so high, that the Top of it may
be seen 60 Leagues off, and that he himself had discovered it at 40 Leagues
distance like a blew Pyramid above the Clouds; and he likewise told me, that
the Island of Madera might be seen from it, though 70 Leagues distant; and that
the Great Canary seemed so near it, that one would think it possible to leap
down upon it: And indeed, Ric^iolus observes, that it might be seen 4 Degrees
distance; and Snellius also allows the Height of it to be Ten Miles; though I
believe, that the way he takes to calculate the Height of it, may be none of
the truest; he likewise by Refraction, judging the Mountain Caucasus to be 51
Bolonian Miles high, which is not believed probable; since the Mountain
Teneriff has been observed, by one who took it is Height in a Ship at Sea, not
to be above 7 Miles high in a Perpendicular Line, yet it is esteemed the
highest Mountain in the World; though if what Aristotle and others report of
Mount Caucasus, be true, there may be others much higher than those. For though,
if measured from the Foot, or Level of that piece of Ground, which they stand
on, they may be lower, yet considering that the Ground they stand on, may be
much more protuberant, from the Level Superficies of the whole Globe, they may
be much higher upon that Account.

EXPERIMENT XXVI. The Pressure of the Atmosphere may be able to keep up the
Mercury in the Torrecellian Experiment, though the Air presses upon it, at a very
small Orifice.
IT being observed by several Learned Men, That Mercury is suspended at an
equal height in a close Room, as in the open Atmosphere; to prove, that the Air
having a Communication with the External, even at small Crannies, may have an
equal Force, as if the Mercurial Cylinder was immediately subject to the whole
Atmosphere; I shall add, That if the Tube, just before mentioned, for a
Portable Barometer, be so drawn out at the Flame of a Lamp, that the Orifice is
but about a tenth Part as big as before, the Mercury will be suspended at the
usual Height; and the like will succeed, if instead of drawing the End of the
Pipe out so, a Cork be put into the End of the Tube, leaving but a small part
of the Orifice open to the Outward Air.

EXPERIMENT XXVII. An Oblique Pressure of the Atmosphere may be sufficient to
keep up the Mercury at the usual Height, in the Torrecellain Experiment, and
the Spring of a small quantity of Air may do the same.
IF the the Shorter Leg of a Siphon, See Plate the 7th. Fig. the 3d.
being bent, as represented by Fig. 3d. Plate the VIIth the Mercury be
suspended at it is usual Height, it appears that the Pressure of the Atmosphere
has as strong Effects, if the End of the Tube, through which it is conveyed,
only admits of the Pressure of the Air, which it receives downwards.

But if instead of being so bent, See Plate the 7th. Fig. the 4th.
the End of the Shorter Leg be Hermetically sealed, as represented Fig. IV.
Plate the VII. the Mercury is sustained at it is usual Height, it will appear,
that the Spring of a small quantity of Air is able to bear up a Cylinder of
Mercury.

N. B. If the Tube thus Hermetically sealed, be shaken, the Mercury will form
some Vibrations upon the Included Air; the Spring of it being compressed, and
expanded again successively for a while.

But the former of these Trials may be made in a Pipe, conveniently shapen
before the Longer Leg is filled with Mercury, and the latter by stopping the
Orifice with a Cork, and Close Cement, which may be pierced with a Wire, when
this is used as a Baroscope; which way may be taken with a Traveling Baroscope.

EXPERIMENT XXVIII.
A Baroscope of use but at some times.
TO show that the Suspension of Mercury in a Glass Tube, less than 30 Inches
long, does not proceed from a Fuga Vacui, I caused one to be Hermetically
sealed at one End, the Length of it being about two Foot and a half; and filled
it with Mercury, a small quantity of Water being left upon it; and when the
Atmosphere was much lighter, I found that the Mercury subsided, and that there
appeared a small Bubble of Air in the Water, which being no bigger than a Pin's
Head, was so far compressed before, as not to appear.

EXPERIMENT XXIX. The Ascension of Liquors in very slender Pipes, in an
Exhausted Receiver.
HAving tinged Spirit of Wine with Cocheneel, which bubbled in the Exhausted
Receiver, for some time, several slender Pipes being put into it, it rose
highest in those whose Bore was narrowest; but when the Air was let in again,
the Liquor in both subsided to a Level: But two Pipes of different Bores, being
let down into that Liquor a second time, though it answered the former Trials in
the Ascent; yet, the Surface in the slenderer Pipe, remained something above
the other, when the Air was let in again. But what was more Remarkable, was,
that though the Liquor in the Vessel, in this Trial, emitted no Bubbles, yet that
in the Ends of the Tubes did; which were supposed to be caused by the sides of
the Glass, they were contained in.

EXPERIMENT XXX. When the Pressure of the External Air is taken off, it is very
easy to draw up the Sucker of a Syringe, though the Hole at which the Water
should succeed, be stopped.
FOR a further Illustration of the Doctrine of the Spring and Weight of the Air,
we made the following Trials.

The I. TRIAL.
We took a Syringe of Brass (see Plate 8th. Fig. 1st.) whose Barrel was about
six Inches long, See Plate the 8th. Fig. 1st.
and it is Diameter about one Inch, and having fitted the Sucker to the Barrel
of the Syringe, we stopped the lower Orifice of the Syringe, and tied a good
Weight to it; which being done, we let it down into the Receiver, tying a
String to the Sucker, and another End of that String to the Turning-Key in the
Cover of the Receiver; where we observed, That though when the Receiver was
exhausted, we could, by turning the Key, draw up the Sucker easily; yet, when
the Air was admitted into the Receiver again, it could not be lifted up with a
less Force, than what was sufficient to overpower the Pressure of the
Atmosphere, or the Air contained in Receiver; but the Air being once let in,
when the Sucker was raised to the Top of the Barrel, the Pressure of it was so
violent, as, by forcing the Sucker down into the Barrel of the Syringe, to
break the String, which was tied to the Turning-Key.

The II. TRIAL.
Being a Variation of the former.
We took the former Syringe, and having tied a Weight, which weighed about two
Pound and two Ounces, to the Sucker, we suspended it in our Receiver, the
Orifice of the Barrel being first stopped with a Cork; and we observed, that
after a few Exsuctions, the Weight drew down the Barrel of the Syringe; and
when the Air was again let in, the Pressure of it raised it up much faster than
it fell.

But in this Experiment, it is to be noted, that if Air gets into the Barrel of
the Sucker, whilst it is drawn down, it will not be raised quite so high again
as before. And likewise, the Reason why it is requisite, that so large a Weight
should be tied to draw it down, is because it must not only overpower the
Pressure of the Air, but also the Straitness which requires a Force to make the
Sucker move in the Barrel.

Secondly, it is observed, that as the Weight did not overpower the Pressure of
the Air, till a good deal was exhausted; so neither did it rise again, till a
sufficient Quantity of Air was let in again.

EXPERIMENT XXXI. About the opening of a Syringe, whose Pipe was stopped in the
exhausted Receiver, and by the help of it, making the Pressure of the Air lift
up a considerable Weight.
HAving closed up the Hole at the Bottom of the Syringe, See Plate 8th. Fig. 2d.
with good Cement, we tied a hollow piece of Iron to the Barrel, into which
several Weights being put, we tied the Rammer to the Turn-Key; and though, when
the Receiver was exhausted, we could draw up the Rammer without the Syringe;
yet, upon a Reingress of Air, the Syringe and the Weights would be raised
swiftly up: So that so small a Cylinder of Air as equalled the Barrel of the
Pipe, was able to lift up the Weight of sixteen Pounds.

EXPERIMENT XXXII. The Sticking of Cupping Glasses depends on the Pressure of
the Air.
TO make it evident, See Plate 8th. Fig. 3d.
that the Sticking of Cupping Glasses, and the Pain which they cause, proceeds
from the Pressure of the Air, we provided a Receiver, and a Large Glass, such
as Plate the 8th. Fig. 3d. delineates; I caused the Cupping Glass to be applied
to a Young Man's Hand; which being done, and his Hand applied to the Top of the
Receiver, instead of a Cover, the Lower Orifice of the Receiver, having first
been cemented on the Pump, upon the first Exsuction of the Air, the Cupping
Glass fell off his Hand, for want of the Pressure of the External Air, to press
against it.

EXPERIMENT XXXIII.
TO illustrate the former Experiment, we took a Brass Hoop, mentioned in the
Fifth Experiment, and stretching a Bladder upon the upper Orifice of it, as
upon the Head of a Drum, we tied it up in the Middle of the lower Orifice, See
Plate the 8th. Fig 4.
and placing it upon a piece of Wood, which had a hole in the Middle for the
Neck of the Bladder to hang through, we made several holes on the Lower Side of
that Bladder; which being done, we suspended a Blind-head at the Turn-Key of
our Receiver, and when the Receiver was exhausted, we let it down to the
Bladder, and found, that when the Air was again admitted into the Receiver, the
Pressure of it so pressed upon the Bladder, as to fix it fast to the Blind-head.

But repeating the Experiment, and exhausting the Receiver more perfectly, we
took out the Bladder thus fixed to the Blind-head, and having tied the Glass to
the Hook of a good Statera, and likewise a large Scale to the Neck of the
Bladder, and put in Weights into it, till they amounted to 35 Pound weight;
then the Weight, overpoising the Pressure of the External Air, the Bladder fell
off: But in this Experiment it was observed, See Plate the 8th. Fig. the 5th.
that as the Weights in the Scales grew heavier and heavier, the Bladder seemed
to be sucked more and more into the Receiver.

EXPERIMENT XXXIV. Bellows whose Nose is very well stopped, will open of their
own accord, when the Pressure of the External Air is taken off.
AS an Argument of the great Force of the Air's Weight, it is observed, that
when the Nose of a Pair of Bellows is stopped, it requires a Force able to
overpower the Pressure of so large a Pillar of Air, as lies upon them, to open
them; but when that Weight of the Atmosphere is taken off, the Spring of the
Included Air is so strong, as to be able to raise and expand the Bellows of
it is own accord.

To make this Evident, See Plate the 8th. Fig. the 6th.
we caused a Pair of Bellows to be made, whose Boards were circular, and near 6
Inches Diameter, without a Valve, the Nose of them being about an Inch long,
and the Leather limber: Which Bellows, when full of Air, seemed to be a
Cylinder of about 18 Inches high.

The Nose of these Bellows being stopped, when they were emptied of Air, we
conveyed them into our Receiver, and observed, that when the Air was exhausted
out of the Receiver, the Air contained in the Folds of the Bellows, and betwixt
the two Bases lifted up the Higher a considerable Height.

EXPERIMENT XXXV. An Attempt to examine the Motions and Sensibility of the
Cartesian Materia Subtilis, or the Ether, with a Pair of Bellows, which were
made of a Bladder, in the exhausted Receiver.
IN order to try, whether there be any finer Substance than Air, in the
exhausted Receiver, we contrived to make a Pair of Bellows of a Bladder, whose
Bases were Paste-board, See Fig. the 7th. Plate the 8th.
the upper being covered with a Plate of Pewter, to which was fixed a Leaden
weight to press it down: Besides, over against the Nose of the Bellows, in
which the Neck of the Bladder terminated, it was contrived, that the End of a
Feather was fixed so, that if any Subtle Matter were forced out of the Bellows,
it should discover it self by moving that Feather.

The Bellows being thus provided, and the Pillars, to which the Feather is
fastened, being joined to the upper Basis of the Bellows, with Cement, we fixed
a Weight to the Lower Basis, and conveyed it into the Receiver; See Fig. the
Eighth.
where we observed, upon the exhausting of the Receiver, that the Air in the
Bellows raised up the upper Basis, together with it is Weight; and the Air
rising out at the Vent, manifestly moved the Feather: But when the Receiver was
quite exhausted, and the Weight upon the Upper Basis depressed it violently, we
could not perceive that the Feather was in the least moved, and the like was
observed upon repeating the Experiment.

EXPERIMENT XXXVI. The great and seeming Spontaneous Ascent of Water, in a Pipe
filled with a Compact Body, whose Particles are thought incapable of imbibing
it.
WE took a slender Pipe, and having tied a Linen-cloth to the Iower Orifice, we
filled it with Minium; and immerging it in Water in a Wide-mouthed Glass about
an Inch, the Water ascended about 30 Inches; and the Experiment being again
repeated in another, it rose 40 Inches.

In which kind of Experiments, the following Particulars were to be observed:
First, That other Powders being made use of instead of this, the Experiment did
not succeed so well; nor was the Success much better, when we made use of Ink
instead of Water.

Secondly, Our Experiment succeeded the better, the finer and closer the Minium
was: But if the Pipe be too small, the Event will not always be successful.

Thirdly, We observed, That the Water ascends not to it is utmost, under 30
Hours, and sometimes longer.

Fourthly, From hence it appears, That the Water in our Tube rose, without any
swelling of the sides of the Tube, which some Learned Men ascribe the Cause of
Water's Rising in Filtres to.

Fifthly, From hence it may be urged, as probable, That the Sap in Trees may
rise after the like manner, being promoted by Heat, and a due Texture of Parts.

EXPERIMENT XXXVII. Of the seeming spontaneous Ascent of Salts, along the sides
of Glasses, with a Conjecture at the Cause of it.
I Have several times observed, that the watery Part of a Solution of Sea Salt
or Vitriol, being evaporated, the coagulated Salts would creep up the sides of
wide-mouthed Glasses, in which the Solution was contained; and not only so, but
if the Experiment were longer continued, they would rise over the sides of the
Glass, and cover the external Superficies with a Crust of Salt.

As for the Cause of so strange a Phenomenon, though I will not be positive in
it; yet, it may not improbably depend on the like Cause, as the Ascent of Water
in the Tube, mentioned in the foregoing Experiment.

For we may observe, that the Edges of Water are not only above the Superficies
of the rest of the Water; but Sea Salt as well as several others, chrystallize
at the Top of the Liquor they swim in, and near the sides of the Glass, their
Coagulation being promoted by the Coldness of it; which Salts, when once the
sides of the Glass is beset with them, the Water may rise to the Top, for the
same Reason that it does in the slender Pipe before mentioned, and Salts
carried up to the Top of those, and coagulating there, still lay a further
Bottom for their Ascent; and so successively, till they rise to the Top of the
Viol: And that there are Passages betwixt these saline Parts, for the Water to
ascend through, appears; since they may be broke off in Flakes, separate from
each other: And if it should be thought, that the Water in such an Ascent,
would dissolve the Salt; it may be answered, that the Water being so much
impregnated with Salt already, can imbibe no more; and consequently, for that
Reason, when it runs down the outsides of the Vessels, coagulates by the way,
being too thick and full of Salts to continue long fluid.

EXPERIMENT XXXVIII. An Attempt to measure the Gravity of Cylinders of the
Atmosphere, so that it may be known and expressed by common Weights.
The Weight of a Pillar of Air of a determinate size.
BEING desirous to know what was the Weight of an Atmospherical Cylinder of Air,
of a determinate Diameter, I caused a Pipe to be made of Brass, whose Diameter
was an Inch, and it is Length three; one End of which being closed up with a
Plate of Brass, I counterpois'd it in a nice pair of Scales; and found, that it
was able to contain about 137 Drachms 45 Grains of Mercury; which being
multiplied by Tens, a Cylinder of Mercury of 30 Inches, and consequently an
Atmospherical Cylinder able to counterpoise it, must amount to 12 Ounces and
about 6 Drachms. And by weighing Water in this Tube, before the Mercury was put
into it, the Water weighing 10 Drachms 15 Grains, the Proportion of Water to
Mercury seemed as 13 18/41 to 1.

But in estimating the Weight of a Cylindrical Pillar of Air, it may be here
requisite to advertise, that I made use of a Brass Cylinder, because the
Cavities of a Glass Tube are unfit for such an Experiment; since it is a hard
thing to know, whether the Bore of such Tubes be equal throughout their
Diameter.

The Weight of a Cylinder of Mercury being thus found, it will not be very
difficult to know, the Weight of a Cylinder of a different Diameter, by the
Assistance of the Doctrine of Proportions and the 14th Proposition of the 12th
Book of Euclids Elements. For since according to that, Cylinders of equal
Bases, are to one another as to their Heights; and since, by the second
Proposition of the same Element, such Circles as the Bases of Cylinders, are to
one another as the Squares of their Diameters; and since Mercurial Cylinders
will bear the same Proportion in Weights as they do in Bulk; The Rule will be,
That as the Square of the Diameter of the Standard Cylinder, is to the Square
of the Diameter of the Cylinder proposed, so will the Bulk of the former be to
that of the latter; and the Weight of that to the Weight of this; so that the
Square of one Inch being 1, and the Square of 2 being four, the Weight of the
latter will be four times the Weight of the former.

EXPERIMENT XXXIX. The Attractive Virtue of a Lodestone in the Exhausted
Receiver.
TO try how far the Account given of the Attraction of a Lodestone, depended
on what some Modern Philosophers teach, viz. That the Effluvia of a Lodestone
pressing away the Air betwixt the Body attracted, that Air helps the
Attraction, by pressing against the opsite side of the Stone; We placed a
vigorous Lodestone in our Receiver, having adapted a Cap of Steel to it, to
the lower side of which, a Scale with 6 Ounces of Troy Weight was fixed, which
being all the Lodestone, besides the Steel and the Scale was able to keep up
(all which being suspended at a Button, which was on purpose on the inside of
the Cover of the Receiver) we observed, that though the Receiver was exhausted as
much again as in common Experiments; yet, the Lodestone sustained it is Weight
almost as firmly as before the Pump was plied; and the Reason why it was not
altogether, was, the thinness of the Medium; since the Weight suspended must be
heavier, when the Air which was nearer proportioned to their Weight was
exhausted.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
THE Number of Sheets contained in this Volume, amounting to what the
Booksellers think fit to answer the Price put upon it; And also, to make the
succeeding Volume Proportionable, the next Volume begins with a Continuation of
what our Author further delivers concerning the Air.

The TABLE.
A.
ACCIDENTS no distinct Entities Page 3. Secondary Affections of Matter, what
Page 8. The Effects of Natural Agents, how diversified Page 10,21.
Considerations in order to the Doctrine of Alteration Page 13, 14. Alteration
what Page 15, 16. Products of Art the Effects of Nature Page 59. An Acid may be
turned into an Alkaly Page 90. The Air's Spring and Weight proved Page 166,
167, 311, 317. from thence to the End of this Volume. Objections, raised by
Franciscus Linus, answered Page 393. The Actions of some Bodies depend on the
Catholic Laws of the Universe 241. and the Established Laws of Nature Page
242. The Temper of the Air in Subterraneal Groves Page 256. The Air enclosed in
the Receiver acts by Virtue of it is Spring Page 315. What Weight is requisite
to draw the Sucker down Ibid. The Air's Expansion in a Lamb's Bladder Page 317.
-- The Force of it Page 318, 371, 451. -- It Is Expansion measured Page 319,
320, 409. Whether Air be a Primogeneal Body Page 341. The Air's Gravity and
Expansion under Water Page 351. The weight of the Atmosphere considered Page
360. Why Air is indisposed to pass through Pores, which Water will Page 370.
Proportion betwixt the weight of the Air and Water Page 372. -- beewixt it and
Mercury Page 374. The Height of the Atmosphere considered Page 372. The
Tunicular Hypothesis examined Page 398. A Table of the Air's Condensation Page
411. -- of it is Rarefaction Page 413. Why Air condensed by Cold does not raise
Mercury equally, as when condensed by Pressure Page 415. Why Animals die in the
Exhausted Receiver Page 430. The Air's Pressure on Bodies contained in it Page
431. The weight of a Pillar of Air of a Determinate Size Page 480. The Air's
Pressure sensible to the Touch Page 461.
B.
A Bitter Substance may become sower Page 96. The Expansive Force of steeped
Beans Page 243, 244. A Bubble broke in the exhausted Receiver Page 450. A
Bladder broke by the Air's Expansion Page 449. A Portable Barometer Page 465
C.
Colors no Inherent Qualities Page 9. Considerations in order to the Doctrine
of Corruption Page 13, 14. Corruption what Page 15. Similar Colors no
Arguments of Similar Substances adequately Page 24, 25. The Chemists Doctrine
refuted Page 100, 112. Motion in the Parts of Consistent Bodies Page 144.
Colors exhibited by Reflection Page 151, 153. Camphire dissolved in Oil of
Vitriol Page 188. A Concrete the Result of a Mixture of Spirit of Wine, and a
Solution of Coral Page 196, 197. The different Temper of Climates Page 252.
Observations concerning Coral Page 272. Of the Flame of a Candle in the
Exhausted Receiver Page 323. Concerning Live Coals, etc. Ibid. Corrosives,
their Effects Page 390. Cupping Glasses, how they operate Page 474.
D.
Motion in the Parts of Diamonds Page 205, 206.
E.
Eggs how Hatched Page 73. A strange sort of Earth Page 196. The Temperature of
the Regions of the Earth Page 256. -- of the First Page 257. -- of the Second
Page 259. -- of the Third Page 261. Why the Middle Region is coldest Page 259.
The Pneumatick Engine described Page 307. -- The Method of managing it Page 310.
Elasticity explained Page 418. The Pneumatick Engine made use of in the First
continuation described Page 435.
F.
Forms what Page 11. -- Their Effects whence Page 12. The Doctrine of
Substantial Forms considered Page 29. Forms not reduced out of the Power of
Matter Page 30. The Aristotelian Doctrine of Forms contrary to Reason Page 31.
Their Arguments considered Page 32, 33. Substantial Forms no Causes of Adhesion
Page 34, 35. A Compound Form what Page 36, 41. The Doctrine of Subordinate Forms
considered Page 37. Subordinate Forms proved. Page 38. A Compound Form what
Page 39. Specific Forms considered Page 40. (...), hard to be distinguished
amongst the Forms of Natural Bodies Page 41, 50. How distinguished Page 51, 55.
Subordinate Forms act, how Page 42, 43. Subordinate Forms in Inanimate Bodies
Page 49, 52. A Superadded Form it is Effects Page 53. Concurrent and Subordinate
Forms how distinguished Page 56. Subordinate Forms not necessary to
Discriminate Bodies Page 67. Fluidity, it is Definition Page 115. What is
requisite to render Bodies Fluid Page 116, 119, 120, 121, 193, 434. All Bodies
not equally inclined to Fluidity Page 117, 118. What the Motion of the Parts of
Fluids depends on Page 124. The Superficial Figures of Fluids Page 142. -- of a
Nitrous Liquor Page 146. -- of Water Ibid. -- of Oil of Turpentine Page 147,
151. -- of a Solution of Tartar Ibid. -- of Oil of Cloves Ibid. -- of
Quicksilver Page 148. -- of a Nitrous Liquor, and Spirit of Wine Page 150. --
of Oil of Aniseeds Page 153. -- of Water included in Oil Page 155. -- of Oil of
Turpentine upon Cloves Ibid. -- of Oil of Aniseeds coagulated Page 155. -- of
several other Mixtures Page 156, 157. A Fluid turned Solid Page 180. Fluids not
divisible into Fluid Parts, as Quantity into Quantity Page 183. Subterraneal
Fires, their Effects Page 262. Filtration, it is Cause Page 365.
G.
Considerations in order to the Doctrine of Generation Page 13, 14. Generation
what Page 15. Gunpowder it is Ingredients Page 67 Phenomenon afforded by a
Gummy Substance, in Vacuo Boyliano Page 154. Solidity of Glass depends on a
Juxta-position of Parts Page 162. The Parts of Glass in Motion Page 207, 208,
209. What Figured Glasses best resist the Pressure of the Air Page 320, 321.
Gunpowder exploded in Vacuo Boyliano, etc. Page 328. Glass Plates broke in the
Exhausted Receiver Page 448. Flat Glasses broke in the Exhausted Receiver Page
447.
H.
Heat no Inherent Quality Page 9. Heat what Ibid. Humidity a Relative Quality
Page 125. Heat unusual in Mines whence Page 263. Heat produced by Attrition
Page 445.
I.
Juxta-position of Parts not the only cause of Cohesion Page 160.
Juxta-position of Parts promoted by the Air's Spring Page 161. -- proved by the
Cohesion of Polished Glasses Page 163. -- by the Cohesion of Polished Marbles
Page 164, 165, 166. The Interposition of Minute Parts may turn a Liquor into a
Solid Page 178. Observations of Indurated Bodies. Page 191. -- of the Bone of a
Deer's Heart Page 192. The Effects of a Bar of Iron held to a Mariner's Compass,
in a Perpendicular posture Page 202. Iron, how it acquires Magnetical Virtues
Page 246.
L.
The Motion of the Parts of Liquids variously determined Page 126, 127, 128,
140. -- proved by a Solution of Sugar in Water Page 126. -- by a Solution of
Salt of Tartar Page 127. -- by Lead raised in the Form of Vapors Page 128. --
by droping Oil of Turpentine upon Spirit of Wine Page 139. -- by opening the
Body of Copper with Sal Armoniack, and applying it to a Candle Page 141.
Liquids, why sometimes unapt to mix with each other Ibid. A Diaphanous and
Opacous Body afforded by a Liquid Page 143. The Superficies of Liquors, in
Vacuo Boyliano Page 148. A Liquor may become consistent, by the mixture of a
Powder Page 179. The Effects of a Lodestone upon Filings of Iron Page 293.
M.
Matter defined Page 2. Motion, a Catholic Agent Ibid. -- Guided by God in the
Creation Ibid. Mechanical Affections, their result Page 7. Mixture and Texture,
how different Page 22. The Effects of Motion various Page 23. Modification,
twofold Page 44, 45. -- In what Respects Page 47, 48. Medicines Chemical, laid
aside too rashly Page 113, 114. The Effects of languid and unheeded Motion,
from Page 210 to 238. Motion, may be propagated through different Me diums Page
223. An Observation concerning Manna Page 253. Concerning a Match, burning in
the Receiver Page 325. Why Mercury is not always suspended at the same Height
Page 334. Marbles disjoined in the exhausted Receiver Page 446. Mountains,
their Height Page 468.
N.
Nature, may not be always exact in her Laws Page 255. Natural and
Preter-natural States of Bodies not rightly stated Page 302. The natural Sat
of the Air, a forced State Page 304.
O.
Odours, no inherent Quality Page 9. Odours, what Ibid. Observations about
Lignum Vitae Page 103. Observations made in Quarries Page 104.
P.
Primary Affections of Matter Page 3. Putrefaction, what Page 16.
Corpuscularian Principles very firtile Page 21, 22. Minuteness of Pores no
Arguments of their Nonexistence Page 125. A Plastic Power inherent in Bodies
Page 189. Plastic Power, what Page 190. Petrification, how effected Page 194,
195.
Q.
Qualities, no distinct Entities Page 3. Qualities, the Result of Modification
Page 5. -- Proved Page 6. Qualities, act how Page 11. Complexion of Qualities
no real Qualities Page 17. Whether Qualities depend on substantial Forms Page
18. Qualities of a Compound, different from the Ingredients Page 19. Some
Qualities, the Result of mixture Ibid. Qualities, how altered Page 20, 182.
Different Qualities in Homogeneous Bodies Page 26. -- Exhibited by Venice
Turpentine Page 27. -- By putrifi'd Urine Page 27. New Qualities added upon a
Dissolution of the Specific Form Page 46. Qualities, the Result of Motion,
etc. Page 73, 74, 76, 77. Various Qualities produced, by a Change of Texture,
in Camphire Page 78, 79, 80. -- In Copper and Silver Page 81, 82, 83, 84, 85.
-- In preparing of Luna Cornea Page 86, 87. -- In preparing of a Peculiar Salt
Page 88. -- By digesting Spirit of Nitre with Sea Salt Page 89, 90. -- By
distilling Oil of Vitriol with Nitre Page 91, 92. -- By digesting Spirit of
Wine and Oil of Vitriol together Page 102, 103. -- By a Redintegration of Salt
Petre Page 108, 109.
R.
Redintegrations of Bodies considered Page 69. -- Of Amber Page 70. -- Of Roch
Allom Ibid. -- Of Vitriol Page 71, 72. -- Of Antimony and Oil of Vitriol Ibid.
-- Of Salt Petre Page 105, 106, 107. The Signification of the Word Rest,
limited Page 198. Of Respiration Page 382. The Aristotelian Rarefaction
examined Page 404. Rarefaction explained Page 416. -- According to the Doctrine
of the Plenists Page 417. The Rota Aristotelica explained Page 419, 420.
S.
Sounds, no Inherent Qualities Page 9. Sounds, what Ibid. Species of Bodies,
how distinguished Page 57, 58. Salts, their Figures how accounted for Page 62.
Salts obtained from an Alkaly Page 63. -- From Oil of Vitriol and a Solution of
Sea Salt Ibid. -- From a mixture of Spirit of Wine and Nitre Ib. -- From a
Solution of Copper Page 64. -- From Gold Page 65. -- Venetian Borax Ibid. --
Spirit of Urine and Nitre Page 66. -- Soot and Sal Armoniack Ibid. -- Spirit of
Nitre and Potashes Page 68. Salt Petre obtained from Potashes Page 107. --
Aqua Fortis and Salt of Tartar Ibid. Solidity refined Page 158. What is
requisite to Solidity or Firmness Page 158, 159, 160, 161, 168, 169, 170, 171,
172, 173, 174, 176, 177, 178, 179, 181, 184, 185, 186, 187. A Solid turned
Fluid Page 180. Motion in the Parts of Solids Page 200, 201. Cosmical
Suspicions, from Page 249, to 256. The Temper of Submarine Regions Page 266. --
Of the uppermost Ibid. -- Of the lower Page 267, 268. The Bottom of the Sea
unequal Page 279. -- Vndisturb'd in Storms Page 271. -- Almost stagnates Ibid.
The Proportion of Salt in the Sea to the Water Page 275, 282, 283, 284. Springs
in the Bottom of the Sea Ibid. The Reason of the Saltness of the Sea Page 278,
279. -- Its Bitterness, whence Page 280. Concerning the Propagation of Sounds
Page 353. A Spring bent in the exhausted Receiver Page 458. To what Height
Water will be raised by Suction Page 452, 454, 456.
T.
Transmutation of Metals not impossible Page 94, 95. The Texture of their
Liquids contributes to their Mixture Page 175. The Texture of Bodies enables
them to work on each other Page 247. Trees under Water Page 273.
V.
Union, the Cause of the Effects of Compounds Page 44, 51. Vitriol, Natural and
Artificial agree in Qualities Page 60, 61. Vitriol turned into Allom Page 68.
Vortices, beyond the Concave Surface of the Firmament Page 256. Of a Vacuum
Page 331, 362, 440. Vapors and Fumes, why they ascend Page 356.
W.
Water acquires new Qualities by an Alteration of its Form Page 76. Water
Convertible into Earth Page 98, 99. -- How it becomes Solid Powder Page 99. An
insipid Water drawn from Spirit of Vinegar and Salt of Tartar Page 188. Water
its Gravitation Page 270. Agitation requisite to keep Water from stinking Page
281. Memoirs for the Natural History of Mineral Waters Page 286. The different
Weight of Mineral Waters Page 291. -- Observations requisite in trying them
Page 295. Whether they have Arsnick in them Page 296. What Proportion of Salt
they afford Page 299. Of the Elater of Water Page 337. It depends on the Elater
of the Air contained in the Pores of it Page 339. Water hot, its spontaneous
Ebullition Page 391.
The END
ADVERTISEMENT.
THis Volume containing an Epitomy of several of the Author's Works; I think it
necessary to advertise, that to avoid a Repetition of all the Titles prefixed
to the Tracts Printed severally; I have digested each of those Books into such
a Method as they would have been probably Printed in, had they been all writ by
our Author at one time; each Book being contained in Chapters, the Titles of
which, will acquaint the Reader what Tracts they belong to: And that the Reader
may be more clearly satisfied, I intend at the End of the next Volume, to add
such a Table of the Author's Works, as shall readily direct what Chapters each
Book is abridg'd in, by referring to them.

IMPRIMATUR Liber Cui Titulus, THE WORKS Of the HONORABLE ROBERT BOIL Esquire
EPITOMIZED By RICHARD BOULTON.

JOHN HOSKYNS, V. P. R. S.
Vicesimo Septimo Martii, 1699,
THE WORKS OF THE HONORABLE Robert Boil, Esquire EPITOMIZED.

VOL. II.

BY RICHARD BOVLTON, of Brazen-Nose College in Oxford.

Illustrated with COPPER PLATES.

LONDON: Printed for J. Phillips at the King's- Arms, and J. Tailor at the Ship
in St. Paul's Churchyard, MDCC.

To His Excellency The Most Illustrious PRINCE, CHARLES Duke of BOLTON,
Marquess of Winchester, Earl of Wiltshire, and Baron St. John of Basing; the
Premier Marquess of England; one of the Lords Justices of the Kingdom of
Ireland; Lord Lieutenant and Custos Rotulorum for the Countys of Dorset and
Southampton, the Town of Southampton and County of the same; Vice Admiral of
Southampton and the Isle of Wight; Lord Warden of the New Forest in Hantshire,
and one of the Lords of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.
May it please Your Excellency,
SInce nothing contributes more to the Advancement of Natural Knowledge, than
the Encouragement of great and eminent Persons; not only Custom but Interest
has generally inclined those, who employ their time in the pursuit of it, to
shelter the Fruits of their Labors under the Protection of noble Patrons: For
as there can be no greater Motives to Virtue and Morality, than the Favor of
an Omnipotent Power; so in the Affairs of this World, we are most inclined to
pursue, whatever may deserve the Esteem of great Men, or lead us into their
Favor.

And if the Tree of Knowledge flourishes most under the favorable Patronage of
Princes, the Interest of, Learning will, at the same time, be a good Plea to
extenuate my Presumption, and a great Argument why I should lay this at your
Excellency's Feet.

For, Illustrious SIR, whilst amongst the happy Number of His Majestys
Favorites, we behold Your Excellency dignified with Titles of Honor, at the
same time we are surprised to see, that no Titles can be so great but Your
Excellency's Character adds a Luster to, and increases the Dignity of them: A
character! which, could I convey it down to future Ages, I must be able to
represent, in the most lively Colors, All the Virtues of a good and pious
Christian; the meek and liberal Temper of a Puissant and Noble Prince; the
Wisdom of a Counselor, and the Qualifications of one, to whose Judgment and
Sagacity the Administration of the Government of a Kingdom has been, in a
great measure, committed, by the most Judicious and Sagacious of Kings.

But, Illustrious SIR, since the draught of so Noble a Character as Your
Excellency's is too hard a Task for a Pen better qualified than mine, I have
sufficient reason to decline it; and shall rather reflect on the Happiness of
this Kingdom, whilst so Great a King has made choice of so Wise a Counselor;
and the great Felicity of the Commonwealth of Learning, whilst under the
Patronage of so Illustrious a Prince as the Duke of BOLTON; and particularly on
my own Happiness under Your Excellency's Protection, which is the more
augmented by this opportunity of professing my self,

Most Illustrious SIR, Your Excellency's Most Humble and Devoted Servant,
Richard Boulton.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
THE candid Acceptance of the former Volume, and the favorable Approbation of
the Learned, having given the Booksellers sufficient Encouragement to proceed
in Printing the two subsequent Volumes; there is no need that I should, on
their part, enlarge on the Subject of the Preface annexed to the first Volume,
to show the Usefulness of the Design; since the general Consent of the Learned
has already put that beyond Doubt.

Therefore, having laid down the Reasons why I proceeded in such a Method as I
have placed the Subjects in, in the first Volume, in the latter end of that
Preface, I shall, without increasing the bulk of this Volume with a long
Preface, briefly subjoyn the Rationale of this; And,

First, The first Volume ending with an Epitomy of the Honorable Author's
first Continuation of Physico-Mechanical Experiments, I have begun this with
some Experiments belonging to that first Continuation, and to them I have
subjoined his second Continuation; to which, by reason of some affinity betwixt
particular Experiments that Treatise and another, delivered in another Tract, I
have added a Chapter of Observations on Animals included in Vacuo; and another
relating to the same Subject, out of the Philosophical Transactions: And
because these Observations engage our Thoughts in several things relating to
the precedent Phenomenon of the Vacuum Boylianum, and may remind us of what he
bath delivered of the Spring and Weight of the Air, I have in the next place
laid down his Animadversions on Mr. Hobbes Problemata de Vacuo, his Discourse
of Attraction by Suction, and what he has delivered concerning the Barometer
in the Philosophical Transactions. And forasmuch as in all his
Physico-Mechanical, and other Experiments already delivered, and tried in Vacuo
Boyliano, we have several instances of the Rarefaction and Condensation of the
Air, etc. hopeing it would help some to a seasonable Reflection on what was
before delivered; I have added what he has taught concerning the admirable
Rarefaction of the Air, and the Duration of its Spring; as also concerning its
Condensation and admirable different Extension, when rarefied and compressed:
And since these Subjects renew our Considerations concerning the Spring of the
Air, I have added further, a Chapter of the Weakened Spring of the Air, out of
the Philosophical Transactions. And because the Spring and weight of the Air
and their Effects, are not the only Qualities and Considerations to be taken
notice of in the Atmosphere, from those I proceed to deliver what he has
Taught concerning Hygroscopes and their Utilities; as also what he has writ of
the Efficacy of the Airs Moisture: And because there are several Qualities in
the Air which not only affect our outward Senses, but have a manifest Influence
on the Mass of Humors which circulate in our Bodies, and on whose Tempers the
Preservation or Distempers of a human Body depends, I have added what he has
delivered concerning the Salubrity and Insalubrity of the Air, whose variations
in Temperature, alter the Constitution of the Humors of our Bodies. And since
we are not only affected by manifest Qualities of the Air, but also by occult
ones, I have laid down what our Author has said on that Subject: and since
Magnetical and Electrical Qualities are generally accounted Occult ones, I have
added his Tracts on those Subjects. And to conclude the Third Book, I have
added his General History of the Air, which I have therefore placed the last
relating to that Element, because it consists of several Fragments which belong
to several of the preceding Subjects, or bear a relation to some others which
follow, concerning Colors, Tastes, and Odours. And having thus ended the Third
Book, the Fourth contains those Subjects which have a more immediate Relation
to the Outward Senses, and are considered as their Objects; which I therefore
for distinction sake place together: Of which what our Author has delivered
concerning the Mechanical Production of Tastes, Odours, and Colors, I have laid
down in this Volume, and shall proceed to the remaining Objects of our Senses,
in the Third Volume; where I shall give a short Account of the Method I take in
that, and in the mean time subscribe my self the candid Readers

Very humble Servant, R. Boulton.
London, October. 13. 1699.
Vol. II. Plate. 1
Fig: 1. page 4.
Fig: 3. page 5.
Fig: 4. page 6.
Fig: 2. page 2.


Vol. II. Plate. 2.
Fig: 4. p: 14
Fig: 1. p: 8.
Fig: 5 p: 17.
Fig: 3.
Fig: 2. p: 14.


Vol. II. Plate. 3.
Fig: 2. p: 22.
Fig: 1 p: 21.


Vol.II. Plate.4.
Fig: 3. p: 27. and.29.
Fig: 4. p: 29:
p: 23. Fig: 1.
Fig: 2. p: 25.


Plate.5. Vol.II.
Fig: 1. p: 32.
Fig: 5. p: 485.
Fig: 3. p: 32.
Fig: 2. p: 32.
Fig: 4. p: 33.


Plate.6. Vol: II.
Fig: 1 p: 33.
Fig: 3. p: 35.
Fig: 5. p: 366.
Fig: 2 p: 34.
Fig: 4. p: 365.


Plate.7. Vol: II.
Fig: 1. p:35.
Fig: 2. p: 37.
Fig: 4 p: 374
Fig: p: 334


THE WORKS Of the HONORABLE ROBERT BOIL Esquire EPITOMIZED.
BOOK III.
CHAP. I. Experiments touching the Spring and Weight of the Air, etc.
THE Bulk of the former Volume, forbidding that I should add any more of the
Experiments concerning the Air's Spring and Weight, I shall now proceed to lay
down what our Author has further delivered in his first Continuation of
Experiments relating to that Subject.

EXPERIMENT I. The Cause of the Ascension of Liquors in Syringes is to be
derived from the Pressure of the Air.
AS in the Experiments recited in the former Volume, it appeared, that the
Pressure of the External Air, occasions the Difficulty of drawing up the Sucker
of a Syringe; so I shall now show, that the Pressure of the External Air, upon
the Surface of the Water, in which the Syringe is immersed, causes it to
ascend, when the Sucker is drawn up.

TRIAL I.
Having cemented a Glass Pipe to the lower End of a Syringe, and immersed the
lower End of that Pipe in a Viol which contained Mercury, we tied the Sucker of
the Syringe to the Stopple which is in the Cover of the Receiver, and having
conveyed it into such a Receiver as Fig. 2. Plate 1. Represents; See Plate 1.
Fig. 2.
we observed, that upon drawing up the Sucker, the Mercury did not in the least
ascend, till the Air was let into it, and then it ascended up to the Top of the
Glass Tube: And this Experiment being varied, by drawing the Sucker up an Inch
before the Receiver was exhausted, the Mercury rose to the Top of the Glass
Tube, though it did not in the least rise when the Sucker was drawn up as high
again, after the Receiver was exhausted. And in trying this Experiment it was
further to be noted, that when the Receiver was exhausted, it was as difficult
to raise the Sucker, as when the End of the Syringe was stopped, the remaining
Air which was able to keep the Sucker from rising, being unable to raise the
Mercury.

TRIAL II. Being a Prosecution of the former.
The former Trial being again repeated, besides what we observed in that
Experiment, we further noted, that a considerable Weight being tied to the
Syringe to keep it steady and firm, the Mercury did not rise till we permitted
the Air to return again into the Receiver, though the Sucker was raised two
Inches.

But lest the Phenomenon exhibited by these Experiments, should be influenced
by the Air contained in the Glass Pipe; I caused the Pipe to be filled with
Spirit of Wine, and immersed it in a Viol which contained the same Liquor
tinged with Cocheneel; and observed, that though, when the Receiver was
exhausted, the Liquor afforded Bubbles plentifully, and at the Top seemed to
boil, yet it did not ascend in the least, notwithstanding the Sucker was raised
two Inches and a half: But when the Air was let into the Receiver again, it
ascended into the Body of the Syringe, which appeared, by the small Quantity of
Spirit remaining in the Bottle, in which the Glass Tube was immersed.

EXPERIMENT II. An Attempt to discover the Motion of Ether in the Exhausted
Receiver.
HAving instead of the Glass Tube mentioned in the former Experiment, provided
a crooked one of Brass, See Plate 1. Fig. 1.
such as the first Figure represents, and joined a Glass Tube to the shorter
Leg with Cement, we caused Weights to be fixed to the Top of the Sucker to
depress it speedily when occasion required: This Syringe was fixed to a
Pedestal to keep it firm, and to hinder it from tottering; and a Feather was
likewise fixed with Cement to the lower End of the Syringe, so that the small
End was placed above the Orifice of the crooked Tube. All which being conveyed
into a Receiver, and the Pump set on Work, we observed, that, the Sucker by the
help of the Turning-Key being often elevated and permitted to fall again, the
Feather was gradually less shaken, with what was forced out of the Syringe, as
the Receiver was more and more exhausted, till at the last the Feather did not
seem in the least to be moved, before Air was again let in, and then it was
blown up as before: In which Experiment we observed, that as the Cavity of the
Receiver was more or less exhausted, the Descent of the Sucker was accordingly
quickened, so that had there been a Substance finer than Air in the Receiver,
the Blast would have been greater as the Descent of the Sucker was swifter.

We tried the same Experiment a second time, contriving to draw up the Sucker
higher than we did before, but the Event was no more satisfactory than the
former.

But that I might be informed, what Quantity of Air was drawn out every
Exsuction, as well as when the Feather was more or less shaken by the Wind
thrown out of the Syringe, I made use of a Glass Tube, such as Figure the Third
represents, See Plate 1. Fig. 3.
instead of the former Brazen One; and the one End being immersed in a Jar, and
placed in the Receiver, as the Air was pumped out, several Bubbles broke
through the Water out of the Pipe, but External Air getting in at a Leak, the
Water was pressed up into the Pipe again; nevertheless, upon an Exsuction of
that Air it again subsided; yet yielded so many Bubbles, that we could not
conveniently make any further Observations, till the Receiver having stood
still for some time, the Water was freed from Air; and then, though the Pump was
set on Work, till the Gage discovered the Receiver to be very well exhausted;
yet we could not discern, that any Bubbles were forced through the Water in the
Bottom of the Tube by frequently elevating and depressing the Sucker; for though
there appeared a few in the Top of the Water, yet we judged that those rather
proceeded from some aerie Particles lodging in the Pores of the Water.

But what was most Remarkable in this Experiment was, that after some time the
Water rising about an Inch in the Tube, above the Surface of the Water without
it, we several times raised the Sucker 2 or 3 Inches, and fuffered it to fall
again, without perceiving, that the Water in the Tube was in the least
Affected; which is an Argument either of a Vacuum, or that the Parts of that
Ether are so fine, that they exceed the Rarefaction of the Air so far, as not
to be able to effect what a Particle of Air does which is not above 1/500 part
of the Quantity of a Pin's head; a Particle of Air, before Expansion, of that
Minuteness being able, when the Receiver is exhausted, to displace much more
Water upon their Expansion than this Ether.

By which Experiment, as well as what we have taken notice of, the Reason I
formerly assigned for the rising of Water in Siphons seems to be confirmed; the
Water in the Pipe made use of in these Experiments, not being able to rise when
the Air was exhausted, though the Sucker was drawn up, till Air was permitted to
enter into the Receiver again.

EXPERIMENT III. Concerning the falling of a light Body in the Exhausted
Receiver, the Figure of it disposing it is Motion to be visibly altered by a
small Resistance of the Air.
TO discover whether so light Bodies as Feathers would be affected in their
descent in the exhausted Receiver by any subtle Matter contained in it, we
fixed a small pair of Tobacco-Tongs in such a Receiver as Fig. the Fourth
Represents, See Plate 1. Fig. 4.
which was 22 Inches high, and having joined four Feathers together with
Cement, so as to lie across each other, we fixed a small piece of Paper to
them, which being held in the Tongs, the Feathers hung in an horizontal
Posture; And upon an Exsuction of the Air out of the Receiver, till by a
Mercurial Gage it seemed void of Air, we opened the Tongs, by turning the
Stopple in the Cover of the Receiver, (a short String, the one End of which was
fixed to the Stopple, and the other to the Tongs, being by that means shortened)
upon which we observed, that though these Feathers turned several times in the
unexhausted Receiver, yet the Experiment being often repeated, we could not
perceive them in the least to turn in the exhausted Receiver, but to fall like
a dead Weight; and what was further to be observed was, that the Descent of the
Feathers was much quicker in the exhausted Receiver, than when it was full of
Air.

Yet in this Experiment it was observed, that the Phenomenon were less
convincing than the former, because we took notice that the Feathers fell
without in the least turning when the Receiver was but half exhausted.

And we further noted in this Experiment, that, the Receiver being lengthened
with a Cylinder of Laton, covered over with Cement, and kept from being pressed
too much inward by the outward Air, by a Case made of Iron Bars, when the Air
was let in again into the exhausted Receiver, it made a considerable crackling
Noise, the sides of the Metalline Receiver which before were in some measure
compressed being again extended.

EXPERIMENT IV. Of the Propagation of Sounds in the Exhausted Receiver.
HAVING caused a Cylinder of Box to be turned, See Plate 2. Fig. 1.
with an Axle-tree at each End, into the Cavity of the uppermost was received
the Bottom of the Stopple; and the Axle-tree at the Bottom was adapted to a
Hoop of Brass fixed in the middle of a Trencher, which was about 5 Inches
broad, and 3 thick, and which had a piece of Lead fixed to the Bottom to keep
it steady; which being done, a Wire was fixed in the upper part of the
Trencher, and at the End, which bent downwards, was fixed a Bell, and at
another place of the same Trencher was fixed a Steel Spring, to the upper part
of which a piece of Steel was joined, at such a convenient Distance, that when
it was bent back by two Pegs placed at right Angles in the Cylinder (which had
several Holes made in it on purpose) and the Spring on a sudden ceased to be
pressed upon, it would fly forcibly upon the Bell, and give it a smart Stroke.

Things being thus ordered, I caused the Receiver to be exhausted, and though the
Sound (which was caused by turning the Cylinder fixed to the Stop-Cock, so as
to make the piece of Steel strike upon the Bell) was scarce discernible, yet as
Air was gradually let in, it became louder and more audible.

And the like Experiment being tried by suspending a Watch which had an Alarm
belonging to it, by a piece of Thread, which was tied to a Glass Button
purposely blown in the inside of a Receiver which was made of one entire piece,
so that it was less subject to break; we ordered the Watch so, that the Alarm
should begin to go by the time that we were ready to make our Observations, at
which time one that held his Ear near enough to the Top of the Receiver,
perceived, that when the Air was wholly exhausted, the Sound of the Alarm was
scarce at all discernible, but became much louder as the Air was gradually let
in.

EXPERIMENT V. About the breaking of a Glass Drop in the Exhausted Receiver.
TO know the Reason, why upon the Breaking of a Part of the solid Case of the
Stem of a Glass Drop, which upon it is first Formation falling into Water, was
kept full of Rarifi'd Air; I say, to know the Reason, why such a Bottle flies
in pieces when part of the Stem is broken off upon a sudden Ingress of External
Air; I caused the lower End of a Glass Drop to be fastened to a staple Body,
the Stem being tied to one End of a String, and the other End being fastened to
the Turn-Key; which being done, and the Receiver exhausted, the Stem was broke
off by shortning the String, whereupon the Bubble flew into a Thousand Pieces,
the Air enclosed expanding violently, and endeavoring to rush out at that
small Vent.

EXPERIMENT VI. About the Production of Light in the Exhausted Receiver.
TO try whether Light might be produced in the Exhausted Receiver without an
Access of Air, we made use of a Virtical Cylinder, the lower Basis of which was
fixed in a Staple Trencher; and having fixed two pieces of Steel in the lower
End of that Cylinder, so as to rub forcibly against a Lump of Loaf-Sugar, I
observed, that the Vitriol Cylinder being forcibly turned by the help of the
Turning Key, the Steel made Impressions strong enough upon the Sugar, to cause
it to afford, not only several Flashes, but little Sparks of fire.

EXPERIMENT VII. The Production of a kind of Halo, and several Colors in the
Exhausted Receiver.
WE made use of a large inverted Cucurbite for a Receiver, which being
exhausted, and a large Candle held on the Opposite side, when the Stop-cock was
turned, to give way for the Air, to pass out of the Receiver into the Cylinder,
the Cavity of the Cylinder seemed to be filled with Fumes; so that the Candle
whose Flame was visible, though it appeared to be encompassed with a kind of
Halo, whose Color was between Blew and Green; and after a few Exsuctions,
would be of a Reddish or Orange Color, very vivid: Which Meteor I supposed to
arise, from some Particles of the Turpentine, which extricating themselves upon
the Application of a hot Iron to the Cement, caused an Explosion in the
Receiver, when the Parts of the Air were put in Motion and disposed to
Expansion; and the variety of Colors, I conceive to proceed from the various
Positions of those Particles of Matter which fill up the Receiver and variously
reflect the Rays of Light. To confirm which Opinion I observed several Steams
to rise up from the Cement upon turning of the Stop-cock; and if we continued
to exhaust the Receiver, it would become clearer and clearer, and the Colors
more dilute, till the Cement was enabled to emit more Steams, by re-applying a
hot Iron to it: And as for the Reason, why these Steams do not so plentifully
rise, when the Receiver is evacuated, it appears to be, because the Particles
of the Turpentine are less agitated as the Heat declines; and further, because
they want Air to support them.

To confirm what I have intimated, as the Causes of the aforementioned
Phenomenon, I conveyed some of the Cement Melted in a Crucible into a Receiver;
and observed, that upon opening of the Stop-cock to let out the Air, the Steams
would for some time plentifully fly about, but after a little time would
subside again. But in the aforementioned Phenomenon, the several Colors seemed
to depend on the different Degrees of Heat which the Cement acquired; as also,
on the different Size and Figure of the Receiver; as also, on the Nature of the
Cement and the Quantity of Air which was left unpumped out.

EXPERIMENT VIII. About the slacking of Quicklime in the Exhausted Receiver.
HAving conveyed an Evaporating Glass, with a sufficient Quantity of Water in
it into the Receiver, when the Air was drawn out, we let down a piece of
unslacked Lime into it, by the Assistance of the Turning-Key; and observed,
that in about part of an Hour, the Lime began to slack violently, and at each
Exsuction afforded very large Bubbles, which continued as long as we plied the
Pump; so that in a little time the whole inside of the Receiver was covered
over with Lime Water, a great part of the Mixture boiling over into the
Capacity of the Receiver; in which Experiment the Outside of the Vessel was
considerably hot, and the Mixture continued its Heat near part of an Hour after
the Receiver was removed: The Lime made use of in this Experiment was very
strong.

EXPERIMENT IX. An attempt to measure the force of the Spring of included Air,
and examine a Conjecture about the difference of it is strength in unequally
broad-mouthed Glasses.
TO measure the force of the Air's Expansion, we fixed a Syringe in a Frame,
that it might be kept firm and erect; which being done, we provided a Leaden
Hoop, which was suspended at the Top of the Sucker, and hung so far below the
Bottom of the Syringe, that it might have Space enough to rise in upon the
Expansion of the Air in the Cavity of the Syringe, when the Receiver should be
exhausted; the Weight in the mean time being prevented from compressing the Air
beyond it is natural State by a String, the one end of which was tied to the Top
of the Sucker, and the other to the Turning Key; which being done, and the Pump
set on Work, we found, that the Expanding Air was able to raise about 7 or 8
pound Weight, and had the Rammer had a free Passage it probably would have
raised a much greater Weight; but the Experiment was less satisfactory in
determining the force of the Air's Expansion, in elevating a determinate
Weight; because the Air made it is way too easily betwixt the unequal Superficies
of the Sucker, and the concave Surface of the Cylinder.

Therefore to be more exact, I caused two Cylinders to be made different both
in Length and Breadth, the Diameter of the one being an Inch, and of the other
two Inches; In the former, I put a Lamb's Bladder, which contained a sufficient
Quantity of Air, and having ordered the Receiver to be exhausted, I found, that
a Cylinder of Air of an Inch Diameter, was able to raise a Weight of 10 Pound
Averdupoiz Weights; but though the Bladder for a long time kept the Air from
flying away, yet when it was loaded with the utmost Weight it was able to bear,
some Air getting out of the Bladder rendered our Trial less satisfactory.

Wherefore we made use of a Cylinder 4 Inches Deep and two in Diameter, which
having a broad Basis to stand upon, we put a Lamb's Bladder into it well blown
and tied; See Plate 2. Fig. the 2 and 4.
and putting a Wooden Plug upon that, we loaded the Plugs with Weights
amounting to 35 Pound, the uppermost of which was fastened to the Turning-Key,
to prevent it from falling, and then the Plug being marked at the brim of the
Cylinder, we set the Pump on Work, and observed that the Expansive force of the
Air in the Bladder was so great that it lifted up the Plug considerably; yet
when the Air was again let into the Receiver the Plug was so far depressed that
the Mark was below the Edges of the Receiver; yet the Air being again a second
time exhausted, the Bladder raised the Plug so high, that parts of the whole
Plug was lifted up above the Edges of the Cylinder. And by repeating the Trial
we found, that the Air in the Bladder, when the Receiver was exhausted, was
able to bear up 7 pound Weight more, by which Weight the Mark upon the Plug,
was not depressed below the top of the Cylinder.

But in trying these Experiments the following Particulars are to be Noted.

1. That the Plug must be so adapted to the Cylinder as to move up and down
easily; also it must be of a convenient length, not exceeding an Inch and a
half; and it will be likewise requisite that the Plug should have a strong
Ledge upon the upper part of the Cylindrical Surface, that it may rest upon the
Edges of the Cylinder and sustain the Weights laid upon it more firmly.

2. When the Bladder was put into the hollow Cylinder, we took care to adapt it
by easy and frequent Compressions to the Cavity it was placed in, making a
Mark in the inside of the Cylinder where the Air in it is Natural State was
Compressed to, that we might learn what Weight the Expansion of the Air was
able to sustain above that Mark; for the Air being preternaturally compressed,
upon the Account of that accidental pressure may be able to raise a greater
Weight than Air uncompressed, so that the Weight it raises above that Mark is
alone to be taken for what Air condensed is able to lift up more than the Air
in it is Natural State.

3. When the Bladder was taken out of the Cylinder, the Figure of it was
proportionable to the Cavity, which it was contained in, being 2 Inches
Diameter, and 2 Inches and long.

4. From the Experiments now mentioned it appears, that the Air is able at it is
first Expansion, to raise a Weight proportionably larger according to the
different Bores of the Cylinders made use of; but when it has been a little
more Expanded the Proportion is not so exact, because a small Quantity of Air
being to fill up or part of an Inch more, the smaller Quantity of Air must be
much more rarefied and consequently lose of it is expansive Force.

But comparing the expansive Force of Air in different Bores at it is first
Expansion, some may think the Proportion not exact; since the small Bladder
being able to raise no more but 10 Pound, and the Weight which the larger
raises being 42, it is more than a Duplicate Proportion-of what our Hypothesis
requires; but if we consider that comparing the Diameter of each Cylinder, the
Bladder in the less, proportion ably takes up more Room than in the larger; it
may be sufficient to account for the Difference.

5. Considering that the Bladders in which Air is Included, may straiten the
Cavities of the Cylinders, the expansive Force of the Air might be more exactly
determined, could Cylinders be contrived stanch enough without such helps.

6. And it will not a little contribute to render the Force of the Air's Spring
difficult to be determined, that the Air it self at different times varies, in
it is degrees of Pressure: Yet from what has been said it seems probable, that
were it possible to contrive an exact Cylinder very tite one, of an Inch Bore
would be able to raise above 10 pound Weight.

EXPERIMENT X. An easy way of making a small Quantity of Included Air raise 50
or 60 Pound or a greater Weight in the Exhausted Receiver.
TO demonstrate more obviously the Air's Spring, we took a See Plate the second
Fig. 4.
Brass Cylinder whose Depth was 4 Inches and it is Diameter 4 Inches and, to
which we adapted a See Plate
short Plug, to whose upper Basis was fixed a broad Rim for Weights to stand on
more firmly; which being done we pressed a Bladder into the Cylinder, that it
might adapt it self to the Cavity of it; and then, observing, how much the Plug
was above the surface of the Cylinder, we laid the Weights upon it (see Plate
the 2d Figure the 5th) and observed that the Air in a Cylinder about 4 Inches
broad lifted up 75 pound at the 5 Exsuction so high that one might discern the
Mark; See Plate 2. Fig. 5.
and at 2 Exsuctions more it was elevated 3/10 above the Top of the Cylinder,
and at the same time, in a Mercurial Gage the Mercury that usually stood at
above the highest Glass Mark subsided to below the Second. When the Air was let
into the Receiver again, after some time the Bladder subsided again, and being
taken out exactly answered the Cavity of the Cylinder. The Receiver being again
exhausted at the 24th Exsuction the Mercury in the Gage was depressed to the
lowest Mark, and at the 35th to below it.

And the former Experiment being tried in a small Receiver in which we heaped
flat Weights one upon another, the Air raised 100 pound Weight, and would
probably have raised much more, had it not been, that the Bladder was so much
strained as to give way for some Air to get out at a Leak.

And here it may not be improper to advertise, that the Orifices of such
Receivers must not be very wide, for if they be they will be subject to be
cracked by the violent external Pressure of the Atmosphere.

EXPERIMENT XI.
TO Compare the Gravity of Air and Water, I weighed a Glass Bubble in the
Receiver, which I found to weigh above half a Grain more in the exhausted
Receiver than before the Air was drawn out; and this Bubble being weighed in
the open Air counterpoised 68 Grains and an half; upon which the Bubble being
immersed in Water, we found that the Air in it had been so far rarefied by the
Heat employed in sealing it up, that the Nip being broke off, it sucked in 125
Grains of Water, the Glass together with the Water sucked into it weighing 193
Grains: The whole Cavity of the Bubble being large enough to contain 739 Grains
of Water, it weighing 807 Grains, so that the Proportion betwixt the Weight of
the Air and Water did not quite amount to 1228 to 1.

Having weighed a Glass Bubble in the Receiver, whose Weight was 60 Grains, the
Air contained in it in Vacuo weighed 27/92 of a Grain, and the Weight of such a
Quantity of Water as it would contain, weighed 720 Grains. In which Experiment
the Proportion of Air to Water in Weight was as 857 17/27 to one. But Galileo
says, Water is but 400 times heavier than Water, though Ricciolus is as much
mistaken on the other side, who says it is 10000 times heavier.

To inform my self further of the Weight of the Air, I took the following
Measures; having exhausted a Receiver, and when it was void of Air
counterballanced it, upon turning the Stop-Cock and a Reingress of Air, it
weighed 36 Grains more than before, which succeeded when tried a second time,
and likewise a third. And then the Receiver being exhausted was immersed in
Water, and the Stop-Cock turned to give way to an Ingress of Water, and when as
much Water as was able to enter into the Receiver had succeeded in the Place of
the exhausted Air, we turned the Cock again to keep that Water in, and the
Receiver being again weighed, the Water weighed 47 Ounces, 3 Drachms and 6
Grains, so that the Water was heavier than its bulk of Air, near 650 Grains,
the Mercury in a Baroscope at the same time being boyed up to 29 Inches, so
that the Weight and condensed state of the Atmosphere being greater then than
usually, was the Reason why the Disproportion was not as great as at other
times; though we may reasonably suspect, that the Quantity of Air contained in
the Pores of the Water, joining with that in the Receiver, might hinder so much
Water from getting in as was requisite to fill the Space deserted by the
Exhausted Air; besides several Particles of Air might probably get in at the
Stop-Cock, whilst the Experiment was trying, which joining with the Air
remaining in the Receiver might contribute to prevent a sufficient Ingress of
Water.

From all which Experiments it appears, that though the Weight of the Atmosphere
is so various, that it is impossible to know exactly the Proportion betwixt it
and Water, yet it is evident that Water is to Air some Number betwixt 600 and
1100 to 1, being greater or less as the Atmosphere is more or less condensed.
But these Trials are only of use in England, for the Weight of Water as well as
Air, is so different in most Countries, that it is requisite to make frequent
Experiments in each, to determine the Proportion of the Weight of Air in such
Places.

CHAP. II. A second Continuation of Physico-Mechanical Experiments.
PLATE III. A Description of the Engine with a double Tube to exhaust the Air.
A. A. TWO Brazen Pumps. B. B. Two hollow Plugs, the lower Part of whose
Cylindrical Cavity is open. See Plate 3. Fig. 1.
C. C. Two smaller Orifices in the upper Basis of the Plugs, furnished with
Valves, which open outward, so that the Air may get out, but cannot return into
the Cavity of the Plugs again. D. D. D. D. Iron Rods, fixed to the Gnomons, F.
F. and designed to move the Plugs. E. E. Two Iron Stirrups fixed to the Tops of
the Rods D. D. D. D. designed for the Operator to stand in, to set the Engine a
going. G. G. G. A Rope which lies upon the Pully H. each End being tied to the
Stirrups E. E. L. L. Two Valves placed at the Bottom of the Pumps, so that by
opening inward, they may admit the Air out of the Tube M. M. M. M. A Tube which
rising from both Pumps, ends in the Plate O. O. Having first made a Curvature
P. P. Q. Q. of a convenient length that the Tube P. Q. Q. may not hinder the
Operator from standing in the Stirrups E. E. O. O. A Plate perforated in the
Middle to afford an Intercourse betwixt the Tube P. Q. Q. and the Receiver R.
To render this Engine fit for use, See Plate 3. Fig. 2.
it must be supported in a Wooden Frame, (See Fig. the second;) and then a
Quantity of Water being thrown into the Tube P. Q. Q. sufficient to fill the
Pumps and something more, the Operator standing in the Stirrups, must weight
them up and down successively, one after another, which being done, as the Plug
in each Pump is raised up, the Air contained in the Receiver R. and the Tube Q.
Q. will by it is Spring and Expansion, lift up the Valves L. L. and make it is
way into the Space deserted by the Plugs in the Pumps; but as soon as the Plugs
begin to be pressed down again, the Air contained in the Pumps will be hindered
from passing into the Receiver by the Valves K. L. and consequently the whole
Cavity of the Plugs being full of Water, the Air, as they are forced down, will
lift up the Valve C. and so the Air contained in the Receiver will be
successively drawn out as the Plugs move up and down alternately.

The Reasons why this double Engine is preferable to a single one, is because it
evacuates the Receiver more speedily, and also with less trouble; for whereas
in a single one the Pillar of Air which presses against the descending Sucker
is to be resisted by force, as well to depress the Sucker as to keep it from
rising up again, in this double one the Weight of the Atmosphere depresses one
Plug proportionably as it resists the Rising of the other, and the Motion of
the Plugs up and down is rendered much more easy, when the Receiver is in some
measure exhausted, because the Atmosphere which lies upon the descending Sucker
helps the Operator to weigh it down, the Spring of the included Air being so
far weakened as not to resist the Weight of the Atmospherical Pillar that lies
upon it.

PLATE IV. A description of the Mercurial Gage made use of in the following
Experiment.
The Gage A. B. C. D. E. is made up of three Glass Tubes cemented together, See
Plate 4 Fig. 1.
so that their Cavities make a continued Passage, being open to each other; The
Tube B. C. D. is designedly crooked, that the lower Orifice of the Tube E. D.
as well as the Orifice of Tube A. B. may be cemented to it; which being done,
the crooked Tube, whose Diameter is larger than either of the other two, is to
be filled with Mercury, and then the Orifice E. of the smaller Tube is to be
hermetically Sealed up; but the Orifice A. of the Tube A. B. whose Diameter is
larger than that of E. D. is to be left open.

This Gage being put in a Receiver when it is exhausted, the Air contained in
the Tube E. D. will expand so powerfully as to descend into the crooked one to
C. forcing the Mercury to rise into the Tube B. A. almost to the Top, before
the included Air has lost it is Spring.

To discover then the Quantity of Air included in a Receiver, we may make use
of the Receiver F. G. E. which being placed on the Plate L. M. we must try the
Torrecellian Experiment, by inverting the Tube H. filled with Mercury into the
Glass I. and then the Top of the Receiver F. being closed with Cement, and the
Tube A. B. and E. D. being marked with Papers, as the Mercury in the Receiver
is suspended at 30, 29, or 28 Inches or less, accordingly as the Receiver is
exhausted, the same Marks, viz. 30, 29, etc. being placed upon the Papers,
pasted on the Tubes of the Mercurial Gage, at each distinct Surface of the
expanded Air and the rising Mercury, for the future, when the Air and Mercury
descend and ascend to those Marks, in the exhausted Receiver, it will denote,
that the Receiver is so far exhausted, that the remaining Air is only able to
bare up a Cylinder of Mercury in the Torrecellian Experiment, so many Inches as
the Mark to which the lower Surface of the Air, and the upper Surface of the
Mercury rest at, is more or less in Numbers.

But if the Air contained in the Receiver, be more than naturally compressed,
it will likewise compress the Air contained in the Tube E. D. by squeezing the
Mercury somewhat into the lower part of the Tube. How much taller a Cylinder of
Mercury Air so compressed will bear up, than when it is but naturally
condensed, we may learn by the following Computation.

For supposing a determinate Quantity of Air to be contained in the Space A.
when the Force that compresses it is F. if the Pressure F. be increased by the
Pressure G. it will compress the Air contained in A. into half the space it
took up before; See Fig. 2.
so that the remaining Space B. will be a part of the Whole: And if to the
Pressure F. G. we add H. the Air which possessed the Space A. when it was only
pressed by F. will be squeezed into a fourth Part of the Space A. viz. C. And
consequently the Air compressed will possess a Space proportionable to the
Whole, as the first Pressure is to a total Pressure.

The Remaining Space: the Total Space.

The First Pressure: the Total Pressure.

So that three of those Quantities being known, the Rule of Proportion will
teach us the fourth. For if the Atmosphere as usually condensed in England,
possesses the Tube E. D. and the Atmosphere is then able to raise a Mercurial
Tube of 30 Inches; When that Air is compressed into the Space N. E. to know the
Quantity of it is Pressure, I exactly measure the Space N. E. which if 6 Inches,
I constitute that the first Term or Quantity of Pressure; so that the second
Term will be the whole Space D. E. suppose 12 Inches; the third Term will be
the Height of 30 Inches of Mercury, which was the first Pressure; and so the
fourth Term or total Pressure will be found to be 60 Inches of Mercury; From
whence I conclude, the Air so condensed in the Receiver, to be able to bear up
a Mercurial Cylinder 60 Inches tall.

And by the same Principle before laid down, it will be no difficult matter to
judge, what the Proportion betwixt the size of the Tube A. B. and E. D. ought
to be; for that depending on the Length of the Legs, the higer they are, the
more able they are to restrain the Air, when it is but a little dilated in the
sealed Part. For supposing the Length of A. B. to be 10 Inches, which Height of
the Mercury is of the usual Pressure; the Tube A. B. will be large enough if it
be as big again as E. D. for when the Mercury has ascended to A. the expanded
Air in the other Leg possessing the Space which it forced the Mercury out of,
will take up three times as much more as it did before; and consequently, of
it is first Pressure will be able to curb it is Spring: But if the Legs were not
altogether so long, then the Mercury being but partly expelled out of the
crooked Tube, the Diameter of the Tube A. B. ought to be proportionably larger
in respect of E. D. That the ascending Mercury leaving it more space to expand
in, it is Spring may be so far spent, that the Mercury by it is Weight may
seasonably resist it is further Expansion: And it would always answer, if the
Height of the Gage be in the same proportion to 30 Inches, as the Space first
possessed by the Air is to the Whole, which that Air would possess in Vacuo,
according to the Principle above delivered.

The Tube is more useful when longer, than shorter, because the expanding Air
being more able to drive the Mercury into the Tube A. B. more Degrees of it is
Rarefaction will be discovered, though less sensibly. But

The D. C. ought to hold Mercury enough to fill the Tube A. B. before the Air
in the Tube E. D. can make it is way out; But how much larger, or of what Figure
it is, is not so material.

A Description of the Engine made to compress Air.
A. A. A Glass Vessel, See Plate 4. Fig. 3.
whose Orifice is exactly covered by a Brazen Plate B. B. C. C. A Brass Tube
penetrating that Plate in the middle, to which it is fixed. E. A small Valve,
which opens inward, and covers the Orifice of the Tube C. E. A Spring which
presses it down. G. G. G. A Gnomon fixed to the Plate B. B. to hold down the
Spring F. I. I. A square Lath which the Plate B. B. lies upon, which is bored
through in the Middle for the Tube C. to pass through. L. L. L. L. L. L. Two
Iron Wyres which being fixed in the Lath, and encompassing the Iron Plate K. K.
keep it from rising too high. In the Middle of the Plate K. K. is a Screw M. M.
which joins the Receiver and the Plate B. B. close together. And that the
Receiver may neither be damaged by the Screw, nor the Glass by the Iron Plate,
a piece of Wood and Leather is put betwixt the former, and as well to prevent
damage as to render the Receiver closer, a piece of Leather is to be put upon
the Plate. N. N. A Pump fixed to the Tube C. below the Plate B. B. O. O. The
Sucker. P. A small Orifice at which the Air enters in, when the Sucker is
brought to the Bottom of the Pump.
When we have a mind to compress any thing in the Air, we conveigh it into the
Receiver thus prepared; and drawing down the Sucker, that the Air may enter in
at the Orifice P. and fill the upper part of the Cylinder, we raise the Value,
by which means the Air lifts up the Sucker, and makes it is way into the
Receiver, till the Sucker being drawn down again, the Valve closes up the
Orifice of the Pipe C. and so successively keeps the Air in the Receiver as it
is forced in, the State of the pressed Air being made evident by the Mercu^l
Gage.

If the Pump be fixed to the Pipe C. by a Screw, when one Receiver is full, it
may be removed to another.

The Mercurial Gage described in the first Figure will not so evidently show
the different Degrees of the Air's Condensation as the Gage T. for the whole
Tube being full of Air, except one Inch, the Condensation of so great a
Quantity will be more evident.

But here it will be requisite to note in very accurate Experiments, that though
the Figure of this Gage makes it fit for short Receivers, yet if the Mercury
be, when the Air is compressed, squeezed down or upwards, it is Gravity causes
some difference in the Degrees of Pressure, which is not to be slighted.

PLATE IV. How Mixtures may be made in compressed Air. See Fig. 3.

A. A. The Receiver in which they are to be made. Q. Q. R. R. Two Tubes, the
one End of each of which is sealed, and the other open. R. R. S. A Brazen
Vessel laid upon the Orifice of each.
The Substances to be mixed must be each put into a distinct Tube Q. Q. R. R.
The Vessel of R. Q.S. being inverted, and laid upon their Orifices, and being
thus conveyed into the Receiver, when the Gage T. T. shows that by the help
of the Pump, the Air is sufficiently compressed, by inverting the Engine, the
Substances contained in the Tubes, will be mixed together in the Vessel which
was inverted on the Tops of the Tubes, when placed first in the Receiver.

PLATE IV. A Description of a Wind-Gun.
A. A. A hollow Copper Globe. See Fig. 4
B. B. A Tube fixed to it. F. A Valve opening internally, and shutting the Tube
B. B. G. A Spring to depress that Valve. H. A Gnomon so placed as to keep the
Springfast. C. C. An Iron Tube fixed to the Tube B. B. and the Globe A. A. D.
D. A Plug adapted to the Cylindrical Cavity of that Tube. E. E. E. Another
adapted to the Tube B. B. with a Wyre which almost reaches to the Valve F. R.
The Protuberance of the Tube C. C. whose upper Part is designedly hollow, to
receive the End of the Iron L. L. L. L. A crooked Iron, whose End R. being
moveable, helps to lift up the Plug E. E. E. O. P. O. A crooked piece of Iron,
fixed in M. that the Shoulder might be set against it when any Mark is aimed
at, and that the Thumb being set against the bending P. in pressing up the Plug
E. E. E. the Fingers might more vigorously draw up the Leaver L. T. T. A
Rectangle of Iron, compassing the Leaver L. L. and the Iron O. P. O. to keep it
in such a Posture, that the Plug may not fly out, whilst the Air is compressed
into the Globe A. A. I. I. An Elliptick Hole which is shut with a Valve that
opens inward; the Design of it is, that what is amiss in the Globe, may be seen
and mended. S. S. A Plate of Metal perforated with a Screw V. which sustains
the Valve, and keeps the Hole V. shut. Q. A Hole for the Air, which is to be
pressed into the Globe to enter in at, when the Sucker D. is pulled down to the
lower End of the Tube C. C.
The Method to press Air into this Globe is this; I set my Foot upon the
crooked End of the Sucker D. and then pulling up the Globe, as soon as the Tube
C. C. is full of Air, I depress the Globe, by which means the Air in the Tube
is forced into it through the Valve F. and this Method being taken as long as
the Air's Spring would permit us to compress it any further, the Air may be
discharged, if, when the Plug D. is drawn out, and a Bullet is put into the
Tube instead of it, the Plug E. E. E. be raised so that the End of the Iron
Wire may open the Valve B. for the Air violently rushing out, will drive the
Bullet away with great Violence.

The Globe will be sooner filled with Air, if half an Ounce of Water be put
into the Tube C. C. before the Sucker D. for the Top of the Tube being filled
with Water, the Air will be forced clearly out of the Tube into the Globe.

And this Wind-Gun has these Advantages above any other yet mentioned; First,
that it is not so subject to be spoiled, as those that have two Valves;
Secondly, it is easily mended, what is amiss being taken out at the Elliptick
Hole. Thirdly, it is much more stanch, the Crannies being stopped with Silver
Soder, which damages not the Leather on the Valve, because it is put in after
the Soder is cooled, at the Elliptick Hole. Fourthly, several Bodies may be
conveyed into it at the Elliptick Hole, whereby we may be enabled to try
several Experiments.

PLATE V. How Factitious Air may pass out of one Receiver into another.
A.A. A Metalline Plate perforated in the Middle. B. B. To which a Stop-Cock is
fixed, the lower Orifice being made into a Male Screw. D. C. Which is received
by the Female Screw D. of the Copper Funnel D. C. See Fig. 2.
E. E. A hollow Tube, both of whose Ends are formed into a Female Screw, to
receive the Male Screw of the Stop-Cock B.B. See Fig. 1.
F. F. The Receiver laid on the Plate A. A. and exactly fitted to it.
The Matter of which factitious Air is to be made, is to be put into the
Receiver F. F. and the Orifice of the Tunnel C. being placed on the Receiver,
and the Stop-Cock B. being opened, the Air is to be drawn out of the Receiver,
which being done, the Stop-Cock is to be shut again, and the Male Screw being
taken out of the Female Screw in the Brass Tunnel, the Receiver is to be
immersed in Water to keep External Air out; As for the Degrees of Compression
of the factitious Air, they may be discovered by the Mercurial Gage before
mentioned.

To transmit this Air into another Receiver F. F. we make use of the small Tube
E. E. Fig. the Second, into each End of which the Stop-Cocks of two Receivers
being screwed, and the Crannies stopped with Cement, by turning the Stop-Cocks,
the Air may be let out of one into the other.

To discover the Rarefaction of the Air contained in which Receivers, because
they must be inverted, we contrived the following Gage.

See Fig. 4.
A. A. A Viol filled with Mercury up to the Superficies D. D. B. B. A Tube
cemented in the Neck of it. C. C. Another which passing through the Tube B. B.
leaves room for a due intercourse betwixt the External and Internal Air, the
upper End of which must be sealed, and the other End open.
If this Gage be put into a Receiver when it is inverted, both the Tubes will
have the Air contained in them exhausted, and will be ready to receive
factitious Air, as soon as the Stop-Cocks are turned to give an Intercourse
betwixt them; and then the Gage being inverted, and the Mercury which lay below
the Orifice of the Tube B. B. falling about the Pipe C. C. by rising up into
it, will show the Degrees of the Compression of that factitious Air.

PLATE VI. An Instrument by which Air may be filtrated through Water.
See Fig. 1.
A. A. A Glass Receiver whose Orifice is adapted to the Plate B. B. which is
perforated in the Middle by the Tubes C. C. D. D. which are cemented to it. E.
E. E. E. A Stop-Cock into which the lower Ends of the Tubes C. C. D. D. are
inserted. F. F. The Key of the Stop-Cock in which is made the Chink G. G.
without any Perforation. H. H. The Receiver to which the Stop-Cock is fixed,
preventing an Ingress of outward Air, and having a due Intercourse with the
Pump I. I. L. L. A Glass Vessel. M. The Stopple in the Top of the Receiver
fastened with a Screw.
See Fig. 2.
A Stop-Cock cut transverse, so that the Insertions of the Tubes C. C. D. D.
into the Stop-Cocks may be perceived.

The Use of this Instrument is as follows, To try how much Air may acquire new
Qualities in respect of a Body included with it, we conveigh that Body into the
Vessel, and then pouring a sufficient Quantity of Water at the Orifice M. until
the Receiver A. A. be half full, and the Vessel L. L. swim up to the Top of it,
the Orifice M. is stopped up, which being done, and the Key so placed, that the
Tube C. C. may communicate with the Chink G. G. upon drawing down the Sucker,
the Air in the Receiver A. A. will pass through the Pipes C. C. and the Chink
G. G. into the Receiver H. H. and from thence into the Pump: Upon which, the
Chink in the Stop-Cock being turned so as to communicate with the Insertions of
the Tube D. D. and then the Sucker being raised to the Top of the Cylinder, the
Air will be impelled into the Tube D. D. and emerging through the Water, will
rise into the Top of the Receiver A. A. and by this Method we could strain it
through Water as often as we had a mind to be informed, what new Qualities it
acquired in reference to the Bodies about it.

FIGVRE III. How the same Numerical Air may be sometimes condensed, and
sometimes rarefied.
The Receiver A. A. being fixed upon the Plate B. B. and the Stop-Cock C. C.
being fixed to the Perforation of the Plate B. B.

The Pump D. D. is joined by a Screw to the Stop-Cock C.

E. A Vessel which fluctuates in the Receiver, in which an Animal being put,
and the Pump filled with Water, and joined to the Stop-Cock by a Screw, the
Water contained in the Pump will, by lifting up the Sucker, be forced into the
Receiver, and by that means condense the Air, without an addition of new, and
by drawing the Sucker down again, the same parcel of Air will be again
expanded; so that Observations may be made, how much the thickness or thinness
of Air contributes to the preservation of the life or health of Animals.

PLATE VII. An Instrument to distill in Vacuo,
See Fig
A. A. A Brazen Vessel, the lower part of which is shut, and the upper open. B.
B. A piece of Tin exquisitely adapted to the Tube, so as to prevent the
External Air from entering in, being adapted to the Edges of it A. A. D. D. C.
C. A Tube fixed in the middle of the Tin Plate B. B. D. D. A Brazen Vessel,
whose Orifice is contiguous to B. B. E. E. A Stop-Cock fixed to the Perforation
in the Plate B. B. F. F. A Tube-reaching from the Stop-Cock to the Pneumatick
Engine. G. G. A metalline Vessel enclosing the Junctures of the Vessels with the
Diaphragma, and also the Stop-Cock, that by keeping them immersed in Water,
they may be free from External Air; this is cemented to the Vessel A. with
Soder.
The manner of using this Engine is the following, viz. The Tin Plate being
removed, and the Ingredients to be boiled, being put into the Vessel A. A. then
re-applying the Tin Plate A. A. and the Vessel D. D. and the Tube F. F. being
applied to the Pneumatick Engine, and the Air pumped out, the Vessel G. G.
having been first filled with Water, we shut the Stop-Cock, and remove the Tube
F. F. and then the exhausted Vessel being placed on the Fire, Vapors will
ascend through the Tube C. C. which will be condensed in the upper Vessel; and
what Quantity of Air is there generated, will appear by the Mercurial Gage H.
in the Top of the Vessel.

But here it is to be noted, that round pieces of perforated Paper being laid
upon the Orifices of the Vessels A. A. D. D. they will be more exactly joined
with the Tin Plate. The Junctures of the Tube F. F. both with the Pneumatick
Engine and Stop-Cock are to be guarded with Cement, and the Stop-Cock must be so
contrived, as to stand so far without the Vessel G. that it may be conveniently
turned: When any thing is to be conveyed into the Vessel, the Tin Plate E. E.
and the Stop-Cock may be laid aside: Which may be done without any great
Dissiculty; for the Key being made up of two parts, the one of which M. is
turned in the Stop-Cock, by a Chink, into which the End of the other part O. O.
which fills the Pipe N. N. fixed to the Vessel G. G. is received, so that one
End being prominent outwardly, whilst it is turned, it may communicate Motion
to the other Part M. But whilst the Tin Plate B. B. is is to be taken out of
the Vessel G. G. it must be drawn outward.

Fig. 2.
Another Instrument for the same Use with the former.
B. B. A small Tube, both Ends of which are polished, that it may be exactly
adapted to the Orifices of the Vessels A. and D. A. A. D. D. Two Vessels made
of Glass, so joined by the Tube B. B. that Vapors may pass from one to the
other. E. E. F. F. G. G. I. Are of the same Use with the first Figure, and the
Instrument is to be evacuated by the same Method; only the Glass Vessel must be
placed in Balneo Mariae, or on Sand, and the Vapors so raised will condense in
the Vessel D. D.
CHAP. III.
ARTICLE. I. Several Ways to help the Production of the Air.
EXPERIMENT I.
Air produced from Bread.
TO try whether a piece of Bread, which was moist, and a little kneaded, would
yield Air; I included it in Vacuo with a Mercurial Gage, July 12th 76. but it
yielded none: On the 12th. some broke in the Receiver, and raised Mercury 3
Inches high; and at Night it was raised an Inch higher, though no external Air
got in. July 13th. it ascended higher. On the 26th Day it expanded it self so
powerfully, as to separate the Receiver and it is Cover, the Smell of it being
acid. So that Air may be drawn out of Bread by such a Menstruum as Water.

EXPERIMENT II.
JVly the 11th. Bread being burnt by a Burning-Glass in Vacuo, yielded Air,
which came from it with an Explosion; whence we may guess, that could Air be
separated more easily from it, it would produce very considerable Effects.
EXPERIMENT III.
September. 22. I Enclosed in a Receiver, From Grapes.
Eight Ounces of dried Grapes, bruised in 7 Ounces of Water, the Receiver being
large enough to contain 22 Ounces. September. 23. Though the Receiver was covered
with Water all Night, the Mercury was raised two Inches. September. 30. In seven
Days it was raised thirteen Inches. October. 5. In five Days more it was 25
Inches high. October. 18. The Mercury ascended slowly, some Air making it is way
out of the Receiver. Grapes without Water did not yield Air so plentifully. See
Art. IX. Exp. I.
EXPERIMENT IV.
July 12. I Shut up 10 Ounces of Raisins of the Sun bruised, From Raisins.
in as much Water as was sufficient to make them ferment. July 14. In 48 Hours
raised the Mercury ten Inches; at Night the Mercury was 5 Inches higher; the
next Day it was almost as high as when buoyed up by the Atmosphere. July 16. In
the Morning the Receiver and it is Cover were separated by Air, which got
through the Water which the Receiver was covered with. The same Raisins were
shut up in Vacuo again. July 18. In the Morning the Air broke out. July 19.
They were enclosed in the empty Receiver. July 21. The Receiver was so full of
Air, that some of it forced it is way out; and they were enclosed in the
exhausted Receiver again. July 22. The Receiver was almost full: The 23d in the
Morning it forced it self out. When the Parts of the Water have worked upon
Grapes 5 or 6 days, they yield. Air very fast, though at the first they do not.
EXPERIMENT V.
August 13. 1677. PLums were shut up in one Receiver, From Plums.
and Pears in two others. August 16. They were all full of Air, and one which
contained Pears, and lay open to the Sunbeams, raised the Cover in 24 hours.
EXPERIMENT VI.
October. 16. 77. From bsed Grs.
I Enclosed two Ounces of bruised Grapes in a Receiver large enough to hold 20
Ounces of Water.. October. 17. The Mercury was raised half an Inch. October. 18.
The Mercurial Cylinder was raised half an Inch more. The 20th it increased 2
Inches. The 22d 4 Inches. The 27th near 6 Inches. Jan. 2. 78. It was not quite
10 Inches high.
October. 16. 77. Three Ounces of bruised Grapes being included in an exhausted
Receiver, large enough to contain 30 Ounces of Water, with half an Ounce of
Spirit of Wine. October. 17. The Mercury did not ascend much. October. 18. It was
not an Inch high. Jan. 2. 18. The Receiver was quite full, and some of the
Liquor as it was poured out, produced Bubbles in some Turpentine about the
Orifice, which broke outwardly. Though Spirit of Wine promotes the Generation of
Air in Vacuo, yet in the open Air it hinders it. See the II. VIII. and XIV.
Exp. Art. II.
EXPERIMENT VII.
July 19. 78. MVST expressed; From Must.
bruised Grapes were put into a Receiver, when it was 10 Months old. The 21.
The Mercury was no higher. 23. It was raised 3 Inches. 24. Raised 5 Inches. 25.
In the Morning it was 104, in the Evening 137 and the Must made its way out.
26. More Must got out. The Air was further expanded, but the Mercury was
suspended at the same height. 27. The Screw being left open, half the Must got
out: From thence it appears, that by keeping Grapes for some time, their
Fermentative Virtue becomes more powerful.
EXPERIMENT VIII.
Jan. 30. BOiled Apples being put into Receivers, From boiled Apples.
with, and without Sugar, they both presently filled them full of Air. Jan. 31.
Raw Apples being shut up in Receivers, in one of which was put a third part of
Sugar, and the other without. Feb. 10. The former had yielded some Air. Feb.
14. The raw Apples and Sugar raised the Mercury 30 Inches: Those which were
boiled raised it two Inches: In the other Receivers we had no Air generated,
Feb. 18. In the Receiver in which the raw Apples and Sugar were enclosed, the
Mercury was raised 56 Inches. The Boiled Apples and Sugar raised it 3. The raw
Apples had yielded little; but in that which was almost full, the Apples were
very little Fermented, but of a very pleasant Taste. Feb. 21. The Cover was
broke, and the Apples and Sugar had lost some of their Juice, but they were not
Rotten. March 1. In the great Receiver in which raw Apples were shut up, the
Mercury was raised 25 Inches: In the little One not above 7. Where Boiled
Apples and Sugar were contained it was raised 9 Inches. March 8. In the large
one it was 29. In the less 22. That where the Boiled Apples were, stayed at 9
Inches. March 17. Some Juice got out of the large Receiver: In the less the
Mercury stood at 67 Inches; and the boiled Apples and Sugar raised it 15
Inches. From whence it appears, that the Sugar, and the largeness of the
Receiver as well as the Crudity of the Fruit contributed to the Production of
Air.
ARTICLE II. Several ways to hinder the Production of Air.
EXPERIMENT I.
December. 20. 78. DOugh made without Leaven; From Dough.
but with the same Meal with Bread-Corn, being enclosed in a Receiver, where
the Heat of a Fire kept it warmer than at Midsummer, in 10 hours it yielded no
Air: So that if Dough be once too cold it hinders it is Fermentation for the
future, which I the rather believe, because Dough being shut up in the Summer
presently generated Air.
EXPERIMENT II.
May 23. THree Ounce of Dough Leavened being enclosed in a Receiver large
enough to hold 50 Ounces of Water; I put Spirit of Wine to it. May 24. The
Mercury was Three Inches high. May 26. The change was small. May 27. None at
all. May 29. None at all. June 2. It ascended a little. June 14. Not at all.
December. 14. Being taken out it smelled subacid: And being put into an Empty
Receiver it swelled so much as to take up twice as much space as before with a
gentle Ebullition. May 23. The same Quantity being of Dough shut up without
Spirit of Wine. May 24. The Mercury was 19 Inches high. May 26. It Is Height
was 38. May 27. No alteration. December. 14. It continued at the same Height;
and the Dough smelled subacid: From whence it appears, that Spirit of Wine
prevented the Generation of it in the last Experiment.
EXPERIMENT III.
August 29. PEars, From Pears.
and a Mercurial Gage being closed up in a Receiver filled with Water, such a
Quantity of Air was pressed in as was able to raise the Mercury 26 Inches
higher than it used to be. In a little time they were all made like a Pultis
for Consistence. Aug. 30. In 24 hours the Mercury was depressed an Inch and an
half. Aug. 31. It remained at the same Height. Sept. 1. They began to yield
Air, the Mercury being raised to 27 Inches. Sept. 2. In 24 hours it was raised
8 Inches higher. Sept. 3. The Height of the Mercury was 17 Digits higher, the
height being 52 Inches. Sept. 4. The Mercury was buoyed up 7 Inches further,
rested at 59 Inches. Sept. 5. The height of the Mercurial Tube was 64 Inches:
And a Pear broken in the Receiver was turned Black. Sept. 6. It was raised 3
Digits and higher than what is usual. Sept. 7. It was 3 Digits lower, and
rested again at 64 Inches. Sept. 8. This day the Mercury subsided to 58 Inches.
Sept. 9. It was raised up 3 Digits higher again, and was suspended at 67
Digits. Sept. 10. In 24 hours it was raised 1 higher, being suspended at 69
Inches. Sept. 11. It descended to 67 Digits again, the Night being very cold.
Sept. 12. No Alteration happened at all. Sept. 13. It subsided further to 64
Digits, the Cold was sharper. Sept. 14. It was 70 Digits high. Sept. 16. It
subsided to 69. Sept. 19. It stood at the same height. Sept. 20. It was raised
again to 71. Sept. 23. It subsided to 69. October. 1. It was buoyed up again to
75 Digits. October. 3. On the 2 there was no alteration: To Day it stood at 70,
the Weather being exceeding cold. October. Yesterday the Mercury remained at the
same height; but this Day being Rainy it rose again to 75. October. 7. The
Weather being the same, the Mercury was at a stand. October. 10. This Day it
subsided to 69 Inches, the Rainy Weather continuing. October. 12. To Day it was
Depressed to 65 Inches: Cold Weather coming on again. October. 13. It was 64
Inches high. October. 14 It was 69 Digits high. October. 15 It was 74 Digits high.
October. 24 It was 68 Inches. The Season being cold Nov. 2. It was 64. The Cold
more violent. Nov. 5. The Mercury was 80 Inches high. The Cold more moderate.
Nov. 2. It was 65 Inches high: It was sharp frosty Weather. Nov. 27. It was 68
Inches high. A Thaw coming on. Dec. 6. It was 61 Inches high. The Weather being
very Frosty.
From the former Experiment, it appears, that Fruits yield not Air plentifully
when violently compressed, in the Air: The Air afforded, when they are
compressed not being of what they yield in the Empty Receiver. But that the
Cold might concur to hinder the Generation of Air will be evident from the
following Experiment.

EXPERIMENT IV.
Feb. 22. 77. TEN Ounces of Paste being included in a Receiver which was large
enough to hold 22 Ounces of Water, From Paste.
I impressed Air enough into it to sustain 73 Inches of Mercury above the
length of a Cylinder which the Weight of the Atmosphere is able to bear up. In
two hours there was no sensible Alteration. Feb. 23. In 18 hours the Mercury
was raised 7 Inches. And in 6 hours more it ascended 8 Inches higher, being
buoyed up to 83 Inches. Feb. 24 It was 90 Inches high. Feb. 25 It was 97 Inches
high. Feb. 26 It was 101 Inches high. Feb. 27 It was 105 Inches high. Feb. 28
It was 107 Inches high. March. 1 It was 112 Inches high. Water seemed to be
expressed out of the Paste. March. 2 It was raised to 120 Inches. March. 3 It
was raised to 121 Inches. March. 4 and 5 It remained at 121 Inches. March 8.
Upon a Thaw the Mercury ascended 4 Inches and rested at 125 Digits. March 10.
It rose 6 Digits higher, being suspended at 131 Digits. March 21. The Season
being so long Cold, no Air was generated, except that in the three last Days
the Mercury was raised 7 Inches, and rested at 138 Digits. April 4. One of the
Iron Wires made use of to straiten the Receiver, was broke, and the sides of
the Receiver started out of their Places 4 or 5 Foot.

From whence it appears that Cold and Compression hinder the Generation of Air.


EXPERIMENT V.
March 1. 77. TWO Raisins of the Sun being bruised were shut up in an exhausted
Receiver with Six Ounces of Vinegar: It afforded Bubbles plentifully. March 2.
It still yielded Bubbles; but the Mercury was not raised half an Inch. March
25. The Vinegar seemed to contain Bubbles; but the Mercury was not raised an
Inch.
So that Vinegar hinders Fermentation and the Production of Air.

EXPERIMENT VI.
April 7. HAving put 10 Ounces of Paste into a Receiver able to contain 22
Ounces, Paste included in a Receiver.
of Water, as much Air was pressed in as sustained Mercury above its usual
height 128 Inches. In Six hours it was raised four Inches, being sustained at
132 Digits. April 8. In 16 hours it ascended 9 Inches higher, but for nine
hours after it rested at 141. April 9. Some Air broke out in the Morning; the
Mercury subsided to 130 Inches, therefore thrusting in as much Air as raised it
to 141 I closed it it up with a Screw. Apr. 10 It was at 151 Digits. Apr. 11 It
was at 158 Digits. Apr. 12 It was at 168 Digits. Apr. 13 It was at 176 Digits.
April 14 It was at 183 Digits. April 15 It was at 183 Digits. April 16 It was
at 187 Digits. April 17 It was at 191 Digits. April 27. Eight Days it is Station
was unaltered, but the two last it was raised 7 Inches, being raised to 198
Digits. April 30. So much Air being let out, that the Mercury was raised but 50
Inches above it is usual height, to try whether the compressed State of that Air
hindered it from expanding, the remaining Air being pinned up presently raised
the Mercury sensibly, and 3 hours after the Mercury was raised to 62 Digits
from 50. In five hours space after rose 1. May 1. In 15 hours it raised only an
Inch. May 3. On the Second it was at a stand; to Day it was raised 1. May 4.
The Mercury ascending no higher, I let the Air go; and the Screw being set
again, in five Minutes the Mercury was raised two Inches. May 7. In 3 Days it
was raised 2 Inches higher. May 8. In the two last Days it was raised an Inch.
And the mass being shut up in Vacuo, in 5 hours the Mercury was buoyed up an
Inch. May 21. It had not been raised 3 Inches yet. May 30. It rested at 4
Inches and.
From whence it appears, that all the Air that Paste will afford, may be
obtained from it, though it be compressed; yet it is hindered in some Measure,
till that Pressure is taken off. And from hence it appears, that Air may be
generated by repeated Turns and Reciprocations; and that it is more slowly
generated in compressed, than in free Air, it usually yielding all that it
will, in two or three Days time.

EXPERIMENT VIII.
Artificial Air.
July 30. 77. HAving included Plums and Apricocks cut asunder in a Receiver,
Plums and Apricocks.
I pressed so much Artificial Air of Cherries into them, as raised 64 Digits of
Mercury. August 1. They yielded no Air, but became Yellow, as if too ripe.
August 3. The Mercury was raised a little higher, and a whole Apricock,
appeared full of Drops of Water. August 7. The whole Apricock grew softer; and
the Mercurial Cylinder 59 Inches taller than it is usual Length. August 8 It was
61 Digits high. August 9 It was 65 Digits high. August 10 It was 71 Digits
high. August 11 It was 74 Digits high. April13 It was 78 Digits high. April14
It was 80 Digits high. April15 It was 80 Digits high. April16 And till the 22
th it rested at the same height. The 24th it was 77 Inches high. On the 29th I
opened the Receiver, and found that the Fruit was well Colored and smelled
Subacid, the Flesh being Spongeous; It emitted several Bubbles when first it
was freed from the ambient Pressure.
Common Air.
July 30. 77. The same Fruit being conveyed into a Receiver with Common Air,
some being cut and others whole. July 31. The Mercury was raised 8 Inches high.
August 1. At six a Clock in the Evening the Mercury was raised 20 Inches.
August 3. The Fruit was much more firm, than those Included with Artificial
Air. The Mercury was raised to 35 Inches. August 4. The Mercurial Cylinder was
raised to 42 Inches. August 6. The Apricock appeared unaltered: The Mercury
stood at 57 Inches. Aug.7 It was 81 Digits high. Aug.8 It was 95 Digits high.
Aug.9 It was 113 Digits high. Aug.10 It was 124 Digits high. The Apricock began
to turn Yellow: But did not in the least appear Moist. Aug.11 It was 131 Digits
high. Aug.13 It was 157 Digits high. Aug.14 It was 163 Digits high. Aug.15 It
was 171 Digits high. Aug.16 It was 171 Digits high. Aug.17 And for some time
after it stood at the same height. Aug. 27 It was 182 Inches high. Aug. 29 The
Receiver being opened, the Apricocks were more Acid and less grateful to the
Taste, than those in factitious Air: The Pulp was well Colored, but Spongy;
they yielded Bubbles as the others did.
From this Experiment, we may be induced to think that the Artificial Air,
hindr'd the Apricock enclosed with them, from yielding Air; yet it enriches
their Color and Firmness; and is good to preserve their Taste.

EXPERIMENT VIII.
Grapes without Spirit of Wine.
AN Ounce and an half of unripe Grapes bruised being enclosed in a Receiver,
capable of holding 10 Ounces of Water.

Oct. 11 The Ascent of the Mercury was small Oct. 12 The Ascent of the Mercury
was small Oct. 13 It was an Inch. Oct. 17 It was 1 Inch. Oct. 18 It was 1. Oct.
19 Near 4 Inches. Oct. 20 The same, but their surfaces seemed moldy. Oct. 21
It was 4. Oct. 22 The same, the surface seemed more moldy. Oct. 23 The same,
the surface seemed more moldy. Oct. 24 The same, the surface seemed more
moldy. October. 26 It was 5 Inches high. October. 27 It was 6 Inches high. October.
28 It was 6 Inches high. No. 2 It was 7 Inches high. No. 6 It was 9 Inches
high. No. 8 It was 10 Inches high. No. 9 It was 13 Inches high. No. 12 It was
15 Inches high. No. 14 It was 17 Inches high. No. 18 It was 23 Inches high. No.
21 It was 26 Inches high. Dec. 8 It was 36 Inches high. Dec. 12 It was 39
Inches high. Dec. 27 It was 39 Inches high. Jan. 6 It was 36 Inches high. The
Air made it is way out.
October. 10. 677. Grapes with Spirit of Wine.
The Experiment being made with another Receiver into which was put 2 Drachms
of Spirit of Wine along with the Grapes.
Oct. 11 The Mercury unaltered. Oct. 12 The Mercury unaltered. Oct. 13 The
Mercury unaltered. Oct. 17 The Ascent was small. Oct. 18 Not of an Inch. Oct.
19 It rose but little. Jan. 6. The Grapes all this time afforded no Air: So
that Spirit of Wine hindered their Fermentation.
EXPERIMENT IX.
HAving conveyed a Peach into a small Receiver, and so much Spirit of Wine as
was just able to afford Vapors to rise about it.

March 28. 78. It had the same Color but was the less Firm: It had almost
wholly contracted the Taste of the Spirit of Wine, but yielded no Air.
EXPERIMENT X.
Air with Spirit of Wine.
I Conveyed 5 Peaches into a Receiver with as much Spirit of Wine as was
sufficient to raise Vapors about them.

October. 18 The Mercury ascended not. October. 20 It was 3 Inches. October. 21 It
was 5 Inches high. October. 22 It was 7 Inches high. October. 23 It was 9 Inches
high. October. 26 It was 9 Inches high. Nov. 2 It was 12 Inches high. Nov. 6 It
was 14 Digits. Nov. 12 It was 16 Digits. Nov. 14 The same. Nov. 16 The same.
Dec. 8 It was 18. Dec. 16 It was 19. Dec. 27 It was 20. Jan. 6 It was 23.
March. 8 It was 31.
Air without Spirit of Wine.
October. 17. Five Peaches being shut up in a Common Receiver without Spirit of
Wine; October. 18 it ascended not. October. the 20th The Mercury was 5 Digits.
October. 21 It was 8 October. 22 It was 10 October. 23 It was 10 October. 26 It was 12
Nov. 2 It was 15 Nov. 6 It was 17 Nov. 12 It was 20 Digits high. Nov. 14 It was
20 Digits high. Nov. 16 It was 21 Digits high. Dec. 8 It was 26 Digits high.
Dec. 16 It was 26 Digits high. Dec. 27 It was 28 Digits high. Jan. 6. 78 It was
32 Inches high. March 28 It was 33. April 15. Liquor broke out, and the Air
after it: From this Experiment it appears that the Vapors do not hinder
Fermentation so much as Spirit of Wine it self.
EXPERIMENT XI.
Paste with Leaven.
HAving closed an Ounce and a half of Leavened Dough in a Receiver with so much
Air as was able to bear up 23 Ounces of Water.

April 28. The Mercury in the Gage was 2 of an Inch high. April 3. It was 3 of
an Inch high. May 4. The Mercury subsided, and the Paste was Moldy, It was
raised 2 high. May 6 It was 2 May 8 It was 3 May 10 It was 3 May 14 It was 4
May 17 It was 4 May 20 It was 5 May 24 It was 6 May 28 It was 8 June 2 It was 9
June 6 It was 10 June 41 It was 11 July 5 It was 13 July 19 It was 15
Paste without Leaven.
April 27. 78. An Ounce and a half of Paste without Leaven being contained in a
Receiver large enough to hold 23 Ounces of Water. Without Leaven.
April 29. In the Afternoon it ascended of an Inch. April 30. There was no
Alteration. May 4. It ascended slowly and the Paste turned Moldy. May 6. It
was about 4 Inches high. May 8 It was 5 May 10 It was 7 May 14 It was 10 May 17
It was 12 May 20 It was 13 May 24 It was 16 May 28 It was 18 June 2 It was 20
June 6 It was 21 June 14 It was 25
From whence it appears, that Leaven hinders Fermentation and the Production of
Air.

EXPERIMENT XII.
May 23. Paste with Spirit of Wine.
AN Ounce and a half of Paste, on which Spirit of Wine was poured, being shut
up in a Receiver. May 24th The Height of the Mercury was 1 Inch. May 26 It was
near 2. May 27 It was near 2. May 31 No Alteration. June 1 It was 3 Digits
high. June 6 It was 4 Digits high. June 10 It was 4 Digits high. July 19 No
Variation. December. 14. The Receiver being opened, the Paste smelled subacid.
Paste without Spirit of Wine.
May 23. Without it.
An Ounce and a half of Paste being put into a Receiver large enough to contain
25 Ounces of Water, without an Addition of Spirit of Wine. May 24. The Mercury
did not ascend. May 26 It was 3 Digits high. May 27 It was 4 Digits high. May
28 It was 5 Digits high. May 29 It was 7 Digits high. May 31 It was 9 Digits
high. June 2 It was 12 Digits high. June 6 It was 17 Digits high. June 10 It
was 22 Digits high. July 4 It was 30 Digits high. July 19 It was about the
height of 30 Digits. The Air broke out. December. 14. The Mercury was raised 15
Digits again; The Receiver being opened, the Paste was very acid.
From these Experiments it appears, that Spirit of Wine prejudices the
Production of Air; And it likewise hence is evident, that Paste which is made
without Ferment, will in time yield as much Air, as that prepared with it.

EXPERIMENT XIII.
October. 11. New Ale enclosed in a Receiver.
NEW Ale was put into one Receiver, so that the whole Cavity was taken up with
it, and another Receiver was likewise filled with the same Liquor, except a
small Part of it is Cavity which contained Air. October. 12. In the Receiver
exactly filled, the Mercury was raised a little; the other had it is Cover
burst, and the Ale was conveyed into another large enough for the Purpose.
October. 13. In that wholly filled, the Mercury was 12 Digits high; In the other
it was raised 13 Digits. October. 14. The Mercury in the full Receiver was 13
Inches, and the other 18. In the Evening the height of the Mercury in the full
Receiver was 22 Inches, and in the other 20. October. 15. The Height of the
Mercury in the full Receiver was 42 Inches: In the other 26. The Bubbles which
before appeared in the full Receiver disappeared; And the Air in the Gage
possessed a larger Space than before.
In the full Receiver the Height of the Mercury was
October. 16 60 Inches. October. 18 90 Inches. October. 22 90 Inches. October. 23 108
Inches. October. 26 108 Inches. October. 28 138 Inches.
In the other.
October. 16 30 Inches. October. 18 40 Inches. October. 22 42 Inches. October. 23 50
Inches. October. 26 60 Inches. October. 28 63 Inches.
The Bubbles appeared again.
Nevemb. 8. When the Receiver was opened the Ale seemed ready to fly into
Froth, except the Orifice was presently stopped again; It Is Taste was very
Pungent: As the Hole in the Gage is opened or shut, the Mercury will descend or
ascend. November. 9. Almost the same Phenomenon were taken notice of when the
other Receiver was opened.
From this Experiment it appeared, that though the Ale sooner ferments when Air
is permitted to be with it, than when it is not; yet the Ale in such Receivers,
at the last expands more violently.

EXPERIMENT XIV.
June 27. Pease with Spirit of Wine.
GReen Pease and Spirit of Wine being put into the Receiver, by some Air that
got in accidentally, the Mercury was raised 18 Inches: to prevent which a
second time, the Receiver was cemented, and made firm with Turpentine. June 30.
The Height of the Mercury did not vary. July 7. No Air was generated in the
highest Degree of Heat.
Pease without Spirit of Wine. The same Quantity of Pease being put into the
Receiver, as in the last Experiment, without Spirit of Wine.
June 28. At night the Height of the Mercury was 5 Inches. Jun. 29 It was 10
Digits high. Jun. 30 It was 16 Digits high. July 1 It was 19 Digits high. July
5 It was 26 Digits high. July 7 It was 30 Digits high. July 8. The Air got out
of the Receiver, it being too much filled.
From which it appears, that Spirit of Wine hinders the Generation of Air in
Pease.

ARTICLE III. The Effects of Artificial Air, are different from the Effects of
common Air.
EXPERIMENT I.
June 19. 77. Cherries in: closed in a Receiver.
CHERRIES being shut up in an evacuated Receiver; the Mercury was raised in 6
hours 5 Inches. June 20. The Mercury was raised 3. At night it was 2. June 21
It was raised 1 June 22 It was raised 1 June 23 It was raised 2 June 24 It was
raised 1 June 25 It was raised 1 June 26 It was 3 June 27 It was 3 June 28 It
was 5 June 30 It was 1 July 1 It was raised 3 July 2 It was raised 4 July 3 It
was raised 2 July 4 It was raised 2 July 5 It was raised 3 It was 45 Inches
high, but the Air being conveyed into another Receiver, It subsided to 25
Inches. July 6 It rose 4 July 7 It rose 5 July 8 It rose 5 July 9 It rose 5
July 10 It rose 6 July 11 It rose 12 July 13 It rose 7. July 13. The Mercury
being raised 3 Inches, was suspended at 92 Inches, and the Air being conveyed
into another Receiver, was 50 Inches high. July 14 It was raised 14 July 15 It
was raised 11 July 16 It was raised 13 July 17 It was raised 5 July 18 It was
raised 9 The 19 It was subsided from 102 to 92 Inches; Part of it being
conveyed into another Receiver. The 20 It ascended 15. The 22 Air getting
out, it subsided to 63 Inches The 23 It ascended to 12. The 24 It ascended 4,
the height of the Cylinder being 79 But the Air being removed into another
Receiver it stood at 62. July 25 It rose 8 July 26 It rose 9 July 27 It rose 4
July 28 It rose 5 July 30 It ascended ten Inch. the Length of the suspended
Cylinder being 98 Inches. And part of the Air being conveyed into another
Receiver, it stood at 64. July 31 It rose 6 Inc. August 1 It rose 9 Inc. August
2 It rose 4 Inc. August 3 It being removed into another Receiver was 68 Inches
high. August 4 It being removed, subsided to 54 Inches. August 6 It rose 7 In.
August 7 It rose 4 In. August 8 It rose 0 In. August 9 It rose 3 In.
The Receiver being opened; the Cherries were almost insipid, being of a
whitish Color, and the Pulp spungy.

From this Experiment it appears, that, though Cherries are capable of yielding
Air, yet the Production of it is not very regular.

EXPERIMENT II.
July 13th 67. Cherries enclosed in a Receiver.
CHerries being enclosed in a Receiver, together with as much Air, obtained
from Cherries put up in another Receiver, as was able to sustain a mercurial
Cylinder 50 Inches. July 15. It was raised two Inches higher, though the day
before there was no Variation in it is Height. July 16 It was raised 1 July 17
It was raised 1 July 26 It was raised 18 Some Air got out. July 27 It was
raised 2 Some Air got out. July 30 It was raised 7 July 31 It was raised 9
Inches. August 1st. It stopped at the height of 61 Inches, some Air making it is
way out. Aug. 27. The Air being wholly vanished; I took out the Cherries, which
retained their Color without Putrefaction: Their Taste was acid, and the Pulp
was full of Cavities like fermented Paste.
From this and the foregoing Experiment compared, it appears that Fruits yield
less in artificial than common Air, and consequently, their natural State is
longer preserved.

EXPERIMENT III.
September. 10th 77. Common Air. Grapes enclosed in a Receiver.
SIX Ounces of unripe Grapes being shut up in a Receiver, which was large
enough to hold 25 Ounces of Water, with common Air, I shut up the Receiver
firmly with a Screw. September. 11 The Mercury rose not in the least. September. 12
It was about an Inch high. September. 13 It was raised to 3 September. 14 It was
raised to 7 September. 15 It was raised to 10 September. 16 It was raised to 12
September. 17 It was raised to 14 Sept. 18 It was raised to 16 Sept. 19 It was
raised to 18 Sept. 20 It was raised to 20 Sept. 21 It was raised to 22 Sept. 22
It was raised to 23 September. 23 It was raised to 27 Inches, no Alteration being
observed in the Grapes. September. 24 It was 30 Inches high. September. 25 It was
31. The Color of the Grapes being turned yellow. September. 26 It was raised to
32 September. 27 It was raised to 34 Sept. 29 It was raised to 35 Sept. 30 It was
raised to 35 October. 1 The Mercury was 35 Inches high. October. 2 It was 36 October.
0 It was 36 October. 6 It was 36 October. 10 It was 35 October. 13 It was 32 None of
the Air made it is way out; but the Cold increased. November. 9 The Mercury had
neither ascended nor descended. December. 19 The Air was lost. December.20 The Grapes
took out of the Receiver were firmer than before, their Taste and Smell
discovering them to be moldy.
Factitious Air.
September. 10. 77. Having included 2 Ounces of unripe Grapes in a Receiver which
was large enough to contain 8 Ounces of Water, and as much of factitious Air of
Pears as sustained a mercurial Cylinder of 10 Digits. Sept. 11. The Mercury
subsided to 8 Digits. Sept. 12. It ascended 3 Inches. Sept. 13 It rose to 16
Sept. 14 It rose to 20 Sept. 15 It rose to 23 Sept. 16 It rose to 24 Sept 17.
It was sustained at 28 Inches; the Color of the Grapes being turned Yellow.
Sept. 18 It was 29 Sept. 19 It was 30 Sept. 20 It was 31 Sept. 21 It was 33
Sept. 23 It was 35 Sept. 24 It was 20 Some Air got out. The Grapes were Yellow.
Sept. 24 It was 21 Sept. 25 It was 22 Sept. 26 little Variation. Sept. 27 It
was 22 Sept. 29 It was 27 Sept. 30 It was 28 Oct. 1 and 2 It was 28 Oct. 5 It
was 30 Oct. 6 It was 31 Oct. 10 It was 31 Oct. 13 It was 31 Nov. 9 It was 13.
Some Air made it is way out. Nov. 19 It was 29 Inches high. Dec. 20. The Grapes
had acquired a greater degree of Firmness, The Taste and Smell being not less
grateful than before.
In which Experiment the firmness seems to be effected by an exhalation of the
Spirits; and it hence likewise appears, that Factitious Air may preserve the
Taste, though it causes a change in Color.

EXPERIMENT IV.
July 18. HAving enclosed two Pieces of Oranges, Artificial Air from Oranges.
the one with Common Air, and added as much Factitious Air of Cherries as was
sufficient to bear up 12 Inches of Quicksilver, and the other without any
addition to the Air contained in the Receiver. July 20. The latter seemed
Moldy; the other not appearing to have undergone any Change. July 23. The
Orange contained in the Factitious Air was unaltered, the Mouldiness of the
other being increased. July 26. That in the Common Air seemed Putrid; as
likewise the other did, but without Mouldiness. August 1. No farther
Alterations appearing in the Oranges, I opened the Receivers, and observed that
in the Artificial Air, which held the Mercury 26 Inches high, was well Tasted
and Firm; only the Top of the Rind had lost a little Juice; that in the other
Reciver seemed Rotten, except the Rind.
It may be here observed, that Factitious Air of the Cherries, has different
Effects on several Fruits.

EXPERIMENT V.
Factitious Air.
July 20. 76. Artificial Air from Beef.
HAving compressed Air made of Cherries in a Receiver with a Piece of Beef, so
that it bore up a Cylinder of Mercury 27 Inches high. July 21 There was no
considerable Change in the Height of it. July 22 There was no considerable
Change in the Height of it. July 23 There was no considerable Change in the
Height of it. July 25 There was no considerable Change in the Height of it.
July 26 The Receiver and Cover were separated; the Flesh Stunk.
Common Air.
July 20. 76. Beef being shut up with Common Air: The Mercury was raised. July
21 0 July 22 1 Inch. July 23 5 July 25 9 July 26 14 toward Night 18. July 27
21 toward Night 25. July 28 The Air got out.
Hence it appears, that the Artificial Air of Cherries, hindered the Generation
of it from Flesh.

EXPERIMENT VI.
Common Air.
March 14. 76. Artificial Air from Onions.
TWO Onions being enclosed with Common Air in a Receiver. March 28. The Mercury
on the Sixteenth was depressed of an Inch, but after was buoyed up 2. And the
Air geting out, the length of the Roots was increased. April 28. They were
putrifi'd and corrupted. May 9. The Mercury neither ascended nor subsided, but
the Roots were putrifi'd.
Factitious Air.
March 17. 76. Onions bing included with Air obtained from Paste. March 28.
They took Root just as they usually do in Common Air. April 28. The Extremities
of the Roots began to putrify, perhaps because the Artificial Air might be
moister: The Mercury Ascended 9 or 10 Inches. May. 18. One of them began to
corrupt: From whence it appears, that Vegetation is not hindered by artificial
Air; and it likewise appears, that the Quantity of Air is increased.
EXPERIMENT VII.
Common Air.
August 25. Artificial Air from Grapes.
SIx Ounces of Grapes being shut up in a Receiver large enough to contain 25
Ounces of Water. Aug. 26 It Is Ascent scarce discernible. Aug. 27 1 Inch. Aug.
28 It Is Height was 1 Aug. 29 It Is Height was 1 Aug. 30. The Mercury subsided a
little; the Grapes were not equally altered, as in Artificial Air of Pears.
Aug. 31. The Grapes being open to the Atmosphere. September. 7. Their pungent
Taste was something abated; though they retained their Color.
Factitious Air.
Aug. 25. Two Ounces of Grapes being shut up in a Receiver, large enough to
hold 8 of Water, so much Air of Pears was thrust in, as was able to raise it 15
Inches. Aug. 26. Some Air getting out, a supply was added, which raised the
Mercury to 17 Inches high. Aug. 27. The Mercury subsided to less than 16
Inches; toward night it ascended again to 17 Inches. Aug. 28 It rose to 19
Aug. 29 It rose to 21 Aug. 30 It rose to 22 Aug. 31 It rose to 23 Sept. 1 It
rose to 24 Sept. 2 It rose to 24 Sept.and 4 they acquired a Yellowness. Sept.
5. Air got out. Sept. 7. The Grapes were insipid, and of an ungrateful Taste.
From this Experiment we may argue for the Power of Artificial Air in changing
Colors: It promotes the Generation of Air, and preserves Tastes.

EXPERIMENT VIII.
Factitious Air.
Aug. 2.76. Artificial Air from Gilliflowers.
A Gilliflower being enclosed with Air of Paste in a Receiver. Aug. 4. It was
moist, and altered it is Color. Aug. 9. It was in some measure altered. Aug.
12. Their Moistness increased gradually without Mouldiness. Aug. 31. It was not
so fresh as those in Vacuo. Aug. 2. Common Air. Being enclosed with Common Air.
Aug. 4. It was unaltered. Aug. 9. It was wet, and almost Colorless. Aug. 12.
It was very Moldy. Aug. 4. Vacuum. Two Gilliflowers being shut up in Vacuum.
Aug. 4. They seemed moist. But in a year after underwent no Alteration. From
whence it appears, that factitious Air renders Colors more subject to change.
EXPERIMENT IX.
Common Air.
July 24. Artificial Air from Apricocks and Plums.
A Pricocks and Plums being enclosed in a Receiver. July 28. There was no
Change in the Fruit, but that one Plum which was cut in pieces, was a little
moldy. Aug. 11. The Color Taste and Consistence of the Fruit were all very
acceptable. July 24. Artificial Air. The same Ingredients being shut up with so
much Artificial Air of Cherries, as kept a Cylinder of Mercury up to 22 Inches.
July. 25. It subsided 3 Inches, and rose to 22 again-towards Night. July. 26 It
rose 28 July. 27 It rose 34 July. 28 It rose 36 July. 29 It rose 40 July 30 It
rose 44 Foot high. Those Apricocks which were cut in pieces were moist, and
began to dissolve in Water. July. 31 The Height was 51 Aug. 1 The Height was 60
Aug. 2 It was 65 Foot high. The Fruit being taken out, were of a grateful
Taste, and as far as they were immersed in Water, very soft.
From whence it is evident, that the Air of Cherries hastens Alterations in
Color, and Firmness in Apricocks.

EXPERIMENT X.
July 30. PLums cut in pieces, being shut up in Vacuo, and likewise with Common
Air; and in another Receiver with Common Air of Gooseberries. Aug. 2. In the
latter, they were unaltered: In common Air they grew moldy: In Vacuo they
became soft. Aug. 5. In the Artificial Air, they became red, soft and moist; In
Common Air black and moldy, yet firm: In Vacuo they were near a Dissolution.
August 7. They became soft in Common Air. August 8. They became red instead of
Black: Artificial Air seems to promote Alteration.
EXPERIMENT XI.
Sept. 24. Peaches shut up in a Receiver.
FIve Peaches being closed in a Receiver, with Artificial Air of Grapes
together with Common Air. Sept. 25 The Mercury was 21 Inches high. Sept. 26 It
rose to 23 Sept. 27 It rose to 31 Sept. 28 It rose to 39 Sept. 29 It rose to 42
Sept. 30 It rose to 45 Oct. 1 It rose to 48 Oct. 2 It rose to 48 Oct. 3 It rose
to 52 Oct. 5 It rose to 52 The Peaches were Wet. Oct. 6 It rose to 58 Oct. 7 It
rose to 58 Oct. 8 It rose to 61 Oct. 11 A little higher. Oct. 19 It rose to 95
Oct. 25 It rose to 61 Very Cold. The Cold abating it Ascended. Oct. 27 Oct. 30
It rose to 61 ^/^ Nov. 2 It rose to 59 Very Cold. Nov. 6 It rose to 61 A Thaw.
Nov. 7 A little heigher. Nov. 9 At the same height. Nov. 9 In a Month it
gradually ascended to 8 Inches. April 1. It was 96. When the Receiver was open,
as the Air broke out, it emitted several Bubbles; their Taste and Color were
good, the consistence of them was as if they had been boiled: And in three
hours time they were Rotten.
Bodies corrupt less in a Mixture of Factitious and Common Air, than in the
Latter it self.

EXPERIMENT XII.
August 4. Pears enclosed in a Receiver.
FOur Pieces of Pear being closed with Common Air in a Receiver. August 6. The
Color of this Fruit was equally altered as of others: The Mercury ascended
not. August 7. The Mercury ascended a little, the Alteration in the Pears being
small. August 8. They were very little Altered; the Cylinder of Mercury was 4
Inches. August 9. It was 4. Aug. 10 It rose to 6 Aug. 11 It rose to 10 Aug. 13
It rose to 16 Aug. 4 It rose to 20 The Pears grew softer. Aug. 15 It was 21
Aug. 16 It was 19 Aug. 17 Air got out. Aug. 8 The Air being got out, and the
Fruit taken out, it was rotten.
August 4. Other Pieces of the same Fruit being shut up with as much Artificial
Air of Cherries as sustained 23 Digits of Mercury above it is usual height.
August 6. The Color of them was a little altered. August 7. They were almost
all Rotten: The Mercury neither subsiding nor ascending. August 8. They were in
some Measure altered. August 10. They gradually became softer: The Mercury
being raised 40 Digits. Aug. 11 It rose to 51 Aug. 13 It rose to 61 Aug. 14 It
rose to 67 Aug. 15 It rose to 73 Aug. 16 It rose to It Descended, though no Air
made it is way out. August 17. The Mercury was 67 Digits high: No Air got out.
August 18. The Mercury subsided not: The Taste of the Fruit was Acid, and their
substance very soft; the Air contained in the Receiver likewise, smelling very
sharp.
August 4. 77. Pieces of the same Fruit being enclosed in a Receiver. August 6.
They altered their Color. August 7. A piece of a Pear became soft: and another
in Artificial Air was putrid the Day before. August 8. They were all soft; and
one was Moldy. August 9. Their Rottenness gradually increased. August 11. They
were altogether Rotten and Mucid.
From this Experiment and the former it appears, that Rottenness is equally
promoted, in included and open Air, though much faster carried on in the Latter.

August 4. 77. Several Pieces of Pears being shut up in Vacuo. August 6 The
height of the Mercurial Cylinder was 5 Digits. Aug. 7 It rose to 8 Aug. 8 It
rose to 10 Aug. 9 It rose to 12 Aug. 10 It rose to 14 Aug. 11 It rose to 16
Aug. 13 It rose to 20 Aug. 14 It rose to 23 Aug. 15 It rose to 25 Aug. 17 It
rose to 28 August 20. They were not in the least Changed till to Day; when
being soft, the Mercury was at a stand. August 26. All things Remained as
before. From which Experiments it appears, how apt Artificial Air is to soften
Fruit.
EXPERIMENT XIII.
August 21. 77. Apricocks shut up in a Receiver.
SIX Apricocks being divided into Quarters, one Piece of each was enclosed in a
Receiver. August 22. They seemed Riper. August 23. One piece which touched the
Water, acquired Mouldiness, the other beginning to putrify. The Mercury
ascended a little. August 24. Those next the Water were not only Moldy, but
all Rotten. August 25. Putrefaction gradually became greater: The height of the
Mercury was 7 Inches. Aug. 26 It rose to 15 Aug. 28 It rose to 30 Aug. 29 It
rose to 30 The Fruit was almost dissolved. Aug. 30 It rose to 33 Aug. 31 It
rose to 38 Sept. 1 It rose to 38 Sept. 2 It rose to 38 Sept. 3 It rose to 38 A
little. Sept. 4 It rose to 41 Sept. 5 It rose to 43 Sept. 7 It rose to 45 Sept.
8 It rose to 46 Sept. 9 It rose to 46 Sept. 22. The Mercurial Cylinder vari'd
little: The Fruit was almost dissolved. October. 1. The Taste of the Fruit which
remained undissolv'd was subacid and grateful: The Mercury then standing about
46 Inches high.
August 21. 77. A Quarter of each of the same Fruit being placed in a Receiver,
which was not sufficiently guarded from the outward Air, August 22. They became
as flaccid as if they were withered. August 23. Many were Rotten and Moldy.
August 24. They were wholly putrifi'd. August 21. A Quarter of each of the
Apricocks being shut up in a Receiver, and a sufficient Quantity of Artificial
Air from Pears added, as raised the Mercury 20 Inches. August 22. The Mercury
stood still, but became Riper than those in open Air. August 23. The Alteration
was not so great as in Common Air. August 24. They were unaltered. August 25.
They began to yield Air; but the Quantity was not discernible. August 26. They
underwent no considerable Change. August 28. They began to be a little moist:
Yet the Alteration they underwent was not so considerable as of those in Common
Air. August 30. The Mercury Rose 30 Inches above it is usual Height. Aug. 31 It
rose to 40 Sept. 1 It rose to 40 Sept. 2 It rose to 40 Sept. 3 It rose to 45
Sept. 8 It rose to 49 A little. Sept. 9 The height was 40 Sept. 11 The height
was 38 Sept. 12 The height was less Sept. 13 The height was 33 Sept. 14. The
Mercury subsided so far as to disappear. Sep. 22. It rose again to 33 Inches:
The Fruit was covered with a Mucor. October. 1. The Apricocks were well colored:
But spongy and soft, and of a subacid Taste.
August 21. A quarter of each of the aforesaid Fruit, being enclosed with as
much Common Air as was able to raise the Mercury 90 Inches above it is usual
height. August 22. The Receiver bursting with the Elasticity of that Air, the
Fruit was enclosed with as much Air as raised the Mercury 60 Inches. August 25.
New Air was added, the Fruit was not Moldy. August 26. They were altogether
Rotten and Moldy.
From whence it appears that Corruption is quicker in Artificial, tho greater
in Common Air.

ARTICLE IV. The Effects of Air compressed, different from the Effects of
Common Air.
EXPERIMENT I,
March 21. 77. Onions shut up in a Receiver,
TWO Onions being shut up with as much common Air, as was able to sustain 60
Inches of Mercury. March 28. They took Root like others in the Air, no more
compressed than that of the Atmosphere. April 28. Onions shut up 8 Days ago,
were moldy: The Extremities of the Roots of those in compressed Air, began to
rot: And new Air being put in raised the Mercury 69 Digits. April 29. Those in
the compressed Air were moldy.
From this Experiment it appears, that Compression hinders not Vegetation; and
though Compression seemed to hinder Corruption at the first, yet upon an
Intrusion of fresh Air, it was by that promoted.

EXPERIMENT II.
May 9. HAVING enclosed an equal Proportion of Tulips and Lark-Spurs together
in two Receivers; Tulips and Lark-Spurs enclosed in a Receiver.
as much Air was squeezed into one as was able to raise Mercury 70 Digits. May
11. Two Tulips in the common Air uncompress'd, were moldy. May 12. Another in
the uncompress'd Air became moldy. May 14. All the Tulips and one Lark-Spur
became mucid; One Tulip in the compressed Air being likewise mucid. May 17.
Three in the compressed Air acquired a Mucidness, yet not so much as those in
the Air uncompress'd: Two of the Lark-Spurs in uncompress'd Air were finew'd,
but those in the compressed Air, were not. May 21. The Flowers shut up in
uncompress'd Air were rotten, those in the compressed Air being unaltered,
except that the Mouldiness was rather diminished. May 30. The Flowers being
dissolved and taken out, those in the compressed Air were subacid; From these
Trials it appears, that Compression hinders Putrefaction.
EXPERIMENT III.
May 21. 77. HALF an Orange being enclosed in a Receiver, Oranges shut up in a
Receiver.
and as much in another; to which, so much Air was added, as raised the Mercury
100 Inches above it is usual height. May 25. That in the uncompress'd Air was
more mucid than the former. May 26. The compressed Air getting out, it was
supplied by a new Addition. May 30. The Air being daily added as it got out,
the Orange in the compressed Air was more mucid than the other. June 1. The
Oranges being taken out of the Receivers, that in the compressed Air was much
more corrupted than the other, so that, though Compression hinders Corruption,
yet it is promoted as the Quantity of Air is removed.
EXPERIMENT IV.
May 31. 77. AN equal Quantity of Roses being put into two Receivers, Roses
shut up in a Receiver.
so much Air was pressed into one of them, as was able to raise the Mercury 90
Inches above the Height it is suspended at, by uncompress'd Air. June 11. Those
in the uncompress'd Air had lost a little of their Color; but those in the
other Receiver had contracted a Yellowness, as if exposed to dry in the open
Air, neither were they mucid. June 18. Those in the uncompress'd Air were very
little altered, but those in the compressed Air, grew yellower and yellower:
They were neither dry nor flaccid, nor was there any considerable Alteration in
their Smell. But both being exposed to open Air, those were sooner altered
which were in the uncompress'd Receiver.
From whence it appears, that sometimes compressed Air is more disposed to
alter Colors, than uncompress'd; and it may not be amiss to observe, that the
Roses after this manner shut up, did not acquire the least Mucidness, but only
a yellow Color: But when the Experiment was tried with Tulips and Lark-Spurs,
the Success was different. See Exper. II.

EXPERIMENT V.
June 1. I Put one half of an Orange in one Receiver, Oranges shut up in a
Receiver.
and the other half in another, adding to one, as much Air as was able to raise
the Mercury, an hundred Inches above the Height it was sustained at in the
other. June 6. Both of them became mucid, but especially that which was kept in
the compressed Air: In this Experiment it was to be noted, that the Air which
was compressed in the one Receiver, daily got out, and was as often renewed.
June 11. The Orange in the uncompress'd Air acquired no further Mucidness, tho
the other did. June 18. The Mucidness of the Orange in the uncompress'd Air
decreased; And though the other Orange ceased to increase it is Mucidness, as long
as it was not supplied with fresh Air, yet so much fresh Air being shut up with
it, as was able to raise the Mercury 80 Digits, June 20. It became much more
mucid in two days time. Whence it appears, that as the Quantity of Air is more
or less, so the Body enclosed in it, is more or less mucid.
EXPERIMENT VI.
June 17. 77. HAVING shut up two Shrew-Mice, Shrew Mice shut up in a Receiver.
and each of them in a distinct Receiver, we added so much Air to one of them,
as raised the Mercury 30 Digits: But the Mouse in the uncompress'd Air, was
shut up, about 5 and 521, 61 after the other.
The Mouse in the compressed Air seemed to lose its Strength a great deal
sooner than the other, the Motion of its Breast being not near so quick;
nevertheless, about 6 and 181, that in the common Air died Convulsive, yet that
in the compressed Air, continued to be as well as it was an hour and half ago.

About 11 of the Clock that in the compressed Air continued Respiration; but
about 4 in the Morning it was found dead, in the same Posture it was 7 hours
before in; whence we may guess, that it was free from Convulsive Fits.

The Mouse in the common Air had consumed, so much of it, that the Mercury in
the Gage, which stood at 29 Inches, was raised to 30 when the Receiver was
opened.

From whence it appears, that compressed Air contributes to the prolonging of
Life.

EXPERIMENT VII.
June 13. 77. I Enclosed 4 Flies in a Receiver, Flies shut up in a Receiver.
with as much Air as raised the Mercury 60 Digits above it is usual Height; 3
others at the same time being shut up with common Air. July 14. In the Morning
they were all well. In the Afternoon 2 of those in the compressed Air were
dead. About 5 all in the compressed Air were dead but one, and the 3 in the
common Air were alive. July 15. In the Morning, those in the common Air were
dead; but that in the compressed Air being taken out, flew speedily away.
From hence it appears, that they died rather for want of Nourishment, than
Air; since that which survived in the compressed Air, and had the Bodies of the
other to feed upon, was not distempered.

EXPERIMENT VIII.
June 15. EIGHT Flies being included in two distinct Receivers, Flies shut up
in a Receiver.
and the Air in one compressed more than in the foregoing Experiment. June 16.
Two in the common Air, and one in the compressed were dead in the Morning. In
the Afternoon all in the common Air seemed dead. June 17. All, except one in
the compressed Air, were dead. From this and the foregoing Experiment it
appears, that the Compression or Rarefaction of the Air, affects Flies very
little, except there be almost a complete Vacuum.
EXPERIMENT IX.
June 18. TWO Frogs being enclosed in two Receivers, Frogs enclosed in a
Receiver.
shut up by the help of Screws, the one with common Air, and the other with an
Addition of as much as raised the Mercury 70 Digits. June 19. No Alteration was
perceived. June 20. The Frogs were alive, and the Air seemed to be increased.
June 21. In the Evening, that in the common Air was dead. June 23. In the
Morning, that in the compressed Air was dead.
Whether the Compression of the Air, or Disposition of the Body of the latter
contributed to prolong it is Life, must be determined by further Observations.

EXPERIMENT X.
June 18. 77. Oranges conveyed into a Receiver.
TWO halves of an Orange being shut up in two Receivers with Screws, so much Air
was added to the one, as sustained the Mercury 90 Digits. June 22. That in the
common Air was moldy: And at 3 a Clock Afternoon, the other had contracted a
Mucor. June 23. That in the common Air was more mucid than the other. June 24.
That in the compressed Air was all over moldy. June 28. That in the common Air
had lost it is Mouldiness: The other was unaltered. June 30. Being taken out,
that in the common Air was half rotten; the other, wholly putrified, and mucid.
From hence it appears, that as the Quantity of Air is greater, so is the Body
contained more mucid. The Mouldiness in the compressed, increased more
intensly, though it began not so soon.

EXPERIMENT XI.
June 29. 77. Roses enclosed in a Receiver.
TWO Receivers stopped with Screws containing Roses, so much Air was squeezed
into one, as raised the Mercury 90 Digits. July 14. The Roses in the common Air
were altered. But the others began to wither and look yellow about 4 days ago.
July 17. Being taken out, those in the compressed Air were much corrupted, and
of an ungrateful Smell; The others had undergone very little Alteration. From
hence it further appears, that the Quantity of Corruption depends on the
Quantity of Air.
EXPERIMENT XII.
July 4. A Limon being divided, and shut up in two Receivers with Screws, so
much Air was added to one, as sustained the Mercury 90 Digits. July 7. Both
pieces seemed to acquire a Mouldiness at the same time. July 17. That in the
compressed Air, was much more hoary and putrid than the other. This Experiment
does not only confirm what was inferred in the foregoing, but also that a
Triple Compression of the Air in Respect of a Limon, is too weak sensibly to
retard the Production of Mouldiness or Finew.
EXPERIMENT XIII.
July 18. 77. Gilliflowers enclosed in a Receiver.
ONE parcel of Gilliflowers being enclosed in a Receiver with common Air, and an
equal parcel in another, with as much compressed Air, as sustained the Mercury
100 Digits above it is wonted Pressure. July 23. Those in the compressed Air
were covered with a Mouldiness: but the others were only moist: The Air was
subsided 30 Inches. July 25. Those in the compressed Air were more compressed
than the others, and had lost their Color. July 26. Those in the compressed
Air were wholly putrified, and covered with a hoary Finew; the others were only
moist in some places. August 1. Those in the compressed Air being taken out,
were rotten and stunk; the others were moist, retained their Color, and
smelled not at all offensive. This Experiment confirms, That the Quantity of
Air does increase Corruption; and also that Mouldiness is not produced, but in
compressed Air.
EXPERIMENT XIV.
July 21. 77. A Shrew Mouse in common Air.
TO try whether a Shrew-Mouse would consume or produce Air, I shut it up in a
Recipient with common Air. After 2 hours some was consumed; but the Mouse died.
July 24. Toward Evening, the Mercury seemed a little higher. July 25. A great
deal of Air was produced de novo. July 26. It increased considerably.
From whence it appears, that living Animals consume, and dead ones produce Air.

EXPERIMENT XV.
August 31. Pears enclosed in a Receiver.
AS much Air was pressed into a Receiver which contained Pears, as sustained
the Mercury 30 Digits above the usual height. Sept. 1. The Mercury was
depressed. Sept. 2. It sunk to 25 Inches. Sept. 3. It was raised to 26. Sept 4.
It was 28 Digits high. Sept. 8. The Receiver being opened, 5 of the Pears had
lost their Firmness, but 2 retained.
August 31. The same sort of Pears being shut up with common Air. Sept. 1. The
Mercury was depressed a little; I suppose by the Cold. Sept. 2. It was not
changed. Sept. 3. It was raised a Digit. Sept. 4 The height of it was 4 Sept. 5
The height of it was 6 Sept. 6 The height of it was 6 Sept. 7 The height of it
was 12 Sept. 8 The height of it was 20
Being taken out, they retained their Taste and Firmness, much better than in
Vacuo.

Aug. 31. The same sort of Pears being shut up in Vacuo, so much External Air
broke in, as sustained the Mercury an Inch. Sept. 1 The Height of it was 4
Sept. 2 The Height of it was 8 Sept. 3 The Height of it was 12 Sept. 4 The
Height of it was 16 Sept. 5 The Height of it was 19 Sept. 6 The Height of it
was 23 Sept. 7 The Height of it was 27 Sept. 8 The Height of it was 30
Being taken out, they had lost their Taste in a great measure, but reserved
their Firmness.

From these Experiments it appears, that as the Compression is greater, the
less Air is produced.

EXPERIMENT XVI.
December. 7. A small Bird.
A Small Bird being shut up in a Receiver, which was large enough to contain 20
Ounces of Water, began to be ill, before I had set the Screw; but as much Air
being pressed in, as raised the Mercury 30 Digits, she seemed to recover; but
after a little time, she began to be ill again: yet so much Air being thrust
in, as raised the Mercury to 45 Digits, she recovered a second time; But some
time after she began to gasp again; nevertheless, 28 Minutes after the Receiver
was opened, she got out, and was very well.
EXPERIMENT VII.
Jan. 20. 1678. A Shrew-Mouse in a Wind-Gun.
A Shrew-Mouse being shut up in my Wind-Gun, and the Air so far condensed, that
it reduced it to a twentieth Part of the Space it possessed before, upon a
Discharge of that Air, the Elliptick Hole being opened, the Mouse was taken out
dead. Another Mouse being put in, and the Air compressed to a third Part of
it is Space, it was taken out well. The Experiment was repeated, and the Air 7
or 8 times condensed, by which the Mouse seemed not the least prejudiced; The
same Experiment being repeated, the Air being 7 times compressed, when the
Mouse had been shut up 24 Minutes, upon a Discharge of the Air, after repeated
Groans, died. From whence it appears, that compressed Air is noxious, yea,
mortiferous.
EXPERIMENT XVIII.
Jan. 28. 78. A Shrew-Mouse in compressed Air.
I Put a Shrew-Mouse into a Glass, to whose Neck I tied a Bladder, stopping the
Orifice, which being shut up in a Receiver, when the Mouse began to be sick, by
pressing new Air into the Receiver, the Bladder was straightened, and though new Air
could not penetrate into the Mouse; yet the Air it was shut up in being
compressed, it was much better, and being taken out, in a short time recovered.
Another Mouse being shut up after the same manner, till it could scarce breath;
when the Air was compressed, its Respiration seemed abated; upon which, the
Receiver being opened, and the Mouse exposed to the Air, it could not breath
much more freely; yet when Air was blown upon it with a pair of Bellows, it
seemed relieved; but being again shut up with compressed Air, it breathed less
frequently, and died. March 25. A Mouse being shut up in an Instrument before
described, when I perceived the Mouse sick, I intruded Water into the Receiver,
so that the Air was reduced into half the Space it possessed before; upon
which, the Mouse breathed more rarely; but the Air being successively
compressed and left to it is liberty again, the sick Mouse seemed to breath more
lively in the common Air, than in the compressed. Whence I conjectured, that
the Air is to Animals as Food, which ought to bear some proportion to the
Strength of the Animal. In Confirmation of which Conjecture, I shut up a Mouse
in my Pneumatick Engine, and rarifi'd the Air so much, that it possessed three
times the Space it did before; upon which, the Mouse seemed better, but
presently began to be sick, yet underwent no sensible Alteration upon an
intromission of Air: The like success happened three times successively, though
at the last the Mouse died.
ARTICLE V. The Effects of Artificial Air upon Animals.
EXPERIMENT I.
May 5. 77. A Be, A Be in Artificial Air.
together with distilled Vinegar, and Powder of Coral, being conveyed into a
Receiver; I so contrived the matter, that when the Receiver was exhaustod, the
Coral fell into the Vinegar: But the Air produced, had no Effect on the Be;
yet when it had been a little exposed to the Air, it began to move: Whence we
may gather, that Artificial Air is not fit for Animals to live in.
EXPERIMENT II.
August 12. 76. TWO Flies being contained in a Receiver, Flies in Artificial
Air.
with as much Artificial Air of Goosberries as sustained 26 Inches of Mercury:
And two others being shut up in Vacuo, adding common Air enough to sustain 23
Digits of Mercury, upon which, in a quarter of an hour the latter began to fly,
but those in the Artificial Air lay without motion. Aug. 13. Those in the
Artificial Air seemed dead; the others were well; nor did the former recover,
though exposed to common Air a whole day. Aug. 18. The same Experiment was
repeated with the like Success. This Experiment is a further Confirmation, that
Artificial Air is noxious to Respiration.
EXPERIMENT III.
June 22. 77. PASTE being contained in 3 exhausted Receivers. Paste included in
3 Receivers.
June 23. Into one I put a perfumed Cone kindled, which was extinguished in a
Minute, as soon as the Receiver was stopped; yet in common Air, it burnt bright
for some time after the Receiver was stopped.
Another Experiment being tried with a Fly, I observed, that though when it was
shut up in Artificial Air for some time, it seemed dead, till revived in the
Sunbeams; yet another shut up in common Air, received no damage: The like
Success followed, when we tried the Experiment a second time, save that the Fee
being taken out of the Artificial Air, was something longer before she
recovered. From hence it appears, that Artificial Air is prejudicial to Fire as
well as to the Life of Animals.

EXPERIMENT IV.
Jun. 25. 77. HAving enclosed Paste in four Receivers, two of which were
exhausted, and the other two but half evacuated. June 26. Those which were half
full of common Air, being filled with Artificial, I put two Flies into one of
them, which were deprived of Motion, as soon as they came to the Bottom; A
Third, and then a fourth, successively being put in, they continued to live
longer; yet after some Convulsions, lay unmoved and supine; But being removed
into common Air, in a little time they came to themselves: Those Flies that
were put into Receivers, which only contained common Air, were well sooner.
June 27. One of the Receivers which had been wholly exhausted of common Air,
being casually thrown down, gave way to an Ingress of external Air; A Frog
being being put in, was not much disaffected. June 30. The fourth Receiver
being forced away from it is Cover, I put a Frog into it, which after five
minutes high Convulsions, lay without Motion four minutes; and then being taken
out of the Receiver, continued so 46 minutes; but in five minutes more grew
very well.
From hence it appears, that if Artificial Air be mixed with common Air, it is
so much the less prejadicial to Animals.

EXPERIMENT V.
June 28. I Enclosed Paste in four Receivers, A Frog in Artificiab Air.
3 of which were wholly exhausted of common Air, but the fourth was left half
full. June 29. One of the Receivers being full of Artificial Air, and a Frog
put into it, after it had been violently Convulsive for 4 or 5 Minutes, and lay
void of Motion for about a Minute, being taken out of the Receiver, in about 5
Minutes, began to move, and was well again in a little time. A Frog being put
into another Receiver with Artificial Air, was Convulsive for about 7 Minutes,
and then lay void of Motion for about a Minute; yet when it was taken out of
the Receiver, it began to struggle and move, after which Motions, which seemed
to be the Relics of its Convulsions, it lay for about half an hour void of
Motion again; yet, at the last, it recovered a second time. A Frog being cast
into that Receiver, which was but half exhausted, for ten Minutes seemed
Convulsive; and then, lying still for about a Minute, the Receiver being
opened, within half an hour recovered power to move again: But in the
Experiment it was to be noted, that the Quantity of Artificial Air, was so much
increased before the Frog was cast in, that part of it, and consequently some
of the common Air made it is way out. A Frog being shut up in a Receiver with
common Air. July 1. In the Morning it was alive, in the Afternoon dead; It
lived near 48 hours. June 30. A Frog being shut up with Artificial Air wholly,
after 7 Minutes Convulsions died; nor did it recover, though taken out 2 Minutes
after. July 1. It did not recover: Hence it appears further, that Artificial
Air is most detrimental, when least common Air is mixed with it.
EXPERIMENT VI.
June 30. Paste included in a Receiver.
PASTE being shut up in two exhausted Receivers. July 4. Some little Air having
got into one Receiver, I put a Shrew-Mouse into it, who after vehement
Convulsions, died in a Minute.
A Snail being put into the other Receiver, continued to move vehemently for a
quarter of an hour, after which time, its Motion gradually declining, in a
quarter of an hour it seemed dead, but in a short time grew well again.

Flies being shut up in another Receiver, were not at all prejudiced, too much
External Air having got in.

From hence it appears, That Artificial Air is prejudicial, upon the Account of
some venomous Quality; and not only by defect of Common Air; since Snails lived
a longer time in Vacuo. See Art. VI. Exp. III.

EXPERIMENT VII.
July 5. 77. A Frog in Artificial and Common Air.
HAving transmitted Artificial Air of Cherries out of One Receiver into
another, full of Common Air, in which a Frog was contained; so much Water
flowed out, as was sufficient to give way to the Ingress of the Artificial Air.
Upon which the Frog being Convulsive for about a Quarter of an hour, lay still;
yet soon recovered again, when exposed to the Air.
This Experiment seems to prove, that Artificial Air of Cherries is less
pernicious than that of Paste; See Exp. V.

EXPERIMENT VIII.
July 9. 77. Goosberries enclosed in Vacuo.
GOosberries were shut up in three empty Receivers. July 20. So much Air was
produced, as separated the Cover from the Receiver: Two Flies being cast
successively in, presently Died; a third seemed Convulsive; a fourth in less
than a quarter of a Minute lay without Motion: The Receiver being cleared of
the Artificial Air it, grew well. July 24. A Shrew-Mouse being shut with Air
from Goosberries, Died in half a Minute.
Hence it may be inferred, that Air produced from Fruit is less prejudicial
than Air obtained from Minerals; for July 20 a Mouse being shut up with Air
produced from Gunpowder, Died in a Quarter of a Minute.

EXPERIMENT IX.
July 5. 77. Paste in Vacuo.
PAste being contained in four exhausted Receivers. July 6. One was forced from
it is Cover: Some Common Air got in before it could be stopped. A Shrew-Mouse
being put in, was Convulsive a Minute and and then remained moveless: Being
taken out, after some Convulsive Motions, Died. July 7. A Bird shut up as the
Mouse was, in a quarter of a Minute Died: A Bird of the same kind being shut 4
Minutes with common Air, was very well. July 9. The same Bird which continued
well in the Common Air, Died when enclosed with Artificial Air, in a quarter of
a Minute. An Adder being shut up with Artificial Air, in 2 Minutes began to be
ill; and in 24 Minutes was deprived of Motion, and though 6 Minutes after it was
exposed to the Air, yet it recovered not. July 10. There was no hopes of
Recovery.
EXPERIMENT X.
July 12. 78. A Bird in Artificial Air.
A Bird shut up with Air from Raisins Died in of a Minute. July 18. A
Shrew-Mouse being shut up with the same sort of Air, after 2 Minutes seemed ill
and void of Motion; yet in 2 or 3 Minutes was well again.
EXPERIMENT XI.
October. 1. 78 A Shrew-Mouse in a Receiver.
A Shrew-Mouse being shut up an hour in Common Air could scarce Breath. Another
being cast into the same Receiver, before the Stopple was clapped on again, some
fresh Air broke in, by which the first Mouse was refreshed; yet about an hour
after both died. About 4 after Noon, another Mouse being clapped in very
cautiously, died in 3 Minutes. Whence it appears, that the same Air is not long
fit for Respiration.
EXPERIMENT XII.
April 28. A Snail in Artificial Air.
A Snail being enclosed with Air from Paste, froath'd, and contracted and
expanded successively, till in 4 Minutes it became void of Motion; At a quarter
of an hours end, being taken out, it was void of Motion: Yet being pricked with
a Pin, a quarter of an hour after moved a little. A Snail being shut up when
that Air was blown out, was not ill at all: whence it appears, that Artificial
Air is more prejudicial to Animals, than a Vacuum.
EXPERIMENT XIII.
Jun. 22. 78. Green Pease in a Receiver.
IN a Days time green Pease yielded Air enough to sustain 10 Digits of
Mercury. Jun. 23. The Mercury was 30 Digits high. Jun. 24. It rose no higher.
The Cover and the Receiver stuck not together, yet no Air got out. Jun. 26. The
same Pease being shut up in the same Empty Receiver. Jun. 29. A Snail being
thrown in, and the Receiver being full of Factitious Air, it froth'd, and
frequently contracted and expanded; but after six Minutes, lay still 2 or 3.
Being taken out it moved a little.
Whence we gather, that Factitious Air of Pease is not so prejudicial to Snails
as that of Paste. See Experiment XII, XI. The Factitious Air being blown out, a
Snail did very well in the Receiver. In this Experiment it is observable, that
Pease sooner yield Air in Vacuo, than in Compressed Air.

ARTICLE VI. Animals in Vacuo.
EXPERIMENT I.
Jun. 22. 76. A Butter-Fly in Vacuo.
A Butterfly moved 3 hours in Vacuo, and recover^d it is Motion when lost, upon
an ingress of Air. Being hung by a thread, tied to one of her horns, it was
moved from one side of the Receiver to the other by the Motion of it is Wing,
but when the Air was drawn out, we could not move the Thread from a
perpendicular Posture.
EXPERIMENT II.
July 12. 76. Two Flies in Vacuo.
TWo Flies being shut up with as much Air as sustained 10 Inches of Mercury,
the biggest seemed presently Dead, though the other lived 24 hours. When both
Flies lay as Dead, so much Air was let in as raised the Mercury to 15 Inches;
upon which the less Fly began to move. Infects may breath in rarifi'd Air
sooner than in Artificial.
EXPERIMENT III.
May 1. Two Snails in Vacuo.
TWo Snails seemed well for the space of an hour in Vacuo and crept up to the
Top of the Receiver; but in two hours fell down void of Motion: 4 hours after,
being exposed to the open Air they began to move. Whilst they were shut up they
helped to produce Air enough to raise the Mercury of an Inch.
They lived longer in Vacuo, than others in artificial, Art. V. Exp. VI.

EXPERIMENT IV.
August 12. 76. Fly-Blowings in a Receiver.
FLy-blowings were put into an empty Receiver. August 14. Worms were formed: So
much Air got in as was sufficient to sustain Mercury 15 Digits.
Whence it is evident, Insects may be produced and live in very rarifi'd Air.
See Exp. VI. and VIII.

EXPERIMENT V.
March 17. 77. FRog-Spawn being divided into two equal Parts, Fog-Spawn.
and each of those included in a distinct Receiver, the Spawn being first put
into glass Vessels; one of the Receivers was exposed to the Sun, being totally
exhausted; the other was left full of Air. That in Vacuo swelled into Bubbles.
May 2. The Bubbles remained in Vacuo. No Frogs were produced in either. 3 Days
since the Bubbles disapear'd; and the Spawn turned into a green Liquor. July 2.
The Spawn in Vacuo, and the Water contained in the Vessel being raised in
Vapors, stuck to the sides of the Receiver, and there condensed: The Spawn and
Water in the Common Air retained their own Form.
EXPERIMENT VI.
August 16. 77. I Enclosed Flies Eggs in an empty Receiver. Flies-Eggs.
August 29. No Worms being produced, I let the Air into the Receiver. Sept. 4.
They produced nothing: This Experiment compared with the IV, seems to show,
that though Insects may be produced and live in Air highly rarifi'd, yet they
cannot in Vacuo.
EXPERIMENT VII.
June 15. A Frog in Vacuo.
A Frog enclosed 14 hours in an exhausted Receiver, Died. June 16. The
Experiment being repeated; in 2 hours the dead Frog afforded some Air. June 18.
The Frog in Vacuo was swelled; but the Air being let in, it was more lank than
before.
Artificial Air is more prejudicial than a Vacuum to the Life of such Animals.
See Exp. IV, and VII, of Art. V.

EXPERIMENT VIII.
August 3.78. FLie-Blowings sticking to Flesh being shut up in Vacuo. August
12. No Worms generated. August 15. There being no Alteration in the Eggs; Air
was let into the Receiver. Sept. 15. They produced nothing. This is a
confirmation of the Inference drawn from Exp. IV.
EXPERIMENT IX.
April 22.78. VInegar full of small Eels, Vinegar with Eels in Vacuo.
or Vinegar Worms was shut up in Vacuo. August 29. The Worms still moved, the
Number being fewer than before. Sept. 6. Yesterday they moved: To day they were
all dead. Those left in the open Air were as lively as before. Whence it is
evident, that the Air influences even those diminutive Animals.
ARTICLE VII. Fire in Compressed Air.
EXPERIMENT I.
May 14. I Enclosed such a Cone in a Receiver, Perfumed Cones in Vacuo.
as is usually wholly consumed in the open Air before extinguished, and then
intruding as much Air as raised the Mercury 120 Digits high above it is usual
height, I kindled the Cone with a burning Glass; when parts of an Inch were
consumed and the Receiver filled with Smoke, I took it out, and found that the
outside was only burnt, the inner Parts being left untouched. Another Cone
being shut up with uncompress'd Air, in a Receiver something larger, much less
of it was consumed, than of the former.
EXPERIMENT II.
May II. A Perfumed Cone being enclosed in a Receiver, and kind'ld in
uncompress'd Air, being weighed when the Fumes were condensed, it had lost a
Grain. Another being shut up with as much Air as elevated the Mercury 90
Inches, lost 4 Grains more than the former. So that the more Air is contained
in the Receiver the greater is the Consumption of the Matter burning in it.
EXPERIMENT III.
May 17.77. A Persum'd Cone being shut up with a Screw in a Receiver, with as
much Air as sustained 60 Inches of Mercury above it is usual height, being set
on Fire with a Burning-Glass, it lost 3 Grains and a half. The Experiment being
repeated in Air compressed so much as to sustain 120 Inches, lost 7 Grains. May
17. The Experiment being tried, when the Mercury was at 97 Inches, it lost 6
Grains. This Experiment confirms the Inference drawn from the foregoing, and
shows that the Consumption bears a greater Proportion to the Compression, than
the Compression to the Consumption. May 18.77. A perfumed Cone being shut up in
a Receiver, 7 times as big as before, lost 3 of it is Weight; which Air, had it
been compressed into a 5th part of that Space, the Cone would have lost 10
Grains.
Whence it appears, that the Condensation of the Air promotes the Consumption
of the Matter contained in it.

EXPERIMENT IV.
May 19.77. THE same Experiment being repeated in a Receiver closely stopped
with a Screw, the Cone lost a Grain and a quarter. May 21. The same Experiment
being repeated, and the Cone set on fire, it lost 4 Grains. May 23. It was
twice repeated, but the Cone not being well fired; In one it lost of a Grain;
in the other, a whole one. May 24. The Cone lost 1 Grain and The Cone being
taken out, and cleansed of the Soot, it lost in a Receiver, 6 Grains. In an
uncleansed Receiver it lost 3 Grains in Weight. May 25. In a cleansed Receiver
it lost 6 Grains. In one well cleansed after it lost 7 Grains. In a Receiver
unwash'd, the Cone would scarce be kindled. May 26. In a Receiver unwash'd, in
the middle of a Sunshine Day, the Burning-Glass being long applied, it was 8
Grains lighter.
Whence it appears, that though the Consumption of the Matter be not always the
same in the Quantity of Air, yet it is greater, according to the Degrees of
Compression.

EXPERIMENT V.
May 22. HAving enclosed a perfumed Cone with so much Air as raised the Mercury
30 Digits above it is usual height; it lost 1 of a Grain. May 23. The same
Experiment was tried with the same Success. The same Experiment being tried
again, the Receiver broke into 100 pieces. See Exper. 3. yea in Exp. VI. of
Art. II. though it resisted Air compressed enough to sustain 198 Digits, yet
another time it was broke with a sixth part of that Pressure: Therefore a Man
ought, in trying such Experiments, to guard his Head, lest a Receiver
accidentally breaking, should fly in pieces and wound him.
ARTICLE VIII. Fire used to produce Air.
EXPERIMENT I.
June 4. 76. Paper besmeared with Sulphur.
PAper besmeared with Sulphur, and burnt in Vacuo, yielded Air, which lasted 2
Days without Diminution.
EXPERIMENT II.
June 15. Hartshorn in Vacuo.
Hartshorn burnt in Vacuo, yielded some Air. June 17. Air produced by burnt
Hartshorn was soon destroyed; but if it lasted an hour undiminish'd, it
usually continued a considerable time. June 19. Hartshorn taken out of the
Receiver yielded a fetid Oil, but no Volatile Spirit.
EXPERIMENT III.
June 21. Amber in Vacuo.
AMber being burnt in a Receiver, ascended in Fumes up to the Top, and thence
reflected downwards; but burnt in Vacuo, they rose not above a Digit at the
first; but afterward it rose almost to the Top: The Mercury in the Gage was
not altered in it is height. June 22. Water, in which the Receiver was immersed,
got into the Receiver. July 8. No more Water got in: Nor did the Amber produce
the least Air.
EXPERIMENT IV.
Jan. 18. 77 Camphire included in a Receiver.
TWO Drachms of Camphire being put in an empty Receiver upon a Digesting
Furnace. Jan. 19. It was sublimed into Flowers; no Air was produced.
EXPERIMENT V.
May 24. 76. Sulphur Viv. melted in a Receiver.
SULPHUR Viv. being melted in an exhausted Receiver by the help of a
Burning-glass, yielded no Air.
EXPERIMENT VI.
July 19. PASTE included in a Receiver and burnt, afforded so much Air, that
the Cover which before could not be moved without difficulty, easily parted
from the Receiver.
ARTICLE IX. Concerning the Production of Air in Vacuo.
EXPERIMENT I.
Sept. 9. 76. Dried Grapes in Vacuo.
AN Exhausted Receiver being half full of dried Grapes. Sept. 10 It ascended
Sept. 12 It ascended Sept. 14 It ascended Sept. 17 It ascended Sept. 22 The
Ascent was Sept. 27 The Ascent was The Height was 3 Digits. October. 11. The
Mercury was 6 Digits high. Sept. 9. 76. A Receiver being half full of dried
Figs, the Air was drawn out till it stood at 3 Inches. Sept. 10. No Air
produced. Sept. 17. No Air. Whence it appears, that there is no Regularity in
the Production of Air from dried Fruits.
EXPERIMENT II.
August 5. 76. Pears and Apricocks.
PEARS and Apricocks were shut up in Vacuo. Aug. 6. In 18 Hours the Mercury was
raised 2 Inches; In ten Hours more the Height of it was 3 Digits. Aug. 7 The
height was 5 Aug. 8 The height was 6 Aug. 9 In 14 hours it was 7 Inc. hig. Aug.
10 The height was 8 Aug. 11 The height was 10 Aug. 12 The height was 12 Aug. 13
The height was 14 Aug. 14 The height was 16 Aug. 15 The height was 18 Aug. 16
The height was 20 Aug. 18 The height was 25 Aug. 19 The height was 29 Aug. 20
The height was 31 Aug. 21 The height was 32 Aug. 22 The height was 34 Aug. 23
The height was 35 Aug. 26 The height was 38 Aug. 29 The height was 41 Sept. 1
The height was 42 Sept. 4 The height was 44 Sept. 7. The three last Days being
hot, it was raised to 46 Sept. 10 The height was 47 Sept. 13 The height was 44
Sept. 23 The height was 48 Sept. 27 The height was 50 Nov. 5 The height was 52
Nov. 28. The Apricocks were reduced to Water; the Skin being severed from the
Pulp, no more Air was produced. Jan. 10. 77. It was a hard Frost, at which time
the Mercury came to 57 Inches. Upon a Thaw, it was depressed to 23. March 3.
The Apricocks were putrifi'd and had lost their Color. Hence it is evident,
that Apricocks afford Air almost as fast in their wonted Pressure as in Vacuo.
EXPERIMENT III.
June 20. 76. Sour Cherries.
Sour Cherries whole, being put into one Receiver, and others cut into
another; The whole ones raised the Mercury in two hours, 10 Lines; the
dissected ones, 20. June 21. The whole ones raised the Mercury to 3 Inehes; the
other Gage was spoiled. June 26. The whole ones raised the Mercury 15 Digits;
The other Receiver was full of Air. July 9. The Receiver being removed from
it is Cover, I eat a Cherry, which was well tasted: The rest being included in
Vacuo, and some of them broke, in an hour raised the Mercury 2 Digit. July 10.
The Mercury ascended not, because the Gage was spoiled. July 15. The Cover was
severed from it is Receiver. Whence it appears, that dissected Fruits produce
Air sooner than whole ones.
EXPERIMENT IV.
June 9. 77. Cherries in Vacuo.
CHerries being put into a Receiver, raised of a Digit of Mercury, in an hour.
Jun. 10. The Mercury was raised in 18 hours to the height of 11 Digits. June 11
It rose to 15 June 12 It rose to 15 June 13 It rose to 22 June 16 It rose to 30
June 18 the Receiver was opened.
Fruits of the same kind in France filled their Receiver in 2 Days; and
probably there may be the like difference in other Fruits, in several Countries.

EXPERIMENT V.
June 12. 76. Cabbages in Vacuo
CAbbages being included in a Receiver, in an hours time raised the Mercury a
Line. June 13. It was raised to 10 Digits. June 17. It was raised almost to the
Top of the Gage; the Cabbages being very little altered. June 19. Having been 2
days exposed to the Air, were corrupted and blackish; being shut up in Vacuo,
they raised the Mercury an Inch. June 22. It was raised to the height of 1.
June 23. No more Air being produced, the Cabbage was taken out: It stunk much:
So that I suspected, that Bodies have afforded as much Air as they can before
they putrify.
EXPERIMENT VI.
May 29. 76. Oranges in Vacuo.
HAving shut up two pieces of Orange, which weighed 4 Ounces, in 2 exhausted
Receivers, large enough to hold 10 Ounces of Water. June 10. They removed the
Receiver from it is Cover; upon which, I shut them up in an exhausted Receiver,
capable of containing 8 Ounces of Water; upon which the Mercury ascended of a
Digit. June 13. It was almost 2 Digits high. June 16. It ascended about 3
Lines. June 21 It ascended not one Line. July 18. The Mercury was no higher,
but some Mouldiness appeared.
EXPERIMENT VII.
April 27. 76 A Tulip in Vacuo.
A Tulip being shut up in a Receiver, with as much Air as raised the Mercury 2
Digits. May 2. That which before was stripped, put on a dark Red, and became
moist: It afforded but little Air.
EXPERIMENT VIII.
April 22. 76. A Limon in Vacuo
A Limon shut up with a Mercurial Gage 3 Digits long. April 24It was 1 Digits
high. April 25It was 2 Digits high. April 26It was 4 lines higher. Apr. 27It
rose 1 Line Apr. 28It rose 1 Line Apr. 29 May 3. In four Days it ascended a
little above a Line. May 3. 77. The Limon was a little altered; The Mercury was
raised to the Top of the Gage. Jan. 1. 17. The Limon had contracted a
Yellowness and Moisture.
EXPERIMENT IX.
March 16. 67. An Apple in Vacuo.
AN Apple which began to putrify, was put into one Receiver, and a bruised one
into another. May 15. The bruised Apple appeared wholly rotten; and the
Receiver was forced from it is Cover. The other Apple was unaltered. Aug. 20.
That which before began to putrify, was yet unaltered; It tasted grateful, but
subacid; The Pulp was of a mealy Consistence. This Confirms the Inference from
the 5th Exp. of this Article.
EXPERIMENT VII.
May 17. 76. Milk in Vacuo.
AN equal Quantity of Milk being shut up in common Air, and in Vacuo. May 18.
That in the common Air was covered with Cream; the other, with Bubbles. May 19.
The Bubbles swelled more and more, the Mercury was raised a little. May 20 The
Bubbles swelled more and more, and the Milk seemed curdled: The Mercury in the
Gage being raised to the Top. The Milk in the free Air was evidently curdled.
May 22. The Milk in Vacuo being curdled, yielded more Air yet, almost all the
Bubbles being broke: From this Experiment it appears, that Milk is sooner
coagulated in open Air than in Vacuo. June 20. The Milk in the free Air stunk,
and was full of Worms; and emitted several large Bubbles when the Air was drawn
out; the Worms moved vehemently, and all lived four hours. All the Bubbles on
the Milk in Vacuo, were broke, and it continued coagulated. May 19. 77. Some
Whey in Vacuo, was poured out of a Vessel into a Receiver about 4 days ago, it
seemed limpid like Water: The Whey remaining in the Vessel, was sufficient to
separate the Butyrous from the Caseous Part. To day the Milk stagnant in the
Receiver, seemed to be got out; the Cover being forced from the Receiver.
Toward night, the Milk being taken out of the Receiver, was found acid, both
in Smell and Taste: After a little time, the limpid Whey disappeared, being
mixed with the Caseous and Butyrous Part. May 24. The Butyrous Part vanished,
and the Milk began to smell amiss. June 1. The Milk had no very bad Smell, nor
had it produced Worms, but grew dry, and then the Mice eat it up.
In this Experiment the following Particulars were remarkable. First, That the
Coagulation was slower when the Air was drawn out. Secondly, The Weight of
Butter, Whey or Cheese, is not the same in the Air, as in Vacuo, because one
swims on the Top of the other. Thirdly, The Putrefaction of Milk is retarded,
by drawing out the Air. Fourthly, Milk by being kept in Vacuo, is not unfit to
generate Worms, when exposed to common Air.

EXPERIMENT XI.
Sept. 5. 77. Urine in Vacuo.
HAving enclosed 3 Ounces and 3 Drachms of Urine in a Receiver, capable of
holding 10 Ounces. Sept. 7. The Mercury was raised 2 Digits. Sept 8. It was
somewhat higher. December. 5. The Mercury ascended to the height of 3 Inches. The
Urine was unaltered. December. 6. Urine was set under a Receiver, being left open
to the common Air. December. 16. The Urine in Vacuo was not changed. The other in
10 days time seemed Turbid, and it is Superficies moldy.
From this and the foregoing Experiment we may infer, that Urine contains less
Air than Milk.

Besides, the Efficacy of Air corrupting Urine is worth Notice.

EXPERIMENT XII.
May. 19. Diluted Paste.
A Vessel half full of diluted Paste, which was without Leaven, being conveyed
into a Receiver, before the Receiver was quite exhausted, the Paste was swollen
quite to the Top of the Vessel. May 20. It swelled more, several Cavities being
interspersed through it. May 22. It yielded more Air, and was much more tumid.
May 23. The Receiver was separated from the Cover by the Air produced in the
Receiver. The swelling of the Paste was something abated, and it was much more
so in the Afternoon: It did not Taste Acid.
EXPERIMENT XIII.
July 20. 76. Beef in Vacuo.
A Quantity of Beef being put into one exhausted Receiver; and a like Quantity
into another, which was in some Measure exposed to the Air. July 21. The
exhausted Receiver was filled with Air: But suspecting that some Air had got
in, I shut the Beef up in another Receiver. July 22. The Mercury in 14 hours
was raised 15 Inches. July 25. The Receiver was not half full of Air. July 26.
The Receiver was severed from it is Cover; and the Beef being again ncluded in
Vacuo, sustained 10 Digits of Mercury in an hours time. July 28. The Receiver
was full, and when re-exhausted, the Beef yielded a great deal of Air again in
a short time. July 30. The Receiver was again filled, and being exhaust'd, the
Beef yielded so much Air in an hour as was able to sustain 10 Digits of
Mercury. August 1. The Receiver being again full, and the Beef Stinking, we
threw it away. Hence it appears, that,
Flesh yields more Air whilst it Putrifies than before, but it is otherwise
with Fruits. See Exp. IX of this Article.

EXPERIMENT XIV.
July 18. 78. Goosberries in Vacuo.
GOosberries being shut up in Vacuo; In half an hour the Mercury was raised a
Digit: In an hour and half it was raised another. July 19. The Receiver was
almost filled. July 20. The Receiver and it is Cover being parted, a good deal
of Juice ran out. July 29. The Goosberries were again included in Vacuo. July
30. In 16 hours the Mercury raised an Inch and. July 30. 77. They did not
wholly fill the Receiver: Some time since they lost their red Color, and
inclined to a White one.
It seems from hence to follow, that since after they had yielded all their
Air, they underwent no change, that Air was the Cause of Corruption.

EXPERIMENT XV.
Aug. 23. Pears in Vacuo.
PEars being included in a Receiver, with as much Air as raised the Mercury an
Inch and. In two hours it was almost 6 Inches high. Aug. 24 It was 12 Aug. 25
It was 16 Aug. 26 It was 18 Aug. 27 It was 21 Aug. 28 It was 23 Aug. 31 It was
30 Sept. 1 It was 32 Inches high. Sept. 2 It was 35 Inches high. Sept. 3 It was
38 Inches high. Sept. 4 It was 44 Inches high. Sept. 5 It was 45 Inches high.
Sept. 6 It was 50 Inches high. Sept. 7 The height was the same; some Air
getting out. Sept. 9 It was 53 Inches high. Sept. 8 It was 54 Inches high.
Sept. 10 It was 58 Inches high. Sept. 12. Yesterday there was no Alteration: To
day, as I suspected, some Air getting out, it was 53. Sept. 13. Being
transmited into another Receiver it was 32. Sept. 16. The Receiver being opened
the Pears were Rotten.
EXPERIMENT XVI.
From Sept. 17 to 22. Plums in Vacuo.
PLums dried being enclosed in a Receiver yielded very little Air. Nov. 8. The
Receiver was opened, no more Air being produced.
EXPERIMENT XVII.
Sept. 28. Nut-Kernels.
NUt-kernels being enclosed in a Receiver. Sept. 26 It rose A little Sept. 30
It rose 2 Inches Oct. 6 It rose By degrees to 6 Inches. Oct. 15 It was 10
Digits high. Oct. 22 It was 15 Digits high. Nov. 28. It was 20 Digits high. The
Kernels had neither lost their Color nor Taste: So that Air may be procured
from Fruit of an hard Consistence, without Putrefaction.
ARTICLE X. Concerning the Production of Air above it is wonted Pressure.
EXPERIMENT I.
Jun. 22. Pease with a Glass full of Raisin.
NEw Pease were shut up in a Receiver with a Glass full of Raisins of the Sun
bruised and mixed with Water. Toward Evening the Raisins yielded Air enough to
raise the Mercury 12 Digits. Jun. 23 It was 49 Digits high. Jun. 24 It was 75
Digits high. Jun. 25 It was 90 Digits high. Jun. 26 It was 90 Digits high. Jun.
28 It was 100 Digits high. The Pease turned Yellow and seemed to Sweat. Jun. 30
It was 110 July 1 It was 110 July 4 It was 124 July 7 It was 140 July 16. It
remained at the same height; but the Liquor which came from the Pease got out.
July 12. New Liquor was produced; The Mercury neither rose nor fell. July 13.
The Liquor got out, and some Air; But the Cover being better adapted, new
Liquor was produced. July. 25. The Receiver was broke in Pieces. The Pease kept
their Taste, and parted from their Husks as if they had begun to boil.
EXPERIMENT II.
Sept. 15.76. Unripe Plums in Compressed Air.
UNripe Plums being shut up with as much Air as sustained an Inch of Mercury.
Sept. 16 It rose to 6 Sept. 17 It rose to 8 Sept. 18 It rose to 10 Sept. 19 It
rose to 12 Sept. 20 It rose to 14 Sept. 22 It rose to 18 Sept. 23 It rose to 18
Sept. 24 It rose to 19 Sept. 26 It rose to 23 Sept. 28 It rose to 26 October. 1
It was 30 October. 4 It was 31 It was somewhat Cold. October. 5 It rose to 32
October. 7 It rose to 33 October. 9 It rose to 33 October. 11 October. 14 It rose to 27
October. 15 The Cold abated. October. 17 It rose to 38 October. 19 It rose to 39
October. 22 It rose to 41 October. 26 It rose to 43 October. 29 It rose to 45 Nov. 2
It rose to 46 Nov. 5 It rose to 47 Nov. 20 It rose to 53
The Production of Air is, in this Experiment, sometimes regular and sometime
irregular.

EXPERIMENT III.
July 6. 76. Goosberries in Compressed Air.
GOosberries included in a Receiver with as much Air as raised Mercury of an
Inch; in half an hour it was raised half an Inch more; in 7 hours it was raised
to 5 Inches. July 7 It rose 5 July 8 It rose 3 July 9 It rose 3 July 10 It rose
4 Digits high. July 11 It rose 4 Digits high. July 12 It rose 4 Digits high.
July 13. The Cover was broke; and another substituted in it is Place. July 14,
15, 16, 17, 18. There was no Change: The Fruit being taken out, Part was shut
up in Vacuo; the rest with common Air. In four hours the Ascent of the Mercury
was 4 Digits. July 19. The Mercury ascended in 14 hours; but because I
suspected that some Air got out, I set the Screw, and in 9 hours the Mercury
rose 11 Inches. The Cover broke and the Air was lost.
Hence it appears, that unfermented Goosberries contain much Air, which they
more readily afforded, when the Pressure of the Air, is taken off; tho when
fermented they yield a great deal more in Compressed Air.

EXPERIMENT IV.
July 8. 76. Paste in Compressed Air.
SWollen Paste being included with as much Air as raised Mercury, by the
Pressure of that, lost a third Part of it is humidity. Soon after it swelled
again, and in half an hour raised the Mercury two Digits. The Paste continued
to swell, and the Mercury in an hour was raised 2. In an hour more it was
raised 3 and in another 4. It staid at 16 Digits. July 9. In 14 hours it was
raised 21 Inches high, and stood at 37. the Screw being set to prevent Air from
getting out, the Cover broke, and upon an Ingress of Air, the Paste subsided 2
Digits, though the Compression was less than before. In 5 hours Space the Mercury
ascended 13 Digits. But the Screw being set, the Cover broke again, so that the
Air got in, and depressed the Paste again. In 4 hours the Mercury ascended 10
Digits, and the Paste rose as before; But being willing to make use of another
Screw, I permitted a little Air to get out. July 10. The Paste rose again this
Night, but yielded no Air. In 7 hours time the Mercury ascended 4 Inches. July
13 A little Air was produced. July 17. The Paste being taken out, was subacid
in Smell. Hence it appears, that Paste may yield Air in Compressed Air, as well
as in Vacuo. The rising of the Paste seemed to depend on the Expansion of the
Air in the Paste, which was depressed and overpowered by the External Air,
when it was let in.
EXPERIMENT V.
July 13. 76. Beans shut up in a Receiver.
BEANS, such as Horses eat, being shut up with Water in Vacuo, those that were
bruised, seemed to swell; those which were whole, seemed unaltered. The
Mercury, July 14 rose 7 July 15 rose 5 July 16 rose 3 July 17 rose 6 July 18
rose 9 July 19 rose 1 July 20 rose 3 July 21 It rose 5 It rose 2 July 22 It
rose 78 July 23 It rose 5 i. e. 35 July 24 It rose Above the wonted Pressure.
July 25
The Receiver was not able to bear a greater Pressure. The Beans were very
fetid, like putrified Flesh.

Beans yield Air in a moderate Pressure, as well as in Vacuo, sometimes sooner,
and sometimes slower.

EXPERIMENT VI.
July 23. Goosberries in Vacuo.
GOosberries shut up in Vacuo; and in 2 hours the Mercury ascended 1 Inch. July
24 It ascended to 7 July 25 It ascended to 12 July 26 It ascended to 17 July 27
It ascended to 20 July 28 It ascended to 24 July 29 It ascended to 30 July 30
It ascended to 31 almost Some Air, being transmitted out of this into another
Receiver, it stood at 26. July 31 The height was 35. August 1. Some Air got
out, and whilst I endeavored to stop the Receiver close, the Mercury that was
raised to 39 Inches, subsided to 30 Inches. Aug. 2 The height of the Mercury
was 39. Some Air being transmitted, it stood at 31. Aug. 3 The height of the
Mercury was 39 Aug. 4 The height of the Mercury was 41 Aug. 5 The height of the
Mercury was 43. Air transmitted it stood at 30 Aug. 6 The height of the Mercury
was 43 Aug. 7 The height of the Mercury was 47 Aug. 8 The height of the Mercury
was 48. Air being transmitted, it sunk to 36. Aug. 9 The height of it was 41.
Aug. 10 The height of it was 47. Air being transmitmitted, it stood at 35. Aug.
11 The height of it was 38 Aug. 12 The height of it was 42 The Air was drawn
out, and the Mercury was 26 Inches high. Aug. 13 The height of it was 33 Aug.
14 The height of it was 36 Aug. 15 The height of it was 39 Aug. 16 The height
of it was 41 Aug. 17 The height was 44 Aug. 11 The height was 47 Aug. 19 The
height was 50
The Air being transmitted, and the Goosberries taken out, they had lost their
Color, and almost all their Acidity. They produced Air very regularly, except
a little faster, when some part had been drawn out.

EXPERIMENT VII.
Sept. 12. Crude Grapes.
CRUDE Grapes were put into a Receiver, with as much Air as raised Mercury 3
Digits. Sept. 13 The hight was 5 Sept. 14 The hight was 10 Sept. 16 The hight
was 17 Sept. 17 The hight was 19 Sept. 19 The hight was 23 Sept. 20 The hight
was 25 Sept. 22 The hight was 30 It was stopped with a Screw Sept. 23 The hight
was 3 Sept. 24 The hight was 32 Sept. 26 The hight was 34 Sept. 27 The hight
was 36 Sept. 28 The hight was 36 Sept. 29 The hight was 37 Sept. 30 The hight
was 37 Oct. 2 The hight was 39 Oct. 4 The hight was 39 Oct. 5 The hight was 40
Oct. 7 The hight was 41 Oct. 8 The hight was 42 Oct. 15 The hight was 46 Nov. 2
The hight was 54 Nov. 5 The hight was 58 Jan. 10 The hight was 70 There was no
sensible alteration in the Gage when the Frost was most severe, though the Grapes
and their Juice was Froze. Sept. 21. The Grapes being little altered, and the
Mercury not much higher, the Receiver was open^d, and the Grapes though more
pungent, had not lost their Taste, but their Juice preserved it is red Color.
Hence it appears, that Grapes yield not all their Air in a little time.

EXPERIMENT VIII.
August 10. 77. Pears in Vacuo.
PEars cut in two being included in a Vacuum, about Evening the Mercury was
raised 10 Digits. Aug. 11 It rose to 20 Aug. 13 It rose to 38 Aug. 14 It rose
to 48 Aug. 15 It rose to 55 Aug. 16 It rose to 60 Aug. 17 It rose to 68 Air
being Transmitted it subsided to 53. Aug. 18 The hight was 61 Aug. 19 The hight
was 64 Aug. 20 The hight was 70 Aug. 21 The hight was 72 Air being transmitted
it stood at 61. Aug. 22 The hight was 68 Aug. 23 The hight was 74 Aug. 24 The
hight was 79 Aug. 25 The hight was 81 Air being transmitted it sunk to 61. Aug.
26 The hight was 56 Soem got out; being transmitted it sunk to 52. Aug. 27 The
hight was 60 Aug. 28 The hight was 68 Aug. 29 The hight was 75 Aug. 30 The
hight was 83 Aug. 31 The hight was 88 Sept. 1 The hight was 93 Sept. 2 The
hight was 100 Sept. 3 The hight was 89 Some Air got out. Sept. 4 The hight was
100 Sept. 5 The hight was 100 Sept. 7 The hight was 100 No Air got out. Sept. 9
The hight was 107 Sept. 10 The hight was 107 Air being Transmitted it sunk to
99. Sept. 11 Sept. 13 The hight was 105 Oct. 8 Air got out. Pears yielded their
Air by fits.
ARTICLE XI. Various Experiments.
EXPERIMENT I.
March 16. Melted Lead in a Receiver.
LEad being melted in a Brass Vessel, an Inch and in Diameter, it was
conveyed into a Receiver, and the Air pumped out, before the Lead cooled;
when it was cool the Surface was concave, especially in the Middle; though when
it cools in open Air, the Surface is generally unequal, except in the Middle.
The same success happened when the Experiment was made with Tin. Neither of the
Metals afforded Bubbles.
EXPERIMENT II.
Sept. 2. A Solution of Salt in Water.
A Solution of Salt in Water being conveyed into a Receiver. Sept. 15. The
Salt was not Christaliz'd.
EXPERIMENT III.
August 8. 76. Artificial Air.
ARtificial Air from Goosberries was included in a Receiver. March 1. 7 6/7. No
Alteration in the height of the Mercury.
EXPERIMENT IV.
August 8. Air weighed.
A Phial which was large enough to hold 7 Ounces 5 Drachms and 3 Grains of
Water, having the Air exhausted, was poised to an Aequilibrium with another
weight. Upon which a Piece of a Bladder which covered it, was pierced with a
Needle, and the Air getting into it, weighed 4 Grains and, which Weight is to
the former, as 1 to 814; so that Water is 800 times heavier than Air of the
same Bulk.
EXPERIMENT V.
Jan. 16. 77. Aqua fortis and fixed Nitre.
AQua fortis and fixed Nitre, being mixed in a Receiver together, yielded much
Air. March 5. The Air was not destroyed, nor the height of the Mercury altered.
But Nitre was produced in Vacuo from the Mixture.
EXPERIMENT VI.
May 12. 76. Several Bodies in Vacuo.
A Phial which had a long Neck, being so far filled with Oil, that it wrought
up to the middle of it is Neck, was conveyed into a Receiver; and so much Air
Compressed into it, as raised the Mercury 120 Inches above the usual height.
The Surface of the Oil subsided of an Inch, being condensed by Cold; which was
evident, since the compressed Air being let out, the Surface rose not again.
August 5. The same Experiment being made with Water, there was no sensible
Alteration in the height of it is Surface, tho the heat might have given reason
to expect some change. Jan. 14. 78. A Glass Phial being filled with Spirit of
Wine, till it rose within 3 Inches of the Top of it is Neck, was by the heat of
my Hands, caused to rife to the top of the Vessel: Which being then Invert'd
into a Vessel full of Mercury, and my Hands removed, the Cold Spirit admitted 3
Inches of Mercury into it is Neck; yet being conveyed into a Receiver, and so
much Air compressed into it, as raised 90 Digits of Mercury, the Spirit was not
in the least condensed by compression, tho Cold had such a considerable effect
on it. When the Receiver was opened there was no appearance of Bubbles in the
Spirit of Wine. It would be worth while to consider, why Cold should have such
a considerable Effect in condensing Spirit; and why it cannot be condensed by
Compression.
EXPERIMENT VII.
May 12. 76. Spirit of Wine and Oil of Turpentine.
SOme Spirit of Wine contained in a Glass Vessel, with some drops of Oil of
Turpentine upon it, were briskly moved about, till the Receiver being
exhausted, they stuck to several Bubbles which rose out of the Spirit of Wine,
and were by them carried to the sides of the Vessel; where they were kept,
except 2 Drops, which the Bubbles left behind upon the Surface of the Spirit;
which, whilst the Receiver was exhausting, continued their Motion, but in a
little time after, were wholly at rest. Yet upon a Re-ingress of Air, they for
a little while renewed their Motion again. The same Experiment being repeated
with Spirit of Wine and Oil of Turpentine, wholly freed from Air; there was
neither any Ebullition, nor an appearance of Bubbles; yet the Drops of Oil
moved in Vacuo after the same Manner as in open Air. Hence it appears, that the
Motion of the Parts of Oil, depend not in a Dissolution in Vacuo; since all
Dissolutions are company'd with a production of Bubbles.
EXPERIMENT VIII.
May 19. 76. Radishes in a Receiver with Claret.
HAving cut two Radishes transversly, and suspended them all Night in Vacuo,
over a Vessel of Claret, the small End of one being downwards, and the other in
a contrary Posture; all being freed of their Air, the next Day I freed two
other Radishes from their thick Skin, and cutting them transversly, suspended
them over the Wine, as the others, in Vacuo; upon which, immersing them all in
the Wine, they emitted Bubbles considerably; especially, those that had been
longest in the Receiver. From this Experiment we may urge, that Bubbles are
formed of Particles of Air contained in Water; and the Reason why those
Radishes yielded most Air; whose Skins were not pulled off, is, because those
Skins are full of Canals and Pores, to contain Air, in for the forming of
Bubbles. The Liquor ascended equally in all the Radishes, notwithstanding their
Postures.
EXPERIMENT IX.
May. 4. A small Tube immersed in Water.
A Small Glass Tube open at both Ends, being immersed in Water, the Water in
Vacuo, ascended as high as it usually does in common Air; but in a little time
it was raised higher, by Bubbles of Water, which divided and intercepted the
Cylinder of Water in 3 several places; besides, several Bubbles of Water passed
out at that End of the Tube which was immersed. One End of this Tube being
Hermetically sealed up, the Experiment succeeded after the same manner, as when
it was open; but in the open Air, the Water ascended not. One thing in this
Experiment was very Remarkable, viz. That the Water suspended in the Tube,
yielded no Bubbles, but only at the Bottom of the Tube; nor did the Cylinder of
Water even at the Bottom yield Bubbles, when it was raised above the Surface of
the Water which it was before immersed in.
May. 5. The Experiment was repeated; but before the End of the Tube was
immersed in Water, a Drop, which ran over the Superior Aperture of the
Receiver, fell down to the open End of the Tube, and was raised two Lines in
the Cavity of the Pipe: No Bubbles were formed in half an hour, till the Tube
was immersed in Water, and then successively they rose one after another. In
trying this Experiment, several times I observed, that though, whilst the Tube
was immersed, several Bubbles appeared about the End of it, yet when it was
raised above the Surface of the Water, none were to be seen. May 6. The
Experiment was tried with an Infusion of Nephritick Wood; in which the Success
was alike, except that in the Infusion, when the Bubbles were small, they
ascended to the Top of the Liquor, which is an Argument of it is Thinness, and
that it has no Viscocity. May 10. I repeated the same Experiment, with a
Mixture of Spirit of Wine, and an Oil made per Deliquium; In which nothing was
to be observed different from the former, but that the Liquor ascended not so
high. From these Experiments it may probably be inferred, That the Formation of
Bubbles in the Extremity of the Tube, depends on aerial Particles, which swim
in the Water, and meeting with some Impediment at their End, are kept there,
till new ones joining with them, form Bubbles.
EXPERIMENT X.
July 18. 76. Beans with Water in an Iron Tube.
BEANS, such as Horses eat, being shut up with Water in an Iron Tube 2 days
ago, to day seemed unaltered; but the Stopple of the Tube being pulled back,
Air and Water broke out; which Eruption was succeeded by a bubling Noise, which
continued above an hour. July 25. The Iron Tube was opened a second time, and a
bubling Noise succeeded as before. Whence it appears, that Beans contain Air,
which cannot discharge it self in a Compression, till that Compression is
removed.
EXPERIMENT XI.
March 4. 77. Spirit of Sal Armoniack and Copper.
A Glass half full of Spirit of Sal Armoniack, being included in Vacuo, with
Filings of Copper in it, in 15 Minutes it was tinged with a diluted Blew,
which, upon an Ingress of Air, in 3 Minutes became vivid and thick. April 4.
The Liquor having been enclosed in Vacuo, had almost lost it is Color, which it
regained when the Air was let in again.
EXPERIMENT XII.
May 8. Oil per Deliquium with Spirit of Wine.
OIL made per Deliquium, being shut up in a Receiver, with Spirit of Wine
swimming upon it; when the Air began to be exhausted, great Bubbles rose from
the Spirit, and small ones from the Oil; but in an hour, the Oil afforded
Bubbles large enough to fill the whole Diameter of the Pipe in their Ascent,
and an hour after that, they broke out so violently, as to strike against the
Top of the Receiver. May 9. The Experiment being repeated in a Vessel, which
was longer and narrower, I observed, that the Bubbles which rose from the Oil,
were not very large, till of an Inch above the Surface of it, and then they
were suddenly expanded.
EXPERIMENT XIII.
May 3. 76. Aq. Fort. and Spirit of Wine.
A Mixture of Aqua Fortis and Spirit of Wine, being divided into three Parts,
and each of those included in a distinct Vessel with a piece of Iron, one of
them was included in Vacuo; upon which, several considerable Ebullitions
succeeded. The Liquor when taken out, was black and Turbid; though in the other
two, it was not altered in Color, but only a black Powder was settled in the
Bottom. Wherefore one of those being included in Vacuo, after Ebullitions, less
violent than those in the Vessel first included, the Liquor in a quarter of an
hours time, being taken out, was almost as black and turbid, as that first put
into the Receiver: That in the open Air, was not much altered. May 4. The
Liquors shut up in the Receivers, appeared clear and green; But that in the
open Air, bubbled more than the day before, and was of a red Color: And all
three being shut up in Vacuo, the red Liquor afforded larger Bubbles. Hence it
appears, that Spirit of Wine promotes Ebullition in Vacuo.
EXPERIMENT XIV.
Jan. 21. 78. Spirit of Sal Armoniack with Filings of Copper.
A Glass half full of Spir. Sal Armon. with Filings of Copper, stopped with a
Leather Stopple, was put into a Receiver, with unfermented Paste. Jan. 22. The
Air yielded by the Paste, penetrated the Leather, which is impervious to common
Air, which appeared by the Tincture it gave the Liquor. Jan. 25. The Liquor had
almost lost it is Color; so that the Particles of Artificial Air are so minute,
as to penetrate Pores which common Air cannot. Feb. 2. The Glass being shut up
in a Receiver, which admitted Air so gradually, as to be filled in 24 hours,
the Liquor still remained Colorless. Feb. 15. The Glass being again shut up in
Vacuo, with Paste, the Air afforded by it, did not as before, penetrate the
Leather; nor was the Liquor in the least tinged by it.
EXPERIMENT XV.
April 2. 78. HAving put a Shrew-Mouse into the Engine described, A Shrew-Mouse
in Vacuo.
for the Filtration of Air through Water; when the Pump was stirred, and the
Air began to penetrate the Water, it was a little better; but could not
recover. Apr. 12. The Experiment was repeated with a weakly Mouse, that had
been kept fasting a long time; the Success was the same as in the last
Experiment; for the Mouse being taken out before it was dead, could not recover
in the free Air.
EXPERIMENT XVI.
May 2. 78. SIX Weeks ago, Spawn of Frogs in Vacuo, etc.
Spawn of Frogs being included in common Air, in Vacuo, and in another Receiver
with compressed Air, which sustained 60 Digits above the ordinary height. The
Mercury in Vacuo, in 15 days was raised 1 Inch. The Spawn in common Air, was
corrupt and blackish; that in the compressed Air remained unaltered. A Month
after, the Spawn in Vacuo was turned into Water, except the black Spots; but
had not altered it is Color. That in the common Air was very black; That in the
compressed Air began to be reddish; which Color sensibly increased. May 22.
That in the common Air had lost it is Color. June 23. That in the compressed
Air had acquired a Greenness. October. 15. That in Vacuo was exhaled out of it is
Vessel, and remained in the Receiver in the Form of Water: That in the common
Air was void of Color; and that in the compressed Air was still red.
EXPERIMENT XVII.
May 9. 78. AN Orange having been divided, Oranges in Vacuo.
and included in two Receivers, in which was left an equal Vacuity; the
Capacity of the larger being so far filled with Water, as it was bigger than
the Cavity of the other, I observed, that that which was shut up with Water,
was four times more moldy than the other. The same Experiment was repeated,
the third part of the Cavity of one Receiver being filled with Water, yet the
Orange was not touched by it. June 15. Neither of the Pieces of the Orange was
moldy, and the same Experiment being again repeated, neither Piece was moldy
in a Months time. The Difference seems to be the Effect of some Disposition in
the Air.
EXPERIMENT XVIII.
June 1. 78. A Small Glass Tube, Venice Turpentine in a Wind-Gun.
half full of Venice Turpentine, being put into the Wind-Gun, as soon as the
Air was compressed into a tenth Part of the Space it possessed before; The
Leather which covered the Elliptick Hole was driven out. The Tube being taken
out, I perceived several Bubbles in the Top of the Turpentine, which I
supposed, had been pressed into it when the Cavity of the Gun had Air
compressed in it; Therefore placing the Tube again in the Gun, I caused the Air
to be condensed to 15 times as little compass. June 3. The Turpentine being
taken out, was free from Bubbles, but by degrees, a great many were formed in
it. June 4. Having freed Turpentine from it is Air, and poured Water upon it, I
shut up all in the Wind-Gun. June 8. At the first sight, both the Water and
Turpentine were free from Bubbles; but soon after they appeared and ascended in
the Turpentine, almost from the Bottom: So that the Air that formed these
Bubbles penetrated the Water and most of the Turpentine.
EXPERIMENT XIX.
Aug. 11. 78. WHEN Spirit of Sal Armoniack was cleared of it is Bubbles, Filings
of Copper and Sp. Sal Armon. in Vacuo.
I mixed Filings of Copper with it in Vacuo; upon which, it yielded several
Bubbles; they did not yield Air, but destroyed what was contained there before;
The Liquor was green and turbid. December. 5. The Spirit was for the greatest
part got out of the Vessel, and condensed in the Receiver; that which continued
in the Vessel, was as clear as Water. The Mercury was wholly driven out of the
Gage; whence it was reasonable to suppose, that the Air was gradually consumed
in the Receiver.
EXPERIMENT XX.
September. 2. 78. A Cylinder of Tin, and another of Lead, Mercury raised in a
Tube in Vacuo, etc.
being immersed in Vacuo in Mercury, and two others in Mercury exposed to
common Air. Sept. 6. The Mercury in the Tin Cylinder in Vacuo, was raised 4
Inches and a half. The Pipe being cut transversly, half of that Space above the
Mercury it was immersed in, and in another place an Inch above the Surface of
the Mercury, the Amalgama had penetrated into the Metal half a Line above, and
a whole one below. The Mercury in the Lead Pipe had not sensibly penetrated
into that Metal, except where it was immersed: It was raised in it 2. Sept. 7.
The Mercury had ascended 5 Digits in the Tin Pipe, which was exposed to the
Air. Sept. 10. The same Cylinder continuing in the Mercury, was besmeared up to
the very Top, 6 Inches above the Surface of the stagnant Mercury, which had
penetrated the Tube the deeper, by how much the nearer the stagnant Mercury, so
that near the Surface it had penetrated 3 Lines deep. The Mercury was not
raised above 3 Digits and a half in the Lead Pipe, nor had it made any sensible
Penetration: So that the Pressure of the Air contributes little to the Ascent
of Mercury into Metals.
EXPERIMENT XXI.
December. 12. 78. THE Head of a Whiting being cut off, A Whiting in Vacuo.
and divided into 5 parts, one of them was shut up in Vacuo; another in common
Air, another in compressed Air, which sustained 50 Digits above the usual
height. The fourth was included with Air from Paste, the last piece was exposed
to open Air. December. 15. That in the open Air, in the Morning began to shine;
and in the Evening, yielded a Light more vivid. December. 16. It gave over
shining till Evening. Dec. 17. It shined a little. Dec. 18. at Night it shone a
little. Dec. 20. It continued to shine. Dec. 22. It ceased. Dec. 23. That
included in common Air, began to shine. The 24. It did not. Jan. 26. 79. None
of them shined.
ARTICLE XII. Artificial Air destroyed.
EXPERIMENT I.
August 3. 77. ARtificial Air of Cherries being transmitted into a Receiver
full of common Air, Artificial Air of Cherries destroyed.
till the Mercury was raised 25 Inches above it is usual height. Aug. 4 It sunk
to 23 Aug. 6 It sunk to 20 Aug. 7 Aug. 8 a little Aug. 10 to 19
EXPERIMENT II.
May 26. 76. Artificial Air generated and destroyed.
SIX Grains of Sal Armon. being let fall into a sufficient Quantity of Oil of
Vitriol in Vacuo; there followed a great Ebullition, so that the Mercury rose
to it is usual height, but presently subsided again. May 27. The same Experiment
being tried, with this difference, viz. that the Salt was kept 10 hours in
Vacuo, before it was dropped into the Oil; the Success was, that it was 7 or 8
hours before the Air generated by the Ebullition, was destroyed. May 29. The
Salt being not mixed till after 24 hours, the Ebullition and Quantity of Air
generated, were less, and more slowly produced; and it was observable, before
the Ingredients were mixed, that the Mercury rather subsided in the Gage, as if
some Air had been drawn out. July 8. Oil of Vitriol being included with a fifth
Part of common Air, raised the Mercury a little, and kept it up 24 hours. From
whence it appears, that Artificial Air may be destroyed.
ARTICLE XIII. Experiments concerning the different Celerity of Air produced in
Vacuo, or in Common Air.
EXPERIMENT I.
Common Air.
July 1.0 77. Air from sour Paste.
SOwrish Paste being included in a Receiver, In an hour the Mercury was raised
an Inch; in 7 hours 6 Digits. July 11 The height was 11 July 12 The height was
24 July 13 The height was 30 July 14 The height was Sensibly greater. July 15
It ascended a little. and was 38 Inches high. July 19 It yielded no more Air.
Vacuum.
July 10. 76. A less Quantity being enclosed in Vacuo, in an hour the Mercury
ascended 2 Inches, In 7, it was raised to the Top of a short Gage. July 19. The
Cover was not separated from it is Receiver; but the Paste being fired by a
Burning-Glass, it is Superficies was tinged yellow by the Fumes, which after
their Ascent fell upon it, so much Air was produced, that the Cover was easily
removed from the Receiver.
EXPERIMENT II.
Common Air.
August 20. 76. From Paste 24 hours old.
PASTE 24 hours old, being included with as much Air as raised Mercury 4 Digits
and above it is usual height. In 6 hours, it was raised to 8 Inches. Aug. 21 It
rose 4 Aug. 22 It rose 1 Aug. 23 It rose Aug. 26 It rose Aug. 27 It ascended
not. Aug. 29 It smelled subacid.
Vacuum.
Aug. 20. Paste being enclosed in Vacuo, the Mercury was presently raised 2
Inches. Aug. 21 It rose 5 Aug. 22 It rose 3 Aug. 23 It rose 1 Aug. 26 It rose 2
in 3 days. Aug. 27 It rose 0 Aug. 28 The Paste was taken out.
Hence it appears, that sometimes Air is more easily produced in Vacuo, than
common Air.

EXPERIMENT III.
Vacuum.
September. 4. 77. From Filberd Kernels.
FILBERD Kernels were enclosed in common Air. Sept. 5 The height was 5 Sept. 6
The height was 10 Sept. 7 The height was 10 Sept. 8 The height was 12 Sept. 9
The height was 15 Sept. 11 The height was 18 Sept. 12 It was 23 Sept. 13 It was
27 Sept. 14 It was 29 Sept. 15 It was a little more. Sept. 17 It was 30 Sept.
18. Some Air got out; several Bubbles appearing in the Turpentine, which
guarded the Joints of the Receiver.
Common Air.
Sept. 4. In the Afternoon the Air seemed to be diminished. Sept. 5 It was
almost Sept. 6 It was the same Sept. 7 It was 1 Inch. Sept. 8 No Alteration.
Sept. 18 No Alteration.
EXPERIMENT IV.
September. 15. 77. EIGHT Ounces of Raisins of the Sun, bruised and diluted with
Water, being included in a Receiver, large enough to hold 22 Ounces of Water.
Sept. 16 The height was 6 Sept. 17 The height was 10 Sept. 18 The height was 15
Sept. 19 Sept. 20 It was 29 Sept. 21 The Receiver forced from the Cover. Sept.
24. Some Raisins being taken out, the rest were shut up in Vacuo. Sept. 25. The
Receiver was severed from it is Cover.
Sept. 15. 77. The same Ingredients being shut up in common Air. Sept. 16 The
height was Sept. 17 The height was 1 Sept. 18 The height was 3 Sept. 19 The
height was 5 Sept. 20 The height was 7 Sept. 21 The height was 9 Sept. 22 The
height was 11 Sept. 23 The height was 12 Sept. 24 The height was 15
When the Air broke out, several Bubbles rose from the Raisins: Hence it
appears, that Air is more easily generated sometimes in Vacuo, than in common
Air.

EXPERIMENT V.
Vacuum.
Feb. 17.77. Onions in Vacuo.
THREE Onions being enclosed in Vacuo. Feb. 19 The Ascent was 1 Feb. 21 The
Ascent was 1 Feb. 25 The Ascent was 9 May 4 They were not altered. May 18 They
were not altered. Jun. 19 The onions rotten.
Rarefied Air.
Feb. 17. Three Onions were enclosed in Air, so far rarifi'd, that it sustained
only 10 Digits of Mercury. Feb. 19. The Mercury ascended not. 21. They had
acquired a Mouldiness. 25. The Mercury ascended 7 Digits. May 4. No Alteration
in the Onions. 18. No Alteration in the Onions, but the Receiver was forced
from the Cover.
Common Air.
Feb. 17. Three Onions were included in a Receiver, not exactly shut. Feb. 21.
They were not moldy; but budded. 25. They shot forth their Roots. May 4. They
began to be Moldy. This Experiment shows, that some Bodies yield Air as well
in rarefied Air as in Vacuo. As also that Vegetation is promoted by Air. It is
here likewise worth our Notice, that whilst the Onions shot forth, they did not
grow Moldy
ARTICLE XIV.
EXPERIMENT I.
Bruised Fruits.
August 23. 77. Bruised Pears in Vacuo.
Bruised Pears being included in an exhausted Receiver. Aug. 25 The height was
5 Aug. 26 The height was 10 Aug. 27 The height was 14 Aug. 28 The height was 18
Aug. 29 The height was 21 Aug. 30 The height was 25 Aug. 31 The height was 28
Sept. 1 The height was 30 Sept. 2. Receiver was separated from the Cover.
Whole Fruit.
August 23. Whole Fruit.
The same Quantity of Pears being proportionably included in a Receiver. Aug.
25 The height was 11 Aug. 26 The height was 17 Aug. 27 The height was 25 Aug.
28 It was 28 Aug. 29 It was 33 Aug. 30 The Receiver was forced from it is Cover.
Hence it seems, that entire Fruit yielded Air sooner than Bruised ones.

EXPERIMENT II.
August 24. Whole Apples in Vacuo.
WHole Apples being included in a Receiver exhausted. Aug. 25 It was 5 Aug. 26
It was 9 Aug. 27 It was 12 Aug. 28 It was 15 Aug. 29 It was 19 Aug. 30 It was
25 Aug. 31 It was 28 Sept. 1 It was 29 Sept. 2 It was 30 Sept. 3 The Receiver
severed from the Cover.
August 24. An equal Quantity of bruised Fruit being put into a Receiver. Aug.
25 It was 1 Aug. 26 It was 3 Aug. 27 It was 4 Sept. 3 The same. Sept. 25 The
same.
This Experiment is a Confirmation of the Inference drawn from the last.

EXPERIMENT III.
August 25. 77. Bruised Grapes were shut up in Vacuo. Bruised Grapes in Vacuo.
Aug. 36 It was 1 Aug. 27 It was 2 Aug. 28 It was 2 Aug. 29 2 Sept. 15 2
August 25. 77. Unripe Grapes whole were shut up in a Receiver. Aug. 26 It was
3 Aug. 27 It was 5 Aug. 28 It was 7 Aug. 29 It was 10 Aug. 30 It was 12 Aug. 31
It was 13 Sept. 1 It was 15 Sept. 2 It was 16 Sept. 3 It was 18 Sept. 4 It was
18 Sept. 5. They began to be Yellow. Sept. 7 They grew Yellow; the Mercury was
18 Inches. Sept. 15 it was 20.
This is a further Confirmation of the former Experiment.

EXPERIMENT IV.
Sept. 10. 77. TWO Ounces of ripe Grapes being included in a Receiver capable
of holding 10 Ounces. Ripes Grapes.
Sept. 11 It was 6 Sept. 12 It was 9 Sept. 13 It was 12 Sept. 14 It was 15
Sept. 15 It was 20 Sept. 16 It was 25 Sept. 17 It was 28 Sept. 18 It was 30 The
Grapes unaltered. Sept. 19 It was 30 Sept. 20 Grapes a little riper. Sept. 21
The Receiver was forced from the Cover. Sept. 22 The Grapes beginning to Rot,
were shut up in another Receiver. Sept. 23 It was 5 Sept. 24 It was 9 Sept. 25
It was 14 Sept. 26 It was 17 Sept. 27 It was 20 Sept. 29 It was 27 Sept. 30 It
was 28 Oct. 10 The Receiver forced from the Cover. The Grapes seemed rotten;
but preserved their Firmness
Sept. 10. 77. The same Quantity of bruised Grapes being included in a Receiver
of the same Size. Sept. 11 It was 4 Sept. 12 It was 7 Sept. 13 It was 10 Sept.
14 It was 12 Sept. 15 It was 15 Sept. 16 It was 18 Sept. 17 It was 20 Sept. 18
It was 25 Sept. 19. A good Quantity of the Juice was Spilt, the Receiver being
severed from the Cover. Sept. 20. The same Grapes were shut up with as much Air
as raised the Mercury 3 Inches. Sept. 21. The Receiver was separated from the
Cover; and the Grapes enclosed in another Receiver with common Air. Sept. 22.
The Mercury was 11 Inches high. Sept. 23 It was 19 Sept. 24 It was 19 Sept. 30
It was 20 Oct. 3 Being taken out they were bitter.
Ripe Grapes yield more Air when bruised, than unbruis'd.

EXPERIMENT V.
Nov. 19. 78. A Sound and a bruised Apple, Sound and bruised Apples in
Receivers.
being each put into a distinct Vessel; Another bruised one was put into a
third; which was so adapted to it, that when the Receiver was exhausted, the
Air formed in the bruised Apple expanding it self, squeezed out the Juice. Nov.
22. In the first Receiver the Mercury was 5: In the second 3: In the third 0.
Nov. 23. In the 1st 7 Inches: In the others no Alteration. December. 7. In the
1st 11: No Alteration in the others. Jan. 23. The first separated from the
Cover. May 20. 79. The third separated from the Cover: In the second no Air
produced. The Reason why bruised Fruits yield most Air in Vacuo, seems to be,
because they there have more Liberty to expand their Parts.
ARTICLE XV. Air is sometimes found unfit to produce Mouldiness.
EXPERIMENT I.
July 12. 78. ROses being included in two Receivers, Roses in Common and
Compressed Air.
and as much Air with one of them as sustained 60 Digits of Mercury. August 2.
Those in Common Air turned Yellow, the others retained their Color. Feb. 10.
79. Those in the Compressed Air were unaltered. This compared with Exp. IV.
Art. IV. shows, that several times the Air is so different, as sometimes to
hinder and sometimes to promote Corruption.
EXPERIMENT II.
May 22. Tulips and Lark-Spurs.
TUlips and Larks-spurs being shut up in two Receivers, and as much Air
compressed in One as sustained 60 Inches of Mercury 15 Days ago. In five days
some of the Tulips in the Common Air that were cut, seemed Moldy. To day the
other part seemed Moldy. The Flowers seemed as fresh as when first put in; but
those in Compressed Air were more moist. June 22. No more Moldy: This
Experiment compared with the same made the Year before, confirms the Inference
drawn from the foregoing.
ARTICLE XVI. Experiments concerning the Change of Weight, made in the Beams of
the Sun, even in Vessels sealed Hermetically.
EXPERIMENT I.
Sept. 4. 78. Minium exposed to the Sun Beams.
A Dram of Minium being exposed to the Sun Beams, concentered by a burning,
Glass lost part of a Grain.
EXPERIMENT II.
Sept. 6. Calcined Coral exposed to the Sun Beams.
Calcined Coral being exposed to the Beams of the Sun in a Glass hermetically
sealed, became whiter. Sept. 10. In two hours, the Glass being weighed, it from
the first had lost 1/1^ of a Grain.
EXPERIMENT I.
May 23. Calx of Tin in a Glass Hermetically Sealed.
CAlx of Tin included in a Glass hermetically Sealed, lost 1/64 part of a
Grain, by the Effects of the Sun Beams concentred by a burning Glass. May 29.
The Experiment being tried with Minium, it lost 1/32 part of a Grain. May 30.
Being about to repeat the Experiment, the Glass flew in Pieces. June 6. The
same Experiment being tried with Minium it lost 1/64 part of a Grain. Upon a
second trial the Glass broke. July 15. The Sun had no effects on Coals of Wood.
June 20. The Sulphur Vive though it melted and fumed, lost none of it is Weight.
August 1. The same Experiment being repeated it lost no Weight.
ARTICLE XVII. The Preservation of Bodies in Compressed Liquors.
EXPERIMENT I.
Aug. 3. 78. An Apricock in Water.
AN Apricock was shut up in one Receiver full of Raisins of the Sun stoned;
Another being conveyed into a Second, so that it neither touched the Water
nor Raisins. Sept. 10. The Apricock enclosed in the Water being taken out,
bubbled whilst the Air made it is way out. The Apricocks had a pleasant Relish,
but the Raisins had lost their Taste. Feb. 10. 78. The other Apricock only
seemed to have lost it is Firmness. Some Fruits may reserve their Taste in an
Infusion of Raisins of the Sun, if the Vessel will bear a great Compression of
Air.
EXPERIMENT II.
Sept. 17 78. Peaches included in Artificial Air.
PEACHES being included in 2 Receivers, with an Infusion of Raisins. Sept. 11.
The Air generated in one Receiver, forced out some of the Air. Sept. 25. More
of the Liquor was forced out, so that a fifth part seemed empty; but the Screw
being set, it was preserved. Sept. 26. The same Receiver leak'd again. Nov. 27.
The Receiver being opened, whilst the Air made it is way out, the Peaches
bubbled: The yellow sort were soft, but preserved their Taste; the other sort
reserved it is Firmness. The Liquor was very grateful and pleasant. December. 28.
The other Receiver being opened, though before it seemed unaltered, yet both the
Liquor and Peaches bubbled. One side was soft, the other hard: It Is Taste was
pleasant, but something sharp. So that Liquors may acquire a Sowerness, though no
Spirits evaporate.
EXPERIMENT III.
Sept. 20. Peaches and crude Grapes.
PEACHES and unripe Grapes, being included in two Receivers, in one of which
was Apples bruised to a Pulp; In the other, an Infusion of Raisins of the Sun.
Sept. 25. That in which the Raisins were had, forced half it is Liquor out, and
raised the Mercury 100 Inches, the Receiver being opened, whilst the Air got
out, the Peach turned as soft as a Pultis; the Taste of it was pleasant. The
other Receiver was unaltered. Another Peach was shut up with an Infusion of
Raisins of the Sun. Sept. 26. The Mercury was 30 Digits higher than usual.
Sept. 27. It was 72. Sept. 28. It was 90. Liquor got out. Sept. 30. It was at a
stand: the Liquor was all gone. October. 1. The Receiver was opened, and the
Peach though soft, tasted pleasant. October. 3. The Receiver in which the Apples
were contained being open, all things were much fermented; the Juice of the
Apples having got out, the Peach though soft, tasted pleasant. Fruit cannot long
be preserved in the Pulp of Apples, they yield so much Air.
EXPERIMENT IV.
Sept. 23. 78. Pears with the Pulp of Apples.
PEACHES and crude Grapes being included in one Receiver with the Pulp of
Apples, and in another with unripe Grapes bruised. October. 1. That which
contained the Apples was unaltered: But the other had lost it is wind; one of
the Peaches had lost it is Firmness, both of them retained a grateful Taste.
Feb. 5. 79. That which contained the Apples, seemed unaltered; the Pulp and
Peaches tasted grateful, but a little too pungent; when the Receiver was
opened, there happened a very great Ebullition.
EXPERIMENT V.
Sept. 25. 78. Pears with the Pulp of Apples.
TWO Butter Pears were shut up in a Receiver with Pulp of Apples. Sept. 26. The
height of the Mercury was unaltered. October. 5 It was 16 October. 6 It was 16
October. 12 It was 16 October. 29. It subsided. October. 26. The Receiver was cracked
One of the Pears began to rot, the rest, as well as the Apples, tasted well.

EXPERIMENT VI.
October. 1. 78. PEACHES being included with Pulp of Apples in one Receiver, and
unripe Grapes bruised in another. October. 5. Wine got out. The Mercury was 64.
Digits high. October. 6. Wine ran out. It was 70 Inches high. Oct. 8. All the
Wine ran out: It was 86 high. Oct. 12. 86. Oct. 18. 86. The other Receiver
which contained Pulp of Apples, for those five Days, had lost some Juice.
December. 4 The Receiver which contained the Apples being opened, several Bubbles
broke out, with a considerable Noise; The Peach was soft and pungent. Jun. 28.
79. The Mercury in the other Receiver, stayed at the same height. The Peaches
emitted several Bubbles, being wrinkled and a little altered in Color; their
Taste was very pungent, and a little acid.
EXPERIMENT VII.
October. 4. 78. Peaches with Wine and Beer.
PEACHES being shut in one Receiver with Wine; In another with Beer hopp'd; and
in another with Beer without Hops. October. 5. The Mercury in the last was 15
Digits high. In the second, 10. In the first, 9. October. 6. In the last. 25
Inches. In the second, 15. In the first, 20. October. 8. In the last, 35. Second,
15. First, 20. October. 12. In the last, 63. Second, 15. First, 28. Oct. 15. In
the last, 81. Second, 15. First, 30. Oct. 16. No Alteration at all. 18. It
descended a little in all. 22. The Ascent in the Wine answered the Degrees of
Heat and Cold. October. 24. In the last, it was 96 Digits high. Second, 15.
First, 30. Oct. 30. In the last, 115. Second, 29. First, 30. Nov. 3. In the
last, 117. Second, 20, First, 30. Oct. 6. In the last, 120. Second 31. First,
31. Oct. 11. In the last, 105. Second, 31. First, 28. Cold Weather. Nov. 16.
The Peach which was lowest in the middle Receiver, rose up to the Top; the
others remained at the Bottom. Nov. 25. In the last, 140. The second, 47.
First, 32. Nov. 28. In the last, 96. Second, 36. First, 28. very cold Weather.
December. 13. In the last, 96. Second, 47. First, 33. In the first, the Peach was
firm, and well colored; it had borrowed a Taste from the Wine; which might be
made grateful with Sugar. The Wine was very palatable. December. 30. In the last,
96 Digits. Second, 47. The Peaches in the last when it was opened, rose up to
the Top, and bubbled; The Taste, which they had got from the Sugar, was made
pleasant with it. Hence it appears, that fermented Liquors may preserve Fruit.
EXPERIMENT VIII.
Sept. 5. 78. ONE Peach whole, and another cut, was included with old Wine in a
Receiver. Nov. 20. Some of the Wine ran out: Nov. 30. A third part was lost.
December. 8. The Wine was almost lost, but what remained was pleasant; the
Peaches were much fermented, and a grateful Taste. This compared with the first
Receiver in former Exp. shows, that Wine hinders Fermentation, if in a
sufficient Quantity; but here the Peaches took up too much Room.
EXPERIMENT IX.
October. 11. 78. A Whole Peach, and another cut, was included in hopp'd and
fermented Beer. October. 12 It was 3 October. 15 It was 15 October. 16 It was 15
October. 18 It was 12 very cold. October. 20 It was 12 October. 22 It was 12 x
Warmer. Nov. 2 It was 20 Nov. 3 It was Lower, cold. Nov. 6 It was 28 hotter.
Nov. 8 It was 33 Nov. 11 It was 40 Nov. 12 It was 40 Beer got out. Nov. 16 It
was 46 Nov. 19 It was 43 Beer lost. Nov. 20 Beer lost. Nov. 23 It was almost
all lost. The Receiver being opened, the Peaches were soft, yet of a grateful
Taste.
This Exper. compared with the second Receiver, Exp. VII. show that Beer in a
sufficient Quantity, hinders the Generation of Air, and Fermentation of
Peaches, but here the Peaches took up too much Room.

EXPERIMENT X.
October. 19. 78. RAW Beef being shut up with stale Beer, Beef with stale Beer.
compressed till the Mercury rose 60 Digits above it is usual height. In another
it was shut up with Beer uncompress'd: And in a third, the Receiver was filled
with common Air. October. 20. In the first it sunk 40 Digits. In the second, a
little. In the third, it ascended a little. October. 26. In the first, it
ascended and descended irregularly: It ascended slowly in the second. In the
third it was at a stand. Oct. 27. A Piece left in the Air, began to smell ill:
In the second and third, the Mercury ascended: In the first it descended. Nov.
3. In the second, it was 20; in the third, 10 Digits high. Nov. 5. The two
first did not stink, but the Flesh had got a Taste from it; and being boiled in
it, was tender. That included with common Air, stunk. But the same piece of
Beef being shut up again with Air. Nov. 6. Mercury was raised 3 Digits. Nov.
11. 8. Nov. 25. 20 Digits. The Flesh stunk. Hence it appears, that Beer may
preserve Beef, when compressed for some time.
EXPERIMENT XI.
Nov. 12. BEEF was shut up with Water, Beef with Water and Salt.
and a fortieth Part of Salt, in one Receiver; In another with Salt Water,
compressed till the Mercury was raised 15 Digits above it is usual height. In a
third, Flesh and Air was only enclosed. Nov. 13. Mercury descended in all;
especially where the compressed Water was. Nov. 18. In that which contained
compressed Water, it almost rose to it is former height. A piece of the same
Beef exposed to the Air, began to smell ill. Nov. 23. Air was generated in all;
The Mercury in the second was 20 Digits, having descended 3. In the other two,
it was about 16. In the first the Flesh was not corrupted. Nov. 30. The Flesh
included with Salt, did not stink; but when boiled, was tender and pleasant.
December. 6. The Mercury in that which contained the compressed Air was 25
Digits: The Flesh was strong scented, but did not stink. That included in
Vacuo, bubbled when the Receiver was opened, and in an hours time, yielded Air
enough to sustain 3 or 4 Digits of Mercury. The Receiver which contained it,
being immersed in hot Water, the Liquor bubbled much, though the Water it was
immersed in, did not boil; the Receiver was soon full of Air, and then, though it
was immersed in boiling Water, the Liquor did not bubble. The Flesh was
pleasant and tender. So that Water as well as Beer may help to preserve Flesh.
EXPERIMENT. XII.
Nov. 29. 78. OYsters were shut in one Receiver without their Shells; Oysters.
In another they were shut up in their Shells with common Air, and in a Third
with Salt Water. These three being closed up with Screws, 3 Oysters in their
Shells, and 8 taken out were shut up in Vacuo; where it was observable, that
when the Air was exhausted, those which were without their Shells emitted large
Bubbles, one of the others opened the Shell. Nov. 30. The Mercury in Vacuo
ascended a little, but in those 3 which were stopped with Screws it descended
rather. December. 4. The Weather growing warmer, the Mercury in the first
Receiver was 7 Digits. In the Second, 0. In the Third, 3. In the Fourth 3. Dec.
5. In the First 20. In the Second, 1. In the Third 3. In the Fourth 5. Dec. 7.
In the First the Height of the Mercury was 30. In the Second 1 Digit. In the
Third 3. In the Fourth 8. Other Oysters left in the open Air began to Smell
ill. Dec. 9. In the First it was 30; In the Fourth 11. In the Rest no Change.
Dec. 13. In the Fourth it was 14 Inches High. Dec. 20. In the First it was 46.
In the Fourth 24. No alteration in the others. Dec. 21. In the 1 st. 52. In the
4 th. 25. No alteration in the others. Dec. 22. In the 1 st. 60. In 4 th. 27.
No alteration in the Rest. Dec. 27. In the 4 th. 29. No alteration in the Rest.
Jan. 7. 79. The Oysters in the Third Receiver had Colored the Water black.
Jan. 25. Some Bubbles were formed in the Turpentine, about the Commissure of
the Receiver and Cover, of that which was exhausted; the Height of the Mercury
was not altered, but the Oysters being taken out Stunk: Those in the other
Receivers Stunk, and were turned to a viscous Gelly.
From this Experiment it seems to follow, that Fishes yield not so much Air as
Flesh; yet they will Corrupt though not affected by the outward Air.

EXPERIMENT XIII.
Nov. 29. 78. A Vessel of fresh Butter.
A Glass Vessel filled with fresh Butter, being conveyed into a Receiver with a
Mercurial Gage. Nov. 30. The Butter being in the Night condensed by Cold, the
Mercury sunk a little. December. 2. The Cold increasing, the Mercury sunk
sensibly. December. 5. The Cold growing more remiss, the Mercury ascended almost
to its former Height; some of the same Butter having been all the time exposed
to the Air, smelled ill. December. 7. The Cold coming on again, the Mercury
returned to the Top of the Gage. The Butter in the open Air smelled worse.
December. 24. The Butter had yielded no Air, but was all of a grateful Taste,
except the Superficies of it, which was contiguous to the Leather. So That
Butter may be Preserved a long time, if Preserved from the Contact of Air.
EXPERIMENT XIV.
Nov. 30. 78. Whitings and Oysters*
ONE Receiver was filled with Whitings and Wine, another with Whitings and
Oysters. When the Screws were Set, the Mercury in the Gage was compressed, but
in 3 hours returned to it is former Mark. December. 2. The Cold increasing, the
Mercury Sunk in both. December. 4. The Cold ceased, and the Mercury ascended in
that Receiver which contained the Oysters. December. 5. In that which held the
Oysters, the Mercury was Raised 20 Digits. December. 7. It rose to 40 Digits.
Dec. 9. No alteration in either; that in which the Wine was contained,
remaining still below it is first Height. December. 20. The Contents of both
stunk. But what was remarkable in this Experiment, was, that there was
Corruption without a Generation of Air, in that Receiver which contained the
Wine.
EXPEREMENT XV.
December. 3.78. Raw Beef with Pepper and Cloves.
RAw Beef with Pepper and Cloves being put into two Large Receivers, and as much
Beer added as filled the Remaining space, in a little time after the Pressure
of the Air growing more Remiss, the Mercury came almost to the open ends of the
Gage. December. 8. The Mercury ascended not. The Beef being taken out of one to
be Boiled, had acquired a sweet smell from the Cloves, and the Liquor smelt
like Hippocras. Jan. 2. 79. The other Receiver was opened, no Air being
produced. The Flesh was uncorrupted; and being Boiled in Vacuo with an intense
Fire, I observed, Air or Spirits broke out at the Stop-cock fastened to the Top
of the Receiver. When the Receiver was Cool the next day, it was almost void of
Air; The Flesh was Tender, and well Tasted, only it was Boiled a Little too
much, having been on the Fire Six Hours.
Hence it appears, that Beer impregnated with Aromaticks will preserve Flesh.

EXPEREMENT XVI.
December. 4.78. Larks with Beef.
TWo Larks with some Beef being shut up in a Receiver, with as much Ale as
filled up the Space not possessed by them: Another was filled with Beef alone,
and a Mixture of Beer and Ale. December. 9. Some Pieces of the Larks which were
exposed to the Air, began to smell ill; but those in the Receiver had not
yielded Air enough to sustain 5 Digits of Mercury. In the other Receiver no Air
was Generated. December. 19. The Cover of the Receiver, which held the Larks
being broke, Liquor ran out: The Beef and Larks were incorrupt, and being
Boiled Tasted gratefully, the Taste of the Beef being made pleasant by the
Mixture of the Larks and Beer. December. 23. The other Receiver being opened, the
Boiled Flesh seemed pleasant. Hence it appears, that Birds may be preserved
long in Beer and Ale.
EXPEREMENT XVII.
December. 14. ONe Receiver was filled with a whole Apple, Apples and Sugar, etc.
and a sufficient quantity of Powdered Sugar. A Second was filled with an Apple
cut in Pieces, and Sugar. A Third was filled with an Apple cut in Pieces and
Water, with a 1/10 part of Sugar. A Fourth had 5 parts of Water, and one of
Sugar included with an Apple cut in Pieces. December. 21. In the first the Sugar
was not Melted; The Mercury ascended a little. In the Second the Sugar was
Melted and the Apples shrivel'd; they yielded much Air when First included in
the Receiver. In the other Two the Mercury ascended a little. In the Third the
pieces of Apple were corrupted very much, for the Skin was taken off. December.
22. Air was produced in all the Receivers, but most in the Second and Third.
December. 27. In the 3 First the Mercury was 10 Digits high, in the Fourth 6.
December. 31. In the 1st. and 2d. It was 13. In the 3d. 15. In the 4th. 9. Jan,
2. 79. In the 1st. and 2d. almost 14. In the 3d. 17. In the 4th. 11. Jan. 7. In
the 2d. It was 16. In the 3d. 36. In the Fourth 15. The Mercury in the First
rose no higher; but the Air made it is escape, when the Screw was eased. Jan. 9.
In the first it was 6 Inches high. In the 2d. 16. In the 3d. 39. In the Fourth
15. Jan. 17. In the 1st. 13. In the 2d. 19. In the 3d. 56. In the 4th. 17. Jan.
30. In the 3d. 76. Digits. The Liquor broke out, and therefore I opened the
Receiver. The Fruit had communicated it is Taste, which was pleasant, to the
Water; The Mercury in the 2d. being raised no higher, I opened it, and found
that the first was better Tasted than the former, and having communicated, in a
great Measure, it is Taste to the ambient Sugar, It was in the form of a good
Syrup. Feb. 16. The Mercury in the First Receiver was 22. In the Fourth 33. The
Receiver being opened, I found that the Taste of the First being wholly
imparted to the Water, had made it very Pleasant. Feb. 27. The Mercury in the
First Receiver was 30 Digits high. March 15. The Receiver being opened, I
found, that though the Color of the Apple was good; yet the Pulp was Spungy, and
had in a great Measure lost it is Taste.
Hence it appears, that Sugar does not preserve Fruit so well as Fermented
Liquors. See EXP. VII.

EXPERIMENT XVIII.
December. 23. A Glass Vessel being full of Milk, Milk included in a Receiver.
and stopped with a Screw, was conveyed into one Receiver, and Milk with a
Lark in it into another. December. 24. In the Evening the Caseous and Butyrous
Parts were separated both in the Milk in the Receivers, and in some of the same
exposed to the Air. December. 27. No Air generated where the Lark was; The other
Gage was spoiled. December. 31. The Mercury was raised in that which held the
Lark. 3 days since, Milk that had all the while been exposed to the Air, Stunk.
Jan. 1. 79. The Mercury was 10 Inches high, where the Lark was contained. Jan.
2. It was 14. The Milk below the Butyrous Part seemed red. Jan. 4. It rose to
19 Digits. White Serum grew together in the Bottom of the Milk. Jan. 9. The
Mercury was 29 Digits high. Jan. 25. The Receivers being opened, the Lark
Smelled strong, but when Boll'd Tasted Pleasant; though it had been kept 32 Days.
In the other Receiver the Butyrous part was sour, but the Caseous Part Tasted
subacid.
From hence it appears that Milk may Preserve Flesh.

EXPERIMENT XIX.
December. 24. 78. A Lark was put into a Small Receiver, A Lark with Melted
Butter.
and the Remaining space filled up with Melted Butter. December. 27. The Mercury
sunk, the Butter grew Yellow below, White in the Middle, and Fluid above. Jan.
5. 79. The Mercury gradually rose. 9. It was a little higher. 28. It was
altered but little, the Receiver being opened; the Butter contiguous to the
Leather which Lined the Cover, was of an ungrateful Taste and white. The Rest
of the Butter was Yellow and Rancid. The Lark being Roasted was Pleasant to the
Palate. Hence it appears, that Butter when Melted and hot, does not preserve
Flesh so well as otherwise.
EXPERIMENT XX.
Jan. 4. 79. A Receiver being filled with Boiled Flesh and Broth, whilst the
Screw was Set, Boiled Flesh and Broth.
they were so Compressed as to Raise the Mercury 6 Digits, but it soon subsided
again. Jan. 28. The Mercury had subsided 8 Digits below it is usual Height. The
Receiver being opened, we found the Flesh Sweet and Pleasant; The Broth Subacid
and well Tasted.
This Experiment Teaches, that Beef being kept in Receivers as long as
Experience shows that it may, and then taken out and Boiled, and included again
in Receivers, may be carried to Sea without Salting it, which may be of no
small use in helping to preserve Beef Fresh in long Voyages. See. EXP. XII.

EXPERIMENT XXI.
Jan. 30. 79. Raw Flesh with Pepper and Cloves.
RAw Flesh was included with Pepper and Cloves in one Receiver, and in another
by it self. Feb. 11. In the First the Mercury was 3 Digits high. In the Second
almost 1. Feb. 12. In the First 4. In the Second 1. Feb. 13. In the First 6. In
the Second 3. The Flesh of the First being boiled was Tender and Pleasant. Feb.
14. In the Second 5 19 In the Second 6 20 In the Second 11. The Flesh being
Boiled was Tender and good, though it was kept in B. Mariae but 5 hours. Some of
it before it was boiled was put into a Receiver free from Air.
Feb. 28. The Ascent of the Mercury was small. March. 20. The Mercury was 16
Digits high. The Flesh being taken out Tasted Pleasant, but was inclining to
corruption.
EXPERIMENT XXII.
Feb. 10. RAw Beef Seasoned with Pepper and Cloves was put into one Receiver.
In another it was enclosed with Salt. In a Third alone. Feb. 19. In the 1st.
and 3d. the Mercury ascended. In the 2d. it did not. Feb. 21. In the 1st. it
was 4: In the 3d. 10: In the 2d. 0. 25 In the 1st. it was 6: In the 3d. 19: In
the 2d: 26. No Ascent: The Third being opened, and the Flesh Boiled, it tasted
well. In the former Experiment Spices seemed to hinder, but here they promote
the Generation of the Air: So that I am inclined to think, that the difference
in these two Experiments depends on this, Viz. that in the former the
Ingredients were shut up so close that there was no Room for Air to be
Generated in. March 9. The Mercury in the 1st. was 8 Digits; In the 2d. None.
12. In the 1st. it was 12; In the 2d. 1. April 3. In the 1st it was 11: In the
2d 1. April 3. In the 1st it was 11: In the 2d 1. The Receiver being opened and
the Flesh boiled, it was sweet and tender.
From this Experiment we may infer, that Salt hinders the Generation of Air.
Less air was generated in the second Receiver, because it was more exactly
filled. To preserve Flesh without Salt the Air must be kept out; and likewise
there must be a great compression in the Receiver.

Of what use these Experiments may be for to help Mariners to transport fresh
Meat and Fruits, the Reader may judge.

ARTICLE XVIII. Experiments concerning Elixation and Distillation in Vacuo.
EXPERIMENT I.
Dec. 12. 78. Beef boiled in Vacuo.
A Reciver large enough to contain 22 Ounces of Water, having 2 Ounces and 6
Drachms of Beef in it, was immersed 3 hours in boiling Water, and then lest to
cool all Night; I found by the help of our Pneumatick Engine that the Air formed
in the Receiver, was not able to hold up 3 Digits of Mercury: So that by
deducting from the Calculation, one may learn that Flesh, whilst boiling,
cannot generate a sufficient Quantity of Air to cause an entire pressure in a
Receiver large enough to hold a double Weight of Water: That is, a Pound of
Flesh shut up in a Receiver capable of containing 2 Ounces of Water, will not
yield Air enough to sever the Receiver from the Cover without the help of heat.
EXPERIMENT II.
Dec. 23. THree Ounces of Beef being shut up in a Receiver large enough to
contain 32 Ounces of Water, when it had boiled long, separated the Receiver
from the Cover, so that Vapors got out. The Receiver being close again, it was
a good while before the Cover and it were severed a second time: If the Fire be
strong enough, sweet Exhalations continually make their way out. Dec. 24. The
Receiver being cool, was almost wholly evacuated by the Pneumatick Engine: So
that it appears, that the Receiver and it is Cover are not separated by Air
which is able to continue in that Form; but by violent exhalations, which when
resisted, fall back, and condense in the Receiver, so that if the Fire be not
too violent, the Avolition of those Steams may easily be prevented.
EXPERIMENT III.
Jan. 21. 79. Paste without Leaven in Vacuo.
PAste without Leaven being shut up in Vacuo and in another Receiver with
Common Air: And both of these shut up with a Screw in Balneo Mariae, I left
them there 3 hours, and then after they had been exposed to a moderate Fire, I
caused them to be opened. The Paste in Vacuo was reddish on it is Superficies,
the other was not boiled enough, therefore both were shut up in B. M. all
Night. Jan. 22. The Paste being taken out, was sufficiently boiled, but had no
Crust. That in Vacuo, was full of Cavities and insipid; the other was well
Tasted and of a Close Body. Both Receivers were void of Air.
EXPERIMENT IV.
Feb. 3. 79. When Leavened Paste had filled a Receiver full of Air, it was
removed into another, upon which it stunk; yet when it was in a hot Balneo M. 3
hours, Bread was made of it full of holes, but without a Crust. Feb. 5. The
same Experiment being repeated without removing the Paste from one Receiver to
another and exposing it to the Air, the Bread made of it was much lighter than
the Former.
EXPERIMENT V.
Feb. 12. Rosemary and Water distilled in Vacuo.
ROsemary and Water being shut up in the Instrument, contrived to distill in
Vacuo, that being placed in Balneo Mariae, it yielded a Water which had a sweet
Smell; as also some Drops of essential Oil, well scented and clear from any
Empyreuma. But the Stop-cock being opened to let in Air, the Noise which the
Air rushing in caused, was soon over, so that I judge the Rosemary had afforded
a good deal of Air. Feb. 13. The same Rosemary being again exposed to a more
violent Fire, it only yielded a Water less odoriferous than the former.
EXPERIMENT VI.
Feb. 10. 79. Flesh boiled in Vacuo.
A Pound of Flesh was boiled in Vacuo, with 4 pound of Water, and in 3 hours
the Mercury, in a Gage which was contained in the upper Part of it, was not
raised above 3 Inches. It Tasted ill, as also the Liquor which was made of the
condensed Vapors; it was not boiled enough. Feb. 11. The same Experiment was
repeated, the Flesh being first sprinkled with Pepper and Cloves, the Mercury
ascended 6 Inches, in the same time that before it was raised 3: It Tasted
well, and the Liquor formed of the Vapors Tasted strong of Pepper.
These Vessels seem proper to distill Bodies that are very thin and Volatile in.

ARTICLE XIX. Concerning Elixation in Vessels stopped with Screws, by whose
help, Hartshorn and the Bones of Fishes and four-footed Creatures may be
softened.
EXPERIMENT I.
Jan. 29. Beef boiled in B. M.
BEef boiled in Balneo Mariae eight or nine hours, in a Vessel stopped with a
Screw, had a very unpleasant Taste: After I boiled Beef seasoned with Pepper
and Cloves 3 hours and it Tasted very pleasant: Beef that was not so Seasoned
being boiled 3 hours Tasted well. So that I conjectured that the first Flesh
was spoiled with over-boiling, when the Flesh was not seasoned, Vapors
gathered in the Top of the Vessel, and condensed Tasted unpleasant.
EXPERIMENT II.
Jan. 29. APples boiled 2 hours, were soft and well Tasted; but some Pieces,
impregnated with the condensed Vapors, which were of an ungrateful Smell, had
acquired a less acceptable Taste.
EXPERIMENT III.
Feb. 4. Season Flesh enclosed in a Receiver.
FLesh closely compressed and seasoned with Pepper and Cloves, being shut up in
a Receiver stopped with a Screw, that was kept hot in Balneo an hour, in which
time the Flesh was alittle over boiled: when the Balneum was opened, all the
Water broke out. Feb. 5. Some Part of the Water was enclosed in a Receiver shut
up with a Screw. March 12. The Flesh was very good. Elixation, by how much the
more perfect, contributes the more to the hindrance of Fermentation. See Art.
XVIII. Exp. XII, XX.
EXPERIMENT IV.
Feb. 10. Cow-heel boiled in Vacuo.
A Cow-heel being boiled, four hours over a moderate Fire, was so soft, that
the Bones might be eat like Cheese. Feb. 12. A Cow-heel being boiled 12 hours,
Tasted Empyreumatical, and the Juice would not Coagulate: So that hard Bones
and Tendons in Balneo Mariae may become good Nourishment.
EXPERIMENT V.
Feb. 10. A Fish boiled in B. M. 2 hours Tasted well, and the Bones were very
soft. The Juice hardened presently into a Gelly of a firm Consistence. This is
a good way to boil Fish that are full of Bones.
EXPERIMENT VI.
Feb. 5. Hearts-horn boiled in Vacuo.
Hartshorn boiled 4 hours, was very soft like Cheese, and the Juice presently
hardened into a Gelly. Feb. 17. The Experiment being repeated, the Hartshorn
was Boiled 6 hours, and grew very soft: The Juice getting out of it, hardened
into a Gelly, and stuck to the outside of it.
These Experiments may be of great Use to Mariners, since by them they may
learn how to boil their Meat with out consuming fresh Water, which may be kept
for other more cogent Occasions.

CHAP. IV. New Experiments about the Preservation of Bodies in Vacuo Boyliano.
EXPERIMENT I.
Several Substances included in Vacuo.
A Piece of roasted Rabbet was preserved in Vacuo above two Months unaltered.

EXPERIMENT II.
WHite Bread being enclosed in Vacuo from the 11th of March to the 1st of
April, was unaltered, save that the outside of some Crumbs were a little dry;
nor was it any further altered in 17 days time more. The inside of the Receiver
was not Moist.

EXPERIMENT III.
MIlk having been shut up in Vacuo three Months, smelled and Tasted sowrish,
being turned partly into a Whey, and in Part into a soft Curd.

EXPERIMENT IV.
VIolet Leaves being shut up a Month and 2 days in Vacuo, had undergone no
Alteration, but that they had lost their smell by being crushed down into the
Vessel; it being usual for them by crushing to exchange their Fragrancy for an
earthy Smell.

EXPERIMENT V.
SOme Violets being kept 7 Months in Vacuo, some retained their proper Color,
others looked like white Violets.

EXPERIMENT VI.
SHeeps Blood being shut up in Vacuo, whilst the Receiver was exhausting
emitted Bubbles and swelled: Being kept in a heat equal to the heat of a
digesting Furnace, for two days, was Florid and Fluid; afterward it inclined to
a Blackness: Eighteen days after, external Air rushing in, and the Glass which
held the Blood, being in a light Place; we perceived the lower side of it to be
covered with a Coagulated substance of a deeper Color than that which swam
upon it; but when, by shaking, it was raised, it seemed of a fair Color: The
Blood being poured out, had no more an offensive Smell than the Blood of a
newly killed Dog.

EXPERIMENT VII.
CReam being shut up in Vacuo near a Year, was like Butter on the top, which by
agitation was separated from the Butter-Milk it swam in: The Butter-Milk was of
a grateful Sowerness, like other Butter-Milk; but the Butter was Sowrer.

EXPERIMENT VIII.
SOme slices of roasted Beef being put into one Vial; White Bread into another;
and pieces of Cheese into a third, on the 15 of September; February the 18 we
perceived little Alteration; they being free from Putrefaction.

EXPERIMENT IX.
JVly-Flowers and a Rose being enclosed in a Vial on the 12th of August;
February 18 they were a little moist; but retained their Shape and Color. In
these two Experiments no Dew was perceived in the upper Parts of the Receiver.

EXPERIMENT X.
STrawberries being included in Vacuo, June the 4th: In the beginning of
November we found them altered in Color, but not in Shape. No sign of
Corruption appeared.

EXPERIMENT XI.
ROasted Beef, Cheese and a French Rose being included in three distinct
Receivers in Vacuo, May the 2d; were unaltered September the 5th: Flowers were
preserved unaltered 8 Months and a half.

EXPERIMENT XII.
A Pint of Beer, which was a Year Old, being shut up in Vacuo, June 17; though in
August Thunder turned the Drink in our Cellar Sower; yet that in Vacuo appeared
unaltered September 1.

EXPERIMENT XIII.
ALe being enclosed six Weeks in Vacuo; though Thunder happened which turned the
Ale in the Cellar Sower, yet this was good as before.

EXPERIMENT XIV.
BLackberries included in Vacuo September 1st, 70; June 20th 73 were free from
an ill Scent, and not in the least Moldy; some sower Liquor being taken out
from under them, they were shut up again.

October. 11. 74.

They were much blacker than before: No other perceivable Alteration. It is not
a little strange, that so tender a Fruit should thus be preserved so long.

POSSCRIPT.
TO show that Liquors, by being Hermetically sealed in Bolt-heads, may be kept
from sowering a long time, June 14 we shut up good Ale in one; the 5th of July
next Year after, it was not sower: In 13 Months time after it was turned a
little Sower. This Ale was preserved much longer from sowering than otherwise
it would.

June 14. 70. A Pint of French Claret being shut up, July 5, 71 was clear and
high Colored, and had deposited a Sediment. When the Glass was broken, white
Streams rose plentifully from the Wine, which presently disappeared again: The
Wine was rough, but well Tasted. July 6. It was shut up again. August 5, next
Year the Wine Tasted well. June 20, 73, it was still good, and therefore Sealed
up again. October. 11. 74. It was opened again; and appeared to be well Colored,
but less Spirituous; yet it was not Sower.
CHAP. V. New Pneumatical Experiments about Respiration, upon Ducks, Vipers,
Frogs, etc. communicated in the Philosophical Transactions of August the 8th
and September the 12th 1670. contained under the following Titles.
TITLE I. Observations made about the lasting of Ducks included in the
exhaust'd Receiver.
EXPERIMENT I.
Animals shut up in Vacuo.
TO try whether Ducks, which continue a good while under Water without
Respiration, would bear the absence of Air much longer, than other Animals in
Vacuo, we enclosed a Duck in a Receiver, which was third Part filled by her:
The Air being exhausted she continued well longer than a Hen would have done;
yet in a Minute she was discomposed; and in two, she, after violent
Conuvlsions, hung down her Head as if dead, but presently revived when Air was
let in. Being shut up much longer in Common Air, she was not Discomposed.

EXPERIMENT II.
A Duck.
A Callow Duckling being shut up in a Receiver, in a Minute seemed disordered:
In less than two Minutes being ready to dye and violently Convulsive, we let in
Air; upon which she recovered. Being shut up 6 Minutes with Common Air, she
seemed well. N. B. The Duckling seemed much bigger when the Air was exhausted,
than before.

TITLE II. Of the Phenomena afforded by Vipers, included in an exhausted
Receiver.
EXPERIMENT I.
A Viper.
TO try what effects Air would have upon Vipers, (Animals constituted
differently from other Creatures) January 2, 6 A Viper was shut up in a
Receiver; as the Air was drawn out she began to swell, and soon after we ceased
Pumping, she began to Gape. In 2 hours she did not appear to be quite Dead:
Soon after she gaped, the swelling subsided, but presently rose again.

EXPERIMENT II.
ANother Viper being shut up in Vacuo, after she had moved a little up and
down, began to froth at the Mouth; soon after we left pumping, her Body and
Neck swelled prodigiously, and a Blister rose on her Back, 1 hour she appeared
to be alive, but no longer. Her Neck and a great part of her Throat seemed
transparent; Her Mouth was open and distorted; The Epiglottis with the Rimula
Laryngis was almost thrust to the end of the Nether Chap. The black Tongue
arising from beneath the Epiglottis, raught beyond it, but seemed dead. The
Mouth was black within. Upon a Readmission of Air, in 23 hours, the Mouth was
shut, though it opened again. Scorching or pinching the Tail caused Motion in the
Body of it.

EXPERIMENT III.
A Snake.
A Snake, being enclosed 22 hours with a Gage in a Receiver, seemed dead; but
when held something near the Fire, put out her forked Tongue. The next day she
was dead, her Jaws gaping as if stretched with Violence.

TITLE III. Phenomenon afforded by Frogs in an exhaust-Receiver.
EXPERIMENT I.
Sept. 9. 1662. A Large Frog being shut up in Vacuo, Frogs in Vacuo.
was but little swelled, and moved her Throat almost as fast as before the
Receiver was evacuated. Her Body swelled more, and she continued alive about 2
hours. In a little more than 3 hours she seemed dead; but being left all night
upon the Grass; she recovered again.
EXPERIMENT II.
A Frog being enclosed in a Receiver almost totally exhausted, about 11 a
Clock; at the first seemed unaltered, but in six hours died.

EXPERIMENT III.
Sept. 6. 62. A Slender and a large Frog being both included in a Receiver;
whilst it was exhausting, the Lesser skipp'd up and down, and some time after;
but in a quarter of an hour seemed dead. The Larger Frog swelled a little, and
continued alive half an hour; but the Receiver leaking, we pursued the
Experiment no further.
EXPERIMENT IV.
A Small Frog being included in a Receiver, at the first seemed lively; but
after, moved up and down as if very uneasy; yet was alive when the Receiver
was wholly exhausted for the Space of an hour, but at the latter end of the
time, she wanted Respiration, and her Belly and Throat were swelled. In 3 hours
time, the Air being let in, the Abdomen and Throat subsided, and instead of a
Swelling, there remained a Cavity.

EXPERIMENT V.
A Large Frog being shut up in a plated Receiver exhausted, in seven hours was
dead, being much swelled; but upon an Ingress of Air, was lanker than ever.

TITLE IV. Of the Phenomenon afforded by a newly kitten'd Kitling in Vacuo.
A Kitling in Vacuo.
A Newly kitten'd Kitling being included in a Receiver, when it began to be
exhausted, in a Minute, after Convulsions, lay with the Tongue out as if dead;
but when exposed to the Air, in a Trice recovered. Another Kitling of the same
Age, being included in the same Receiver, after it had been, by turns,
convulsive six Minutes, upon pumping out the Air, seemed dead; and when taken
out of the Receiver, lay with its Tongue out, without either Pulse or
Respiration; but being pinched, it presently gave signs of Life, and in a
quarter of an hour, gaping and straining to fetch Breath, it recovered. A third
being put into the same Receiver, after violent Convulsions and want of Breath,
in a Minute and half seemed dead, no more Air being drawn out, than what was
done at 3 Exsuctions. The Pump being still plied, and the Kitling seeming to
swell, some time after gave signs of Life, being violently convulsed. After it
had been enclosed 7 Minutes, we let in the Air, and put Aq. Vitae into the
Mouth of the Kitling, yet it died in our Hands. These Animals continued perhaps
3 times as long alive in Vacuo, as others would have done.

TITLE V. Some Trials about the Air, usually harbored in the Pores of Water,
etc.
Air concealed in the Pores of Water.
TO try how much Air is contained in a Quantity of Water, in reference to their
Bulk: We filled a Chemical Pipe 36 Inches long, with Water, and inverted it in
a Glass Vessel about of an Inch deep, and 2 Inches Diameter. These being
included in a Receiver, the Air was pumped out, and upon a Readmission of it,
the Bubble collected at the Top, wanted 8/10 of about 100 part of an Inch. Soon
after, a Tube, to be described by and by, was filled with the same Water, and
inverted; and when the Receiver, into which it was conveyed, was so far
exhausted, that the Water in the Pipe sunk even with the stagnant Water, Air
was let in, and rose the Water within a Tenth part and of an Inch to the Top.
The Tube was 43 Inches above the stagnant Water; this Experiment being twice
tried, the first time the Space possessed by the Air was of an Inch, and more;
the second it was and 1/15. The first time the Water subsided level with the
stagnant Water: In the second Trial, within 4 or 5 Inches of it.

In these Experiments it was observable, that though the Air possessed so little
Room in the Pores of the Water, that the Water seemed not to subside when it
was drawn out; yet, the Air in the Cavity of the Tube, possessed a considerable
Space.

Quare. Whether Water freed once of it is Air, will yield Air again? and whether
there is not Air enough in the Pores of Water, to be serviceable to Fishes,
when sucked through their Gills?

To discover more nicely what Quantity of Air is contained in the Pores of
Water, we made use of a Pipe, which consisted of a Globous Part 3 Inches
Diameter, and a Stem 9 Inches long; an Inch of which, at the Top, was melted
and drawn out 2 or 3 Inches, till it was as slender as a Crow Quill: This Glass
being filled with Water, was with a Pedestal conveyed into a Receiver, and
upon evacuating of it, Bubbles plentifully rose, and made a kind of a Froth or
Foam, but breaking at the Top of the slender Pipe, they did not run over. When
the Receiver had been pretty well exhausted, we left off pumping till the Water
had been pretty well freed from Bubbles; and so we successively pumped and left
off again, till the Water seemed quite free from Air; and then, letting in
External Air, the Water did not seem a Hairs breadth lower than before. The
like Experiment was tried with Claret, which made us think it worth while to
try what kind of Substances may be obtained from Aerial and Spirituous Bodies,
by handling them thus.

TITLE VI. Of some Phenomenon, afforded by Shell-Fishes in an exhausted
Receiver.
EXPERIMENT I.
Oysters in Vacuo.
TWO Oysters in their Shells, being shut up in Vacuo; whilst the Receiver was
exhausting, several Bubbles got out of the Shell; the Oysters were alive at the
End of 24 hours.

EXPERIMENT II.
A Craw-Fish in Vacuo.
A Craw-Fish being included in a Receiver, when the Air was pretty well
exhausted, seemed dead, but revived upon a Readmission of the Air; when the
Air was again exhausted, it was void of Motion; the Experiment being 3 or 4
times exhausted, and Air let in again, when the Fish was taken out, it seemed
not to have suffered much harm.

EXPERIMENT III.
ANother Oyster being shut up in a Receiver, and immersed in Water, that the
Bubbles which might come out of the Shell might be visible, if any; we found
that this Fish was so strong, that no Bubbles could get out of the Shell.

EXPERIMENT IV.
A Craw-Fish stronger than the former, except one small Intermission, continued
in Motion whilst the Air was exhausting.

TITLE VII. Of the Phenomenon of a Scale Fish, in an exhausted Receiver.
A Gudgeon in Vacuo.
WE filled the Globous Part of a Receiver, which was shaped like a Bolt-head,
and large enough to hold a Pint, half full of Water, and put a Gudgeon 3 Inches
long into it, which swam up and down; this being done, we exhausted the
Receiver so far, that but one part of twenty of the Air was drawn out, and then
we observed the following Particulars.

First, The Water, except about the Fish, afforded no Froth, and but few
Bubbles. Secondly, The Fish discharged several Bubbles at its Mouth and Gills,
and several, after it rested half an hour, stuck to its Fins and Tail, and
other Parts; these Bubbles by swimming would be shaken off, but upon a little
Rest, they would appear about him again. Thirdly, Except at the latter End, he
seemed to take in Air at his Mouth and Gills. Fourthly, After a while, he lay
on his Back, and would swim in that Posture. Fifthly, In some time he moved
more lively than at first. An hour and half after he was included, he seemed
clear of Bubbles, but lay on his Back, and was a little tumid, yet as lively as
before. An hour and a after he was without Motion, and stiff, yet being excited
by Motion, he moved a little. Air being let into the Receiver, whilst he was
under Water, he sunk to the Bottom, and seemed a little revived, and being
conveyed along with the Water into a Basin of fresh Water, he was further
recovered; yet could not lie on his Belly, but turned from one side to the
other: his Belly seemed much shrunk; he was alive at 24 hours end, and then was
able to lie on his Belly.
TITLE VIII. Of two Animals included, with large Wounds in the Abdomen, in the
Pneumatical Receiver.
EXPERIMENT I.
ABird in Vacuo.
A Small Bird, whose Abdomen was opened tranversly, in about a Minute after we
began to Pump, had Convulsions in its Wings; and being taken out, was past
Recovering, though there was very little Alteration in its Lungs, and the
Auricles of its Heart continued to beat.

EXPERIMENT II.
A Frog in Vacuo.
A Frog, whose Abdomen was so much opened, that two curled Lobes of its Lungs
came out at the Incisions, was suspended by the Leg in a small Receiver, which
when it was in some Measure exhausted, lay void of Motion, its Abdomen and.
Thigh being swelled very much, as if distended with some Aerie Vapor. One Lobe,
when the Frog was shut up, appeared full, the other shrunk up, and thus they
continued, till Air was let into the Receiver again, and then the Body growing
less tumid, and the Lobe of the Lungs which was tumid, subsiding, it presently
recovered.

TITLE IX. Of the Motion of the separated Heart of a cold Animal in the
exhausted Receiver.
EXPERIMENT I.
The Heart of an Eel in Vacuo.
THE Heart of an Eel being shut up in a Receiver upon a Tin Plate, beat as in
the open Air; and the Receiver being exhausted, grew tumid, emitting several
Bubbles out of it; yet it continued to beat as fast, or faster than in the open
Air. The like Success we had with another.

EXPERIMENT II.
THE Heart of another, though tumid, beat an hour in Vacuo, and then beginning to
fail, I applied Heat to the Glass, upon which, it renewed and continued it is
Motions another hour; at which time, it is Motion was renewed, by applying of
Heat a second time; at the end of the third hour, the Motion, which was but a
trembling one, could neither be promoted by the Air, nor Heat.

TITLE X. A Comparison of Times, wherein Animals may be killed by drowning, or
withdrawing of the Air.
EXPERIMENT I.
Sept. 10. Animals in an exhausted Receiver
A Green-Finch being sunk in Water by a Weight, was dead after it had lain half
0184 0108 V 3 a Minute without Motion.
EXPERIMENT II.
A Sparrow, which at the first moved very vigorously under Water, being taken
up, after it had lain half a Minute without Motion, was past Recovery.

EXPERIMENT III.
A Mouse being immersed half a Minute, and some Seconds, after some faint signs
of Life, tho not Convulsive, died.

EXPERIMENT IV.
A Duck, being immersed by a Weight, after it had lain quiet for a Minute, was
a little uneasy; but being quiet at the end of the second Minute, we took it
out, and in a little time it recovered; but being immersed again in fresh
Water, it emitted several Bubbles at its Beak and Nostrils; and in two Minutes
time, began to struggle: At the end of four Minutes ceasing to emit Bubbles, it
began to gape, which continued two Minutes, and then its Head hanging carelessly
down, it seemed dead; being taken out a Minute after, it was past Recovery.

EXPERIMENT V.
A Duckling being immersed with its Beak about 2 Inches under Water, emitted
Bubbles at its Beak, which likewise arose from some place in its Neck, about as
far from its Eyes as from its Ears, after which, several times it endeavored
to dive lower, and having been moderately convulsed, hung its Head down, as if
dead at 3 Minutes end; soon after, a trembling Motion appeared in some parts of
its Bill, but that ceasing, at the end of the 4th Minute, it was taken out past
Recovery.

EXPERIMENT VI.
A Viper was so long kept in Vacuo, that it seemed dead; but, being kept all
night over a digestive Furnace in a Glass Body, was as lively as ever. Then we
immersed it in a Glass Body stopped with a Cork, and depressed with a Weight;
where it lay a considerable time, with very little Motion; when four hours were
almost past, it swam above the Bottom of the Water, and had several times put
out its Tongue; when a little more than seven hours were past, it seemed dead,
its Head and Tail hanging down without Motion.

N. B. Though several of these Animals seem to die a little sooner in Water, than
in Vacuo; yet it does not certainly prove, that the former kills them faster,
for in Water they are deprived of Air instantly; In a Receiver, by degrees;
which is evident from hence, viz. That having provided a Receiver which could
be exhausted at one suck, the Animal contained in it would be dead in half a
Minute.

TITLE XI. Of the Accidents that happened to Animals in Air brought to a
Considerable Degree, but not near the utmost one of Rarefaction.
EXPERIMENT I.
Aug. 18. A Linote being 3 hours in a Receiver, Several Animals in Vacuo.
large enough to hold 4 Pints, seemed sick; but being taken out, recovered.
EXPERIMENT II.
Aug. 18. A Linote being enclosed in a Receiver half exhausted, was not in
danger of Death in less than 1 hour, and then being exposed to the Air,
Recovered.
EXPERIMENT III.
Sept. 9. A Lark being included in a Receiver of the former Magnitude, together
with a Gage; when of the Air was exhausted, in a Minute and half was taken with
Convulsions, and at the end of the second Minute, was past Recovery.
EXPERIMENT IV.
Sept. 9. A Green-Finch being shut up in the same Receiver, half exhausted, in
a Minute was sick, and threw Matter, which she vomited, upon the side of the
Glass; upon which, she seemed better, and continued so for 3 Minutes, and then
being sick, and vomiting as before, she eat part of it up, and seemed again to
recover; some Air getting in, though it was pumped out again, for the last
Eight Minutes, she seemed better than we expected. At the end of a quarter of
an hour, the Bird being not like to die, we took her out.
EXPERIMENT V.
A Viper, together with a Gage, being included in a Receiver, which held 3 1/^
Pints of Water, for 36 hours after it was exhausted, moved up and down nimbly,
and put out her Tongue often: At the end of 60 hours she seemed almost dead,
and the next day at Noon was quite dead. The Receiver taking in as much Water
as the included Air would admit, by measuring it, we found that 5 parts of six
of the Air had been drawn out.

A Digressive Experiment concerning Respiration on the Tops of High Mountains.

Of Respiration on the Tops of Mountains.
Upon Enquiry I was told, that the Mountains in Armenia are so high, that they
cannot get to the Tops of them for Snow, and that those that go up high, are
troubled with a shortness of Breath. And the like difficulty of Breathing has
been observed on a Mountain in the Country of Sevenes, in or near the Province
of Languedoc. And one that had been on the Top of Pic de Midi, one of the
highest Pyrenean Mountains, observed the like shortness of Breath: And the Air
on the Mount Teneriff, has so violently affected some, that they were not able
to climb to the Top of it.

TITLE XII. Of the Observations produced in an Animal in Changes, as to Rarity
and Density, made in the same Air.
TO try whether an Animal that was almost dead, by being contained in rarifi'd
Air, would recover upon a Condensation of that, without admitting any fresh Air
to come to it; we took a Lamb's Bladder, whose outside being oiled, to render
it more transparent, we cut so much of it is Neck off, that way might be made
for a Mouse to be put in; which being done, that the Neck of the Bladder might
be tied up so, that no Air could get in at the Wrinkles, we covered a Wooden
Stopple with Cement, which squeezing into the Crannies, we could utterly
exclude the Air.

A Bladder thus prepared, being conveyed with a Mouse in it, into a Glass
Receiver, we plied the Pump, till the Glass Vessel was so much exhausted, and
the Air in the Bladder so far expanded, that the Mouse was like to die. Upon
which, the rarifi'd Air in the Bladder being again condensed, by admitting
External Air into the Receiver, the Mouse was revived. The Experiment was a
second time tried with the like Success.

TITLE XIII. Of an unsuccessful Attempt to prevent the Necessity of
Respiration, by the Production or Growth of Animals in our Receiver.
EXPERIMENT I.
Respiration necessary absolutely continue Life.
A Good Company of Tadpoles being shut up in a Receiver, upon the first
Exsuction, they rose to the Top of the Water; and tho they subsided again, yet
upon the second, they rose again, and seemed to be discomposed; when the
Receiver was exhausted, they swam upon the Top, being not able to dive down;
and in an hours time, they became destitute of Motion; when the Air was let in,
they sunk to the Bottom, but recovered not.

EXPERIMENT II.
THE like Experiment being tried with a less number in a less Receiver, though
they were supplied with Air sooner than the others, yet very few recovered.

EXPERIMENT III.
THE same Experiment with the first, being tried some Years after in another
Receiver, we had the same Success.

EXPERIMENT IV.
WE included some of those Insects in a Receiver with Water, which first live
in Water, and then turn winged Insects; which swimming up and down a few days,
put off their exuviae, and were perfect Gnats, which stood upon the Water, and
lived a considerable time.

A digressive Experiment concerning the Expansion of Blood and other Animal
Juices.

The Blood and other Humors expanded.
Lamb's Blood preserved from Coagulation was conveyed into a Receiver in a
wide mouthed Glass: When the Receiver was pretty well exhausted, the more
spirituous Parts of the Blood making their way out, raised the more clammy
Parts into large Bubbles; and the Expansion of the volatile Parts were so
vehement, that it boiled over a Glass, of which it filled but part. Having
included warm Milk in a Cylinder 5 Inches high, the Quantity of it being only 3
Ounces, it boiled so impetuously when the Air was totally exhausted, that
several parcels of it flew out of the Vessel. Gall discovered a greater degree
of Intumescence.

N. The design of these Experiments was to know, whether when the Air is drawn
out of a Receiver, Animals may not be prejudiced by an Expansion of the Humors
in the Capillary Vessels, as well as by an Absense of Air, since the Parts of
them distending the Vessels may, stop Circulation, and cause Pains and
Convulsions. I once observed a Bubble to move to and fro in the Humors of one
of the Eyes of a Viper in our exhausted Receiver.

Another Digressive Experiment.

The Liver and Heart of an Eel, together with the Head and Body of another,
being conveyed into a Receiver; when the Air was exhausted, the Liver
manifestly swelled, and several Bubbles seemed to arise from the Medulla
Spinalis, or the Parts adjoining. The Air being let in, the swollen Parts
subsided, and the Skin seemed more flaccid than before.

TITLE XIV. Of the Power of Custom to enable Animals to hold out in Air too
much Rarefied for Respiration.
EXPERIMENT I.
The Prevalency of Custom to enable Animals to continue in Vacuo.
A Small Mouse being conveyed into a Viol with a Wide Neck, a Bladder was tied
upon it, which had all the Air expressed out of it. This being conveyed into
a Receiver with a Gage; a fourth part of the Air was only remaining in it; upon
which, the Bladder was half distended with rarifi'd Air, and the Mouse was very
uneasy, and ill; but that rarifi'd Air by an Ingress of External Air being
condensed, it presently recovered.

EXPERIMENT II.
THE Experiment being repeated, and the Mouse kept in the rarifi'd Air four
Minutes, was very ill, and with much difficulty recovered in the outward Air,
trembling for a long time.

EXPERIMENT III.
THE same Mouse being again shut up, was a quarter of an hour in rarifi'd Air,
and when taken out, sooner recovered than before, and with less trembling.

EXPERIMENT IV.
THE same Mouse being again conveyed into a Receiver, after it had recovered
its Strengh, the Air was a little further rarifi'd than before: At the first,
the Mouse seemed discomposed; but after continued quiet a quarter of an hour.
The Air being expanded by three Exsuctions more, it seemed ready to die, but
Air being let in again, it presently recovered.

TITLE XV. Some Experiments showing, that Air, become unfit for Respiration,
may retain it is wonted Pressure.
EXPERIMENT I.
Air unfit for Respiration retains it is usual Pressure.
A Mouse being shut up in an Oval Glass hermetically sealed, and a Gage
suspended by a Wire in the Neck, in 2 hours we found it dead; and with much ado
recovered, when Air was blown in with a pair of Bellows, the sealed end of the
Glass being broken off. The Station of the Mercury in the Receiver was not
altered.

EXPERIMENT II.
THE same Experiment being tried with a small Bird, in half an hour it was sick
and drooping, and in 2 hours a difficulty of breathing gradually increasing, it
died. The Gage was not sensibly altered.

EXPERIMENT III.
TO show that it is not a defect of Cold in an exhausted Receiver, that kills
Animals included in it. We hermetically sealed a small Bird in a Receiver,
large enough to hold 3 Quarts of Water; In a few Minutes it began to be sick
and pant, and continued so half an hour: The Viol was immersed 6 Minutes in
Water refrigerated with a Solution of Sal Armon. but the Bird was not
refreshed; it vomited and purged, when taken out of the Water; and continuing
to pant as before, in an hour from her first Imprisonment, died.

TITLE VI. Of the Use of the Air to elevate Steams of Bodies.
The usefulness of Air to raise Steams from Bodies contiguous to it.
TO prove that the Air carries off the fuliginous Steams from the Lungs in
Respiration; We prepared a Red Liquor, consisting of such Saline and Spirituous
Parts, as the Mass of Blood yields: This Liquor well stopped up in a Bottle,
though it be but half full, emits no Steams; but when the External Air comes to
it, it emits white Exhalations, which rise up into the Air. Whence it appears,
that the Contact of the Air, may enable Bodies to emit Vapors.

In this Liquor there are two things worth our Notice; the First is, that when
the Viol has lain quiet and stopped a competent time, the upper Part will
appear void of Fumes, so that the Air will retain but a certain Quantity; which
may help to give a Reason, why the same Air which will be clogged with Steams,
in a short time becomes unfit for Respiration.

The Second is, that in Vacuo for want of Air, though the Bottle was unstopp'd,
these Exhalations would not rise; but as soon as it was let into the Receiver,
they rising up plentifully, were drawn out along with the Air, a second time
exhausted. This Experiment has some Affinity with that Mentioned in the 29 of
the Experiments of the Spring, and the weight of the Air in the first Volume,
that being made with Corrosive Ingredients, and this of Medicines good for the
Lungs.

TITLE XVII. Of the long Continuance of a Slow-worm, and a Leech alive in the
Vacuum made by our Engine.
EXPERIMENT I.
A Slow-worm and a Leech alive in Vacuo.
WHite Snails without their Shells, being shut up in Vacuo had store of Bubbles
sticking to them; but they put out and drew in their Horns at pleasure; in some
Hours they became void of Motion and Tumid; And in the space of Twelve hours
seemed like blown Bladders, the substance of their Bodies being consumed; The
External Air being let in, they sunk together like two Skins, no signs of Life
appearing,

EXPERIMENT II.
ANEft being included in an Exhausted Receiver 48 hours, it seemed swelled in
it is Belly; it is under Jaw moved the first Night, but not after. The Receiver
being opened under Water and half filled, the Animal was very much revived.

EXPERIMENT III.
A Leech being included with a little Water in a Receiver, large enough to hold
12 Ounces; when the Air was Pumped out, the Leech keeping under Water, several
Bubbles rose from distinct parts of it is Body, yet it was not much indisposed.
It continuing well five days, by opening the Receiver under Water, I found that
it had been all the time well exhausted.

TITLE XVIII. Of what happened to some Creeping Insects in our Vacum.
EXPERIMENT I.
SIX Caterpillars being shut up in Vacuo, two hours after, Creeping Insects in
Vacuo.
moved up and down: 8 hours after they seemed quite dead; but being exposed to
the Air in the Morning were alive.

EXPERIMENT II.
Caterpillars being Shut up in two Receivers, to one we added the Air which was
drawn out of the other Receiver. Those which had Air with them, were alive two
days, the others in Vacuo seemed dead in a little time.

TITLE XIX. Of the Phenomenon suggested by Winged Insects in our Vacum.
EXPERIMENT I.
Winged Insects in Vacuo.
FLesh-Flies whose head were cut off, being included in a Portable Receiver;
furnished with a large Pipe and a Bubble at the end of it; When the Air was
drawn out, they lost their Motion; two hours after, Fire not being able to
excite Motion in them, I let in the Air, and then they began to move; and were
observed to move the next Morning.

EXPERIMENT II.
SEveral Ordinary Flies and a Be or Wasp, lay as if dead in the exhausted
Receiver, except some, which for a few Minutes were Convulsive; after 48 hours,
they neither Recovered when exposed to the open Air, nor the Meridian Sun.

EXPERIMENT III.
A great Flesh Fly being put into a Portable Receiver was very brisk and
lively till the Air was drawn off, but then was taken with Convulsions; the Air
being let in again she Recovered, but it being a second time exhausted, she lay
as dead till the Glass was stirred, and then she moved a little; the next Night
after neither heat nor any thing else would recover her of a long time; but at
the last, when she was well, being shut up again 48 hours and placed in a Warm
place, she grew so ill as to be past Recovery.

EXPERIMENT IV.
A Grass-hopper whose Body was an Inch long, being shut up in an oval receiver
large enough to hold a Pint; when the Pump was first Plied he was very uneasy,
and several Liquid drops came from his Abdomen to the quantity of a quarter of
a Spoonful; when the Receiver was pretty well exhausted he fell on his back and
lay as dead. But the Receiver being placed in the Sunshine he moved a little,
and soon after lay as dead 3 hours. But the Receiver being opened and placed,
after he seemed dead half an hour, some time in the Sun beams, in a short time
he recovered.

EXPERIMENT V.
A Rose-Flie being shut up in a receiver, strugled much whilst the Receiver was
exhausting, but in 6 hours time seemed dead; the Receiver being opened Four
hours after, the Beetle was lively enough. The Receiver being a Second time
exhausted, the Animal in the mean time seemed much disquieted.

EXPERIMENT VI.
SEveral Butterflies being Shut up in Vacuo, were not able to fly in so thin a
Medium, but when the Receiver was inverted, would fall from one end to another
rudely enough.

TITLE XX. Of the Necessity of Air to the Motion of such small Creatures as
Ants and even Mites themselves.
Air requisite to the Life of very Minute Animals.
ANts being shut up in Vacuo, in Seven hours time seemed dead; but the Receiver
being opened, about 14 hours after they were most of them Recovered.

Cheese, which had a great many Mites in it, was conveyed into Four several
Receivers, Three of which were exhausted: The Mites in the unexhausted Receiver
were alive a Week. In two of the exhausted Receivers they seemed dead, and
continued so Four hours; but Air being permitted to rush in 3 days after,
several of them were revived, and continued alive 2 or 3 days longer. In the
other Receiver Mites which lay dead 3 days Recovered presently upon a
Readmission of the Air.

CHAP. VI. The most Considerable Animadversions on Mr. Hobbs's Problemata de
Vacuo.
THe first Passage in Mr. Hobbs's Problemata de Vacuo taken Notice of is this,
Viz. He says, Why contiguous Marbles are not easily separated.
if a Vacum interspersum, were allowed in the Air, when two Flat Marbles are
exactly adapted to each other's Superficies, they might as easily be separated,
as moved, when separate in the open Air. To which it is Answered, that though
there be several Vacuities interspersed betwixt the Particles of an
Atmospherical Pillar of Air; yet notwithstanding, since each of those Particles
are endued with a Specific gravity, and are incumbent on the surface of the
uppermost Marble, whatever separates those two Bodies, must have a force able
to sustain the weight of the Pillar of Air which leans on it. But when the Air
is contiguous to each side of the Marble, having an equal Pressure on each side
from the Ambient Atmosphere, there is required no more force to move it up and
down, than is sufficient to surmount the Weight of it, etc.

And though Mr. Hobbs says, that the Reason why two Marbles cannot be Separated
suddenly, is, because the Air cannot instantly fill the space deserted by them;
yet from Experiments already laid down; it appears, that they may be pulled
asunder, and much more easily, in an exhausted Receiver where there is no Air
to succeed the space left betwixt them upon their Avulsion. Where it is
evident, that a force able to overcome the hardness of the Stone, is not
requisite to draw them asunder, but only so much as is able to raise the Weight
of the upper Marble; and in the open Air as much as is sufficient to overpower
the incumbent Atmosphere.

Another Argument against what Mr. Hobbs lays down in favor of a Plenitude,
may be taken from the following Experiment. We took a Glass Bubble about as big
as a Nutgmeg, and having Sealed up it is Stem, we held it in a Flame, and as
soon as it was ready to Melt, removed it into the open Air, where the Bubble,
which was dilated in the Flame by the help of the included Air's spring, was
pressed in on one side by the Weight of the Ambient Atmosphere, the Rarefied
Air, being condensed, and not able to resist the Pressure of the External Air;
yet when the Bubble was again conveyed into the Flames, the Internal Air
expanding plumped up the sides of the Glass, which were again compressed and
bruised by the Weight of the open Atmosphere; and this Experiment being tried a
Third time, Answered as when First repeated, till at last the one side of the
Bubble had a hole made in it, by the violent Pressure of the Atmosphere; from
whence it appears, that the same quantity of Air may, by being Rarefied, and
leaving Vacuities betwixt it is Rarefied Parts, be able to take up and possess a
larger space; and that there must be Vacuities interspersed betwixt the Parts
of that Air, is evident, since the Pores of the Glass are too sine, to admit
External Air, or when the Bubble was compressed, to give way for an egress of
the Air contained in it.

A Second Argument Answered.
Mr. Hobbs asserting, that the Cavity of a Receiver exhausted, is full of Air,
the first Experiment here alleged against him, and which shows, that the
Weight and pressure of the Atmosphere is very considerable is this: A Pewter
Porringer being cemented down upon an Iron Plate, which was fixed to the Pump,
we drew out the Air, upon which the Incumbent Atsmosphere depressed the Unequal
surface of the Porringer, and rendered it Concave; and in another Trial I took
Notice, that the Atmosphere did not exert its Gravity in a perpendicular Line,
but collaterally.

The Reason of Bubbles in an exhausted Receiver.
Mr. Hobbs ascribing the Reason of those Bubbles, which in an exhausted
Receiver, appear for some time upon the Surface of Water, to the violent Motion
of the Air contained in the Receiver, Mr. Boil to disprove him, takes Notice
that when Water is once freed from it is Air, let the Pump be Plied never so
violently, the violent Motion of Mr. Hobbs's Air will not be able to cause
Bubbles; so that the Phenomenon rather depends on a want of Air to press on
the Surface of the Water, and to overpower the Expansive force of that Air,
contained in the Pores of it; which for want of such a Pressure makes it is way
through the Water it is contained in.

Mr. Hobbs Explanation of the Torrecellian Experiment Examined.
Mr. Hobbs's Explanation of the Torrecellian Experiment having been elsewhere
Answered, to what has been their delivered, I shall add the following
Experiment; The Torrecillian Experiment being Tried with a straight Tube, we
raised the Pipe a little in the stagnant Mercury; and then conveying a piece of
a Bladder under the End of it, and tying it firmly; when the end of the Tube
was raised above the stagnant Mercury, I observed, that the Weight of the
Mercury upon the Bladder was very slight, and the Equilibrum betwixt the
Mercurial and Atmospherical Cylinder was so equal, that if the Tube was but
inclined, so that the Weight of the Mercury was not Perpendicular, the
Atmosphere would buoy up the Bladder, and form a Concave in the lower end of
the Mercury; but when the Tube was Erected again, the Bladder would be
depressed, and become Protuberant: And if the Bladder was nimbly applied, when
the Mercury was a little below it is wonted Station, the Mercury being then
lighter than the Atmospherical Cylinder, the Bladder would be raised up into
the Cavity of the Tube: In which Experiment we may Observe, that though upon the
Ascent and Descent of the Mercury, the Cavity above it is accordingly varied in
it is Dimensions; yet no Air can Ascend to fill it, as Mr. Hobbs would suggest,
since the Bottom of the Tube is shut up with a Bladder, which as I have
elsewhere made it appear, cannot be penetrated by Air.

Another Argument against Mr. Hobbs's Explanation of the Torrecellian
Experiment, is deduced deduced from an Observation made on the Traveling
Baroscope; for it is Observed, that when the shorter Leg is Sealed up with Air
included in it, Heat will so Rarisie that Air, that it will elevate the Mercury
in the longer Leg, without making it is way through the Mercury below, as Mr.
Hobbs supposes it does in the Torrecellian Experiment; where one would expect,
that if Air condensed could Penetrate Mercury so easily, the rarefied Air would
rather penetrate than buoy it up.

The Reason of Suction.
To show, in Opposition to Mr. Hobbs, how much the Atmospherical Air is
concerned in Suction, we took a Glass Bubble, whose long Stem, was Cylindrical
and very slender, and having, by the help of heat, expelled a good quantity of
the Air contained in it, when by immerging it in Water that Rarefied Air which
remained in it, was condensed; the Water was almost raised to the Top of the
Pipe; when this was done, the Air in the Bubble being Rarefied, it forced out
almost all the Water in the Stem, only a few Drops, which satisfied us that
none of the Rarefied Air had got out of the Pipe; as the Depression of the
Water so low assured us, on the other side, that the included Air was almost as
much Expanded, as when the Water began to ascend into the Pipe. When the Air
was thus Rarefied, we presently removed the Pipe out of the Water into the
Stagant Mercury, which ascended into it in a short time. In which Experiment,
did the Mercury rise to prevent a Vacuum, or did it is Ascent, depend on any
internal Principle of Motion, or on the compression and propagated Pulsion of
the Air that was expelled, there would be no reason, why the Mercury should not
rise as high as the Water. But from our Hypothesis, the Reason is plain; for as
soon as the Cylinder of Water or Mercury together with the compressed Air is
equiponderant with the Atmosphere incumbent, it rises no higer; So that though
the Air is less condensed, when the Tube is immersed in Mercury; yet the
greater Weight of Mercury making a greater resistance than Water, the external
Air is not able to buoy it up any higher to compress the Air enclosed.

And this Experiment is confirmed by the following: For having expelled a
little Air out of the Bubble by heat, so much Quicksilver ascended into it, as
filled a Fourth Part of the Pipe; which being carefully removed, so that no
Mercury could run out; we caused the Air in the globous part to be Rarefied
till almost all the Mercury was expelled, the end of the Pipe being all the
while immersed in Water; as soon as the Air included began to cool, the Water
rose up into the Body of the Ball, buoying up the Mercury before it, whereit
was observed, that as the Air was more or less Rarifi'd, and the Quicksilver
exepll'd out of the Stem, the Ascent, of the Water would proportionably vary.
So that as the Body to be buoyed up by the External Air varies in Weight, so do
the Degrees of it is Ascent.

Another Observation, which shows that there is no Circulation of Wind, such as
Mr. Hobbs supposes to be the Cause of Suction, is, that Smoke will ascend
without being in the least blown about. But since Mr. Hobbs will not allow of a
Vacuum, but asserts, that the Air makes it is Way through the close and solid
Bodies, I shall add, that having expelled the Air by Rarefaction, out of a very
thin Aeopile, and stopped the Orifice up with Wax, the External Air made such a
violent Pressure on it, as to thrust the Sides of it considerably inwards.

CHAP. VII. The Cause of Attraction by Suction.
Attraction, what.
SUction being looked upon to be a sort of Attraction, before I descend to a
more particular Consideration of the former, I shall premise something of the
latter.

And though Attraction is generally taken to be a kind of Pulsion, yet both of
them to me seem to be but extrinsical Denominations of the same Local Motion;
in which, if a Body moved, precede the Movent, or tends to acquire a greater
Distance from it, we call it Pulsion; and if upon the Account of Motion, the
same Body either follows, or tends toward the Movent, it is termed Attraction;
so that the difference is no Physical one, but only Accidental, in respect of
the Line of Motion to the Movent. As when a Man draws a Chain after him, though
he goes before it, yet he has some Part of his Body behind one Link, which
draws the rest after it; and so if that Chain draws any thing after it, though
the Cause of the Attraction goes before, yet there is a certain Cohesion of
Parts, that enables it to drag that Body after it; so that Attraction evidently
appears to be a Species of Pulsion, and such an one as is usually termed
Trusion, as when a Gardener drives his Wheelbarrow before him without letting
go his Hold.

But perhaps it may be said, that there are Attractions where it cannot be
pretended that the Attrahent comes behind any Part of the Body attracted; as in
Magnetical and Electrical Attractions, or as when Water rises by pumping.

As for the two first Instances, should we allow with Modern Philosophers, of
screwed Particles and other Magnetical Emissions, we might say, that these
coming behind either the Body attracted, or it is porous Parts on it is
Superficies might cause such an Effect; or by procuring some Discussion of the
Air, that may make it thrust the moveable toward the Attracting Body. But were
there none of these, nor any other subtle Agents, that cause this Motion by a
real, though unperceived Pulsion; I should, to distinguish these from other
Attractions, term them Attraction by Invisibles.

But as for the last Instance, I suppose it will be easily granted, that the
ascending Rammer only makes way for the Water to rise, as it is buoyed up by
External Air; for from the Torrecellian Experiment it is evident, that, since
the Terraqueous Globe is continually pressed upon by the Atmosphere, if in any
part, that Pressure be taken off, the Incumbent Atmospherical Pillar will buoy
up as much of that Liquor, as a Pillar of Air of such a Diameter is able to
counterpoise: The Truth of which is further confirmed by observing, that, if
the Air from about a Syringe be exhausted, the Sucker may be pulled up without
elevating the Water, or drawing it up after it. And indeed, supposing two Men,
by thrusting equally on each side a Door, to keep it shut, one might as well
say, that he that left off thrusting on one side, was the Cause of the Doors
opening, as that the Water rises by the drawing up the Rammer, which only gives
way to the Water as buoyed up by the External Air.

Thus much being said of Attraction, I shall proceed to consider, The Cause of
Suction, as laid down by others exanun'd.
that Species of it called Suction; for which several Philosophers have thought
on various Causes. As Nature's Abhorrency of a Vacuum, which, were it true,
Water by Suction might be raised to any Height; but we have found by
Experience, that it will not be raised above 33 Foot, which Weight the
Atmosphere is able to buoy up; as appears from the Torrecellian Experiment. And
further from an Experiment elsewhere laid down, where, though Water may presently
be sucked up to the Top of a Pipe 3 Foot long, yet Mercury being too heavy to
be buoyed up so high, it will not be elevated higher than an Atmospherical
Cylinder is able to raise it.

But those Modern Philosophers who allow not a Fuga Vacui, ascribe the Ascent
of such Liquors to an Impulse or Propagation of Motion, by the Dilation of the
Thorax; for they think, that the Lungs drawing in the Air, the dilated Thorax
propagates the Impulse, till it reaches successively the Body sucked; for such
thinking the Universe totally a Plenum, think that such Matter not finding any
other Place to move into, does upon that score buoy up the Water or Mercury in
the Pipe. But if we consider, how vast the Dimensions of the Air are, and
comparatively how inconsiderable an Impulse the Thorax by dilating can make, it
will scarce be thought, that so slight a one will compress the whole Air, so
much as to make it impel the Body sucked vigorously enough to rise to that
height, which Liquors may be raised to by Suction. But the Ascent of such
Liquors evidently depends on this, that by Suction the Pressure is taken off
the Surface of the Water, within the Pipe, and consequently, it must rise and
be buoyed up by the Pressure of the Atmosphere, on the stagnant Water.

To countenance my Opinion, and to refute the others I have mentioned, I shall
offer the following Experiment, viz. A small Bubble with a Stem being sealed
up, when the Air was forced out by Rarefaction, the Stem was broke under Water,
upon which the Water rushed into the Cavity of the Bubble, where if it be said
to go into the Bubble to prevent a Vacuum, those that say so, allow dari
Vacuum, and subvert their own Principles; and as for the Plenists, upon the
same Account we may ask them, what became of that Air which was expelled out of
the Bubble, and remained so, till the Stem was broke; since were the World an
absolute Plenum before, there could be no room for it without, nor could there
be such an empty Space within to receive the Water. Besides, if they say the
external Air being condensed and compressed by that which is forced out of the
Bubble, occasions the Re-ingress of Water when the Stem is broke off, it may
justly be wondered, that a cubic Inch of Air should be able to condense the Air
so much, that a Mile's distance from the place the Bubble was evacuated in, it
should be able to press the Water thus in again. But by our Hypothesis, it is
accounted for without these Difficulties; since the Resistance of the rarifi'd
Air within the Bubble, being disproportionable to the Pressure of the less
rarifi'd Ambient Air, it must consequently yield to it, and give way to the
Ingress of Water.

Our own Opinion proposed and proved.
From what has been said, it plainly appears what our Hypothesis is, which that
I may confirm by the following Experiments I shall briefly intimate: That the
Ascent of Liquors by Suction, in a Word, depends on the External Pressure of
the Air, when it is taken off the internal Superficies of the Liquor in that
Tube; what that Pressure depends on we have elsewhere proved in our
Physico-Mechanical Experiments of the Air's Spring and Weight, and therefore
shall proceed to Experiments to confirm what we teach of Suction.

We took then a crooked Siphon, whose shorter Leg was parallel to the longer,
which being hermetically sealed, and so much Water conveyed into the crooked
End, that it was of an equal Height in both Legs, so much Air was contained in
the Cavity of the shorter Leg, as possesses an Inch and. The Instrument being
thus prepared, one was ordered to suck at the Top of the longer Leg, and by all
the Force and reiterated Suctions, he was not able to raise the Water higher
than the Air in the shorter Leg depressed the Surface of that; for when the
Spring of that Air was so far weakened, that it could not depress the Water
subjacent; the Water kept at the same Station, being not above four Inches
high, which was not two Inches and an half higher than at first. But as soon as
the External Pressure of the Atmosphere, was again admitted to the Surface of
the Water in the longer Tube, it was presently depressed, and the Air in the
shorter Leg condensed, till the Water likewise rose in that to it is first
Station.

For a further Confirmation of our Hypothesis about Suction, I shall subjoyn
Experiments to prove the following Propositions.

Our Hypothesis reduced to Propositions.
I. That a Liquor may be raised by Suction, when the Pressure of the Air,
neither as it has Weight, nor Elastacity is the Cause of the Elevation. II.
That the Weight of the Atmospherical Air is sufficient to raise up Liquors by
Suction. III. That in some Cases Suction will not be made, as, according to the
Hypothesis I dissent from, it should, although there be a Dilatation of the
Suckers Thorax, and no danger of a Vacuum, though the Liquor should ascend.
The first Propositions proved.
To make out the first Proposition, I made the following Experiment, viz. I took
an inverted Tube, such as was formerly made use of, for a Traveling Baroscope,
but something longer, which being filled with Mercury, it was inverted, and the
Mercury in the longer Leg stood above the Mercury in the shorter Leg, as high
as it usually does in an ordinary Barometer; and then, one was ordered to suck
at the shorter Leg, upon which the Mercury subsided in the longer, and rose in
the shorter; the Mercury in the longer by it is own Weight depressing the
subjacent, and raising that, when the equivalent Weight of the Atmosphere was
taken off.

The second Proposition proved.
As for the second Proposition laid down, viz. That the Weight of the Air is
sufficient to raise Liquors in Suction; It may easily be proved by Arguments
drawn from our Physico-Mechanical Experiments, and therefore here I shall only
take notice of Phenomenon exhibited by our Traveling Baroscope; for having got
a Baroscope, whose shorter Leg was something longer than ordinary, we caused
one by Suction to raise the Mercury up to the Top of it, and then hermetically
sealing it up, we marked the place to which the Mercury had subsided in the
longer; which being done, we unsealed the shorter Leg, and observed, that the
Pressure of the Atmosphere elevated the Mercury in the longer Leg 5 Inches.

The third confirmed.
For a further Confirmation of the Doctrine laid down in this Proposition, I
shall subjovn the following Experiment. We made use of a Traveling Baroscope,
whose shorter Leg was 2 Inches above the Surface of the stagnant Mercury; and
having sealed up the End of the shorter Leg, we opened the End of the longer;
upon which, the Weight of the Atmosphere being added to the Pressure made by
the Cylinder of Mercury, the Air contained in the shorter Leg was compressed
into half the Space it possessed before. This Experiment being tried a second
time had the like Success.

To make it further appear, how much the Ascent of Liquors depends on Pressure.
I took a Glass Siphon like the former, and having hermetically sealed up the
shorter Leg, I poured in so much Mercury as compressed the Air in the shorter
Leg, into half the Space it possessed before; the Mercury in the longer Leg
being at the same time, about 30 Inches higher than in the other; nevertheless,
the Mercury could not be raised by Suction above one Inch higher in the longer
Leg; whereas, did the Ascent of Liquors depend on Nature's Abhorrency of a
Vacuum, it would have rose much higher, there being no danger of leaving a
Vacuum in the shorter Leg, since the Air was compressed into half the Space it
naturally possesses; so that the Reason according to our Hypothesis evidently
appears to be this, viz. that the Pressure of the Cylinder of Mercury, and the
compressed Air being in a due Aequilibrium, when, by sucking, the Air is drawn
out of the longer, the Air in the shorter expands it self so much, as Pressure
is taken off by the Removal of that Air, and when it is expanded so far, the
Pillar of Mercury keeps it from expanding any further, so that, there being no
other Force to raise and press the Mercury up, it can be elevated no higher,
since the Air included in the shorter Leg acts only by Virtue of it is Spring,
and not as in the open Atmosphere, by Virtue of it is Spring and Weight too, so
when it has lost it is Spring, it can propel the Mercury no higher.

To conclude this Discourse, I shall here explain one Phenomenon in Vacuo
Boyliano, which to some seems an Argument of Nature's Abhorrency of a Vacuum.
The Phenomenon is, That if ones Finger be applied to the Orifice of the Pipe,
that conveighs Air from the Receiver to the Pump, the Pulp of one Finger, will
enter a good way into the Pipe, and be very painful; the Protuberant Part of it
seeming to be drawn in by Attraction. To which we give this brief Answer, viz.
That when first the Finger is placed there, it receives an equal Pressure from
the Air within the Pipe, and from the Atmosphere; but when that Air is drawn
away, the External Pressure finding no Resistance, presses the fleshy Part into
the Tube, which is accordingly painful, as the External Pressure in reference
to the internal Resistance is greater or less.

To illustrate this Explication, I shall add, that having closed up one End of
a Glass Pipe, whose Diameter was an Inch, with a piece of oiled Bladder, and
filled it full of Water; it was immersed in a tall Vessel full of Water, the
immersed End of the Tube reaching almost to the Bottom of the Vessel, and the
other End emerging, and standing open above the Vessel: This being done, we
took Water out of the Tube, till the Surface of it was considerably lower than
the Surface of the Water in the Glass Body; upon which, the Bladder being more
strongly pressed against by the Water in the Vessel, than that in the Tube, the
Bladder was forced so much into the Cavity of the Tube, as to form a
Semi-Globe; but if, when the Water in the Tube, and that in the Vessel were
equally poised, the uppermost Orifice of the Tube were stopped, though the Pipe
were so much immersed, that the Quantity of Water, which pressed against the
lower side of the Bladder, were greater than that in the Tube; yet would not
the Bladder have the least Protuberance; but if the Orifice of the Tube were
left open to the Air, the Bladder would suddenly be pressed so much into the
Hollow of the Pipe, that it is Unequal Superficies would represent a Semicircle.
The same Experiment being tried with a Tube, the lower End of which was so
bent, as to form a right Angle, the Success was the same: Nor did it vary when
tried in the straight Pipe, with Wine instead of Water, save that Wine not
being specifically aeque-ponderant with Water, a greater Quantity of Wine was
requisite to settle them, at first, in a just Aequilibrium; but when that
Aequilibrium was lost, by immerging the Tube into the Water, the Bladder was
raised, so as to become protuberant in the Cavity of the Pipe.

CHAP. VIII. Some Observations and Directions about the Barometer, communicated
by Mr. Boil, in the Phil. Transact. of April 1666.
Observations concerning Barometers.
THE Design of trying Barometrical Experiments in several Parts, being only that
by comparing Notes, The Extent of Atmospherical Changes, in Point of Weight,
might be the better estimated; I shall lay down the following Directions for
those, whose Curiosity leads them that way. First, It will be requisite to note
the Day and Hour in which Observations are made. Secondly, The Situation of the
Place where the Barometer stands as to Height, since by the Length of the
Atmosperical Pillar of Air that presses upon it, the height of the Mercury may
vary; though not always exactly; for sometimes upon Changes in the Air not
otherwise observable, the Mercury will subside more than usually in that which
stands furthest from the Center of the Earth, when at the same time it does not
proportionably subside in that which is placed in a lower Situation. And

It, perhaps, may be Worth Noting, whether upon excessive Droughts, when the
Ground is parched and cracked, some subterraneal Effluvia may not rise, which
may add a specific Gravity to the Air.

Nor will it be needless, when other Observations are making, at the same time
to observe the Weather; as also what Winds blow, and whether violent or more
remiss; for sometimes it is observed, that when high Winds blow, the Mercury is
the lower, though not always.

But to favor what has been intimated, viz. That the Alterations in the
Weight of the Air, depend on subterraneal Steams mixed with it; It has been
observed, that after long Droughts, upon a Shower of Rain, so many Steams have
been either prevented from rising, or depressed and precipitated, that the
Mercury has subsided within 2/16 of an Inch.

CHP. IX. An Account of a new kind of Baroseope which may be called Statical:
communicated in the Philosophical Transactions of July 2. 1666.
A new Baroscope described.
HAving caused a Glass Bubble to be blown, as large and thin as it possibly
could be; I counterpois'd it in a Pair of Scales, which would turn with the
30th Part of a Grain; which Balance being suspended at a Frame, both the Frame
and the Balance were placed by a good Baroscope, from whence the present
Weight of the Atmosphere might be learnt. By which means I could discern
Variations, by which the Altitude of the Mercury was not altered above of an
Inch. And it was not a little pleasant to behold, that sometimes the Bubble
would be counterpois'd; but when the Atmosphere was very high, it would
manifestly preponderate, and upon other Changes the Scales would preponderate
on the other side, and in some Days time again regain it is Aequilibrium; so
that by looking first on the statical Baroscope, one might foretell, whether in
the Mercurial Baroscope the Water were higher or lower; but of all the Seasons
we made our Observations in, the most frequent Changes were in the Spring.

This statical Baroscope having exactly answered upon frequent Observations, I
shall add the following Notes concerning the Instrument.

And first, as to the Grounds on which I proceeded in making this Baroscope. 1.
That the Glass Bubble and it is Glass Counterpoise are not of the same Bulk, the
Bubble being a hundred times bigger than the Counterpoise. 2. If Bodies of
equal Weight and unequal Bulks be weighed in another Medium, the Aequilibrium
will be lost; for if the new Medium be heavier, the Body whose Dimensions were
larger, will be lighter than before; and Vice versa, and the Disparity of
Weight in the new Medium will be greater, as the Inequality of Bulk betwixt the
two Bodies varies. 3. These two things being laid together, I considered, that
it would be the same thing in reference to the Effects, what Medium these
Bodies were weighed in, provided the difference were considerable; and
consequently, since the Baroscope made it evident, that the Weight of the Air
varied, the Bubble and it is Counterpoise would be differently affected upon
those Variations, and would accordingly preponderate, the Bubble being subject
to preponderate when the Air was lighter; and Vice versa.
Secondly, The Bubble was about the size of a large Orange, and weig'd 1 Dram
and 10 Grains. Thirdly, If I had had, any Opportunities, I would have tried
whether the Aequilibrium of these two Bodies would have been altered, by the
Dryness or Moisture of the Air. Fourthly, When I could not get one Bubble large
enough, I have made use of two less, which though they are not altogether so
convenient, yet, if the Scales be strong enough to bear the Weight, they will
answer the Design of the Experiment.
This Instrument may be improved by several Accomodations. As,

First, To the Ansa of the Balance, an Arch of a Circle may be fitted, which
being divided into 15 or 20 Degrees, will readily tell the Quantity of the
Angle, and how much the Position of the Cock declines from a Perpendicular.
Secondly, A Counterpoise of Gold may be made use of. Thirdly, The Balance
being made of Copper or Brass, will in time vary less in it is Exactness, than
if it be made of Steel, which is more subject to rust. Fourthly, The Bubble and
it is Counterpoise may be suspended at the Beam, by which means it will be less
burdened with Weight. Fifthly, The whole Instrument will be more free from
Dust and irregular Agitations, if placed in a Frame, like a Square Lanthorn,
with Glass Windows and a Hole at the Top to give an Intercourse betwixt
External and Internal Air. Sixthly, This Instrument having a light Wheel and an
Index fitted to it, such as Dr. Wren used to open Weather-Glasses with, and the
Ingenious Mr. Hook, applied to Baroscopes, will discover more minute
Variations. Seventhly, The Beam may be improved by being made longer, and it is
Balance may be more exquisite than those I generally employed.
Thus, though this statical Baroscope be inferior to the Mercurial one in some
Respects, yet in others it is more convenient; For

First, It demonstrates to Autopsie, that the Ascent and Descent of the
Mercury, depends on the varying Weight of the Atmosphere; since here it cannot
be pretended, that the Changes depend on a Fuga Vacui. Secondly, It shows that
the Air has Weight, and much more than some Learned Men would allow; since in
so small a Quantity of it, we see considerable Variations. Thirdly, It is more
easily, provided; and more conveniently removed. Fourthly, We are more easily
satisfied of the Goodness of them. Fifthly, The Absolute or Respective Weight
of the Air may more easily be discovered; if, when the Weight and Dimensions of
the Bubble is Hydrostatically discovered, upon every Alteration of the
Mercury's Height in the mercurial Baroscope, the statical Baroscope's
Aequilibrium be restored by the Addition of Weights; that Weight in the
statical Baroscope answering the Variations in the Ascent or Descent of the
Mercury in the other. Sixthly, By this Instrument, we may compare the mercurial
Baroscopes of several Places, and be able to make some Estimate of the
Gravities of the Air therein; for, if in one place the Bubble weighs a Dram,
when the Mercury is 29 Inches high, and that when the Mercury is risen an 8th,
it is requisite to add the sixteenth Part of a Grain to preserve the
Aequilibrium; When I come to another Place, and find the same Proportions
answer, I may conclude, that there is no sensible Difference in the Weight of
the Atmosphere in those Places; but if an additional Weight be required to
preserve the Aequilibrium, then the Air is so much heavier, than when the
Mercury stood at 92 Inches.

But in making these Observations we must take notice, whether the Places in
which they are made, are equally distant from the Center of the Earth; for if
one be a Valley, and the other a Hill, there will happen a difference upon that
Account.

There is yet another use which may be made of this statical Baroscope, which
is, to discover the Weight of the Atmosphere at the Top and Bottoms of high
Mountains; but whether that may contribute to the discovering the Height of
Mountains, or not, I shall leave to be considered with more leisure.

CHAP. X. A Discovery of the Admirable Rarefaction of the Air, even without
Heat.
FROM what has been delivered amongst our new Physico-Mechanical Experiments,
it appears, that long since I could, by the help of my Engine, rarifie the Air
to 152 times it is usual Dimensions; and the Virtuosi of the Florentine Academy
tell us, that they would rarifie it, without the help of my Engine to 173 times
it is former Dimensions; Yet for further Satisfaction, I made the following
Trials.

EXPERIMENT I.
Air expanded to above 8000 times it is natural Dimensions.
HAving filled a round Glass Egg of clear Metal, and furnished with a Pipe some
Inches long, with Water; this, together with a Viol, in which Water was
likewise contained, was conveyed into a Receiver; and when the Air was
exhausted, we observed, that Bubbles were afforded plentifully in both, so that
the Water seemed to boil, and that in the Stem of the Glass Egg ran over. This
being done, and the Water in both freed from Air, we took them out, and filling
up the Stem of the Glass Egg, with Water out of the Bottle, we inverted it into
more of the same; so that the Glass Egg and Stem was wholly full, except that a
Bubble of Air was contained in the Top of the Egg, whose Dimensions were a
Tenth and less than two Centesms of an Inch. Then the Glasses being placed in
the Receiver, we set the Engine on Work; and observed, that the Bubble gradually
expanded, till it filled up the whole Capacity of the Egg, except the Stem; and
lest the Water should be thought to subside only for want of the Internal Air
to bear it up, we continued pumping, till the Bubble in the Egg expanding
further, depressed the Surface of the Water in the Stem, below the Surface of
the External Water. The Air being thus far rarifi'd, we compared the Diameter
of the Bubble with the Diameter of the Glass, and found it to be as 1 to 20;
and consequently, according to Euclid, the Proportion betwixt Spheres being
triplicate to that of their Diameters, the Diameter of the lesser being one,
the Diameter of the other must be 8000. So that the Air expanded, possessed
8000 times the Space it possessed before. The Glass Egg being filled with such
Water again, and no Air included in it, though the Receiver was in a great
measure exhausted, yet the Water did not subside, till a Bubble at the last
rose to the Top, whose Diameter was to the Diameter of the Glass as 1 to 14, so
that according to Euclid's Rule beforementioned, the Bubble expanded,
possessed 2744 times as much Space as before. But Dr. Wallis, observing the
great Thinness of the Glass, thought that the expanded Bubble possessed 8232
times it is former Dimensions.

N. B. Water being let into the Exhausted Receiver, till it would receive no
more; we found, that by reason of some Leaks, the Receiver had not been
perfectly exhausted.

EXPERIMENT II.
June 2.62. Air expanded to 10000 times it is former Bulk.
ASmall Bolt-head, which was able to contain 80 Grains of Water, being inverted
into a Jar, it was shut up in the Receiver; and when the Air was exhausted,
Bubbles which rose out of the Water expanding themselves, presently drove all
the Water out of the Bolthead; but when the Air was let in again, the expanded
Air in the Bolt-head formed a Bubble no bigger than a Pin's Head: After this,
we filled the Bolt-head with Water cleared of Air, and when the Receiver was
pretty well exhaufied, a Bubble ascended to the Top of the Bolthead, which,
when the Air was again let in, was almost invisible; yet the Receiver being
again exhausted, it expanded it self so far as almost to drive all the Water
out of the Bolt-head; yet when the External Air was again admitted into the
Receiver, it shrunk into a Bubble, whose Diameter was 1/22 part of the Diameter
of the Bolt-head, so that to fill the whole Cavity it expanded it self 10648
times; but considering the Cavity of the Neck of the Vessel, which it likewise
in some measure filled, it was expanded to 13769 times its Bulk.
The Diameter of the small Bubble retracted, was 1/27 of an Inch. The Diameter
of the outside of the Head of the Glass was 29/36 of an Inch. The Water that
filled the Head was 60 Grains. The Water that filled so far of the Neck, as the
expanded Bubble possessed was 17 Grains. The Bolt-head weighed 15 Grains.

EXPERIMENT III.
THE foregoing Experiment being repeated, we found that a Bubble, whose
Diameter was 1/16 of an Inch in Diameter, when expanded, possessed the whole
Space of the Ball, as well as Neck of the Bolt-head, and depressed the Surface
of the Water within the Pipe, below the Surface of the stagnant Water.

From these Experiments it appears, that according to the most moderate
Estimate, Air expanded will possess 2744 times it is natural Space, and
according to our most successful Experiments 13000. So that we may justly
admire the Minuteness of those Aerial Instruments, that she employs even about
Visible Operations.

CHAP. XI. New Observations about the Duration of the Spring of Expanded Air.
Observations about the Duration of the Air's Spring.
IT having not been as yet attempted to show, whether a Portion of expanded Air,
would retain it is Elasticity, and it is Power of Restitution or not, nor how
long; nor whether a Portion of Air enclosed in a Receiver, would have it is
Spring varied upon Full, or the Change of the Moon; though I cannot much boast of
the Progress I have made, yet I shall subjoyn the following Attempts on that
Occasion.

A Glass Bubble newly blown, and whilst it contained none but rarifi'd Air, had
it is Stem imediately clapped into a Flame, and Sealed up; Many Months after it
was inverted into a Basin of Water, and the Seal broke off under the Surface of
it; and though Water was violently impelled into the Cavity of it, yet the
included Air had so far retained it is Spring, as not to suffer the Cavity to be
quite filled with Water.

Another Method I took to show the Durableness of the Air's Spring was the
following, viz. Leaving a small Portion of Air in the Folds of a Lamb's
Bladder, whose Neck was closely tied; it was enclosed in another Vessel, and
conveyed into our Pneumatick Engine, and when the Receiver was exhausted, the
expanded Air distended the Bladder, so that it filled the whole Cavity of the
Vessel, by whose sides, it was guarded from the Pressure of the outward Air, so
that the expanded Air kept the Bladder distended two Years.

For further Satisfaction, I contrived an Instrument, by which I could learn,
whether, and how long Air variously expanded will retain it is Spring; by which
I could not discover, that the Air lost any thing considerable of it is Spring,
in ten Weeks time.

Another Instrument I made use of, by which I could find, that Air expanded to
1000 times it is usual Dimensions, would be sensibly affected by Heat, and lose
the Expansion it gained thereby, upon a Removal of that Heat.

March 18. We tried the following Experiment. A Cylindrical Glass having a long
Stem at the unsealed End, was filled with Water, and inverted into Water, which
lay in the bottom of a large Pipe, sealed at one End, and 3 or 4 Foot long;
which being done, the large Pipe was so far exhausted, that the Air the
inverted Pipe possessed the whole Cavity of it down to the Stem; upon which the
larger Tube being closed up, the expanded Air possessed the same Space 3 Months
after, except that betwixt the Pipe and the Stem, upon extreme Cold, the Water
rose or near. The closed Apex being broke open under Water, it gradually filled
the whole Cavity, except a small Space possessed by a little Bubble. The
Diameter of the Cylindrical Part of the Pipe was of an Inch, and its Length 3
Inches; the Bubble was about 2/10 in Diameter, and 2/100 in Depth; so that the
Bubble was, according to Dr Wallis his Computation, to the Space it possessed,
when expanded, as 1 to 1350.

CHAP. XII. New Experiments touching the Condensation of the Air by mere Cold,
and it is Compression without Mechanichal Engines.
Of the Air 's Condensation by Cold, etc.
TO try how far the Air is capable of being condensed by mere Cold, when the
Season of the Year has not pre-affected it; I tried the following Experiment
in Autumn.

In the middle of September about Noon, on a Sun-shiny Day, we placed a Bolt
head in a Frame, so that the Stem was Perpendicular to the Horizon, and the
lower End of it immersed in Water. This done, we covered the Ball of the
Bolt-head with a Mixture of beaten Ice and Bay Salt; upon which, the internal
Air being condensed, the Water rose up into the Stem, and stood a good while:
Then having made a Mark at it is highest Station, we filled the Vessel with
Water, and found that it yielded 19 and vj, the Weight of the Water which
filled the Stem up to the Mark being j and iij, by which Number, the former
being divided, the Quotient was 14 4/11 Drachms; so that the Proportion of the
two Quantities being as, 11 to 158; The Space into which the Air was condensed,
was, to it is former Space, as 147 to 158: So that the highest Degree of
Condensation it was then capable of, made it lose of it is former Extent 11/158.

N. B. First, The Stem of the Glass ought to be long, lest the Water, upon the
Air's Condensation, should rise into the Ball of it.

Secondly, The Cylinder of Water was two Foot, so that it might, by it is
Weight, in some measure, hinder the Ascent of more, and so keep the Air from
condensing to it is utmost.

Thirdly, When the Water rose as high as it well could, we observed it to rise
and fall alternately, for a little time.

Fourthly, The Air may thus be further condensed, than by Winters Cold.

But to show that in the forgoing Experiment, the Cold did not compress the Air
immediately, but partly, in as much as it, by stuffing up the Pores of the
Water, caused it to swell, and so to compress the Air; I took a new Glass
Bolt-head with a short Neck, and filled it full of Water; so that when it was
hermetically sealed up, the Liquor wrought within 3 Inches of the Top, the
sharp End which was made for the Convenience of sealing being of an Inch long;
This being done, the Bolt-head was placed in a Mixture of Snow and Salt, upon
which, the Water ascended and compressed the Air into the Conical Part; upon
which, the Glass flew in pieces. In which Experiment, according to Dr. Wallis
his Estimate, the Air was compressed into a 40th part of the Space it possessed
before. Which is considerable above the utmost Compressure made in Wind-Guns,
where it is usually thought not to be compressed into less than a 15th, and
(according to Mersennus) into an 8th part of it is former Space.

CHAP. XI. Of the Admirably differing Extension of the same Quantity of Air
rarefied and compressed.
The admirable different Extensions of the same Quantity of Air.
THE first Thing I shall take notice of, concerning the different Degrees of the
Air's Rarefaction and Condensation, is, That, in our Climate, though Cold will
not condense it near into a 20th part of the Space it possessed before, yet it
may be expanded to 70 times that Space.

Secondly, The Air may be much more condensed and rarifi'd by our Engines, than
by Heat or Cold; the Proportion in respect of Expansion being as 1 to 70.

But, Thirdly, Perhaps the Proportion betwixt the Degrees of the Air's
Condensation and Rarefaction will not be thought so great, as what we have
mentioned; if we consider, that the Air we make Experiments with here below, is
so much compressed already, by the Incumbent Atmosphere, that for that Reason
it is more inclined by it is Spring to yield to an Expansive, than a Compressive
Force.

Fourthly, It may be questioned, how the parts of the Air, which have a
specific Gravity, come to be spread so thin in the Cavity of the exhausted
Receiver, since there is nothing in it for them to swim in, and to bear them
up; Since the Proportion is so great betwixt the Parts of the Air, and the
Cavity of the Receiver, they are contained in.

Fifthly, It is not a little wonderful, that Air should be so subject to vary
it is Dimensions; so that if we consider how far it may be expanded without the
Assistance of Art, elaborate Engines or Heat, the Top of the Atmosphere must be
extremely rare.

To conclude; If we compare the utmost Degrees of Condensation and Rarefaction
together, the same Portion of Air may possess 520000 times the Space, at one
time, that it did at another.

CHAP. XII. New Experiments about the weakened Spring, and unheeded Effects of
the Air, communicated in the Philos. Transact. of December. 75.
TO try whether, as some Corrosions of Bodies in close Vessels increase the
Spring of the Air, so others may not weaken it; and likewise to discover
whether some Effects of the Air may not depend on some unheeded Qualities, I
made the following Experiments, which I shall lay down when I shall have made
some Trials. the Changes of Color in Solutions of Copper, by the Influence of
the Air.

EXPERIMENT I.
Change of Color in a Solution of Copper.
FILINGS of crude Copper being put into a Crystal Glass of a Conical Figure,
with as much Spirit of Salt, as stood a Fingers breadth above the Filings; we
covered the Vessel with a Stopple exactly adapted to it; upon a Solution of the
Copper, the Color of the Liquor was a dark Brown; but it soon lost that
Color, and was clear again like common Water; but when, by taking out the
Stopple, the Liquor was again exposed to the Air, it first acquired a brown
Color upon the Top, and that penetrating deeper into the Liquor by degrees;
it, in a quarter of an hour, was wholly tinged with a brown Color again; and
so it successively laid down, and re-acquir'd that Color, as it was stopped
up, or exposed to the Air, till at the last, being kept up a Month, it kept the
brown Color it had acquired in the Air unaltered.

EXPERIMENT II.
A Bottle of the same Liquor with the former, and which was much clearer, being
exposed to the open Air, in half an hours time was not in the least altered;
but the Vessel being again closed up for two or three hours, it acquired a
faint Green; and the Glass being again unstopp'd 24 hours, the Green was deep
enough, but not very transparent.

EXPERIMENT III.
ABout 3 Spoonful of the brown Tincture of Copper, was shut up in a Receiver,
capable of holding ten times as much; It retained it is Color half a Year in
Vacuo, and then being exposed to the Air, it acquired a Green in about an hour,
without the Precipitation of any muddy Sediment.

EXPERIMENT IV.
SOme of the aforementioned Tincture being left a considerable time in a
Window, lost it is Color, and appeared like common Water; but toward the
latter end of December, being exposed to the Air, it acquired a faint and
moderately transparent Green.

EXPERIMENT V.
Filings of Copper and Spirit of Wine.
FILINGS of Copper, and as much rectified Spirit of fermented Urine, as rose an
Inch above them; being shut up in a Conical Glass with a mercurial Gage, in
some hours the Mercury in the sealed Leg was depressed.

EXPERIMENT VI.
A Gage being shut up in a Receiver, with the same Ingredients as in the former
Experiment; In some time the Spirit acquired a very pleasant blew Color, and
two or three Days after, that Color began to grow fainter and fainter; so that
at the end of the fourth Day, it had wholly lost it is Color: But being exposed
to the Air, in four or five Minutes the Top of the Liquor began to turn Blew,
and at the end of ten Minutes, it diffused it self throughout the Whole, and
five Minutes after, grew so strong, as almost to be Opacous. The Liquor shut up
again, in two or three days time grew clear. And this Experiment being tried
several times, had the like Success. In trying these Experiments, I forbore to
shake the Glass, lest the Alterations should be supposed to arise from any
Sediment raised and mixed with the Liquor, though for the most part, none was to
be perceived.

EXPERIMENT VII.
Filings of Copper with Spirit of Sal Armon.
HAving enclosed Filings of Copper with Spirit of Sal Armoniack, enough to cover
them an Inch, we shut up, with them, a Gage; In some time, the Spirit had got a
blew Color, and in the mean time, for two or three Days the Mercury in the
sealed Leg descended near 1/^ of an Inch. The like Success we had, when the
Experiment was tried several times after.

EXPERIMENT VIII.
Coral and Spirit of Vinegar.
A Mercurial Gage with Coral and Spirit of Vinegar, being enclosed in a Conical
Glass, whilst the Menstruum worked on the Coral, several Bubbles were produced,
which breaking in the Cavity of the Vessel, compressed the Air into parts of
the Space it possessed before; but after the Operation of the Menstruum was
ended, the Compression declined, till the compressed Air regained it is Extent
within a third of what it was dispossessed of by the Compression.

Spirit of Vinegar and Minium.
Spirit of Vinegar and Minium, being after the like manner enclosed with a Gage
in a Conical Glass, though the Minium was in a great measure dissolved, yet the
Gage, discovered no Alteration in the Air.

EXPERIMENT IX.
Filing of Copper with Sp. of Sal Armon.
ABOUT the 20th of August we put Filings of Copper into a Viol, with as much
Spirit of Sal Armon. as covered them an Inch; In three Days it had acquired a
deep blew Color, and almost lost it again: The Viol being opened, in five
Minutes it was of a deep Blew; but being shut up again nine Days, it lost it is
Color.

EXPERIMENT X.
THE same Ingredients being shut up in a Viol hermetically sealed, presently
acquired a deep Blew, and in twelve Days after lost it again; during which
time, the Mercury in the open Leg was impelled up; but, when in the Night the
Seal was broken open, there succeeded a Noise, and the Mercury in the shorter
Leg was raised briskly near 3/^ of an Inch; and though the Air had access to the
Liquor, at an Orifice no larger than a Pea; yet, in a Minute and a half, the
Surface of the Liquor had acquired a lovely fair Color a quarter of an Inch
deep; and in five Minutes, the whole was Blew.

CHAP. XIII. A Statical Hygroscope proposed to the Secretary of the Royal
Society.
COnsidering how much Men's Bodies are influenced, by the Moisture of the Air
and it is Dryness, I made use of the following Hygroscope to discover the
different Degrees of those Qualities, viz. A Sponge; which is a Body that sucks
up the Air's Moisture much more commodiously than several other Bodies; for
though common Sea Salt or Salt of Tartar will imbibe the Moisture of the Air, yet
it is a hard matter to separate it from them again. And though Lute-Strings
discovered the Degrees of the Air's Moisture by the increase of their Bulk, yet
they continued not to answer Expectation long. I likewise made use of a Cup,
made of a Light Wood, with a Button on the Bottom of it, to which a Hair being
tied, it was, by that, suspended at a Balance; and also, I observed several
things, when I made use of Sheep's Leather, which would be a good Hygroscope,
being plentifully furnished with Pores to imbibe Moisture, but that it is more
subject to Rot than Sponge.

A statical Hygroscope.
For in the main, I found nothing so convenient as Sponge, which is so
plentifully stocked with Pores, that a Dram, having imbibed as much Water as
it could contain without dropping, weighed 2 Ounces and 2 Drachms; And

All that is required in using this Hygroscope, is, that the piece of Sponge
made use of, be first weighed in Air of a moderate Temperature, with a Nice
Balance; for as afterward it increases or decreases in Weight, so accordinly
the Air is moister or drier. In making use of this statical Hygroscope, you may
use what Quantity of Sponge you please, so that it is Weight be not so great as
to injure the Balance.

CHAP. XIV. A Brief Account of the Utilities of Hygroscopes,
The Usefulness of Hygroscopes.
THE Use of a Hygroscope is either General, or Particular; The general Use is,
to estimate the Changes of the Air, as to Moisture and Dryness, by ways of
measuring them, easy to be known, provided and communicated. This appears from
the Description of our statical Hygroscope; by which, we can by the help of
small Weights, discover the least sensible Alterations in the Temperature of
the Air; nor is it the only Advantage in our Hygroscope, that it is able to
discover such Alterations in the Air's Temper, but it is an Additional one,
that it is durable and lasting.

N. B. It is one great thing wanting in the Preparation of Hygroscopes, that we
have not yet found a Standard of Moisture and Dryness to adjust and compare
other Hygroscopes by.

But having thus briefly intimated the most general Use of Hygroscopes, I shall
now proceed to mention their Particular Uses.

USE I. To know the differing Variations of Weather in the same Month, Day and
Hour.
I Have commonly observed, that when the Weather was at a stand, the Sponge
grew heavier in the Night, but lost that Moisture the next Day, before Noon;
but in frosty Nights, at the latter End of the Winter, this Observation did not
hold.

Amongst other Observations, it would not be amiss to note, whether there be
any Correspondence in the Air's Operation on Hygroscopes and Baroscopes; and if
at all, in what kind of Weather. For usually in the Summer, when the Hygroscope
is lightest, the Baroscope is higher, though strong Winds may make both lighter,
such as the North-West with us; whereas South Winds with Rain usually make the
Baroscope lighter, and the Sponge heavier. And East Winds, though they make the
Baroscope heavier in Winter, yet they make the Hygroscope lighter.

It would likewise be of use to observe on the Seacoast, whether the Ebbing
and Flowing of the Sea, causes any sensible Alteration in the Hygroscope, as
likewise at what time the Air is moistest; especially at Full and New Moons; by
which Observations we may more easily hope to determine, whether the Moon
diffuses a Moisture through the Air or not, than by observing the Plumpness of
Oysters and Shellfish, or of the Brains or Marrow of Animals, which is a hard
thing to be sure of. To these Observations it will be requisite to note,
whether upon Spring-Tides in March or September, the Hygroscope receives any
sensible Alteration.

USE II. To know how much one Year or Season is dryer or moister than another.
IF the Hygroscope when it continues longest without some sensible Alteration,

USE III. To discover and compare the Changes of the Temperature of the Air
made by Winds strong or weak; frosty, snowy and other Weather.
THAT the Sponge in the Wind or Sun loses considerably of it is Weight, January,
having lost a 24th Part of it is Weight, after it had been 3 quarters of an hour
exposed to it; and making use of half an Ounce of Sheeps Leather instead of
Sponge, this being hung in the Wind, only lost 1/18 of it is Weight in an hour.

But though it be possible thus to make Observations of Particular Winds; yet it
requires a great deal of Caution, as well as Skill in Physic and Cosmography,
in forming Rules for the observing of the Qualities of other Bodies, since
Winds which come from the same Quarters in several Countries have different
Qualities; for though North Winds in the Winter, are generally attended with
Frost, yet at the Famous Port of Archangel a Thaw accompanied it; the Reason of
which seems to be no other than, that the Northern Wind coming a long way over
the Northern Seas, does not acquire such a Disposition as the South Wind, which
passes over a large Tract of Frozen Land. And it is observed in Egypt, that
the North Winds which are elsewhere drying, are there moist, which is attested
by Mr. Sands in his Travels into Egypt, lib. 6. Cap. 8. Sect. 3. And Monsieur
de Serres affirms, that about the Quarters of Tholouze, the South Wind dries,
and the North Wind brings Rain; yet from Narbonne to Lions, all over Provence
and Dauphine it is quite otherwise.

But, besides that on this account Winds from the same Quarters may differently
affect the Hygroscope; It Is Operation may be considerably diversified, as it
blows vehemently or slowly over the same Country; for tho Wind would rather
increase the Weight of a Hygroscope if moved slowly, yet by a more vehement
Agitation, several moist Particles in the Sponge are dissipated and dispersed.
To these Observations I shall add the following, Viz. that frosty Weather has
been observed to make the Hygroscope grow lighter toward Night, and that snowy
Weather increased the Weight of it, as likewise misty and foggy Weather.

But what is more strange is, that on a Sunshiny day, the Sponge has
preponderated upon the passing by of a Cloud; but as soon as that was gone,
regained it is Aequilibrium; and I have observed, that when the Air has grown
heavier, the Hygroscope has grown lighter, as if those Terrestrial Effluvia
which increase the Weight of the Air were unfit to be imbibed into the Pores of
the Sponge; wherefore at such times it may not be amiss to take notice; whether
any, and if any, what kind of Meteor, as Wind, or Rain or Hail, or in the
Winter, Snow or Frost, will commonly be signified or produced.

USE IV. To compare the Temperature of differing Houses, and differing Rooms in
the same House.
THIS may be of considerable Service in enabling Men to choose Rooms,

USE V.
TO observe, in a Chamber, the Effects of the Presence or Absence of a Fire in
a Chimney or Stove; which will sensibly appear by the help of our Hygroscope.

USE VI. To keep a Chamber at the same Degree, or an assigned Degree of Dryness.
THIS may easily be done by observing the Aequilibrium of the Sponge,

To these Observations I shall add, that I have sometimes taken notice, that
the Hygroscope has not answered our Expectation, as at other times; whether
the Air, at that, abounded with other Effluviums, which rendered the moist
Particles of it, more unfit to be imbibed by the Pores of the Sponge, I shall
not determine; nor whether in time, Hygroscopes may not help us to discover the
Nature of different Effluviums, such as those of Spirit of Wine, Chemical Oils,
etc. Nor shall I undertake to determine, whether this Instrument joined with
the Baroscope and some others, may not help to give us a foresight of some
Constitutions of the Air which precede Diseases, Hurricanes, Earthquakes, or
Inundation; especially of those Accidents which depend on the Air's being
overcharged with Exhalations and other moist Vapors; as well as it does of a
shower of Rain.

To conclude this Chapter, I shall intimate, that though in these Matters it be
perhaps impossible to form Hypotheses, which can in no Points be called in
Question, yet the Theory may be as good as can, by a wise Man, be expected, in
so mutable a Subject as the Air; and therefore they ought not to be slighted or
suddenly laid aside, since several Accidents may intervene in the Air, on which
those may depend. As we know, though Tides generally Ebb and Flow, so as to
answer the Theory given of them, yet by fierce Winds and great Land-Floods, the
regular Course of them has often been altered.

CHAP. XVIII. A new Experiment and other Instances of the Efficacy of the Air's
Moisture.
The Efficacy of the Air's Moisture.
THAT the Moisture of the Air has had considerable Effects on Subjects far less
tender and curiously contrived, than Men's Bodies, will appear from what
follows; and that the Moisture of the Air has a considerable Influence,, and
usually a bad one, may well be argued from the Effects we have taken notice of
on several Parts of Animals; and that the Skins of Animals are sufficiently
prepared to receive such Effluviums, appears from what I have before observed,
viz. That Sheep's Leather being made use of for a Hygroscope, plentifully
imbibed the Moisture of the Air; and even Bladders which by Nature are made
impervious to Urine, are so disposed to imbibe the Moisture of the Air, that
the membranous Part put into a Pair of Scales, and counterpois'd, makes a good
Hygroscope; and not only these, but Lute-strings, which are made of the twisted
Guts of Animals, and even Bones, the most solid Parts of Human Bodies, will so
far imbibe the Moisture of the Air, as to swell considerably.

Nor are Animal Bodies alone capable of having their Pores penetrated by the
Moisture of the Air; but it insinuates it self into inanimate Bodies, and
swells the solid Parts of Wood; and even Polished Marbles are observed to be so
plentifully stocked with moist Vapors, as evidently to sweat; nay even the Air
it self is not without Vapors and moist Parts, dispersed through it in the
Heat of Summer, which will appear from the following Experiment.

Having filled a Bottle with Water and four Ounces of Sal Armon. we
counterpois'd it in a Pair of Scales, and in an Hours time, so many moist
Particles in the Air were condensed by this frigorifick Mixture, that, they
first appeared in the form of a Dew, on the outside of the Glass, and then ran
down the sides of the Vessel, till that Scale preponderated and weighed a
Dram more than the other.

But to proceed to Instances, which, show the Force and Efficacy of moist
Vapors, when they penetrate solid Bodies. It is no weak Argument of their
Efficacy that we observe, that, by the powerful Insinuation of Moisture, the
Strings of Musical Instruments are swollen and broken; nor is it in
considerable, that Doors and Door-Cases are so swollen in Rainy Weather, as to
open and shut with a great deal of uneasiness.

Marchasites burst by the Air 's Moisture.
Besides which Instances, I have observed a Piece of Wood to increase
considerably in it is Weight in rainy Weather: And I am told, it is usual for
musical Instruments to grow out of Tune, not only the Wooden, but the Metalline
Pipes of Organs being apt to swell in wet Weather. And not only by the help of
Rain, but the Moisture of the Air, Marchasites have been swollen and burst
asunder; which I am apter to believe, because I have observed Vitriolate
Efflorescences upon the Surfaces of shining Marchasites, caused by the Action
of external Moisture on them; and the Moisture of the Air has so powerfully
penetrated some Marchasitical Substances, that they have burst asunder;
whereupon it appeared, that a greater Quantity of Vitriol was generated within
their Substances, than without.

To conclude what I have to say on this Subject, I shall add the following
Experiment to assist a Virtuoso, to make an Estimate in known Measures of the
mechanical Force of the Aerial Moisture.

I caused a Rope about 22 Yards long, to be fastened at a convenient Height, to
an immovable Body; and then having fixed a Pully to another stable Body, about
18 Yards distant from the former, the Rope lying upon the Pully, was, betwixt
both, almost in an horizontal Posture; but to that End of the Rope, which hung
down from the Pully toward the Ground, was fixed a Weight of 50 Pound, and to
the upper Part of that, an Index, which being placed horizontally, pointed to a
Board which was divided into Inches and parts of Inches, that we might discover
the better, the Ascent and Descent of it upon changes of Weather.

When the Weight had stretched the Rope as much as it could; I observed, that
in one rainy Night the Weight was raised five Inches; but the next Day proving
a dry Day, it was depressed lower than before.

But a heavier Weight being made use of instead of the former; June 4th in an
hour and quarter, the hundred Weight was raised of an Inch. The Sky being
cloudy, but without Rain. June 6th. In the Night which was cloudy, it was
raised about 3 Inches, and an hour after that Observation was made, it rose
half an Inch more.

From whence it appears, that the Force of the Air's Moisture is considerable,
since the Rope that, by it is Assistance, raised the Weight, was but about the
third Part of an Inch Diameter, being 3/10 and 4 decimal Parts of 1/10.

CHAP XIX. Of some unheeded Causes of the Insalubrity and Salubrity of the Air,
etc.
The Insalubrity and salubrity of the Air depends on subterraneal Vapors*
AMongst the several Causes, on which the Salubrity and Insalubrity of the Air
depend, subterraneal Effluvia are in Effect most considerable; which differ not
only according to their respective Natures, but according to Place and Time;
according to Place, as they ascend from the superficial or deeper Parts of the
Terraqueous Globe; according to Time such as ascend daily, and may be termed
ordinary Emissions, or only at distant times; the latter of which may be termed
periodical, and sometimes fortuitous or irregular.

But notwithstanding the Vapors which rise from the Earth, may be
distinguished by these Distinctions; yet since Nature offers her Phenomenon not
so distinct, but confusedly and together, I shall sometimes consider the
Terraqueous Steams, in the more general Notion, with reference to each of the
Members of this Distinction. But that I may deliver what I have to say more
distinctly, I shall lay it down in the following Propositions; Proceed under
the following Propositions.
having first observed, that the Insalubrity of Marish, and the Salubrity of
Sandy Grounds, may depend on some Effluvia, which act not merely or principally
as they are Moist or Dry.

PROPOSITION I.
THE first Proposition is, Prop. 1.
That it seems probable, that in diverse places, the Salubrity or Insalubrity of
the Air considered in general, may be in good part due to subterraneal
Expirations, especially to those I called ordinary Emissions. Which may
contribute to the preserving of Health either by promoting Respiration, or by
correcting noxious Particles in the Air, and checking morbifick Ferments.

And indeed, if we consider what a great variety of Bodies, besides Minerals,
the Earth is stocked with, though some may emit Effluvia noxious to Men as well
as Plants, yet in that Variety there may not be a few, whose Exhalations may be
as friendly to him; for Trees and Grass have not only been observed to flourish
over Tin Mines in the West of England, but over Veins of another kind of
Mineral, which was not far from the Surface of the Earth. And it is observed,
that those that Work in Tin Mines, usually live very long. And I have not only
been told, that the Fumes that rise from such Mines, though often very
bituminous, and of an offensive Smell, yet some of them are well scented: And a
Friend of mine, who caused himself to be let down in a subterraneal Cavern,
which was broken open by digging for a Mine, not only observed, that the Air
was very pleasant to breath, but likewise amongst several imperfectly formed
Minerals, store of a Mineral Earth very fragrant and pleasant, which Smell it
in some measure retained, when it had been exposed to the Air for some time.

And I my self have observed in Ireland, a piece of Ground to yield very good,
though short Grass, in a Country justly esteemed healthful, which I attributed to
some sulphurous Exhalations-from Limestone; which have had so considerable
Effects in other places, that I am told that a piece of Ground in Derbyshire
which lies upon Limestone, is so warmed by the Vapors that rise from it, that
Snow is much sooner Thawed upon it, than that which lies near it, on Soil which
covers Freestone. To which it may be added, that a Gentleman observed in
Hungary, that walking over some Ground which affords that Noble Oar called by
the Germans Rot-gulden ertz, the Air was very pleasant, nor was the Air much
less pleasant on that Ground which lay upon Veins of Cinnabar; yet over other
sorts of Mines the Air was very inoffensive. Nor is it improbable, that
subjacent Fossiles should influence the Air, since I have observed Mineral
Earths twenty Foot deep, yield a volatile saline Spirit, like that of
Hartshorn.

And that several Effluvia may impregnate the Air, which are not to be
discerned by any of our Senses, appears from those Magnetical Effluvia of the
Earth, discovered by the Ingenious Gilbert and others, which do not only steam
through the Air, but as I have observed, act upon Bodies in an Instant, which
are contained in Glasses hermetically sealed.

But though from hence it may appear, that the Salubrity of the Air may be
improved by the Effluvia of some Minerals; yet it is beyond doubt, that in
general they render the Air Insalubrious, since there are a great many more
that emit bad, than good ones: For besides that the Air has been observed in
Hungary to be very offensive and prejudicial to Respiration, that in the
Neopolitan Grotta de Cani, suddenly deprives Dogs both of Sense and Motion. To
which may be added the Averni in Hungary, which suddenly kill those that draw
in the Air infected with them. Besides which, there are a great many noxious
Effluvia which rise from Marchasitical Minerals, which we take little notice
of, and in places which we little suspect them to be in; nevertheless, they
infect the Air, and render it corrosive, by emitting that ill conditioned
Sulphur, which they so much abound with, that a pound distilled in an Earthen
Vessel with a good Fire, besides an inflammable Sulphur, which was condensed
into thin Films on the side of the Receiver, yielded a strong Acid, not much
unlike Gas Sulphuris, which was corrosive enough to dissolve Coral in the Cold.
And that there is other Marchasitical or Vitriolate Matter in England, besides
those Stones, from which the greatest part of Vitriol is obtained, I my self am
a Witness, who have obtained a Vitriol from a Vein of Metalline Oar, consisting
of a black, heavy Stuff, without any troublesome or artificial Preparation.

PROPOSITION II. It is probable, Prop. 2.
that in diverse Places some Endemical Diseases do chiefly or partly depend on
subterraneal Steams.
UNder the Title of Endemick Diseases, I not only comprize those that are
solely peculiar to some Places, as the Plica Polonica to Poland, and the
Disease in France called la Colique de Poictou, but those that chiefly appear
in particular Countries, as Agues in Kent and Essex Hundreds, Consumptions in
England, and Fluxes in Ireland.

But before I proceed further under this Topic, it is requisite I should first
Advertise, that I deny not but that a great many of such Distempers may depend
in a great measure on Excessive Heat or Cold, or some other manifest Qualities
of the Air, as also bad Diet, or Intemperance; but the Reasons why I think they
generally in a great measure likewise arise from some noxious and contagious
subterraneal Effluvia, are the following.

1. Because frequently the Causes are not manifest; and 2. Contagious Effluvia
may be emitted. 3. A large Tract of Land may abound with the same kind of
Mineral, and another piece of Land with another. 4. As the Effluvia are Saline,
Sulphurous, Antimonial, Arsenical, or of another Nature, they may have
different Effects; so in Hungary, some cause a difficulty of breathing.
But the Effluvia of the Earth, do not only affect the Body by the Mediation of
Respiration, but being contiguous to the Skin, get in at the Pores of the Body,
and have sensible Effects on the Internal Parts. And that the Pores of the Body
are capable of receiving very subtle Effluvia, might be evinced by several
Instances; but it may suffice to intimate, that I have so prepared a Mineral
Substance, that it would have very sensible Effects on Substances contained in
the Bladders of dead Animals, when it had no other way to get to those
Substances than through the Pores of the Bladder, which are not near so
perspirable as other Parts of the Body, not constituted to hold so subtle and
penetrating a LIquor as Urine.

Nor need it be a less Wonder, how these subterraneal Effluvia should have so
sudden Effects on human Bodies, and in so little time, since we see in moist
Weather, how suddenly Lute-strings are broke, and Ropes shortened by the
Insinuation of moist Particles into their Pores. And though those Effluvia are
not so plentifully dispersed in the Air, as to enter the Pores in such Swarms,
yet the Mass of Humors may in time be sufficiently impregnated with those
noxious Vapors to enable them to produce their Effects, when, sucked into the
Capillary Vessels, they gradually deprave the Mass of Blood.

And that Effluvia from without, may have considerable Effects on the Mass of
Blood, appears from Appensa and Periapta, as also the Effects of Mercurial
Plasters and Girdles; and the Effluvia of a Lodestone, which caused a Friend
of mine to be troubled with Fits of the Colic, an Argument that Mineral
Effluvia may cause particular Diseases. To which we may add, that Arsenical
Appensa, extolled by some in the Plague, have produced the Effects of Poison,
and in some a Faintness and Dispiritedness, according to the Testimony of
several Physicians. And that Mineral Expirations may cause a determinate
Distemper, we may learn from an Observation of mine, which was, That a Chemist
rubbing very often Red Arsnick in a Mortar, and endeavoring to make an
Excellent Medicine of it, first complained to me of a Difficulty of breathing,
and sometimes of Pains and Tumors in his Testicles.

And it will not be very much doubted, whether Mineral Effluvia penetrate the
Pores of the Body or not, by those that shall know, that the Fumes of Sulphur
are so penetrating, that at the Pic of Teneriff, they blacken Silver in the
Pockets of those that go up to it. I made a Preparation of Sulphur, which
emitted Effluvia so powerful in the Cold, that they penetrated a Leathern
Purse, and discolored Silver contained in it.

But besides the forementioned Effects of Vapors on the Pic of Teneriff, I was
told that one that ascended that Mountain, had the Color of his Hair altered
before he came down again; which argues the Power of Mineral Effluvia to
penetrate the Pores of the Body.

But lest it should be questioned by some, whether such Mineral Effluvia would
not be consumed, and cease in less time than Endemical Diseases are continued
in one Place; I shall imtimate that I think several subterraneal Bodies may
have a power of propagating their Virtue to Matter contiguous to them, by some
Seminal Principle, or something Analogous to a Ferment, or by bringing some
more Crude Mineral Earths gradually and successively to a greater Degree of
Maturity and Perfection: For it has been observed, that in Tract of time a
Mineral might be obtained from an Earth which at another time it could not be
obtained from; which Observation holds as to Nitre, which is one of the most
Catholic Fossils, and most plentifully emits Effluvia. Besides, though Mineral
Effluvia in the Region of the, Earth discoverable by us, should be consumed; I
see not why supplies may not be brought from the Bowels of the Earth. Indeed,
considering how closely the Matter of Minerals is crowded together, and how
long Magnets severed from their Mines, emit Effluvia without a sensible
Diminution, the Stock of Mineral Earth from whence they flow cannot be thought
suddenly to be exhausted; for an Effluviating power is so durable, that one had
a perfumed Watch, which, though constantly worn, preserved it is Scent 16 years,
and by the same Reason could perfume Marbles quite through, so that they
retained their Scent a long time.

But before I leave this second Proposition, it is requisite that I should take
Notice, that noxious Effluvia may cause Distempers, not only by Respiration and
penetrating the Pores of our Body, but by impregnating the Water made use of
for preparing and Diluting our Aliment, without any sensible alteration in the
Water to be discerned by us; So Water by an Infusion of Crocus Metallorum
becomes Emetick; and indeed sometimes, those Effluvia are so numerous, that in
the Borders of Lancashire, the Mud in a Ditch is so strongly impregnated with
subterraneal Exhalations, that at the Surface of the Earth or Water they will
take fire, and flame like a Candle.

But besides that Distempers may be propagated by these subtle Effluvia
impregnating Water, they may be also prejudicial, in as much as being mixed
with the Nutriment of Plants, they may deprave their Juices, and consequently
make them unfit to be eaten: And that Mineral Effluvia may in a great measure
deprave and influence the substances of Plants in their growth, is confirmed by
some, who have noted, that Oaks, growing in Ground which abounded with
Vitriolate Mines, were much more heavy and solid than others; and these
Effluvia are sometimes so numerous and crowded into the Pores of Plants, as not
to be overcome and concocted by the Ferments of the Plants, but to keep their
own Natures; for I have observed in a Vine near Paris several Marchasitical
Particles throughout the Pores of the Root and Trunk. And I have been told that
at Tockay in Hungary the very Kernels of the Grapes are as if it were Guilt
over with Leaf Gold. But,

Besides the aforementioned Ways by which our Bodies may be affected with
Noxious Effluviums, we may not a little suffer, by the depraved Humors which
some Animals we Feed upon, are nourished by, and which vitiate their Bodies
primarily, and secondarily ours.

As from what has been said it, appears, that Subterraneal Effluvia may cause
Distempers, so it may not be amiss to take Notice that possibly in some measure
Mineral Effluvia may prevent Distempers; for it is Observed, that several parts
of Scotland are free from Agues, and that very hot and large Regions in the
East Indies are rarely troubled with the Plague; nor is it less remarkable that
in Ireland the Air is impregnated with such sort of Emanations as prevent the
Generation of any venomous Creatures; To which I shall add the following
Instance from Beguinus in his own words, who says, Dignum admiratione est, quod
quamvis in vicinia Hydriae Comitatus Gloricensis, ubi reperitur copiose
singulis fere annis Lues pestifera grassatur, illa tamen semper immunis ab hac
manner soleat, idque viri providae aetatis se observasse, et a Majoribus suis
accepisse mihi sancte confirmarunt; to which I shall add further that the
Learned Michael Magerus, pronounces Mercury an Antidote against several
Diseases; and particularly the Plague.

PROPOSITION III. It is likely, Proposition 3.
that diverse Epidemical Diseases are in great Part produced by Subterraneal
Effluvia.
Though several Epidemical Distempers are caused by manifest alterations in
sensible Qualities of the Air; yet to show that some of them principally, and
others partly depend on the Effects of Subterraneal Effluvia, I shall offer the
following Considerations.

And First, the Structure and disposition of the Parts of our Globe, which are
not much below the Surface of it, and much more, the deeper Subterraneal
Regions, are so plentifully stocked with Mineral substances; so, that it is not
improbable but that Subterraneal Effluvia ascending thence into the Air, may
cause excessive Heat or Cold, or some other manifest Qualities, and
consequently in part occasion most Epidemical Diseases. For from what I have
elsewhere shown, it not only appears, that these Effluvia, by acting on one
another may excite sudden heats; but also that Minerals, of different Degrees
of Maturity, acting on one another, may produce an Intense Cold. Besides, the
changes of the Air on which Epidemical Diseases depend, are so considerable,
and instantaneous, that they can scarce be attributed to the Influence of the
Sun or Moon, which are too regular and constant in their Influence to cause
such Anomalous effects, as we cannot but take Notice of in a few years time;
but are rather caused by an irruption of Subterraneal Steams, which are
frequently both impetuous and irregular: And though some attribute them to the
Influence of the Stars; yet the vanity of Judiciary Astrology having been so
plainly detected by several Learned Men, I shall here only observe that it is
much more unlikely that particular Towns should alone be Influenced by such,
than by Effluviums from Bodies near the Surface of the Earth where those Places
stand; and that which renders it much more probable is, that I have frequently
known Diseases very Fatal to happen suddenly in some places, where the first
Contagion has been accompanied with a very troublesome Fog.

That sudden and violent Heats may be produced by a Mixture of Subterraneal
Bodies, not only appears from Oil of Vitrol poured upon Iron, Spirit of Nitre
upon Butter of Antimony, Filings of Copper, Tin, or crude Antimony; But from
Oil of Vitriol poured upon Powdered Marchasites which was accompanied with very
strong Scented Fumes: To which I shall add, that even Sulphur has to my
knowledge had considerable effects on Marchasites: And I have been told by a
German Chemist, that in Germany, Marchasites which were found there, would grow
hot, if long immersed in pure Water. And if we consider upon how many Accidents
the Course of Subterraneal Waters may be turned, it will be easily evident,
upon that Account considerable Degrees of Heat may succeed; for if a convenient
quantity of Filings of Steel be mixed with Powder of Sulphur, and that Mixture
be moistened with Water, it presently grows very hot, and emits Fumes
copiously, like Slak'd-Lime.

And I have been informed by several, who frequent Mines, that Damps, which are
made up of Subterraneal Effluviums, are not only very irregular in Reference to
their Distance, but also their Duration; and have very ill effects on those
that come within the reach of them; and if such pernicious Fumes are to be
discovered so near the Surface of the Earth, well may they affect those that
Inhabit on the Soil, near which such Effluvia rise: I say near which, because
though they do not immediately rise in the very Towns they infect, and are
carried thither by the Motion of the Air; yet in a large Tract of Land, they
may be so dispersed as to have no considerable Effects.

But it is not requisite always that those Effluvia, which cause Distempers,
should be noxious at their first Rise from the Earth, since Mineral Fumes may
acquire new Qualities by associating with particular Particles in the Air, and
may by that means be disposed to act upon particular Parts of the Body, and to
cause a determinate Disease: So though neither Spirit of Nitre nor Sal Armoniack
alone can Dissolve Gold; yet Aq. Regia which is a Composition of both, will;
but has no such effect on Silver, Diamond's or Rubies.

As for the Reason why Epidemick Distempers affect some and let others go free;
it may not only be accounted for by the peculiar Dispositions of those Bodies,
but also by considering, that the Effluvia which rise from the Earth, may be so
imperfectly mixed with the Air, as to fall upon one Body, and not another; so I
have observed several Leaves on a Tree blasted with a Wind which blew at that
Corner of the Ground, yet others on the same piece of Ground were untouched;
nay, the very Leaves of that were not all blasted on that side which the Wind
blew, so that I suspected some Arsenical Vapors being mixed with the Air, cast
upon them were like Hail shot from a Gun, and scattered in it is Flight: And on
a Cause not much unlike this may depend the Effects of some Winds which cause
Blasts on the Faces of some People, yet let others go free, as I remember I was
Riding once in the Wind, which, though it disaffected not me, yet my Man, who Rid
after me, escaped it not.

In favor of our Hypothesis already laid down, I shall add, that the short
duration of some Distempers, as well as their Progressive Motion from one Town
to another, are Arguments either that these Vapors rise all at once, and are
dispersed, or the Subterraneal Commotion that causes them passes on from one
Part of the Earth subjacent, to another. Nor is it less Consonant to our
Hypothesis that the short duration of some Distempers may depend on a
successive rise of Effluvia, since when those of one kind cease to be emitted,
and another kind succeeds, the latter may check the former by precipitating
them, or uniting into Quid Tertium less prejudicial to all Animal Bodies. So by
an ascociation of new Particles with those Pestilential Effluvia which cause an
Annual Plague in Grand Cairo, it suddenly stops, and those already infected,
dye not, if the Air be sufficiently impregnated before, as a late Writer of
Voyages into Egypt testifies in these Words. The Drops or Dew purifies the
Air; for as soon as it falls, the Plague ceases to be Mortal, none dies of it;
The Air is wholesome, all Distempers cease; and if any person grows sick, he
never dies, etc. I have been told that about the Tin Mines in Devonshire, not
only the Grass and Fern, but the Trees will be suddenly blasted, by the
powerful Effluvia which suddenly rise over a considerable compass of Ground.

Having said thus much of Epidemical Distempers, it perhaps may be Expected
that I should say something of the Plague and it is Origin, which I must own my
self at a loss in; for though I think it rather seemingly Pious, than really so,
to ascribe such things to a Supernatural Power, which may be accounted for by
Natural ones; yet I deny not but that some may arise from a Supernatural Origin.

But what ever may be the first Origin of Plagues, I am inclined to think, that
the Propagation of them depends on a Malignant Disposition in the Air, arising
from some Subterraneal Effluvia; for these Reasons; First, because the
Malevolent Aspects of the Planets seem too Remote and Indeterminate to act on a
particular place. Besides, according to the vulgar Hypotheses, the Plague ought
to rage most where it very seldom happens: For Leo Africanus informs us, that
in Numidia, though raging hot, it happens but once in an hundred Years; and
Purchase in his Pilgrimage, Lib. 6. Cap. 13. tells us, it is not known at all in
the Land of Negro, and seldom in Japan or New England; and in the East Indies,
China, Tunquin, and Cochinchin^, it is never heard of: Whereas the Country of
China contains more Inhabitants than all the Nations of Europe; and were the
Plague a Punishment inflicted for the sins of Men, certainly in Countries so
large and savage, they might expect it from Divine Justice as often as we.

But perhaps it may be said, that these Histories as much Press our Hypothesis,
as those others alleged by Physicians: But if we consider, that I confess it
difficult to determine the Original cause, the other part of my Hypothesis is
not at all shaken, since it could not be denied, but that noxious Effluvia
would be able to propagate the Plague there, were there an Original cause to
set those secondary causes on work: But for as much as from our Hypothesis it
appears that the Original Cause of the Plague is not always so abstruse, but
sometimes begun, as well as propagated by those noxious Effluvia, without the
Concurrence of any other Cause, it may be requisite to take Notice; that in
China and those Countries where the Plague, is unknown, we may presume such
noxious Steams are not emitted; for though Sulphur is usually found in many
Countries where Metalline Veins are frequent; yet I never heard that in those
Mines an Ounce of Native Sulphur was ever found.

Besides, though there may be Minerals in a Country which may emit noxious
Vapors; yet the Mines from whence they come may by so deep in the Earth that
they may not be able to infect the Atmosphere powerfully enough to cause a
Pestilence, though promoted in making their Way by some violent Earthquake, when
upon a fall of some weighty Mass of Earth in Subterraneal Caverns a trembling
Motion is communicatted to the Earth about it, and propagated more or less
proportionable to the first Cause; for which Reasons, noxious Effluvia being
sometimes emitted which could not otherwise make their own way, probably the
Plague happens in Africa once in 30 or 100 Years periodically. And a French
Historian takes notice of a Disease in France, not much unlike the Colic,
which, for a long time returned every 10th Year. And Platerus, Lib. 2. P. M.
303. Relates that the Plague at Brasil successively returned every 10 Years,
for 70 Years together.

But further, though in the East Indies such Vapors should arise, which would of
themselves be pernicious; yet others may rise, which though noxious likewise, may
by combining with them, form a Third Substance innocent enough: So Corrosive
Sublimate, when combined with Crude Mercury, becomes so useful and innocent a
Medicine as Mercurius Dulcis.

Besides what has been said, another Reason why some Countries are free from
the Plague, may be some peculiar disposition in the Air to resist the Effects
of noxious Exhalations; as when the River Nile Increases and Over-flows, the
Plague in Egypt ceases: And the Soil in some Countries is of such a Temper as
to impregnate the Air, so that it suffers not poisonous Creatures to live in it,

A Second Reason why I think the Plague is propagated by Subterraneal Effluvia,
is, because it happens sometimes when no Distemper is perceivable in the Air
which seems able to produce such an Effect; yet when the Aspects of the Stars
have been threatening enough, and the Air very intemperate, no Plague has
followed; as when Fernelius Writ his Observations De abditis rerum Causis, Lib.
2. Chap. 13. It was immoderately hot, but very Healthful; and the same further
tells us, that the Plague has sometimes began in Winter, and gone off in
Summer: And Johannes Morellus, that a Temperate and Healthful Spring, which
succeeded a Winter, in which the North Wind Reigned, brought in the Plague,
though at the same time, the North Wind continued serene and clear. And the
Constitution of the Air before the Plague in 1665, was not much unlike it.
Whence it is evident, that the Plague depends not on manifest Qualities of the
Air, but is rather caused by Subterraneal Effluvia which float in it, and which
are drawn in by Respiration; and that Poisonous Exhalations have rose from the
Earth and infected the Air with a Pestilential Disposition, Monsieur de
Meszeray in the Life of Philip de Valoris, and Diemerbroeck de Peste, Lib. 1.
Chap. 8. testify.

And though there is a manifest difference in Pestilential Distempers in several
Countries, and at different times; yet it is easily accounted for by our
Hypothesis, since the Minerals from whence those Vapors rise may be varied by
new Combinations, and the Influence of Subterraneal Fires and Menstruums, as
well as in the open Air, by which they may be enabled to produce Symptoms more
violent than in ordinary Distempers; so that Hippocrates might well acknowledge
in Distempers (...), something above the ordinary Course of Nature.

The ill Effects of Mineral firmer
As for the Natures of those Exhalations, though they are hard to be known, yet by
the Effects and Symptoms of some Plagues, and of Yellow, Red, and White
Orpiment, we may suspect them to flow from that Mineral Substance; but though I
believe some Plagues may arise from such Causes, yet since the Earth abounds
with several Minerals which we are not acquainted with, we cannot deny but by
the combinations of such, there may result Substances which yield Effluviums
hurtful enough to human Bodies; so by adding Common Salt to Orpiment, they
prepare White Arsnick, which by the Mixture of Salt, of it self innocent,
becomes more pernicious, causing violent Symptoms, which I have taken off by
Oil of Sweet Almonds and something made of Limons; And Sandarach, as well as
Native Arsnick, seem to be little else than Red and White Orpiment, the Effects
of which are taken Notice of by Sennertus. M. P. E. vid. Page 66. on a Painter,
whose Face was swelled, together with Fainting Fits, upon opening a Box where
Orpiment had been kept some time. And White Arsnick has had very fatal
Effects, when externally worn in Amulets, sometimes causing burning Fevers,
Anxieties about the Heart, inflammations, exulcerations of the Breasts; Black
Pustles, as if made with a Caustic, weakness and Fainting, and sometimes
sudden Death, which Symptoms have been cured by the same Antidotes that the
Plague is. And that Subterraneal Mineral Effluvia are able to effect very
strange things, appears from what Kircherus observes, Scil. That in the Kingdom
of Naples 1660, there were several Stains observed on Linen Clothes, much
resembling Crosses, that poisonous Matter which was the Cause of them, being
spread along the Threads, which crossed one another at right Angles. These
Stains would wash out with Soap and Water; but their duration was very unequal,
some of them contrinuing ten, and others fifteen days.

Antidotes against the ill Effects of the Plague.
And though it be impossible to discover the Natures of all noxious Effluvia; yet,
undoubtedly a great many may, and Antidotes thought on to destroy their ill
Effects. In the great Plague of London, when upon a subsidence of the
Pestilential Humors, the Patients usually dyed, the following Plaster applied
to the Tumors of several, prevented them from falling; and either burst or made
them fit to open; and so saved the Lives of many.

Emplastrum attractivum Pestilentiale nostrum.

. Gum. sagapen. Ammon. Galban. an iij. Terebinth. Lact. Cerae Virginis an.
iiijss. Magnet. Arsenicalis subt. pulv. ij Rad. Aron. pulv. j Gummi depurentur
cum Acet. Scyllit, and ad consistentiam Emplastri coquantur, and postea
ponderentur, deinde cum rebus aliis F. Empl. S. A. Hoc Emplastro Carbunculus
obducatur, quod paucis horis Venenum extrahit.

Praeparatio Magnet. Arsenicalis antea dicti.

Arsen. Chrystallin. Sulphuris Vitri, Antimonii Crudi an. Haec tria in mortario
ferreo pulverisentur. In Vase fortissimo Vitreo, ponantur ad ignem arenae,
donec vitrum optime incalescat, and praedicta solvantur and liquentur instar
Picis, quod observabitur quando filum quoddam immittitur in fundum, quod
extractum postea instar Terebinthinae trahetur ubi satis coctum erit. Postea
remove vitrum ab igne, and subtiliter pulverisa and ad usum serva.

Another eminent Physician preserved himself from the Plague, by taking every
Morning a little Sea Salt dissolved in Sea Water: And in another Plague, I knew
two recovered with a Conserve made of Goats Rue.

Why the Plague sometimes unexpectedly ceases.
But further, besides what has been discoursed on; it is not less disagreeable
with our Hypothesis, that sometimes the Plague unexpectedly ceases; since those
subterraneal Effluvia, which continue the Infection, ceasing to be emitted from
the Earth, those in the Air are soon spent and swept away with the Wind; which
Effluvia may cease to be emitted; either because they meet with some other
Effluvia in the Earth, which corrects them; or because they primarily rose from
a Conflict and Agitation, depending on the mutual Action of two Bodies; which
as Spirit of Salt poured on filings of Iron, or Aquafortis on Salt of Tartar,
emit Fumes less plentifully, as the Ebullition declines. And that noxious
Exhalations may be corrected, by a combination of others as pernicious, not
only appears from what has been before delivered; but may be illustrated by
noting, that though Spirit of Saltpeter will corrode Silver; yet, if Spirit of
Salt be added to it, it soon loses that Quality.

PROPOSITION IV. It is very probable, that most of the Diseases, that even
Physicians call new Ones, are caused either chiefly or concurrently by
Subterraneal Steams.
New Diseases caused by subterraneal Steams.
BY new Distempers, I would be understood to mean, not every one that varies a
little in Symptoms from the same sort at another time; but such as at their
appearance are, by their Symptoms altogether unknown: That these Distempers
depend not on any intemperate and manifest Qualities of the Air; nor on the
influence of those Heavenly Bodies, that move about us, seems evident; because
the Influence of the latter are too indeterminate, and the alterations in the
Temper of the Air, much more frequent than the Access of new Distempers.

But from what has been said under the Third Proposition, it appears, that the
Globe we inhabit, abounds with various noxious Minerals, which are subject to
various Confluxes, Conflicts and Dissipations; and which, by emitting Effluvia,
may infect the Air, and cause new Diseases, which may continue accordingly, as
the Cause is more or less durable; so Manna for these two or three Ages has
been found on certain Trees, which faculty of producing Manna, they still
retain, yet had it not before.

Experiments to show that Metals may be raised in the form of Vapors.
To conclude this Chapter, and to render what we have taught concerning mineral
Effluvia more probable, I shall add the following Experiments; from whence it
will appear, that malleable Metals may be raised in the form of Vapors into
the Air, and become part of Fumes, or perhaps of Invisible Vapors, or even of
Flame it self.

EXPERIMENT I.
Dantisic Vitriol and Sea Salt Distilled.
HAving powdered three Pound of Dantsic Vitriol, and two of Sea Salt, and
distilled them with a strong naked Fire; we obtained a blew Spirit of Salt:
Besides which there rose a Powder of a Cupreous and Martial Nature, which
settled in the bottom of the Liquor.

EXPERIMENT II.
English Vitriol and Sea Salt.
THE former Experiment being repeated with English, instead of Dantsic Vitriol,
we obtained a Yellow Spirit, with a Yellow Powder, which seemed to be a Crocus
Martis.

EXPERIMENT III.
Mercury Sublimate and Copper.
WE cast thin Plates of Copper into a Retort upon a double weight of good
Mercury Sublimate, and having luted on the Receiver, by a long continued Fire,
we obtained some running Mercury, and some Sublimate, which had not fastened
upon the Copper. In the Bottom of the Retort we found a weighty, brittle and
resinous Substance, fusible and inflammable, almost like Sealing Wax; this
being beaten and exposed for some time to the Air, turned to a kind of
Verdigreese, which gave a green Tincture to Spirit of Salt. This being
Distilled ad Siccitatem several times, till fully impregnated with the Spirit;
it was mixed with Triply, and with a strong Fire afforded a colorless Liquor,
like Water, which upon an Addition of Spirit of Hartshorn turned Blew.

EXPERIMENT IV.
Venetian Sublimate and Cornish Tin.
VEnetian Sublimate Distilled from Cornish Tin, into a good large Receiver,
yielded a Spirituous Liquor, which emits white Exhalations, upon an Access of
free Air; but if the Orifice of the Vessel be but covered with a Piece of
Paper, Air promotes the rising of Metalline Vipours.
it presently ceases to emit those Exhalations; yet begins again, when that
Paper, which lay but lightly upon it before, is taken off: Whence it appears,
that the Air may promote the rising of metalline Vapors in the Atmosphere.

And that Metalline Fumes will ascend in the form of Vapors, will appear from
the following Experiment, viz. Having satiated Aqua fortis with Copper, and
steeped some brown Paper in it to soak up some of the Menstruum, when the
superfluous Moisture was partly evaporated, we laid some of it upon the Hearth,
near a Wood Fire, upon which, the Paper being Scorched, emitted Fumes like
Smoke, which rising up in the Air, as soon as they came to the Flame, they
imparted to it a Color, partly Blew, and partly Green; as it was variously
mixed with the Flame and Smoke of the Wood.

CHAP. XX. Suspicions about some hidden Qualities of the Air.
Latent Qualities in the Air.
BEsides the four first Qualities of the Air, viz. Heat, Cold, Moisture and
Dryness, and those which Philosophers and Chemists have discovered, as Gravity,
Springiness, etc. I am apt to suspect, that there are other latent Qualities in
it, due to the substantial Ingredients, which it is made up of: For the Air we
live in, is not a simple Body, but a confused Aggregate of Effluviums; which,
being jumbl'd together, constitute a great Mass of Heterogeneous Matter,
endew'd with different Qualities.

For from what is elsewhere delivered, it appears, that there are various
Effluvia, besides those that afforded ordinary Meteors, which arise from Bodies
in subterraneal Parts; several of which have no Names, or at least none
assigned them, and have several Powers and Qualities which we know not of.

Besides, the Sun and Planets may have Influences here below, distinct from
their Heat and Light, which may mix with the Atmosphere we live in: And for as
much as those celestial Globes that move about us, may be endew'd with
substances, that we here know nothing of, the Effluviums which come from them,
may affect us in a different manner from any Bodies, we here have in our
Atmosphere. And tho the greatest Part of those Effluviums, Qualities in the Air
which arise from the Union and Conjunction of other Bodies with it.
which are active in our Atmosphere, arise from subterraneal Parts, and from
Celestial Bodies; yet doubtless there are a great many that result from the
mutual Action of the different Parts of it acting on those Bodies that are
exposed to it; for though, notwithstanding any manifest Qualities we can discern
in it, the Air seems to be unfit for a Menstruum; yet I doubt not, but it may
have considerable Effects on Bodies disposed to be acted on by it; for not to
urge, that sometimes the Quantity of a Menstruum compensates it is want of
strength; we know, that there are several Liquors, which, tho insipid, and make
no sensible Impressions, on the Organs of Taste, yet by their various
Attritions and frequent Motions against Bodies, become fit for Solvents: So the
Air, having it is Parts always acting on Copper exposed to it, in tract of time,
produces that Efflorescence colored like Verdigrease; a factitious Body
usually produced from the same Substance corroded by Vinegar or the Juice of
the Husks of Grapes. Besides, we see, that Mercury, which has no sensible
Taste, has a faculty of Dissolving Gold and Silver, and all Strong Menstruums,
which dissolve Bodies with the utmost Vigor, are soon glutted, and can
dissolve no more; so that, though the Air be a weak one, yet it has this lasting
Advantage, that when a small Quantity of it is glutted, it bears so great a
Proportion to the Body it acts on, that a fresh Part of it is still to supply
the Deficiency and Place of that which can act no longer.

The Air abounds with saline and sulphurous Parts.
Besides, the Air abounds with so many saline and sulphurous Parts, that by
rubbing upon Bodies that lie in their way, by frequent occursions, they cause
considerable Effects, so we see, according to the Proverb,

Gutta cavat Lapidem, non vi, sed, saepe cadendo. Moreover, though the Parts of
Air are very minute, yet, we know, that the Bodies which are exposed to their
Action, are only acted on by them upon their outward Superficies, which may
consist of as many Parts, and as minute as those of the Air, which, by
successively hitting against them, carry them along with them: So Sugar or Sal
Gem. being immersed in Water, have their Parts dissolved and carried up into
the Liquor, by the successive attritions and occursions of so insipid a
Menstruum, and whose Parts are in so gentle a Motion.

The Sunbeams sufficient to raise some Bodies.
And I am apt to believe, that some Bodies have may such a disposition, to be
worked upon by the Sunbeams, as to be raised by them in such a form, as not to
be distinguished from the Body they are raised in. But whether they may or not,
certainly it is consonant to Experience, that the Atmosphere is filled, in
several Places, with Effluviums of different kinds, and of uncommon or
unobserved Natures; which Conjecture may be favored, by observing, how subject
Camphire is to waste; and that, when the Superficies of some solid Bodies have
been taken off they emitted Steams copiously, by which in a Minute of an hour,
they suffered a manifest decrement of weight.

Arguments to prove latent Qualities in the Air.
But to reassume the Discourse we have made this Digression from, I shall urge
some Arguments a posteriori, which favor what I proposed concerning these
latent Qualities in the Air.

And first, I shall urge the appearing growth of some Salts, in Bodies, which
usually afforded them not at all, or not in such plenty; Vitriolate
Efflorescences having been observed to be, after sometime, on the glistering
parts of Marchasites, which were kept in a dry Room: And it has been observed,
that a heavy ponderous Mineral exposed to the Air for some time, became so
brittle, that it would crimble away, and plentifully abounded with Copperas;
and some of the same being kept in a close and dry Place, was in some time
covered over with an Efflorescence, which being mixed with an Infusion of
Galls, manifested it self to be a Vitriol; whose growth is the more strange in
the Air, because it is not a mere Acid Salt; but abounds with combustible and
sulphurous Parts, which I have often separated from common Vitriol without the
addition of any combustible Matter; and sometimes without any addition at all.
And it was not a little strange that our blackish Minerals, yielded vitriol
Efflorescences so soon, since I kept shining Marchasites, from whence they
usually prepare Vitriol, without being changed near so much, as those I have
mentioned; and it is usual, sometimes, to let them lie exposed to the Air two
Years, before they yield their vitriolate Parts.

Alum Ore regains it is Salt when exposed to the Air.
To these Observations we may add, that Alum Ore, being robbed of it is Salt,
recovers it again by being exposed to the Air; and Lime in old Walls has in
time regained a Nitrous Spirit, which I have learned by dissolving it in common
Water, and evaporating the filtrated Solution. Nay, And so does Vitriol.
calcined Vitriol exposed to the Air, in a competent time regains fresh Parts
of a vitriolate Salt.

Suspicions about the Productions of Vitriol.
But tho I propose these Observations as favorable to the Suspicions laid down;
yet I am apt to suspect, that the Air concurs to the Production of them, rather
as an Ingredient, than as an Agent; or that the Production of them depends on
some seminal Principle, by which, when they are once ripened, the Moisture of
the Air helps them to disclose themselves in the Form of saline Concretes; as
in Tartarous Matter saline Parts are generated, which cause that acid Taste in
Tartar, of Renish Wine especially: Besides, it may be suspected, that the Salt
found in Marchasites, etc. may be made of saline Particles swimming in the Air,
and attracted by congenerous Particles, that remain in those Bodies, that are,
as it were, the Wombs of such Minerals; or that these Aerial Salts, assisted by
the Moisture of the Air, open the Textures of these Wombs, and by extricating
the latent saline Parts, and adjoining with them, compose those emergent
Bodies; but tho I suspect, that the Air is not wholly concerned in producing
such Bodies, yet I believe it is in a great measure concerned, as I have
already intimated.

The necessity of Air to continue flame, an Argument of a latent Principle.
But to proceed to other Instances of these Aerial latent Qualities, I think
that the necessity of the Air's Presence to preserve and continue Flame, is a
sufficient Argument of some latent Spirit or Quality, whether vital Substance
or nitrous Spirit diffused through the Air, on which likewise the Life of
Animals depends, and without which, they, as well as Flame, presently, are
extinguished and die.

To these I shall add, that Animal Substances enclosed in Vacuo, yield not
Insects, as when exposed to the open Air; And it is related by a Noble Man of
this Country, that an Oak being dug out of a Rock of Salt, was so hard, that
Iron Tools could scarce work upon it; yet in three or four Days, being exposed
to the Air, it was rotten. And it has been observed by several, that the Air
has such an Influence on Diaphoretick Antimony, that if it be long exposed to
it, it becomes Emetick.

From which Observations, and what I have before laid down concerning
Quicklime, the Air seems to be a Substance capable of being assimilated by
every Body, The Air seems to consist of all sorts of seminal Principles.
or that it consists of all sorts of seminal Corpuscles; so that any Body may
find a Substance there, analogous to it, and fit to make up a part of the same
Body.

But without any further notice of this odd Surmise, I shall subjoyn the
following Phenomenon to favor my Suspicion. The first is, That though the Juice
of the Fruit of the Tree Junipa (which the Indians use to black their Faces, to
make them more formidable to their Enemies) gives such a Tincture, that it
cannot be washed out with Soap; yet the Air abounds with Particles of such a
Nature, that it disappears in ten Days time; though I suspect that, it in a great
measure depends on the continual Excretion of Sweat, through the Pores of the
Skin.

Damasco S^ (...)
And I am informed, that Instruments made of Damasco Steel, though when first
made, they excel not, or scarce equal those of common (...) yet when kept in
the Air two (...) they answer Expectation and a^ (...) proved. And I have
observed, that (...) ^e Body, which would not be dissolved in a strong
Menstruum, nor lose it is Color by Fusion, would presently be turned black, if
exposed to the Air.

Remarkable Changes of Colors.
It is observed in Blood concreted, that the black internal Parts being exposed
to the Contact of the Air, become florid; and I have prepared a factitious
Concrete, which if kept to the Fire, or secluded from the Air, would be of a
red Color; yet in a quarter of an hour, being exposed to the Air, it would
turn almost black. To which I shall add, that an inquisitive Person prepared a
Medicine of a vegetable and Animal Substance, which at that time of the Year
would be coagulated in a Viol like Oil of Aniseeds; but if unstopp'd and
exposed to the Air, it would presently dissolve again, and recoagulate when
stopped up again; The Consideration of which Experiments may tell us, that the
Air by being communicated to the Blood by Respiration, may have Effects not
inconsiderable upon it, in carrying off it is fuliginous Recrements,

To what has hitherto been delivered in favor of our Suspicion, it may be
added, That there are Anonymous Substances and Qualities in the Air; To
countenance which, I shall take notice of those various and odd Diseases,
incident both to Men and Beasts, which prove Mortal to a particular Species of
Animals, and in particular Places, which depend on some unknown subterraneal
Vapors: To which I shall subjoyn, that Fernelius mentions a Plague, which
affected no Animals but Cats; Dionysius Halicarnassus, takes notice of one that
only affected Maids; whereas, that which raged in the time of Gentilis, seized
none but Lusty Men: And Bolerus gives us an Account of another, which only
affected the younger sort of People. Cardan speaks of a Plague at Brasil, which
only affected the Switzers, and neither the Italians, French or Germans; and
Johannes Vtenhovius gives an Account of a cruel Plague at Copenhagen, which
only raged amongst the Danes. As for the Cause of these Diseases, tho I think
they are chiefly to be ascribed to subterraneal Effluviums; yet I deny not, but
that the Particular Constitutions of Men are concerned in them; nor do I think
the Distempers already mentioned, alone depend on such Steams as rise from the
Earth, but the Sudor Anglicus in the 15th Century, the Scurvy and the Morbus
Hungaricus, the Lues Moraviae, Novus Morbus Luneburgensis, and some others in
the last Century.

Considerations drawn from what has been said.
And now, if from what has been said, our Suspicions concerning Subterraneal
and Sydereal Steams, may seem not ill grounded; they may lead us to consider
the following Particulars.

1. Whether those Effects, which are sometimes thought to depend on the
immediate Wrath of God, and the Intercourse of Angels, may not arise from these
Steams, whose Qualities are probably heteroclite, and unknown; since we see
that there are several Steams dispersed through the Atmosphere, which cause it
to raise Mercury in a Baroscope, which could be no otherwise discovered, but by
the Effects they have on the Air, made evident by that Instrument. And this
Consideration has sometimes made me suspect, that even the Sunbeams may cause
a manifest Gravity in the Atmosphere besides that which they do by virtue of
their Heat; and it may be worth Enquiry, whether some Spots in the Sun, upon
their Dissolution, may not be dispersed through, and cause some considerable
Effects in our Atmosphere, at least in it is Gravity. 2. It will not seem
improbable, that some Bodies have peculiar Dispositions to be associated with
those Exotic Principles, which arise from subterraneal Parts, or are
transmitted from the Planets. Upon which Dispositions, or the contrary, what we
call Sympathy and Antipathy depend. By Virtue of such Dispositions, a
Burning-Glass refracts the Sunbeams, and the Sunbeams impart a Lucidness to
the Bolonian Stone. And that the Steams of subterraneal Bodies will act on some
Bodies, and not on others we have given sufficient Proof. 3. The third thing
which may be suggested by what we have delivered; is, whether there may not be
Receptacles or Attractives of Syderial and other Exotic Effluviums, that
wander up and down the Air, such as are Magnets; by which I mean, not such a
Body that can attract foreign Effluvia; but such a one as can detain them, when
by virtue of their various Motions they happen to come near such a Magnet. Just
as Oil of Tartar per Deliquium draws to it, aqueous Vapors, and embodies with
them, when they chance in their Passage through the Air to come near it.
But a greater resemblance of the Magnet may be allowed to some Bodies, than
what is here mentioned; for such a Magnet may not only by a Juxta-Position or
Contact detain the Effluviums, that would glide along it; but also arrest those
subtle Parts of Matter by a kind of precipitating Quality; and so it may fetch
in some Effluvia, which would otherwise pass by it: On which occasion, I
remember, that in some Cases, I have been able to give some Bodies Electrical
Qualities, without exciting them by rubbing, etc.

CHAP. XXI. Some Additional Experiments relating to Suspicions about the Hidden
Qualities of the Air.
EXPERIMENT I.
Experiments relating to occult Qualities of the Air.
HAving poured Water upon the Calx of Dantzick Vitriol, part of it, soon after
it was sufficiently impregnated, with the Vitriol remaining in the Calx, was
filtred and gently abstracted, and yielded several Grains of a Salt of Vitriol,
not much different from that which had been calcined. Another Portion of Water
was left in the Air six Weeks, upon the calcined Vitriol in a wide mouthed
Glass, and then being abstracted as the former, it yielded a Salt much like
Saltpeter, and different from the former. And Colcothar which had lain several
Months in the Air free from Rain, being turned into a Lixivium, yielded a Salt
much whiter than Vitriol, and of a different Figure. From whence it appears,
that the Air has considerable Force in varying Salts obtainable from calcined
Vitriol.

EXPERIMENT II.
DUlcifi'd Colcothar of Venereal Vitriol being exposed to the Air in January
and February, increased in Weight 4 Grains.

EXPERIMENT III.
THE 12th of March, Eight Ounces of Outlandish Vitriol calcined to a Redness,
being put into a broad and flat Metalline Vessel; and into another Vessel
smaller than the other, we put 2 Ounces of Colcothar, so that the Superficies
of the latter, was larger, in respect of it is Quantity than the Superficies of
the other. June 25. We weighed these Powders, and found that the 8 Ounces had
gained a Dram and 16 Grains, and the 2 Ounces had gained as much within a
Grain. Then the Powders being put into the same Vessels, August the 4th, the
smaller Quantity weighed 26 Grains more than it did in June. Whence it appears,
that different Circumstances cause notable Disparities in the Increase of
Weight.

EXPERIMENT IV.
TWO Ounces of small Lumps of Marchasites, which were partly shining, and
partly darkish, and seemed well disposed to yield Vitriol, were kept in a pure
Air, and gained 12 Grains in Weight in seven Weeks.

EXPERIMENT V.
SPIRIT of Salt being put upon Filings of Copper, and kept in a moderate Heat,
when it had acquired a thick and muddy Color, we decanted it into a clean
Glass, with a wide Mouth, and left it a competent time exposed to the Air, till
it had acquired a fair Green; yet nothing was precipitated to the Bottom to
make it clear.

EXPERIMENT VI.
I Once Observed, that the Fumes of a sharp Liquor acted more powerfully on a
certain Metal, held in the Air, than the Menstruum, from whence those Fumes
rose, would do it self. And it is observed in some Mines in Hungary, that the
Fumes render those Ladders soonest unserviceable, which were nearest the Top of
the Grove, where there is a more free access of Air.

EXPERIMENT VII.
A Soft Chemical Substance, which would smoke in the open Air, being conveyed
into our Pneumatick Engine in a Viol, when the Air was exhausted, ceased to
smoke; and by continuing there some time, would not smoke again, when it was
re-expos'd to the Air, till the fresh Air had blown upon it some time. This
Preparation, being kept in the Vessel it was prepared in six Weeks, would cease
to smoke, when the Vessel was but covered with a piece of Paper; and another
remarkable thing was, that when it was contained some time in a Receiver, close
Luted, it would soon so glut the Air with it is Steams, as not to be able to
smoke longer.

CHAP. XXII. Of the Celestial and Aerial Magnets.
IT would be of great Use in discovering the Nature of the Air, and it is
Correspondency with Subterraneal and Celestial Regions, could we, Of Celestial
Magnets, ctc.
by Experiment, make any progress in preparing such artificial Magnets, as
would imbibe the Exotic Parts of the Air.

Nor will it be lost Labor to expose several Mineral and other Substances to
the Air, and to enquire, what it is that gives them the additional Weight, they
receive by it; and with what Qualities that Substance is endew'd; for if such
Experiments could be tried with good Magnets at several times, and in several
places, we might by them learn, what Effluviums the Air, then, and in those
places, abounded with; nor might it be of small Importance in discovering a
correspondency betwixt the Terrestrial and some Etherial Globes of the World.

Amongst other things which make me hope that Equiries of this Nature may not
be altogether unsuccessful; I shall only intimate, that Notable Operation the
Air has upon Vitriol, diversified by circumstances, after Fire could work no
further on it: For Zwelser speaking of a Chemical Preparation of Vitrol, Viz.
Colcothar, says, that the Salt it yields, when long kept, is imbibed into it,
from the Air. For, says he, when it has been exposed to the Air, Sal praebet,
quandoque candidum, quandoque purpureum, aspectu pulcherrimum, quod aliquando
in Copia acquisivi, and penes me asservo, quandoque etiam Nitrosum. And an
ingenious Person told me, that he likewise had obtained several sorts of Salts
from Colcothar; and at the last, when it had been kept a long time, a pretty
quantity of true running Mercury.

Besides what has been already said, concerning Colcothar, I shall propose two
or three Inquiries, to any Virtuoso, that would assist in these Trials.

And first, it will be convenient to note, the Nature of the Soil; the
Temperature of the Air; the Month of the Year; the Winds; the weight of the
Atmosphere; and, if any, the Spots of the Sun; the Moon's Age, and her place in
the Zodiac, as well as the principal Aspects of the Stars and Planets; since
we cannot deny, though not positively assert, that these Bodies are concerned in
the production of those Salts which Colcothar yields: This, nevertheless we
know, that, though those Bodies which move about us, should have no considerable
effect on what is done in our Atmosphere; yet it, at different times and
Places, abounds with various subterraneal Steams, and several Phenomenon appear
in it, which are irregular, and though some are regular enough, yet are they as
to their Causes unknown, as those Thermae Piperinae in Germany; which begin and
cease to flow at certain times: And Johannes de Laet tells us, that in the
Mexican Province, Xilolepec, there is a Fountain, which successively flows and
ceases to flow for four Years together; and in the time of it is flowing, it is
observed, that it flows much more plentifully in dry, than Rainy Weather.

Secondly; I would recommend the following Observations, viz. What kind of
Vitriol the Colcothar is made of, Martial, Hungarian or Roman Vitriol; what
degree of Calcination is made use of, and how far the Calcined Matter is freed
from it is Salt by Water: For I have observed, a Saltless Colcother exposed to
the Air several Months, without the least increase of Weight, which probably
might depend on some Peculiarity of the Air, where the Experiment was tried,
since in other Places, the success has been the contrary.

But Thirdly; Besides several sorts of Vitriols, it may not be amiss to try
these Experiments with several Preparations of them; for I once made a Solution
of Copper with Sublimate and Spirit of Salt; which, exposed to the Air, was
green, though before, it was not of that Color, but of a muddy Red; and some
which, appeared to be a dirty Liquor, as long as it was kept in the Vessel it
was made in, free from the Air, appeared to be of the Color of an Emerald,
when exposed to it. And what was remarkable in these Experiments, is, that
accordingly as the Qualities of the Matter and Circumstances differed, the
green Color appeared sooner or less speedily.

But to conclude: Though the success of Experiments of this kind be very
doubtful; yet since the Seize are so desirable, it may encourage the
curious, not to pretermit the Advantage, which may succeed such Endeavors: For
as Mariners at Sea, who at a distance upon the Horizon, some times see
something obscure which, whether it be a Cloud, a Mountain, or an Island, they
cannot distinguish, yet it has proved worth their while to approach it, and
not lose the probability of a Discovery; so, who knows, but by making an
advance in less promising Experiments, we may discover something which may
richly reward our Pains.

CHAP. XXIII. Experiments and Notes about the Mechanical Production of
Magnetical Qualities.
Magnetical Qualities Mechanically pronuc'd.
Though the Operation of a Lodestone is justly reckoned amongst occult Qualities,
and thought to flow from the substantial Form of the Magnet; yet I see no
Reason, why it may not be easily mechanically produced; since a Piece of Steel,
fitly shaped, and well excited like a Loadstone, points to determinate Poles,
viz. North and South, draws other Pieces of Steel to it, and Communicates to
them in a faint degree the same Attractive and Directive Virtues, which are not
slight and transient Impressions, but durable and lasting; where it is evident,
that, though the Steel is endew'd with magnetical Virtues, yet it has not the
Form of a Lodestone; but only, the Metal by the Action of a Lodestone
acquires such a disposition in it is Parts, as inables it to perform Magnetical
Operations; which Power it loses again, by being heated red hot, and cooled in
the Air, yet the Form of the Steel is still the same: And from what I have in
another place laid down, it appears, that a Lodestone it self may lose it is
faculty of attracting Iron, and yet retain all it is other Qualities; Nay, though
it is a peculiar Quality of a Lodestone, to point North and South; yet without
destroying it is substantial Form by Fire, the Poles may very easily and
speedily be changed, if a small Fragment of a Lodestone has it is Poles
successively applied to a very vigorous Magnet.

But to make it further appear, that Magnetical Qualities may be Mechanically
produced, or altered; I shall add, that I have observed, that whilst the Parts
of well tempered Steel have been excited to Motion by Rubbing, they would draw
to them Filings of Steel, or thin Fragments of Steel or Iron; but when the
Adventitious Warmth acquired by that attrition ceases; they presently lose
their attractive Power: And I have elsewhere observed, that the lower end of a
perpendicular Bar of Iron, has been so far altered by the Effluvia of the
terraqueous Globe, as to be turned into a kind of Magnet, whose lower end
becomes the North Pole of it, and the other the South; to which Observation we
may add, that if the Bar of Iron stand but a while in an erect Posture, the
Magnetical Qualities of it will be so transient, that if the upper End, which
attracted the North end of a Needle, be inverted and held downward, it will
drive it away; and on the contrary, if it remain a long time in that Posture,
the change wrought upon it is so great, that a Piece of a Bar of Iron, which
was upon the Top of a Church, called Arimini, in Italy, by the Rustyness of it,
and the Magnetical Virtues it had acquired, seemed to be turned into a
Lodestone.

And further, it may be observed, that if a Piece of Iron, have it is Pores
opened and loosened, it imbibes the Magnetical Effluvia of the Earth so fast,
as to acquire Magnetical Virtues much sooner. And here it may not be useless to
observe, what different Effects, Fire has upon two different Bodies; for by
keeping a Lodestone red hot, it loses it is attractive Power, though afterward,
it be cooled in a perpendicular Posture; whereas, Iron, by being heated and
cooled in a perpendicular Posture, acquires a manifest Virticity; so that the
internal Texture and Constitution of the Lodestone, seemed to be destroyed and
weakened by Ignition: From whence likewise it appears, that Magnetical
Qualities may be altered by, and depend on Mechanical Principles. And,

To these Observations, I shall add further, that having brought a Piece of
Oker to a convenient Shape, and after I had heated it red hot, suffered it to
cool in a convenient Posture, it was able to exercise Magnetical Operations on
a poised Needle. And indeed, a convenient Posture, so much contributes to the
preservation of Magnetical Qualities, that leaving a very vigorous Lodestone,
for sometime, in an inconvenient Posture, it lost considerably of it is
Magnetical Virtues. And this corruption of Magnetical Qualities is further
evident in an excited Needle, which, as it is variously touched with this or
that end of a Lodestone, points with this or that end Northward or toward
the South.

To make it yet more probable, that Magnetical Virtues may be Mechanically
produced and destroyed, I shall subjoyn, that by an Experiment tried by the
Ingeniou^ Dr Power, it appears, that a Bar of Iron, ignited, and suffered to
cool North and South, and hammered at both Ends, will lose it is Magnetical
Virtues, by two or three smart Blows, upon the middle of the Bar, with a Hammer.

CHAP. XXIV. Chymico-Magnetical Experiments and Observations.
Magnetical Experiments and Observations.
THE Lodestone being a Body, whose Nature is so little known, and whose
Qualities are so admirable, I shall, in order to the better Understanding of
it, lay down some Experiments, made upon several, brought from different
Countries, and of different Sizes, Shapes and Colors.

But before I proceed to them, it is requisite to advertise, That although the
Title of this Chapter be Chymico-Magnetical, yet all the Experiments contained
in it are not Chemical, several others being mixed with them. Also it is
requisite to note, that Iron and Steel being usually reckoned amongst
Magnetical Bodies, I have also added a few Experiments made upon them.

EXPERIMENT I.
SEveral Stones being heated in the Fire, had, by the Action of it, their
Texture visibly altered; some being brittle, others flying asunder of their own
Accord, whilst others continued whole; in which it was observable, when broke,
that some were not unlike Iron Ore; whereas others were shattered into flakes
or plates of various Colors: But some, which were English, reserved their
Solidity and Color.

EXPERIMENT II.
SEveral small Load-Stones being burnt, we could not perceive the least of that
sulphurous blew Flame, which Porta, Lib. 7. Cap. 7. of his Not. Magic, takes
notice of.

EXPERIMENT III. and IV.
IT is worth observing, that several Load-Stones, being struck with Steel,
afforded Sparks of fire much bigger than those that are usually struck from
Flint. Whereas two cubial pieces of Lodestone being struck together, afforded
Sparks, but not so large as the former.

EXPERIMENT V.
IF an oblong Lodestone be cooled in a perpendicular Posture, the lower End
becomes it is Northern Pole; yet if that End instead of being exposed to the
Effluvia of the Earth be cooled, whilst resting on the Northern Pole of a
strong Lodestone, it will be the Southern Pole, and will attract the North End
of a Needle.

EXPERIMENT VI.
IF a Lodestone, which has lost it is attractive Virtue, be heated red hot,
and cooled in a perpendicular Posture upon the North Pole of a vigorous
Lodestone, and continue there for some time, the attractive Virtue is renewed.

EXPERIMENT VII.
A Lodestone that has lost it is attractive virtue by Ignition, will not
acquire so durable an attractive Virtue, by being applied cold, as hot, to a
Lodestone.

N. B. Though several Load-Stones lose their attractive Virtue by Ignition, yet
the Observation does not hold in all; since English ones, not only retain a
Directive, but an Attractive Virtue after it.

EXPERIMENT VIII.
HAving heated two Load-Stones red hot, and placed them upon a Plate of Silver,
we found, that as they grew colder, it had a more sensible Operation on them.

EXPERIMENT IX.
WE observed, that one of the two Magnets just now mentioned, not only retained
something of it is Magnetical Qualities when twice ignited, but being thrust
into Filings of Steel, carried a considerable Quantity of them up with it;
which shows, how firmly the Qualities of some Magnets are lodged in it.

EXPERIMENT X.
BUT we observed, that the Magnet which would thus carry Filings of Steel along
with it, being heated again, and suddenly immersed in Water; when cool, would
not carry Filings of Steel along with it, as before, nor would not move a
well-pois'd Needle, except held near to the Point of it.

EXPERIMENT XI.
AN oblong Lodestone of a black Color, which weighed about three Drachms, by
being kept some time in a Charcoal Fire, lost much of it is Color, and about of
a Grain in Weight.

And to discover the Affinity betwixt a Lodestone and Iron Ore, I took a Lump
of it, which was almost like white Stone; and observed, that it did not only
manifestly move a Needle, but when ignited, underwent a sensible Change in
Color, and would attract the North End of a Needle.

EXPERIMENT XII.
TO prove that some Bodies, not usually class'd amongst Magnetical ones, have
nevertheless Magnetical Qualities, I shall subjoyn; That a Brick being divided
into two oblong pieces, and heated in the Fire, acquired a Verticity by cooling
North and South, it is Southward End being in some measure able to draw the
North Point of a Mariner's Needle, which the other End of the Brick would drive
away.

EXPERIMENT XIII.
HAving without the help of Iron Instruments powdered a black Lodestone, and
poured Spirit of Salt upon the fine Powder, it caused such an Ebullition, as
usually succeeds the Effusion of that Liquor upon Filings of Iron, and likewise
raised fetid Fumes: And being kept for about two Nights in Digestion, extracted
a strong Tincture, being almost red, and not green, like that of Mars; yet
would, like that of Iron, turn a Tincture of Galls black, which in several
Positions would appear Blew. And to this I shall add, that a Solution of
Load-Stones being made in Aqua Regia, the Tincture appeared to be of a golden
Color.

EXPERIMENT XIV.
HAving powdered an ignited Lodestone, and digested Spirit of Salt upon it, it
extracted a Tincture, which was much like that of troubled Gold, and would turn
an Infusion of Galls black: This Tincture being evaporated, would not shoot
into Crystals, but upon an Affusion of Salt of Tartar, yielded a Precipitate
much resembling a Solution of Vitriol, whereas another Part of it upon an
Addition of Spirit of fermented Urine, afforded a yellowish red Precipitate.

EXPERIMENT XV.
HAving wet a red Mineral, (which I suspected to be Iron Ore,) with Linseed
Oil; and preserved the Powder in a red hot Crucible for about two hours, it was
turned black; and when cool, had acquired a Magnetical Virtue, which another
Portion of it did, though it was not as the other, wet with that Oil.

CHAP. XXV. Experiments and Notes about the Mechaninal Origin and Production of
Electricity.
Of the mechanical Production of Electricity.
THOUGH Electricity be a Quality, generally reckoned amongst the Number of those
that are termed occult ones; yet there is no need to ascribe it to the power of
a Substantial Form, since it may be mechanically produced by material
Effluviums, issuing from, and returning to the Electrical Body, assisted in
it is Operation by the External Air.

There are several Modern Hypotheses which endeavor to account for
Electricity; as the Learned Cabeus's, who supposes that, the Steams of the
electrical Body discussing and expelling the ambient Air, that, when driven
off, is violently opposed by the Atmospherical Air, and being driven back upon
the Body said to be attracted, forces it up to the electrical Body.

Another Hypothesis, proposed by the Ingenious Sir Kenelm Digby, and embraced
by Dr. Brown and several others; is, that the Electrick Body being rubbed,
emits unctuous Steams, which being cooled by the External Air, shrink back, and
carry along with them, those light Bodies which lie in their way. Of this
Opinion is Gassendus, who supposes these unctuous Steams to cross each other,
and by getting into the Pores of Straws and other attracted Bodies, take faster
hold of them, and when they shrink back, draw those Bodies along with them.

Cartesius rejecting these Hypotheses, supplants another, which I cannot in few
Words lay down; but all the Reason he rejects them being, because he supposes
Glass incapable of emitting Effluvia; it will be sufficient to remove that
difficulty, to Observe, that if two Pieces of Glass be rubbed together, they
emit odorous, and sometimes very Stinking Effluvia.

But without taking any further Notice of what Moderns have laid down about
Electricity, since they allow it to be performed by Virtue of subtle Emanations
from the Attracting Body; It may suffice, that I proceed to mention some
Phenomena, that make us probably believe it done by Virtue of Mechanical
Affections, either of the Attracting Body, or both.

And First, it is Observed, that most, if not all Electrical Bodies, attract
not till warmed; by which heat they are enabled to send forth Eufflvia.

Secondly, Amber attracts most vigorously when warmed by rubbing and Chafing;
by which Action, the Motion of the Effluvia, as well as of it is internal Parts
are more agreeably modified, than by the Action of Fire; but if the Parts of
the Amber be first put into Motion by the Fire, and then Modifi'd by Chafing,
it sooner becomes Electrical.

Thirdly, Tersion, as well as Chafing, promotes Electricity, by removing those
Bodies, which might choke the Pores of the Amber, and obstruct the Efflux of
Emanations, by sticking to the surface of it.

Fourthly, Electrical act not like those more subtle Magnetical Steams, since
the Operation of Electrical Effluvia, are obstructed by the Interposition of a
piece of the finest Linen or Sarsnet.

Fifthly, Electrical Effluvia act less vigorously in Thick and Cloudy Weather,
especially, if the South Wind blows; and on the contrary they act likewise more
faintly in the Night than in the Day.

Sixthly, Most Electrical Bodies are made of Matter, capable of emitting
Odoriferous Steams by Heat and Attrition.

Seventhly, For which Reason, Bodies continue their Electrical virtues
sometimes after the attrition; the Commotion in the Parts of the Concrete,
caused by that attrition, not immediately ceasing.

Eighthly, To make it probable that Electrical Effluvia may insinuate
themselves into the Pores of other Bodies, I shall add, that I found them
subtle enough to attract Spirit of Wine, and also the Smoke of an extinguished
Wax-taper at a considerable distance.

Ninthly, The Electrical Virtue depends not on any Sympathy betwixt the Body
Attracting and the Substance Attracted; since Amber indifferently draws to it
all Bodies, which are not too gross, except Fire, by the violent Motion of
whose parts, the Electrical Emanations are dissipated, and the Fire determined
another way.

Tenthly, A vigorous and well excited piece of Amber will attract not only the
Powder, but less minute Fragments of Amber; and the following Experiment may
give us Reason to believe, that the Electrical Effluvia of the Attracting Body,
not only fasten upon the Body to be drawn, but that the Cohereing Particles of
the Effluvia make up viscous Strings, which intervening betwixt those two
Bodies, when their agitation ceases, shrink inward, and are contracted; as a
highly stretched Lute-string, when permitted to shorten it is Dimensions: The
Experiment was this, viz. We suspended a piece of Amber by a Silken-thread, by
the help of a piece of Wax, and then rubbing the Edge of it with a Pin-cushen
covered with Course black Stuff, when it was well excited, and brought to
settle, we observed, that if the Cushen was held near the excited Edges, the
Effluvia would fasten upon it, so that when the Cushen was removed, the Amber
would follow it several times for the space of ten or elven Minutes.

Electricity Mechanically produced and destroyed.
But to proceed to what I promised in the Title of these Papers, I shall add
some Experiments to show, that Electricity may be Mechanically produced or
destroyed.

EXPERIMENT I.
A Fourth Part of Good Turpentine being evaporated, the remaining substance
hardened into an Electrical transparent Gum.

EXPERIMENT II.
THE dry Mass which remained after a Distillation of Petroleum and strong
Spirit of Nitre, being a brittle substance like Jet, resembled it in it is
Electrical Quality.

EXPERIMENT III.
THE Transparent Glass made of Antimony burnt to Ashes, had a considerable
Degree of Electricity. Which is the more worthy our Notice, because, that as a
Vitrum Antimonii, which is accounted purer than ordinary, may be made of the
Regulus of the same Mineral, (in whose preparation a great deal of Sulphur is
separated and left amongst the Scoriae) so Glass of Antimony made without
Addition, may in part be reduced to a Regulus (a substance not looked upon to
be Electrical:) Nor is some peculiar and fixed part of Antimony alone capable
of Vitrification, since of the other Part, which usually flies away, an
Antimonial Glass may be made, without an Addition of other Ingredients.

EXPERIMENT IV.
I Once prepared a Glass of Lead per se, which had a Languid Electricity, and
which would afford a Malleable Lead again, which is not in the least Electrical.

EXPERIMENT V.
AMber being Distilled per se, the Caput Mortuum being quite burnt was black,
and brittle, and not in the least like Amber; yet though it is substantial Form
was destroyed, it was more vigorously Electrical than Amber it self; And as it
appeared from the Instance of Glass of Antimony above, that the remaining
substance may retain an Electricity, though the Form of the Body be destroyed,
and part of it dissipated; so from common Glass, we may Learn, that a compound
substance may be Electrical, though the separate Ingredients were not.

EXPERIMENT VI.
Electricity may be produced by unheeded and fortuitous Causes.
TO make it appear that Electricity may be caused by unheeded and fortuitous
Causes, without depending on the substantial, or even Essential Form of the
Attrahent, I shall subjoyn, that Locks of some Hair being brought to a certain
degree of Dryness, by Curling or otherwise, have been oserv'd to be attracted
by the Flesh of some Persons, as Hair is wont to be by excited Amber; which
they were more subject to do in Frosty Weather.

To try whether the Air was much concerned in Electricity, I suspended a piece
of Amber (which, when excited, would stir a poised Needle of an Hour) in a
small Receiver, and when the Air was exhausted, the Amber being let down near a
Straw or Feather, attracted it in Vacuo.

EXPERIMENT VII.
TO show that the Attraction of light Bodies, depends on very small
circumstances, I made use of a Downy Feather taken off the Body of a Fowl, to
which when it had been attracted by an excited piece of Amber, I applied the
end of my Finger to it, upon which it stuck and left the Amber. The same
success I had, when the Experiment at distinct times was tried with the Tip of
a Silver Instrument, and Iron Key, and, a piece of black Polished Marble. We
had the like success, when the Experiment was tried at several distant times
afterward. But one thing remarkable was, that if the Amber had lost it is
attractive virtue, before my Finger or the other Bodies were applied, the
Feather was not disposed to stir, till the Amber was again excited.

To conclude these Notes, I shall advertise, that the event of Electrical
Experiments is very uncertain, and varied by slight Circumstances, some of
which are altogether overlooked, which in some Measure appears from the above
recited Notes.

And therefore I shall add, that sometimes it is very hard to know whether a
Body be Electrical or not; for, though Kircher denies Crystal to have an
attractive power; yet I have observed the contrary. And though, the industrious
Gilbert denies Electricity to Cornelians and Emeralds, yet all that I have
tried, had some Degree of it, except one Cornelian. And indeed Electricity is
constantly inherent in Diamonds, so that it may be one good way to try whether
they be Genuine, since most of them are considerably more attractive than
common Glass. But to conclude, I shall add further, that rough Diamonds are
Observed, to have a faculty of attracting much more eminently than Polished
ones; for which no other Reason can be conceived, but that the Diamond in
Polishing, being considerably, Heated by the Mill, several and a great part of
it is Electrical Effluvia are spent and fly away.

CHAP. XXVI. The General History of the Air begun.
TITLE I.
What we understand by Air.
BY Air, I mean, that thin, Diaphanous, fluid Body in which we Breath, which
encompasses the Terraqueous Globe, and is capable of Rarefaction and
Condensation; so different from Ether or Vacuum, that it refracts the Rays of
the Moon as well as other Remoter. Luminaries.

TITLE II. Of the constant and permanent Ingredients of the Air.
Of the Naure of the Air.
BY Air, I would not be thought to mean, such Artificial and Temporary Air as
usually flows out of an Aeolipile, when one that is furnished with Water is
exposed to a sufficient Heat, and then condenses into Water again; but common
Air, which is Permanent, and continues in that Form; Which I conceive, is made
up of three kinds of Particles. The first are Effluvia, from several substances
belonging to the Terraqueous Globe: The Second are the Magnetical Steams of the
Earth, and Sydereal Emanations: The Third are these Elastick and Springy Parts
of the Air which are Permanently so.

As for the Structure of these Elastick Parts, they may be conceived different
as Men's contrivances devise to answer Particular Phenomenon: One may think them
like the Spring of a Watch; others like a Fleece of compressed Wool,
endeavoring always to expand themselves; others, like Curled pieces of Wire,
of different Lengths and Thickness, and diversified by being more or less
Curled: All of which may be capable of being compressed and expanded again, by
virtue of their Native Structure, Heat, Girations and other Motions. I have
likewise compared 'em to thin shavings of Wood, which are of different Sizes;
and this comparison may in some Measure Illustrate their Generation, there
being no Art requisite to the production of such, nor curious Instruments; and
yet their Curls are very different and seemingly Casual; as also their
springness depends on their convenient shape. And the Generation of Air may be
further illustrated, by observing, that these springy Chips may be made of the
Parts of Beams and Blocks, not at all Elastical before. Which favors an
Experiment I made, wherein, by the Action of a Menstuum upon a Mineral Body, a
quantity of Fire was Generated, permanently Elastick.

But not to multiply Conjectures about the Structure of the Parts of the Air, I
shall add, that, though their Elasticity seems to depend on their Structure; yet
it may be increased, by quickening their Motion by the Action of Fire; Besides,
there may be several Elastick Parts in Air, whose Elasticity may rather depend
on their Motion, than Figure, they being, thereby enabled to strike against
Bodies about them, and to keep them off. And not improbably in these warmer
Climates, the parts of Temporary and Artificial Air may be put into such
Motion, as may for the time keep it fluid; those parts of Matter being disposed
to be kept in Motion.

TITLE III Of the Ether in the Atmosphere.
TITLE IV. Of the spungy Particles of the Air, and the the Spring of the Air.
Aerem va: lide comprimere aur dilatare.
FOllibus lusoriis aerem pyulico ingerentes majorem subinde atque majorem
difficultatem percipiunt; quo enim magis Aer conclusus naturali raritate
recedere cogitur; etiam majore nisu resistit, neque solum magis densari renuit,
sed and se latius explicare molitur. Hinc didicimus and pneumatico fontes
construere, qui Spiritu interno urgente aquam in altum evibrant, and plumbeas
Glandes fistulis ejaculari, non pulvere nitrato ignem concipiente, sed aere per
vim densato ad antiquas dimensiones recuperandas erumpente. Quoniam vero
ingesta jam in conceptaculum non exigua aeris copia difficilius comprimitur
nova aeris accessione; quam ut manus valeat trusillum recta impellere, idcirco
trusilli hastulam deformatam in helicem; and suae Matrici insertam, adhibere
oper pretium erit, dum enim manubio agitante contorquetur Cochlea, sensim
deprimitur Embolus, aeremque ingerit. Ne autem mora longiore opus sit perpetua
versatione Manubrii, ita Cochleae Matrix externam vasis faciem contingat, ut
illi adnecti, atque ab eo disjungi valeat: initio enim, quando adhuc levis est
aeris modice compressi resistentia, lamella illa suo foramine interius
claviculatim striato cohaerens hastulae emboli, si a vase disjuncta fuerit una
cum hastula movebitur: deinde vero, quando jam trusillis aegre impellitur,
lamilla illa cum Vase connectatur, and non nisi versato Manubrio adduci atque
reduci Embolus poterit, id quod satis lent perficietur: Rem claritatis Gratia
in font Pneumatico explicemus.

Sit vas A. B. ex materia Metallica, in cujus superiore part labrum, ex quo
perforamen A. immittatur in vas aqua, ita tamen, ut non impleatur; aqua enim in
vas modice inclinatum descendens, aerem expellet per Tubulum C. D. ubi satis
Aquae immissum fuerit, occludatur foramen A. diligentissime Cochleola
congruente and convoluto Epistomio E. Tubus D. C. sit Aeri impervius ad vasis
latus statuatur modiolus cum embolo congruente H. I. and emboli hastula sit
connexa cum mobili vasi ansa, H. O.

Porro hastula H. K. perforata sit, and continuo ductu usque ad emboli K. F.
fundum pateat Aeri ingredienti via H. S. sed foramini S. adjecta sit Valvula,
quae Aeri regressum obstruat. Similiter modioli fundo in I. Valvula exterius
apposita aperiatur ingesto Aeri transitum praebens; sed Aeri intra vas
compresso cum nusquam exitus pateat, Valvula ipsa modioli foramen I. occludit.
Hastulae vero H. K. exterior facies sit in helicem striata, and lamellae M. N.
tanquam Matrici congruat, quae in M and N. Cochleolis adnecti queat exterius
vasi, quasi esset ansae fulcrum.

Vbi immissum fuerit quantum satis est aquae, Cochleolis M and N. revolutis
disjungatur Matrix a vase: tum attracta ansa H. O. una cum Lamella M. N.
attrahitur embotus K. S. and per apertum ductum H. S. ingreditur Aer, modiolum
implens. Impulso deinde Embolo, Valvula ad S. clauditur, and Aer ex modiolo,
per patentem Valvulam I. ingreditur in Vas; ex quo nequit exire, neque aquam
propellere, clauso scilicet Epistomio and foramine A. quapropter comprimitur,
and densatur; ideoque attracto denuo Embolo K. S. inclusus vasi Aer se latius
explicare connitens Valvulam L. F. valide applicat foramini modioli, sibique
exitum obstruit. Toties adducitur atque reducitur Embolus, and Aer ingeritur,
quoad magna premendi difficultas percipiatur; ubi eo ventum fuerit, tunc
Lamella M. N. iterum vasi adnectatur suis Cochleosis; nec jam Embolus recta
adduci queat; sed areptum in O. manubrium versatur, and Embolus intra modiolum
circumactus sensim attollitur, qui deinde revoluto in contrarium Manubrio
deprimitur, and multa vi Aer in vase comprimitur. Laxato demum Epistomio E.
compressus in vase Aer, aquam exprimit per Tubum C. D. primum quidem
vehementius, subinde remissius, prout Aeris vis elastica sensim conquescit.

Hoc idem quod de Aere intra Vas comprimendo ad aquam evibrandum comminisci
placuit, servata analogia, dicendum est de Aere, tum conatu manus recta
trusillum impellentis, tum open Cochleae similiter conformatae, intra
conceptaculum comprimendo, ut ex fistula deinde multa vi emittatur plumbea
Glans, ubi reseratus Aeri exitus illum subito dilatari permiserit. Quin and
Pneumatica hujusmodi tormenta citra conceptaculum Aeris compressi construere
non inutile accidat, si, quemadmodum nostrates pueri surculos sambuceos fungosa
medulla exhauriunt, and utraque Tubuli extremitate papyraceis Globulis
obstructa, alterum Globulum congruo Cylindro propellunt, atque inclusum Aerem
densant, quoad Aeris vim elasticam, and impellentis manus Conatum, non ferens
extremus alter Globulus edito scloppo expellatur; ita ferream fistulam
longiorem paraveris, cujus alteri extremitati immittatur plumbea Glans, obducta
papyro, aut simili Materia, ut exquisite Tubi osculum implens, demum universam
Aeris vim excipiat, alteram extremitatem aliquot Spiris ambiat cava Cochlea,
quam impleat Cylindrus ferreus in congruentem Cochleam deformatus; si enim
hujusmodi Cylindrus, vis brevior fuerit, quam fistula, and apto Manubrio
convolutus, in fistulam sensim immittatur, totum Aerem, quo fistula replebatur,
ad exiguas spatii angustias adiget, ex quibus magna vi demum, qua data porta,
erumpens, ejacul abitur plumbeum Globulum Casati Mechanicorum, Lib. 8. Cap. 5.
p. 792. 793. etc.

TITTLE V. Of the Magnetical Particles in the Air.
TITLE VI. Of the Destruction, Generation, Absorpsion and Extrication of the
Air.
Concerning the Production of the Air.
AIr being a body not only concerned in agreat many Phenomena of Nature, but
likewise so necessary to the Preservation of Animals; Is thought it of no small
use to thy whether it might be Artificially prepared and obtained from Bodies
which seemed not at all to abound with Air; for could it be done, it would not
only be considerable in helping to explain several Phenomenon of Nature, but to
preserve Diverse much longer under Water. To try therefore whether it might be
effected, and whether that which seemed to be Air, were truly so; I made use of
the following Experiments, taking a durable Springiness or Elasticity as the
Criterion, by which I should judge, whether the Air generated were Genuine or
not.

EXPERIMENT I.
Jan. 17. Air generated by a mixture of Oil of Vitriol and Filings of Steel.
FIlings of Steel, and a conveniently shaped Glass, which contained Oil of
Vitriol, and was sealed at both Ends, but with a Hole opened near one of them,
were coveigh'd into a long and large Tube, so much Water being put in with them
as was sufficient to dilute the Oil. This being done, and the External Tube and
the Water exhausted, till the Mercury in the Gage was so far raised in the open
Leg, that little remained in the sealed Leg; we closed up the External Tube
exactly, and observed, that when the Oil was caused to run out of the internal
Tube, by acting upon the Metal it caused several Bubbles, and a sensible Heat;
when this Conflict had continued some time, so much Air was generated, as
depressed the Mercury in the open Leg down to the Bottom; and raised it so much
in the other, that the Air above it was more compressed, than when the
Atmosphere had free Liberty to press against it. The Spring of this newly
produced Air was so strong and durable, as to keep the Mercury at ^he same
height 3 or 4 Days; and some Days after, a Boy having heedlesly removed the
Tube from its usual Station, the Mercury in the Gage ascended an Inch and a
half, at which Height it continued till the 25th of January.
EXPERIMENT II.
March. 8. Flower moistened with Water.
A Glass Viol, which was large enough to hold a Pint, was filled with Flower of
Wheat drenched with Water; and the Orifice being closed with a Cork and strong
Cement, after the Glass had been placed 13 Days in a warm Place, it was burst
by the Violent expansion of the included Matter, though the Night before, part of
the Glass below seemed empty. The Taste of the included Matter seemed to me
only a little sowrish; but to another manifestly acid.
EXPERIMENT III.
March 9. Raisins included in Vacuo with Water.
BRuised Raisins with a little Water being put into a Bolt-head; when it was
exhausted, I placed it in a warm Place. In four Days no Air was generated; but
some time after the Bolt-head was burst in pieces, and the Raisins thrown
about.
EXPERIMENT IV.
Feb. 22. A Glass, which would hold about 3 Pound of Water, having a sufficient
Quantity of Raisins put into the Water, a Bladder was tied to the Neck of it,
which had all the Air squeezed out, and, in two Days time, it was so filled
with Air, that we could not tie it up, without losing some of the Water.
EXPERIMENT V.
April 28. SPirit of Salt, and Filings of Steel, being put into a wide mouthed
Glass, we covered it with a Receiver, fitted with an Eel-Skin and a Wire, to
the latter of which, a thin Glass Vessel was tied, hermetically sealed at the
Bottom, and furnished with a sufficient Quantity of Filings of Copper. This
being done, and the Receiver exhausted, we thrust the Glass which contained the
Filings, against the Bottom of the Viol, and broke it off; whereupon the
Filings falling into the Menstruum, a considerable number of Bubbles were
generated. The Viol being kept of an Hour longer in Vacuo, the Liquor acquired
not the least Greenness.
EXPERIMENT VI.
Air shut up in Oil of Turpentine and Spring Water.
A Bubble of Air about the Size of a Pea, being left at the Top of a round Viol
with a long narrow Neck, the Cavity of it being filled with fine Oil of
Turpentine, and then inverted into a Viol filled with the same Liquor; Another
Viol which had a Bubble in the Top, was filled with Alcohol of Wine, and
inverted it into the the same Liquor. On the sixth Day the Bubble in the Oil
disappeared, and on the seventh, that in the Spirit of Wine vanished.

EXPERIMENT VII.
May 23. Frog 's Spawn:
A Receiver, which had been three Years exhausted, was opened; and a black
opacous Liquor, which we judged to be Frog's Spawn, which was contained in a
Viol, being taken out, was of a stinking Smell, but not moldy. It had yielded
some Air.
EXPERIMENT VIII.
IT is observed, that when Miners meet with running Waters under Ground, they
are by those, supplied with Air enough for Respiration; though it is observed,
that standing Waters do not afford Air.

Experiments about the Production of Air, and the Examining thereof proposed.
Sect. I. To produce Air by Fermentation in Receivers exactly closed; and in
sealed Glasses. Sect. I. To separate Air from Liquors, by boiling; or by the
Engine. Sect. I. To obtain Air by Corrosion, especially with Spirit of Vinegar.
Sect. I. To separate Air by Sulphurous and Animal Menstruums. Sect. I. To
produce Air in Vacuo by Burning-Glasses and hot Irons. Sect. I. To obtain Air
from Gunpowder, and other nitrous Substances. Sect. II. The Air produced may
be examined, by trying whether it will Preserve or Revive. 1. Animals. 2.
Flame. 3. Fire. 4. The Light of Rotten Wood, Fish.
Sect. II. To examine it is Spring, and the Duration of it, as also it is Weight,
and whether it will help to raise the smoke of Liquors.
TITLE VII. Of the Accidental or less constant Ingredients of the Air. TITLE
VIII. Of Aqueous Particles in the Air, and of it is Moisture and Dryness.
Of the Air 's Moisture and Dryness.
THOUGH Dryness be a Quality which only depends on this, viz. That the Pores
intercepted betwixt the stable Parts of a Body, are not filled with any visible
Liquor; yet it has a considerable Interest in the Changes of Bodies upon
different Scores. First, In as much as the Body dried is deprived of Liquid
Parts, upon the Effects of which, several of it is Operations depend. Secondly,
Upon the Recess of those Parts evaporated, the Texture of the Body may be so
far changed, as to acquire a disposition to act otherwise, and to be acted on
in a different manner to what it was before.


EXPERIMENT I.
TO evince the Efficacy of the Air's Moisture, we suspended a Quarter of a
hundred Weight by an Iron Ring at the End of a Rope, which was about 3 Foot and
a half long, and 3/10 of an Inch in Diameter; and when the Weight had stretched
the Rope for 2 or 3 Days, we placed a Board under it, so that it might just
rest upon it, and then causing the Rope to be wet, in about half an hour it
shortened so much, that the Weight would swing this way, and that, like a
Pendulum without touching the Board; yet the same Day the Rope was stretched
again, so that it touched the Board.

About Morocco, which is an Inland Town, though the Soil be dry, and the Heat
violent in the Day; yet I am told by one who was there, that the Nocturnal Air
was so damp, as to be able to make his Clothes unfit to be worn, till Air'd;
yet, though the Air was very piercing, neither the Knife in his Pocket, nor the
Sword in his Scabbard were subject to rust, though the same Metal exposed to the
open Air, was.

Air too moist cannot be wholesome. The Air about Oakly and Brill in
Buckinghamshire, though a high Country, is so moist in October, that the
Stair-Cases and Pictures will stand all over Dew, which gathering in drops,
runs down in Streams; and it is obser'd, that the North and North-East side of
the Houses are so moist, that except the Rooms be air'd often, the Furniture
will rot.

Having made use of a Hydroscope which was made of a Box, to whose Bottom a
piece of Gut-string was fastend, and the other End of it to an Index, which lay
upon the Top of the Box, the Circumference of the Box was divided into Degrees,
or Partitions; By which we could perceive, that when Moist Vapors insinuated
themselves into the Pores of the Lute-string, it would be wreathed and twisted
up, and the Index would be moved that way, which the twisting of the Rope
inclined it, and when the Weather was dryer, it would return back the other way.

EXPERIMENT II.
ONE of these Hygroscopes being conveyed into a small Receiver, when the Air
was exhausted, the Index did not sensibly alter it is Place in a long time; till
the External Air was let in again. From which Experiment, and some others tried
with a Thermoscope, it appears, that the Ether, or that subtle Matter which
succeeds in the Place of the exhausted Air, is neither hot, cold, moist, nor
dry.

TITLE IX. Of Clouds, Mists and Fogs.
Of Clouds, Mists and Fogs.
AN excellent Astronomer told me, that of all the white Clouds, whose Height he
had measured in fair Weather, he found none to exceed Quart. of a Mile; and
very few above a Mile.

A Mist at Sea driving toward the Shore, without any sensible Wind, causes the
Sea to swell more than a brisk Wind. It has likewise been observed, that Mists
in some places rising about 30 Foot high, have fallen down in a Dew again.

TITLE X: Of Terrestrial Steams in the Air.
Of Terrestrial Effluvia.
PIllars of Fumes have been diverse times observed to rise from Ground which had
several Veins of different Metal in it, some ill scented, some well scented,
and others inodorous; and I have observed, that the Charcoal made in Cornwall
affords a manifest Arsenical and Sulphurous Smell beyond other Charcoal.

Jcournal des S avary, III. 1685.
Tell est par exemple ce nuage horrible d'une fumee epaisse qui s'eleva de la
mer de Cretee au Commencement de l'Eestede l'an, 721. et qui s'etant repandu
dans l'air le fit paroistre tout en feu. La mer n'en fut pas mesme exempte, car
les grosses Masses de pierres enflammees qu'on en vit sortier, et qui se
joignirent al 'Isle qu'on Nomme Hiera, echauferent si fort les eaux qu'elles en
bruloient les maines.

TITLE XI. Of Salts in the Air.
Of the Salts in the Air.
THOUGH the Peripateticks teach, that the Air is an Element, and consequently a
pure simple Body, whose Qualities are moist and dry; yet from what we have
already delivered, it appears, that it is an Aggregate of various kind of
Effluvia jumbled and mixed together; I mean, the Air distinct from that Purer
Substance Ether, which I suppose diffused through the Interstellar Part of the
Universe.

Amongst the Effluvia which rove up and down the Air; I account Saline ones the
Chief, which is not unlikely, since the Terraqueous Globe, which continually
emits Effluvia, abounds with great Quantities of Marine, Aluminous and
Vitriolate Salts, which impregnate the Air; besides several Exhalations raised
by the Sunbeams, from the Surface of the Earth and Water; not to mention
several other Saline Vapors which are dispersed in the Atmosphere, and arise
from Vulcanos, as well as common Fires.

And as it is not improbable, but that the Air plentifully abounds with Saline
Effluvia; so very likely, besides Nitrous, there are other kinds raised up and
roving about in it; as Common Salt, and Vitriolate Salts; and that which seems
to prove, that the Air in some places abounds with vitriolate Salts, is, that
it has been observed, that Hinges have been corroded and rotted, and other
things prejudiced upon a Vitriolate Soil, whereas in Houses, which stood on a
Chalky Soil, no such Effects were observed: Besides, on the Vitriolate Ground,
we took Notice of Saline and White Efflorescences upon the Surface of the Soil,
when beaten upon by the Sunbeams.

Besides which kinds of Salt, I am induced to believe, that the Air abounds
with Volatile ones; For besides, that an Acquaintaince of Mine obtained a
Spirit and Salt of Similar Qualities with Spirit of Hartshorn from Earth dug
up some Yards deep; we may observe in favor of what I propose, that the very
Soot which rises from fires near great Towns, a great part of which is
dispersed in the Air, abounds with a Saline Spirit, which may be obtained from
it by Distillation; as likewise, a great quantity of Volatile Matter may be
raised in the form of Vapors from Animal substances putrified and corrupted.

But besides these more simple Salts, there may be several others compounded in
the Air, which may result from several Coalitions of simple Salts; and several
Compound Salts may, not unlikely, arise from Subterraneal Parts: In favor of
which I shall add, that in America the Effluvia of a Vulcano, not only
offended, the Faces of some that approached too near, but caused a manifest
alteration in the Color of their Hair. And it has been observed that several
Sulphurous Exhalations have been gathered about the Crannies of Mount
Vesuvius, which issuing out of small Crannies stick to the Edges like Flower of
Brimstone: To which I shall add, that I had a Stone brought me from another
Vulcano, whose Pores were full of a White Salt compounded of a fixed one, and
another Volatile much like Sal-Armon.

The Salts we have hitherto taken Notice of, are such as may be referred to a
determinate Species: But I am apt to believe, that there are others which are
such as are not known, nor have they any Names given them; this appears from
what we have elsewhere taught of Subterraneal Fumes; and may be further
illustrated, by intimating, that I have observed Old Glass-windows sometimes
corroded, as if Worm-eaten; which probably proceeded from some corrosive
Particles carried thither by the Wind.

As for the Nature of these several Salts, that at different times, and in
various Places, impregnate the Air, amongst the different Methods that might be
taken to investigate them, I shall mention the following.

Several ways to discover the Nature of the Salts in the Air.
First, We may expose such Bodies to the Air, as we think will most likely be
worked upon, by the Salt we judge Predominant in that place; as Lime, where we
think Nitre abounds; as also we may hang up Silks of such Colors as Nitre is
most apt to fade, or discolor. In places where we think Vitriol abounds we may
expose Preparations of Sulphur, which it usually turns Black: In other Places
we may spread White Linen Cloths, and observe what Salts they imbibe along
with the Rising Vapors and Falling Dew. A Second way to discover the Nature of
the Salts in the Air may be, by exposing some Body, which several Salts have
different Effects on.
EXPERIMENT I.
CLean Copper Plates being placed over Glasses, under which, Spirit of Salt and
Spirit of Nitre diluted with Water, were set. I Oserved, that they were
discolored alike by the ascending Fumes; it being common for these Spirits to
draw a green Tincture from Copper as Spirit of Soot and Urine do a Blew one. I
have observed a piece of Copper brought from a Mine overcast in several Parts
with a Verdigrease, which effect I judged to depend on the Efficacy of some
Effluvia in the Air. And possibly with other Bodies, discovering different
discolourations, we be enabled to learn what kind of Steams those Effects are
produced by. And it has been observed, not only at Amsterdam, but elsewhere,
that Plate, in a little time, in those Airs, would acquire a Rusty Color, or
one partaking of Yellow and Black.

A Third way, which may be taken to discover the different Nature of Effluvia,
may be by exposing Preparations of Mineral Bodies, whose Colors are apt to be
changed by the Air.

EXPERIMENT II.
IF a Solution of Silver in Aq. Fortis be precipitated with Spirit of Sea Salt,
the Powder will be at the First White; but after a while being exposed to the
Air, the Surface of the Liquor will acquire a dark Color, which may perhaps
vary as the Air is differently impregnated.

EXPERIMENT III.
AN equal Weight of Filings of Copper and Powdered Sal Armoniack, being mixed
and put into a Covered Crucible, and kept over a moderate Fire till the Sal
Armon. had done Smoking, as much of the remaing Mass as could be parted was
taken out, and looked of a Dark Color; but being grossly beaten and exposed to
the Air, looked like Verdigrease, a substance whose Color commonly varies,
according to the Nature of the Salts concerned in the production of the
Pigment. But a Parcel of the same Mass being grossly beaten, and Hermetically
Sealed up from the Air, and left in a South Window, was not discolored when
that exposed to the Air, had acquired a Virdigrease Color.

EXPEREMENT. IV.
SPirit of Soot of Wood dissolved Copper into a lovely Azure; but the substance
growing dry in the Air, changed it is Ceruleous for a Cyanious Color, such as
may be seen in good Turquoises. Which Change depended not on the
Saline-Sulphureous Salt. Which I rather believe, because I had the same success
when I made use of an Urinous Spirit drawn from an Animal substance.

Most of the Inland Parts of our Country abound not with Corrosive Vapors, the
Bars of Iron being not so subject to be corroded and Rust; So that I believe
this Salt may proceed from Sea Vapors, or a dissolution of some Corroding
Salt, upon the burning of a Sea, or Mineral Coals.

Mox ollam ex igni removent; Agricola de re Metal. Lib. 12.
postea ex refrigerata eximunt halinitrum purissimum: quod candidi marmoris
speciem gerit; aetque tunc etiam id quod terrenum est, in fundo residet. At
terra, ex qua dilutum fuit factum, and Rami quernei vel consimilis Arboris
alternis sub dio ponantur, and aqua qua combibit halinitrum conspergantur: quo
modo quinque vel sex annis rursus apta fit ad conficiendum dilutum. Halinitrum
quodammodo purum, quod dum terra tot annos quievit interea, ortum fuit, and
quod lapidei parietes in Cellis Vrinariis and locis opacis exudant, cum primo
diluto permistum decoquatur.

Si vero locus aliquis talium venarum, copiam suppeditaverit, ipsae statim non
conjiciantur in cast ella; sed primo convehantur in areas, atque cumulentur:
quanto enim diutius aeri and pluviis expositae fuerint tanto meliores fiunt.
Nam in ejusmodi cumulis, aliquot post Mensibus, quam Venae in are as fuerint
conjectae, nascuntur fibrae long venis bonitate praestantes: deinde vehantur
in sex, plurave Castella longa and lat a ad novem pedes, ad quinque alta.

Si vero dum dilutum recoquitur, seperata non fuerint, mox ex minoribus Vasis
infundatur in Majora, eaque concludantur; in quibus item atramentum sutorium
seperatum ab alumine concrescit utrumque incisum and in Hypocausto siccatum
divendatur dilutum, quod in vasis and cupis non concrevit in cortinam, refusum
recoquatur: sed verra, quae in fundo cujusque cortinae resedit, ablata in
castella una cum verra; denuo aqua and urina dilutaur. At terra quae in
Castellis diluta, postquam effluxit, superfuit egesta and coacervata quotidie,
rursus magis ac magis fit aluminosa, non aliter atque terra, ex qua halinitrum
fuit confectum, suo succo plenior fit: quare denuo in Castella conjicitur, and
aquae effusae ea percolantur.

And I have not only been informed, that the Dews in the most Southern parts
are more than ordinary Corrosive; but that in Basil they are so Esurient, that
the Portugals are forced to keep their great Guns cased up; in which Country
the same Person told me the very Money was corroded by the sharpness of the Air;
and he likewise observed, that the Dew left a White Salt upon the Grass, which
looked like a Hoar Frost.

And I am likewise informed by a Native of the Place, that in a Town called
Fahlure in Sweedland, which stands upon the bottom of a Hill, which has a
Copper Mine in it, The Exhalations are so powerful as to Corrode Iron and
Brass, and even Money it self, though locked up in Chests of Wood an Inch thick.

TITLE XII. Of Sulphur and Inflammable Particles in the Air; and of Lightning,
and it is Effect.
Of Sulphur and Inflammable Matter, etc.
A Neopolitan Lord told me, that Riding upon Sulphurous Ground, the Horses Feet
would raise a Dust, which would be ready to take Fire; and when purposely, he
had caused several pieces of that Earth to be cut like Turffs, and to be laid
in a heap, in the Night, the Steams which plentifully rose from them, would
sometimes take Flame; And the same Lord told me, that near Mount Vesuvius, He
observed the Flame so violent, than when Measured by a Quardrant, it appeared
to be near two Miles high above the Top of the Mountain, and that great Flakes
of Fire were thrown up into the Air as big as the Room we talked in.

Voila tout ce qu' on peut dire cette Isle, qui semple un enfer car on voit la
mer du port, Voyage de Levant. page 203.
and de la cost toute noire and brulee d'un petit escuel, qui paroist depuis
environ soixante ans, and d'ou on vit sortir en ce temps la une grande flamme,
qui is a laisse une ouverture si profonde, que si on y jette une pierre, on ne
l'entend point tomber. Mais ce qui est arrive depuis en ce port, n'est pas
moins estonnant; je le rapperteray icy comme je l'ay appris de diverses
persons en plusieurs endroits. Ily a environ 18 ans que durant la nuit d'un
certain Diamanche, commenca dans le port de Santorini un tres grand bruit
lequel s' entendit jusques a Chio, qui en est eloigne deplus de deux cent
milles, mais de tell sort qu' on crut a Chio que c' estoi l'armee venitienne
qui combatroit contre celle des Turcs, ce qui fit que des le matin chacum monta
aux lieux les plus elevez pour en estre Spectateur, and me souviens que le
Reverend Pere Bernard superieur des Capucins de Chio, homme Venerable, and tres
digne de foy, me conta qu'il y avoit este trompe comme les autres, car il crut
aussi bien qu' eux eux entendre pleusieurs coups de canon; cependent ils ne
virent rien, and en effect ce fut un feu qui seprit dans la terre du fond du
port de Santorini, and y fit un tell effect, que depuis le matin jusqu' au soir
il sortit du fond de la mer quantite de pierres de ponce, qui montient en haut
avec tant de roideur and tant de bruit, qu' on eust dit que ce fusset autant de
caups de canon, and cela infecta tellement l'air, que dans la dite Islle de
Santorini, il maurut quantite de persons, and plusieurs de la Mesine Isle en
perdirent la veue, qu' ils recouvrerent pourtans quelque jours apres. Cette
infection s' estendit ausi loin que le bruit qui l'avoit precede, car non
seulement dans cette Isle, mais mesme a Chio, and a Smyrne, tout l'argent
devint rouge, soit qu' il fut dans les Coffres, ou dans les poches; and nos
Religieux demeurans en ces lieux la me dirent que tous leurs calices en
estoient devenus rouges. Au bout de quelques jours cette Infection se dissipa,
and l'Argent reprit sa premiere couleur, les pierres de ponce qui sortirent de
la couvrirent tellement la mer del'Archipel, que durant quelque temps, quand il
Regnoit de certains Vents, il y avoit des ports, qui en estoient bouchez, en
facon qu' il n'en pouvoit sortir aucune barque, pour petite qu' elle fut, que
ceux qui estoient dedans ne se fissent le Chemin au travers de ces pierres de
ponce avec quelques pieux; and on en voit encor a present par toute la mer
Mediterranee mais en petite Quantite, cela s' estant disperse ca et la. Seneque
raconte en une de ses Epistres que Santonini est bastte sur des mines de
souphre, and ce sont else qui fournissent asseurement la matiere pour allumer
en cet endroit, and n'y trouva point de fond. Il y a pourtant une petite Isle
appellee Firesia, a la point de laquelle* on peut donner fonds, and point en
aucun autre endroit.

It is usually observed, that there is a strong smell of Sulphur near where a
Thunderbolt falls. When I was near the Lake of Geneva called Lacus Lemanus,
there was a terrible Storm of Thunder, and the next day so strong a smell of
Sulphur, that a Soldier who stood near the Place where a Thunderbolt fell
into the Water, could scarce bear the smell of the Sulphur.

July 24. 81. A Ship being at Sea about 100 Leagues off Cape Cod in 48 Latitude
about 3 P. M. after a violent Storm of Thunder, the Bituminous Matter fell upon
the Stem of the Ship, and burnt there, emitting a strong Sulphurous Smell; and
what was very remarkable, was that when Night came, they found, that the North
Point of the Compass was become the South Point, and vice versa. And,

It was observed by a very famous Planter, that several Trees remote from one
another, had very long and remarkable fissures in the Bark, upon great Storms
of Lightning.

TITLE XIII. Of Electrical Influences or Effluviums in the Air.
SIR,
Celestical Effluvia in the Air
IN order to discover the several affections of Winy Liquors, and the several
Distempers incident to them; and how to preserve them, it is requisite to
consider the Qualities of the Air, it is Temperature and Motion.

And this puts me in mind to beg our Friends Assistance, who would do well to
make some progress in perfecting the Theory of the Planets; for if that be not
clear, we cannot be free from Errors in respect of their Motions and
Calculations; and if we be mistaken in these, i'ts impossible to know either
their Places in the Heavens or their Aspects, and consequently the Phisical way
of their Motion must be uncertain, and of no use or advantage.

But, though by some they are looked upon to have little or no influence upon our
Globe, yet all the Arguments alleged against that Opinion, are rather levelled
against Astronomy, in Relation to some Superstitions about this Doctrine, than
that they show, why, when the Rays of each make different Angles upon one
another, they may not at the last affect us. Since that they do is evident, by
undeniable Experiments, not only on inanimate and vegetative Bodies; but
likewise from the Observations of Physicians in all Lunatic, Epileptick,
Paralitick or Lethargick Persons.

And indeed, since Rarefaction and Condensation are mediate Motions, which
dispose Bodies to Corruption, and are assisting in Generating New ones; and,
since all the Affections and dispositions of Moisture, Heat, Cold, Drought, the
Course of all Winds, Showers, Thundering, or whatsoever else is used by Nature,
to produce these two General Effects of Rarefaction and Condensation, do in a
great Measure, if not wholly depend upon, and are altogether regulated by the
Course and Aspects of the Celestial Bodies, it will not be irrational to teach,
that every one of those, emitting Rays peculiar to themselves have, by the
Influence of those, different Effects on our Atmosphere: The subtle parts of
the Air being not only subject to be worked upon by them, but likewise our
Spirits, and other Humors, whose Parts, by the impression of these subtle
Rays, may acquire a new determinate Motion, and consequently be altered, whence
may arise Convulsions, Cramps, Lameness, etc. Accordingly as the Humors
influenenced by them, are differently acted on, and disposed to show their ill
Effects in this or that Part.

So that it would be of considerable Import to Natural Philosophy, and of no
small use in Husbandry, Gardening, as well as Physic, to make such
Observations, as might tend to the Improvement of the Theory of the Planets by
keeping exact Diaries in several Places, of the Changes of the Weather, and at
the same time of the Mutual Aspects, places and Motions of the Planets;
Besides, it would not a little conduce to the Perfecting of the Natural
Histories of Countries, and particular Places.

But in instituting and perfecting Observations of this kind, we are not yet
Furnished with Thermometers, sufficiently improved; for,

First, We are not yet acquainted, what Proportion the Diameter of the Cylinder
ought to bear to the Diameter of the Head; to make our Observations of the
Alterations in the Air, regular. Secondly, We are not told what Length the
Cylinder ought to be; nor has it as yet been well graduated, 16 being the
greatest Number; whereas to make Observations on the more Minute alterations,
every Inch may be divided into 10, and consequently the whole into a 1000
Degrees. Thirdly, We are not yet told what Liquors are most proper to make such
Experiments with; Whether such as Attract the Air, and preserve their first
Quantities; such as Ol. Sulph. per Campanam Ol. Vitriol. or Liquors, such as
Sal Tartar, etc. or whether Liquors whose Parts are more subtle and fine, such
as Spirit of Wine, or Turpentine; or Lastly, Spirit of Vinegar, or well refined
Quicksilver.

In making such Experiments, it may be convenient to fix several Glasses in one
Frame, with several sorts of Liquors in them; and that Observations should be
made in several Rooms together, the Glasses being neither exposed to the Sun
Beams, nor to the injury of Storms, Rain or Winds. In the History it self it
will be requisite to give an Account of the very place such Experiments were
made in, taking Notice whether the Experiments are not influenced by the Air in
the Chimney, the Cranny of a Wall or Door, or the Breath of People. It will be
requisite likewise to note the Proportion betwixt the Warmth of Day and Night,
in constant Weather: The agreement or disagreement of the Motion of the Air,
and Bodies above it in uncertain Weather: How far these may foretell Winds or
Rain; the disposition of Air, when it Thunders, under times of Mildews or
Blasting, eminent Eclipses, Conjunctions.

It is a Received Tradition in Java, that the Beams of the Moon, if one stays
long under them, will cause Contractures; so that a Physician, who Slept under
them, had his Mouth strangely contorted, and his Neck stiff, which Symptoms he
removed sooner than they are wont to go off, by the use of Aromatic Medicines.

TITLE XIV. Of the Height of the Atmosphere. TITLE XV. Of the Motion of Air,
and of Winds.
Storms of Wind.
AT Porta Nova Nov. 22. 1667. There was so violent a Rain and Wind, that most of
the Houses were Ruined; Men and Beast carried into the Water by the Violence of
the Winds and Flood; the Town Wall was most of it thrown down and few Trees
left standing. I am told that Hurricanes are very frequent about the Island
Mauricius, where one lasted four days, in one of which it had seven
Exacerbations, each of which differed two Points of the Compass from the
Preceding; The surface of the Sea by the Collision of the Waves, was covered
with a White Froath; the Day was darkened by it, and the Noise like, that of
Thunder, so that those on the Shrouds could not hear those on the Decks.

A Learned Physician, that Traveled into America, told me, that those
Countries are supplied with a constant Wind from the Hills; but Barbados,
which wants Hills, has no such Winds. In the Island of Teneriff Breezes
constantly flow from the Sea; but all Night, a sharp Wind blows on each side
from the Land Sea-ward. I am told by a Traveller, that though the Tops of
Mountains are generally calm; yet he had met with Winds considerably strong.

In Lettere di Venetia
MArtedi sui li 29. Agosto 1679. all hoar 19. incirca si leuolevo nelle Paludi
della Villa di Fauis del Dominio Cesareo tree miglia lontana da Palma Noua
Dominio Veneto un ucnto chiamato Bissa boua, che allargandosi per circa
cinquanta passi scorse con ^anto empito, e furore, che porto per aria diuersi
huomini, che tagliauano il fieno in quei Prati, e anco alcuni Carri carichi di
fieno con i Buoui precipitandoli assai lontano con la rouina delli animali, de
Carri, e degli huomini, e passando per i Campi sbarbicando ogni sort di Piante
le porto per aria gettandole molti passi lontano, rendendo la terra per oue
scorce cosi arsa, che pare non ui sii may stata piantata cosa alcuna. Arriuo
nella villa decta Bagnaria del Dominio Veneto dove getto a terra molte Case
sino a fondamenti, et altre discoperse, e rouino portando per aria tauole,
traui, et ogni altra cosa che era dentro esse Case restando mal trattate molte
Person senza pero la morte di alcuno. Fuori di dettata Villa ui e una Chiesa
chiatata S. Tomaso la quale resto scoperta, e rouinata una part del muro
portando uia il Campanile, e Campane che nel giorno seguente non erano per anco
trouate; -- Di la si porto uerso Seuigliano Dominio Veneto e rouino^ tutta la
Campagna senza danno pero della Villa stessa mentre li passo poco lontano, e
girando poco lungi dalla Villa stessa spianto da fondamenti un Palazzo del D.
Co. Horatio Strasoldo, nel quale gli amazzo ogni sort di animali che ui erano,
portando per aria li mobili e sino le botti, esterminando parre della
possessione. Non restorono pero offese Person, perch erano alla Campagna a
lauorare, e nel camino getto pure a terra due altre Case che sono nel Taglio
per andare a Strasoldo spiantandole affacto con la morte di una Donna, d'un
Fanciullo, e diuersi Animali.

Di la uolto uerso Palma, et arriuando sino all mura della Fortezz agiro uerso
la Villa di Priuano mezo miglio distante quale rouino la meta, spiantando da
fondamenti belissimi Palazzi, portando per aeria travi, tavole, et ogni altra
cosa con la morte di molti, quantita di feriti, e diuersi strapazzati con far
alla Campagna di molto male. Di poi scorse nella Villa di Visco Dominio
Imperiale, e tra li altri danni fatti ronino tutto il Palazzo novo del D. Marco
Foscolini Gentilhuomo di Cinidal nel quale essendoni una gran rimessa da
Carozze, la di cui Porta hauena tree Cadenazzi, and entrando il Turbine per li
balconi getto la Carozza con tanto empito nella Porta siessa che la ruppe, e
porto fuori la Caroza tutta fracassata gettandola sopra un muro della Corte
assa alto, portando il Cielo della stessa mezzo miglio lontano, e verto nel
medemo Palazzo ferito, e mal trattato un seruitore di esso Foscolini, di cui
ronino pure Braida, and un Brolo essendo in detta Villa restati due morti, e
diversi feriti; -- S' inoltro poi nella Villa di S. Vido di Crauglio stato
Imperiale, la quale rouino tutta affatto senza restaurui nemeno una Casa,
portando per Aria coppi, travi, legne, sassi, e mobili con la morte di
moltissime Person, e moltissimi feriti e rouinati, et in detta Villa non si
puo anddare, ne con Carri, ne con Caualli per la grande moltitudine di
rouinazzo, arbori et altro che hanno attauer-sato le strade, essendo rimassi
morti gran numero di animali. --

Da questo luoco si porto uerso Villes Villa Imperiale buona part della quale
getto a terra andar al. Territorio di Monfalcone con la morte di molte person,
et quantita di animali con lasciar le Campaign per dove e passata senza piante,
e come strada battuta. --

Ha danneggiato anco altre Ville ma leggiermenre, ne per anco si sa quello
hauera fatto piu avanti nel detto Territorio.

Questo successo ha lasciato un spauento grande in queste Parti, essendosi
uedute cose incredibili mentre pioveuano sassi, tauole, arbori, traui, coppi,
huomini, done, fanciulli, botti, sorghi, uva, galline, animali, et in
conclusione cio che incontraua portaua per aria con un rumore, e fracasso cosi
gradne, che faceua terrore essendo per debt Ville un concorso grande di Popolo
uicino per uedere cose che si rendono incredibili.


I am told, that though the Eastern Winds blow near Tangier about of a Year, yet
they reach not into the Inland Country; where such Winds are not common.

I am told by one who observed it in the Bottom of a Mine near the Sea, that
before South Winds the Water would be troubled, but before East Winds it would
be clearer than ordinary, the Depth of the Mine was about 15 or 20 Fathom.

He told me likewise, that the Hurricanes at Goa, come but at two Seasons;
about the beginning of March, and the 4th of October.

TITLE XVI. Of the Air as the Medium of Sounds, and of Sounds and Noises in the
Air, and Particularly Thunder; and of the Airs Operation on the Sounds of
Bodies.
Of the Air as the Medium of Sounds.
UPon the Rising of several Tempests together, the Sky seems covered over with
Globes of Smoaky Clouds, the Air seeming black and Thick; and by and by
incessant Lightning, with terrible loud Thunder breaks out; Ludolph's History
of Aethiop. l. 1. c. 5.

A Viol String has been Observed, upon Rainy weather, to sound half a Note
sharper than before, and, I am told by the same Person, that having kept false
Strings in his Pockets for some time after, they became true ones; and the same
Person has Observed, that some Strings are apter to Receive a Tension, than
others.

TITLE XVII. Of the Weight of the Air
The Weight of a cubical Inch of Water.
HAving placed a hollow Cube of Brass, every side of which was an exact English
Inch, in a pair of Scales as Horizontally as we could, It Is Weight being xi.
gr. 1. ss. we filled it with common Water, and then, besides the Counter-poise
of the Brass Cube, the Water weighed 254 ^/^ Grains; and since it is a hard
Matter to fill the Vessel more exactly than we did, I judge that a Cubick Inch
may way, 256 Grains.

Of Quicksilver.
A Cubick Inch of Mercury weighed in the same Brass Cube was 3580 Grains, which
is to the Weight of Water, as 14 to 1

Of a Pillar of the Atmosphere.
The Weight of the Air incumbent on an Inch Square of Air here below, amounts to
18 l Troyweight, i. e. 15 l. 1/17 Averdupois-weight.

As 11 to 14. or rather as 355. to 452, so is the Area of a Square inscribed in
a Circle to the Area of the Circumscribed Circle.

Hence 355: 452 1: 1, 2732394.

Hence if the side of a Circumscribed Square be an Inch, that Multiplied by an
Inch, renders a Cubick Inch for the Solid Content.

In the like manner, if the Height of a Cylinder Erected on the Circumscribing
Circle, be an Inch, the Solid content of that Cylinder is, 1, 2732394.

Wherefore 1, and 1, 2732394, Multiplied, by the Weight of the Cubick Inch of
any kind of Metal, give the Weight of a Cubick Inch, and of a Cylindrick Inch
that Circumscribes the same; whence an Inch Table for both is easily made, by
contiunal addition, or for any Height propounded, Multiplying both by the same.

See Plate 6. Fig. 4.
LE Tuyan recourbe estoit ferme au bout ae et Ouuert alautre extremite B. La.
recourbure depuis G. jusq' a C. estoit pleine de Mercure and tout le rest
estoit plein d'air. La longueur AE.C. estoit 4. Pouces ou 32/8. J'echauffay cet
air, et il feit baisser le Mercure Jusques en f. qui estoit plus bas, and en
mesme temps il monta jusq' en H. qui estoit plus haut que G. ou C.

Pour scauoir quelle hatetur de Mercure auroit este necessaire pour empescher
la dilatation de lair, and retenir le mercure en C. je nay qua trouuer ce qui
seroit necessaire pour repousser le mercure en C. Etainsy contenir lair dans
lespace AE. C. non obstant la Chaleur. Jepose pour principe ceque lexperience
fait voir, Cest que quand une quantite dair occupe un certain espace que
jappelle AE. et que la pression qui leretient dans cet espace soit B. si on
vient a augmenter cette pression de tell quantite que lon voudra comme X. on
diminuera l'espace AE. d'une certain quantite D. Laquelle quantite est au
restant M. comme X est a B.

D. M X. B. donc. M. D B. X.

Il est aised appliquer cette reigle a lexperience cy dessus. Car AE. f. ou
35/8 de pouce sont lespace AE. Lapression ordinaire de lair qui est de 30
Pouces. Jointe nae un pouce de haut que se trouue enter. f et H. est B X 31
Pouces de Mercure: et si nous y en adjoustons assez pour reduire lair a lespace
AE. C. Le dit AE. C. sera M. X 32/8 Et. f. C. sera D. X

Posant donc. M. D. B. 32. 3. 31.

La quatriesme propotionelle sera X. X 2 29/32 pouces, qui estants joints a B.
X 31 Pouces feront 33 29/32 pouces don't lair sera press en C. AE. qui sont
pres de 4 Pouces au dessus de la pression ordinaire.

An Experiment made at the Spire of the Cathedral Church in Sarum.
HAving procured all the Surveying Chains we could, and a proper Frame for a
Baroscope, we went into the Church, where when the Tube was inverted, as in the
Torcellian Experiment; the Mercury stood at 30 Inches, and 50 Centesms of an
Inch: Being drawn up to the first floor which is 1033 Inches, it subsided 9
Cents of an Inch; being drawn up 935 Inches higher, it sunk 8 Cents more; being
drawn up 2313 Inches higher yet, it lost 23 Cents, and when it was let down
again the Mercury reascended to it is former Station at every one of the Marks.

At another time an inverted Baroscop being made use of, such as Plate 5, Fig.
6, delineates, having set a Mark where the Mercury stood below, when it was
raised.

Inches Inch. Cent. 1033 The Liquor Ascended 1 25 1^68 2 39 2467 3 22 4281 5 64
4800 or 400 feet 6 40

On the great Continent not far from the Sea, before a great Storm, in which
the Wind blew along the Continent, the Mercury was Raised two Inches above it is
usual Station; but when the Wind blew from the Sea, the Mercury subsided; which
has been observed by another Gentleman in England, where in the Inland Parts
likewise the Mercury subsided before a Storm.

An Extract of a Letter writ to the Author, by the Ingenious Author of that
most incomparable Essay of Human Understanding Mr. Lock, Dated Chapter Chapter May 5th
1666.
An Account of Minedeep Gruffs.
IN the Letter we are informed, that designing, at the Request of Mr. Boil, to
try some Barometrical Experiments in the Gruffs at Minedeep, when he came
there, he found it neither safe nor easy, for one not accustomed, to go down
into them; for the Descent not being Perpendicular, but crooked, as the Cranies
of the Rocks gave them way easiest in sinking their Pits, they are forced to
clamber up and down the Narrow Passage, by setting their Hands and Feet against
the sides of it, all the Assistance besides, being a Rope which they take under
their Arm; besides, sometimes when they are down, the Damps catch them; and if
they cannot get out speedily, they fall into a Swond and die: The only Remedy
which Recovers them is this, they first Dig a hole in the Earth for their
Faces, and then cover them close with Turffs. To force Air into these Gruffs,
they place Turfs on the Lee side of the Pits Mouth, instead of which, if they
be plaon the other side, those in the Gruffs are seized with a want of Breath
and Fainting. Sweet Flowers being taken down into them, presently Stink. And it
is likewise observed, in these Gruffs, that it is very dangerous to descend
into them, when any Fire remains in the Chinks of the Rocks; for they usually
make such Fires upon hard Rocks, that they may more easily Dig through them.

The Torrecellian Experiment being tried, on a Steep Hill, the Mercury at the
Bottom was suspended at 29 Inches and; at the Top of the Hill it subsided to
28, where both as I ascended and descended, the Mercury gradually subsided and
rose again; only the Sun had so far Rarefied the Air above the Mercury, that
when the Tube was brought to the bottom again, the Mercury wanted 1/32 of it is
former height, which I suppose depended on the Resistance that Rarefied Air
made to the Pressure of the Atmosphere.

Having visited the Incrusting Spring, I formerly mentioned, I observed, that
about the Springhead there was only a little Moss Incrustated; but 40 or 50
Yards of it, where the Water has a Fall higher than my Head, it Sheathed every
thing with Stony-cases, and makes the sides of the Banks hard Rock. It bears
Soap, Freezes Quickly, and Waters Ground with advantage; It is used in the
Kitchen and Brewhouse belonging to the Gentleman, in whose Ground it Rises in,
without any sensible ill Effects; only his Horses are Observed to be usualshort
Breathed. Thus for the Extract of Mr. Lock's Letter.

Some days ago the King doing me the Honor to Discourse with me about the use
of Baroscopes, he told me, that he himself had by observing the Baroscope,
foretlod a Storm, which accordingly ensued.

Nous apprenons de ces experiences, que puisque le poids de l'Air et le poids
de l'eau qui est dans les Pompes se tiennent mutuellement en Equilibre, ils
pesent precisement autant l'un que l'autre; and qu' ainsi en connoissant la
hauteur ou l'eau s'elve en tous les lieux du monde, nous connoissons en mesme
temps combien chacun de ces liex est press par le poids de l'Air qui est au
dessus d'eux; et partant.

Que les lieux qui sont au board de la mer, sont pressez par le poids de l'Air,
qui est au dessus d'eux jusques au haut de sa Sphere, autant precisement, que
si au lieu de cet Air on substituoit une colomne d'eau de la hauteur de 31
Pieds deux poulces.

Ceux qui sont plus elevez de dix toises, autant que s' ils portoient de l'eau
de la hauteur de 31 Pieds un poulce.

Ceux qui sont elevez au dessus de la mer de 500 Toises, autant que s' ils
portoient de l'eau a la hauteur de 26 Pieds onze poulces: and ainsi du rest.

Nous apprenons par ces experiences que l'Air qui est sur le niveau de la mer
pese autant que l'eau, a la hauteur de 31 Pieds deux poulces; mais parce que
l'Air pese moins sur les lieux plus elevez que sur le niveau de la mer; et qu'
ainsi il ne pese pas sur tous les Points de la terre egalement, and mesme qu'il
pese differemment par tout, on ne peut pas prendre un pied fix, qui marque
combien tous les lieux du monde sont Chargez par l'Air, le fort portant le
foible; mais on peut en prendre un par conjecture bien approchant du just;
comme par exemple, on peut fair estat, que tous le lieux de la terre en
general considerez comme s' ils estoient egalement chargez d'Air, le fort
portant le foible, en sont autant pressez, que s' ils partoient de l'eau a la
hauteur de 31 Pieds; et il est certain qu' il n'y a pas un demi pied d'eau
d'erreur en cette Supposition.

Or nous avons veu que l'Air qui est au dessus des montagnes hautes de 500.
toises sur le niveau de la mer, pese auntant que l'eau a la hauteur de 26 Pieds
11 Poulces.

Et par consequent tout l'Air qui s' etend de puis le niveau de la mer jusqu'
au haut des montagnes, hautes de 500 Toises, pese autant que l'eau a la hauteur
de 4 Pieds un poulce, qui estant a peu pres la septieme party de la hauteur
entiere; il est visible que l'Air compris depuis la mer jusques a ces montagnes
est a peu pres la septieme party de la mass entiere de l'Air.

Nous apprenons de ces mesmes Experiences, que les vapeurs qui sont epaisses
dans l'Air, lors qu'il en est le plus Charge, pesent autant que l'eau a la
hauteur d'un pied huit Poulces; puisque pour les contrepeser, else font
housler l'eau dans les Pompes a cette hauteur, par dessus celle ou l'eau
contrepesoit deja la pesanteur de l'Air: de sort que si toutes les vapeurs qui
sont sur une contree estoient reduites en eau, comme il arrive quand else se
changent en pluye, else ne pourroient produire que cette hauteur d'un pied
huit poulces d'eau sur cette contree. Et s' il arrive par fois des orages ou
l'eau de la pluye qui tomb vienne a une plus grande hauteur; c' est parce que
le vent y port les vapeurs de contrees voisines.

Nous voyons aussi de la, que si toute la Sphere de l'Air estoit pressee and
comprimee contre la terre par une Force qui la poussant par le haut, la
reduisist en bas a la moindre place qu' elle puisse occuper, and qu' elle la
reduisist comme en l'eau, elle auroit alors la hauteur de 31 Pieds seulement.

Et par consequent qu' il faut considerer toute la mass de l'Air en l'estat
libre ou elle est, de-la mesme sort que si elle eust este autrefois comme une
mass d'eau de 31 pieds de haut a l'entour de toute la terre, qui eust este
rarefiee et dilatee extremement, et convertie en cet estat ou nous l'appellons
Air, auquel elle occupe a la verite plus de place, mais auquel elle conserve
precisement le mesme poids que l'eau a 31 pieds de haut.

Et-comme il n' y auroit rien de plus aise que de suppter combien l'eau qui
environneroit toute la terre a 31 Pieds de haut peseroit de livres; et qu' un
enfant qui scait l'Addition et la Soustraction le pourroit fair; on trouveroit
par le mesme moyen combien tout l'Air de la Nature pese de livers, puisque c'
est la mesme chose; et si on en fait l'epreuve, on trouvera qu' il pese a peu
pres huit Millions de Millions de Millions de Livers.

IN ay voulu avoir ce plaisir, et j' en ay fait le compte en cette sort.

IN ay suppose que le Diametre d'un cercle est a sa circonference, comme 7 a 22.

IN ay suppose que le Diametre d'une Sphere estant multiply par la
circonference de son grand cercle, le produit est le contenu de la superficie
Spherique.

Nous Scavons qu' on a divise le tour de la terre en 360 degrez. cette division
a este voluntaire, car on l'eust divisee en plus ou moins si on eust voulu,
aussi bien que les cercles celestes.

On a trouve que chacun de ces degrez contient 50000 toises.

Les lieues autour de Paris sont de 2500 toises; et par consequent il y a 20
lieues au degree: D'autres en comptent 25 mais aussi ils ne mettent que 2000
toises a la lieue; ce qui revient a la mesme chose.

Chaque toise a 6 pieds.

Un pied Cube d'eau pese 72 libres.

Cela pose, il est bien aise de fair la supputation qu' on cherche.

Car puisque la terre a pour son grand cercle, ou pour sa circonference 360
degrez. Elle a par consequent de tour 7200 lieuves. Et par la proportion de la
Circonference au Diametre aura 3291 lieues. Doncen multipliant le Diametre de
la terre par la Circonference de son grand cercle; on trouvera qu' elle a en
toute sa superficie Spherique 1649200 lieues quarrees. C' est a dire 103, 095,
000, 000, 000, toises quarr. C est a dire 3711, 420, 000, 000, 000, pieds quarr.

Il's ensuit qu' un pied cube d'eau pese 72 livres.

Et parce qu' un prisme d'eau d'un pied quarre de base, et de 31 pieds de haut,
pese 2232 livres.

Donc si la terre estoit couverte d'eau jusques a la hauteur de 31 pieds; il y
auroit autant de prismes d'eau de 31 Pieds de haut, qu' elle a de Pieds quarrez
en toute sa surface. (Ie scay bien que ce ne seroient pas des prismes, mais des
secteurs de Sphere; et je neglige expres cette Precision.)

Et partant elle porteroit autant de 2232 livres d'eau, qu' elle a de pieds
quarrez en toute sa surface.

Done cette mass d'eau entiere peseroit. 8283, 889, 440, 000, 000, 000, livres.

Donc toute la mass entire de la Sphere de l'Air qui est au monde, pese ce
mesme poids de 8283. 889, 440, 000, 000, livres.

(...) C' est a dire, Huit Millions de Millions de Millions, deux cent quarte
vingt trois Mill huit cent quatre vingt neuf Millions de Millions, quatre cent
quarente Mill Millions de livres.


Mr. Pascal in his small Tract, either Dela Pesanteur de l'Air; or in that
Del'Equilibre des liqueurs.
See Plate 7 Fig. 4.
De caetero, feci haud ita pridem experimentum ponderandi aeris, quod pulchre
successit; nam sumpta vitrea lagena, valde levi et ad lampadem sufflata, ejus
figurae, qualem alibi excusam vides, magnitudine parvae pilae quales habentur
in sphaeristeriis, non habente nisi minimam quandam aperturam per quam
immittatur pilus in extremitate orificii sui B. ponderavi eam in lance valde
exacta, and frigida pondus habuit 78 granorum cum dimidio: Postea calefeci eam
carbonibus impositam, and reposui in bilancem eo situ quo hic descriptum vides,
nimirum orificio in imum verso, and deprehendi eam vix habere pondus 78
granorum, tum immergendo orificium in aquam, refrigescere feci, and dum aer se
condensat pro modo quo refrigescit lagena, intravit tantundem aquae quantum
aeris calor antea expulerat; denique ponderans eam cum omni illa aqua
deprehendi eam habere pondus 72 granorum and dimidii plus quam antea: unde
concludo aerem qui per ignem expulsus erat, se habere ad aquam quae in locum
suum regressa erat uti se habet ad 72, aut uti se habet 1. ad 145. sed potui in
eo errasse difficile, quippe est in ea re omnino exactum essee; Id saltem certo
scio, quod pondus aeris hoc modo sit sensiblile, and prolixe hic deduxi
processum meum, ut si te eadem curiositas incessat, possis id eodem modo
perficere experimentum. Vale.

TITLE XVIII. Of the Consistency of the Air; it is Rarity, Density, Fludity,
Subtily.
Of the Consistency of the Air, etc.
A Thin, but large Bladder, having a third Part of the Air, it was capable of
containing, remaining in it, had it is Neck strongly tied; and at the other end
a Weight was suspended of 14 Pound by a String, which could not shrink of an
Inch, without raising the Weight from the ground: But the Air in the Bladder
was so far expanded by heat, that the Weight was raised, and would swing in the
Air like a Pendulum. The same Experiment being tried with a 50 pound Weight,
before the expanded Air was able to raise the Weight, the Bladder would burst.

To try whether the Corpuscles of the Air would penetrate into a Liquor exposed
to the Ordinary pressure of the Atmosphere, we poured a Urinous Spirit upon as
much Filings of Copper, as covered the bottom of a Cylindrical Vial, so that
the Spirit was the Breadth of 3 Fingers above the Filings, which being done, on
that, we poured so much Oil of Almonds, as covered the Spirit the Thickness of
a Crown piece; upon which the Vial being kept some days in a quiet place, the
Urinous Liquor did first acquire, and then lose a blew Tincture. When the blew
was in a great Measure vanished, the Bottle was kept unstopped a Minute, and
then stopped again; in a short time the Urinous Spirit was tinged with blew,
which Color in an hour extended it self all over the Liquor, the Oil upon the
Top of it still remaining clear.

TITLE XIX. Of the Heat and Coldness of the Air.
TO show that it is not without Reason that I Question what the Peripateticks
teach about the Limits and Temperaments of the Air, which they divide into
three Regions, I shall propose the following Particulars.

The Air at Morocco, though excessive hot in the Day is Cold at Night, as well as
the Mountanous Parts thereabouts.

One, who stayed a Year in Guinea, though it is excessive hot, told me, that
about 4 a Clock in the Morning, he was ready to tremble with Cold.

One told me, that in Jamacia, when he lay in his Hammock about 3 or 4 Foot
from the Ground, though he had much Cloths under him, yet he perceived it Cold
beneath, and Hot above.

So that to show that not only Liquors, and Animal Bodies may be affected with
the Summers heat, but even Glass it self, I shall intimate, that Glass-stopples
of Factitious Crystal being so fitted to Viols of the same, though in Winter they
would move about easily; yet in the Summer they would not be pulled out by the
Assistance of a String, till the Expansion of the Glass was taken off by being
cooled in Water.

I am apt to believe, that several Effects, which we are apt to attribute to
the Heat of the Air, putting the Parts of the Juices of our Bodies in Motion,
depend on some Effluvia raised by Heat from other Bodies, and which swim in the
Air.

A large Piece of Amber being placed in the Summer in the Sunbeams, had its
Parts put into such an Agitation, as enabled it to emit Electrical Effluvia,
and to attract light Bodies, which Power it would lose when removed out of the
Sunbeams again.

Mr. Nickson told me, that, near Hudson's Bay, when they were a Leeward of
certain floating Islands of Ice, they were sensible of it by a new Access of
Cold; before they approached so near as to see them, which was at 20 Miles
distance. He likewise told me, that that Wind brought along with it a Foggy
Air; And that in that of Hudson's Bay where he wintered, the Rivers were not
free from Ice from the latter End of October, to the middle or end of May, though
the Latitude of Charlton Island, most frequented by the English was of the same
Latitude with London, and at the most not exceeding 52 Degrees: The Ice was
near six Foot deep; and the Frost so violent, that Bottles of Brandy would have
a fourth Part turned into Ice, the unfroze Liquor being much stronger than
before: The Ice which swam upon the Water was fresh, from whence they supplied
themselves with fresh Water, either by melting it in their Pots, or by
gathering it from large Cavities in floating pieces of Ice, where it was melted
by the Sunbeams.

A Traveller told me, that upon the Top of a Pyrenean Mountain in the Summer it
was very hot, though the same Day it was covered with Snow; and another told me,
that the Winds at Morocco were so hot, as almost to stifle him.

And it has been observed, upon the Tops of high Pyrenean Mountains, that,
below them there were Clouds which yielded Rain plentifully, out of which
Lightning flashed upwards as well as downwards.

Dr. Stubbs told me, that in a Bolt-head about 2 Foot long, about 7 or 8 a
Clock in the Morning, which is the faint time of the Day, the Water would rise
but of Inch and half a quarter, after which time it would subside till that
time the next Day. He further added, that in 8 or 10 Months time in that hot
Country, Water would not decrease in Quantity, though kept unstopp'd.

I am told by another, that in the Torrid Zone near the Coast of Sumatra, though
Ice nor Frost nor Snow are ever observed, yet he has known Hail to fall. And I
am told, that in the Island of Ceylon, which lies betwixt 6 and 10 Degrees
North Latitude in that Torrid Climate, it would be so cold at the Top of some
Hills, to whose Tops they could ascend in half an hour, that they would almost
shiver. And Capt. Knox told me, that having spent 18 Years in that Island, he
observed a kind of Meteor in Winters Mornings between a Dew and a hoar Frost,
which presently vanished; and that once there happened a shower of Hail, which
were about the size of a black Cherry, but were presently melted upon the
Ground.

The Heat is so violent in the Island Suaquena, that it excoriates the Skin,
melts Indian Wax in a Cabinet, and sears your Shoes like a red hot Iron. Yet on
some Mountains in Aethiopia, they dread Cold more than Heat; though no Snow
falls, but only a little Hail now and then, which soon melts; and Tellesius
witnesses, that in many Regions in Aethiopia, the Air is more mild than in
Portugal, so many Degrees distant Northward.

At Tripoli in Barbary it is observed, that when the Wind blows over a long
Sandy Desert, it, as well as the Wind it brings along with it, seems as hot as
the Steams from an Oven: And and the same has been observed near the Island of
St. Lovis, on the Coast of Africa; where it was further remarkable, that the
Ground was so hot, that the Gentleman, who related it, could scarce endure to
stand upon it; and he further told me, that when the Wind blew from a Wood, in
which the dead Bodies of Wild Beasts lay, it stunk so that it could scarce be
endured.

In summo ejus montis, Idae sc. fastigio sacellum est, quod aedificiolo
duntaxat constat saxis sibi invicem impositis and sine calce cohaerentibus
fornicis in modum constructo, ad tectum praebendum. Sublimi adeo loco est, and
a vehementioribus ventis interdum ita perflato, ut lapilli inde transferantur.
Petri Bellonii, lib. 1. cap. 16.
Paulo infra id sacellum planities conspicitur montibus undique cincta, in qua
multa sunt pascua, ubi Arietes and Caprae Cretenses aestate pinguescunt. Si
quis ex summo montis vertice undique prospiciat, p^^^ aberit, quin totius
Insulae ambitum videat cum (...) vicinis Insulis, Miso, Cerigo, sive Cythera,
(...) Archipelagi. Aeris intemperies in hoc ^^^te adeo magna est quemadmodum ut
in caeteris prae^^^ montibus, ut in ipsis Caniculae ardoribus ^ridie* nullo
etiam spirante vento, ingens sen^^^tur frigus: qua de causa nec hyeme, nec
asl^te (...) eum incolit. Nam licet pastores interd^ ^^i^^ greges ad pascua
agunt, noctu tamen in valles se recipient.

In the next Chapter.

Late porro patet hic mons ejusque radices (...) maris littora, ut ante
diximus, attingunt; nam licet urbi Candiae sunt vicinae, meditullium tamen
insulae occupat ipse mons, adeo in sublime evectus, ut nives ejus verticem
perpetuo tegnant; tamque frigida a^ra mediis etiam astatis ardoribus isthic
est, ut vix ferri queat: tametsi in convallibus magnus sit aestus.

Jacobi Zabarelli de-Regionibus Aeris, c. 8.
Contigit id meae experientiae, quod etiam aliis contigisse audivi, ut
ascenderem ad summutatem usque montis Veneris, qui omnium in Patavino agro
altissimus est; ibi per totum diem habui Aerem serenissimum, sed infra circiter
medium montis vidi nubes, quae me visione vallium prohibebant, vesperi autem
postquam de illo monte descendi, inveni factam eo die infera part magnam
pluviam cum in montis cacumine nihil pluisset; ex eo intellexi me transiisse
per mediam Aeris regionem, in qua est facta pluvia, nec tamen eam sensi
frigidissimam, imo vix aliquam animadverti differentiam frigidioris and
calidioris Aeris, nam aestivum tempus erat, pro aestivo tempore eram vestitus,
nec tamen tantum frigoris, quod me laederet, ex eo loco percepi; pars igitur
illa non est absolute frigida, sed solum comparatione inferi, Aeris calidioris.

Idem de Alpibus proprio exemplo edoctus testatum reliquit Bartholinus Syst.
Phys. Instit. Succinct. de Terra, Aere and Igne, C. 4. Resp. 1.

Mount Atlas in the Heat of Summer has been seen covered with Snow; and
several People who have visited the Tops of high Mountains, such as the Alps
and Teneriff, have found it exceedingly cold. I am told by one, that he never
heard of Snow or Ice in Guinea; but in Barbary, where the Plains were excessive
hot, the Tops of Mountains were covered with Snow, and the like has been
observed in the Island Ceylon, and the Mountains of Congo.

In the Summer 88, I placed a Glass in a Cave, which faced the Sea, it being
covered with 80 Foot of Earth, and cut right in about 130 Foot, the Mercury
stood above Temperate; and at the same time, in another Glass in the open Air
it stood at hot: About Christmas following the Mercury in the Cave varied not,
but that without stood at Frost.

In New Hampshire in New England it is observed, that in the Winter the
North-West Wind is very cold, and in Summer intensly hot; It is ascribed to a
large Tract of Woody Land, which in the Winter is covered with Snow, and in the
Summer, the Valleys being close, keep in the Heat till it becomes very violent.

Balbini Hist. Bohem. l. 1. c. 9. Demontibus, and de valle Lauezka, p. 29.
Chanowsky in vestigio Boh. piae, C. ult. Montes part eltera aestatem, altera
hicmem referentes.
De montibus ad Bavariam stantibus mira est Alberti Chanowii nostri narratio:
Post Bergreichensteinam (oppidum fodinis hodieque nobile) esse montes non tam
situ (alii enim ad septentrionem, alii ad meridiem latus obvertunt) quam Coelo
and temporibus adversantes, vallibus latissimis montes illos dirimentibus;
monstri instar est (quod se vidisse, and Anno 1639. in rem praesentem venisse
religiosissimus ille and Apostolicus vir asserit) in altero monte saepius
aestatem, in altero apposito hiemem dominari, it a ille succus aestivat, hic
altissimis nivibus obsitus a viatore superari non potest; ob eamque causam
Messes ipsae variant, and dum in montibus ad nos obversis demessa sunt omnia,
Id. Ibid.
altera Montium part seges virescit: Mirius illud quod in Biessinentibus and
Czachroviensibus Agris in tractu Plsnensi, contiguis, quos unus tantum sulcus
dirimit ac dividit, deprehenditur: Czachrovienses adhuc hibernant, cum in
Biessinensi Coelum ardeat, ibi caput attollit humo frumentum, cum Czachrovii
adolescit in culmum; clemento quoque dispari, illud riget, hoc tepet and
ferve^, eaque ex causa, dum Czachrovienses been pelliti ingrediuntur,
Biessinenses pellibus onerari se sentiunt, villosque deponunt. Aliquid tale
Anno 1652. mihi quoque accidisse memini: nam cum Glacio Zambergam in Bohemia
contenderem, and Glacio ob nives altissimas certum vehiculi genus, quod trahas
dicimus, sumpsissem, superatis montibus, qui comitatum Glacensem a Bohemia
dividunt, subito alia rerum facies apparuit: altero enim montium latere viridia
omnia reperimus, sic ut Trahae nulli jam rei and usui essent, and currum petere
cogeremur, nisi in luto natare placuisset; at accolae montium illorum quotannis
id sibi accidere confirmabant, ut unum latus montium profundissimae nives
contegerent, quando alterum latus lectissimos flores proferret, and cum ibi
omnia ventis verti viderentur apud se e floribus suavissimos odores efflari.

I was told by a Gentleman, who several times went down into the Hungarian Gold
Mine at Cremonitz, that when he was drawn up the Groove, which was bout 100
Foot deep, as soon as he ascended half the way, he perceived the Air sensibly
warmer, which continued several Feet nearer the Day; in which Region he
observed, several Veins of Native Vitriol of different Colors, which were soft
under Ground, and being exposed to the open Air, presently hardened. Under the
Torrid Zone the Mariners, I am told, hang up their Bottles of Liquor in a
Linen Cloth, that the Wind may blow upon it, by which means it would be cooled
enough to make it fit for drinking.

The Heat of the Sun is so violent in some Parts of Moscovy, Norway and
especially at Mozambique, that it often sets the very Houses on fire; which I
the less wonder at in the latter place, because they build their Houses with a
Stone that abounds with Sulphur Viv. When the Sun is in the Zenith, the sandy
Ground is so hot, that they can scarce endure to tread on it.

Un Gentilhomme de mes amiss plein de merit and digne de creance me mande enter
plusieures chooses extraordinaires qu'il a observees proche de Barege aux
Pyrenees, qu'il y a des ponts de niege d'un rocher a lautre pardessous les
quels passent des torrents. Il en a vu un qui embrasse deux torrents, and qui a
vint neuf toises de long and autant de large par dessus. Il y a par dessous ce
pont Neuf toises and demi enter les Naissances de la voute les ponts sont
tellement forts qu' il estime que du Canon y passeroit, and il a fait rouler de
grosses pieces par dessus.

Le tremblement de Terre que souffrit la Syrie l'an 750. ne fut gueres moins
surprenant; puisque la Terre s'estant ouverte de toutes parts, plusieurs Villis
furent abimees, d'autres renversees, and quelques unes qui estoient elevees sur
des hauteures transportees dans des plains eloignees de six mill de leur
situation. On en peut dire autant du froid extreme qui l'an 753. glaca le
Pont-Euxin a la longueur de cent mill, and toute l'estendue de la mer voisine,
jusq' a 30 condees de profondeur, quoy qu'on ne fut encore qu'au commencement
de l'automne.

Journal de Scavans III. 1685. It is the Custom at Guinea to cool their Water
by burying it all Night under Ground: And on the contrary in some Places it is
so excessive Cold, that in the Woods, it would freeze our Eyelids; the outside
of the Houses would be half covered with Snow, and Ice-ickles would hang on the
Insides; the Clothes on our Beds would be covered with a hoar Frost, and Water
which stood near the fire, would have one side hot, and the other froze: The
Sea would be froze up till the beginning of June, and the Ground till the
beginning of July. Capt. James.

I was told by one who ascended to the Top of the Pic de Medi, a Pyrenean
Mountain, that though the North side was covere'd with Snow, yet the Heat of the
Sunshine could scarce be endured on the South side; this Hill is so high, that
it may be seen from Montauban 27 Leagues distant.

An Ingenious Physician told me, that though Jalap at Tangier might be reduced to
Powder; yet at Morocco it was so melted by the Heat of the Air, as to become
incapable of being powdered.

Nel capo di comorino si termina cosi IN esta, come IN inverno dalla part, di
la dal capo verso Notte, and dal'altra part correspond illi ^^mpo assai
contrario e eiverso, di maniera che, chi va navigando, per quella costae nel
mese di Ottobre, sino ad Aprile naviga nel esta, e non puo in tutto questo
tempo, passare il capo per Esser iui la stagione del inverno, and il Puere, che
resiede nelle Chies ch' appartengono al Capo di Comorino ne Alcune la state, il
che e cosa di gran Meraviglia, essendo cio nel medessimo tempo nella distanza
sola mente di due, o tree miglia.

An eminent Virtuoso descended into a Mine in Tirol 1800 Foot deep, without
taking notice of any hot Region by the way; and at the Bottom the Air was so
temperate, that notwithstanding what is said of Antiperistasis, no intense Cold
was retreated thither to shun the Heat of the superior Air.

One that descended into several Mines in England, observed it sensibly colder,
when he was about a Yard below the Fast, as Miners call that solid Earth, which
they distinguish from that looser Earth that lies above it, in which Plants and
Trees spread their Roots, they seldom reaching to, or penetrating into the
Fast, though sometimes it lies near enough the External Surface of the Earth.

An Exact Relation of the Pico Teneriff.
A relation of Mount Teneriff.
The Gentlemen who gave the following Account, set out from Oratava, a Town
situated on the North side, two Miles from the Sea, and in 8 hours got to the
Top of the first Mountains, to wards the Pico de Terana, from whence the
Company proceeded over sandy and lofty Mountains, which were not covered with
Pine Trees as the first 8 hours Passage was: This Way continued till they came
to the Foot of the Pico, where they found very large Stones, which seemed to
have fallen from some superior Part.

Thoughts concerning the cause of it is stupendous Bulk.
It is thought by Dr. Pugh, that the whole Soil in that Island being
sulphurous, did take fire, and most of it Blew up at the same time; in which
general Conflagration, he supposes, those many Mountains of calcined Stones
which lie up and down the Island, but especially the South-West Parts of it,
were cast up; and the greatest Quantity of Sulphur lying about the Center of
the Island, raised the Pico to that Height, which it now remains at. On the
South-West side these calcined Rocks lie one upon another from the Top of the
Pico to the Sea shore, but very few on the North; so that he supposes the
Vulcano chiefly discharged it self that way; several of these calcined Rocks
resemble Iron Ore; some Silver, and others Copper; especially in the South-West
Parts called the Azuleios, there are vast Quantities of a bluish Earth,
intermixed with blew Stones, which are covered with a yellow Rust, like that of
Vitriol or Copper; and he was told, that a Bell-Founder of Oratava got pure
Gold out of two Horse Loads of Earth; and he was further told by another, that
a Lump of Earth brought from the Top of the Mountain, yielded a good Quantity
of Silver. About this Mountain are likewise observed, several Vitriolate as
well as Nitrous and Martial Springs. To confirm this Notion of the Reason of
what he observed, he alleges, that the very Tracts of the Torrents of Sulphur
which ran down from the Mountain are yet visible, which did so much Damage to
the Ground it flowed upon, that nothing but Fern is able to grow upon it. But
what seems further to confirm his Account is, The Instance of the Palm Island
15 Leagues from Teneriff, where upon the firing of a Vulcano, the Earth shook
terribly, and the Torrents of flaming Sulphur made as loud a Noise as Thunder;
and the Light of it made the Rooms as light all Night for six Weeks, as if
Candles had been in them, and the Sand was carried about in the Wind like
Clouds.

But to proceed: What was further observed by Mr. Clappham and others, who
purposely ascended this Mountain: As soon as they were got a Mile in their
Ascent upon the Pico, some of them grew faint and sick, several that ascended
were taken with Fluxes and Vomitings, and were Aguish; their Horses, and even
their Wine as well as themselves being extremely cold. When they had ascended a
Mile further, they came to the black Rocks, from whence they traveled over a
white Sand, so hot that it burnt the Skin of a Dog's Feet who went up with Dr.
Pugh. When they came to the Top, there were sulphurous Steams copiously
ascending and continually, which were so hot, that they made their Faces sore,
and at a little distance appeared like Smoke.

There was little Alteration in the Wind, till we came to the Top, where it was
very impetuous. The strong Waters there had lost their Force, but the Wine
seemed rather more Spirituous.

An account of the Pico.
Upon the Top is a Pit called Caldera, of a Conical Figure, which is about 80
Yards deep, and a Musket Shot over; It is covered over with loose Stones,
Sulphur and Sand, which being stirred, very offensive Vapors are raised; it is
dangerous to go further than 4 or 5 Yards into it, because their Feet are apt
to slip from under them. In the Bottom is a sort of clearer Sulphur, which
looks like Salt upon the Stones.

From hence they could see the Grand Canaries, Palma and Gomera, and Hiero, 20
Leagues distant. When the Sun rose, the Shadow of the Mountain covered all
betwixt it and the Horizon, so that the Top of it cast it is shade into the
Clouds; but when the Sun rose higher, so many Clouds were raised, that we could
see nothing but the Emergent Tops of some Mountains, which to those that are
below, sometimes seem to be wrapped about the Pico, and upon North-West Winds
foretell a Storm. From the Tops of most of those Mountains very exuberant
Springs issue out in great Spouts. At the Foot of the Sugar Loaf is a Cave
about 10 Yards deep, and 15 broad, having a Hole at the Top 8 Yards over;
opposite to which, in the Bottom, is a round Pit of Water 6 Fathom deep, whose
Brink is about a Yard below the Surface of a Bed of Ice which encircles it, the
Orifice of which is as broad as the Overture above, so that those that descend
into it, are let down by a Rope, and swing to and fro, that they may light upon
the Snow. The Water seems to be only melted Ice: From the Top of this Cave
Ice-icles hang very plentifully.

The Perpendicular Height of the Pico is accounted two Miles and a half.

Trees and Plants, etc.
In all the Passage nothing but Pines grew; and amongst the white Sand, a bushy
Broom; and where, in their Ascent they lay all Night, a sort of Cardon, whose
Stems are Eight Foot high; the Trunk about half a Foot Thick, every Stem
growing in four Squares, and rising from the Ground like Tuffs of Rushes; on
the Edges of these grow several red Berries, which by squeezing, yield a
poisonous Milk, which fetches the Hair off where it lights on the Skin of any
Beast, so that I suppose it to be a kind of Euphorbium. In this Island there
likewise grows a Shrub called Legnon-vell, which is carried to England as a
Sweet-Wood. There are growing in this Island also, Apricocks, and Peaches,
which bear twice a Year; very fruitful Pear Trees; Almonds of a tender Shell,
Palms, Plantanes, Oranges, Limons, and especially Pregnadas, called so because
each of them carries a small one in it is Belly. Besides these, they have
Sugarcanes, Cotton and Coloquintida, Carnations, and Roses that blow at
Christmas; Sampier covers the Rocks, and Clover the Ground; and another Grass
grows near the Sea, which is of a broader Leaf, and so luscious, that it will
kill a Horse, though no other Cattle: 8 Ears of Wheat have been found to spring
from one Root, and a Bushel to yield 130.

The Canary Birds build in the Barrancos of Gills, Birds.
which the Water has fretted away in the Mountains, places very cold. They
have also Quails and Partridges less than ours; great Wood Pigeons, Turtles at
Spring, Crows; and sometimes the Falcon appears from the Coast of Barbary.

They have Goats on the Mountains, Beasts, etc.
and also Hogs and Conies, but their Camels come from Lancerote. Amongst their
Fish are the following, viz.

The Cherna, Fish.
a large well-tasted Fish. The Mero, Dolphin, Shark, Lobsters, Mussels,
Periwinkles, and the Clacas, the best Fish in the World, which grow in the
Rocks, 5 or 6 under a Shell, through the Top of which they peep with their
Nebs. They have likewise a Fish with 7 Tails, each of which is a Span long
united to a short Body, and much resembling our Eel. They have besides these,
Turtles, and Cabridos, preferable before our Trouts.

The Island is full of Springs of pure Water like Milk, Springs.
which in Laguna they strain through a Basin made of a Spungy Stone.

Their Vines are very plentiful. Vines.


Customs of the Inha^ants.
Dr. Pugh, who had done some charitable Cures amongst the Ancient Inhabitants,
called Guanchios, was permitted to visit the Caves where the dead Bodies lie,
which are sewed up in Goats Skins, very curiously and close, with Thongs of the
same; which are more soft and pliable than our Kid's Skins: The Preserving of
Bodies thus by Embalming them, was a Custom of a Particular Tribe of Men, who
married only amongst themselves, and kept their Art of Embalming to themselves;
so that, upon the Conquest of the Spaniards, most of them being destroyed, the
Knowledge they retain of the Ingredients is by Tradition, which is that,

Of the Embalming of Bodies.
They boil in Butter of Goats Milk, which for that Purpose is preserved in the
Skins. 1st. A sort of Wild Lavender. 2ly, A Gummy Herb called Gara, which grows
on the Mountains. 3ly, A kind of Sow-Bread. 4ly, A Wild Sage, of which they
make a Balsam, and when their Bodies are Embowel'd, and several times washed in
a Lixivium of the Bark of Pine-Trees, and dried again either in the Sun in
Summer, or in a Stove in Winter; they then several times successively anoint
them with the Balsam, and dry them again, till they grow light, and the
musculous Parts appear through the shrievel'd Skin, and then they sew them up
in Goats Skins curiously dressed; but the Poorer sort having their Brains taken
out, are sewed up in Skins which have the Hair on.
They have above 20 whole Families of their Kings and great Persons, which they
will not discover. They are laid in several Postures; and some of them being
laid along on Beds of Wood so hardened, that Iron will not cut them. They also
have Earthen Pots so hardened, which they boil their Meat in; They make their
Knives and Lancets of a kind of Slate called Tabona.

Their Food.
Their Food is Barley roasted and ground betwixt two Stones, which they make into
Cakes with Milk and Honey, and carry it on their Backs in Goats Skins.

They drink no Wine; nor do they care for Flesh; But are Lean, Tall, very
Active and Courageous.

They will leap from one Rock to another, Activity.
sometimes Ten Fathom deep. Having a Lance which they point at the Place which
they design to light on and then when they leap, they clap their Feet to the
Lance, which Lance lighting on the Rock first, takes off the Violence of their
Fall: Novices often break their Necks in learning. They whistle so loud, they
may be heard 5 Miles; and it so affected the Relator's Ears, who was in Company
with one of them, that he could not hear well of 15 Days after. Besides, they
throw Stones with as much Force as a Bullet goes out of a Gun.

But to return to Mount Teneriff, by one that went to the Top; it was observed,
that no Snow was on the South side, and though it was on the North side, yet it
was not within two Miles of the lowest part of the Sugar Loaf.

He likewise observed, that though the Sack which they drank at the Top was
exceeding cold, and seemed to have no Effect on them; yet when they came into a
thicker Air, two of the Company were drunk.

Having tried to fire a Birding-Piece upon the Top of the Mountain, he could
not; the Company that gave the former Relation, say they did. The sulphurous
Matter they traveled over was so hot, that it burnt two or three pair of Pumps
in pieces in the Journey, though their Feet were not sensibly more hot than at
other times. In some Regions of the same Mountains it was very hot, and on the
other side of the same, very cold.

To what Depth the Water will be frozen in hard Winters. To what Depth the
Earth will be froze at the same time. Whether Muscovian Ice be harder than that
in England. Whether Liquor cast up, will freeze before it comes to the Ground.
Whether Brandy, Sack, etc. will freeze in Russia. Whether Instruments of Iron
or Steel be britler there than here. Of the cracking of Timber and the Causes
of it in Wooden Houses. Of the Preservation of Flesh, Fish, Herbs, etc. in hard
Weather. Of the curing of those whose Nose or Cheeks, etc. are frozen. Of the
Symptoms of those that are froze to death. Of the keeping of dead Bodies.
TITTLE XX. Of the Air in Reference to Light, it is Perspicuity, Opacity,
Reflections, Refractions, Colors, Light and Lightnings.
Of the Air in reference to Light, ctc.
I Am told by a Traveller, that on the Coast of Genoua, from a high Place he
could see Places remote, in a Morning, though not when the Sun was near the
Meridian.

The late King Charles the Second told me, that walking upon the Beack on the
Strand by Dover, he unexpectedly discerned a Coast, which had rising and
falling Ground, upon the Virge of the Horizon; and the same was observed by the
Courtiers that stood by him; but in a little time it disappeared again, as if
it had sunk into the Sea, which Phenomenon I attributed to this, viz. That
that Coast lying but a little too far off to be seen before, the Air interposed
betwixt His Majesty's Eye and the Shore, being filled with Vapors and
subterraneal Steams, was rendered more refractive than before, by the help of
which new Refraction, the French Coast which lay beyond it, was as if it were
lifted up, in reference to the sight, and so became visible as long as that new
Refraction lasted; but when those Steams were dissipated, they presently
disappeared: In favor of which Conjecture I alleged, that a piece of Gold
being laid in the Bottom of a Cup, and the Eye so placed, that the Object is
but just hid from it, upon pouring in Water, the Object will, without removing
the Eye, become visible. The Surface of the Water, which is a thicker Medium
than the Air, refracting the Rays, and changing them from a Perpendicular to an
inclined Position, so that they are caused to fall upon the Pupil.

The Duke of York told me, that he was not a little surpised in Scotland, that
contrary to the common Observation, by Country men in other Places, a Morning
in which the Sky was red, was succeeded with a fair Day, it being usual in
those Parts. It is observed, that when the Redness is pretty near the Ground,
and appears with narrow streaks intensly red, it signifies bad Weather; but if
it be elevated, and the Wind Easterly, it foretells a fair Day.

Capt. James in his Northern Voyage observed, that by Reason of these
Refractions, the Sun seemed to rise 20 Minutes too soon, and to set 20 Minutes
too late; and this he learned by calculating of it is rising and setting with
good running Glasses, and comparing that Calculation with the Stars when come
to their Meridian.

March. This Evening the Moon rose in the Form of an oblong Oval along the
Horizon. April. Though on a clear Sunshiny Day I could not see an Island which
lies but 4. Leagues off South-South-East, yet when the Weather was misty, it
might be seen from the lowest Place. The Height of it being taken
Instrumentally, standing near the Seaside, it was 34 Minutes, the Sun bing 28
Degrees high, which shows how great the Refraction was; yet it will not be
amiss to note here, that I have seen the Land elevated by Refractitious Air,
when the Sun has rose presently round. Jan. 6. The Latitude was 51, 52, which
Difference was occasioned by a greater Refraction. Jan. 21. The Sun rofe like
an Oval, seeming as long again as it was broad, but as it rose higher, it
gradually recovered it is roundness.
In Poland near Warsaw June, 1669/70 we had clear Weather, and extreme cold,
and for two Days we observed the Sun and two Parhelions, from near 10 to almost
12 a Clock, yet the Air was free from Clouds, and so clear, that we could
perceive Icy Spangles flying in it. And whereas usually in Frosty Weather, any
smooth Iron or rather Metal, being brought into a warm Room out of the open
Air, first a Dullness, and then drops of Water will appear in the Glass; at this
time there appeared something like a hoar Frost. Whether subtle Particles of
Cold will penetrate polished Metal or not, I will not determine, though the
sudden Adhesion of ones wet Finger to Iron, seems to favor the Affirmative.

The same Month returning back from Warsaw, I saw the Sun rife with a large
Pillar, colored like a Rainbow, perpendicular over it, out of a clear Horizon.

In Cornwall it was observed, that in driving home Levels or Links, the Waters
partaking of the Minerals, are sometimes sanative, and at other times cause
Wounds.

One who traveled over the Alps observed, that in the Clouds below, which
seemed big with Thunder, something moved up and down like a shining Fish in
muddy Water, the Lightning appearing through the Cloud. It has been observed
on the Coast at Naples, that in the Morning at Sun rising a Town which was at
some distance off, seemed to have two Steeples, though it really had but one in
it; and another Morning, the Refraction was so strong, that there seemed to be
a very fair Town beyond it, walled about; and adorned with Towers and Steeples
very delightful; which very Town disappeared when the Sun was rose higher above
the Horizon.

A dry blighting East Wind, which Country People call a red Wind, causes an
Opacity or Thickness of the Air, like Vapors, which continuing for two Years
together, not only blasted the Fruit, but the Leaves of the Trees just in the
Tender. Mr. J. T.

That the Air is sometimes Clear and Transparent, and sometimes darker and more
clogged with terrestrial Steams, is a common Observation. But it has been
sometimes observed in Russia, that in a clear frosty Air, the Stars have
appeared to be much more Numerous than at other times.

Captain James has observed, in Charlton Islands, which, though of the same
Latitude with Cambridge almost, is but little warmer than Nova Zembla; that in
January the Firmament appeared fuller of Stars by two Thirds than before; The
Cloud in Cancer appearing full of Stars, and a great many small ones amongst
the Pleiades: But the Moon rising about Ten a Clock, a quarter of them was not
to be seen; the Wind for most part of the Month being Northerly and very cold:
And the like has been observed by the Russian Emperor's Physician.

The Duke of York, when he was High Commissioner in Scotland, sent me word that
he had observed the Sky so clear, that the Stars afforded Light enough to read
by; and that several Fleaks of Light extended themselves from the Horizon, like
so many Tails of Blazing Stars; and passing betwixt Charles's Wain and the
North Star, seemed to terminate over our Heads: This was observed in December.

TITLE XXI. Of the Operation of the Air on the Consistency of Animal Substances.
The Effects of Air on Animal Substances.
IT is generally believed by those, that judge of things by their Senses, that
since the Air is an invisible Body, it acts only upon others, by it is manifest
Qualites, viz. Heat and Moisture: But I am apt to believe, that it has other
Faculties, amongst which, some may be called Generative and Restorative, and
others Corruptive; and that not only in respect of Animals, and other Bodies of
a slighter Texture, but also of Salts and Minerals.

It has been observed, that when Cheshire Cheeses have been carried from hence
to the East Indies, without being kept in leaden Boxes fitted to them; those
that have been cut under the Line, were dry on the outside, but unctuous and
soft in the Middle, as if all the oily Parts wanting in the outside, were
shrunk back thither. But those that were cut when they had passed the Torrid
Zone, and came into the Temperate Zone, were uniform and good enough.

It is observed, that in Peru as well as Egypt, where it seldom rains, that
Bodies are not subject to corrupt. In the Country last mentioned it is likewise
observed, that the Air abounds with Nitre.

It has been observed, that under the Line, not only Biskets have been
altered, but that most of the Meat, and even Salt Meat has been much impaired;
but that their Water which was fresh, would be as clear and sweet as when first
put into the Casks.

Silk Stuffs that have been brought to Jamaica, I am told, have rotted without
losing their Color, by being exposed to the Air.

TITLE XXII. Of the Operation of the Air on the Consistency of vegetable
Substances.
The Effects of the Air on consistent Bodies.
A Piece of Limon having been kept a Year and some Months in a Receiver, with a
mercurial Gage; it kept it is Color pretty well, as well as it is shapes,
except, that, the upper side was a little depressed, the Liquor which filled it
up before stagnating upon a Glass Plate, which was adapted to the Receiver.
When the Receiver was opened, the external Air rushed in with a considerable
Noise; whence it was evident, that all the Air the Limon had yielded in that
time, was not sufficient to fill the Cavity of the Receiver. Neither the Limon
nor the Juice were moldy or ill tasted; so that it made me think, that
Mouldiness cannot be well produced without a Concurrence of the Air. The Liquor
was acid, but clear and without Faeces, being of a Color betwixt brown and
red: It turned Syrup of Violets into a Purple Color, and corroded Fragments of
red Coral in the Cold.

It has been observed, that Lozenges, which a Scholar frequently carried in
his Pockets, were dissolved when he came near the Line; but recovered their old
Consistence, when much past it.

TITLE XXIII. Of the Operation of the Air on consistent mineral Substances.
The Effects of the Air on mineral Substances.
IN drawing Copper out of deep Mines in Sweedland, I am informed, they use Ropes
made of Leather, Links of Iron being subject to break with the Coldness of the
Air and the Weight of the Ore.

It has been observed, that Glasses kept half a Year, though well neal'd, have
broke in pieces, and froze of themselves; the Cracks partly depending on some
Particles of Salt, which had not undergone a sufficient Comminution.

I am told, there is a House in Suffolk near the Sea, in which, though it is but
8 Years old, the Iron Bars are swelled, and so rotten that they will crimble
away; The Winds which blew upon those Windows in which they were being
Southward; and I am likewise told, that Iron Bars drenched in Sea Water, and
after exposed to the Air, were so far impaired, that when hammered, great
Flakes would fly off them.

Purbeck and Blechington-stone will moulder away in the Air; But those dug up
at Painswick, near Gloucester, will, by being exposed to the Air, change their
Primary Softness for a Crusthard and Glassy Marble, which penetrates but a
little way into it is Substance, but is generated sooner, the oftener it is
washed.

TITLE XXIV. Of the Air in reference to Fire and Flame.
CAndles which burn in Grooves furnished with Air Shafts, will sometimes
continue burning 8 Fathom deep or more. When they come into close Ground, though
Candles will burn for a while, yet when the Dust rises, they go out.

Experiments touching the Relation betwixt Flame and Air.
THE burning of Candles, etc. under a Glass Bell, as also Spirit of Wine,
Matches, Touch-Wood, Sponck, etc. The keeping of Animals under a Glass Bell,
whilst the Flame is burning.

The burning of Bodies to Ashes in sealed Glasses, as also in exactly closed
Receivers; Cotton burnt in a sealed Glass.

The burning of a Mixture of Flames under Water in an E. R. as also of a saline
Substance, and likewise of Salt Petre.

A Pistol not firing in an E. R. An Experiment of burning Gunpowder.

The burning of Spirit of Wine and Oil of Turpentine in Glass Vessels with
slender Necks.

TITLE XXV. Of the Air in reference to Fermentation.
Of the Air in reference to Fermentation:
RAisins being enclosed in an exhausted Bolthead half full of Water, and set on
a digestive Furnace, presently began to ferment; and swimming upon the Liquor
afforded Bubbles, which were gradually fewer; and at last a Sediment appeard in
the Bottom. The Top of the Bottle being accidentally broke, the External Air
rushed in with some Noise, and the Surface of the Liquor was covered with Froth
like Bottle Drink, and I thought I perceived a visible Fume come out of the
Glass, which had a Languid Smell. The Liquor had a high Tincture of the
Raisins, and was of a better Consistence than that of Water.

TITLE XXVI. Of the Air as the Receptacle of Odours. TITLE XXVII. Of the
Operation of the Air on the Odours of Animal Substances.
Of the Effects of Air on Odours.
SOur Grapes having lain 3 Years in Vacuo, were not moldy; but the Surface of
the uppermost was discolored with a Tartarous Efflorescence. The Grains had a
musty Smell; but the Liquor tasted Acid, and would corrode Coral in the Cold.
The Gage scarce discovered any Air produced.

In Madrid I am told, though they throw their Excrements into the Streets in the
Night, yet the stink is not very much the next Day; nor will dead Animals stink
long there.

TITLE XXVIII. Of the Operation of the Air on the Odours of vegetable
Substances.
LArge Pieces of Oranges having been three Years included in Vacuo, their Rinds
were, on their Surface, almost black; they yielded very little Liquor; being
neither moldy nor putrid.

TITLE XXIX. Of the Operations of Air on the Odours of Mineral Substances.
TITLE XXX. Of the Operation of Air on the Tastes of Animal Substances.
MR. Nickson told me, that Meat might be preserved in frosty Weather, all
Winter without Salt; but, if dressed when froze, would not relish well.

TITLE XXXI. Of the Operation of Air on the Tastes of Vegetable Substances.
TITLE XXXII. Of the Operation of the Air on the Tastes of Mineral Substances.
TITLE XXXIII. Of the Operation of the Air on the Colors of Animal Substances.
Of the Effects of Air on Colors.
THE Air influences Colors so much on black Taffety, that in Brasil, after it
has been worn a few days, it becomes of an Ironish Color; but if it be kept
from the Air, the Color fades not.

In a Particular Region in Brazil, 50 Leagues beyond Parigna, White People turn
Tawny; but a little beyond that, they recover their Color again.

Upon Charlton Island, there is a sort of Birds called Partridges, which are
white in the Winter, and gray in the Summer.

TITLE XXXIV. Of the Operation of the Air on the Colors of Vegetable
Substances.
I Am told, that most Trees in Jamaica acquire a Greenness, when newly cut
down, on that Part which is most exposed to the Air; and that Lignum Vitae,
when green, is as soft as Oak. Several Trees which are soft when cut down,
afterward grow hard; especially the Cabbage-Tree, which presently hardens, and
the Pith rotting out, it serves for a Pipe about 100 Foot long, which will not
corrupt under Ground, but grows as hard as Iron.

The Juice of Aloes Plants, which in the Island of St. Jago was clammy, bitter,
and of a dark Color; under the Line lost it is Bitterness, and acquired a green
Color.

Stains are most easily got out of Linen, at those times of the Year, when the
Fruit with which they were stained flourish.

TITLE XXXV. Of the Operation of the Air on Mineral Substances.
ONE Part of Lapis Calaminaris being mixed with four of Saltpeter, was kept
some hours in a vehement Heat in a Crucible, by which means the Matter being
alkaliz'd, Water was poured upon it, which made a muddy red Tincture; which
being set in a Wide-mouthed Glass in a Window, it became green and more
diaphanous than before; but in a few Days, it became a transparent Liquor, a
Powder subsiding which was red like Brick-dust.

Spirit of Vinegar received no Tincture from Copper boiled in it; but being
exposed to the Air in a broad Glass, in which part of the Filings were not
covered with the Menstruum, some acquired a greenish blew Color; but those
Filings which were quite covered with the Menstruum, acquired no such Color,
till by evaporating it, they were exposed to the Air.

A Solution of Sal Armoniack in Water, being poured on Filings of Copper,
contained in a slender Viol, and on another parcel contained in a Wide-mouthed
Glass, that in the latter was much more tinged than the other; And what was
remarkable was, that though the lower Part of the Solution was of a deep Blew,
yet it was covered with a Film of a differing Blew, like that of the finer sort
of Turcoices.

Three Drops of Spr. Sal Armon. being put upon two distinct parcels of Filings
of Copper, which were on two pieces of brown Paper; one was exposed to the Air,
and the other shut up in Vacuo; that in the open Air tinged the Paper with a
Blew, the other remained of an hour without any Effect; but when it had been
exposed to the Air as the other, it tinged it Blew.

A yellow Urinous Spirit of the Lees of Wine, having Filings of Copper thrown
into it, drew from them a pleasant green Tincture, which in a few days became
yellow; but by being exposed to the Air, it turned green again; yet regained
it is Yellowness when it had been shut up for some time. I have sometimes
observed, that though by being, kept from the Air, this Tincture would lose it is
Greenness, yet it would sometimes renew it again, without being exposed to the
outward Air.

Spirit of Amber extracted a green Color from Filings of Copper. And though
Spirit of Honey uses to turn Blew, when exposed to the Air, yet this Evening it
continued yellow an hour. And I have observed, that though a Tincture often
varied it is Color, being sometimes Colorless, and at other times of a deep
Blew, yet another Bottle, which contained the same Mixture, did not so.

It has been observed about a Mountain in Wales, that there are several
Stones, which though of a Rusty dark Color, yet when exposed to the Air, in a
few years they become white.

Mercurius Sublimatus Dulcis and Vitriolum Romanum, being kept in Papers apart
near two Years, the Sublimate looked like Antimony, and the Superficies of the
Vitriol had acquired the same Color.

TITLE XXXVI. Of the Air destroying or introducing other less obvious Qualities
into Animal Substances. TITLE XXXVII. Of the Air destroying or introducing
other less obvious Qualities into Vegetable Substances.
The Effects of the Air in producing Putrefaction.
THE Heat and Moisture of the Air in Guinea, has been observed so much to
promote Putrefaction, that Maggots were found in white Sugar; several Drugs
have lost their Virtues; and Ointments became verminous: And in the Island St.
Jago, the sweet Meats contracted such a Moisture in one Night, that they were
forced to dry them in the Sun.

The Oxford Air being generally moist, agrees not with splenetick Bodies. Mr.
J. T.

Air too dry, though hot, produces not diverse Insects, such as white Snails and
Fleas, which are bred in wet Summers.

TITLE XXXVIII. Of the Air destroying or introducing other less obvious
Qualities into Mineral Substances.
Less obvious Qualities introduced into Minerals.
OBservandum etiam quod Antimonium Diaphoreticum quocunque modo, sive cum solo
Nitro aut addito etiam Tartaro, paratum sit, tractu Temporis Aeri expositum,
pravam ac quasi malignam induat Naturam, sumptumque intra, Cordis and
angustias, Cardialgias, Lipothymias, vomitusque similia prava symptomata
procreet, quae facile tamen evitabimus, si vel singulis diebus vel tribus
Mensibus recenter illud conficiamus, vel jam paratum Antimonium Diaphoreticum
vetustum, addita portiuncula Nitri, aut etiam absque Nitro per unam vel alteram
horam, Vulcano tradamus penitusque igniamus, iterumque si Nitrum additum
fuerit, edulcoremus, and parumper reverberemus. Zwelf. p. 800.

The Earth of Egypt preserved dry, at the 17th of June begins to increase it is
Weight, which still increases more as the River augments.

Ceruss of Antimony, I am told, as well as Ant. Diaphoret. acquired a vomitive
Quality, tho kept in a stopped Glass long.

Those Pots which are made of Earth, which has lain 4 or 5 Years dry, bear
Fire best; and it is observed, that those Bricks which lie at the Tops of
Brick-kills, bear Weather worst, being not so well burnt as the others.

TITLE XXIX. Of the Air in reference to the Propagation and Vegetation of
Plants.
The Effects of the Air in respect of generation.
IT has been observed, that that side of the Pyrenean Mountains, which respects
France, is flourishing and verdant, though at the same time, the other side which
respects Spain, is barren, and looks dismally, being blasted and parched with
noxious Winds.

TITLE XL. Of the Effects of the Air in Reference to the Generation, Life and
Health of Animals.
The Effects of the Air in respect of Generation.
DE vita igitur ac morte, and iis pene omnibus quae huic considerationi affinia
sunt, dictum est. De sanitate vero morboque non solum Medici, sed and Physici
est, causas quadantenus refer. Quatenus vero hi differant, and quatenus
diversa contemplantur ignorare non convenit. Equidem quod confinis sit
quadantenus haec Medici Physicique Tractatio, and res ipsa testatur. Nam and
Medici, quicunque paulo elegantiores and diligentiores sunt, de natura dicunt,
and artis sua principia inde sumere dignantur; and Physici omnes fere, qui
concinnitatis aliquid habent, tractationem naturae usque ad medicinam
persequuntur. Aristot. de Respirat. cap. 21. and parag. 87.

The Temperature of the Air depends on subterraneal and terrestrial Steams
mixed with the Air, and shuffled amongst one another.

The last great Plague was foretold by one who had a great Swelling in his
Groin the Year before, the like having happened to the same Man once before.

That there are Changes in the Air which depend on the Motion of it barely, I
am persuaded, not only because it ventilates those places it passes through
when in Motion, and drives away stagnant Air; but I am told that in Languedoc,
that if, when the Silkworms had eaten their fill, it happened to Thunder, the
Air being put into a disturbed Motion, the weakest of them would die.

Several Horses being let down a third part of the way into Mines 1000 Foot
deep, some of them died; but others survived, and were there employed without
any inconveniency to Respiration, though the Receptacles they wrought in were
furnished with Air, only from the Groove by a moderately big Shaft: I am told,
the deepest Mine in Bohemia is 2000 Foot deep.

I am informed by one who lived at Tripoli and Guinea, that the Air is not
constantly unhealthful there, but that the Men are sometimes suddenly taken
with Fluxes and Fevers, which frequently kills in 48 hours.

The Air in Russia in the Winter when the North Wind blows, is too thick for
Respiration; And I am likewise informed, that when our Europaeans pass the
Line, all the Lice about them ascend into their Heads, but disperse themselves
again when they have passed the Equator a good way; but they usually die under
the Equator.

It it observed, that in Scotland Agues are very rare, though at the same time
they are very rife in England.

Aer autem corrigitur causa corruptionis ablata, and quod jam inductum est mali
extinguendo; Roderici Fonf. de Sanit tuend. page 105, 106.
si igitur ex nimio humore Aer putrescit, ignibus accensis qui omni putredini
remedio sunt, exsiccandus, sic ignes, per vias and domus fiant ex odoratis
plantis, qualis Laurus est, Mirtus, Pinus, Cupressus, Rosmarinus, and reliquae
ejus generis, qua ratione pestem Athenis Hippocrates extinxit; vapores
praeterea maligni per Aerem sparsi, dissipandi sunt, id quod a magnis ventis
fieri solet. Sic Olysiponi, cum trium dierum ingens procella venisset pestis
extincta nuper est; in Maroco ingens pestilentia vento quodam evanuit; qui
veluti e furnace (adeo calidus erat) exire videbatur, Aerem autem nos imitando
ventos commovere poterimus, si bombardarum strepitus fieri curemus; si vero
vapores ex paludibus, ac stagnantibus aquis fieri videntur; eas resiccare aut
novare oportet frequenter, maxim per aestatem. Renovantur autem novis
supervenientibus aquis quas e fluminibus per canales traducere oportet; aut
siccandae sunt factis rivulis, and fossis per quae superfluant ad flumina; quod
cum primus magnus Etruriae Dux Cosmus Pisis fecisset, and magna animi
contentione, tunc faciat Ferdinandus, factum est, ut saluberrimus ejus urbis
Aer per omne anni tempus sit redditiis; verum si cadaverum inhumatorum
multitudo Aerem inficit; magna and profunda facta fovea sepeliantur, si ab
immunditie, and excrementis, quae per urbem domos sparguntur, id quod, ut reor
Bisantii, and Olysiponi, in causa ect, cur pestis adeo saeviat, ac duret,
mundare oportet omnia; viae ac domus quotidie, vel saltem semel in septimana
repurgandae.

1. Joh. Beguinus in Tyrocin. Chimic. lib. 2. cap. 13. Dignum admiratione est,
quod quamvis in vicinia Hydriae Comitatus Goriciensis, ubi reperitur copiose
Mercurius, singulis fere annis Lues pestifera grassatur, illa tamen semper
immunis ab hac manner soleat, idque viri provectae aetatis se observasse, and a
majoribus suis accepisse, mihi sancte confirmarunt. Hinc patet, Mercurium esse
summum omnis putredinis ac corruptionis alexipharmacum. 2 Michael Majerus in
lusu de Mercurio. Argentum vivum est plurimorum morborum alexipharmacum, and ut
testantur quidam, ipsius Pestis (cum eo loco ubi Mercurius effoditur, and
tractatur, nunquam aut rarissime hoc Contagium grassetur) dummodo maneat in sua
propria natura, and non a salibus aut aquis corrosivis inficiatur, ac venenosus
reddatur.

Several Clove Trees growing in the Island of Ternate, in the East Indies,
after they were all cut down, it was very unhealthful, the Exhalations from
them being wanting to correct the noxious Steams of a neighboring Vulcan. So
that though the Inhabitants of Batavia formerly resorted thither for Health's
sake, they now are some of them forced to go to supply the Deficiency of men,
which the Unhealthiness of the Place makes, to supply their Garrisons.

It is observed at Tangier, that new Comers are usually feverish for some time,
especially if the East Wind blows.

Several Ants included in a Receiver, ran about till it was exhausted, and then
lay as dead, but recovered when Air was let in again, two or three times
successively.

Relatione della Provincia di Malavar. page 64 and 65.
Si Patrono queste barche dalla costa della pescaria, e vanno all isola di
Ceilam, nella costa della quale per la lunghezza di venti miglia, tree sole
miglia lontane da terra, set braccia abbasso arrivando sino alli dieci nel
fondo, si ritrova infinita quanta di madreperle, escono per questa pesca le
barche la matina col vento di terra, and arrivando al posto delle madreperle,
gettare l'ancore, e fermaresi in quel posto, cominciano a tuftarsi nel mare i
marinari, de quali ogni barca ne ha quindeci, e venti, e ciascuno di essisi
lega nel mezzo, con una fuc, della quale ha cura uno, che resta in barca e con
un' altra fune legandosi una pietra alla gamba, un' altro ha pure cura di
quella, e cingendosi un' sacco di cuoio dinanzi, mettendosi le guante all
mani, cosi legato si tufta con violenza nel mare, lentando quelli le funi, e
col peso della Pietra, va con grandiss' violenza giu, and arrivato ch' e,
scioltasi dalla gamba quella fune, con la quale sta legata la pietra, resta
egli libero, and la pietra viene subito tirata soprada quello, che n' ha cura,
et il marinaro poi comincia con molta sollecitudine a pigliare quelle
madreperle, che li vengono dinanzi, e le met nel sacco, e sentendosi mancare
la respiratione, tocca la fune, con la quale sta legato nel mezzo, e quello
subito con grandiss' velocita lo tira et arrivando nella barca, scaricando le
madre perle ripiglia fiato, e dopo torna a legarsi di nuovo la pietra, e
dinuovo si tufta come sopra's 'e detto, e sempre cosi per tutta la giornata. Et
e tanto faticosa questa pesca, eh' essendo, tanto profunde le Madre perl nel
mare, molti mancando loro la respiratione si trovano affogati.

In the Island Johanna it is observed, that if a Stranger lies all Night there,
he will die of a Putrid Fever in a few days; but though they go but a Mile upon
the Sea every night in a Boat, they are generally safe. The Island is very hot
in the Day, but cold after Sunset; and it is supposed, that the
Unhealthfulness of the Place depends on Exhalations which plentifully arise
from a vast Number of Plants that grow in the Island, which being condensed at
Night, infect the Mass of Blood. There is one Hill in the Island very high,
which is seldom ever free from Fogs or Clouds, which vary in their Height
according as the Weather alters.

On the Coast of Cormandel, and most Maritime Places of the East Indies, there
are sometimes such Fogs, that the Inhabitants for the time, are forced to keep
the Windows and Doors of their Houses fast shut, there being at those times
little or no commerce, though the Weather is very hot.

At Balassore in the Bay of Bengale, and other Places of that Country, after
great Raius the Air is so much corrupted, that the Smell is very nauseous to
the Inhabitants, which may be occasioned by a great number of Frogs, left on
dry places after Inundations, and putrified by the Heat of the Sun. At that
time there is great Mortality amongst the Natives, chiefly by violent Fevers.

When sick People are set on shore at St. Helena, they are generally much
better in a few days, though before they were very weak.

Le chemin plus court de Mosul a Bagdad, est par la Mesopotamie; mais on n'y
trouve aucun Village, and le Samiel y regne tout l'Ete depuis Mosul jusques a
Sourat; ce qui oblige a prendre l'eau, sur le Tigre ou ce vent ne Soussle
point. Le nom de ce vent et compose des mots, Sam et jel, c'est a dire poison
et vent comme qui diroit vent de poison, Ce pourroit etre le vent urens, dom
parle Job xxvii. 21. Lorsque quelqu'un a respire ce vent, il tomb mort
subitement quoi qu' il en ait quelques uns qui ont le temps de dire qu' ils
brulent au dedans. D' abord qu' on est mort, on devient tout noir, et si on
tire le mort par le bras ou par la jambe ou par un autre endroit la chair quite
les os et rest enter les mains de ceux qui la touchent. Thevenot dans le
Bibliotheque Vniversel Tom. xiii. p. 266.

Dr. Collins told me, that in Muscovy their Horses are subject to a very foul
Disease, from which they defend them by keeping Goats in their Stables.

The Plague generally at Smyrna, but especially Aleppo, at the End of June, or
the beginning of July, degenerates into other Distempers, the infectious
Particles of the Air, then being dissipated, and deprived of their pernicious
Qualities. For a like Reason the Offensive Smoke of a Candle being further
rarifi'd by the Application of Smoke, loses it is ill Scent and other ill
Qualities; besides, it may be further offered, that the Heat of the Summer, may
raise other saline Effluvia from the Earth, which mixing with the former, may
correct and alter their infectious Qualities. And as for the Reason why the
same does not happen at other places as well as Smyrna, it may be answered,
that the Concurrence of Causes may be the Reason of the Difference, since some
Soils may emit Pestilential Vapors with a slight Heat, which others may
correct when raised by a greater; for a like Reason to which, the Plague in
Grand Cairo ceases, the Earth, upon the swelling of the River Nile, emitting
Nitrous Vapors, which correct the Pestilential ones.

To show, that the Qualities of the Air may be very much altered by the
supervening Coldness or Heat of it, I shall allege the following Experiment,
viz. That equal parts of Alum and Nitre, being dissolved in the same Portion
of Water, when the Liquor was pretty well evaporated, and an earthen Vessel
which contained it, was set in the Cold, the Alum was first coagulated into
several octoedrical Grains, and upon a further Evaporation, at the last the
Nitre shot into very fine little Crystals, of a Figure natural to such Salts.
From whence we may conjecture, that several Salts which act jointly, may be so
separated by supervening Qualities in the Air, as to act separately.

A Mouse lived ten Minutes with a Quarter of Air, and three afterward.

TITLE XLI. Of Heavy Bodies sustained in, or taken up into the Air. TITLE XLII.
Of Dew. TITLE XLIII. Of Rain.
IT has been observed, in the Country of Campen, that Rain falling into Pits,
which were dug to a sort of Quicksand, would in a little time form a Clay,
which skilfully handled, would yield good Iron. The Waters in that Country are
obser'd to leave a strong Matter at the Bottom when distilled, notwithstanding
the Rectification.

Quicquid erit, sine fuco significat, velut Rottenburg, L. 1. c. 8. De mont.
Bohemtae, p. 26. A Milessow monte temporum praesagia capiuntur.
Silesiae compastum appellant, perinde Milessow Temporum prognostes, jure
merito dici potest. Vidi ex proximo totum aliquando Montem densissimis Nebulis
contectum, ea prorsus Imagine, qua Mons Sinai Moyse in Nebula latente
depingitur, at caeteri circum Montes, innubes and hilares velut rerum
gerendarum ignari stabant. Sol ipse formosissimus ibat; at accolae locorum
domum fugiebant, pecora urgebant, meque, ut domum protinus reciperem,
properarem, and equos currum trahentes concitari juberem monebant, neque horae
quadrans intercessit, jam Coelum obduci, Sol contegi, cripi omnis aspectus.

Immensum Coelo ruit agmen aquarum
-- ruit arduus Ether, Virg.

Et Pluvia ingenti sata letae, boumque Labores.
Diluit, implentur fossae, and quae Divinus Poeta prosequitur. At contra etiam
accidere vidi, ut caeteri fumarint Montes, Milessow nihil se commovente, nihil
aut Nubilum, aut turbidum minanse; Incolae rogati, nihil esse magnopere
timendum a caeteris spondebant, hunc unum intuendum esse, horum Nubila omnia a
Milessow quodammodo devorari.

TITLE XLIV. Of Hail.
ON cerit de l'Isle en Flandres le 25 May; style nouveau, qu'il tomb dans
cette ville la une graisle dout les moindres grains estoient comme des oeufs de
Pigeon. Cet orage a pass sur la Citadelle and la ville, and na pas laisse une
vitre entiere du cost du vent: les maisons sont toutes decouvertes, and les
arbres rompus, les bleds coupez, and les perdrix and les lieures morts. On a
pese plusieurs grains de cette graisle, dout les uns estoient d'un quarteron,
de d emi livre, de trois quarterons, et les plus gros d'une livre and
d'avantage. Il y en avoit un entr' autres qui avoit dans le milieu une espece
de matiere brune qu'ou mit dans le feu, qui fit fair un grand bruit. Il y en
avoit un, qui estoit diaphane, lequel estant mis aupres du feu, fondit tout
aussi tossed comme du plomb, quoy qu'il fut beaucoup plus dur que les autres.

TITLE XLV. Of Snow.
TITLE XLVI. Of other things falling out of Air.
EO ipso anno quo Dux Eboracensis postremo rediit e Scotia Londinum, depluere
tanta copia pisciculi halecibus color, figura, sapore quam simillimi in
superiori Gallocidiae in Scotia part non procul a mari, ut duo terrae jugera
ad Robertum Murray de Brughton equitem pertinentia nunc Londini, ut audio,
degentem, cooperuerint. Rem autem totam serenissimo Duci Eboracensi prius de
eadem ab eo interrogatus, quod tum certior aliis de hac pluvia factus esset,
tanquam testis oculatus, ut qui aliquos horum pisciculorum videram, confirmavi:
is porro ingeniosissime, summaque very specie nodum ita solvit, ut diceret hos
pisciculos una cum aquis furentium ventorum gyro in turbinem actis evectos esse
nubes, e quibus non procul inde pondere rursus suo relapsi fuerint in vicinam
terram.

TITLE XLVII.
Promiscuous Experiments and Observations of the Air.

TITLE XLVIII.
Desiderata in the History of the Air, and Proposals toward supplying them.

THE WORKS Of the HONORABLE ROBERT BOIL Esquire EPITOMIZED.
BOOK IV.
CHAP. I. Experiments and Observations about the Mechanical Production of
Tastes.
THAT Taste, which is Quality of a Body, by which it is enabled to cause such a
Sensation upon our Sensory, may be caused, by the Peculiar Size, Shape, Motion,
and mechanical Texture of a Body will appear from the following Instances,
whether they be simple or compound Bodies.

EXPERIMENT I. To divide a Body almost Insipid, in two Bodies of very strong
and very different Tastes
Two Corrosives obtained from an insipid Body.
SAlt Petre refined, though almost an Insipid Body, distilled by the way of
Inflammation, or by the Help and Addition of a Tastless Clay, will yield a
nitrous Spirit, so sharp and corrosive, that it will dissolve Metals; and a
corrosive fixed Salt, different in Taste from the former, and this will dissolve
Substances that the other will not work upon, and precipitate several Metals,
and other Concretes, out of those Solutions, made of them by the Spirit.

EXPERIMENT II. Of two Bodies, The one highly Acid and Corrosive, and the other
Alkalizate and Fiery, to produce a Body almost insipid.
An insipid Body produced from two Cirrosives.
IF a sufficient Quantity of Spirit of Nitre, be dropped upon the fixed Nitre
made per Deliquium till it is satiated, upon a gentle Evaporation, it will
afford a Salt Petre; and I have often obtained the like from Spirit of Nitre
and Salt Petre, which new Taste I am apt to believe proceeds from the new
Figure and Size of the component Parts, which they acquire upon a mutual
Attrition in the Preparation. For as the Prismatical Figure of Salt of Nitre,
by being broke and rendered more minute, may have a more free Access to the
Organ of Taste, and by it is new figured Angles be able to corrode it; these
again uniting and forming Prisms may become as inoffensive to the Taste as
before. So Wedges may be made of a piece of Iron, and those again united after
a convenient Manner, may form blunt pieces of Iron again, and though a Stick cut
in two, be inoffensive enough to the Hand, yet if violently broken, the ragged
Ends will be apt to prick into the Flesh.

EXPERIMENT III. Of two Bodies, the one very bitter, and the other extremely
salt, to make an insipid Substance.
An Insipid obtained from a bitter and saline Body.
IF strong Brine made of Salt and Water, be cast upon Crystals of Silver
dissolved in Aq. Fort. or Spirit of Nitre, the dried Mixture being brought to
Fusion in a Crucible, and kept in that state a competent time, will afford a
tough Luna Cornea insipid, which will not easily dissolve in more powerful
Menstruums than Spittle.

PROPOSITION IV. Of two Bodies, the one very sweet, and the other salter than
Brine, to obtain an insipid Mixture.
An Insipid obtained from a sweet and a salt Body.
IF a just Proportion of Spirit Sal Armon. or Urine, be cautiously poured on a
Solution of Minium in Vinegar or Saccharum Saturni dissolved in a proper
Menstruum, if the Taste be not destroyed by the Mixture, it will by being dried
and flux'd as in the foregoing Experiment.

EXPERIMENT V. Of an Insipid and Sour one, to make a Substance more bitter
than Aloes.
A Bitter obtained from an insipid and a sour Body.
WHich is done by dissolving a sufficient Quantity of Silver in Aq. Fortis, to
satiate the Menstruum; which if it be filtrated, and it is superfluous Moisture
abstracted, it will yield Crystals more bitter; and no wonder, since if one
touch the Powder of the Crystals with ones Finger or Nail, it would so stain
them, that it cannot easily be removed.

EXPERIMENT VI. Of an insipid Body and a highly corrosive one, to make a
Substance as sweet as Sugar.
A sweet Body obtained from a corrosive and an insipid.
IF good Aq. Fortis be put upon Minium, and kept together in a gentle Heat, till
the Menstruum is satiated, it will be as sweet as Saccharum Saturni, but the
Ingredients must be both good.

EXPERIMENT VII. Of obtaining without Addition from the sweetest Bodies,
Liquors corrosive enough to dissolve Bodies.
A corrosive obtained from a sweet Body.
SUgar distilled in a Retort, will yield a red Spirit, which being rectified,
will come over clear and colorless; And the Caput mortuum will be altogether
insipid; The Spirit is of a very penetrant Taste, and though taken to be a
homogeneous Body, yet I have found it to consist of two Spirits, one of which
would dissolve Copper; Yet these sour Spirits being incorporated with Minium,
would acquire a saccharine Sweetness, part of which they will dissolve in
Digestion. And a like Spirit to this may be obtained from Honey.

EXPERIMENT VIII. To divide a Body, bitter in the highest Degree, into two
Substances, the one extremely sour, and the other perfectly insipid.
A sour and an insipid obtained from a bitter Substance.
THis is done by distilling Crystals of Luna in a Retort, with a strong fire in
a Sand Furnace; by this means the Spirits being driven away, unite into an Acid
corrosive Menstruums, leaving an insipid Substance behind them.

EXPERIMENT IX. To produce Variety of Tastes in one insipid Body, by
associating it with diverse Menstruums.
Diverse Tastes produced in an insipid.
IF Zinke be dissolved in Aq. Fortis, Aq. Regis, Oil of Vitriol, Spirit of
Nitre, Spirit of Salt, distilled Vinegar, Spirit of Sal Armon. or of Urine, it
will, by a Conjunction with those sapid Bodies, so alter their Textures as to
produce a different Alteration in the Tastes of each.

EXPERIMENT X. To produce Variety of Tastes with one Memstruum, by associating
it with insipid Bodies.
Various Tastes caused by an insipid.
AQua Fortis with refined Silver will produce a Bitter; with Lead, a saccharine
sweet Taste; with Tin, a different Taste, though not odious; with Copper, an
abominable Taste; with Mercury and Iron, bad Tastes of different kinds. It will
likewise produce different Tastes with Tin, Glass, Antimony, Brass, Emery and
Zinke.

EXPERIMENT XI. Of two Liquors, the one highly corrosive, and the other very
pungent and not pleasant, to compose a Body of a pleasant and Aromatic Taste.
An Aromatic obtained from two corrosives.
MIX gradually an Ounce of good Aq. Fortis or Spirit of Nitre, with an equal
Quantity of inflammable Spirit of Wine; and when they are well mixed and grown
cold again, if they be distilled over together, they yield an acid corrosive
Spirit of a vinous Taste and a pleasing Smell.

EXPERIMENT XII. To imitate by Art, and sometimes even in Minerals, the
peculiar Tastes of natural Bodies, and even Vegetables.
natural Tastes Artificially imitated.
WHatever is the Plastic Agent in the formation of Bodies of each distinct
Species, to show that the Nature of them depends on Mechanical Principles, I
endeavored to imitate natural Tastes Artificially.

Endeavoring to alter the Taste, Smell, etc. of Oil of Vitriol and Spirit of
Nitre, I obtained a Liquor, which though at the first pleasant, would at a
certain point of time taste like Garlic. And it has been observed, that
Mustard Seed put into Cider to give it a brisk Taste, made it stink like
Garlic: And Semen Dauci fermented with Beer or Ale made it relish of
Limon-Pills.

If Gold be dissolved in a Mixture of Aqua Fortis and Spirit of Salt, and the
Experiment be made hastily, one may obtain a Solution or a Salt of an Austere
Taste like Slows. And the like Taste I have observed in Gold volatilized; or
dissolved without any Tincture at all.

The last Instance I shall make use of, is this; Take a j of Orris Root sliced,
and infuse it in a Pint of Canary or Malaga Sack, till it has given it the
desired Taste and Smell, and then keep it in a cool place.

The same Method being taken with Claret Wine and Cochinele, the Tincture was
taken for good Rasberry-Wine, some of which retained it is Taste 2 or 3 Years.

A short Excursion about some Changes of Tastes made by Maturation.
Tastes produced by Maturation.
THAT several Fruits after they are gathered, acquire a greater degree of
Maturity, after they are separated from having any communion with the Soul of
the Tree, is beyond doubt, since it is not only observed in England, that
Apples, and Medlars become Mellow after they are gathered; but the Fruit called
Bananas in the East Indies, are gathered green, and hung up to acquire a
greater degree of Maturity, and to ripen by degrees, and thereby undergo a
Change both in Color and Taste, and this I am told, has been often found true
in America.

And that the Texture and Consistence of Fruits may be much altered and varied
by the Influence of outward Agents, mechanically working upon them, is evident
in Cherries, which undergo a sensible Alteration by a small Bruise, by which
the Parts are forced to work one upon another; and another Instance we have in
Wardens set to roast in the Ashes. And I have seen a sort of Pears betwixt
France and Savoy, which being stewed a while in a moderate Heat, would be
reduced to a juicy Substance of a lovely red Color, and very sweet and
luscious to the Taste; And some Pears by a moderate Compressure will lose their
hardness, and acquire a yielding Contexture and a pleasant Taste.

But not only vegetable, but more stubborn Salts may be altered by an intestin
Motion of their own Parts, when dissolved in Water, so as to become of a
peculiar and a pleasant Taste.

And how in Vegetables, by an intestin Commotion of the saporifick Parts, a new
Taste may be produced, is evident in Juice of Grapes, which from a sweet and
spiritless Liquor, becomes a spirituous Wine, and after that a sharp Vinegar,
without any Addition.

CHAP. II. Experiments and Observations concerning the Mechanical Production of
Odours.
TO show that not only Tastes, but likewise Odours may be Mechanically
produced, I shall lay down the following Experiments.

EXPERIMENT I. With two Bodies, neither of them odorous, to produce immediately
a strong Vrinous Smell.
A Smell produced from inodorous Bodies.
THis will succeed if good Quicklime and Sal Armoniack be ground together.

EXPERIMENT II. By the bare Addition of common Water, to produce immediately a
very strong Smell, in a Body that had no such before.
A Smell renu'd by an inodorous Body.
IF a good Quantity of Camphire be dissolved in Oil of Vitriol, the Gum will
lose it is Scent, but by an Infusion of cold Water the Camphire will emerge and
smell strong as before.

EXPERIMENT III. Of producing some Odours, each of them quite different from
that of any of the Ingredients.
Odours produced different from those of the Ingredients.
TWO parts of Oil of Turpentine being gradually mixed with one of Oil of
Vitriol, the clear Liquor which they afforded, by Distillation in a sand
Furnace, smelt very strong of Sulphur, and not of Turpentine. What remained
behind in the Retort being forced, for the most part, over in the form partly
of an Oil and partly of a Butter, they smelt like distilled Oil of Beeswax.

EXPERIMENT. IV. Of the Production of some Odours by local Motion.
I Know several Bodies inodorous, which being considerably hot, emit not
odorous Effluvia, yet being put into a peculiar kind of Agitation, emit a
strong Smell. And some Woods yield a powerful Scent whilst in a Turner's Leath,
which before were not odoriferous, as Lignum Vitae and Beech-Wood, the latter
yielding a fragrant Smell much like Roses.

EXPERIMENT V. By mixing a good Proportion of a very strong scented Body, with
an inodorous one, to deprive it speedily of all it is umell.
IF Aqua Fortis not too much dephlegmed, be poured upon Salt of Tartar till
they cease to ferment; this Liquor evaporated, will yield Crystals like Salt
Petre, but if distilled or burnt, they yield very offensive Fumes.

EXPERIMENT VI. By putting a very strong stinking Body to another of a Smell
not sweet, to produce a Mixture of a pleasant and strongly Aromatic Odours.
THis Phenomenon is afforded by the Liquor prepared in the XI Experiment of
the preceding Chapter.

EXPERIMENT VII. By digesting two Bodies, neither of them well scented, to
produce Bodies of a very subtle and strong fragrant Odor.
SOme Ounces of Vitriol digested with ssj of Spanish Wine afforded this
Phenomenon.

EXPERIMENT VIII. By the bare Addition of a Body almost inodorous, and not well
scented, to give a pleasant and aromatic Smell to Spirit of Wine.
EQual parts of Oil of Dantzick Vitriol and Inflammable Spirit of Wine, being
digested together about a Month, and then being distilled, yielded a very
fragrant Spirit, which was sometimes so subtle, that, though distilled with a
gentle Heat in a tall Glass, it would sill the Elaboratory with Fumes; whence
we may learn how much a Mineral Sulphur may be enobled with a vegetable
Sulphur; and how much new Coalitions and Contextures may alter the Odours of
Bodies.

EXPERIMENT IX. To make the forementioned fragrant Body, without Addition of
fire, degenerate into the rank Smell of Garliek.
A fragrant Body turned into one of a Garlic Smell.
THE Odiferous Liquor mentioin'd in the preceding Experiment, being kept in a
Bottle close stopped, in a little time acquired a Garlic Smell. And the like
Smell I have perceived in an Oil distilled from vegetable and mineral Subtances.

Salt of Tartar being digested with several times it is Quantity of Onions,
acquired a Garlic Smell.

EXPEEIMENT X. With an inodorous Body, and another not well scented, to produce
a Musky Smell.
A Perfume made of an inodorous, and another Body not well scented.
THIS we have done, by casting small Pearls into Spirit of Vitriol, for whilst
the Menstruum was dissolving them, we could evidently perceive a strong Musky
Smell.

EXPERIMENT XI. With fixed Metals, and Bodies either inodorous or stinking, to
produce strong and pleasant Smells, like those of some Vegetables and Minerals.
To imitate vegetable Smells, etc.
THOUGH Gold is inodorous, and Aqua Regis of an offensive strong Smell, yet the
Solution being precipitated with Oil of Tartar, and the Precipitate fulminated
per se in a Silver Vessel; we observed, that when the Fulmination was newly
made, the Steams were of a very pleasant Smell, like Musk; so that Art, by
lucky Contextures, may imitate natural and specific Odours: And not only so,
but Nature may endew several differing Bodies with similar Smells; for in the
West Indies, there is a sort of Seed, which for it is Smell is termed Musk-Seed;
and in Muscovy the Skins of Musk-Rats, have such a kink of Smell; and Ducks at
a certain Season of the Year, if violently chased, emit a Musk Scent. And on
the other hand, there is a certain Wood in the East Indies, which smells like
Stercus Humanum. And I remember, that having distilled Saccharum Saturni with a
strong Fire, besides the Empyreumatical Liquor, the Caput mortuum which was of
a grayish Color, emitted a pleasant Scent. And we may observe, that Nature
sometimes takes the same way to produce different Effects; since though the Dung
of most Animals is faetid, yet that of a Musk Animal is well scented. So that
it is enough to introduce into a Body noble Qualities, that it has a due
Contexture and Constitution of Parts.

And on this Occasion, I shall add, that the Excrements of other Animals are
sometimes so much varied by the Temper and Dispositions of our Constitutions,
that Dung has at a certain distance, smelled well, and like Musk to some
People. And not to mention what has been said of Alexander the Great, I knew a
Gentleman, whose Sweat was very fragrant. And Civet, which is so well scented,
in a lax Air, is as offensive to those that come too near great Quantities. And
it has been observed, that a Monky upon eating Spiders, would cause a Scent
like Musk.

EXPERIMENT XII. To heighten good Smells by Composition.
To enrich Smells by Composition.
IT is observed, that a due Proportion of Civet or Musk mixed with Amber-grease,
promotes the Scent of it; for it is not the Quantity, but the Justness of
Proportion that inriches the Scent. The best Proportion being 8 parts of
Amber-grease, two of Musk, and one of Civet.

And it has been observed, that Bodies inodorous mixed with the Ingredients of
Perfumes, promoted their Scent; for which End, Wine Vinegar has been made use
of by some.

And I my self prepared an Essence of Musk, by digesting some of it in Spirit
of Wine for some Days, and then decanting the Tincture; and a weaker sort may
be made, by pouring Milk upon the remaing part of the Musk, and decanting it
after a cold Digestion. And one thing in this Tincture observable, is, that
though it, of it self, has but a weak Scent, yet if a few Drops of it be mixed
with good Sack, it perfumes the whole very richly, both in Smell and Taste.

CHAP. III. Many Changes of Color produced by one simple Ingredient.
Several changes of Color produced by one simple Ingredient.
TO make it appear how much the Colors of Bodies depend on the Variation of
Texture, and their Modification, I tried the following Experiments; in which
several Phenomenon are exhibited, by the Mixture of a colorless Ingredient,
such as Spirit of Salt.

I. If a little Spirit of Salt be mixed with Syrup of Violets upon a piece of
Paper, it is presently turned from a Blew, to a red Color inclining to a
Purple.

II. But if Spirit of Salt be dropped in a just Proportion into a Solution of
Filings of Copper, made with Spirit of Sal Armoniack, the Blew will be turned
into a green Color.

III. Having mixed Syrup of Violets with Spirit of Urine, Hartshorn or Oil of
Tartar per Deliquium, and by that means turned it green, I mixed Spirit of Salt
with it, which turned it red.

IV. If Spirit of Salt be dropped into Water, in which Red Rose Leaves well
dried are put, it will make the Tincture to be of a lovely Red.

V. But if Tincture of Brasil be heightened by an addition of Spirit of
Hartshorn, or Urine, Spirit of Salt will make it as pale as Sack; so that that
which heightened the Red Tincture in the former Experiment, destroys it in this.

VI. Tho an Infusion of Lignum Nephriticum in Water, betwixt it and the Light
appears yellow, yet when held so that the Eye may be placed betwixt it and the
Window, it appears to be blew, yet upon the dropping of Spirit of Salt into it,
it loses that property.

VII. Having dropped Spirit of Salt upon Paper stained with Ink, the black was
presently changed into a yellow and blew color.

VIII. If Filings of Steel be dissolved in Spirit of Salt, the filtrated Liquor
will, upon Evaporation, shoot into green Cristals; which, if when they are dry
they be kept in a Crucible, a moderate Heat will turn them red.

IX. We found that the red Precipitate of Mercury per se would dissolve in
Spirit of Salt, tho crude Mercury will not; we likewise found, that the Redness
of Minium was wholly destroyed by boiling it in Spirit of Salt, and that the
Tincture of Coral extracted with this Menstruum, was wholly void of color.

X. If Filings of Copper be long digested in a Sand-Furnace, in a good quantity
of Spirit of Salt, viz. as much as will cover it the breadth of two Fingers,
the Metal being in part dissolved, will be of a color not unlike a muddy Red,
if held betwixt your Eye and the the light.

XI. But if it stand some hours in a wide-mouthed glass, it will be of a green
color, finer than that which is made by a solution of Mars.

XII. If Spirit of Salt be dropped into a Solution of Silver, or Quicksilver in
Aqua Fortis, the mixture will be of a milky whiteness, and presently deposite a
white Precipitate.

XIII. And the same Phenomenon will likewise happen, if Spirit of Salt be
dropped upon a Tincture of Benjamin, or a Solution of Resinous Jalap.

XIV. Having mixed a sweet Solution of Red Lead in Spirit of Vinegar, with a
Tincture of Red Roses, I dropped Spirit of Salt into the mixture, which
precipitated the red, and turned the green mixture into a durable Scarlet,
which if disturbed by a mixture of the white precipitate, will be of a
Carnation color.

XV. Spirit of Salt, which was muddy by standing upon Filings of Copper, being
boiled to a clearness, and set in a wide-mouthed Cristal Glass, in a small time
puts on the color of a German Amethist; and, in three hours time, a lovely
Green.

XVI. Having gathered by filtration the Precipitate of Sublimate dissolved in
water, and when it was dry, poured Spirit of Salt upon it, in a glass Vessel,
the precipitate at the first will become white, and when the ebullition which
succeeds the mixture is ended, it becomes a transparent Liquor.

XVII. Having dropped Spirit of Salt upon a fourth part of Calcined Copper, we
found that the mixture produced a Tincture of a muddy Red, and a white Powder,
which being acted on by the fire, exhibited several colors.

XVIII. The Solution of Copper, just now mentioned, being put into a
Cylindrical Vial, and 2 or 3 Spoonfuls of highly rectified Spirit of Wine
poured upon it, by shaking the mixture we obtained a Liquor of a green Color
like that of Emeralds.

XIX. A few drops of Spirit of Wine being dropped upon a Taffety Ribband, changed
its Green into a Blew Color; and being dropped on a black Ribband, altered that,
and made it put on that which is called a Fading Leaf.

XX. If Spirit of Salt be dropped upon Purple Paper, it presently turns it Red.

XXI. Powder of Antimony being boiled to a Dissolution in Spirit of Salt, in a
glass Vessel, lost its blackness, and the Solution being dropped into Water, it
in a little time subsided in the Form of a white Precipitate.

These Experiments being laid down, it may be necessary for us to observe, how
unexpected the Result of most Mixtures are; which may be an Argument against
the too frequent use of Compound Prescriptions, since it often not only is
uncertain how those Ingredients may destroy the Virtues of each other, but
sometimes whether they will duly mix according to Physicians expectation.

CHAP. IV. An Experimental History of COLORS begun.
Containing Part the First.
THO there are some, especially Chemists, who think that a considerable
Diversity of Colors, Diversity of Color not always an Argument of a variety
in Qualities.
must always employ a Diversity of Nature; yet we see, that Taffaties are
endued with changable Colors, as well as the Feathers of several Birds, which
have as great an Affinity in Nature as in Place; and not only several Feathers
vary in Color from one another, but sometimes several parts of the same
Feather: And there is no less variety of Color in several Leaves of Flowers,
tho no difference can be discovered in their Properties: A considerable
Instance in which, we have in Marvail of Peru, which tho it produces several
Scores of Flowers in its Season, yet I have scarce found two colored alike.

Yet changes of Color often signify Alteration in the Properties of Bodies.
But tho I believe that a variety of Colors does not always imply a Diversity
of Properties, yet I question not, but that an alteration, in point of Color,
signifies a Variation in the Disposition of Parts of Bodies; which is evident
in the Extraction of Tinctures, and several other Chemical Operations, wherein
the Change of Colors is the only Observation by which the Artist regulates his
Process. So we see, that several Degrees of Maturation produces various Colors
in Fruit; and Steel, if it be heated glowing hot in the fire, and held over a
Basion of Water, till it changes its white to a red Color, so far as is then
quenched will be hardened, and when polished at the end, will look whitish; but
if the end of the Steel be held in a Candle, so that the polished part may not
be sullied, that which is almost contiguous to the Candle, would change from a
bright Yellow to a deep one, or a sanguine Blew, and from that to a fainter,
and then to a deeper Blew; and in each of these diffetent Appearances, its
Texture is so much different, that if whilst it is yellow it be cooled, it is
fit for Gravers Drills, but when blew, it is softer and fit for Springs of
Watches; and if it be kept long in the flame after this blew appears, it will
be too soft for Drills till hardened again. And it is not a little pleasant to
see how these Colors will succeed one another and run along the Steel very
fast. But because the flame of a Candle usually sullies the Steel, we generally
make use of a red-hot Iron to heat it with.

But not to prosecute these Experiments out of their due Place, before I
descend more Particularly to present you with my Considerations concerning
Colors, What is meant by Color.
I think it requisite to premise, That Color being a Word of a twofold
Signification, in the following Discourse, I shall sometimes use it to signify
only the Sensation of those reflected and modified Rays of Light, which cause
that Effect on the Sensory; and generally, in the vulgar Acceptance,
intimating by it, the Disposition in the Object which causes the Rays of Light
to be reflected, so as to produce on the Sensory this or that Color.

What the Perception of Colors depends upon.
And, perhaps, it may not be inconvenient to add, that it is the Opinion of
several Modern Atomists, that the Sensation of Colors depends not so much on
the inherent Qualities of the Object in the Sense, but that such a Motion is
given to the Spirits in the Retina, that that communicated to the Brain, and
causing a Local Motion in some part of it, we always think we see such a
color, when the slender strings of the Retina are put into a like Motion,
whether the Light concurs to the Production of that Motion or not; whence
dreaming Men often think they see several things in their sleep; and distracted
Persons fancy they see several things before them, which depends only upon an
Internal Local Motion of their Spirits: And so upon a violent blow upon the
Eye, we sometimes fancy we see Lightning and flashes of Fire; and even upon a
blow on the Head, or when internal Humors cause such a Concussion in the
extremities of the Optic Nerves, as is wont to produce a Sensation of Light.
And I remember, that having my self a violent Cough, I fancied I saw flashes of
Light, which presently disappeared again: and a very discreet Lady observed,
that the day before she was seized with some violent Hysteric and
Hypochondriacal Fits, which for the time gave her a bastard Palsy, every thing
before her seemed to be dyed with bright and vivid, but unusual colors: And I
am told by an ingenious Gentleman, that several that were seized with the
Plague, sometime before, fancied every thing colored over very beautifully;
and this Symptom was successfully removed, as well as the other Symptoms of
that Distemper by a Vomit The Vomit which was successfully given in this was
made of about 8 or 10 Drachms of Crocus Metallorum, and half a Dram of white
Vitriol.

But further, as the Apparition of a Color may be caused by the Motion of the
Humors within, so the Sensory being Indisposed, that Indisposition may vary the
appearance of External Objects: For I have taken notice, that after looking
upon the Sun or Moon with a Telescope, my Eye has been so altered, that the
flame of a Candle seemed to vary much in its color from what it used to be,
and if I often opened and shut my Eye whilst that adventitious Color seemed to
last, I could discern it gradually diminish, till the Candle appeared to me as
before; and one thing worthy of notice was, that if I looked upon the Object
with one Eye, when the dazzled Eye was shut, the Adventitious Color
disappeared, but was visible again, upon opening the dazzled Eye.

To this Observation I shall add, that a Lady, who had by a Fall, got a Hurt
near her Eye, for six Weeks together fancied every thing covered over with very
dazzling and glorious Colors, especially white Bodies, some of which were such
as she could not describe. And a Learned Gentleman told me, that looking upon
the Sun with a good Telescope, without a colored Glass to guard his Sight, the
Brightness of the Object left such an Indisposition in his Eye, that nine or
ten Years after, whenever he looked upon the Window, he fancied he saw a light
Body before his Eye, of the Size and Brightness of the Sun, as it appeared to
him in the Telescope; to which Instances, I could add others from the
Experien'd Epiphanius Ferdinandus, of the Symptoms of those Bitten by a
Tarantula; from whence it would appear, that an Indisposition in the Organ of
Vision, is sufficient to vary our Judgment of Colors, but these may be more
properly delivered in another place.

The Superficies of a Body considered as the cause of Colors.
But to proceed, from what has been said it appears, I allow and teach, that
the superficial Parts of a Body, reflecting the Rays of Light, and modifying
them, may in one sense be said to be the Cause of that Color it represents,
since as the Beams of Light are variously modified, we perceive several
Sensations.

And though some hold, that the Rays of Light which conveigh Colors, are not
reflected barely from the Superficies of a Body, but penetrate deeper into it is
Substance; yet we are apt to call those Bodies transparent or semidiaphonous,
whose Substance the Rays of Light visibly insinuate themselves into: And that
in all Bodies there is no such Penetration of Light is evident, since several
Substances appear to be of one Color on the outside, and of another within;
which is evident not only in Fruit, but tempered Steel; for though it be
furnished with very vivid Colors on the Superficies, yet within a Hairs
breadth of it, it retains it is Steel Color: And a more Eminent Instance is,
that Lead being melted and poured into an Iron Vessel, when the Scum was taken
off, several Colors succeeded one another, upon it is Superficies, and that
which appeared last, before the Metal cooled, remaining upon the Superficies of
it, we found, that if never so little was taken off, that adventitious Color
would be taken off too, and the Metal would appear in it is own Color; which
shows not only what I alleged it for; but also, that probably an adventitious
Color may be acquired by the Effects the saline Parts of the Air, have on Lead
so disposed to receive it is Impressions, which it will not do, till brought to
a much higher degree of Fusion than bare melting. One thing remarkable in these
Colors was, that they succeed not so regularly as those in Steel, but in the
following order,

Viz. Blew, Yellow, Purple, Blew; Green, Purple Blew, Yellow, Red; Purple,
Blew, Yellow and Blew; Yellow, Blew, Purple, Green mixed, Yellow; Red, Blew,
Green, Yellow, Red, Purple, Green.

Though it is held by ancient Atomists, that the Figure of a Body is sufficient
to vary it is Color; yet I am persuaded, that there are other things requisite;
since we see by the help of good Telescopes, that the Superficies of Bodies are
not only full of several Protuberances, but likewise several Cavities, which
appear not to the naked Eye; so that the very Figures of those may have a great
stroke in causing various Colors, and differently forming the Superficies of a
Body, so as to enable it variously to reflect the Rays of Light, and cause
different Effects in our Organ of Sense.

The various Figures of the Superficial Parts requisite for the Production of
Colors.
But besides the various Figures of these superficial Particles, the Surface of
a Body may be enabled variously to reflect the Rays of Light, as they are
bigger or less; and the Protuberant Particles are set closer, or at a greater
distance: So Water if it have but a few Bubbles on the Top of it, has scarce
any sensible Color, but if it be beaten into a Froth, and a great number of
Bubbles are close set, it presently varies it is Color, and seems white; to
which not only the Number, but the Unequal Superficies of the Bubbles conduce;
nor is it requisite, that all the Protuberant Corpuscles should be of one
Figure, since, those which produce a Blew, and those that yield a Yellow being
mixed together, afford a green Color. But further, the Cavities intercepted
betwixt the Protuberant Parts and their Figures, are to be considered in the
Production of Colors, as well as the Figure and Size of the Particles
themselves: For the Superficies of a Body may be cut transversly with a
Methamatical Plain, void of Depth or Thickness, above which as well as below,
may be several Superficies, as in the Superficies of the Earth, there may be
several Parts above the Horizontal Plain as well as below; upon which Account,
the Rays of Light may be so differently reflected, as to cause different
Colors; so the two sides of a Piece of red Glass seem differently colored,
when the one is Rough, and the other Polished; and though several sorts of
Marbles are never so curiously Polished, yet their Superficies so far vary, as
to exhibit distinct Colors.

The Situation of them likewise requisite.
Besides, in variously reflecting the Rays of Light, the Situation of the
superficial Parts of a Body are considerable, in reference to the Light and the
Position of the Eye, and also their order in reference to each other; for the
Rays of Light will be differently reflected to the Eye, from Parts which are
erected upon a superficial Plain, from what it will be from those Parts
inclined and obverted to the Eye; so Plush or Velvet varies it is Color as the
Parts of it are differently inclined; and a Field of Corn varies it is Color as
the Wind depresses the Ears of Corn successively, or in different places: And
for a like Reason the Hair of a Dog exhibits a different Color, when the order
of them is changed; and so the Parts of Water in Froth, and the Parts of
Hartshorn shaved, alter their Colors, and Glass by being beaten, loses it is
Transparency with the order of it is Parts, and becomes white; And for a Reason
not very different, I have observed, that Pease set in parallel Lines, when
they are risen about half a quarter above the Ground, by casting one Eye the
same way with the parallel Lines, the Ground would appear of it is own dirty
Color, but if I looked upon it transversly, it would wholly appear green, the
Rays which were reflected from the Soil being intercepted.

The Motion of the part of a Body contribute to the Color.
And that the motion of the Parts of a Liquor, may contribute to the change of a
Color, I am persuaded, since I have elsewhere mentioned a Liquor, which,
whilst it was at rest, would be clear and transparent, but when it is Parts were
put into Motion, they would rise up and form a white Fume; and the like Fumes I
have observed to rise from a Liquor diaphanous, and another red. And if the
Superficies of a Body be made up of Parts, whose different sides afford several
Colors, then the Motion or Rest of that Body may contribute to the variation
or continuance of a Color, since a new side being turned toward the Eye, we
must consequently see a new Color; so when the Leaves of a Tree, whose Color
on each side varies, are forced by the Wind, to appear with their other sides
outward, they exhibit a new Color, though a few of them makes no considerable
Alteration; as a single Thread of Scarlet, seems almost void of Redness; but
when several of them are placed together, their Color becomes more
conspicuous. So likewise in a Piece of Taffety which is made of red and blew
Threads interwoven, I found by a Microscope, that when the Silk was so
commodiously placed, that the blew Threads were not intercepted by the red ones,
the Color would be blew; but when the red Threads were more commodiously placed
than the others, the Color would vary: Wherefore it would not be amiss to
endeavor to discover a Reason, by the Use of Microscopes, why Mother of Pearl,
Opals and such like Bodies are of such curious Colors, and what contexture of
Parts is apt to produce Colors so delightful.

How far Asperity contributes to Colors.
But till we are furnished with better Microscopes, or more exquisite Senses, I
fear these things must be undiscovered, since there are several degrees of
Asperity, and the Parts which form them are so minute, that we are not able to
know how their Shades are mixed with, or intercepted one by another; though I was
told by Dr. Finch, that there was a Blind Man at Mastricht, not far from
Vtretcht, who was able to distinguish simple Colors by the Touch, though mixed
Colors he could not discern: And

The Account this Man gave the Doctor of his Sensations of those Colors was,
that Black and White were the most Asperous Colors, and so like, that it was
hard to distinguish them; but Black was the rougher of the two; Green next to
it, Gray next to Green, Yellow a degree below that, Red and Blew so much alike,
that they were hard to be distinguished, but that Blew was the least rough of
the two; and these Diversities of Surfaces this Man discovered, by placing the
Body whose Colors he was to try betwixt his Thumb and his Forefinger; And it
was very remarkable, that his Thumb was not only the most sensible of the two,
but that he had only this Exquisiteness of Sense when fasting, the least drink
disabling him, to distinguish so nicely the difference of Colors.

But I am apt to suspect, that this blind Man rather discriminated these
different Colors by the Smell of the ingredients, than the Touch; and that if
the Organ of Touch contributed to it, it rather did it, by discovering the
several Forms than Degrees of Asperity, since he found it so difficult to
distinguish Black and White from one another, though not from other Colors; and
indeed though the Ribbons which were offered might be almost equally rough, yet
in such slender Corpuscles as those which reflect the Rays of Light, we may
easily conceive, not only a greater closeness of Parts, or a paucity of extant
Parts, but that they may be otherwise ranged, and the Cavities left betwixt,
much deeper in one than the other; for supposing the Protuberant Particles to
be very slender, and cylindrical like the Hair of a Brush, and furnished with
Hemispherical Tops, they may be so very sharp, that a less exquisite Touch,
cannot distinguish them, than that of this blind Man. Nor is every kind of
Roughness inconsistent with Whiteness since the level Superficies of Water
being made rough by Bubbles, presently acquires a Whiteness, and so does Glass
when scratched with a Diamond.

But to proceed, supposing the sharp pointed Particles which are ranged upon
the Superficies of black and white Bodies were so like, that the Touch could
not distinguish them easily; yet upon the Account of some difference in the
Cavities, which intercept the Rays of Light, they may variously reflect it; as
if the Cavities of a black Body be deep, and the other superficial, the one
will drown and detain the Rays of Light, whilst the others undisturbedly
reflect them. From whence it appears, that Colors rather depend on different
Forms of Asperities, than on different degrees of it; and though the blind Man
tells us, that Black was the roughest of Colors, yet it does not therefore
follow, that those Bodies which have the least Asperities, must be the
lightest, and reflect the Rays of Light most, since according to him, White is
the roughest next to Black; and though he assigns Yellow two degrees less of
Asperity than Green, and as many more than Blew, yet it is manifestly to the
Eye a lighter Color, and reflects the Rays of Light more plentifully than
either.

How many ways Liquors may alter Colors.
But to return to what I was saying of the different Asperities of Bodies, by
which Colors may be diversified: To assist us to judge of the Reason of the
Changes in Colors produced by corrosive saline Corpuscles in a fluid Form, I
shall consider how many ways such Liquors may, by working upon them, alter the
Superficies of Bodies upon which they act, and consequently cause them
variously to reflect the Rays of Light.

And First, Such Liquors may alter the Colors of Bodies, by insinuating and
lodging their small Particles in the Pores of a Body: So Oil or Water dropped
upon Paper, alters the Color of it; and the High Road upon Rain loses it is dry
Color, and changes it for another.

Secondly, A Liquor may alter the Color of a Body, by freeing it from an
adventitious Color; as when the dirty Color of Gold is taken off by putting
it into the fire or Aq. Fortis. And not only Silver may be restored by the like
means to it is genuine Luster, but I know a volatile Liquor, which,
incorporating with Grease, will take such Stains out of Clothes. And I have
tried, that having rubbed a Compound Metalline Body on a Touchstone, Aq.
Fortis would take off all the other Ingredients, and leave the Gold, appearing
with its genuine Color.

Thirdly, A Liquor may alter the Color of a Body, either by destroying or
subdividing the Parts of it; as when Wood is cut into Chips, or a piece of hot
Crystal quenched in cold Water, for it being by that means cracked, will not
reflect the Rays of Light as before.

Fourthly, A Liquor may change the Color of another Body, by collecting
together Parts of Matter scattered and dispersed; so Quicksilver poured into a
Solution of Gold, acquires a thin Film, of a yellow golden Color; and by a
like Method all those Colors, that seem to be produced by Precipitation, are
generated; though Resinous Gums dissolved in Spirit of Wine being unites into a
Mass again; and so rectify^d transparent Butter of Antimony, upon a Mixture of
Water precipitates that white Substance, which when it is Salts are washed off,
is called Mercurius Vitae.

A Fifth way, by which a Liquor may alter the Color of another Body, is, by
altering the Texture of it is Parts, as, when Quicksilver is kept long in a
convenient Heat; Metals are corroded, or Fruit is bruised; or when the Parts of
a Liquor are agitated by the Affusion of another Body; or when Chemical Oils
are shaken in a Bottle; for the Bubbles by that means raised will exhibit very
lively Colors.

Another way, is, by putting the Parts of a Body into Motion, after which they
may unite in a new Form; so Vitriol rubbed upon the Blade of a Knife, imparts
not any new Color to it; but if the Vitriol be moistened, it will impart a
true Copper Color to the Iron.

Another way by which a new Color may be imparted to a Liquor, is, by an
Association of it is saline Parts with those of the Body it is made use of to
work upon, by which means the superficial Parts of a Body, may be altered both
in Shape and Figure; and not only a greater number or a less, may be comprised
in the same space, but the Pores betwixt the Protuberant Parts may be much
straightened, and the old ones partly filled up, as well as new ones intercepted;
as when Quicksilver is dissolved in Aq. Fortis, the saline Parts of the
Menstruum associating themselves with the Mercurial Corpuscles, will afford a
Green, which afterward degenerates easily. And so Minium by being dissolved in
Spirit of Vinegar, yields a clear Solution; and if Aqua Fortis be dropped upon
a Copper Plate, the Parts of the Metal being corroded, acquire an Asperity, and
coagulating with the Menstruum form Grains of blew Vitriol, whereas Spirit of
Urine will produce a much deeper Blew. And Aqua Fortis, which will give Red
Lead a dark Color, with crude Lead will produce a white one, with Iron, a
reddish, and upon white Quills a yellowish Color. And that in Chemical
Dissolutions and Precipitations the saline Parts of the Body made use of to
precipitate, unite with metalline Parts they precipitate, we shall have reason
to believe if we consider how much Vitriol, and the Calces of Metals are
heavier than the Metals themselves.

After what we have laid down concerning the Causes of Changes of Colors,
there are two things to be taken Notice of; The one is, that there are other
ways to vary Colors speedily, besides those we have taken notice of by the
help of Liquors; as in Tempering Steel, etc. The second Particular requisite to
be noted is, that though a Change of Color may be effected any one of the ways
abovementioned, yet generally at least three of them are at once concerned.

Several Bodies generally esteemed opacous semidiaphanous.
From what we have been discoursing of the Asperities of Bodies in causing a
Reflection of the Rays of Light, one would think that the Substances themselves
are perfectly opacous and impenetrable by the Rays of Light, and so contribute
to the Variety of Colors, reflected to the Eye: But I am apt to believe, that
even those Bodies which we call Insensible, are compounded of Parts still more
minute, whose Commissures are not utterly impervious to the Rays of Light, and
that the Bodies compounded of those are in some degree Diaphanous. For in a
dark Room, where the Light is only permitted to enter at one Hole, I have
observed, that those Motes which were otherwise insensible; in the Beams of
Light, would represent several vivid and florid Colors, like those of a
Rainbow, or of sparkling Fragments of Diamonds; and as soon as that Position,
which they had at that time, in reference to the Eye and the Light, was lost,
they ceased to represent those Colors, though still remained visible; so that
from hence it appeared, that these small Fragments of Matter, commonly reputed
Opacous, did not barely reflect, but also refracted the Rays of Light: And it
is not a Phenomenon altogether to be slighted, that Water, though a diaphanous
Body, has a manifest Power in refracting the Rays of Light so, that by passing
through it, they represent the lively Colors of a Rainbow.

And it is further observable, that several Bodies which are generally esteemed
Opacous, appear in a great measure transparent, when they are reduced into thin
Parts, and interposed betwixt the Eye and a Powerful Light, which is evident in
thin Plates of Ivory, thick Leaves of Trees, Shells of Fishes and shavings of
Wood. And in a darkened Room I found, that the Substance of my Hand was in a
great measure transparent, when it was held betwixt my Eyes and the Rays of
Light which came in at a small Hole.

And not only white Marble of a convenient Thickness, but Lapis Specularis, or
Muscovite Glass, being divided into thin Plates, will be considerably
transparent; and even Coral it self will manifest the same Transparency if held
near the Light.

But on the other hand, I must own, that having looked upon Mercury precipitate
per se, Filings of Copper and Steel, the Red Calx of Lead, and the Red Color
of Vitriol, they appeared not to have the least Transparency.

How far the Transparency or Semidiaphaneity of Bodies may contribute to the
Variety of Colors produced by them, I shall not take upon me to determine,
since beaten Glass, Snow and Ice, whose superficial Parts are manifestly
transparent, represent not the lively Colors which they do when conveniently
qualified by their Bigness, Shape and Texture.

But to draw an Inference from what has been said of the Cause of Colors; It
appears, that according to the Hypothesis we have laid down, Bodies can only be
said to be colored when placed in the Light; but that, according to the
Ancients, if we take the Sense of the Word Color, to mean only that
Disposition of the superficial Surface of a Body, which enables it to modifie
the Rays of Light; They may be said to have Colors in the Dark, since they
have that Disposition, which enables them to reflect the Rays of Light in such
a Form as to produce Colors.

The short duration of Colors no Argument of their not being genuine.
And from what has been delivered, it likewise appears, that though Colors which
are evanid, and last but for a while, as the Colors of the Rainbow, and all
Emphatical Colors, are generally distinguished from True and Genuine ones, in
as much as the latter are produced by Reflection, and these proceed from
Refraction; yet, since we usually account all Echoes genuine Sounds, and all
Smells true Smells, in as much as they are real Objects of the respective
Sensories they affect, by the same Reason we may conclude these Emphatical
Colors genuine, since the Rays of Light equally affect our Sensory for the
time: And though the shortness of their Continuance has been offered as an
Argument of their not being genuine, by the same Rule we might say, that the
Color of Grass is not genuine, because the Color of an Emerald is more
lasting; but white Color of Froth is held to be genuine, though it is soon
generated, and in a little time destroyed. Besides, were the Whiteness of Froth
accounted an imaginary Color, we must no longer believe such to be
distinguished from genuine ones, by Refraction; since Froth retains it is
Whiteness, whether the Sun be setting, rising, or at the Meridian; the Position
of the Sun in reference to the Eye, and the Object not at all diversifying it.

Moreover, were a Color to be pronounced genuine by the time of it is Duration,
the white Froth of a Tenacious Body, might be said to be more genuine, because
it will continue much longer, than the Color of those Flowers of the Mervail
of Peru, which fade the very day they are Blown: And I have seen a Virginian
Flower, which seldom continues longer than a day.

And that the bare Disposition of the Parts of a Body, by which it is said to
reflect or refract the Rays of Light is sufficient to produce different
Colors, is not only evident in Cloth held in several Positions, by which means
it variously reflects the Rays of Light; but it is further evident, since the
Beams of the Sun trajected through a Prismatical Glass, represent a lively and
vivid Rainbow, upon any Body upon which they terminate, which may be discerned
by the Eye, placed in any Position whatsoever, viz. whether above, or below, or
on the side of the Glass. And though when the Prism is taken away, the Rainbow
disappears, yet nevertheless, the Light, for the time being truly reflected and
refracted from the Prism, and reflected again from the Body, which those (...)
as the Cartesians suppose, the several kinds of Motions of these Globuli might
contribute to vary the Perception of Colors, so I think that without such
Globuli, the Rays of Light may variously affect the Eye themselves, as their
Motion is varied in order, or degrees of Swiftness when they affect our
Sensory, or as their Motion is undulating or more or less direct.

But since I pretend not this Discourse to be a complete History of Colors, I
shall only in their proper Place deliver some Experiments, which may show the
Insufficiency of the Peripateticks and the Doctrine of the Chemists, and in
favor of that opinion which I am most inclined to be of; which is, that Color
is a Modification of the Beams of Light, which they receive from the Object,
from whence being reflected to the Eye, they cause that Sensation we call
Color. But how they come to be so modified, I shall not take upon me to
declare, till I know both what Light is it self, and what figured Corpuscles it
consists of, and likewise their Size and Motion: And before I pretend to lay
down my Opinion, I would further be satisfied what is the Nature of Refraction,
and what degrees of Commixture of Shades with the Light, made in the
superficial Parts of a Body is requisite to produce this or that Color.

CHAP. V. Of the Nature of Whiteness and Blackness. Part. II. Of the
Experimental History of Colors.
ACcording to Aristotle it is taught by Demomocritus, that Blackness depends on
the Asperity of the Surface of a Body; and Gassendus, who is the first that
has attempted to explain the contrary Color, viz. Whiteness, mechanically
gives us the following Account; Cogites velim (says he) lucem quidem in
Diaphano nullius coloris videri, A mechanical account of Whiteness.
sed in opaco terminante candicare, ac tanto magis, quanto densior seu
collectior fuerit. Deinde Aquam non esse quidem coloris ex se candidi, and
radium tamen ex eo reflexum versus Oculum candicare. Rursus eum plana Aquae
Superficies, non nisi ex una part eam Reflectionem faciat: Si contigerit tamen
illam in aliquot Bullas intumescere, Bullam unamquamque reflectionem facere,
and candoris speciem creare, certa superficiei part. Ad haec spumam ex Aqua
pura, non alia ratione, videri candescere and albescere, quam quod sit
congeries confertissima minutissimarum Bullarum, quarum unaquaque suum radium
reflectir, unde continens candor alborve apparet. Denique nivem nihil aliud
videri quam speciem purissimae spumae ex bullulis quam minutissimis and
confertissimis cohaerentis. Sed ridiculum exhibeam, si tales meas Nugas uberius
proponem.

But though this Account be ingenious enough, yet I shall to render it more full:
Add, that Whiteness considered as a Quality in the Object, depends on the
Asperity of the Surface of a Body, whose Parts are so ranged as to reflect the
Rays of Light, not upon one another, but upon the Spectators Eye, and that too,
barely by reflecting them as a Looking-glass does, without Refraction; for in
most other Colors they are so ranged, as either to alter the Texture of the
reflected Light, or to vary it with Shades; but in reflecting the Rays of Light
to represent the Body white, it is not only requisite, that the reflected Beams
should be unaltered, but likewise, that they should almost all be reflected
back, so that some of them facing one way, and some another, they may obvert
themselves to the Eye on which side soever it is placed.

To illustrate this Opinion with Experiments and Observations, I shall first
observe, that the Color of the Sun at Midday in clear Weather, is much more
near to a Whiteness, than when stained by sublunary Bodies, and than when near
the Horizon, where it is Rays have a greater Quantity of Atmospherical Parts of
Matter to pass through; and Water it self the more it is shined on appears to
be much whiter to the Spectators: And I have taken notice, that the Sun when
covered with a white Cloud, has appeared in the Water to be not red, but
white: And it is observed by Smiths, that Iron, which when moderately hot
appears red, when it has acquired a higher degree of Ignition, it seems to be
white.

So those that have weak Eyes complain of too great a Reflection of Light, when
the Ground is covered with Snow; and it is attested by several Writers and
other Travelers, that the Whiteness of the Sun has been so great, that in
Muscovy and Russia they found the Snow, to reflect the Light so much, that they
could see much farther upon snowy Ground, than we here in England where no Snow
lies on the Ground; so that they could see their way by the bare Reflection of
the Snow, when the Sun did not shine. Though I am apt to believe, that the Effect
might in some measure proceed from the Clearness of the Air, cleans'd of those
Steams which sometimes darken it; since it appears, that we are able in a
frosty Night by reason of the clearness of the Air, to discern more Stars than
at other times.

And that white Bodies reflect the Rays of Light most plentifully, and have no
native Light of their own appears, since Snow enclosed in a dark Room was not
at all visible: But on the contrary it is observed, that white Cloths are the
most easily discerned in dark Nights.

And for a further Confirmation that white Bodies reflect the Rays of Light not
only most plentifully, but from themselves; I shall add, that if the Rays of
Light, which enter into a dark Room at a small Hole, Light upon a white Wall,
they Enlighten the Room much further than if they fall upon any other Color.
And that white Bodies cast most Rays of Light from themselves appears, since,
white Paper is not near so apt to be set on fire by a Burning-Glass as black,
the concentred Beams being reflected back much more by the one than the other.
To which I shall further add, that, I have perceived a much greater degree of
Heat, when I have held my Hand in the Sun Beams, with a black Glove on; than
when it was covered with a White one.

And to show that white Bodies not only reflect the Rays of Light plentifully,
but unstained, I shall add, that in a dark Room, when the Rays reflected from a
colored Body, were thrown upon a white Wall, they would represent the Color
of that Body, whereas, if the Beams Reflected from a yellow Body upon a blew,
it would make a green.

And to these I shall further add, on this occasion, that having cast the Rays
of a troubled Water, by the help of a Lenticular Glass, into an upper Room
darkened, the concentered Reflections of the glittering Waves at a few Paces
distance, represented a white Body; but if we approached near the Place on
which those Rays were cast, they only seemed to be Beams reflected from
glittering Waves, which appeared like so many shining Scales of Fishes,
succeeding each other successively and disappearing again. But if the seeming
Whiteness of a River, proceed not from the reflection of the Sun Beams, but the
brightness of the Sky, a Storm may cause the Surface of it to appear Black, the
Rays of Light, being reflected more inward than outward; except near the Sea
Shore, where the Surface of the agitated Water is covered with Froth.

The Surfaces of White Bodies Specular.
But to show, that the Surfaces of white Bodies are Specular, I shall Subjoyn,
that drops of Mercury being raised, by a convenient heat in an Alembick,
represented so many looking Glasses, but caused the sides of the Glass they
stuck to, to appear White: And it is observed, that if we look upon the Milky
Way or Gallaxy, with a Telescope, though to our Eye it appears White, by the help
of that we shall discover, that that Whitness only depended upon a Collection
of the Rays of Light, whose confused Beams represented to the Eye, a white
Body; and why for a like Reason, the Superficies of a Body, which to the Eye
reflects the Beams confusedly may not appear White, as well as the Planets
which shine by a borrowed Light, I see no contradictory Reason

But to return to Experiments, we see, that the whites of Eggs, which are in
some measure Natural Speculums, by being beaten into a Froth appear White. And
if Oil of Turpentine be mixed with Water, and shaken in a Vial, as the
Particles of the Oil are more or less numerous, and minutely divided, it
appears more or less White; which Experiment will likewise succeed if tried
with a yellow Mixture of crude Turpentine, instead of the Oil; and likewise
with an Oil dyed Green with a Tincture of Copper. And for a like Reason the
Water which is carried over with Oils distilled in an Alembick, appears White,
as long as the globular Particles of Oil Swim in it; and hot Water is observed
to be considerably Whitest and Opacous when the hot Vapors disper'd through
it, stop the Passages of the Rays of Light, and cause them to fly from it, more
plentifully upon the Eye; so that I am apt to think, that the Superficies of
white Bodies may as well be unequal, as smooth, provided the Superficies be so
set with Specular Particles, as to reflect the Rays of Light plentifully upon
the Eye; for it is not only observed, that the globular Particles of Oil, make
the Water they are mixed with appear White; but the same Color is likewise
reflected, from Powdered Glass, and even several Threads of it laid together; so
that it is not, according to the Opinion of some, requisite that the Particles
of a white Body, should be altogether Globular. And I have observed, that Snow
looked upon, with a Microscope, appeared to consist of slender Icicles of
several shapes. And I remember, that by contusion, I have obtained a whitish
Powder of Granates, Glass of Antimony, and Emeralds; and the Salt of Venereal
Vitriol, Powdered, will comparatively with the Entire Chrystals, exhibit a
considerable Degree of Whiteness.

And as a Body which is not White, may acquire that Color, by a Change of the
Texture of its Parts; so one that is White, may be deprived of that Color:
Thus Silver being first brushed, and then boiled with Salt and Tartar appears
White; but becomes Specular by being rubbed with a Piece of Steel, the
protuberant Parts, being by that means depressed into a continued Superficies,
and reflecting the Image of a lucid Body, whereas before the innumerable little
Speculae reflected the Rays of Light more confusedly.

(...) ^^cha^ Ac^ of Blackness.
From what has been said of Whiteness, we may be able to guess in some Measure
of the Reason of Blackness, concerning which Quality Gassendus says, Existimare
par est, corpora suapte natura nigra constare ex particulis, quarum
Superficicculae scabrae sunt, nec facile lucem extrorsum reflectunt: So that
Black differs from White, in as much as the Particles which are reflected
externally by the one, are deaded by the other, and not reflected outward,
either because the Superficies has such protuberant Parts, as reflect the Rays
internally, or being soft and pliable yield to the Impress of those lucid Parts
that strike against them; so a Ball, that would fly back from a Stone, will
scarce at all Rebound from a Net or Mud; though the latter Explication I think
the less propable, because several Bodies are Black, whose Surfaces are scarce
of so yielding a Texture, except their peculiar Texture would render them more
capable of being worked on, by the Rays of Light, than other Bodies, otherwise
softer than they.

But whatever is the Cause, why the Beams of Light are very sparingly reflected
from Opacous Bodies; that that is the Reason of Blackness will be rendered
probable if we take notice, that if a black Substance be held partly in the
Sunshine, and partly out, that Part will appear Blackest, which is least Shone
upon; and if the rough Surface of a black Marble be well Polished, and brought
to the Form of a Concave Speculum, it will represent the Image of the Sun
without dazzling the Eyes, and will not in a long time set Wood on Fire, though a
less Speculum of Matter of a more reflecting Nature would cause it to Flame in
a Trice.

And to this I shall add, that having set a white and a black Marble Mortar in
the Sun, the Black one collected the Rays of the Sun, so as to form a Focus
much more conspicuous and hot than the other, by which they were more
dispersed, and reflected a glaring Light. And the Beams of a Candle being cast
upon two Pieces of Marble, through a round Hole, half an Inch Diameter, the
Circle of Light on the Black one, tho much less Luminous, was better Defined.

And for a further Confirmation of our Hypothesis, I shall add, that when the
Rays of Light, fall on the Holes in linen Cloth, or the Mouth of a Well, those
Parts are much Darker, the Beams of Light being not reflected back upon the
Eye; And even black Velvet, being stroak'd up and down, seemed much Blacker one
way than the other, the silken Piles when inclined, reflecting a greater Number
of Rays to the Eye, than the Tops of them were able to do, which make but a
small Part of the Superficies: And I have observed, that a Cart-load of
Carrots, appeared much more Dark when the Ends of them were toward me, than
when a greater Number of Rays were reflected to the Eye by the sides of them.
And in a dark Room it is observed, that if the Light falls upon a black Cloth,
the reflection from it is not near so sensible as if a White one be employed.

And I have observed, that a Piece of Tile being partly colored Black, and
partly White, the Red was much hotter than the White, though not so hot as the
Black Part: And it has been observed in Italy, that black Marbles exposed to
the Sun were much hotter than White ones, though it is observed, that the black
Marble is much more solid than White. And it is further observed, that Rooms
hung with Black are much warmer than others, so that a Lady who was of a Tender
Constitution was used to complain that she was apt to take Cold, after she had
visited Persons whose Rooms where hung with Black. And I am told, that in hot
Countries, Eggs colored Black, and exposed to the Sun, would be roasted by it.
And I have observed them in England to acquire a considerable Degree of Heat by
being exposed to the Sun in the Summertime Blackened over.

And not only the blind Dutchman, but as Bartholinus says, a blind Earl of
Mansfield could distinguish White from Black by the Roughness of the latter.

And for these Reasons I am the rather inclined to believe the Doctrine
proposed, leaving it to be determined by experience, whether the Beams of Light
be reflected from opacous Bodies, and so differently modified before they reach
the Eye, or whether from white Bodies they are not moved more briskly.

CHAP. VI. Experiments in Consort, concerning Whitness and Blackness.
EXPERIMENT I.
Several Experiments concerning Whitness and Blackness.
TO show that the Colors of two diaphanous Liquors, may be destroyed by a
Change of Texture; Satiate warm Water with Sublimate, and having filtered it
through Cappaper, to render it clear and limpid; if a few drops of Spirit of
Urine be dropped into two Spoonsful of it, the mixture will immediately become
White; yet by an addition of Aqua fortis it will again become Transparent, and
will become White again, with Spirit of Urine; and the like has succeeded in
other Experiments as well as of these.

EXPERIMENT II.
IF a Solution of Vitriol be shaken with an Infusion of Galls diluted with
Water, it will turn it Black; but by an addition of a few drops of Oil of
Vitriol, it will presently lay down it is dark Color and become Transparent;
but upon an addition of Salt of Tartar dissolved, it will again acquire a
Blackness; and though this Ink be pale, yet when Dry, it is very Black. The like
succeeded with common Ink, but not so easily, the Operation of the Salts being
hindered by the Gum. And here I shall take Notice, that tho it be generally
allowed, that alkalizate Salts will not precipitate Bodies, except first
dissolved in some Acid Menstruum; Yet I have tried, that a Lixivium of
Potashes, being poured upon Decoctions of Vegetables, would precipitate a
curdled Matter, which would be left behind in the Filtre. And in making the
first Ink, several Particles of black Matter, would be separated by a Filtre;
and when the Ink was made Clear again by the Oil of Vitriol, the Salt of Tarter
seemed to precipitate and to unite those Particles of Matter which were
dissolved by the corrosive Oil.

And to show, that Galls are not so requisite to the making of Ink, as they are
generally supposed, I added a few Drops of a Solution of Vitriol, to a
Decoction of Rose Leaves, upon which it turned black, and changed that Color
for a deep Red, when Aqua Fortis was added to it, which was reduced to a Black
again by Spirit of Urine. And though upon a Mixture of Liquors, mentioned in the
Second Chapter of this History of Colors, a black Color immediately emerges,
yet both the Infusion of Orpiment and a Solution of Minium were before they
were mixed, limpid and Colourses.

EXPERIMENT III.
THE Caput Mortuum of white Hartshorn distilled in a Retort will be black,
which, that it depends on the change of it is Texture only is evident, since the
same happens if it be distilled in Glass Vessels: Yet by Calcination in open
Vessels, it will regain it is pristine Whiteness. Ivory burnt yields a curious
black, and so does the burnt Caput Mortuum of Tartar; but if it be thoroughly
calcined it will be white. So white Woods, as Hazel, will yield a black
Charcoal and whitish Ashes, and even Animal Substances grow black by being
burnt, and white when perfectly calcined.

EXPERIMENT IV.
THOUGH it be held as a Maxim by some Philosophers and most Chemists, viz. Adusta
nigra, sed perusta alba, yet I have tried, that Alabaster burnt yields a
Yellow; and Lead calcined forms a red Minium, which urged further by the fire,
turns to a Glass darker than Minium. So likewise white Calx of Antimony yields
a Glass of a red Color, deeper than the Calx of burnt Antimony. And though
common Glass of Antimony adulterated with Borax is of a more diluted Color,
yet by being urged with a violent fire, it is Color was heightened. Blew
Vitriol burnt till it may be rubbed to a Powder betwixt one's Fingers, will
acquire a white Color; but if urged by a greater Heat, it will pass through
other Colors, as Gray yellowish and red, and when it is almost calcined
thoroughly, it will be of a dark Purple, near to a black Color. To these I may
add, that Crocus Martis per se, is not so near a White, as the Iron it is
prepared from. And that judicious Traveller Bellonius tells us, that a white
Charcoal is made of the Wood of Oxyceder.

EXPERIMENT V.
THOUGH Camphire kept in close Glasses would not lose it is Color by Heat, yet
being set on fire in the free Air, it emitted Smoke copiously, and a Concave
Glass with a Hole in the Middle being turned upon it, it continued burning, and
covered the inside of the Glass, with a black Soot, which was so copious, that
the whole Substance of the Camphire seemed converted into Soot.

EXPERIMENT VI.
Rectified Oil of Vitriol being gradually mixed with Essential Oil of Wormwood
drawn over with store of Water in an Alembick, this Mixture was distilled in a
Retort, where the Caput Mortuum that remained was black; and the like succeeded
with Oil of Winter-Savory made use of instead of the Oil of Wormwood.

EXPERIMENT VII.
TO render yellow Wax white, put a sufficient Quantity of it into a Bolt-head,
with Spirit of Wine, and place it in a Sand-heat, gradually increased till the
Wine begins to boil; and then, the Wax being melted, the Mixture will be white;
which, upon an Evaportion of the most subtle Parts of the Wine will subside
into less Room than before. And one thing remarkable in this Experiment is,
that the yellow Color will neither remain in the Wax, nor the Spirit of Wine
separated by a Filtre of brown Paper whilst it is hot.

EXPERIMENT VIII.
TWO Parts of Sublimate being mixed with one of Tin-glass and sublimed
together, the Matter which ascended was of a peculiar Texture, made up of thin,
smooth, soft and slippery Plates, much like the Scales of Fishes, and of a
shining Color, much like Orient Pearls.

EXPERIMENT IX.
IF a Mixture of Gold and Silver be cast into Aq. Fortis, the Gold falling to
the Bottom will be turned black, though neither the Silver or Aq. Fortis were of
that Color. It is looked upon by Alchymists, that a Mineral abounds with Gold,
if it precipitates a black Powder: And it has been observed, that Gold and
Silver refined would fully white Cloth, by rubbing them on it: And I have
likewise taken notice, that Pens would be colored black, by a Silver case I
kept them in.

EXPERIMENT X.
THAT a Solution of Silver will color Hair black, has often been found. And I
have observed, that Silver dissolved in Aq. Fortis, and evaporated ad
siccitatem, and cleared from their greenish Blewness by a successive Affusion
and Evaporation of fair Water; this Calx being laid either upon the Skin or
Hafts of Knives, would stain them with a lasting black Color.

EXPERIMENT XI.
IN order to discover the Reason of the Blackness of Negroes, and the Colors
of Foxes and Hares as well as other Animals, I shall subjoyn some Collections I
have made for that purpose. And first, tho it is believed, that the Blackness
of the Skins of Negroes depends on the Heat of the Sun, which in other hot
Countries is observed to darken the Complexions of Men, more than in England;
yet I am apt to believe, that something else is requisite to the Production of
those Colors, besides the Influence of the Sun, since we see that Infants are
of the same Color. Besides, in other Places of the same Latitude, the People
are observed to be at the most but Tawny; and several Nations in the Empire of
Aethiopia situated almost under the Torrid Zone: And it is observed by
Travelers and Navigators, that there are very few Blacks in America, though the
New World contains many Climates, and reaches from one Tropic to another. And
though the Danes are whiter than the Spaniards, yet it is observed, that the
Swedes who likewise Inhabit those cold Countries are not so white as them. And
I have seen several Russians, who were of a much browner Complexion than the
Danes, though these are said to proceed from a Race of Tartars, for in one
Province the Muscovites are observed to be much whiter. And I am told, that
Negroes live not far from the Cape of good Hope, which is beyond the Southern
Tropic, though near the same degree of Latitude Northward, Diverse American
Nations are not inhabited by Negroes, and the Inhabitants of Candia, some Parts
of Sicily, and even Spain are not so much as Tawny Moors. And even the
Inhabitants of Greenland are observed to be of an Olive-colour, or a darker
Complexion.

But nevertheless, that Coldness may in some measure contribute to Blackness or
Whiteness, appears from what has been observed in Russia and Livonia, viz.
that Hares and Foxes become white in Winter, and regain their genuine Colors
again in the Summer; yet in Curland, as Olaus Magnus relates, they vary not
their Color in the Winter; though this Country is only severv'd from Livonia by
the River Dugna, where it may seem too strange to be credited, that so small a
compass as that River takes up, should diversity the Effects of Cold so much;
and the same Objection may be made in respect of the Moors, since Negroes
inhabit on one side the River Cenega, and Tawny colored People on the other.

Another Opinion concerning the Color of Negroes is, that it was a Curse
entailed upon the Race of Cham. But not to shift off the natural Cause of that
Color, by flying to a Principal and Universal Cause, whilst there is no
necessity of it; not to urge, that the Curse pronounced by Noah, was, that he
should be a Servant of Servants, which was fulfilled, when the Posterity of Sem
subdued the Cananites; I see not why Blackness should be esteemed a Curse,
since the Negroes are so much content with it, that they paint the Devil white:
Nor do I think Blackness inconsistent with Beauty, since it consists in a
Sumetry of Parts and good Features in the Face; so that Blackness cannot
reasonably be accounted a Curse, except that Color causes their Bodies to be
more scorched by the heat of the Sun, than if it were white, according to the
Doctrine above delivered.

But I am rather inclined to think, that they proceed from some seminal
Influence, since Negroes, as well as Americans Transplanted, retain their
Proper and Native Colors; and Twins which are got by the Portugals and
Ethiopian Women, are, sometimes, one of them white, and the other black. And
how far seminal Impressions contribute to the differences of Organical Parts,
appears from the flat Noses, and Blubber Lips of most Negroes. To which may be
added, the little Feet of the Chinese and the Macrocephali mentioned by
Hypocrates. And it has not only been observed, that a sort of Hens want Rumps;
but I have seen a Raven perfectly white. To which I shall add, that a Lady, who
was a devout Catholic, looking upon the Pebbles at the Bottom of St.
Winifred's Well, some time after bore a Child whose Skin was covered with the
Resemblance of Red Pebbles.

To what has been said of Negroes, I shall add, that the Epidermis only is
black, the Skin under that, being as white as that of the Europeans; so that a
Child who had the Measles or small Pox, after those Pimples had broke, was
covered with a multitude of white Spots: And it is attested by several, that
the Negroes when first born, are red or white like other Children, but in a few
days acquire the Color of their Parents: Nevertheless, some of them that are
born under the Torrid Zone, continue white, and are presented to the King, and
always wait on him. These are usually, as Purchase witnesses, brought up in
Witchcraft, and the People stand in great Awe of them.

EXPERIMENT XII.
NOT only common Crab's Eyes and Pearls, but Coral and Minium dissolved in
Spirit of Vinegar, may be precipitated by Oil of Tartar into white Powders: And
not only Silver and Tin, but Lead and Quicksilver dissolved in Aqua Fortis will
yield a white Precipitate, upon an Affusion of salt Water, and so will
Tin-glass; and the Calces will be much better colored, if they be precipitated
with Oil of Vitriol instead of Oil of Tartar. And black mineral Antimony may,
by the Salts which concur to the Composition of Sublimate, be turned into a
rectified Butter of Antimony, which upon an Affusion of fair Water, will
precipitate the white Powder called Mercurius Vitae; and the like Powder may be
made of Antimony without any Addition at all: And the like white Substance will
be precipitated by an Affusion of Water, upon a Solution of sulphurous Gums in
Spirit of Wine. And to these I may further add, that Water being poured upon a
red Tincture of Benjamin, drawn with Spirit of Wine, will turn it white: But if
such seemingly white Bodies stand for some time, unstirred, a resinous
Substance will of it self subside; And if acid Spirits be dropped upon a red
Solution of Sulphur in Potashes, or some other sharp Lixivium, the
precipitated Sulphur, before it subsides, will turn the red Liquor white. But
tho these several Bodies yield white Precipitates, yet all will not, since Gold
yields a yellow one, whether precipitated by Oil of Tartar, or Spirit of Sal
Armoniack. And Mercury, tho when reduced to a Sublimate, whether precipitated
by Spirit of Urine or Hart's-horn, it yields a white Precipitate, yet with a
Solution of Potashes, or other strong Lixiviate Salts, it will let fall an
Orange Tawny colored Powder; And so will Crude Antimony upon an Affusion of an
acid Liquor. To which we may add, that any of these fixed Salts being poured
upon a Solution of Vitriol, it will yield a Sulphur of Vitriol, not at all
white.

EXPERIMENT XIII.
THO it be in some measure true, that White is a Color like the Materia Prima,
fit to take any Form, and that Black is a Color which is not to be changed for
another; yet it does not hold universally true; for though the Ingredients which
dye a Body Black, by infecting other Ingredients usually hinder it from taking
a higher Color; yet we have made it appear, that Inks of different kinds might
be deprived of their Blackness. And I have sometimes turned black Pieces of
Silk, yellow, with Oil of Vitriol. And as for Whiteness, we ought not to
believe it so easily destroyed without Caution and some Restrictions: For Lead
is by Calcination, turned into a red Body; and Tin is reduced into a white
Calx, and the common Putty sold in the Shops, is made up of half Tin and half
Lead, and yet, notwithstanding the Lead, the Putty is white, without
discovering any Mixture of Minium. And so if Copper be mixed by Fusion with
half the Quantity of Tin, they will yield a Substance, in which the white
Color is much more transparent, than the reddish Color of the Copper.

And on this occasion I shall add, that Arsnick being colliquated in Copper,
blanched it; but the white Mixture being kept upon the Cupel, till the Arsnick
flew away, the Copper returned to it is Pristine Color. And to show how much
the white Color of a Metal may obscure the Color of those it is mixed with, I
shall add, that a fourth Part of Gold being mixed with Silver, the yellow
Color of the Gold was not to be discerned; but when it was rubbed on a
Touchstone, Aqua Fortis would take off the Silver, and leave the Gold behind
it, upon the Stone.

EXPERIMENT XIV.
A Polished Piece of black Horn being scraped with a Piece of Glass, and laid
upon a black Beaver Hat, seemed white enough; but being placed upon white
Paper, the Color of that eclipsed the Whiteness of the Horn, and made it
appear like dirty Linen. From which Experiment it appears, that Colors depend
neither on substantial Forms, nor the Hypostatical Principles of the Chemists,
but on a Reflection of the Rays of Light, variously modified by their new
superficial Texture.

EXPERIMENT XV.
IT is Taught by the Chemists, that Blackness depends on Sulphur adust. But
besides what has been already offered as the cause of Blackness, I shall add,
in reference to the Opinion here proposed, that common Sulphur sublimed, is far
from black, but it is in a great measure yellow, and rather more than less
white than before; and when set on fire to make Oleum Sulph. per campanam, it
yields very little Soot; and the Flame yields so little, that it will scarce
black a white Sheet of Paper; and it is observed rather to whiten than to black
Linen, and makes red Rose Leaves grow pale and not black. And I have seen a
Piece of fixed Sulphur, which was kept several Weeks in a violent Heat, yet it
had no other Color when cool, but a pure red. And not only Sulphur, but that
sulphurous Body Camphire may be kept in a violent Heat without acquiring any
thing of Blackness: Nor will inflammable Spirit of Wine, discolor a piece of
Paper held over it whilst it consumes. And Tin calein'd, yields not a black,
but a white Calx; and not only the Charcoal made of Oxy-Cedar is white, but the
Smoke of Tinby Coals is observed rather to blanch Linen than black it: To what
has been said we may add, that the Ingredients of our Ink were not hot but
cold; and Juice of Limons will blacken the Blade of Knife, except it be quickly
wiped off, though no actual Heat intervenes to adust the Sulphur. And if the
Blackness of the Ink depended on adust Sulphur, it might be demanded, what
became of those adust Particles, when the Liquor, by a few drops of Oil of
Vitriol, lost that Color. Besides, Soot it self may have it is Texture so far
altered, as to yield a Crystalline Salt and a transparent Color.

But were it allowed, since Adustion renders some Bodies black, that that
Color depended on a trorrify'd Sulphur, it might be further demanded, what
gives torrify'd Sulphur that Color; and it might be questioned, what makes a
Window half shut, at a distance to appear black, since it has no Access of
torrify'd Sulphur upon that Posture, but only the Rays of Light are not so
plentiflly reflected by it, as is requisite to affect the Sensory with a more
lively Color; But to conclude. What the Chemists teach of Blackness, to me
seems to come to no more, than if in answer to an Enquiry after the Cause of
Salivation, they should tell us, that the several kinds of Precipitates of Gold
and Mercury, and likewise of Quicksilver and Silver salivate upon Account of
the Mercury that abounds in them, where we are still at a loss to know why
Mercury should have that Effect.

CHAP. VII. Containing promiscuous Experiments about Colors, being the Third
Part of the Experimental History of Colors.
EXPERIMENT I.
Promis^uous Experiments concerning Colors.
TO show how much the Diversity of Colors represented by Opace Bodies, depend
on the Mixture of the Rays of Light with Shades more or less as to Quantity, or
as to Interruption, I shall subjoyn the following Notes.

Paper stained with several Colors, placed in a dark Room whose Window was
Southward, the Beams of Light entering in at a Hole 3 Inches Diameter; the White
yielded the brightest Reflection. Red gave a Reflection stronger than Green or
Blew, whose Colors were scarce discernable, and of an equal Brightness. Yellow
reflected more Light than either Green or Blew. Red reflected more Light than
Purple, and so did Blew. Marble Paper sleek'd reflected the Rays of Light
unstained, but not so bright as white Paper. Purple seemed to reflect more
Light, than a dark Green. In compounding Colors by Reflection we observed,
that if the Colors were not strong and somewhat glossy, the reflected Rays
would not form a compound Color on the Wall.

EXPERIMENT II.
I Have often taken notice, that white Linen would receive and reflect the
Color of a red Silk Wastcoat in a Light Room; though it be generally believed,
that a dark Room is requisite to make the Color of one Body visible by
Reflection from another.

EXPERIMENT III.
Colored sheets of Paper held betwixt the Light and the Eye, at the Hole which
was made in a dark Room, the Colors were each of them represented to the Eye
single, but by placing one sheet of Paper before another, the Rays of Light
passing through the Blew and Yellow exhibited a darker Yellow; but a finer
Paper which was blew, being made use of instead of the former, they afforded a
good Green. The yellow and red represented a dark Orange colored Red. The
Purple and Red, appeared of a deeper Scarlet. Purple and Yellow made an Orange
Color. Green and Red a dark Orange Tawny. Green and Purple, made a Purple more
dirty. Blew made the Purple deeper and more lovely. Red Marble and yellow
represented a Scarlet; but the Colors which were thus compounded varied much,
as the Colors of the Paper were deeper or more slight, and as the Paper
differed in fineness.

EXPERIMENT. IV.
IN the aforesaid darkened Room we placed a Triangular Prismatical Glass in a
convenient Posture, and observed no less than four Reflections and three
Refractions; and by hiding sometimes one Part of the Prism, and sometimes
another, See Plat. 5. Fig. 5.
we found the Rays of Light as the following Scheme represents ( See Plate 5.
Fig. 5

The Explication of the Scheme.
P. P. P. An Aequilatero-triangular Crystalline Prism, of whose Edges P. is
placed next the Sun. A. B. and a. b. Two Rays from the Sun, falling on the
Prism at B. b. and thence partly reflected toward C. and g. and partly
refracted toward D. and d. B. C. and b g. Those reflected Rays. B. D. and b.
g. Those refracted Rays which are partly refracted toward E. and ^. and there
represent a Iris 345, denoting the five Consecutions of Colors, Red, Yellow,
Green, Blew and Purple, and are partly reflected toward F. and 3. D. F. and g
3. Those reflected Rays which are partly refracted toward G. and e Colorless,
and partly reflected toward H. and th. F. H. and 3. th. Those reflected Rays,
which are refracted toward I. and I. and there represent another fainter Iris,
the Colors of which are contrary to the former 54321. signifying, Purple,
Blew, Green, Yellow, Red, so the Prism in the Posture represents four Rainbows.
EXPERIMENT V.
WE observed, that in a light Room, the Prismatical Iris might be reflected,
without losing any of it is Colors, from a flat Looking Glass, the Surface of
Water, or a Concave Looking-Glass; and that Refraction did as little destroy
their Colors as Reflection: For though by a Burning-Glass one Part of the Iris
would appear either beyond or on this side the other, yet the Colors would
appear as vivid in the displaced Part, as in the other. To which I shall add,
that the most part of the Prism being covered with an opacous Body, so that,
the Rays falling but on a small Part of it, the Iris was but little, yet the
Color appeared to be the same through a Microscope as to the naked Eye.

EXPERIMENT VI.
Colors which appear in a dark Room are so dim, that if the Light of the Sun
be let in, they presently disappear; which I experienced by casting the
converging Beams of the Sun upon the Prisimatical Iris, by a concave Speculum;
and if these Rays only crossed the Rays of the Iris, before they fell to
ground, they would likewise disappear.

EXPERIMENT VII.
TRying whether the Colors of opacous Bodies would be varied, as they were in
a different Position in reference to the Eye, or according to the nature of the
Lucid Bodies that shine upon them; we looked upon several Pieces of Paper by
Candle Light; and found, that Yellow was much fainter, than in the Day. The Red
was little altered. A deep Green seemed to be a dark Blew; but, being held by a
Blew, appeared Green; and much blewer than at the first, when looked upon by a
Yellow. Blew, looked like a deep Purple. Purple was very little altered. Red
looked upon with the Yellow, made it appear like brown Cap-paper.

EXPERIMENT VIII.
SUspecting the Flame of a Candle to be tinged yellow with it is Fuel, we looked
upon it through a deep blew Glass; and observed, that through that it appeared
green; a Color which emerges from a Composition of an obscure blew and a
Yellow. And for a like Reason, at the first sight it is not easy to
distinguish a Paper from a light Yellow Paper; and other white Bodies
reflecting the Rays of Light less troubled or more sincere than other Bodies.

EXPERIMENT IX.
A Leaf of Gold being held betwixt the Light and the Eye, seemed full of Pores
like a Sieve, and so modifi'd the Rays of Light that came through it, that they
appeared to the Eye of a greenish Blew; and the like succeeded with a Leaf of
Silver.

EXPERIMENT X.
I Am told that Lignum Nephriticum is used in the Country where it grows as an
excellent Medicine against the Stone; which Virtues Monardes likewise ascribes
to it given in Infusion. An Infusion of this Wood, if it be not too strong will
appear, betwixt the Eye and the Light, to be of a golden Color, except that
upon the Top it will be covered with a sky Colored Circle; but if your Eye be
placed betwixt the Window and the Vial, the Liquor will appear to be of a
lovely Blew. And this Experiment has succeeded by Candle Light: If the Liquor
be held partly before the Eye and a Light, and partly betwixt the Eye and an
Opacous Body, it will half of it seem of a golden Color, and half a Blew; but
if turning your back on the Window you observe the Liquor as it is poured out,
it will at the first seem Blew; but when it has fallen lower, and the Rays of
Light penetrate it more, it will seem Particouloured. If a little of this
Tincture be poured into a Basin of Water, partly in the Sun Beams and partly
shaded, it will afford several pleasing Phenomenon. If some of it be poured
upon white Paper, the drops about it will appear of different Colors, as the
Position of the Eye in reference to them varies; and when it is poured off, the
Paper will be dyed Yellow; and if this be placed in a Window in the Sunshine,
and a Pen held betwixt the Sun and part of the Paper, the Verge of the Shadow
next the Body that Causes it will be Golden, and the other Blew. Which
Phenomena proceeded from the most subtle Parts of the Wood Swimming in the
Water, and in several Positions variously reflecting the Rays of Light. Some of
this Liquor being carefully Distilled, it yielded a colorless Limpid Water, a
deep ceruleous Liquor remaining behind. Spirit of Wine and Salt of Hartshorn,
being mixed together I observed, that it required a certain proportion betwixt
the Liquor and the Salt, which enabled it to vary it is Color. So that tho I
was induced to believe that our Tincture received its Color from a Salt
dispersed through it, yet I suspected, that this Salt would be either altered
or incorporated by Acid Salts; and accordingly dropping Spirit of Vinegar into
some of the Tincture it lost its Blew, but not the Golden Color; but upon an
Affusion of Oil of Tartar per deliquium, that correcting the Acid Salts, it
presently regained its Blew Color again, the ponderous Tartarous Liquor first
altering the Bottom of the Liquor and gradually rising again.

And since Kercherus Art. Mag. lucis and umbrae Lib. 1. Part 3. writes
something of this Exotic Plant, which agrees not with our account of it, since
he says it will according to the difference of the Medium, in respect of Light
and its several Positions, vary its Color; yet from the Account he gives of
it, it appears, that the Wood he made use of, was different from Ours since he
calls it a white Mexican Wood, whereas ours, as Monardes witnesses is brought
from Nova Hispania, and is not of a White, but a darker Color, except on the
outside, which part is much weaker than the other. Besides, he tells us that
his Tincture was like Spring Water when held betwixt the Light, whereas ours is
Yellowish or Reddish, as the Tincture is weaker or stronger. And since he tells
us, that the Tincture will afford all sorts of Colors, and resume a ceruleous
Color in the Dark, I could wish to know how he was convinced of the Latter;
and as for the Former, I have tried that it would not at all Answer. Though this
I must needs own, that having held a Tincture of Lignum Nephriticum in the Rays
of the Sun, in a darkened Room, partly in and partly out, and also, wholly out
of the Beams but partly near them, it afforded a much greater Variety of
Colors than in a lightened Room.

In this Experiment it is not a little to be admired, that the Blew Color
should be so easily destroyed, whereas the Yellow Color is so durable; and
further, that Acid Salts should destroy it and Sulphurous one Restore it.

A Corollary of the Tenth Experiment.
Acid and Sulphurous Salis adistinguish'd.
THis Experiment may give us a hint toward a Discovery of some way to
distinguish whether Liquors abound with Acid or Sulphurous Salts; for if they
be Acid, they destroy the ceruleous Color; if Sulphurous, they restore it.
And by this Method we have found, that, though it has been doubted what was the
Nature of Quicklime, it abounds with Lixiviate rather than Acid Salts. But of
what use this Tincture may be, where neither Acid nor Alkalious Salts are
Predominant, I leave to be determined by Experience; since I found not that
Spirit of Wine, Spirit of Tartar freed from Acidity, or Chemical Oil of
Turpentine would restore the ceruleous Color of this Tincture, when it
disappeared upon a mixture of Oil of Turpentine.

EXPERIMENT XI.
I Have a flat Piece of Glass, which held betwixt my Eye and the light appears
Yellow; but being held so, that it reflects fewer Beams upon the Eye, it
degenerates into to a pale Blew. And the same Piece of Glass being held
Perpendicular to the Horizon, that Part which the Sun shines on will be of a
more dilute Yellow, than the other which is shaded; but if it be held
Perpendicular to the Horizon, the shaded Part will be of a Golden Color and
the other Blew; if the Sunbeams pass through it upon a white Paper, they will
represent a Yellow; yet the Position may be so varied, as to yield a mixed
Color more or less inclining to Yellow in some Places and in others to Blew.
N. 1st In trying of these Experiments, the Sunbeams must fall upon the
superficial Parts of one side of the Glass, on which we must take care to keep
our Eye. And we have prepared a sort of Glass which would answer our
expectation by laying a Leaf of Silver on one side, and urging it with a
stronger Fire than usual. And one thing in this Experiment remarkable was, that
whereas common Artificers color their Glass by putting a Calx of Silver,
Calcined without corrosive Liquors, and tempered with fair Water, on the Plates
of Glass when they burn them, theirs appears Yellow whatever side is held to
the Eye, or in whatever Posture, but this of ours held betwixt the Eye and the
Light appeared Transparently Yellow; but the Eye being placed betwixt the Light
and it, it appeared Blew, and not in the least Transparent.

EXPERIMENT XII.
IT is worth observing, that, tho Painters can imitate most Colors which are
to be met in Nature, yet they make use of no more than, White, Black, Red, Blew
and Yellow, to produce all their Compositions: Thus Black and White represent
several sorts of Grays: Blew and Yellow, Greens; Red and Yellow, Orange Tawny;
Red with a little White, a Carnation; Red with an Eye of Blew, a Purple; and by
a Decomposition of all these, they represent what Colors they please. But in
producing of Colors it is to be observed, that we must take care that the
Pigments be so harmless as not to destroy each others Textures, for then the
success will be frustrated.

EXPERIMENT XII.
WE observed that the Color of a Body did not only seem compound, when we
looked through two Glasses at once upon it, but when the Beams of the Sun were
cast through a double Glass, the penetrating Beams would be tinged with the
compound Color. But the Rays of Light cast by reflection on a Sheet of Paper
from several varnished Glasses, they were tinged with none of the Colors
except Yellow, so that I suspected the Beams of Light to penetrate deeper into
that Substance than others, and to be tinged with the Varnish; which Guess I
was confirmed in, by spreading a little transparent Varnish of a Gold Color,
on a Plate of Muscovy Glass; for the Rays thence reflected were of a Yellow
Color.

EXPERIMENT XIV.
I Not only found by Experience, that those Colors, which are by the Schools,
taken to be Fantastical, might be compounded with as much certainty as real
ones; but that if those Colors were deficient, the resulting Color would be
so too. And amongst those Experiments I made, it was observable, that the
Yellow Beams of an Iris passing through a blew Glass were turned Green. And the
blew Part of an Iris cast upon Red CIoth, would turn it Purple: And by casting
one Part of an Iris upon another Iris made by another Prism, I could compound
Colors, which would answer my expectation as well as with those that are
esteemed real Colors.

EXPERIMENT XV.
I Endeavored to try what alteration would be made in Colors by the use of a
Colored Prism; but I found, that it was too difficult to get such as I
desired, since whatever Pigments a Prism was Colored with, they would make it
too Opake for our Purpose.

EXPERIMENT XVI.
THere are some Liquors which are of themselves devoid of Color, but when
raised in the form of Vapors, for the time have very conspicuous Ones; as
Spirit of Nitre and Aqua fortis, which in the form of Vapors put on a Red or a
deep Yellow. And I further Observed, that the Beams of the Sun Trajected
through these Steams appeared Tinged with their Color, and so did the Rays of
Light, which were received from the setting Sun upon a Piece of white Paper.

EXPERIMENT XVII.
HAving mixed Colored Powders together, I observed, that if a Liquor was made
use of in the Mixture, the same Color would not emerge as from the dry
Powders. Orpiment and Yellow Oker being mixed afford a good Green. A Yellow
solution of Gold in Aqua fortis being mixed with a blew Solution of crude
Copper by shaking yielded a transparent Green: And so did blew and yellow Amel
melted together: Whether this compound Color proceeds from a Union of Rays, or
else from the joint Effect they have upon the Retina, as when two Strings sound
at the same time they make one united Sound I shall not now stay to Examine;
but shall briefly intimate that by a good Microscope I could discern each of
the Powders of the Bise and Orpiment Distinct, so that a Transposition and
Juxtaposition of Parts may produce a new Color, by variously modifying and
reflecting the Rays of Light that fall upon them. So that Colors being
mechanically produced, there is no need of substantial Forms to explicate them;
nor do they seem to be such inherent Colors as they would have them to be,
since they consist only of a heap of mixed Particles of Matter. Nor does it
appear, how these compound Colors should be caused by a Sulphur, which though
the Ingredients must contain it, cause no such Effect there.

EXPERIMENT XVIII.
SYrup of Violets being dropped upon Paper, and a yellow Solution of Gold mixed
with it, the result was a Red, not a Green, which was occasioned by the Acid
Salts in the Solution; so that to produce a particular Color with certainty by
the mixture of Ingredients, it is requisite they should be such as may be mixed
without altering each others Texture, for a blew Solution of Copper in Spirit
of Urine, made with Syrup of Violets not a Blew, but a Green.

EXPERIMENT XIX.
TO show that Colors may be altered, without any Change in the Chemical
Principles of a Body, I shall urge, that essential Oils or Spirit of Wine being
shaken, till Bubbles rise, they will afford, as long as they last, very lively
Colors, and so does Water and Soap, made into Bubbles by Children; and so will
Bubbles in Oil of Turpentine and thin ones blown of Glass. And I have discerned
several Rainbows represented, by holding before my Ryes and the Sun, a Feather
or a Piece of black Ribband.

EXPERIMENT XX.
ALmost any Acid mixed with Syrup of Violets will turn it Red; but Oil of
Tartar per deliquium will turn it Green, and all other Alkalize Salts. And this
may discover, what Salts are predominant in Bodies, as well as our Tincture of
Lignum Nephriticum: Only it will not be worked upon by so slight and weak
Ingredients.

EXPERIMENT XXI.
BLew Bottle or Corn-weed being Candied preserves its Color a long time; and
when newly pressed the Juice will be Blew; yet Spirit of Salt will turn it Red,
and Alkalies, Green; and this being drawn upon a piece of Paper moistened with
an Acid, it rendered it Red. A Solntion of blew Vitriol in Water, upon an
Addition of a Lixiviate Liquor, or an urinous Salt, becomes Yellow: Whence it
appears, that Volatile or Alkalizate Salts change not Blew into Green upon the
account of an easy Transition from Blew to Green, but upon the Account of the
Texture of them.

EXPERIMENT XXII.
ITalian Painters being used to imitate Vliramarine Azure, by grinding
Virdigrease with Sal Armoniack, and leaving it to rot in a Dunghill; This gave
us a hint to pour Oil of Tartar upon a Solution of Verdigrease; which, though at
first, the Mixture was turbid, yet being settled, it produced a lovely
Tincture; and a Lixivium of Potashes, being made use of instead of this Oil,
it yielded an Azure something Paler than the former; and if Spirit of
Hartshorn be made use of instead of these, a greater variety of ceruleous
Liquors may be obtained. The better way to separate these Azure Liquors from
their Feces, is by Decentation, than Filtration, the Lquor being, by the latter
means usually stained.

EXPERIMENT XXIII.
Though the Fumes of Sulphur usually whitens Rose Leaves, yet Oil of Sulphur per
Campanam, heightens the Color of their Tincture.

EXPERIMENT XXIV.
A Grain of Cochinele dissolved in Spirit of Wine, and afterward gradually in
Water, it gave a Tincture to above 125000 times its weight; which is an
Instance of the great Minuteness of the Parts of Matter, and of a vastly minute
Division of them.

EXPERIMENT XXV.
RIpe Privet Berries, being crushed upon white Paper, stain it with a Purple;
Yet Spirit of Salt will turn it Red, and a Solution of Potashes, Green; and so
will Meserion, and the Juice of Pease. From whence and the like Experiments
before premised, it appears, that the Saline Parts of Bodies have a
considerable stroke in producing their Colors.

EXPERIMENT XXVI.
SPirit of Salt being dropped upon several Substances already Red, as Syrup of
Clovejuly-flower, Berries of Spina Cervina, an infusion of Red Roses, Brasil,
and several others, it either made no Alteration, or rendered the Red Lighter.
An infusion of Roses was turned into a dirty Color, by an affusion of a
Solution of Potashes; and Syrup of Cloves was rendered a little more inclining
to Green. Another Red Infusion was advanced into a Crimson; but the Juice of
Buckthorn-berries acquired a lovely Green.

EXPERIMENT XXVII.
SPirit of Salt had a very small Effect upon the Juice of Jasmin; but Spirit of
Urine turned it to a Greenish Yellow; and the Event was much the same when we
tried it with those less Oily Leaves, called Snow Drops, which appear about the
end of Winter.

EXPERIMENT XXVIII.
MAry-Gold Leaves, fresh Madder, and early Primroses, etc. being rubbed upon
Paper till they Colored it, they would be turned Red or Green, by Alkaliz'd
Liquors; though so Acid a Salt as the Spirit of it, rather diluted them, yet it
almost destroyed the Color of the early Primroses; and an Alkalizate Solution
turned the Juice of Madder Root Red, as well as the bruised Root it self. From
whence it abundantly appears, that the Effects of a peculiar Salt upon the
Juices of Vegetables depends on their particular Textures.

EXPERIMENT XXIX.
A Black-berry full Ripe, and another only Red, being rubbed upon a Piece of
Paper, the Juice of the former was turned into a Green by a Lixivium; and one
much fainter, by a Urinous Salt, and by an Acid, into a Red. But the unripe
Berry was little altered by the Acid, but by the other Juices, received
Impressions different from the former. Damask Roses would be colored Red by an
Acid, and Green by an Alkaly; but a Yellow Province Rose by a Solution of Salt
of Tartar was turned into a Green Bluish Tincture; but an Acid only diluted
the Yellowness of the Leaves. And were I in the Island of Banda, I should try
what Effects these Salts would have on the Juice of Cloves, which I am told,
are first White, then Green, and afterward Reddish, and when dried, grow
Black; but the Flowers of them are said to be of an excellent Blew. And one
thing which deserves our notice is, that though Damask, as well as red Roses,
give a red Tincture to Water acidulated, yet the one has a purgative, and the
other a binding Quality. And to what has been said under this Experiment, I
shall add, that Mr. Parkinson tells us, that Buckthorn Berries gathered green,
and bruised into Allum-Water, yield a yellow; when they are black they yield a
Sap Green; and if they grow upon the Trees till the middle of November, they
yield a Purple Color. And Clusius of Alaternus tells us, that the grosser
Parts of some Plants differ in Color from each other; for the Portugal's Dye
their Nets blew with a Bark, and blackish blew with the Wood.

EXPERIMENT XXX.
TO show that a change of Color depends on an Alteration of Texture, I shall
add, that the same Matter being sealed up in a Philosophical Egg, it will by
Digestion, pass through several degrees of Colors, before it comes to that of
the noblest Elixir. And that several Substances will undergo changes of Color
by Digestion, is evident, in rectified Spirit of Hartshorn, Precipitations of
Amalgamas of Gold, and Mercury, without Addition, where by a continued Heat,
the Silver-colour'd Amalgama will be turned into a shining red Powder; which
Effects are produced without an Addition or Substraction of Matter, by the bare
change of Texture.

EXPERIMENT XXXI
IN most Tinctures which the Chemists draw, Redness is the common Color, as
well as in more gross Solutions, though the Menstruums be colorless; as with
Spirit of Wine, from Jalap, Guajacum, Amber and Benzoin, Flowers of Brimstone,
Turpentine, etc. And most Acid or Alkalizate Salts will with sulphurous Bodies
produce a Red, and so will Glass of Antimony; and I know an Acid which will
turn Oil of Turpentine into a Red.

EXPERIMENT XXXII.
THOUGH Balsam of Sulphur seems red, as well as other Liquors in a broad Vessel,
yet it stains Paper yellow; but a Tincture of Cochenele, never so much diluted,
will still remain Red.

EXPERIMENT XXXIII.
OIL of Turpentine digested upon white Sugar of Lead, yields a red Tincture.

EXPERIMENT XXXIV.
IF 5 Ounces of Brimstone and Sal Armoniack, be distilled in a Retort with 6
Ounces of Quicklime, in a Sand-Heat gradually increased, a volatile Tincture
of Sulphur will be obtained, which is red, though none of the Ingredients were
so; yet if agitated when the Vessel it is contained in is unstopp'd, it will
yield a white Fume. And sometimes it may be so drawn, that though the Fumes are
white, yet the Liquor will dye the Fingers black.

EXPERIMENT XXXV.
WE let a Drop or two of Oil of Vitriol fall upon Oil of Aniseeds coagulated,
and spread upon white Paper, by which there was a red Color produced with Heat
and Smoke.

EXPERIMENT XXXVI.
ONE thing to be observed in the Experiments above recited is, that though the
Colors mentioned, are easily produced; yet some of them presently fade, by the
Influence of the Air, or the Intestine Motion of their own Parts. And Parkison
tells us, that Berries of that Plant, which bears Turnsol, a Pigment well known
in Painters Shops, when they are at their full Maturity, yield a Juice, which
being rubbed upon Paper appears green, but presently degenerates into a bluish
Purple, upon the Cloth or Paper; and these being wet in Water, and wrung forth,
will give it a Claret Color. And I have observed the Red Color of Buckthorn
Berries degenerate into a dirty Gray Color; yet by the Mixture of an Alkaly or
an Acid it would put on a green or red Color; and the same Success we had when
we dropped the same Liquor upon a Piece of glazed Tile. And I have observed,
that Silver precipitated in Aq. Fortis, though at the first it is white, yet when
upon a Decantation of the Liquor, the Superficies becomes exposed to the Air,
it presently turns blackish. And I have seen a sort of Pears, which would give
a red Tincture to Wine. And it is observed, that Spirit of Wine being kept upon
white Salt of Tartar, acquires a red Tincture. But as for the reasons of these
things, and also why all Bodies burnt in the open Air almost, are black, I
shall leave to Pyrophilus to enquire.

EXPERIMENT XXXVII.
SPirit of Salt poured on a Solution of Cochinele, or the Juice of black
Cherries, renders their Colors clearer; but turns an Infusion of Brasil
yellow, the Acid Liquor in both weakening the Spirit on which it falls; for as
Crimson is a Red with an Eye of blew, so Yellow is but a dilated Red; and
therefore Alkalizated Salts, will not only restore the Infusion of Cochinele
and Brasil to Crimson, but will turn the yellow Juice of Madder red, and an
Infusion of Brasil to a Crimson. And here it may be worth while to consider,
why Blew and Purple seem to be deeper Colors than Red; and therefore the
Juices of Plants of either of the two former Colors, may be turned red by
Spirit of Salt, or Aqua Fortis; yet Syrup of Violets, should be, on the
contrary, turned green by Oil of Tartar and Spirit of Urine, which is a more
dilute Color than Blew.

EXPERIMENT XXXVIII.
SALT distilled, at a certain time of the Operation yields red Fumes; and
Vitriol, tho green or blew, comes over in white Fumes; and the like I have
observed in the Fumes of several other Concretes. And I have observed, that
even Soot has filled the Receiver with white Fumes; yet neither Spirit of
Nitre is red, nor that of Vitriol or Soot white. And to these Observations we
may add, that the Empyreumatical Oils of Woods are of a Color betwixt black
and red: And though there is so great a difference in the Colors of Plants, yet
the distilled Liquors vary not. And it is observed in Sublimation, that the
Flowers differ much in Color from the Fumes that compose them; as red Benzoin
yields white Flowers, and Antimony affords Flowers some of them Red and some
Gray; and some of them purely white. And it is the Practice of some Glass Men,
to make a Blew sublimate of a convenient Proportion of Brimstone, Sal Armoniack
and Quicksilver: And it is observed, that Orpiment which is a yellow Substance,
yields a Sublimate, amongst which, several red Fumes ascend; and I have seen a
Sublimate whose lower Parts were set with reddish Particles, which glittered
prettily.

EXPERIMENT XXXIX.
IF good Spirit of Urine be dropped into a Tincture, or an Infusion of the
Flowers of Pomgranates, the Red will be turned into a Green Color; but by
Spirit of Sea-Slat, it will become come a transparent Liquor, which red may be
tur'd into a dirty Green, by Spirit of Urine.

Oil of Tartar being dropped into Water wherein Leaves of Senna were immersed,
it presently appeared red; but the same would not happen upon an Affusion of
Oil of Vitriol. Yet red Rose Leaves being put in warm Water, Oil of Vitriol
extracted a red Tincture, but Oil of Tartar would not. But we observed, that
the Oil of Tartar only hastened the Tincture of the Senna, since the Leaves in
a Nights time will yield a Tincture in cold Water, which will not be heightened
by Salt of Tartar. And it may be said of the red Rose Leaves, that the Tincture
was rather extracted than produced by the Oil: Yet this is observable, that in
extracting the Tinctures, the one will not do what the other will; but I have
found that Aqua Fortis will do as well as Oil of Vitriol.

If upon the red Tincture of Roses decanted, you drop Spirit of Urine, and
shake the Viol it is contained in, it will acquire a greenish Blew; which is
observable, since the turning of red into blew is a very unfrequent
Observation. And in the Passage of this red Tincture to a blew, if it be taken
as the Liquor is dropp'n in, it will afford a pretty variety of Colors, so as
sometimes to represent the Tincture of Lignum Nephriticum. And if the Tincture
be very high, the Spirit of Urine will turn it to a deep Opacous blew; but the
Liquor being left open two or three Days, both the blew and the red Color
vanished; the Liquor being of an Amber Color, and having a feculent Sediment
of the same Color, which seems to be formed of the Roses drawn together by the
Acid, and precipitated by the Volatile Salt of the Spirit of Urine, in whose
room other sulphurous Salts may be substituted. And on this occasion I shall
add, That

Having dropped Spirit of Urine into an Infusion of Galls, it presently turned
the Red Liquor into a Purple one; but if the Infusion of Logwood were
impregnated with acid Spirits of Salt, it would yield neither a Red nor a
Purple, but a yellow Liquor.

EXPERIMENT XL.
TO show that Colors may be generated de novo, and again destroyed; We dropped
Oil of Tartar into a Solution of Sublimate in Water, and the Liquor being
agitated, it was turned into a deep Orange Color; but upon dropping in some
Drops of Oil of Vitriol, and continuing to shake the Glass strongly, the whole
will presently become transparent again. In which the Color results from a
Coalition of the Mercurial Particles with the saline ones, and with the
Alkalizate Particles of the Salt of Tartar, which swim up and down in the Oil:
But how these uniting come to form such a Substance as reflects such a Color,
I confess my self at a loss to explain. But in Confirmation of the Reason I
have given for the Color of this Precipitate; I shall add, that having
sublimed together equal Parts of Sal Armoniack and Sublimate, and dissolved the
ascending Flowers in Water, and siltred it, the limpid Liquor turned white upon
the Affusion of an Alkaly, and not yellow. And not only by altering the Texture
of the Mercury, but by varying the precipitating Liquor, the Success of the
Experiment will be different: For if Spirit of Urine be made use of instead of
Salt of Tartar, the Precipitate will be of a different Color from the former.
And from Quicksilver it self, without Sublimate, we may prepare a Pricipitate,
dissoluble in Water without discoloring it. And the Color of such Substances
so much depends on the Texture of the Parts concurring to the Composition, that
though in our Experiment, Oil of Vitriol destroys the yellow Color; yet by the
Assistance of Oil of Vitriol, we may make a yellow Precipitate, with
Quicksilver and Water alone. And I the rather employ Oil of Vitriol in such
Experiments, because it is not only void of Color, but strong and incisive;
for notwithstanding common and undephlegmed Aqua Fortis will not effect the
same thing; yet being carefully dephlegmed, it will in some measure answer
Expectation. But one thing to be noted in this Experiment, is, That though by
dropping in Oil of Tartar and Oil of Vitriol successively, the Liquor will
regain and lose it is yellow Color, yet the Proportion of the Liquor growing
less in respect of the successive additional Drops, the yellow Color will
gradually appear more faint.

An Improvement of the fortieth Experiment.
If Crude Antimony be boiled in a strong Lixivium, it will yield a sulphurous
Sediment, which will settle in yellow Flakes in the Bottom, and will be more
apt to take fire than the Powder of Antimony. Therefore considering that
Sulphur boiled in a Lixivium, may be precipitated by Rhenish or white Wine; and
likewise that by Acids I could precipitate other sulphurous Concretes out of
lixiviate Solvents, such as crude Antimony; And though common Sulphur yields a
white Precipitate called Lac Sulphuris; yet I concluded that Antimony would
yield a yellow one, as well by being made by Oil of Vitriol, as Length of time.
Wherefore I put a fresh Solution of Antimony into one Glass, and some of the
Orange colored Mixture into another, where by dropping Oil of Vitriol into the
latter, it would become transparent, whereas the same Oil would turn the other
clear Solution into a deep Yellow. But in this Experiment we are to observe,
that the Solution of Antimony must be fresh, otherwise in Winter it will scarce
succeed.

Reflections on the XL Experiment compared with the X and XX.
Though the X and XX Experiments show how Acids may be distinguished from Urinous
and Alkalizate Salts; yet thence we cannot distinguish Urinous Salts from
Alkalous. But by the Preceding Experiment I was enabled to distinguish
Lixiviates by their precipitating an Orange Tawny, from a Solution of Sublimate
in Water, whereas Urinous Salts would make it either White or Milky. So that by
this Experiment I could discover, that Sal Armoniack drawn from an Alkaly, is
but a Urinous Salt more refined, the Alkaly separating, and retaining the
Sea Salt mixed with it; for it would not only turn Syrup of Violets green, and
Verdigrease Azure, but would precipitate a White Substance from a Solution of
Sublimate. And from hence we may not only learn to conclude Affirmatively, but
Negatively of the Nature of Salts, since Spirit of Wine and Essential Oils have
either no Salt in them, or it is of a peculiar kind, since they will neither
turn Syrup of Violets Red nor Green, nor a Solution of Sublimate White or
Yellow. I found that Spirit of Oak, though it be a Chemical Principle, yet it
would turn Syrup of Violets Purple, and destroy the Blewness of a Tincture of
Lignum Nephritium, as Acids do, and would corrode Coral like Spirit of Vinegar;
but when the Acid Part of this Spirit was separated from the other, it would
have no more Effect upon any of those Liquors as Spirit of Wine or Essential
Oils. And by this Method we may discover the Nature of most Salts produced
either by Art or Nature; And by the same Method here laid down I have observed,
several Liquors, which, though run per Deliquium, would have no other Effect than
Spirit of Wine. And I know how to make a strong saline Body, which will neither
Work upon Syrup of Violets, or a Solution of Sublimate. And now to what I have
said, it may be seasonable to add, that the Effects of Salts upon a Solution of
Sublimate depend on the peculiar Texture, not only of the Solution, but of the
Bodies by which it is precipitated; for a Solution of Gold in Aqua Regia will
yield a yellow Precipitate, whether Oil of Tartar, Spirit of Urine or Sal
Armoniack be added to it; yet Oil of Vitriol, which precipitates a Solution of
Silver in Aqua Fortis will have no such Effect. And the Crystals of Silver
dissolved, will yield a White Precipitate; whether an Alkaly, or an Acid. was
dropped into the Solution, yet Sal Armoniack would not produce the like Effect:
So that the Superfluous Moisture being evaporated, the metalline Corpuseles
with the saline ones that had imbibed them, coagulated into Salt, as such
Solutions usually do, when the Metal has been precipitated.

EXPERIMENT XLI.
AN Azure Solution of Copper in Spirit of Urine being shaken with Oil of
Vitriol, would become clear as Water. And though Aqua Fortis usually extracts a
Blew greenish Solution from French Verdigrease, yet being dropped into a
Solution of it in Water, it almost rendered it Colorless; but upon an Affusion
of Oil of Tartar or Spirit of Urine, it will disclose a Color somewhat
different from the Solution of Verdigrease it self.

EXPERIMENT XLII.
THE dried Calx remaining after an Evaporation of a Solution of Quicksilver in
Aq. Fortis, gave a yellow Tincture; but Quicksilver being put into a Retort
with four times it is Weight of Oil of Vitriol, and the saline Menstruum being
drawn off in a Sand-heat, till a dry Calx remained in the Bottom, though this
Calx was of a White Color, it would pass through a Milky Color to a Yellow
upon an Affusion of Water. And Beguinus, Tyr. Chym. Lib. 2. cap. 13. Prepares
Turbith Mineral, which he calls Mercurius praecipitatus Optimus, by digesting,
and then two or three times Cohobating one Part of Quicksilver with two of Oil
of Sulphur, and by frequent Ablutions in hot distilled Water, etc. But though
this Yellow of ours be a much finer than any in the Painters Shops, yet it is
too dear for ordinary use, were we certain it would agree with oiled Colors.
From whence it appears, that a Menstruum which is devoid of Color, may produce
a Color, being mixed with a White Calx.

EXPERIMENT XLIII.
TO show that a Color may be produced by a Liquor that has neither Color nor
saline Parts, we poured Water on a gray Calx of Vitriol, and though at the first
the Mixture was of a muddy Color, yet being shut up in a Viol for some days,
the Calx being partly dissolved and shot into Vitriol, gave the Water a
vitriolate Color; and so it did to fresh Water poured on the Calx, when the
tinged Liquor was decanted.

EXPERIMENT XLIV.
BY dropping a few Drops of a Tincture of Cochinele or Brazil into Water; it
will acquire a Pink Color; from which, by successive Additions, it will pass
from that to a fine Red, and from that to a Crimson, and after that, to an
Opace Red; and several intermediate Colors may be perceived in it is Passage
from one Color to another. But these variations will be more conspicuous if we
make use of cylindrical Pipes instead of Viols. And I have observed, that a
Tincture of Brazil being put into a Viol, that in the Body of it appeared Blew,
but that in the Neck, which the Rays of Light trajected more plentifully,
appeared green; and I had a Piece of Glass, which being held betwixt the Eye
and the Light seemed clear, and when the Eye was placed betwixt it and the
Light, it appeared slightly discolored; yet, being applied to the Glass it was
knocked off, it appeared as green as Grass. And I have had Bottles, which, though
they were made of the same Materials with the Stopples, were nevertheless
different in Color. And I have a flat Glass, which obverted to the Eye flat,
appears like ordinary Window Glass; but if the Edge of it be obverled to my Eye
in a convenient Posture, it will appear like an Emerald: And I have had a
certain Pigment, which if it lay thick upon a Piece of Paper, would appear to
be of a Crimson, but being spread thin on the Paper, it would seem green. And I
have likewise observed, that that blew Substance called Litmase being dissolved
in Water, gave it a Tincture betwixt Crimson and Purple; yet it stained Paper
Blew; and the like Color was afforded by it on a Piece of flat glazed Earth.
And some of the same being dropped into a Glass of Water of the Figure of an
inverted Cone, exhibited great-Varietys of Crimson and Purple; and when the
Litmase was perfectly mixed with the Water it afforded a glorious Yellow like
that of a Topaz, when a few Drops of Spirit of Salt were dropped into it: And
if a few Drops of a Solution of Potashes were dropped into it, they Subsiding
into the bottom of it would afford a bright dilute Color in the bottom of the
Glass; a Purple above that, and a deep Crimson, betwixt that, and a Yellow,
which rought to the top of the Glass: And if Spirit of Sal Armoniack were
poured upon that it would turn Part of the Yellow into a Purple or Crimson.
From which Experiments it appears, that as the Particles of a Pigment are
nearer or more dispersed, the Colors represented by them Vary.

EXPERIMENT XLV.
A Preparation of Steel, used as a Succedaneum of Spaw-Waters, and whose Color
was like that of German Amethist; being dropped into Rhenish-Wine afforded a
lovely Green, but Water or Spirit of Wine will not receive that Tincture from
it. And to satisfy my self that the Effect depended not on any Acidity in the
Wine, I impregnated Water with Spirit of Salt, but notwithstanding, it would
not receive a green Tincture from the Liquor. And to vary the Experiment, I
dropped Alkalizate and urinous Salts into the Green Tincture, by which it put
on a dirty and a turbid Color, but if this essense of Steel was dropped into
Water impregnated with Spirit of Salt, a Solution of Salt of Potashes or of
Spirit of Sal Armonick would turn it Yellow, the Vitriolate Salt being
precipitated by them: And Olaus Wormius takes Notice of a rare kind of
Turn-sole, which would communicate a red Tincture to Water; and though it would
to Wine, yet Spirit of Wine would not be at all Tinged by it, so that Tincture
both depends on the peculiar Textures of the Body that receives and that which
gives the Tincture.

EXPERIMENT XLVI.
THe Adventitious Colors of Metals are either such as they acquire by the
Action of the Fire upon them; or such as result from the Coalition of Metaline
Particles with the Mestruum which dissolves them; or lastly when they are mixed
together by Fusion.

And first Tin, by the Action of the Fire being calcined, affords a white Calx
and Lead a Red one; and Copper calcined per se, yields a dark blackish Powder;
and Iron by reverberated Flames may be turned into a Crocus, and Mercury may be
turned into a Red Powder. And,

Besides these more obvious Colors there are several intermediate ones, whilst
by the Action of Fire, Metals are a Calcining. And not only the Calces, but the
Glasses of Minerals vitrifi'd per se are of Colors different from the Metal;
so that I have seen a Glass made of Silver, of a dark Color.

And not only Metals, but Minerals may be brought to yield Colors, by the
Action of the Fire, different from their own, as Antimony affords a whitish
Gray Calx, and Flowers variously Colored; and the Calx by being flux'd will
yield a Glass of a yellow or reddish Color. And Vitriol Calcined passes
through several Colors before it comes to be of a dark Purple.

EXPERIMENT XLVII.
AS for the Adventitious Colors produced by the Union of Metals with their
Solvents; Gold gives Aqua Regis it is Yellow Color, but Mercury gives no
considerable Color to Aqua Fortis, except a Greenness or Blewness at the
first, which presently disappears. Tin corroded by Aqua Fortis, subsided in the
form of curdl'd Milk or Eggs. Lead dissolved in Spirit of Vinegar, affords a
clear Solution; and if the Menstruum be drawn off, appears White. Iron
dissolved by Oil of Vitriol diluted with Water, yields a Green Vitriolum
Martis; but gives a Saffron Color to Aqua Fortis, or a yellowish Red. Common
Silver, such as is coined, gives a Copper Tincture to Aqua fortis; but such as
is refined perfectly, gives a bluish Green to Aqua fortis, and Spirit of
Vinegar; and being sublimed with Sal Ammoniac, it affords a bluish Sublimate:
And indeed Copper dissolved in several Menstruums will yield a great Variety of
Greenish Blew or bluish Green Colors. But with Spirit of Sugar and Turpentine
it affords a Blew Tincture with a mixture of Green. And to show that the
Adventitious Color may result from the Copper it self as well as the Salts
which Corrode it, I moistened Dantzick Vitriol with Spittle, and then rubbing it
upon a Knife, it gave it a redish Color like that of Copper. Saccharum Saturni
with Spirit of Turpentine will yield a red Balsam; and that Stone which Helmont
calls Paracelsus his Ludus, in a proper Menstruum affords sometimes a yellowish
and sometimes a red Solution.

And before I leave this Experiment I shall add that if Quicksilver be
precipitated out of Aqua fortis with Spirit of Sea Salt, or Sea Salt dissolved
in Water, it will subside in the form of a white Powder; but if it be
precipitated with an Alkaly it yields a yellow tawny Powder; but if the
Menstruum be drawn off without precipitating it, the remaining substance, will
vary it is Color, as it is exposed to different degrees of Heat; so that once I
observed the white Calx, to remain partly in the bottom of the Vial, of a deep
Yellow, and in some part Red, the remaining Part being elevated in the form of
a reddish and ash-colored Sublimate. And Vermilion, is only a Sublimate of
Mercury and Brimstone.

EXPERIMENT XLVIII.
TO show that Metals Associated with other Bodies will afford different
Colors, I have given an Instance in Silver, which gave Glass a lovely golden
Color. And I shall now add, that I am told, that Artificers paint Glass yellow
with Calx of Silver. And I have obtained a Substance of a saphirine Blew from
Shel-silver mixed with Powder of crystal Glass, kept in Fusion two or three
Hours, which I attributed to some Copper latent in the Silver. And though Copper
calcined per se yields a dark colored Calx, yet it tinges Glass Green; But
being kept in Fusion with 100 times it is Weight in Glass, it afforded not a
green, but a blew Substance, which whether it proceeded from the Action of the
Mineral, or it is saline Parts only, or both, I must not stay to enquire. But to
proceed, Putty made of Tin and Lead Calcined together, being a white Calx gives
colliquated Glass the resemblance of white Amel, which will receive into it the
Colors of diverse Minerals which will endure the Fire: And I have elsewhere
taken Notice, that blew and yellow Amel, being compounded will afford a Green.
And it is commonly known that the dark Substance called Zaffora will give Glass
a blew Tincture. And that dark Substance termed Magnesia from it is similar
Color to that of a Lodestone, gives Glass not only Colors different from its
own, but in themselves; as a Red, Purplish or Blackish, as the Quantity of it
varies; yet it is used to free Glass from that bluish green Color that it is
subject to; and this may serve to confirm what we delivered in the XLIV
Experiment, viz. that as the Parts of a Pigment are more closely or set at
distance, the Color will vary. And here it may not be altogether fruitless to
advertise, that it may be a good way of trying Ores, and what Metal they most
abound with, to try what Color they give Glass, when mixed in a due
proportion, and kept in Fusion in an equal Degree of Heat and length of time.

But to proceed to other Instances agreeable to those we have laid down, yellow
Orpiment and Sea Salt Sublimed together constitute white Arsnick, and though
Orpiment is the greater Part of the Composition; yet Arsenick gives Copper a
white Color within and without.

In counterfeiting Factitious Gems by Vitrification, it is observed, That
calcined Lead, Colliquated with white Sand, or Crystal powdered by successive
Ignitions and extinctions, yields a Decoction, of the Color of a German
Amethist: And I have observed, in calcined Lead it self, something like the
Color of such an Amethist: And with Glass of Lead overpowered with other
Pigments, you may emulate the Greenness of Emeralds, though in several Cases, the
Color of the Lead may vitiate that of the Pigment; and these Colors so much
depend upon Texture, that before the aforementioned Mixture acquired an
Amethistine Color, it passed through several intermediate Colors; and the
Colors of such Substances may be so much varied by degrees of Fire, that I
have had, a Mass of the size of a small Nut, of four distinct Colors.

ANNOTATIONS.
BUt besides the aformention'd Ways by which Metals may acquire adventitious
Colors, there are yet two unmention'd. For I am told, that it is impossible to
strike that Color termed a Bow-dye without the Materials be boiled in Vessels,
either made of, or lined with a Particular Metal.

The other way of dying Bodies, is with the Solution of Metals in their proper
Menstruums; so Gold dissolved in Aqua Regis, will dye the Nails and Skin, and
Hafts of Knives made of Ivory, not with a Golden Color, but a Purple, scarce
ever to be washed out: And I have already told you, that a Solution of Silver
will dye the Nails Black. So Brine colors Beef Green or Red, and a certain
proportion of Saltpeter and common Salt Colors Neats Tongues Red, and such
Flesh as would be otherwise White. And to these I shall add, that a Solution of
Sulphur of Vitriol or common Sulphur, will Color Silver with a golden or
reddish Color, for which Reason the Bath Water causes that Effect. And the
Juice of Alcanna, which is Green, dies the Skin and Nails of a lasting Red.

EXPERIMENT XLIX.
Boil a sufficient Quantity of powdered Turmerick with Water, adding to every
pound of Water, two Spoonsful of a filtred Solution of Potashes, in a clean
glazed Vessel, till by immersing a Piece of Paper, you find the Turmerick to
have given it is Tincture; then drop into the filtered Tincture a Solution of
Roach Allom, the tinged Parts being curdl'd, will swim up and down in Flakes,
and the Liquor will pass through a Filtre clear, leaving the Yellow Parts
behind it, which may be dulcifi'd by an Affusion of Water, but this vegetable
Lake may be separated from the decanted Liquor without filtration by pouring on
a sufficient Quantity of Water; for then it will either swim on the Top or
subside to the Bottom, and may be made fit for use by being dulcifi'd with
fresh Water, after it has been gathered by Filtration, and then it must be
dried upon a Cloth, under which Bricks Chalk or Paper, is placed to imbibe the
Moisture.

ANNOTATIONS.
Though it be generally believed, that this Magistracy of Vegetables is only made
up of the colored Parts of the Plants, yet to favor the contrary I shall
represent that Allom contains a stony Matter as well as an Acid Spirit; and
though Workmen in the making of it use a Sea Weed (called Kelp) and Urine, yet
natural Allom has been found in England, a Solution of which, by an Affusion
of Lixivium of Potashes would depose a white Curd, which being filtred would
leave behind it a metalline stony Calx, very White, little Bits of which, being
placed upon a live Coal, would neither melt nor fly away, nor would they wash
away in hot Water, so that they were unlikely to be separated from the
Vegetable Lake by Ablutions. And to this I shall add, that from the filtred
Liquor I have obtained saline Parts, which would Flame at a Candle, and fly
away with some Noise; and I have obtained such a Substance from Allom by
precipitating it with urinous Salts and even Urine it self; so that sometimes
we may think, that we obtain a Precipitate from a Liquor, when it is in a great
measure yielded by the Solution of Allom made use of to precipitate it.

The abovementioned way of making Lakes, being tried with Madder, it yielded a
Red one, and with Rue, it afforded one of the same Color with the Leaves. But
since the Color is extracted from the Vegetable by the addition of a Lixivium,
it is a Question, whether the Lake will always be of the Color of the Herb,
since Lixiviate Salts may not only extract, but alter the Tinctures of
Vegetables. And though, Acids sometimes do, yet we have found by experience, that
they will not always restore Colors destroyed by Alkalies, since Syrup of
Violets turned Green by an Alkaly, will not be restored to a Blew by an Acid,
but is changed to a Red. And I have found, that when the Color of the Lake was
not altered by the Alkaly, it would be much fainter than the Vegetable it was
drawn from. But to conclude this Experiment, I shall add, that Allom is not
only of use in such like Experiments as these; but also in the Dyers Trade.

EXPERIMENT L.
HAving a Mind not only to change the Color of one Body into another, but also
to obtain two Substances of distinct Colors from one Body; in order to it I
considered, that since Spirit of Vinegar wholly loses it is Acidity by working
upon Minium, the Solution would alter the Juices of Plants, as Oil of Tartar
usually does, and acordingly I found that it turned, an Infusion of red Rose
Leaves Green. And further considering, that Oil of Vitriol will precipitate
Solutions of Minerals, especially in Spirit of Vinegar, and that the Calcesare
usually fair and White:

Considering these things, I dropped a Solution of Minium into an Infusion of
Roses, by which it was turned Green; but dropping on that, Oil of Vitriol, it
would precipitate the Lead in the form of a white Powder, and leave in the
Liquor a clear and high Tincture of Roses, which appeared when the Experiment
was tried in a Glass shaped like an inverted Cone. And this Experiment likewise
succeeded, when Spirit of Salt was made use of instead of Oil of Vitriol; but
with Aqua Fortis it would not succeed; for though that Liquor will heighten the
Color of the Tincture of Roses, yet it will not precipitate the Lead.

And as by this means from a Green we obtained a white and red colored
Substance, so a Purple will yield a yellow and a red Liquor; for if instead of
an Alkaly, which turns an Infusion of Logwood Purple, I made use of a Solution
of Minium, and put one Part of this to two of the Infusion, Spirit of Salt
would precipitate a red Substance and leave the Liquor above Yellow. But an
Infusion of Logwood being turned Purple by a Mixture of a Solution of Minium,
Spirit Sal Armoniack dropped upon them, precipitated a Bluish deep Purple
Substance, partly in the form of a Powder and partly Curdl'd; but upon an
addition of Spirit of Salt the remaining Part of the Lead was precipitated in
the form of a white Powder; so that there were in the Glass three distinct
Colors, viz, a Purple at the bottom, a white Carnation upon that, and upon the
top a transparent Liquor, Yellow or Red.

But to conclude, I shall add that I would not have my Readers too hastily to
think, any of the foregoing Experiments false, though they should not succeed
upon first Trial, since very slight Circumstances may alter or frustrate the
Event of several of them; to Confirm which I shall add the following Instance,
viz. that if the Ingredients made use of to dye Scarlet, be weighed and mixed
never so exactly, and all other circumstances be observed; yet if they are not
boiled in a Vessel lined with Tin, the Cochineel will not be able to strike a
right Color.

FINIS.
Advertisement.
THE Works of the Honorable Robert Boil, Esquire Epitomized, Vol. I. By Richard
Boulton, of Brazen-Nose College in Oxford: Illustrated with Copper Plates.
Printed for J. Phillips at the Kings-Arms, and J. Tailor at the Ship in St.
Paul's Churchyard. Price Bound 6 s.

The Third Volume of the said Abridgment is now in the Press, and will be
Published in Michaelmas Term and sold at the same Places.

THE TABLE.
A.
THE Effects of AIR on Feathers in an exhausted Receiver, page 6, 7 The Force
of the Airs Expansion. p. 9, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17 The Specific Weight of a
determinate Proportion of Air and Water, page 19, 20 Air produced from Bread,
page 38 -- from Grapes, page 39, 79, 115 -- Grapes bruised, page 41 -- Must.
page 42 -- Apples, page 42, 121, 164, 164, 182 -- Plums and Apricocks, page 72,
77, 168 -- Pears and Apricocks, page 116 The Production of Air obstructed from
Dough, page 44 -- from Pears, page 45 -- Paste, page 48, 49, 56, 58 -- Raisins,
page 49 -- Plums and Apricocks, page 51 -- Grapes with Spirit of Wine, page 54
-- Without, page Ib. -- Peaches, page 55 -- from Ale in Vacuo, page 59 --
Pease, page 60 Amber burnt in Vacuo, page 113 Aq. Fortis mixed with Nitre, page
139 -- with Spirit of Wine, page 146 Ale in Vacuo, page 198, 199 Whether Air be
contained in the Pores of Water, page 205 Ants and Mites in a Receiver, page
227 Attraction what, page 234 Of the admirable Rarefaction of the Air without
Heat, page 249 Air expanded to 8000 times its Natural Dimensions, page 250 --
To 10000 times its Dimensions, page 251 Of the Duration of the Air's Spring,
page 253 Of the Condensation of the Air by Cold, page 255 Of the different
Extension of Air rarefied and compressed, page 257 Of the weakened Spring and
unheeded Effects of the Air, page 259 Of the Efficacy of the Air's Moisture,
page 272, 273, 341 Of the Insalubrity of the Air, page from 276 to 299 The
General History of the Air begun, page 330 What is meant by Air, Ibid. Its
Ingredients, page 331 Of the Air's Spring, page 334 Of the Generation of the
Air, etc. page 336 Of the Air's Weight, page 363
AE.
Whether Ether is contained in Vacuo Boyliano, page 4, 5, 6
B.
A small Bird included in a Receiver, page 93, 103, 209, 221 A Be in
Artificial Air, page 96 A Butterfly in Vacuo, page 105, 227 Beef enclosed in a
Receiver, page 68, 124, 176, 180, 187, 188, 192, 197, 198 Beans included in a
Receiver, page 133, 144 Butter, page 178 Bread in Vacuo, page 195 Beer in
Vacuo, page 198 Blackberrys in Vacuo, page 199 Blood and other Humors expanded,
page 218 The reason of Bubbles in Vacuo, page 230 Observations about the
Barometer, page 243 A statical Baroscope proposed, page 247 Of the Production
of Blackness, page 461, 469.
C
Colors produced in Vacuo, page 10, 11 Cherries enclosed in a Receiver, page
61, 62, 63, 64, 117, 153 Perfumed Cones in Vacuo, page 109, 110, 111, 112
Camphire in Vacuo, page 114 Cabbages in Vacuo, page 118 Coral, page 167
Cow-heel, page 194 Cream in Vacuo, page 197 CLARET in Vacuo, page 199 A
Crawfish, page 207 Catterpillars in Vacuo, Of the Changes of Colors in several
Mixtures, page 259, 260, 261, 262, 263, 305, 405 Of Clouds, page 344 Of the
Mechanical Production of Colors, page 436, 440. Promiscuous Experiments of
Colors, page 483.
D.
A Duck in Vacuo, page 200, 212 New Diseases caused by Subterraneal Effluvia,
page 296
E.
The Heart of an Eel in Vacuo. page 210 An Eft in vacuo, page 223 Of the
Mechanical Production of Electricity, page 323, 324, 325, 326, 327, 328, 329,
330, 355
F.
Flies enclosed in a Receiver, page 86, 105, 225 Frogs in compressed Air, page
87 -- In Artificial Air, page 99, 101 -- In Vacuo, page 108, 203, 210
Fly-blowings in a Receiver, page 106, 148 Frog-Spawn, page 106, 148 Flies Eggs
in Vacuo, 107 Flesh and Broth, page 185, 186, 192, 193 Of Frogs, page 344 The
Influence of the Air on Fire and Flame, page 401 The Relation betwixt Flame and
Air, Ibid. Of the Air in reference to Fermentation, Ibid.
G.
Grapes enclosed in a Receiver, page 64, 135, 162 Gilliflowers in compressed
Air, page 90 Goosberrys in a Receiver, page 101, 126, 131, 133 Gillyflowers in
a Receiver, page 71, 197 A Gudgeon in Vacuo, page 208 A Greefinch in Vacuo,
page 211, 214
H.
Hartsborn burnt in Vacuo, page 113, 194 A Statical Hygroscope proposed, page
264 Of the Utilities of Hygroscopes, page 265, 266, 267, 268, 269, 270, 271 Of
Hail, page 419
K.
A Kitling in Vacuo, page 204
L.
Why Liquors ascend in Syringes, page 2^^ Of the Production of Light in Vacuo,
page 10 A Limon enclosed in a Receiver, page 90, 120, Melted Lead in a
Receiver, page 138 Larks with Beef, page 181 -- with Butter, page 185 A Linote
in Vacuo, page 213 A Lark in Vacuo. page 214 A Leech in Vacuo, page 224 Of
Light ning, page 350 An Extract of Mr. Lock's Letter, page 367 Of the Effects
of the Air in reference to Life, page 410
M.
Milk in a Receiver, page 121, 184, 196 Mercury in Vacuo, page 151 Must, page
42 Minium, page 167 A Mouse, page 212, 220 Why Contiguous Marbles are not
easily separated, page 228 Marchasi^es burst by the Airsmoisture, page 274
Metals may be raised in the form of Vapors, page 297, 298 Of the ill Effects of
Mineral Fumes, page 293 Of the Celeftial and Aerial Magnets, page 312, 313, 314
Of the Production of Magnetical Qualities, page 315, 316, 317
Chymico-Magnetical Experiments, page 318, 319, 320, 321, 322 Of Mists, page 344
The Effects of the Air on Mineral Substances, page 400, 406 Of Maturation, page
428
N.
Nut-Kernels in a Receiver, page 128, 157
O.
Oranges shut up in a Receiver, page 67, 83, 84, 88, 119, 149 Oil per deliquium
with Spirit of Wine, page 145 Onyons in a Receiver, page 69, 81, 159 Oysters,
page 177, 207 Of the Effects of the Air on Odours, page 403 Of the Mechanical
Production of Odours, page 429, 430, 431, 432
P.
Pears included in a Receiver, page 75, 92, 126, 136, 160, 171 Paste enclosed
in a Receiver, page 97, 102, 131, 155 Pease in a Receiver, page 104, 128 Paper
burnt in Vacuo, page 113 Paste burnt in a Receiver, page 114 Plums in a
Receiver, page 40, 127, 129 Peaches, page 74, 169, 170, 172 Antidotes against
the Plague, page 294 Why the Plague sometimes ceases unexpectedly, page 295 The
Vestigation of Plants, etc. page 410
Q.
Quicksilver slacked in Vacuo, page 12 Latent Qualities in the Air, page 299,
310 Whence. p. 300 Of the Manifest Qualities of the Air, page 375, 376, 394 Of
the Production of manifest Qualities, page 408, 409
R.
Roses in a Receiver, page 83, 89, 165 Radishes with Claret, page 142 Raisins
of the Sun, page 39, 158 Rosemary and Water distilled in Vacuo, page 191 A
Roasted Rabbet in Vacuo, page 195 Of Rain, page 418
S.
Whether Sounds be Propagated in Vacuo, page 8 A Shrew-Mouse in a Receiver,
page 85, 91, 94, 103, 148 A Shrew-Mouse in a Wine-Gun, page 94 A Snail in
Artificial Air, page 103 Sulphur Viv. in Vacuo, page 114 A Solution of Salt in
a Receiver, page 138 Spirit. Sal Armon. with Copper, page 145, 151 Sal Armon.
and Oil of Vitriol, page 154 Sheeps Blood in Vacuo, page 196 A Snake in Vacuo,
page 202 Steams elevated by the Air. page 222 A Slow-worm and a Leech in Vacuo,
page 123 The Reason of Suction, page 232, 236, 238 Saline and Sulphurous Parts
in the Air, page 301, 343, 352 -- How raised, Ibid. Seminal Principles of all
sorts in the Air. page 304 Damasco Steel improved, page 305 The Medium of
Sounds, 363
T.
Tulips in a Receiver, page 82. 120. 166 A Tube immersed in Water, page 142
Venice Turpentine in a Wind Gun, page 150 Calx of Tin, page 167 Tadpoles in a
Receiver, page 217 Of Terrestrial Steams, page 344 Of the Effects of the Air on
Tastes page 404 Of the Mechanical Production of Tastes. page 421, 422. 423. 424.
425. 426. 427
V.
Vinegar with Eels in Vacuo. page 109 Urine in Vacuo, page 123 Violent Leaves,
page 196 A Viper in Vacuo, page 201, 213, 215 Of the Production of Vitriol,
page 303 The Effects of the Air on Vegetable Substances, page 398
W.
Spirit of Wine and Oil of Turpentine in Vacuo, page 141 A Whiteing in Vacuo,
page 152, 179 Of Winds, page 359 Of the Production of Whiteness. page 519
The End.
Books Printed for and sold by John Tailor at the Ship in St. Paul's
Churchyard.
In FOLIO.
POOL's Annotations on the Holy Bible, with Mr. Clark's Concordance to the
same, in 2 Vol. the 3d Edition: Much corrected.

Monsieur Thevenot's Travels into Persia and the East Indies. Phillips's New
World of Words; or an Universal English Dictionary, containing the proper
Significations and Derivations, of all Words from other Languages, etc. the 5th
Edition, with large Additions, and Improvements from the best English and
Foreign Authors.

Systema Agriculturae, The Mystery of Husbandry discovered; treating of the
several new and most advantageous Ways of Tiling, Planting, Sowing, Manuring,
Ordering and Improving all sorts of Gardens, Orchards, Meadows, Pastures, Corn
Lands, Woods and Coppices; with Monthly Directions for Husbandmen, and the
Interpretations of Rukick Terms. the 4th Edit.

IMPRIMATUR Liber Cui Titulus, THE WORKS Of the HONORABLE ROBERT BOIL, Esquire
EPITOMIZED. By RICHARD BOULTON.

JOHN HOSKYNS, V. P. R. S.
Vicesimo Septimo Martii, 1699.
THE WORKS OF THE HONORABLE Robert Boil, Esquire EPITOMIZED.

VOL. III.

BY RICHARD BOULTON, of Brazen-Nose College in Oxford.

Illustrated with COPPER PLATES.

LONDON: Printed for J. Phillips, at the King'-s Arms, and J. Tailor at the
Ship in St. Paul's Churchyard. MDCC.

TO THE Most Illustrious Prince WILLIAM, Duke of Bedford, Marquess of
Tavistock, Earl of Bedford, Baron Russel, and Baron Russel of Thornhaugh, Baron
Howland of Streatham; Lord Lieutenant of the Counties of Bedford and Cambridge,
and during the Minority of Wrichesly, (commonly called Marquess of Tavistock)
his Grandson and Heir apparent, Lord Lieutenant of Middlesex; as also Custos
Rotulorum for the said County and the Liberties of Westminster; One of the
Lords of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, and Knight of the most
Noble Order of the Garter.
May it please your Grace,
THE Great and Noble Character which you have already obtained in the World,
has justly obliged them both to applaud and admire You; and no Wonder then,
that it should raise in me an Ambition to lay this at Your Feet; where whilst I
lie secure from the Censure of the World under your Grace's Patronage, I have
this great Advantage, that in whatever I can say, in relation to your
Illustrious Character, I cannot be Guilty of Flattery; since the World
universally agrees, that Your Noble Qualifications are not unworthy so Noble a
Prince; Your Sagacity and Judgment not being less conspicuous in State Affairs,
than your Virtue and Piety in Divine things; the Former having rendered You both
acceptable and serviceable in Council, as the Latter have made You an Eminent
and Illustrious Example of Christianity; so that You become serviceable to your
Country upon a double score; Your Virtues incite your Admirers to pursue and
emulate Good Actions, and your Wisdom and Prudence contribute to the well
Governing of a People, who are the more disposed to be Loyal and Good Subjects,
the more by Example you promote Religion, which teaches them to obey: Upon
which Account we may truly say, that You act not the Politician, but, what is
much more difficult, like a Wise and Prudent Statesman; You gain the People
not by Stratagem, but Example.

But on this Ocasion I can make use of no greater Encomiums than what his
Majesty has been pleased to Honor You with, in the Preamble to the Patent
which creates you Duke, where He declares, in better Words than I am now Master
of, that, as there was no Family in England more conspicuous in Virtue and
Piety, so he thought himself obliged to give Testimony of it, by conferring
that Honor on You, which You long before deserved.

But not to enlarge too much on a Subject which the World is so well acquainted
with, I shall need to say no more, than that in Your Illustrious Person we may
see all the just Qualifications of an English Nobleman concentered; since your
Honor is supported not only by Titles, but Actions; so that Your Character is
pure and unspotted, in a World ready to take the least occasion of Calumny and
Aspersion.

Let me therefore rather admire than endeavor to delineate so Noble and so
Great a Character; which be it never so well copyed, must come far short of its
truly Illustrious Original.

I shall therefore only add, that all Your Admirers wish that You may long
continue an Ornament of the English Nation, and a Standard of Honor and true
Nobility; which are more particularly the Wishes of,

May it please your Grace, Your most humble, and most devoted Servant, RICHARD
BOULTON.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
HAving already, in the Prefaces prefixed to the two preceding Volumes,
intimated the Reasons briefly, why I have placed the Subjects in the Order and
Method they there appear in, I shall take the same Method in this. And,

First, The Second Volume concluding with those Subjects which are more
immediately the Objects of our Senses, viz. Tastes, Odours, and Colors, this
Third begins with what our Author has said in Relation to Cold and Heat; to
which is added, what he has delivered concerning Fire and Flame, and those
Bodies which chiefly affect our Sight. And as for the remaining Part of the
Book, it will be so evident to the Reader, that the Subjects bear a Relation
one to anooher, that there is no need I should allege any thing else to
suggest why I placed them in that Order.

And now having thus far at the last performed a Task which has been so long
desired, and which has hitherto been so well accepted by the Learned; it would
be Ingratitude in me not to return them Thanks, for receiving so heartily the
Labors of one who values himself upon nothing more than that he has had the
opportunity of passing away his Time in their Service, and in contributing his
Endeavors in a Work that may be useful in promoting Natural Knowledge: To do
which, is not only the Study, but the Diversion of the Candid Reader's very
Humble Servant,

R. BOULTON.

A Catalogue of Books Printed for J. Tailor, at the Ship in St. Paul's
Churchyard.
1. POol's Annotations in 2 Vol. Fol. The 4th Edition now in the Press. 2.
Phillips's new World of Words, or an Universal English Dictionary, containing
the proper Significations and Derivations of all English Words. The 5th
Edition, with Improvements from the best English and Foreign Authors. Fol. 3.
The Mystery of Husbandry discovered. The 4th Edition, with large Additions
throughout the whole. 4. Archbishop Usher's Life and Letters. Published by Dr.
Parr, his Graces Chaplain. Fol. 5. Love's whole Art of Surveying and Measuring
of Land made Easy. 4 to. 6. Abbadie of the Truth of the Christian Religion, in
Two Parts. 8 vo. 7. Quintilian's Declamations Englished. 8. Ward's Compendium
of Algebra. 9. Bp. Ho^ on the Lord's Prayer. 10. Diogen ^aertius Lives of the
Philosophers, in 2 Vol. English. 11. Edward's Authority, Style, and Perfection
of the Scriptures. 12. Plutarch's Morals. 5 Vol. Englished by several Hands.
13. Dr. Eachard's Works. 14. Logic, or the Art of Thinking, done into English
by several Hands, The 3d Edition. 15. Esop's Fables, English, with Cuts, the
true sort. 16. The Queen's Closet opened. The Tenth Edition with Additions. 17.
A large and general Phrase-Book, By W. Robertson, M. A. 18. Dr. Salmon's
practical Physic.
TO THE Learned and Ever Honored HANS SLOANE M. D. FELLOW, OF THE College of
Physicians; AND SECRETARY TO THE Royal Society.
Learned Sir,
GRatitude it self does not only oblige me to make a Thankful Acknowledgment of
Your Favors, but at the same time, makes the Obligations greater, since the
Opportunity of owning Favors received from Eminent Men, makes an Addition to
them.

And if Gratitude be such a Virtue as carries along with it it is own Reward,
and also a future Obligation, it is the greater Satisfaction to Me, that whilst
I own your former Favors, I lay a Foundation for a second Acknowledgment; But
more, that it gives me the Opportunity of soliciting Your Patronage, which you
are so free to give to any thing that may promote Natural Knowledge: The
Noble-Design of that Royal Society, in which, Your Station makes you an Useful,
but Your Qualifications a more Serviceable Member.

And as ^our continual Contributions to the Philosophical Transactions, for
which the World is obliged to that Learned and Royal Society, and in Great
Measure to You, makes them the more Valuable; so Your Readiness to encourage my
weak Endeavors has given me sufficient Reason to acknowledge my self,

Learned Sir. Your Most Obliged and Most Humble Servant, R. BOULTON.

THE PREFACE To the READER.
Candid Reader.
ALthough it is the General Consent of all Learned Men, that the Author 's
Works deserve the highest Esteem amongst all Cultivators of Natural Knowledge;
yet, it is as common a Complaint that long Apologies and too frequent
Excursions interspersed through his Writings make 'em less serviceable to
Vulgar Readers, who are unable to carry his Sense along with them, when
interrapted too often with Digressions, which have little or no Relation to the
Subject under Consideration.

And as his Prolix and Complaisant Way of Writing is some Disadvantage to
Vulgar Readers; so there are some, who, though they have Abilities sufficient to
extract the Instructive Part, and to pass over his Prolixities, without losing
the Advantage of his Improvements; yet they are not backwards to say, that the
Reading of Compliments takes up too much time, and they had rather have the
Instructive Part, without his long digressive Excuses, since Men, desirous of
Knowledge, and less studious of Compliments, need no Apologies to render
Knowledge Acceptable, it being sufficiently recommended to Inquisitive Readers
by its own Usefulness.

The Consideration of this made me more willing to be concerned in a Work,
likely to be useful to vulgar Readers, and Acceptable to All; being desirous
and ready, to take any Opportunity of expressing my Willingness to do any
thing, that may oblige the Learned World, or tend to the Improvement of
Knowledge.

For though it is not to be denied, but that Compliments are great Ornaments and
Arguments of the Candor of a well accomplished Author; yet, it is to be
allowed, that, as too many of the finest Flowers may as well intercept the
Light of the Sun, as an obscure Cloud, so Compliments may prejudice Knowledge
if too frequent, as soon as entertaining Digressions.

And if Digressions of any kind be of Disservice to the Reader, and
consequently Disadvantagious to the Author, it will be the more acceptable
Work, if whilst I endeavor to gratify the Reader, I become serviceable to the
Author, in dispersing those Clouds; which, though they may seem Gentlemen-like
Embellishments, are not so entertaining to Philosophers, who consider things
just as they are without Additions of Art or Rhetoric.

Having thus briefly given the Reader the Reasons, which induced me to the
present Work, I shall in the next place proceed to give an Account of the Work
it self.

First then, considering that the Author 's Design and Aim was not only to
improve Knowledge, but, to use a Motto prefixed to one of his Books from the
Illustrious Verulam, Potius promovere in multis, quam perficere in paucis; and
since in order to a general intelligible System of Philosophy, he was
sollicitous of collecting as many Phenomenon as he could, and which might be
serviceable in framing such a System; so I have, (that the Author 's Aim and
Design might not be prejudiced by an Abstract), taken Care both to Epitomize
those things in which he might be said perficere, and likewise have taken Care
not to omit the least Phenomenon which might contribute to the promoting of
Natural Knowledge: So that I can justly say, there is nothing in the Author 's
Works which is not in the Epitomy, except Digressions and Apologies.

And as I have taken Care to omit nothing, so I have been as sollicitous to
draw an Epitomy without any Enlargements, which the Nature of the Subjects did
not require, or without contracting more than the Subjects would admit.

And further, as where the Author has laid down several Historical Truths by
way of Notes without Philosophizing upon them, his Design being to promote as
well as perfect, I have taken Care to avoid any other Connection than the Author
thought such Notes required, so I thought my self obliged to give an Abstract
of the Author 's Philosophical Thoughts, where he has interspersed them with
his Historical Truths, that the Work might be more perfect.

So that the Reader will have in the following Volume, which contains about 30
Sheets besides the Cuts, as much Matter as in the Original takes up near 200
Sheets, which will not only carry this Advantage with it, that what before
would have taken up near two Months time in reading, may be read in a Week, but
he will likewise purchase Philosophy at so cheap a Rate, that upon that Account
it will undoubtedly be more acceptable, the Price of this Volume coming far
short of Forty Shillings, which the Books Epitomized in this Volume almost
amount to. But what is the greater Advantage is, that so much Knowledge
comprised in so small a Compass, will be more easily accquir'd by young
Philosophers, who in larger Volumes are apt to forget what they left at the
Beginning, before they arrive at the End of them: But by this Epitomy, a System
of Philosophy being brought, almost before the Eye at once, it will be more
easily swallowed and digested.

But whilst I am considering the Advantages which the Reader will receive by
the Abridgment, I am told by the Booksellers, that it is likely to meet with
some Disadvantages upon another Account; for it being common for Buyers to
estimate the Value of a Book by the Bulk, they may think too great a Price put
upon this Volume; And therefore, the Booksellers think it necessary that I
should acquaint the Reader, that their Reason will take off that Objection; for
besides, the Dearness of Paper, and the Number of Cuts contained in this Volume
being so chargeable as to amount to a fourth Part of the Charges of the Book;
it is hoped that the Usefulness of the Cuts will excuse the Dearness of it; for
to have Printed an Abridgment without 'em, would have made it dearer, though of a
less Price, the Cuts being as requisite to Illustrate the Author 's Works, as
Maps in Geography to render Accounts of the Terraqueous Globe more intelligible.

Thus much being said in favor of the Booksellers, I shall now proceed to give
a brief Account of the Method I have taken in this Volume, reserving a further
Account of the subsequent Volume till the Publication of it.

And first, considering that it is the usual Method in Systems of Philosophy,
to begin with Generals, and thence to proceed to Particulars; and likewise to
lay down Principles in Order to Explain the several Phenomenon of Nature by
those Principles; I have in compliance with so reasonable a Method, first laid
down the Doctrine of Forms and Qualities, and the Principles by which those
Qualities are diversified, from whence likewise arise those various Forms from
whence each Particular Quality is derived; and because subordinate Forms depend
on the same Principles, and differ only from simple or complex Forms in
reference to their Union in Compound Bodies. I have likewise adjoined an
Account of them, which Doctrine of Forms and Qualities is further Illustrated by
Experiments and Observations annexed by our Author for that purpose: And
because there is an Affinity betwixt those Experiments, and those made by our
Author on Saltpeter, to them I have annexed an Abstract of his Essay on
Saltpeter, which is not only a farther Illustration of the Doctrine of Forms
and Qualities, but being likewise of equal Force in Illustrating what he
delivers concerning those General Affections of Matter, Fluidity and Firmness,
I have in the next place laid down what he Teaches concerning those more
Catholic Modes of Matter; and since our Author in his Chapter of Fluidity has
likewise taken notice of the Superficial Figures of Fluids, I have to that
added what is delivered concerning the same Subject in the Philosophical
Transactions, and because the Firmness of Bodies is said to proceed from a Rest
in their Parts, I have subjoined to that an Essay of the Motion of the Parts of
Solids: And to conclude the first Book, which Treats of the most General
Affections of Matter, I have added an Account of the Effects of Languid Motion,
and the Propagableness of it through those Catholic Mediums, viz. Fluids and
Solids.

And these more Catholic Phenomenon of Nature being Explained in the first
Book, to distinguish 'em from Qualities more Particular; in the Second Book I
begin with the Doctrine of Particular Qualities, which do not only depend on the
Motion or Rest, Shape, Size and Texture of Matter, but likewise on the
Structure of the World as now. Constituted, and the Laws of Nature as now
Established.

And because That Part of the Universe contained in Our Vortex, is the Subject
chiefly of the following Sheets, having first begun with an Introduction to
Particular Qualities; I proceed to consider, first the most General
Observations in the Earthy Region, and from that proceed to consider Submarine
Regions, after which, by way of Introduction to the Region of the Air, I have
added an Essay of the Natural and Preternatural States of Bodies, and
Particularly of the Air, from which proceeding to Experiments made in the Air,
those closing the first Volume; In the second Volume I proceed to what he says
further relating to the Air, in which I shall give a further Account of the
Method taken in that.

Having thus briefly given the Reader an Account of the following Method, I
shall without detaining him any longer, subscribe my self the Candid Reader 's

Very Humble Servant, R. BOULTON.

THE INTRODUCTION, Representing the Grounds and Excellency of CORPUSCULAR
PHILOSOPHI.
HAVING in the Preface given the Reader an Account of the following Sheets, I
shall, by way of Introduction, represent the Grounds and Excellency of the
Corpuscular Philosophy, as delivered by our Author.

And first: It has this to recommend it above all other Systems of Philosophy,
That it teaches us not, as the Doctrine of the Epicureans does, that the World
was made in an Infinite Vacuum, by a Casual Concourse of Atoms; nor as the
Cartesians, That Matter, first put into Motion by GOD, convened into a World,
as now constituted, by Laws Mechanical only; but it allows the Omnipotent
Creator a greater share in the Works of his Hands, teaching that the Motions of
the small Parts of Matter, which compose the Universe, were guided by that Wise
Architect, who when he had constituted the World, established the Laws of
Nature. So that we only endeavor to explain those as now constituted, and how
they are Mechanically carried on.

In doing of which, it accounts for the several Phanomena of Nature, by
Principles more intelligible and clear, than the Doctrine of the Peripateticks;
since it is much more easily understood what I mean by Motion or Rest, Size,
Shape, Order, Situation, and a Contexture of the Parts of Matter, than by
fanciful Ideas represented by the Doctrine of Privation, Substantial Forms, and
their Eduction, etc.

Nor has our Hypothesis a less Advantage over the Hypostatical Principles of
the Chemists, since it accounts for several Phenomenon, which they are at a
loss in; as Eclipses of the Sun, which are brought on, and removed by a Local
Motion of the Interfering Body, and those others concerned in the Phenomenon:
Or, to use another Instance, it is easily understood, that the Image of a Man
cast into the Air, by a Concave Spherical Looking-glass, are more Naturally
accounted for by a Refraction of the Rays of Light than any Hypostatical
Principles.

But besides the Intelligibleness of our Principles, it is a farther
Recommendation, that none are more Primary than Matter and Motion; which is the
first General Affection of it, nor can any be more simple: None more Primary,
because had the same Parts of Matter been always in the same Place, they could
not be diversified; therefore Motion was primarily necessary: Nor could any be
more simple, because neither could be divided into Parts of a different
Denomination; since all Matter is equally Matter, and all Motion must bear the
same Title, considered barely as Motion.

And as none can be more Simple and Primary, so none can be more Comprehensive;
since Motion, Size, Figure, Order and Texture, may be diversified thousands of
ways; and as whole Libraries are made of Twenty-four Letters, so the several
Phenomenon of Nature may be explained by the several Varieties of Textures, and
other Differences, arising from the various Changes our Principles are subject
to.

Nor are the most Obvious Phenomenon of Nature alone explained by our
Hypothesis, but those Qualities esteemed Occult ones, since the Particles which
are concerned in such Compositions, as abound with occult Qualities, are
subject to the same Laws, and capable of the like manner of Action; though their
Parts are so Minute, as to make their Modus Operandi indiscernible.

But what is still more an Advantage in our Hypothesis, is that it flies not to
an unknown Power, as a Plastic one, or an Anima Mundi, whose Operation is not
known, but gives us a Mechanical Account of Things; for the former gives no
more Satisfaction, than if one were told, that a Watch tells the Hours of the
Day, because made by such a Man; whereas the true Reason is, because the Parts
so placed together are in Motion.

And the same Instances may serve to show us the Deficiency of the Hypostatical
Principles: Besides Ingredients by a bare mixture, being able to effect
nothing, nor able to work upon each other, without Motion; those Principles
themselves, appear, to be only different Modes of Matter, varied by our
Hypothesis.

To conclude, There is not any one Phenomenon which any Hypothesis is able to
explain; but a more Intelligible Account may be given by the following.

Plate.1. Vol.III.
Fig: 1. p: 39.
4. p. 17
Fig: 5 -- p: 317.
Fig: 6. p: 37.
Fig: 2 -- p: 37.
Fig: 7. -- p: 3^.
Fig: 3 -- p: 36.
p: 314. p: 314. p: 314. p: 314.


Plate.2. Vol.III.
p: 281. Fig: 1.
Fig: 2. p: 285
Fig: 3. p: 285.
Fig: 4. p: 288.
Fig: 5. p: 290.
Fig: 6. p: 293.
Fig: 8. p: 295.
Fig: 7. p: 294.


Plate.3. Vol. III
Fig: 1. p: 296
Fig: 2. p: 296.
Fig: 3. p: 297.
Fig: 4. p: 297.
Fig: 5 -- p: 299.
Fig: 6.
Fig: 7. p: 301.
Fig: 8.


Plate.4. Vol.III.
Fig: 1. p: 303
p: 303. Fig: 2.
p: 305 Fig: 3.
Fig: 4. p: 305.
Fig: 5. p: 307.
p: 309 Fig: 6.
Fig: 7. p: 309.
Fig: 8. p: 310.


Plate.5. Vol: III.
Fig: 1. p: 329.


THE WORKS Of the HONORABLE ROBERT BOIL, Esquire EPITOMIZED.
An Appendix to BOOK IV.
CHAP. I. Of the Mechanical Production of Cold.
TO make it appear, That Heat and Cold, Experiments concerning the Mechanical
Origin of Cold.
which are generally esteemed two of the most active Qualities, may be
mechanically produced or destroyed by a bare change of Texture, or by
Alterations otherwise mechanically brought on, without the assistance of the
Peripatetick Doctrine of Substantial Forms, or the Hypostatical Principles of
the Chemists; I shall subjoin the following Experiments.

EXPERIMENT I.
A solution of Sal-Armoniac.
Having dissolved Sal-Armoniack in four times its quantity of Water, whilst the
Mixture was a stirring, and the Salt dissolving, the Water acquired such a
degree of Coldness as to congeal Water, with which the Bottle was wet on the
outside, into Ice; but after a Dissolution of that Salt, the Coldness gradually
declined.

EXPERIMENT II.
To try whether the Coldness which the former Mixture acquired, did not rather
proceed from the Effect which the Water had on the saline Parts than on the
Dispersion of those Saline Parts through the Water; I immerg'd a Thermoscope in
Water, which was so warm as to make the Spirit of Wine ascend; but the same
Thermoscope being removed into Powder of Sal-Armoniac warm, it ascended much
faster; yet the Weather-glass being conveyed into the Liquor again, and the
Salt poured into it, it speedily began to subside, and sunk a Division and
below the Mark it stood at in cold Water, remaining at that Station a
considerable time. And the same Experiment succeeded when tried a second time.

EXPERIMENT III.
Having immersed a Thermoscope in Spirit of Salt, I poured Spirit of fermented
Urine leisurely upon it, and observed, that the Mixture by a mutual Conflict
growing hot, A Thermoscope immersed in a Mixture of Spirit of Salt and
fermented Urine.
sensibly raised the Spirit of Wine; which being done, and a Salt obtained from
the evaporated Mixture, not much unlike Sal-Armoniack, it was carefully dried,
and being put into Water, in which a Thermoscope was placed, upon its
dissolution, whilst it was stirred about, the Spirit of Wine in the
Weather-glass gradually subsided.

EXPERIMENT IV.
Another immersed in Spirit of Roch Allom, etc.
Having poured as much rectified Spirit of Roch Allom into a wide mouthed Glass,
as was sufficient to cover the globulous part of a Thermoscope, when the Spirit
of Wine was equally cooled with the Air about it; we poured into it a volatile
Salt, obtained by Sublimation from Sal-Armoniack, and a fixed Alcali; and though
upon the joint Action of these two Bodies, a considerable Noise was raised,
with Bubbles and Froth; yet the Spirit of Wine began to subside, and continued
to do so, 'till the Spirit of Allom was wholly glutted with the volatile Salt,
the whole Descent being the length of an Inch.

From this Experiment and the foregoing it appears, That when Alcalies and
Acids produce Heat, upon a mutual Conflict which ensues their Mixture, they
have not that Effect precisely considered as such; since it is evident, that an
urinous Salt mixed with an acid Spirit, viz. of Roch Allom, produces Coldness;
and not a true Effervescence.

EXPERIMENT V.
A Thermoscope in a Mixture of Oil of Vitriol and Sal Armon.
One part of Oil of Vitriol being shaken together with twelve parts of Water,
the Mixture acquired a little Warmth; but when it was cool, being poured into a
wide-mouthed Glass, and a Thermometer immersed in it, when the Liquor in the
Thermoscope was equally cool with the external, we poured in a sufficient
quantity of Sal-Armoniack to glut the Acid: The effect of which Mixture was,
that upon a cold Ebullition the Spirit of Wine descended an Inch.

EXPERIMENT VI.
Heat produced by a Mixture of Saltpeter and Oil of Vitriol.
Though Saltpeter usually produces a Coldness in Liquors, yet eight Ounces of it
being mixed with six of Oil of Vitriol, the Mixture acquired a considerable
degree of Heat, emitting Fumes copiously.

EXPERIMENT VII.
The effect of Gunpowder mixed with Water.
Though Gunpowder be a Body so inflammable, yet it evidently imparts a
Coldness, if mixed with Water. If a small quantity of Oil of Vitriol be mixed
with the Salt formerly made use of, before the Oil has been mixed with Water,
it acquires a considerable degree of Coldness.

A Digression about Potential Coldness.
Potential Coldness Mechanically explained.
Potential Coldness is usually looked upon to be a Quality so absolute, as not
to be explicable without the Doctrine of Substantial Forms: But it will easily
appear, That it may, without any great difficulty, be clearly explained by
Mechanic Principles; if we consider, that the Figure, Shape and Texture of
Bodies may be so contrived as to lessen the usual and natural Agitation of
Humors about our Sensory, and consequently, the Perception of this Imminution,
may cause such a Sensation as is usually termed Potential Coldness; which
account being allowed, it will follow, That Potential Coldness is only a
relative Quality, depending on the dispersion of the Agents through the Bodies
to be cooled by them: According to which Notion, the cold Fitts in Agues may
easily be conceived to arise from an Intermixture of the Parts of some clammy
Matter, which before a Dissolution, were unable to cause any considerable
Effect in the Mass of Blood; but presently after being mixed with the Blood,
produce such a change in the Motion of its Parts, as affects the Sensory with
such a Sensation as is usually esteemed Potential Coldness; which Sensation may
not only be so produced in Agues, but by a like Cause in other Distempers, and
in several Parts of the Body, as in Hypochondriack and Hysterical Cases. To
render which Account more probable, I shall subjoyn, That I have learnt by the
Effects of Poisons, that the small Parts of them being interpersed through the
Parts of Humors previously disposed, may cause a notable Refrigeration: And I
my self have prepared a penetrating Chemical Liquor, a Drop of which being
given to an Animal, would cast him into a seeming Sleep; and a little larger
Quantity, being by Mischance applied to an akeing Tooth, gave the Person a sort
of trembling, and almost an universal Refrigeration. And that Coldness may be
produced by the Mixture of some subtle Parts of Matter with the Mass of Blood,
appears from the following Histories. Famulum habui (says Benivenius, Cap. 56.
Abditorum apud Schenk. Lib. 7. de Venen. Obs. 24.) qui a Scorpione ictus, tam
subito ac tam frigido Sudore toto Corpore perfusus est, ut algentissima Nive
atque Glacie sese opprimi quereretur, verum cum algenti illi solam Theriacam,
ex Vino potentiore exhibuissem, illico curatus est. And to this I shall add
another, related by Amatus Lusitanus, Cent. 6. Obs. Vir qui a Scorpione in
Manus digito punctus fuit, multum dolebat, and refrigeratus totus, contremebat
and per Corpus dolores, Cute tota quasi aut puncta, formicantes patiebatur, etc.

What Refrigeration depends on.
Whether such Refrigeration depends on a sort of Coagulation of the minute Parts
of the Blood, or whether it may be produced by a different Determination of the
motion of the Parts of those Liquors as to the Lines they move in, I shall not
now examine; but shall rather offer it to be considered, since the internal
Constitutions of several Parts of the Body are different from each other, and
since the Size and Textures of several Agents are also various, whether they
may not upon that account have different Effects upon distinct Parts of the
Body, for all the Qualities of such Agents do not wholly depend on the Action
of the Corpuscles of the Medicine only; but depend on some adventitious
Qualities, which they acquire by being mixed with particular Humors and which
they may dispose to be more or less worked upon, by the other Efficients of
Heat or Cold.

And these Conjectures may not be rendered a little probable, by observing,
That though Spirit of Wine inwardly taken causes Heat; yet externally it abates
the Heat of inflamed Parts; but has different Effects on a tender Eye: And
though internally five Grains of Camphire may diffuse Heat through the whole
Body, yet externally it is used in refrigerating Medicines.

How far these Observations may be of Service in determining whether Camphire,
etc. be hot or cold, I shall leave to Physicians to consider, and shall here
only offer in Proof, That Potential Coldness is only a relative Quality, the
following particulars, viz. That from the VI. and VII. Experiments it appears,
that according to the Dispositions of Bodies to be worked on, the Agent may
have different Qualities: As Fumes of Lead may coagulate Mercury, though it has
not a like Effect on other Liquors: And further, although Sal-Armoniack and
Nitre be, when separate, cool, and though the latter melted in a Crucible takes
not Fire of it self, yet upon an addition of Sal-Armoniack it flashes
vehemently. But I shall leave this Digression, and proceed to Experiments about
Cold.

EXPERIMENT VIII.
Oil of Vitriol poured upon a Solution of Sal-Armon.
To make it appear, how much Motion and Texture may contribute to the Production
of Cold, we gradually added twelve Ounces of Water to an equal quantity of
Sal-Armoniack; and whilst upon a Dissolution of the Salt, the Water became
cold, we poured in twelve Ounces of Oil of Vitriol, upon which the Mixture
became hot; where it is not a little strange, that though Sal-Armoniack in
either of these Liquors produces Cold, yet a contrary Effect should happen upon
its Mixture with both together: The Reason of which could be no other but that
the Heat produced by the two Liquors overpowred the Degree of Cold, which the
Salt was able otherwise to produce.

EXPERIMENT IX.
The Effects of the same Mixtures are so uncertain sometimes, that I have
observed, that having placed a Thermometer in eight ounces of Spirit of
Verdigrease, and gradually put in two ounces of Salt of Tartar, after some
time, the Ingredients having worked upon each other with a copious Froth and a
hissing Noise; the Bottle was something warm, and the Liquor in the Thermometer
raised: Yet another Salt being mixed with Salt of Tartar, and Spirit of
Verdigrease prepared without Spirit of Vinegar, and Spirit of Wine poured upon
it, instead of an Incalescence, a considerable degree of Coldness would be
produced.

EXPERIMENT X.
Oil of Vitriol and Water shaken together, upon an Addition of Sal-Armoniack,
acquire a sort of Goolness; but if Oil of Vitriol and the Salt be first mixed,
upon an Affusion of Water they become hot: And though Salt of Tartar grows hot in
Water, yet the Caput Mortuum of Salt of Tartar and Cinnabar, distilled in a
strong Fire, produces no Heat, notwithstanding a hissing Nolse like that of
Quicklime succeeds its Immersion.

A coincident Disposition betwixt the Agent and the Patient requisite to the
production of their Effects.
That the artificial Production of Cold may be obstructed by an Indisposition in
the Patient, to be acted on by the grand Efficients of Cold, I have learned by
several Observations; and particularly by noting that though Oil of Vitriol be so
fiery a Liquor, as in some measure to have the Effects of Fire it self, and to
dissolve Ice sooner than Spirit of Wine; yet a Pound of choice rectified Spirit
of Wine being put into a Bottle, except a little at the Top, it was wholly
coagulated into a consistent Mass like Ice, notwithstanding the Glass stood in
an Elaboratory in which that Oil was never at any other time observed to
congeal. And this Phenomenon was the more remarkable, because the Oil continued
in that state, when the Weather was too moderate to be the cause of such an
Effect; on the contrary I have observed, that Oil of Anniseeds, which usually
coagulates with a less degree of Cold than Water, continued undisturbed and
transparent, without the least Coagulation, in a very frosty Season; and the
like we have observed in Camphire reduced to an Oil by some Nitrous Spirits.

But to conclude this Section; If Heat depends on a brisk agitation of the
Particles of the Humors about our Sensory, and if Cold be an Effect of a less
degree of Motion than that about our Sensory; it appears that an Imminution of
that Motion which is requisite to produce Heat, is sufficient to cause the
contrary Quality, viz. Coldness. And though Cold seems in such a Sense a
privitive Quality, yet in as much as the Agent which causes that Imminution
acts positively upon the Parts in motion; it may be esteemed a positive
Quality, though in respect of our Sensory it is but a relative one, as lukewarm
Water will appear hot or cold, as the Hand immersed in it has either been
exposed to an intense degree of Cold or Heat. And indeed the principal mistakes
which sometimes occur in Discourses concerning Cold, happen upon the account of
the ambiguity of that Expression, which sometimes is used to signify the Idea
imprinted on the Mind by the advention of an external Object; sometimes for an
Imminution of such a Motion as causes Heat, and sometimes for the Object upon a
contact of which we perceive Cold.

CHAP. II. Showing, that not only our Senses, but common Weather-glasses, may
misinform us about Cold.
neither our Sensories nor Weather-glasses, infallible Criterions of the
degrees of Cold.
THOUGH most Philosophers have hitherto taken the Testimony of our Sensories for
the only Criterion, by which they estimated the degrees of Cold; yet since Cold
is, in respect of our Organs, only a Relative thing; and since it has sensible
Effects on other Bodies, which are affected by more minute Variations than our
Sensories; it may not be amiss to estimate the degrees of it, by the changes it
causes on those Bodies that discover it is slighter Variations, as well as by
the assistance of our Senses; since neither our Sensories alone, nor common
Weather-glasses are too confidently to be relied on in judging of the degrees
of it.

For Cold being a relative Quality in respect of our Sensories, as the
Disposition of the Organ varies, so the same degrees of Cold may seem violenter
or more remiss; as it is observed in hot Baths, the most remiss degree seeming
hot to those that come out of the open Air, yet Cold and Chilling to those that
come out of a hotter Bath into that; the Reason of which appears to be, that
the Parts of the cooler Bath are more briskly agitated about our Sensory than
the Ambient Air; but when we come out of a hotter Bath, they being less
agitated in Respect of that, causes a Cold Sensation by altering and checking
the motion of the Humors, which before were briskly agitated about our
Sensories.

But our Sensories may not only misinform us in such Cases, where they
evidently appear to be differently tempered in respect of those Objects; but
sometimes, when those Variations in the Dispositions of our Sensories are
Caused by unsuspected Agents, or insensible degrees; so we perceive the Air in
a celler much Colder in the Summer, when Bodies accustomed to a warmer Air
descended into it. Nay sometimes we judge amiss of the degrees of Cold, when we
think our Sensories unaltered; so Air blown out of a pair of Bellows upon the
Sensory, by penetrating into the Pores and retardating the Agitation of the
Humors, seems Colder than before, yet when blown upon a common Weather-glass,
that motion enables it not to depress the Mercury.

Besides, sometimes we may be more sensibly affected with Cold, when it depends
not on the Qualities of the Air in general; but either on some Steams which are
endowed with frigorifick Qualities, as Opium externally applied; or on some
chilling distempered Humor in our Bodies.

But further, sometimes Bodies appear colder to our Sensories than to a
Weather-glass; because the former are more affected by the Density and
Penetrancy of the Parts. So water has appeared cold to our Bodies, See Plate
1. Fig. 1.
when by a nice Weather-glass I could not discover, that it was Colder than the
Air.

Amongst several Trials made with these Weather-glasses, the following were
remarkable.

Having caused a Glass-Egg with a Stem, (such as Fig. 1. Plate 1. Delineates,)
to be blown at a Lamp, the Stem being dipped in Water, admitted into it a
Cylinder of Water about half an Inch long, which, when the Pipe was erected,
would subside to the Bottom of the Cylinder, just where it rises from the Egg,
and there it would stand; but if the Glass-Egg was immersed wholly in Water, or
but half way in Quicksilver, the Water would ascend up to the middle of the
Cylinder, and subside again when taken out.

In this Experiment several times repeated, I observed, That when the Glass-Egg
was suddenly removed out of the Water, and immersed in the Quicksilver, the
Cylinder of Water would be raised higher; but if it was first immersed in
Quicksilver, and thence removed into Water, it would subside, but not near so
much as in the open Air. These Trials were made the 26th of June, the Weather
being moderate. But being repeated another day when it was windy and rainy, the
Aqueous Cylinder upon the immersion of the Thermometer subsided.

June 27 in the morning, the Aqueous Cylinder would subside when the
Thermometer was immersed in Water; but ascend when it was depressed into
Mercury; yet when the water had been kept in a warm Room some time, till it was
as warm to the Touch, as the Quicksilver, they would both of them immediately
raise the Mercury in the Pipe.

The like Experiment being tried in January, in Frosty Weather, the Internal
Air being of an equal temper with the External; when the Thermometer was
immersed in a shallow Vessel of Water, the Aqueous Cylinder was raised half an
Inch; and when it was immersed in a deeper Vessel, it was raised as high again;
but soon subsided when taken out into the free Air. From whence it appears,
That we may be differently informed of the degrees of Heat and Cold, when we
Employ our Organs of Touch, and when we make use of proper Instruments.

On this occasion I shall subjoyn, that not only Water, but moist Vapors in
the Air may cause it to seem Colder to our Sensories, than commonly
Weather-glasses discover it to be. And though it be generally agreed, that a
Themometer only more exactly measures the Effects which Cold has upon it and
our Sensories; yet I my self have taken notice, that at the same time the
Weather has seemed cold to me, when the Weather-glass agreed not with the
Information my Senses gave me, which, that it did not proceed from my (...),
was apparent; since others were sensible of it at the same time.

From what has been said, it appears, That it is requisite to take notice when
Birds and other Animals, whose Perception is more delicate than ours, seem to
be affected with Cold, and likewise to examine the degrees of Coldness, as well
by Experiments as by the Touch.

For a further Confirmation of what I have delivered on this occasion, I shall
add what Martinius in his piece of Geography called Atlas Chinensis, says,
speaking of the Air of that Populous Country; his words are these. Ad Coeli
solique temperiem quod attinet, majus in hac Provincia frigus est, quam illius
poscat poli altitudo; vix enim illa excedit gradum secundum supra
quadragesimum; and tamen per integros quatuor saepe Menses Flumina omnia adeo
duro concrescunt gelu, ut currus equosque ac gravissima etiam onera glacies
ferat, innoxie ac securissime transeant: Ex iis etiam ingentia glaciei frusta
excinduntur quae in futuram aestatem ad delicias servant. His Mensibus omnes
Naves ita in ipsa Glacie defixae sunt, ut progredi nequeant ubicunque illas
frigus occupat (quod certo certius circa medium Novembris ingruere solet) per
quatuor illos Menses immotae ibi perstare coguntur, neque enim resolvitur
Glacies ante Martii initium; haec plerunque Glaciei concretio uno fit die, cum
non nisi pluribus fiat Liquefactio. To which he adds what is more for our
present purpose, Omnino illud mirum, tantum non videri aut sentiri illud frigus
ut Europaeos ad bypocausta subeunda videatur posse cogere, aut in Europa ad
Glaciem producendam sufficere, unde ad subterraneas illic exhalationes pro
harum rerum Causis indagandis omnino recurrendum est, etc.

But though I have urged the necessity and usefulness of Weather-glasses, as
preferable to the Informations we receive from our Senses; yet, though they are
not obnoxious to the same Causes of uncertainty, they are apt sometimes to
deceive us; since in common Weather-glasses, besides that the external or
internal Air may be rarefied or condensed by Heat and Cold, the incumbent
Atmosphere being contiguous to the suspended Liquor, it may be boyed up by an
additional Gravity, as well as Heat, in the Atmosphere and Vice versa as we
have experienced by a statical Baroscope, whose Balance would turn with the
500th part of a Grain. And likewise by conveying a common Weatherglass into the
bottom of a deep Pit; and at another time by raising it up to the top of a
Church or Steeple, and comparing it at the same time with a more exact
Thermometer; for, by this Method, it appeared, that the rising and falling of
the Water in the common Weather-glass, depended not on the temperature of the
Air as to Heat or Cold, but on the different altitude of the Atmospherical
Pillar of Air incumbent on the Water.

But besides the Gravity of the Atmosphere, there may be other Causes of the
ascent and descent of the Liquor in common Weather-glasses, as well as Heat and
Cold. For not to urge, that though the height of the same Atmospherical Pillar of
Air should seem unaltered, the Weather-glass remaining in the same place; yet
the weight of the Air may be increased by the copious dispersion of Vapors and
heavy Steams through the Air, and also may be diminished upon a precipitation
of those by Dew or Rain; which Effects may perhaps be falsely attributed to
different degrees of Heat or Cold. To be satisfied of the truth of what I have
here hinted, I tried the following Experiments.

I took two Weather-glasses of a more than ordinary length, See Plate 1. Fig.
2d. and 3d.
the divisions of one of which were half Inches, and those of the other not
much less. The one, which was furnished with good Spirit of Wine (see Plate 1.
Fig. 3.) was sealed. The other (see Plate 1. Fig. 2.) was not sealed; but was
so contrived, that the Air being shut up in the lower part of the Instrument,
might rise with Heat and fall with Cold. In these Thermoscopes I observed, That
in that which was sealed, the Liquor regularly ascended in warm Weather and
subsided in cold: But in the other, there being a little hole left open at the
top, it was remarkable, That though when the Atmosphere continued to be of the
same weight, it would regularly rise and fall; yet when the Gravity of the
Atmosphere was altered, it would not exaltly correspond with the other; for as
when the incumbent Pillar of Air was heavier than ordinary, the Liquor would
not be raised high enough by Heat, the pressure of that Air resisting it: So,
on the other hand, when the Atmosphere was lighter than ordinary; the Liquor in
the unsealed Glass would rise too high. So that by comparing the two
Thermometers together, See Plate 1. Fig. 4.
I could tell, whether the Mercury in the Torrecellian Tube (see Plate 1. Fig.
4) was risen or fallen, and Vice versa; the rising and falling of the Mercurial
Cylinder one quarter of an Inch; usually signifies a great disparity betwixt
the ascent or descent of the Liquors in the two Instruments.

The difference betwixt the height of the Liquors in the two Thermometers last
Night, was but 1 or 2 Divisions: To day, the Barometer making it evident, that
the Air was much lighter; the Liquor in the unsealed Thermoscope was at 58.
Though in the other, the number of the Divisions it stood at was but 41; yet a
Week ago, when the Mercury in the Barometer was much higher, and the Liquor in
the sealed Weather-glass stood at 46, that in the other was no higher than 27.
So that in a Week's time the Liquor in the sealed Thermoscope descended 5
Degrees, and that in the unsealed one ascended 31.

At another time I observed, that when the Mercury in the Barometer was higher
than ordinary, the Liquor in the sealed Glass stood at the 50th Division, but
in the other it was fallen to 32 in warm Sun-shiny weather; so that an unheeded
change in the weight of the Atmosphere, may have a greater power to compress
the included Air in an unsealed Weather-glass, than a considerable degree of
warmth may have to dilate it; and consequently it may happen in an ordinary
Weather-glass, where the Air is included at the top, that the pendulous Water
may rise in warm weather and fall in cold weather.

For a further Confirmation of what I have been saying, I shall add, That even
Yester-night I observed, that the Mercury in the Barometer being at 39 Inches,
the Liquor in the sealed Barometer was at the 40th Division, and in the other
at 39 but this Night the Mercury being raised of an Inch, the Liquor in the
sealed Glass rose to 45, the other being depressed to 34. The Night following,
the Mercury being raised of an Inch, the Liquor in the sealed Glass continued
at the 40th Division; the Liquor in the other in two Days time having been
depressed to the 17th, that is 23 Divisions. Two or three Days after, the
Mercury being risen to 30 Inches, the Liquor in the sealed Glass was at 41; the
other was depressed below the 9th Division, being 33 Divisions lower than the
other.

The Day after, the Mercury continuing at the same height, and the weather
growing much colder, it subsided uniformly enough; that in the sealed Glass
subsiding to the 33 and the other below the lowest Mark of all: Which
difference still continued so great betwixt the Liquors of the two
Thermometers, because the Air to Day was very heavy; whereas at another time
when the Atmosphere was not so heavy, and the Mercury was suspended at 29
Inches and less than a half; the Liquor in the Hermetical Glass stood at 34
when the Liquor in the other was not below 41.

But once I observed the difference betwixt the two Weather-glasses to be
greater than any I have recorded yet; it being near 45 Divisions. And a few
Hours ago I observed, when the Mercury in a Baroscope had risen above of an
Inch higher than it was the Night before, the Liquor in the shank of the
Weather-glass was depressed above an Inch below the surface of the ambient
Liquor in the Viol, and in the Night was so far depressed, that a Bubble of the
external Air made its way out at the bottom of the Tube, and joined with the
common Air in the Cavity of the Viol; an Effect which the coldness of the
Season could not give one hopes to expect; the Pipe in which the Liquor was
contained being 20 Inches long.

CHAP. III. Containing some new Observations about the Deficiencies of
Weather-glasses, together with some Considerations touching the new or
Hermetical Thermometers.
Consider ations of the deficiency of Weather-glasses.
TO excite Men to greater Curiosity and Industry in making Thermometical
Experiments, to what I have already said; I shall add the following
Considerations: And

First, In order to make our Discourses, and what we Communicate to those that
are at a distance more satisfactory; Consideration the 1.
we are not provided with a Standard of Cold, to estimate and judge of the
degrees of it by: For our Senses are by no menas proper Standards, since the
same Body that feels Cold to one is not of the same degree of Coldness to
another; nor can Thermometers be given as Standards: Since they only show, how
far the Air recedes from that degree of Heat or Colndess wherein they were
made, and give us no satisfactory account of the temper of the Air at other
times; nor do they inform us how to express it, so that it is a very difficult
thing, if not impossible, to give a true Standard of Coldness. Besides it is a
Quality, for whose differences there are very few distinct Names there being a
great many Intermediate degree of Cold, betwixt Lukewarm and Freezing; a^ as
well as several degrees of each of those Qualities, for which we have no Names
assigned* And indeed, the Observations made by a Weather-glass, are so
confined, that if a Glass chance to crack, or some Bubbles of Air get in; we
are forced to look out for another Instrument, as a Standard of the Air's Heat
or Coldness. And further, though it be not difficult to include in the Cavity of
a Weather-glass, another Body instead of Air; yet it cannot be done, without
being liable to receive Impressions from the Atmosphere, when first put up.

But though it be difficult to get a Standard of Cold for to judge of it is
degrees by, yet I have sometines thought, That Oil of Aniseeds, which is
coagulated in Cold and thawed again in warm Weather; An Ingenious Gentleman
proposed to settle a Standard for Weather-glasses, by observing the Effects of
such a degree of Cold as is requisite to freeze Distilled Water, and it may be
advantageously made use of when strong enough to freeze Water.
might enable us to make two Thermometers exactly correspondent: If the ball of
the Thermoscope being immersed in Oil of Aniseeds melted, we observe what
station the Spirit of Wine stands at, when it just begins to coagulate: But in
doing of it we are to observe, That the Cavities of the Glasses and the
Quantity of the Spirit of Wine ought to be as equal as can be; otherwise the
success will be much more uncertain. Which way of Estimating Weatherglasses,
though it be not so certain as unquestionably to answer expectation, yet it may
be of advantage to come as near as we can to certainty. But

Consideration the 2d.
Secondly, There is unaccurateness in measuring of Cold by Weather-glasses which
may be avoided, yet is not; since sufficient care is not taken, that the
Diameters of the Cylinders are exact all along, from one end to another, nor
that there be a certain Proportion betwixt the Diameter of the Cylinder, and
that of the Pipe. Besides, open Weather-glasses may be more Commodiously
contrived for Thermometrical Experiments than those that are commonly made use
of; See Plate 1. Fig. 2.
(See Plate 1. Fig. 2.) In which, the mouth of the Vial being so closed with
cement or wax, that the External Air has no communication with it but through
the Pipe; upon an Expansion or Condensation of the Internal Air, the Liquor
has much more Room to rise and fall in, than the Pendulous Liquor in ordinary
Glasses, where the Quantity of Air is much too small in respect of the
Proportion of the Cavity into which it must expand it self, when rarefied; to
make the rising or falling of the Liquor in that, to be so sensible enough. But
besides, that this of ours has this advantage, that the Quantity of Air is
greater in respect of the Proportion of the Cylinder, and consequently the
Water has much more Room to play up and down in; it has this advantage
further, that it is much more convenient for our purpose: Since the Ball of it
may be immersed in Bodies, whose Coldness we have a mind to measure; and
consistent Bodies, as Snow or Ice may be more conveniently heaped about it,
than common Weather-glasses.

Thirdly, Men too Confidently conclude, that if the Liquor in a Thermoscope
rise an Inch higher to day, A third Consideration.
than it was the day before, and an Inch higher the next, that the Air must be
as Cold again the last day as it was the preceding; since it appears not, though
we should allow that Cold of it self contracts the Air, That a double degree of
Cold must produce a double degree of Condensation exactly; for besides that the
different Quantities of Air contained in these Instruments, and the Proportions
of Pipes, as well as the degrees of the Expansions considered together are
sufficient to render the Hypothesis suspicious: I am inclined to believe, That
the Condensation of the Air and the ascent of the Water depend on the Pressure
of the ambient Air, as we shall in a little time make appear, and then this
Computation will be found to be very fallacious: For we have elsewhere shown,
that the forces required to compress Air, is in Reciprocal Proportions or
thereabouts, to the spaces comprehending the same proportion of Air; so that if
a Cylinder of four Inches be able to resist a Pressure equivalent to ten Pounds
weight, when it comes to be compressed into two Inches; an equal force
super-added to the former, will drive up that already compressed Air into half
the space, which is about an Inch: Whence it follows, that in estimating the
Condensation of the Air in a Weather-glass, we must not only Consider how much
Space it is made to desert; but also what Proportion that deserted Space bears
to the whole Space it possessed before, and to what degree of Density it was
brought before the Application of that force: And we must remember, that the
resistance of the Included Air is not to be looked upon as that of a weight,
which may remain always the same; but that of a Spring forcibly bent, whose
resistance is greatest as it is crowded into less Room.

The fourth Consideration.
Fourthly, we ought to have a regard to the particular Nature of the Liquors
employed in Weather-glasses, till we have a more determinate Theory of the
cause of Cold: For amongst Liquors, it does not follow, That because the one is
most subject to be affected with the highest degrees of Cold, and to freeze;
that the other is less susceptible of the lower degrees of it: Since it is
observed, That Spirit of Wine receives notable Impressions from fainter degrees
of Cold, than Water does, when made use of in Weather-glasses; though in our
Climate the latter is much more readily turned into Ice. Besides, we are not to
conclude, That all Subtle and most Spirituous Liquors must be least capable of
being congealed; since Oil of Aniseeds Distilled by a Limbeck, is extremely
hot; yet will it be congealed by a much gentler degree of Cold than Water, and
will be longer undissolved upon a Thaw. And I know some distilled Liquors,
which consist of Parts very penetrating and vehemently Agitated; yet more
subject to freeze than the generality of Chemical Oils or saline Spirits.

And indeed, if we allow, that Cold depends on a Diminution of the usual motion
of the Parts of a Body; I see not, besides those more Catholic Agents which
produce Cold in most Bodies they invade; why one Body may not be said to be
more or less frigorifick in respect of this or that Body, and not of a third?
For Quicksilver will be coagulated by the fumes of Lead* which have no such
effect on other Bodies; nor can the utmost degree of Cold (...) power to
congeal it, and from (...) the Jesuit relates it appears, That Water in
peculiar Regions may receive such a disposition from the Soil, as to receive
strange Impressions of Cold, in respect of the effects it produces there on
Humane Bodies. And though Opium refrigerates not Water, as I have experienced by
the help of a good Weather-glass; yet a few Grains of it presently refrigerate
the Mass of Blood; which is not only an argument, That most Liquors have
peculiar Textures; but that the Parts of one Body may be so conveniently shaped
as to be able, by insinuating into the Pores of another, to stop the Agitation
of their Parts. And in favor of what we have laid down, I shall further add,
That I know more Liquors than one, which, mingled with Spirit of Wine well
dephelgmed, will presently deprive it of it is Fluidity; and the like change I
have sometimes observed in other Liquors: And I can make a Liquor much of the
same temper of Water, that receives a degree of Coldness by the Addition of a
certain substance which stops the Agitation of it is Parts; that would scarce
have any sensible effect on Water.

But to proceed to what we have further to offer in favor of our new
Thermometers, Considerations concerning the new Thermometers.
besides that the Water and Air may be both alternately condensed, without the
influence of the Atmosphere's gravity; they have another advantage, That they
may be used in several Places, and removed without spilling the Liquor
contained in them, or without danger of it being evaporated. Besides they may
be safely let down into any Liquor, even the most Corrosive; it we have a mind
to examine their In doing of which, instead of Liquors made use of in common
Glasses, we employ Spirit of Wine tinged with Cochineele, opened by the most
Volatile Spirit of Urine, which is not only in less danger of being froze, but
susceptible of the slightest degrees of Cold impressed upon it by external
Bodies. But though we think these Weather-glasses subject to fewer Exceptions
than common ones; yet in estimating, the several degrees of Cold, we look upon
them as Instruments to be employed by our Reason, and not quite exempt from
those Imperfections, we have imputed to Weather-glasses; since I suspect, that
some sort of Steams, penetrateing the Pores of the Glasses, may have other
effects upon the Spirit of Wine, than what they have in reference to Heat and
Cold: For I once observed, that having immersed the Ball of a Weather-glass in
a strange kind of a Lukewarm mixture, the Spirit rose up slowly 8 or 9 Inches
in a Tube not above a foot long; and subsided not again much above half an Inch
when exposed to the Air a good while after it had been immersed in Water 5
hours. The Chemist Orthelius in his Theatrum Chymicum Vol. 6. tells us, That
the Liquor Distilled from the Oar of Magnesia or Bismute, will swell
considerably in the Glass it is kept in at the full Moon, and subside at the
New; which observation the Jesuit Casatus makes use of as an Argument. And I
have observed my self a Tincture of Amber made with rectified Spirit of Wine,
undergo several changes, when stopped up in a Bottle, which other Liquors
abounding with Spirit of Wine did not; so that not unlikely, if Weather-glasses
furnished with different Liquors were kept together in the same Place, there
would be some disparity, which could be ascribed to nothing but the peculiar
Natures of the respective Liquors, which, though of different kinds, may receive
the same Color from the same Metals: So Copper gives the known Color to Aqua
fortis, and affords a fair Solution in Aqua Regis, as well as gives a lovely
Blew to Spirit of Urine, or Sal Ammoniac; and I have found, that it would give
a good Tincture to Chemical Oil of Turpentine.

And to show, that even Spirit of Wine in Weather-glasses may be worked upon
and influenced by external Bodies, I shall add, That I have observed in one
that lay by me some time, emergent Bubbles: Which whether they were only made
up of united Bubbles lodged in the Pores of the Liquor, or some Parts of the
Wine disposed to Elasticity by frequent alterations; I examine not: But
sometimes they have been so great as to possess many Inches of space in the
shank of the Weather-glass; which Bubbles, if they be small and lurk about the
juncture of the Ball and of the Cylinder; may, by dividing the Spirit in the
Stem from that in the Ball, hinder it from rising according to the Changes of
the Weather; a Bubble of Air being more dicffiultly removed up and down in the
Stem of the Glass, than the Spirit it self; in favor of which, we have
elsewhere shown, That Water will pass through a narrower space than Air,
except the latter be forced.

But to draw near to a conclusion, though I have mentioned all these difficulties
about sealed Glasses; I would not be thought to do it with a design to set Men
upon greater Nicities than are necessary, but rather to excite us to take into
our Consideration as many collateral Experiments and Observations; besides
those made by our Sensories, on Natural as well as Factitious Bodies, in
judging of the degrees of Cold as we can: For though Water be thought to be most
susceptible of such an intense degree of Cold as destroys Fluidity, yet besides
Oil of Aniseeds, I have distilled a substance from Benzoin, which becomes fluid
and consistent upon much slighter alterations as to Heat and Cold, than would
freeze Water or thaw it: And I have observed likewise, That Amber-grease
dissolved in highly rectified Spirit of Wine, or in other Sulphereous or
Resinous Concretions dissolved in the same Liquor; will shoot into fine figured
Masses in cold Weather, and re-dissolve in warm; others being more rudely
congealed. And even in Chemical Preparations of Hartshorn and Urine, I have
observed, That sometimes the Spirits would be clear, and at other times would
suffer a greater or less quantity of Salt to Chrystallize at the bottom;
according to the various alterations of the Weather, in point of Heat or Cold.

But to bring Instances from more obvious Liquors, it is observed in some Parts
of France by the Watermen, That their Boats will carry greater Loads in Winter
than Summer; and on frozen Coasts in several Countries it is observed, That
Ships draw less Water than on our British Coasts; which is an Argument, that
the Water is heavier and thicker in Winter than in Summer. And I my self have
poised a Bubble so exactly, with Water in it; that though it would swim upon the
top of the Water at Night; yet in the Day, when the Sun had rarefied the Water
it swam in, it would subside to the bottom: And sometimes was so exactly of a
correspondent weight with, and so equally poised in the Water, that it would
neither subside nor swim upon the top, but move up and down till the Water was
either more rarefied or further condensed.

From what has been said in this Chapter, it appears, 1st. That by reason of
the various predispositions in Bodies, the testimony of our Senses is not to be
taken in judging of the several degrees of Cold. 2dly. Though Weather-glasses are
subject to fewer alterations than our Senses, yet they may misinform us; except
we, at the same time, measure the Air's Gravity by other Instruments. 3dly. Our
sealed Weather-glasses are highly preferable before common ones. 4thly, To
conclude this Chapter I shall add, That I would not have Men easily deterred
from making Experiments about estimating Cold; because they may seem
disagreeable to vulgar Notions, since I doubt not but that the Theory we have
is not only very imperfect, but ill grounded.


CHAP. IV. Concerning the cause of the Condensation of the Air, and ascent of
Water by Cold in common Weather-glasses.
COncerning the Reason, why Water in common Weather-glasses descends upon Heat,
and is raised by Cold? there are three Opinions which may deserve our
Consideration.

The Opinion of the Schools concerning the ascent of Water in Weather-glasses
examined.
The first is, that of the Schools and common Peripateticks, which teaches, That
the external Air condensing that included in common Weather-glasses; it rises
to fill up that space deserted by the Air to prevent a Vacuum. But not to urge,
That they have not yet proved, that Nature will not admit of a Vacuum, or that
it is contrary to the Notion a Naturalist ought to have of Matter; to suppose
it to act any thing contrary to its own natural tendency for a public Good: I
say not to urge these Arguments, which we have elsewhere made use of; I shall
allege the following Experiment. viz. That,

Experiments alleged against their Doctrine.
If a Bolt-head with a long Stem be made use of to try the Torrecellian
Experiment with, the space deserted by the Mercury in the Cavity of the
Bolt-head, and from whence the Mercury drove the Air, continues void; the
Pendulous Cylinder remaining at 30 Inches, without offering to ascend to
prevent a Vacuum. Nor will the Quicksilver rise of an Inch higher upon the
application of cold Bodies outwardly; though in a common Thermometer, the same
degree of Cold would make Water ascend several Inches.

To this I shall add another Argument taken from the consideration of sealed
Weather-glasses (see Plate 1. Fig. 3.) in which it is observed, See Plate 1.
Fig. 3.
That the Air, instead of contracting upon an increase of Cold, expands it
self. If it be said, That the Water contracting the Air follows it to prevent a
Vacuum; it may be demanded, Why, since Nature causes the one to contract in
common Glasses, and the other in sealed ones, to avoid a Vacuum; she does not
rather make the Air retain its natural extension than suffer it to be
condensed, and then put her self to double trouble, in compelling the Water to
ascend contrary to its nature?

But not to insist on these Arguments, I shall rather urge, that what is
offered by them will not solve the Difficulty; for whether the Water or Air be
expanded into a large space, since Glass is impervious to Air and Water; I see
not how a Vacuum interspersum and coacervatum can be avoided: For if upon the
expansion, no other Body is added and penetrates the Glass to fill the space
deserted by some Parts of the expanded Body, there must remain Vacuities
betwixt them: Because it is impossible, the same quantity of Matter should
completely and adequately fill a greater space by being expanded; the Parts of
the Body being only able inadequately to fill it by receding from each other:
But were it allowed, that upon the expansion of one of these Bodies, and the
condensation of the other, a third Substance harbored in the space deserted by
the one; it may be questioned, how such Matter should make its way out again?

Mr. Hobbes his Doctrine examined.
The second Opinion I shall take notice of, is that of Mr. Hobbes, which is to
me partly precarious, partly insufficient, and scarce intelligible; for though
when he asserts, That the coldness of Liquors depends on their being pressed
with a constant Wind, besides that he asserts it without Proof; it will appear
from an Experiment shortly to be alleged, That Liquors sealed up in Glasses,
and suspended in Liquors not subject to freeze, may be refrigerated; though it
appears not how they can be raked on by the Wind as his Hypothesis requires.

Secondly, I see no necessity, that the Cold should press upon the superficies
of the Water in the Shank; since by Cold it will be raised in a
Weather-glassess, kept in a still Place and void of any sensible Wind. Besides,
he ought to show, Why Air insensibly moved deserves to be styled Wind, and how
it is possible such a Wind should raise Water so many Inches by pressing upon
it? Nay further, Water poured into a Bolt-head till it reaches into the Stem,
will subside when refrigerated, and not rise. And if the Ball of a
Weather-glass be encompassed with a mixture of Ice, or Snow and Salt; the Water
will readily ascend; which how it will be explained by Mr. Hobbes's Hypothesis,
I do not see.

Thirdly, Mr. Hobbes allowing not of a Vacuum, I wonder he should tell us, That
by a bare Pressure, the Water finding no other Place to recede into, is forced
to rise into the shank of the Weather-glass: For since, according to him, the
shank of the Weather-glass must be full before; I see not how it should be able
to receive the ascending Water, except to use Mr. Hobbes's own words, it can be
fuller than full. Besides, it may be further alleged against Mr Hobbes his
Doctrine, that it gives us no account of the condensation of the Air by Cold,
in Weather-glasses in which the Water descends with Cold and rises with Heat.

Fourthly, whereas Mr. Hobbes in explaining the depression of Water in
Weather-glasses, attributes it solely to it is own Gravity; it will easily
appear, that we must likewise have recourse to the spring of the included Air:
For if a Thermometer be placed in the Sun, when the Water in the shank is but a
little above the Surface of the Water without the Tube; the rarefied Air will
depress the Surface of the Water in the Pipe below the other, and sometimes so
far, that some of the rarefied Air making it is way out of the Pipe, as soon as
the remaining Air is refrigerated again, the Water will be able to rise up
higher into the Tube than it did before.

A Modern Opinion examined.
The third and last Opinion I shall consider is one held by some modern
Naturalists, which ascribes the Ascent of the Water to the Pressure of the Air
gravitating upon the Surface of that Water without the Pipe; but supposes that
the Air contained in it, is contracted by Cold alone: As for the first Part of
this Hypothesis, I readily Assent to it; and the Author's proposed.
but am apt to believe that the contraction of the included Air depends on the
same Cause, and that the spring of it being weakened by Cold, it is condensed
by the same Pressure of the Atmosphere; the weight of the External Air
over-powering the weakened Spring of the Internal.

In favor of this Opinion I shall add the following Experiments, See Plate 1.
Fig. 5.
and First, having filled a Vial capable of holding five or six Ounces, half
full (See Plate 1. Fig. 5.) and having inverted a Glass Tube into it, about 10
Inches long, much bigger than a Swan's Quill, it being first sealed at one end
and filled with Water; the Orifice of the Vial was closed with Cement, so that
the External and Internal Air, had no communication with each other: It was
placed in a Mixture of Snow and Salt, till the Water in the Bottom of the Vial
began to freeze; yet notwithstanding so great a degree of refrigeration, the
Water in the Tube did not at all descend; so that either the Air was not
condensed by Cold, or the Water descended not to prevent a Vacuum. The Glass
being left in this Posture, in our absence, the sealed end of the Pipe flew
off; being beaten out by the Intumescence of the freezing Water.

Having fixed another Pipe as the former, which was some Inches longer, and
drawn very slender at the sealed end, that it might easily be broken; this was
set to freeze as the other, yet the Water descended not, but as soon as the top
of the Glass-Tube was broke off, the external Air pressing upon the Water, and
by the intercourse of that upon the Air; the Water in the Tube subsided 8 or 10
Inches, but rose again when the internal Air was rarefied, within half an Inch
of the top; and then the Apex being sealed up it was placed in Snow and Salt,
yet the Air in the top, had it is Spring so weakened by refrigeration, that it
was not able to depress the Water; though as soon as the Apex was broke off, it
subsided several Inches, the external Air pressing upon it.

The Experiment being a third time reiterated with 3 of Air in the Pipe, when
the Water in the Vial was in some measure froze, it was able to expand it self
a little: But when the Apex was broke off, the External Air depressed the
Surface of the Water two Inches, but being removed into a warm Room it ascended
above an Inch higher than the uppermost Level.

Having put so much Water into a Vessel, See Plate 1. Fig. 6.
(Such as Plate 1. Fig. 6. Delineates) as was able to fill almost the whole
Tube, we caused a Mixture of Snow and Salt to be placed about the Ball of it,
yet we perceived not the Water in the least to rise; but if at all, it might
well be ascribed to the the Intumescence of some airy Parts lodged in the Pores
of the Water. But the Apex of the Tube being broke off under Water, the
External Air forced the Water several Inches up into the Cavity of the Pipe.

Another Experiment we made with the following Vessel (See Plate 1. Fig. 7) the
Stem of this being no thicker than a Raven's Quill though several Inches long,
See Plate 1. Fig. 7.
and the Ball being about as big as a Nutmeg; we dropped a few drops of Water
into the Stem which being suspended there, betrayed very slight changes in the
Rarefaction or Condensation of the internal Air. Watching therefore when the
Air within had raised the Bubble up to the top of the Stem; we immediately
sealed it up, and observed, That though the sealed Glass was placed in a Mixture
of Snow and Salt, the Bubble did not in the least subside: But if the Apex of
the Stem was broke off, the Bubble of Water would be sometimes depressed so
low, as to fall into the Ball of the Weather-glass. And what was further
remarkable, was, That when the Liquor was descending, if the end of the Tube
was sealed up; the Water would immediately stop at the place it rested at, when
the Pressure of the Atmosphere was taken off: Where it would continue till the
Stem was broke open again, and then the Water would be further depressed; as
the weight of the Atmosphere was able to overpower the Resistance made by the
internal Air.

Having made use of such a Vessel (as Fig. 7. Plate 1.) represents and conveyed
a pretty Quantity of Water into both the Legs, See Plate 1. Fig. 7.
we sealed up the end of the bent Stem; leaving so much Air above it, as we
thought convenient: Which being done, we placed the Ball of it in a frame, in
which, the Tube hanging down, we could cover the round Ball with Snow and Salt:
Upon which the Air in the Stem was able to expand it self so far, that the
Water in the longer Leg was raised the length of a Barly-corn higher than
before, and depressed as much in the other: But when the end of the Stem was
broke open, the Water was raised 2 Inches in the longer Leg, and depressed so
low in the shorter, that several Bubbles rose into the Cavity of the Ball.

In which Experiment it cannot be supposed, That the weight of the Water in the
shorter Leg could be able, to raise the Water in the other, except by Virtue of
it is Spring, which being but small, answerable to the Quantity of of it; it
cannot be expected that it should have any considerable Effect upon the Air in
the other Leg; though it is Spring were in some measure weakened by Cold.

An Explication of the Figures in the first Plate.
Fig. 1. p. 12. A. The Ball or Egg. B C. The Stem. D. The little Aqueous
Cylinder.
Fig. 2. The open Weather-glass mentioned p. 16, 22. Fig. 3. The Sealed
Weather-glass, or Thermoscope mentioned p. 16. Fig. 4. The Barometer or
Mercurial Standard placed in a Frame B B. mentioned p. 17. Fig. 5. An
Instrument mentioned p. 34. A. The Vial. B C. The Pipe cemented into the neck
of the Vial, open at C and sealed at B.
Fig. 6. p. 35. A. The Bolt-head. B. The small Stem. B C. The Cylinder of Water
enclosed.
Fig. 7. p. 36.
CHAP. V. The Experimental History of Cold begun.
TITLE I. Experiments concerning Bodies capable of Freezing others.
BEfore we proceed to the natural History of Cold, it perhaps may be necessary
to consider what Bodies are capable of retaining such Qualities, and what are
not; but that being a consideration not so necessary to our present purpose,
which is only to set down what Observations we have made in Bodies subject to
be froze; I shall only in short take notice, That most Bodies, except fire, are
susceptible of actual Cold, and it is a Question whether even that be not
rather a state of Matter in such a peculiar motion, than a distinct and
particular species of Natural Bodies; since even Gunpowder, and Spirit of Wine
before they are set on fire by some other Body are actually Cold. But to
proceed to what Observations relate to our Title.

Experiments of Bodies capable of freezing others.
1. Bodies cold enough to freeze others are very few here in England; Snow and
Salt mixed being most remarkable; which cool the Liquor contained in those
Vessels, which are closed up in such mixtures.

2. Snow alone would not freeze Water, as a Mixture of it and Salt does; and
though Water poured betwixt the Interstices of Snow or Ice freezes; yet there is
a great disparity, betwixt exposing it to the Air, and keeping it up in
Vessels; and though it is froze, when covered with Snow in a Bottle all night,
yet that may proceed from the Coldness of the Air, as well as the influence of
the Snow.

3. If Nitre, Alum, Vitriol, Sal-Armoniack, or Sugar be mixed in due
Proportion with Snow; they will enable it to freeze, though not so intensely as
common Salt.

4. Spirit of Salt being shaken together with Snow in the Vials, they caused a
Dew which was gathered on the outside the Glass to be froze; though the Mixture
within was not, and Oil of Vitriol mixed with Snow in a thin Vial, had the same
Effect only more intensely.

5. But not only these Acid Spirits had these Effects on the moisture of the
Air condensed on the outside the Glasses; but likewise Spirit of Nitre, Spirit
of Vinegar, and Spirit of Sugar, the former of these three being very
powerful, though the latter were not so strongly frigorifick.

6. Spirit of Urine mixed with Snow in a Vial froze the External moisture
weakly; but Spirit of Sal-Armoniack drawn from Quicklime did it powerfully.

7. Spirit of Urine and Oil of Vitriol poured upon Snow, froze moderately.

8. Sal Gem* with a sublimate made with common sublimate and Sal-Armoniack;
nay, and with both loaf and Kitchin-Sugar; as likewise a strong solution of
Potashes mixed with Snow did freeze, though very faintly. And both a Solution of
Salt of Tartar and Potashes Agitated with Snow in a small Vial, produced
Filmes of Ice on the outside the Glass, though very thin ones.

9. A sweet Solution of Minium in Spirit of Vinegar mixed with Snow, excited
the frigorifick Quality of it; yet some of that Solution being enclosed in Snow
and Salt, would not be froze by them. Snow shut up alone, thawed much more
slowly, than that which was mixed with Salts or Spirits. No Salts will promote
the frigorifick Quality of Snow, so far as to enable it to freeze, which
quicken not it is Dissolution. Neither Chrystals of Tartar, nor Borax, both
beaten to powder, nor Sublimate would enable Snow to freeze, as well as the
Powder of each lying undissolved in it.

10. Water of Quicklime being twice tried would not freeze, but only gather a
dew on the outside; yet the Liquor being kept up 12 Months the Spirits with
which those Waters abound flew away.

11. Oil of Turpentine in which Ice dissolves slower than in several other
Liquors enables not Snow to freeze. Though Spirit of Wine shut up with Snow in a
Bottle, enabled it to freeze powerfully, and to Chrystalize even Urine it self,
which might be taken off in Scales.

12. Spirit of Nitre and Snow being mixed together in a just Proportion froze
very powerfully and speedily, not only Water but Spirit of Vinegar, and weak
Spirit of Salt; the first of which retained it is taste, when froze, and the
latter shot into Chrystals which lay across each other. A Solution of
Sal-Armoniack partly evaporated would shoot into Chrystals like combs and
feathers, and Sal-Armoniack distilled from Quicklime would shoot into Branches
almost like those, so nimbly, that one's Eye might discern them to spread and
increase. The like Experiments being tried with Wine and strong Ale succeeded,
but very faintly.

13. Since Bodies generally help Snow to freeze, which hasten it is dissolution;
we threw into a Vial, which contained Snow, heated Sand, which enabled it to
cause a Dew, but not to freeze. And warm Water poured into another, when it had
been shaken, produced a considerable degree of Cold, and gathered Dew, but
froze it not.

14. Though it is generally believed, That the Hoar-froast on Glass-windows, is
only exsudations through the Pores of the Glass, and froze by the External
Cold; yet it will easily appear, That it is rather on the inside the Glass; the
Steams which rove up and down the Room being condensed by the External Cold,
and froze.

15. To show, That the Ice which appears on the outside of the Vial in the
foregoing Experiments, proceeds not from any subtle Parts of the Mixture
penetrating the Pores of the Glass and settling on the outside; we found that
four Ounces and of the Mixture of Ice and Salt, being shut up in a Vial, by the
access of Dew on the outside, the weight of it was increased 12 Grains. Another
Vial which contained two Ounces six Drams and a half increased in weight 4
Grains; the Vial being unsealed under Water, it sucked in a good quantity of
it. Six ounces Snow and Salt being sealed up in a Glass, the Hoar-Frost was
wiped off but returned again; and the Vial being counterpoised in a pair of
Scales, the Vapors condensed by the coldness of it, in the time that the Snow
was melting, weighed 10 Grains. A like quantity of Snow and Spirit of Wine
being shut up in a single Vial, the outside was presently covered with Ice, and
in all it became 7 Grains heavier than before. Another time a mixture of Snow
and Salt, which weighed 3 ounces, afforded 18 grains of condensed Vapors. And
a mixture of Snow and Sal-Gem. which counterpoised 3 ounces and 70 grains, upon
an additional weight of condensed Vapors, weighed 20 grains more than before.

TITLE II. Experiments and Observations concerning Bodies disposed to be Frozen.
Of Bodies disposed to be frozen.
WIthout any more than barely intimating, that there are several Bodies disposed
to be froze by one degree of Cold, that are not with another; I shall observe,
1. That in very cold snowy Weather, Water, Urine, Beer, Ale, Milk, Vinegar,
French and Rhenish Wine, were either totally or partly turned into Ice. But
besides these more obvious Instances, we froze a Solution of Sugar, and another
of Gum Arabic, in Water; a Solution of Alum, Nitre, and Vinegar, froze
without affording any considerable Phenomenon. A Solution of Vitriol was in
part froze, and in part unfroze, that which was froze being not much different
in color from Water; but the unfroze part was of a very high Vitriol-colour.
2. Spirit of Urine and Spirit of Vinegar exposed to an intense Fire, both of
them froze. 3. A dram of Salt of Potashes being dissolved in two ounces of
Water, presently froze in an intense Cold; and Oil of Tartar per deliquium, or
at least, a Solution of the fixed Salt of Tartar was congealed in a mixture of
Snow and Salt.


Appendix to the II. Title.
Oil becomes much more hard in Muscovy than here in England in the most
excessive Cold, but will in neither be turned into perfect Ice. And Captain
James, speaking of an Island where he and his Men were forced to Winter, Page
58, says, All our Sack, Vinegar, Oil, and every Thing else that was liquid, was
now frozen as hard as a piece of Wood, and we must cut it with a Hatchet. And
Olaus Magnus, Gent. Sept. Hist. l. 11. c. 24, says, speaking of the Fights wont
to be made on the Ice in the Northern Regions, Glacialis congressus fit in
Laneis calcibus, non pellibus, aut coriis unctis. Vis enim frigoris, quodcunque
fit unctuosum, convertit in Lubricitatem glacialem.

There being a great similitude betwixt Spirit of Wine and Oil, in respect of
their inflammability, and being disposed to mix with oily Bodies, and as great
an aptitude in the Spirit of Wine to mix with other Liquors: I inquired of the
Russian Emperor's Physician, what alterations he had observed to be produced by
Cold in Muscovy? To which he answered, That Aniseed and other weak Spirits
would be turned into an imperfect kind of Ice, and that strong ones would turn
Ice into a kind of Substance like Oil.

Particulars referrable to the II. Title.
1, In a very hard Frost in December, a Solution of Minium near the Fire seemed
to be froze; though it was made with Spirit of Vinegar, and so strong, that part
of it was shot into Saccharum Saturni. Some at the top, which was yellow, did
not freeze, though poured out. 2. A Solution of Gold made with Salts was likewise
froze. As also a Pint-vial full of the Tincture of Lignum Nephriticum, which
being froze, the Ice had no such color as the Tincture. 3. It is reported,
That in Russia, Brandy will freeze, but the Ice of it is not so hard as common
Ice. And I am informed, that in Moscow the Spirit of Wine would freeze; leaving
some dissolved in the middle which was much stronger than ordinary Brandy. And
I am told, that in Russia it is usual to have Wine froze.
French Brandy being exposed to the Air in Russia froze; and Sallet-oyl become
as hard as Tallow, but Water, at the same time did not freeze.

TITLE III. Experiments touching Bodies indisposed to be frozen.
Bodies not disposed to freeze.
1. THE subtle parts of several Bodies being brought over by distillation, would
not freeze by such an application of Snow and Salt as froze other Bodies. Of
this sort were Aquafortis, Spirit of Nitre, of Salt, Oil of Turpentine, and
almost all the Chemical Oils we had then in possession; Spirit of Wine, and of
other fermented Liquors; and Sack, if good, would scarce freeze; but the
inflammable Part being spent by burning, it would easily freeze.

2. Two drachms of Salt of Potashes, being dissolved in an ounce of Water, the
mixture would not freeze; though the outside of the Vessel was covered with Ice.
At another time a strong Solution of Salt of Tartar would not freeze, though at
the same time Salt of Potashes being dissolved did.

3. That common expressed Oils of Vegetables will freeze after their manner,
and curdle in cold Weather, is commonly observed; yet Train-oyl, which is
usually made of the Fat of Whales by the help of Fire, continued fluid in
Weather that was very sharp, but in an excessive cold night it lost its
fluidity; which seems to disfavour what Olaus Magnus writes, who says, That in
the Northern Regions it is usual to cast Train-oyl upon the Water in their
Ditches, to keep the Water from freezing, and thereby unpassable, the Oil, as
he says, not being subject to congele with Cold; but it may be worth while to
enquire, Whether the Train-Oyl he speaks of be the same as is used by the
Swedes, Laplanders, and Muscovites, and whether they have a different way in
keeping of it or not?

4. Though a Solution of Sugar would freeze, yet a strong Solution of Sugar of
Lead would not in a mixture of Snow and Salt; which is remarkable, since the
Spirit of Vinegar it self would freeze: Besides there must needs be some Water
in the Solution, and the Sugar being but a Vitriol of Lead, it is not a little
strange, that it should not freeze as well as common Vitriol; though in this
latter concrete, Metal be corroded by a Spirit; which, if we may judge by the
Liquor afforded in Distillation, is very much sharper and stronger than Spirit
of Vinegar.

5. Quicksilver would not freeze in the sharpest Air, though exposed to it in
very thin Glasses, and in such a manner, that a little quantity of it made a
large Surface.

6. A very sharp Frost was not able to freeze a strong Brine, though at the same
time other saline Solutions were congealed. But a Solution consisting of twenty
Parts of Water and one of Salt, was froze in a very sharp Night; the Ice
swimming at the top, in Figures almost like Broom, spreading from the surface
of the Water downwards: The Salt dissolved in this Water, is double the
proportion of that which is usually in Seawater. I thawed Ice of Salt Water,
to try whether the dissolved Ice would be fresh or not, but it retained a
little brackishness, which, I suppose, it received from the contiguous Brine;
though I am informed, That in Amsterdam they make use of thawed Ice, instead of
common fresh Water, in Brewing. And Bartholinus de usu Nivis, Cap. 6. p. 42.
says, De Glacie ex marina aqua certum est, si resolvatur, salsum saporem
deposuisse, quod etiam non ita pridem expertus est Cl. Jacobus Fincbius
Academiae Nostrae Senior, and Physices Professor, benemeritus, in Glaciei
frustis e portu nostro allatis.

Particulars referrable to the III Title.
1. Spirit of Sal-Armoniack made with Quicklime, volatile Oil of Amber, a small
quantity of Oil of Vitriol, being exposed two Nights and a Day, froze not. A
Solution of Silver in Aqua fortis was; and Spr. Sanguinis Humani, being froze,
swelled so much as to force out the Cork. 2. Unrectify'd Oil of Turpentine
exposed to the Cold in a Bottle would not freeze; but another Portion being
contained in an earthen Porringer did. 3. I am informed, That there is a Lake
of Water in Scotland, out of which a small River runs, the Water of both which
is never froze; but dissolves Snow or Ice if cast into it. 4. Sallet-oyl being
made use of to keep the Locks of Guns from freezing, hindered them from being
discharged; but Oil of Hemp, or Train-oyl kept them from freezing.
TITLE IV. Experiments and Observations concerning the degrees of Cold in
several Bodies.
Of the degrees of Cold in several Bodies.
TO discover the different degrees of Cold we have proposed several Thermometers
in the preceding Chapters, concerning which we shall add this Advertisement
viz. That though those which are to be immersed in Liquors, have the Ball end
round; yet, when we are to try the degrees of Cold of consistent Powders, it is
better to make use of such as have flat Bottoms, that they may be able to stand
on their own Basis: For so it will be pleasant to see the suspended Bubble in
one of our Thermometers rise and fall, as it is removed from one Body to
another.

2. Freezing has been so generally esteemed, the utmost Effect of Cold, That
most have been content, without examining strictly the several degrees of it.
Nor indeed is it very easily done, since if we do it with common
Weather-glasses it will be a hard thing to distinguish whether the Cold of one
Day, exceeds that of another; since there intervening so much time betwixt the
Observations, the Alterations may be caused by an increase in the weight of the
Atmosphere. And should we make an estimate by the Testimony of our Senses, we
should easily be mistaken; since it is believed, That the different sensations
of Cold which we perceive, depend on the various Dispositions of our Bodies.

But allowing, that vulgar Thermometers might give us a true Information of the
degrees of Cold, which Nature affords, yet they acquaint us not whether Art may
not produce greater; much less will they help us to make an estimate of this
Disparity. And though we may make some guess by the Operation of Cold on
Liquors exposed to it, yet some as Aqueous Liquors freeze too soon, and vinous
Liquors here in England will not freeze at all, except French Wine; which
happens seldom and leaves too great an Interval betwixt the degrees necessary
to congeal Wine, and sufficient to freeze Water, besides the uncertainty
proceeding from the several strengths of Wines.

Wherefore to discover the Intensity of Cold, produced by Art above the highest
degree that Nature affords, See Plate. 1. Fig. 1.
we furnished a sealed Weather-glass (Such as Plate 1. Fig. 1. Delineates) with
Spirit of Wine, and immersed the Ball and part of the Stem in a Vessel of
Water, which was half buried in Snow and Salt, and when the Water began to
freeze at the bottom and about the sides, the Liquor was Subsided to 5 2/^
Divisions, each Division being half an Inch; and then the Weather-glass being
taken out of the Water and applied to the Snow and Salt, it Subsided to 1
Division.

To this we shall add another which shows, That the Water though froze was warmer
than the Spirit of Wine, when the Mixture of Snow and Salt was applied to it.
Jan. 15 the Weather-glass being kept in the Water till it began to freeze
descended to 5 but being removed into the Snow and Salt it Subsided first
briskly and then more gradually till it sunk to the Bottom of the Stem; but
being removed into the Water again, it ascended to the same height, the Water
had before depressed it to.

For a further Trial, how much Liquors may be condensed by Cold, we took Oil of
Turpentine rectified in a gentle Heat, and having weighed a Glass-ball with a
long Stem, it being one Ounce, one Dram, five Grains and a half; we poured on
it so much of the Turpentine as increased the weight to, two Ounces seven Drams
and thirty four Grains and a half; which reaching a little way into the Stem,
we marked the Superficies with a Diamond; after which we poured a Dram more in,
and successively more; still marking how high each Parcel, which was weighed
exactly, rought in the Stem, till the Additional weight increased the former to
three Ounces, one Dram, four Grains, and a half; and then taking a wide-mouthed
Glass with Water in it, we immerged the Weather-glass in the Water as before;
the Vessel in which it was contained being first encompassed with Snow and
Salt: When the Water began to freeze, we marked the Stem of the Glass which
contained the Oil at the place to which it subsided; and then conveying it into
a Mixture of Snow and Salt, when it had subsided as low as it could, we marked
the Superficies, and then removed it into the Air, till it rose to it is first
station; and then we poured so much of the Oil out into another Glass carefully
poised in a pair of Scales, that the Superficies of the Oil remained at the
Mark which it subsided to in the Water; and we found that the Oil poured off
weighed about 10 Grains: And so much more being poured off as made it stand at
the Mark to which the Snow and Salt depressed it, it weighed about as much as
the former; so that the Oil was Artificially condensed, so far, That it
subsided as much after it had been condensed by Cold strong enough to freeze
Water, as it was caused to fall by the force of that. And by dividing the whole
Proportion of Oil, by the number of Grains whose Bulk it seemed to lose by
subsiding in Water, we found that it was condensed by the first degree of Cold
to a 94th Part of it is Bulk and by dividing it by the Additional number of the
Grains more, we found that the Snow and Salt had condensed it a 47th Part of
it is Bulk.

Having circumscribed Water moderately Cold with a Mixture of Snow and Salt,
what it shrunk was, if not insensible, inconsiderable.

To measure the differing weight and Density of the same Proportion of Water,
in the Heat of Summer and when extremely Cold; we weighed a Glass-Bubble in it,
which was Heavier than Water moderately cool, and by the Diminution of it is
weight in that Medium; we found, according to the Rules of Hydrostaticks, the
weight of a Portion of Water of equal Bulk: And then weighing it in Water
cooled, by a Mixture of Snow and Salt, we were informed by a new Decrement of
it is weight, of the weight of an equal Bulk of that Cold Water; by which we
were enabled to make an Estimate of the Gravity and Density acquired by the
Action of Gold, and by weighing the same Bubble in the same Water in hot
Weather, we Learnt further how much more dense and heavy Water moderately Cold
and extremely Cold, is than warm Water. It would be of use to try such
Experiments as these in Italy, where they have the Convenience of keeping Snow,
and of freezing warm Water speedily. A Glass-Bubble which in the Air, weighed
150 Grains being weighed in Water; on a Day not frosty, it weighed 29 ^/8 and
being weighed in Water which was a little froze in a Mixture of Snow and Ice,
it was not above Part of a Grain lighter than before; so that the Water by
Condensation lost not above a 230th Part of it is former Bulk. How far it may be
of use at Sea to make such Experiments as these, and whether they may thereby
learn to know, by finding the Density of the Water in several Places; what
Loads to carry in their ships and what the Water will be able to bear, I shall
leave others to Judge: But if such Experiments be tried in several Parts; our
Sealed Weather-glasses, or that which contains the Pendulous drop of Water, may
be of use; since they not being subject to be varied by the Alterations in the
Atmosphere's Gravity, and since they may be conveniently carried from one
Country to another, the different degrees of Cold in various Regions may be
better Estimated; a Register being kept of the degrees the Liquor or Pendulous
drop stood at such times as the Trials were made and where, and when exposed to
such a degree as was able to freeze. To conclude this Title I shall add, that
in making these Experiments, with the Thermometer in which the Pendulous Water
is contained; the Stem may, for convenience, be held either Horizontal, upwards
or Perpendicular.

TITLE V. Experiments concerning the Tendency of Cold upwards or downwards.
What way or in what Line Cold acts most vigorously.
THAT Heat generally acts most powererfully on Bodies above it, and that it is
Tendency is upwards, is self-evident: But to discover in what Line Cold acts
most vigorously and furthest, we made the following Experiments.

A Glass-Bubble with Water in it, having a flat Bottom, was suspended within
less than half an Inch over a Mixture of Ice and Salt, but froze not. A Bottle
which contained a Mixture of Snow and Salt being held under Water, it was cased
with Ice, especially about the Bottom; so that the Action of Cold seems chiefly
to tend downwards.

But I rely less upon this Experiment, because it is observed, That when a
frigorifick Mixture is exposed in a Vial, the Ice on the outside is always
opposite to the Mixture, not reaching higher or lower than that Mixture, above
half the Breadth of a Barly-corn; and as the Mixture dissolves, and that which
swims upon the dissolved Part grows less and less, so Proportionably the circle
of Ice grows narrower on the outside, till the Mixture is wholly dissolved, and
then the Ice vanishes.

And from an experiment shortly to be mentioned, viz. Eggs suspended under
Water, it appears, That Cold acts on every side, the Shells being wholly
incrustated with Ice.

To put an end to this Title, I shall, in order to facilitate some Experiments
hereafter to be made, advertise, That whereas in common Experiments Water
naturally beginning to freeze at the top, and that Ice confining the subjacent
Water, so that when froze it has not room to expand; I say, whereas in such
cases the Glasses are subject to break, to prevent such ill Consequences; I lay
the frigorifick Mixture first about the bottom of the Glasses, by which means
the Water beginning to freeze at the bottom, the Water is raised up above it;
and as the Salt and Ice is raised higher about the Glass, so the Ice gradually
rises, without danger of breaking the Bottles. To this Advertisement I shall
add, That though I only at the first lay the mixture about the bottom of the
Glass, yet to keep the Water above, cool, I usually put Ice it self or Snow
(either of which will succeed in these Experiments) above that Mixture.

TITLE VI. Experiments and Observations concerning the preservation and
destruction of (Eggs, Apples, and other) Bodies by Cold.
Of the Preservation of Bodies by Cold.
IT is a common Tradition, That if Eggs or Apples be thawed near the Fire, it
spoils them; but if they be immersed in cold Water, they thaw slowly without
damage. To try the truth of this Tradition, I made the following Experiments.

An Egg which weighed 12 drachms and a grain, being wrapped in a waxed Paper to
defend it from the thawing Snow, was froze in a mixture of Snow and Salt; and
then wanting 4 grains of its former weight, it was put into a Basin of Water:
It acquired such a Crust of Ice about it, as increased the weight to 15 drachms
and 9 grains; and the Ice being taken off, and the Egg dried, it weighed 12
drachms and 12 grains; being broke we found it almost thawed: When froze it
swam in the Water, but when thawed it sunk.

We took two Eggs well froze, and placing them both at an equal distance from
the Fire, the one was put into Water and the other laid on a Table: When that
in the Water was crusted over with Ice, we took it out, and breaking it, found
that the Yolk and some part of the White were thawed; but the other Egg being
cut asunder, the White was wholly frozen, and the Yolk hard as if it had been
over-boyl'd: There likewise appeared in it certain concentrical Circles of
different Colors, and a very white Speck in the middle of it.

The same Experiment being tried a second time, we were confirmed in our
Persuasion, That frozen Eggs will thaw sooner in cold Water, than in the open
Air.

An Egg being suspended in Water, was covered with a Crust of Ice equally thick
on all sides.

Frozen Pippins being put into a Basin of Water, were covered over with a Crust
of Ice of a considerable thickness; where it was observable, 1. That that Part
of the Pippin which was immersed, was covered with a much thicker Crust than
that which was above it. 2. The extant Part seemed harder than the immersed. 3.
Those in the Water were thawed, but one that lay out of it was much harder and
more froze. 4. Neither the frozen Eggs or Apples condensed and froze the Air,
though they incrustated the Water.


Eggs being froze in Snow and Salt till they cracked, we put one into Milk, two
into a Glass of Beer, and two more into a large Glass of Sack, but produced no
Ice. Eggs being put into Vinegar produced no Ice; but the Vinegar corroded the
Egg-shells.

A Cheese immersed in Water in a cold Country, was crusted over with Ice; but
lumps of Iron, pieces of Glass, and Stones, being kept longer in Snow and Salt
than was sufficient to freeze Eggs, produced no Ice in Water.

Water being poured into a Bottle which stood on the North-East side of our
Elaborotory, Part of it was presently turned into Ice.

Ice and Juice of Pippins shaken together in a Vial produced a great deal of
Dew, and so did Ice beaten into a Liquor with the White of an Egg. Pippins were
much better when thawed in cold Water than hastily.

It has been observed in the cold Northern Climates, That when they have come
out of extreme Cold too hastily to the Fire, it has raised Blisters; wherefore
it is a custom amongst the more careful sort, to wash their Hands, or other
frozen Parts, in cold Water or Snow before they approach the Fire. I am told by
one, That Cheeses being froze in Muscovy, those thawed in Water were crusted
over with Ice; but were much better than others thawed in a Stove. And
Guilielmus Fabritius Hildanus, Cap. 10. de Gangraena and sphacelo, gives an
Account of a Man who was successfully thawed and crusted over with Ice as our
Apples and Eggs were.

Though a moderate degree of Cold preserves Bodies from putrefaction; yet
Glaciation leaves them more subject to it upon a thaw, though whilst they are in
that state they putrify not.

To prove that the highest degree of Cold under Glaciation hinders Bodies from
Corruption, I shall allege the following Instances, Bartholinus de usu nivis,
says, p. 80. Regii Mutinenses nivem hoc fine arcte compactam servant, in Cellis
Nivariis, in quibus fervente aestate vidi carnes mactatorum Animalium a
Putredine diu se conservasse. And Capt. James in his Journal, p. 74. has these
words, By the ninth of May we were come to and got up our five Barrels of Beef
and Pork, and had four Buts of Beer and one of Cider -- It had lain under Water
all the Winter; yet we could not perceive that it was any thing the worse. P.
79. he farther says, That a Cable having lain under Ice all Winter, was not in
June found a jot the worse.

And from Simlerus his Account of the Alps, it appears, That entire Bodies may
be preserved by Snow without Glaciation. Refert (says Bartholinus, speaking of
him, p. 79. de figurativis) in Rhetis apud Rinwaldios; nivium e monte ruentium
moles Sylvam and proceras Abietes dejecisse, accidisse etiam Helvetio Milite
per Alps iter faciente, ut 60 homines and plures eadem Nivis conglobatione
opprimerentur. Hoc igitur Nivium tumulo sepulti ad Tempus aestatis delitescunt,
quo soluto nonnihil Nive decidua Corpora Mortua inviolata patent; si ab amicis,
vel transeuntibus quaerantur. Vidimus ipsi triste hoc Spectaculum, etc.

To prove that inanimate Bodies whilst froze are not subject to Putrefaction, I
shall bring several Instances. Nor indeed is it much wonder, since, whether
Glaciation proceeds from intruding Swarms of frigorifick Atoms, wedged in
betwixt the Parts of a Body, or whether we suppose it to arise from an
avolition of those restless Particles which before kept the Body fluid or soft;
we must suppose an unusual rest, and consequently the concomitant cause of
Corruption to be wanting.

But to proceed to Instances, I am told, That on the Coast of Sweeden and
Denmark, the Cold will preserve Bodies a long time from putrefaction. And
Bartholinus relates a Story of several dead Bodies (p. 83. de usu Nivis) which
being killed in a Battle in the Winter, were froze in several Postures, and
continued so without being corrupted as long as the Winter lasted. To which I
shall add, that Capt. James tells us, p. 76. of a Man whom they found froze in
the Ice six Weeks after he had been committed to Sea, and all the alteration
the Frost had wrought on his Body, was, that his Flesh would move up and down
upon his Bones like a Glove upon a Man's Hand. And Bartholinus de usu Nivis,
Cap. 12. further tells us, That it is observed in Greenland, that the Frost
preserves Bodies from Putrefaction 30 Years.

But though freezing preserves Bodies from Putrefaction for the time, yet when
they thaw they presently discover, that the Textures of them were impaired and
vitiated all that while by the action of the Cold; for having froze an Ox-Eye,
I observed, that the Chrystalline humor, which was so transparent before,
being froze, lost its diaphaneity and became white. And it has been observed
by others, That though Cheeses which were thawed in Water, were better than those
that were otherwise freed from the Ice; yet they were all, in some measure,
impaired by the Frost.

To these Instances I shall add, that Purchase, Lib. 3. Cap. 5. Sect. 2 p. 493.
tells us, That in Nova Zembla, their strong Beer being froze, was wholly
vitiated, and without strength or taste. And Capt. James tells us, That strong
Alicant Wine, by being froze, had lost much of its Spirits. And it has been
observed in the Northern Country, less cold than Muscovy, That Beef having been
froze, was almost insipid, and yielded Broth little better than Water. Besides
which Instances I am informed, That Bodies much harder than any yet mentioned
may be worked upon by Cold; not to mention, that it is observed, That Bones,
and even Steel it self, are much more subject to break in frosty Weather than
at other times. And it is to our present Purpose, further observable, That
Capt. James relates, that in Charlton-Island the Wood must be thawed before the
Carpenters are able to work it.

And I am further informed, That the Timber of the Houses in Moscow will not
only crack in frosty Weather; but it is observed, That Brick-Houses in the
West Indies decay much sooner than here in England. And it has been further
observed, That Marbles themselves have not only flown in pieces in frosty
Weather, but that Brass-Instruments, and even Iron-Hoops have been cracked by
extreme Cold; as Olaus Wormius, and the Dutchmen in their Voyage to Nova
Zembla witness. But I am apt to believe, that the breaking of the Iron-Hoops
rather depended on the operation of the Cold on the Liquor contained in those
Barrels; than immediately on the Iron-Bars themselves, and that they were broke
by the expansion of that Liquor.

An Appendix to the VI. Title.
In confirmation of what has been delivered before, the Russian Emperor's
Physician told me, That if those that have their Noses or Cheeks froze, don't
rub them with Snow before they go into the Stoves, they sometimes drop off; and
he likewise told me, That moderately weak Wine by being froze, would lose both
its color and taste. He further told me, That Bodies there, will keep all the
frosty Weather incorrupt; and that Venison and Beef, and other Flesh, will be
preserved a long time by Frost; but if it is not thawed leasurely before it
comes to be roasted, it will be much impaired. And I am told, That a young Man
having been froze all over, was recovered by being first rubbed with Snow
before any other means was used.

Particulars referrable to the VI Title.

Fishes taken from under the Ice, in Lakes and Ponds which were frozen over,
and packed up, would be preserved a Month without being salted or dried; and it
was observed, That when they were taken out of the Water in the cold Air, they
would be froze immediately. It was likewise observed by the same Person who
told me these things, That though Flesh-meat froze was better when thawed
leasurely in cold Water than hastily by the Fire, yet it acquired not a Crust
of Ice about it.

In Lapland when any Part is froze, they toast Cheese made of Deer's Milk, and
anoint the affected Part with the Cows-body.

I had some Cheshire-Cheeses froze my self, one of which being thrown into
Water gathered a Crust of Ice about it.

There are white Bears in Green-Land which have so excellent a scent, that when
the Carcass of a Whale was left at some distance from the shore; they would
raise themselves, on their Legs, and with their two Paws, would fan themselves
with the Air, and snuff it in at their Snouts, and then throwing themselves
into the Sea would Swim toward the dead Carcasses; the fat of some of them
would yield a Hogshead of Oil. In Moscow a Hogshead of Malaga-Sack being froze,
a Spirituous Liquor distilled out of it stronger than the Sack it self; but the
Liquor left behind it, was a strengthless Phlegm. A Barrel of Beer being froze
on the Coast of Green-Land, the Spirituous Part was contained in the middle.

The Spanish and French Wines, that are brought to Moscow betwixt Russia and
Poland, are sometimes so frozen by the time they come there; that they are
forced to break the Casks, and to transport it in Jars from one place to
another, and when they have a mind to thaw it, they put it into another
Hogshead, and that being placed in a hole made in Ice or Snow, it thaws
leasurely there without being so much impaired as if thawed in a Stove or by
the Fire.

TITLE VII. Experiments concerning the Expansion of Water, and Aqueous Liquors
by freezing.
Of the Expansion of Water and other freezing Liquors.
THOUGH it has been generally allowed, that Water and other Liquors are condensed
by Cold; yet from what I shall offer, it will appear, That Ice is not Water
condensed but Rarefied.

For I have not only observed, That Water exposed to be froze in a Bolt-head,
would if the frigorifick Mixture inclined it to begin to freeze at the Bottom
first, be expanded, so as to rise considerably higher in the Stem, but when
that Ice was thawed again will subside. And to this I shall add, That having
included Water in a Cylinder, both ends of which were stopped up with Wax, the
Cylinder being hung up in the Air, and the Water froze; it was so far expanded,
That it forced the Wax out of each end of the Pipe, and formed a Rod of Ice
much longer than the Cylinder; from whence it appears, That the breaking of
Bottles by Cold rather depends on the Expansion of the Included Liquor, than
that the weight of the Air caused that Effect, as some Moderns teach; or that
the Internal Liquor being condensed by Cold, the Air breaks in to prevent a
Vacuum: For that Water is expanded by Cold, appears from what I have said;
besides nothing is more commonly observed, than that Water being froze in a
Vessel whose sides are strong enough to keep it from bursting them, the
Superficies of the Ice is generally protuberant and unequal. And that the
breaking of Bottles depends not on Nature's abhorrency of a Vacuum, appears;
since should we suppose, That the Fluid contained in a Bottle would be so far
condensed as to possess less space than before; it is possible there might be a
Vacuum there, and the Bottle not burst; since Glass-Bubbles much thinner than
ordinary Bottles will endure the frost, though stopped close with Air in them.

But not only Water expands it self upon freezing but other Aqueous Bodies; so
Eggs being froze, burst their shells asunder. And Milk, Urine, Rhenish Wine,
and good Spirit of Wine, being set to freeze in distinct Glass-Eggs; the Wine
being froze swelled an Inch above the first Surface, the Milk two Inches, and
the Urine six or seven. And a Solution of Dantzick-Vitriol, did not only become
Opace, but rose considerably higher in a Cylindrical Pipe, upon Congelation.

Whether more stable and consistent Bodies are capable of being expanded by
Cold; would be worth enquiring; since it has been observed, That in Nova
Zembla the very Clocks have been froze so that they would not go; and the like
has been observed by Capt. James in his Voyage at Charlton-Island; his Watch
being froze as well as his Clocks. Whether these Effects depended on any
Swelling of the Ropes, or whether the Spring of his Watch might be weakened by
Cold, or whether some Iceicles stuck to the Internal Parts of it; I shall leave
as bare Conjectures, to be further examined into by Experience.

The Phenomenon of an Experiment about Freezing referrable to the VII Title,
read before the Royal Society.
Having filled a Bolt-head which was as big as two Turkey Eggs with Water, till
it rought, a pretty height into the slender Stem, being put into a Mixture of
Snow and Salt, it subsided a little; but when it began to freeze it would
sensibly swell.

The Experiment being repeated with a Glass whose Stem was as thin as a Raven's
Quill; when first the Ball of it was immersed in the frigorifick Mixture, the
Water presently ascended the height of a Barly-corn, and presently subsided
again, which the Florentine Virtuosi would attribute to a Constriction of the
Glass upon the Application of the frigorifick Mixture.

Secondly, And though the Florentine Virtuosi, relate, That they have observed,
the Water after it had subsided, a little to rest, and then subsided again; yet
in all the Trials I made I did not observe it.

Thirdly, When the Water had subsided a little, it would be at a stand, till
the Liquor began to freeze.

Fourthly, The Experiment being tried with Glasses whose Stems were unequally
big, upon Glaciation, the Ascent of the Water in the large ones would be
indiscernible; but in a slender one it would ascend several Inches in a Minute,
till it rose up to the top of the Stem.

Fifthly, Though the Forentine Academians, say, they have observed the Water to
rise again, before Glaciation; yet I could never see such a Phenomenon.

Sixthly, If the Glass was taken out of the Mixture when first it began to
freeze, as soon as the small Iceicles were melted, it would subside again; yet
if reapply'd to the Mixture a second time, it would freeze in half a Minute.

TITLE VIII. Experiments concerning the Contraction of Liquors by Cold.
Of the Contraction of Liquors by Cold.
1 THOUGH the Liquors we have mentioned expand themselves upon an Intense degree
of Cold, yet we are not thence to couclude, that all will; since we have found
it by experience not only in Spirit of Wine, Aqua fortis, Oil of Turpentine and
several other Liquors which would not be brought to freeze; but also in Oil
congealed by the vehemence of the Cold.

2. Amongst the several Experiments made of the Efficacy of Cold to condensed
Liquors, I shall lay down the following.

3. Spirit of Wine being put into a small Glass-Egg with a slender Stem, in a
Mixture of Snow and Salt subsided of an Inch.

4. Mercury being freed from Air, and placed in a Bold-head in a Mixture of
Snow and Salt, subsided 2 Inches. Common Oil placed in the same Mixture
subsided till it froze; but if it were immediately thawed near the fire, it
would expand it self so much as to rise about the Mark. The Experiment
succeeded a second time, and being tried a third time, the Lumps of the
congealed Oly would sink in the fluid Oil. Oil of Aniseeds artificially froze
subsided considerably in a small Pipe. Empyreumatical Oil of Gaujacum being
exposed to the utmost degree of Cold, would not freeze; but evidently subsided.

Particulars referrable to the VIII Title.

1. Two sealed Weather-Glasses, the one made of a Tincture of Cochineele in
Spirit of Wine; and the other of a blew Tincture of Spirit of Man's Blood and
Copper in Spirit of Wine; were immersed in Water till it began to freeze, and
then being removed into Oil of Turpentine set in a Mixture of Snow and Salt; we
observed, That the Liquor in both Thermometers subsided. Oil of Aniseeds being
put into a small Glass with a large Stem, and placed in a frigorifick Mixture
made by a Solution of Sal-Armoniack subsided 3 Inches; the substance of the Oil
being turned into a white Concrete, which when it was leasurely dissolved, the
fluid Part emitted several Bubbles; and it was further observed in this
Concrete, That though when thawed it swims upon Water, yet when congealed it will
not.

TITLE IX. Experiments concerning the Bubble from which the Levity of Ice is
supposed to proceed.
Of the Levity of Ice and its Cause.
1. IT is usually accounted an Argument of the levity of Ice above Water, that
it swims upon it: For though the superficies of small Portions of it are not
sensibly emergent above the Surface of the Water; yet in Greenland, where huge
Rocks of Ice float in the Sea, they are observed to be as high above the Water
as the Masts of Ships, which could we suppose to float in an erect Posture, and
to be of a prismatical Form, that Part immersed would be nine times as much as
that above the Water. As for the Reason why Ice is born up above the surface of
the Water so much in Greenland more than in our Climate; besides that the size
of those pieces of Ice contributes to the rendering the Observation more
remarkable, the Water's expansion in that cold Climate may cause it to be
further expanded there than here, and consequently lighter.

2. Pieces of Ice free from Bubbles floated in Spirit of Wine drawn from
Brandy, and likewise from Quicklime; and though if that Spirit were warmed, it
would presently subside, yet as it cooled, the Ice would ascend; nevertheless
some part of it being thawed, the Water would subside in a stream through the
Spirit. In warm Water the Ice would swim; but in Oil of Turpentine and the
rectified Spirit of Wine it would sink like a Stone.

3. A piece of Ice which was clear from Bubbles, for as much as we could
discern, and very transparent, would not sink in Water; but another piece,
which in a Microscope appeared to be full of Bubbles, was nevertheless
transparent, and would float on Water.

4. That the levity and expansion of Ice depends on the number of Bubbles
dispersed through it, is unquestionable; but how it comes by those Bubbles is a
matter that deserves our Inquiry: And though Mr Hobbes attributes it to the
Intrusion of some external airy Parts, yet we observed, That Water defended
from the Intrusion of external Air, was not without Bubbles, when froze in a
Glass hermetically sealed; but being expanded, the numerous Bubbles dispersed
through it, gave it a whitish Opacity; and the same Phenomenon were afforded by
Ice froze in Metalline Vessels.

5. And that the Ice froze in the hermetically sealed Glass, received not its
Bubbles from the Air shut up with it; is reasonable to believe: First, Since
the Water must be expanded before it could divide that Air into Bubbles.
Secondly, That the Air in the sealed Glass cannot be dispersed through the Ice,
and thereby cause it to expand, appears; since oftentimes it is so far
compressed by the swelling Ice, that it breaks the Glass, which it would not
do, could it be mixed with the Ice and dispersed through the freezing Water.
But, Thirdly, Were the expansion of Ice to be attributed to the insinuation of
airy Parts, it may be questioned, How, when Liquors begin to freeze at the
bottom first, the Air, which is so many times lighter than Water, can dive into
the bottom of it, and that too without being seen? Fourthly, If the Bubbles
contained in Ice were derived from the external Air depressed through freezing
Water, Ice thawed would yield Air enough to fill as much space as the frozen
Water possessed more than the thawed Water.


6. That the Bubbles contained in frozen Water are not adequately filled with
Air, though sometimes the Air that they contain be afforded by those airy Parts
dispersed through the Pores of Water; and that they are often generated
numerously, notwithstanding a recess of the greatest part of that Air, will
appear from the following Experiments.

I. Water freed from Bubbles in Vacuo Boyliano, and afterward conveyed into a
frigorifick Mixture expanded not so much as common Water, nor was the Ice near
so full of Bubbles. II. Water which had been freed from Bubbles in our
Prismatical Engine, being froze, contained few Bubbles, but being thawed and
then poured into a Glass-Cylinder, it was powerfully expanded so far as to
burst the Glass. III. A Glass-egg with a narrow Stem being filled so far with
Water, that the surface of it rose an Inch within the Stem; it was conveyed
into a Receiver, and whilst the Air was exhausting, Bubbles rose so
plentifully, that the Liquor seemed to boil: Which when it was in a great
measure cleared of, we placed it in a mixture of Snow and Salt; and observed,
that the expanded Liquor being froze, had risen a great way above its first
height. When it was placed in the open Air, of such a temper as made it thaw
leisurely, we observed, That the exterior part of the Ice was full of Bubbles:
But when that was dissolved, the Ice in the middle was of an unusual Texture;
being void of Bubbles and not unlike a frosted piece of Glass, whose aspereties
were very thick set: When the Ice was almost thawed, we conveyed the Bubble
into the Receiver; but though the Air was exhausted, we perceived not that the
Ice was sooner melted; but the Water afforded a few Bubbles, and in a little
time some few appeared in the Ice. When the Ice was wholly thawed, we took the
Glass-Bubble out of the Receiver, and found, That the Water had subsided to its
first Mark, if not a little below it; so that the Water when expanded rising
three Inches in the Stem, and the weight of the whole Water being but two
ounces and a half; the Ice seemed to take up about a twelfth Part more than the
unfroze Water.
7. A Cylinder of Water being immersed in a Mixture of Ice and Salt, and that
conveyed into a Receiver; we found, That when the Air was exhausted, and the
Water in a great measure freed from Bubbles, the surface of it was considerably
raised; the Water in the bottom being turned into Ice as far as the Mixture
wrought, in which we perceived, besides a few large Bubbles, small ones enough
to render it opacous.

8. To show, that the Bubbles perceivable in Ice are not filled with true and
springy Air, I shall subjoyn the following Experiment. We placed a Glass-egg,
which was about as large again as an ordinary Egg, in a mixture of Ice and
Salt; the Cavity of it being fiill'd with Water, which rising up into the Neck,
stood about an Inch above the superficies of the frigorifick Mixture which
circumscribed it; the Diameter of the Stem being large enough to receive the
end of my Finger. The Particulars afforded by this Experiment were,

I. The Water did not sensibly subside before it began to freeze. II. Some part
of it began to swell in a quarter of an Hour. III. In an Hour the Liquor rose 4
2/9 Inches, and continued to rise till it was above five Inches when we took it
out. IV. The frigorifick Mixture being below the surface of the Water, it froze
at the bottom first, leaving the top of the Water uncongeal'd. V. No Bubbles
appeared in the Water though the Ice was full of them, some being as large as
small Pease. VI. We poured as much Sallet-oyl upon the Water, as wrought two
Inches in the Stem, and then hermetically sealing the end of it up; the Water
subsided a little, but was presently raised again to its former height in the
Mixture; about an Inch and a half of the Stem remaining above the Oil filled
with Air. VII. The Glass-egg being weighed first in Air, was left in the Water
poised with its opposite weight. VIII. Upon the thawing of the Ice, several
Bubbles rose which vanished at the top. IX. The Water being thawed, the
Aequilibrium continued the same, and subsided to its first Mark and no lower,
though it had parted with so many Bubbles. X. The Glass being inverted, the
sealed end was broke off under Water; upon which some of it being forced up
into the Pipe, pressed the contained Air into less room than before. XI. The
Water and the Oil possessed the same Places that they did before. XII. The Oil
being thrown out, and so much Water put into the Stem as raised the surface as
high as it was raised by Glaciation; the Glass weighed 4374 Grains: When filled
to the lowest Mark it weighed 4152, and when empty 1032; so that the Water
contained betwixt the two Marks, was about the 15th Part of the whole.
10. A large Glass-egg with a proportionable Stem, being so far filled with
Water, that it wrought up an Inch into the Stem; the next Day the Water was
raised 15 Inches: The whole contained in the Cavity of the Egg being froze; the
frozen Water continuing to swell, was raised 4 Inches higher, a few drops
running over the top of it; but when the Ice was wholly thawed it subsided
again.

11. Another Egg about the same height, being placed in beaten Ice and Salt,
the Water rose an Inch in an Hours time, and several Laminae of Ice appeared at
the Jointure of the Ball and the Neck; but after an Hour and a quarcer, those
disappeared, and the Ball seemed to be filled with white Ice; the Water in the
Neck being raised 4 Inches above the first Mark. Several small Bubbles ascended
through the Neck till it was wholly thawed, and the white Ice was full of
Bubbles. The Experiment being further prosecuted, the Water swelled till some
of it ran out at the top of the Tube: Upon which, the top of it being sealed
up, we placed it in a warm Room till the Water was quite thawed; so much Air
only-remaining above the Water when froze, as in dimensions equaled a small
Pea. When the Ice was wholly thawed, the Water subsided to its first Mark, and
then the top of the Stem being broke off under Water; so much of it was
impelled by the external Air, as, when the Pipe was re-inverted again rose 7
Inches, above the first Mark, and left about an Inch above it; so that the Air
which caused the Water when froze to swell, and which was generated there, took
up one Inch and: Which being expanded through the Cavity of the Cylinder, above
the surface of the Water when thawed; so far appeared not to be Air, that it
wanted a Spring to resist the ingress of the Water.

12. Another time the tip of a sealed Stem being broke under Water, it received
10 Inches and above

13. In the same Bolt-head wherein the greatest condensation of Air was tried,
the Water being froze, was raised a Foot above its former station; and then
being sealed up, and leasurely thawed; it subsided again to its former Mark:
And then the Seal being broke off under Water, so much of that contained in the
Basin was forced into the Tube, as sill'd 11 Inches of it; near of an Inch of
Air being generated in the former part of the Operation.

14. Another time the Water swelling 10 Inches in the same Glass, we broke off
the Neb under Water, and it received as much of the external Water; so that in
this no Air was generated.

15. The like Experiments being tried with aqueous Liquors; the Neb of one that
contained Milk being broke off under Water, it was manifestly impelled by the
outward Air. And another being likewise opened under Water which contained
Urine, it received about five or six Inches of Water.

16. Another Glass which contained Claret Wine, being opened under Water, the
Water was impelled near an Inch above the Mark; which would not have happened,
had the Bubbles been filled with true and permament Air.

TITLE X. Experiments about the Measure of the Expansion and the Contraction of
Liquors.
The expansion and contraction of Liquors measured.
TO measure the expansion of the Air, we took a Bolt-head, and poured in so much
Water, that it rose a little way into the Stem; which being done, and the
number of Ounces it contained set down, to those we successfully added one
Ounce after another; marking how high each of them wrought: Which being done,
we poured out a convenient quantity, and froze the remaining Water from the
bottom upwards, and the Ice that consisted of 82 parts of Water, filled the
space of 91 and; so that the congealed Water possessed a 9th part of space more
than it did before. In another Experiment 55 Parts of Water being froze, were
extended to 60; 6 of those remaining unfroze.

2. Another way we took to measure the expansion of Water, was, by marking a
Cylindrical Pipe at the superficies of the Water contained in it; which, when
it was froze, was raised a tenth part higher than before. Another more exact
Cylinder being made use of, we found, that Water froze expanded to about a
ninth Part of the space it possessed before.

3. But perhaps this Method of measuring the expansion of freezing Water may
suggest a difficulty to those that are acquainted with Hydrostaticks: since
Archimedes has made it appear, as well as Stevinus, That floating Bodies will
so far, and but so far, sink in the Liquor that supports them, till the
immersed Part of the Body be equal to a bulk of Water, weighing as much as the
whole Body.

4. For Capt. James has observed Ice to float a great deal above the Water;
and the Hollanders in their Voyage to Nova Zembla, take notice of a Hill of Ice
which was 16 Fathom above the Water, though but 36 below it: And Janus Munkius in
his Account of G^enland, observed, That one that was but 4^ Fathom under Water,
was 20 above it; whereas according to our Computation of the expansion of
Water, the Part under Water ought to be 8 or 9 times as deep as that above it.

5. But to clear this difficulty I have these things to represent; First, That
the Ice which we take notice of, floats in fresh Water, but that observed by
Navigators, being fresh floats in salt Water; yet this is to be likewise
considered, That near the Poles the Seas are not so salt as ours, or those
under the Line, and consequently will not be able to bear up the floating Ice
so high; except the coldness of that Region recompenses the want of Salt.

6. But besides these Considerations, that which I would chiefly insist upon
for the removal of this difficulty, is, That these huge Piles of Ice are made
up of vast Lumps, betwixt which are large Vacuities which are only filled up
with Air; so that we are not to judge of their weight by the bulk they appear
to be of to the Eye; but by the specific weight incumbent on that part
immersed in the Water: For we see in Barges, that sometimes they carry Loads,
which consisting of light Matter, may be piled a great height above the Water,
without depressing the Vessel so much as heavier Bodies of less bulk, which are
more ponderous in Specie; for the greatest part of these floating pieces of
Ice, as Bartholinus takes notice, are compiled of store of Snow frozen
together. Besides, it is observed, That most of those stupendous Mountains
which lay so much above Water below rested on the Ground, so that probably they
might have sunk much lower, had the Water been deep enough for them; for Mr.
Hudson in his Voyage takes notice, in a Bay that bears his Name, of a piece of
Ice sevenscore Fathom deep.

7. Having said thus much of the expansion of Water, it perhaps may be
expected, that I should say something of the expansion of aqueous Humors; and
also of the degrees of the Condensation of Water and watery Humors: But as for
the first, I doubt whether there be any expansion, except of the watery Parts of
them; but if it may be of any use to direct us in making an estimate of the
different Proportions they contain of Phlegm, or other more spirituous
Ingredients; I would not discourage those whose Curiosity shall prevail with
them to prosecute such Experiments. And as for the condensation of Water by
Cold, though perhaps in hotter Climates it may be considerable, yet I have not
found it very sensible in all the Trials I have made here.

Particulars referrable to the X Title.
1. A Bolt-head whose Stem was 17 Inches above the Water being sealed up, and
placed about 9 hours in a frigorifick Mixture, the Water ascended 15 Inches and
afterward of of an Inch; being neglected for an hour the sealed end was blown
off, and the Bottom of the Glass broke in pieces. 2. Water freed from Air in.
our Receiver, and sealed up in a round Bolt-head, in which the sealed Apex was
about 5 Inches above the Water, afforded an Ice very free from Bubbles, and
having stood in a frigorifick Mixture about 2 hours, it was raised 4 Inches
and: The Conical Apex being broke with a noise and a seeming smoke, we found
Water unfroze, under the Pipe, and that the Air was condensed to a 20th Part of
the space it possessed before. 3. The Globous part of a Glass-Egg 3 Inches
Diameter was filled with Water and froze from the Bottom upwards; after it had
been Hermetically sealed, it rose 8 Inches, the length of the whole Stem being
10 Inches and a half. But being a second time sealed up and froze with Ice in
it, it wrought not 4 Inches above its first station.
TITLE XI. Experiments touching the Expansive force of Freezing Water.
Of the Expansive force of freezing Water.
1. TO help us to make an estimate of the Expansive force of freezing Water, We
filled a Pewter-Bottle full of Water; it being large enough to hold half a
Pint: In a frosty Night it cracked the Bottle; and the like success we had with
frozen Water in a Pewter-box, such as they keep Salves in. And we found the
Expansive force of Frost so strong, That it burst a Bottle, the thinnest part
of which was 1/14 of an Inch, and the thickest ^/86: It also broke an Earthen
Bottle of Flanders-Metal, the thinnest part of which was as thick as the
strongest of the other.

2. To make a more Determinate Estimate of the Expansive force of Frost; we
made use of a Brass-Cylinder, to which we adapted a Plugg, which falling a
little way within the Cylinder rested upon the edges of it. The length of the
Cylinder was about 5 Inches and the breadth 1 The Experiment made in this
Instrument was by filling it full of Water and then laying 56 pound weight upon
the top of it: And though it was a hard matter to cause the Mixture to freeze;
yet we were at the last able to do it, and then we observed, That the Expanded
Ice lifted up the one side of the lower so high, that the weight fell down; but
at another time it succeeded so well, that the lower was uniformly raised, the
breadth of a Barly-corn. Upon a gentle thaw the Superficial Parts being taken
out, the Ice appeared full of Bubbles: And in the Morning when it began to melt
before the fire, the weight being taken off; several drops of Water, dilated
into numerous Bubbles, issued out, like a kind of Froth.

3. Another way we took to measure the Expansive force of Cold, was, by driving
a Wooden Plugg so fast into the end of the Brass-Cylinder, That half a hundred
weight and a quarter of a hundred, might be suspended at it without pulling it
out; yet in two frosty Nights the expanding Water was able to raise it a
quarter of an Inch.

4. There is one thing in these Trials deserves to be taken notice of, viz.
That the Expansion of Air by Heat being sufficient to make it possess 70 times
it is former space; yet the utmost degree, Water by Glaciation will extend it
self to, is a ninth: So that the former by Expansion acquires 60 times the
space that Water does; taking Mersennus his account of the Air's Expansion to
be true, which comes short of what we have shown it capable of being Expanded
to.

5. We endeavored likewise to measure the force of Waters Expansion when
congealed, by enclosing it in a Iron-Globe whose Diameter was about 3 Inches,
and which had a Female Screw continued from it is Cavity to the out side; to
which was adapted Male a screw so close, That we were forced to use a Vice to
screw it in; but our hopes were frustrated; the Compactness of the metal, as we
supposed, keeping the Liquor from freezing.

6. It would be worth while to consider the cause of so powerful an Expansion,
since neither the Cartesian nor the Epicurean Doctrine are able to explain this
Phenomenon: For the first only accounting Cold to be a Privation of Heat; and
depending upon the recess of those subtle Parts, which he supposes Expansion to
depend on; according to him, they should rather continue an Inactive Mass, than
retain such a Springyness. And since according to Epicurus, Expansion depends
on an Insinuation of frigorifick Atoms, It may well be questioned, how parts of
Matter, which have such a free entrance into such Vessels, should not rather
find as easy a Passage out again as in, without breaking them? Besides in
several Oils and other Liquors which must receive those frigorifick Atoms we
perceive not the least Expansion at all; but they are rather condensed.

7. How great the Expansive Force of congealed Wine, Milk, Urine and other
Liquors is, I shall leave it to others to enquire, and shall only take notice,
That undoubtedly it is considerable; since in the Dutch Voyage to Nova Zembla
it was observed, That even Iron-hoops were burst by the forcible Expansion of
included Liquors. And in Russia it has been observed, that though Beer and Wine
would not burst Wooden Vessels, yet Glass and Stone-Vessels would be often
broken

Particulars referrable to the XI Title.
1. We took a Brass-Cylinder 2 Inches Diameter, and having put a Bladder with
Water tied close up in it, so that upon Expansion it could not get out into the
Cavity of the Cylinder; we put a Plugg into it, upon which were placed several
weights; which amounted to 120 Pounds, yet the frigorifick Mixture being
applied to the Cylinder, the Water expanded raised the Plugg, near half an
Inch; and the Experiment being repeated again the next Day the freezing Water
raised 130 Pound-weight. 2. An Iron-Barrel 14 Inches long and of an Inch in
Diameter, whose sides were at the thickest Part 1/16 and at the least ^/16; was
filled with Water, and being buried in a Mixture of Ice and Salt 2 hours, it
made an oblique crack in the Barrel Six Inches long; and the Ice being taken
out seemed full of Bubbles but very small ones; and the like success we had
with another Barrel of a Gun, whose Muzzle and Touchhole were stopped up with
Metal; nor had we less success when we buried a Pewter Bottle in a frigorifick
Mixture, both the Barrel of the Gun and the Bottle being burst in a quarter of
an hour.
TITLE XII. Experiments concerning a new way of Estimating the Expansive force
of Congelation, and of highly compressing Air without Engines.
A new way of Estimating the Expan^e force of Congelation.
HOW far we were able to compress the Air by the Incumbent weight of a Cylinder
of Mercury, we have else where shown; but to reduce it to a greater degree of
Condensation I made the following Experiments.

1. Having filled a Glass-Egg with Water till it wrought about an Inch into the
Stem, we placed it in a Mixture of Snow and Salt, and in a few hours the
Surface of the Liquor was raised about 7 Inches; and the Apex of the Stem being
sealed up, by a fresh application of Snow and Salt it was raised 8 Inches
higher: So that the Air being compressed into the space of an Inch, possessed
about nine Parts of ten of what it did before: Whereupon the Stem being
inverted and the sealed end opened, the Air which when the Stem was inverted,
rose up to the Ice, and separated the unfrozen Water in the Stem from it,
powerfully expanding it self; forced out about ten Inches of Water, with
Violence and Noise, besides a great number of Bubbles ascended from the Bottom
of the Glass to the Top. N. B. when the Air was compressed beyond seven Inches,
we several times observed, That the Glass just above the Water on the inside
was full of little drops of Dew, which when the Apex was broke off Disappeared.
2. A Vial whose neck was drawn out into a slender Pipe, being filled till it
wrought an Inch within the Pipe; in a little time, by the Expansion of the
Water, the Air being too much compressed, the head of the Pipe flew off; and
the same happened to a round white Glass whose Stem, filled with Air, was about
3 Inches: Nor was the success otherwise when we repeated the Experiment in a
large single Vial, whose Stem was four Inches long, and it is Basis an Inch
broad. 3. An Oval Glass about the size of a Turkeys-egg, with a neck almost
Cylindrical, was filled with Water within four Inches and a half, and then a
piece of Paper being pasted upon the Stem divided into half Inches and
quarters, and the Apex being sealed up by a moderate Heat; the Surface of the
Water was raised considerably, but the Oval Part of the Glass being covered
with a Mixture of Ice and Snow, the Air was compressed into a 17th Part of the
space it possessed before; And the Ball of the Glass bursting afterward with a
considerable Noise, the Ice appeared full of Bubbles, which rendered it white
and Opacous. In another Glass whose Ball was larger in proportion to the Stem,
the Air was compressed into a 19th Part of it is former space before the Glass
flew in pieces. 3. And this way of trying how far the Air might be compressed
and Water expanded by Cold, we thought least Exceptionable; because the Pores
of Glass are more impervious to Air and Water, than some Metalline Vessels; for
having broken open the Apex of the Stem of one of our Glass-Eggs, we found,
that though the Water was but a little expanded; yet not finding a way out at the
Pores of the Glass, the Water rose up a quarter of an Inch.
TITLE XIII. Experiments and Observations concerning the Sphere of Activity of
Cold.
Of the Sphere of Activity of Cold.
IN estimating the Sphere of Activity of Cold, we are not only to consider the
Degree of it in the cold Body; but also the Medium through which it is to pass,
and the Consistence and Texture of it; as likewise the Instruments employed to
receive or acquaint us with the Action of Cold: Since, from what has been
before laid down, it appears, That Weather-glasses give us a more nice account
of the Degrees of it; and that our Sensories may mis-inform us, upon the
account of their various Predispositions. Besides the Sphere of Activity may be
varied by the Bulk of the cold Body.

1. But to consider the Sphere of Activity of small Pieces of Ice; we have
found it very small in comparison of the Atmospheres of odorous Bodies;
insomuch that I am persuaded, we can have no sense of Cold, without the
immediate Contact of a cold Body; since Ice approaching our Sensory, or a
Weather-glass, affects neither; though held as near as possibly they may without
touching. And the like has been observed at Sea, where in foggy Nights the
Seamen have not been able to discern neighboring Mountains of Ice: Though by a
Merchant who made the Observation in Greenland, I am told, That he perceived a
manifest access of Cold, upon the approach of a floating piece of Ice.

2. And I am told, that in Ispahan the Capital City of Persia, the Ice being
never much more than a Finger thick, they usually pour Water upon it, which as
it runs over the Ice, is in part froze, by which means, they thicken the Ice,
and preserve it in proper Conservatories. This Experiment having been tried in
England, by pumping of Water upon Flakes of Ice; I found, That the Pump-water,
being warmer than the Ice, thawed it, instead of increasing the Thickness of
it. And though here in England, Water poured upon Snow promotes its Dissolution,
yet in Russia and Muscovy I am told, That Water thrown upon Snow freezes it;
which they therefore make use of to incrustate several Bodies with Ice; yet one
thing is to be observed, that generally at the same time, the sharpness of the
Air is so violent, as to incrustate several Bodies with Ice, when only Water is
made use of; so that in trying such Experiments, we are to consider the
Temperature of the Air at the same time, which has a great Influence in
promoting or varying the Effects of such Trials.

3. How deep Frost penetrates into Water and Earth will be a very hard thing to
determine; since Earth especially, may be more or less disposed to freeze,
according to the several Degr^es of Cold, and its Duration; the Tex^^^ of the
Earth, and the Nature of the Juices d^^^ed through it, or subterraneal Steams:
Whence large Tracts of Land that lie over some Mines, are always free from
Snow, good quantities of Limestone being near the Surface of the Earth.

4. But though it be so difficult to know to what Depth Frost will reach, yet
that we may contribute as much as we can to the general History of Cold, we
shall add the following Notes. After four Nights hard Frost the Ground in the
Orchard was froze about 3 Inches deep, and in the Garden about 2; after ten
Nights Frost, the Ground in the Garden was froze about 6 Inches, and that in
the Orchard was froze 8 or more. Eight Days after, it was froze about a Foot
Deep.

5. A Pipe of Glass 18 Inches long being thrust down into a Hole in the Ground,
the Surface of the Water contained in it being level with the Earth; the next
Morning the whole Capacity of the Cylinder was froze 3 Inches, from which Stick
of Ice a Part of the Cylinder was froze 6 Inches deep; but the rest of the
Water remained unfroze: The Ground in the Garden, that Night was froze ten
Inches deep.

6. It has been observed, that in Moscow the Ground in a Garden was not froze
above two Foot deep; but Capt. James says in Charlton-Island he observed the
Ground froze ten Foot deep; and the same Author in his Journal, p. 86. says,
That the Water does not freeze naturally above six Feet.

One Particular referrable to the XIII Title:

I am told, That a Lee-ward of great Banks of Ice, they may discover them by
the access of Cold, twenty Leagues.

TITLE XIV. Experiments concerning the Different Mediums through which Cold may
be diffused.
Of the Mediums through which Cold may be diffused.
IN trying these Experiments we are to take Notice, that the Mediums are not to
be too thick; since, from Experiments already delivered it appears, That a
compact Medium very thick will not give way to Cold.

1. Having placed a Mixture of Snow and Salt in a Pipkin, and another in a
white Basin glazed within and without, they were both incrustated with Ice. And
that Cold will penetrate Pewter-Bottles, appears from Experiments already laid
down.

2. Having caused two Cups to be made of Lattin, or Plates of Iron covered over
with Tin, the Unequal Part of one of which, was less than the Concave of the
other; and the less having a broad Ledge, by the help of which it rested on the
Brim of the other, so as to leave an Interval betwixt its Unequal Superficies
and the Concave of the other; we filled that Interval with Water, and putting a
Mixture of Ice and Salt within the less Cup, and on the outside of the other,
we had Cups of Ice made of the enclosed Water.

2. The Learned Erasmus Bartholinus in his discourse De figura Nivis mentions
an Experiment by which Air is turned into Water in the midst of Heat, viz. Ice
or Snow being put into a a funnel; which he supposes refrigerates and condenses
the Ambient Air; but I rather think, That the Dew which he supposes to be
condensed Air, is made up of moist Vapors swimming in it; which is so small in
Quantity, That having suspended a Tunnel in the Air, with a Mixture of Snow and
Salt; which is much more refrigerating than either Ice or Snow by themselves,
it gathered but a very small Quantity, and that too lasted no longer than
whilst the Mixture was dissolving; besides those condensed Vapors were first
Froze before they dropped down in the form of Water.

3. That in Hermetically sealed Glasses, a Mixture of Snow and Salt will freeze
Vapors on the outside, is evident, from what has been laid down; but that
Cold should not only penetrate Glass, but afterward act upon Water in Vacuo;
was a little more strange: For having suspended a Tube of Water in Vacuo and
piled Snow and Ice about it, as high as the Included Water wrought; it worked
upon it, and Froze it from the top to the bottom.

4. But what is yet more strange is, That Cold will act through a evidently hot
Medium; for drinking a good quantity of Mineral Waters timely in the Morning, I
observed a Manifest Coldness through the Muscles of my Abdomen, which was in a
higher degree remarkable in a Gentleman who drunk much greater quantities.

5. To try whether the fluidity of Water depended on a Congenite motion in the
Parts of it, or whether it was conveyed to it by impulse from the Ambient Air;
we provided a Glass-Bubble about the size of a Wall-nut and of a Pear like
shape, whose Stem was purposely made crooked, and suspending it by a thread in
Oil of Turpentine contained in a narrow Glass; and this being placed in a
Mixture of Snow and Salt, though the Oil continued fluid; yet the Water in the
Bubble was froze. And when we went to take it out, the Bubble being cracked,
the greatest Part subsided to the Bottom of the Mixture; but we perceived,
That, that which was pulled out, was divided by a line through the middle from
the top downwards. And it was further observable in this Trial, That the two
separable Pieces of Ice, being left in a Mixture of Ice and Salt for 14 hours,
were very little wasted. The like success we had with a Bubble of Water
suspended in Spirit of Wine; but another suspended in Sea Salt was not froze at
all; nor was another that we hung in a sharp brine: But the same Experiments
being tried another time; the Water was froze both in the Bubble suspended in
Spirit of Wine, and in that which was immersed in the strong Brine; the Bottle
which contained the latter being cracked, which cracks were not much unlike the
lines drawn from the Pole of a Globe to the Meridian; reaching from the top of
the Bubble downwards.

6. A Bubble suspended with Water in it, in a Glass immersed in Snow and Salt,
was froze, without the Intervention of any Liquor.

TITLE XV. Experiments and Observations concerning Ice.
Concerning Ice.
1. THOUGH in the East Indies it has been thought strange, That Water in England
should without any Artificial means be turned into a consistent Body; yet it is
related by some, That in Russia the Ice on the contrary, is found much harder
than Ours.

2. To make an Estimate of the Cohesion of the Parts of Ice, we thought to have
tried what weight Cylindrical pieces of Ice of different Diameters would bear:
But being frustrated in such Trials, we tried how much weight a Plate of it
placed betwixt two Iron-Bars would bear; but having not convenient weights we
were forced to be content to know, That it bore a much greater weight than one
could suppose it capable of.

3. A piece of Ice 3 Inches long, and as many broad; and about 4 of an Inch
thick was laid cross a frame; and a piece of Iron of this Figure (7) having a
scale hung at the longer Leg, the Horizontal Leg was placed upon the middle of
the Ice; and then 117 Ounces Troy-weight being put into the Scale, when the
Iron had melted half the Ice through on one side, and a third Part of the
other, the weight was able to break it. The Experiment being repeated when the
piece of Ice was 2 Inches and a half long, it bore 17 pound Averdupois and 48
Ounces Troy-weight, when the Iron on one side had melted and on the other Parts
of the thickness of it.

4. Plates of Ice being laid upon a stool, and Bay Salt strewed on some Parts
of them, they promoted the melting of the Ice so much, That they buried
themselves in it; but the Parts thawed by this means, were so incorporated
with, and froze to the stool, That we could not separate them without knocking
them in pieces: At another time Salt thrown upon Ice made a crackling Noise and
by a Candlelight, several Steams were observed to rise from them, like from
some hot Liquors: A few drops of Aquafortis dropped upon Plates of Ice, and Oil
of Vitriol, the latter sooner penetrated but the former with more Noise as if
the Ice were cracked.

5. Olaus Magnus Gent. Septentr. Hist. Lib. 1. Cap. 14 says, of the strength of
Ice, Glacies primae and mediae byemis ad^o fortis and tenax est ut spissitudine
seu densitate duorum digitorum sufferat hominem ambulantem, trium vero
digitorum Equestrem Armatum; unius palmae and dimidiae, turmas vel exercitus
militares; trium vel quatuor palmarum integram Legionem vel myriadem Populorum
quemadmodum inferius de bellis hyemalibus memorandum erit. But this account is
the less satisfactory; because he tells us not how far distant from the shore
this weight would be born, for the weight of one Man may be much greater at
some distance from the shore than of more, upon or near the side; since the
shore has there a greater strength to support it.

6. Purchase Lib. 4. Cap. 13 says, That the Ice in Russia was as hard as a
Rock; and it is observed by the same, Lib. 4. Cap. 13. p. 813, That the Ice
which floats in the Sea being taken up and thawed yields fresh Water; but
whether it consists of an accumulation of fresh Particles in the Sea, or
whether it is a Collection of Ice carried thither from some fresh Water I much
Question; since the main Ocean is seldom froze, and especially since Purchase
Lib. 3. Cap. 7. says, That the floating Ice near Nova Zembla which closes up
the straight of Weigals flows down from the Rivers Oby and Jenesre and several
others.

7. As for the bigness of some Pieces of Ice they seem almost Incredible; the
Dutch in their Voyage to Nova Zembla take notice of one 96 foot high; and Capt.
James has met with some as deep under Water, besides what floated above, and
some much higher: And Purchase Lib. 4. Cap. 18. p. 837. Tells us of a Mountain
of Ice which was 140 fathom high. As for the Length of these pieces of Ice, all
that I can meet with is an observation of Capt. James's who measured a piece of
Ice which was 1000 paces long.

8. As for the bigness of concrete Pieces of Ice, Mr. Hall in his Voyage to
Greenland takes notice of one 24 Miles long. And by another, a vast Tract of
Ice has been observed, which was so long that the Bounds of it could not be
discovered from an indifferent high Hill. To which we may add what the French
Hydrographer Fournier relates in his Passage to Canada, That he met with some
Pieces of Ice as big as Mountains; others, as Ships; and one 80 Leagues long;
in some Places plain, and in others unequal with high Mountains. And Olaus
Magnus, Lib. 3. Cap. 2. page 384. says, Neque minori bellandi impetu Sueci and
Gothi super aperta Glacie, quam in ipsa solidissima Terra confligunt: Imo ut
prius dictum est, ubi antea aestivo tempore, acerrima commissa sunt Bella
navalia, iisdem in locis Glacie concreta, Aciebus militari modo constructis,
Bombardis ordinatis, habentur horrendi conflictus, adeo solida Glacies est in
Equestribus Turmis sufferendis, ampliter vel stricte collocatis. And it is
known to us all, that not long since, the King of Sweedland and his whole Army
marched over the Sea to Zeeland, where Copenhagen the Capital City of Denmark
stands. And Bartholinus, de Nivis usu, takes notice, That in the Eastern
Regions the Sea has been froze a considerable Depth. To which I shall subjoyn
that Glycas apud Fournier, Lib. 9. Cap. 19. observes, That in the Year 775, the
Mediterranean was froze for 50 Leagues, 30 Cubits thick, upon which as much
Snow fell as raised it 30 Cubits above the Top of the Water.

9. To what Instances we have already recited, we shall add that of the
Dutchmen in their Voyage, viz. that some pieces of Ice which were 18 Fathom
below Water and ten above, were very blue; the like to which Capt. James takes
notice of; and Virgil, speaking of the Frigid Zone, says, Caerulea glacie
concreta, atque imbribus Atris.

10. In the Spring the Ice is observed by Olaus Magnus to be much less compact
than in the Winter; and it is attested by the same, and also by Mr. James Hall
in his Voyages, that when these Rocks of Ice break they make a vast Noise; and
the like has been observed by others: And though Olaus Magnus attributes the
cleaving of these Rocks of Ice, to the Effect which warm Exhalations have upon
them; yet I am told, that sometimes they are observed to fly in pieces upon
excessive Cold.

Particulars referrable to the XV Title.
1. A Decoction of Sage, Rosemary and Parsley being exposed to be froze in
distinct Vessels, the Superficies of the former was very rough. Juice of Lemons
froze, represented Trees without Leaves. 2. Hard Ice beaten, and common Salt
being mixed together, afforded white Fumes like Smoke, though the Experiment was
tried in a close Room. Snow-Water froze in Ice and Salt, afforded an Ice very
transparent, and with minute Bubbles. 3. Ice partly powdered, and in part
grossly beaten, being mixed with Bay Salt, when the Mixture was stirred,
afforded a sensible Smoke, which was greater or less as the Mixture was more or
less stirred; and floating over the Brim of the Vessel, rather sunk than rose;
just as the Fumes do from a Cloth dipped in Aq. fortis and hung up to dry. 4. I
am told by one who was in the Frigid Zone, that he supplied himself with fresh
Water from the Ice, by digging Pits in it; and the same Person tells me, That
he has observed Pieces of Ice 50 Fathom deep, which were not above a tenth
Part above Water. He likewise observed near the Coast of Greenland, the
Variation of the Compass to be 22 Degrees; and a little time after scarce any
thing at all. He told me further, That sailing in the Main Sea in the Height of
77 Degrees, his Ship was surrounded with Ice 'till the 7th of June; and the Ice
opening he failed through it; Part of it passing along toward Hudson's
Streights. And it is observed, That these Mountains of Ice much weaken the
strength of Winds, insomuch that if they be driven near them by a Storm, the
Wind is so much quashed that they immediately find a Calm.
TITLE XVI. Experiments and Observations concerning the Duration of Ice and
Snow, and the destroying of them by the Air and several Liquors.
What Liquors soonest dissolve Ice and Snow.
TO discover what Liquors Ice would be soonest dissolved in, we contrived to
freeze Water in a long Cylinder; which being loosened by applying a warm Hand,
we divided some into Pieces of an Inch long, and others into Inches, and our
Experiments being made with these Cylindrical Pieces of Ice:

In the first Trial.
1. In Oil of Vitriol, a Cylindrical Piece of Ice of an Inch in length lasted 5
Minutes. 2. In Spirit of Wine 12 Minutes. 3. In Aqua fortis 12. 4. In Water 12
Minutes. 5. In Oil of Turpentine about 44 Minutes. 6. In Air 64 Minutes.
The second Trial.
1. In Oil of Vitriol an Inch of Cylindrical Ice lasted undissolv'd 3 Minutes.
2. In Spirit of Wine 13 Minutes. 3. In Water 26 Minutes. 4. In Oil of
Turpentine 47 Minutes. 5. In Sallet-Oyl 52 Minutes. 6. In Air 152 Minutes.
2. We likewise thought it worth while to try, what difference there would be
in the Duration of Pieces of Ice, of the same Bulk and Figure, but of different
Liquors; as also whether Attrition would contribute to the Dissolution of Ice,
which Iobserv'd it did: Whence it appears, That as the Agents contiguous to Ice
are different, they dissolve it is Texture sooner or later, and if Snow or Ice
be kept in a Place where neither the Sun nor the Air has much Influence upon
it, it will continue a long time.

An Appendix to the XVI Title.
1. In confirmation of what was said in the Close of this Title, I shall add
the following Account of the Italian Conservatories, sent me by my ingenious
Friend Mr. J. Evelyn: The Snow-Pits in Italy, etc. are sunk in the most
solitary and cooled Places, commonly at the Foot of some Mountain or elevated
Ground, which may best protect them from the Meridional or Occidental Sun; 25
Foot wide at the Orifice, and about 50 deep, is esteemed a competent
Proportion. And though this be excavated in a Conical Form, yet it is made flat
at the Bottom, or Point. The Sides of the Pit are so joyced, that Boards may be
nailed upon them very closely jointed. About a Yard from the Bottom, is fixed a
strong Frame or Tresle, upon which lies a wooden Grate; the Top or Cover is
double thatched, with Reed or Straw, upon a copped Frame or Roof; in one of the
sides whereof is a narrow Doorcase, hipped on like the Top of the Dormer, and
thatched --

To Conserve Snow.

They lay clean Straw upon the Grate or Wattle, so as to keep the Snow from
running through, whilst they beat it to a hard Cake of an icy Consistence,
which is near one Foot thick; upon this they make a layer of Straw, and then
Snow, and Straw again; and continue S.S.S. 'till the Pit is full, and then
laying Straw or Reeds upon all, they keep the Door locked. This Grate is so
contrived, that the Snow melting by any Accident in laying, or extraordinary
Season of Weather, it may drain away from the Mass, and sink without stagnating
upon it, which would accelerate the Dissolution; and therefore the Bottom is
but very slightly steened, etc.



2. And it has been observed by the Dutchmen in their Voyage to Nova Zembla,
That in June, the Sun was not powerful enough to melt Snow: And even in warmer
Climates, where the Reflection of the Sunbeams is not so considerable, Snow
continues unthawed all Summer; as upon the Top of the Alps, and other high
Mountains. And Capt. James observes, that, in August, Ice that was kept in the
Sunbeams, continued unmelted 8 Days or more; and the same Author observes,
that the very Ground was frozen in June.

TITLE XVII. Considerations and Experiments concerning the Primum frigidum.
Of the Primum Frigidum.
1. THO several Sects of Philosophers have disputed about a Primum Frigidum,
some contending for Earth, others Water, others Air, and another Sect for
Nitre; yet I am apt to believe, That there is no such thing as a Primum
Frigidum, or (...), in which that Quality principally resides, and from whence
all other Bodies derive theirs; no more than that there is a (...), or
Principle subject of Residence for any other Quality: For if an intense Degree
of Motion amongst the minute Parts of a Body, be sufficient to give it the
Quality of Heat; it may be enough to render a Body cold, that that Motion is
diminished upon a removal of its Cause; so that it may be doubted whether Cold
be a positive or a privative Quality.

The Earth not the Primum Frigidum
2. Indeed Plutarch supposes the Earth to be the Summum Frigidum: But we daily
see, That it is froze by the contiguous Air communicating Cold to it, and, by
the Interposition of another Body, may easily be preserved from that. So the
Salt-Works upon the Marshes of the Island Xaintonge in France, are preserved
from the Damage the Frost would do them, by letting in Water, by Sluices, to
overflow them. Besides, were the Earth the Summum Frigidum, it might justly be
wondered, why it congeals not the Water contiguous to it, sooner than Hail or
Snow in the Air? Since Terrene Parts of Matter cannot be brought thither
without some Cause able to elevate them, and perhaps to alter the Qualities of
them. Not to mention those Vulcano's which argue the Earth to abound with
Subterraneal Fires; and that in several Places where there are no such
Vulcano's, as in deep Mines, those that work there, find it very hot and
troublesome: And in deep Wells, it is observed, that the Water is so far from
being froze, that it comes up reaking hot; which cannot be supposed to proceed
from the Beams of the Sun, since it has been observed by Monsieur de Claves,
Livre 11. Chap. 8. That in the Southern Countries the Heat of the Sun
penetrates not above six or seven Foot deep. And the subterraneal Parts are so
far from being extremely Cold, That it is observed by Miners, That the lower
they dig, the more Vapors, exhalations and Heat they find. And Jo. Baptista
Morinus, witnesses, That in Mines in Hungary four hundred fathom deep, after
the descent of 80 fathom, it is always hot; but whether these may proceed from
Subterraneal Fires or a Mixture of other Bodies I shall not determine; since I
have seen Bodies actually Cold mixed together produce Heat. And I am told, That
in some Parts of England they dig up a Mineral, which, upon a Addition of Water
only, becomes Hot; and for a like reason perhaps those Heats in the Hungarian
Mines may be caused: For that Mineral Steams ascend, is evident, since they
have been observed in a Perpendicular Groave not only to stink^, but by their
Corrosive Qualities, to corrode the wooden Ladders. And Morinus himself tells
us, That descending into the Golden Mines at Cremnitz, the Heat increased
extremely as he descended; which they attributed to a Mine of Smaragdine
Vitriol, which lay under it; of which kind of Vitriol, there is some, even in
the Cold and Superficial Region of the Earth.

3. But if against what has been said it should be alleged, That by the
Primum Frigidum they only mean some Earth Mixed with the common Parts of the
Terrestrial Globe, I should be glad to know, how we must discover this. But
though I have brought these Arguments against this common received Notion; I
cannot agree with Gassendus, who thinks, that the Earth is no more Cold than
Hot: Since it being naturally a Body whose Parts are inclined to rest; it,
without the assistance of some Extrinsick Agent to put it is Parts in Motion,
must consequently affect our Sensory with a greater degree of Coldness, than
Air or Water, whose Parts are more Agitated.

4. And if those that argue for the Earth's being the Primum Frigidum, had only
urged that it was the Summum Frigidum, Earth the Summum Frigidum.
I could have more easily agreed with them: Since, in the Straits of Weigats,
the Seas are froze; but not in the Northern Seas, nor that of Tartary; for the
main Seas never freeze, but only near the Land, where it is much Colder than in
the Ocean.

Water not the Primum Frigidum.
5. It is the Opinion of Aristotle, and the Schools, That Water is the Primum
Frigidum; but in all Waters that are Froze by Cold we always see, they begin at
the top, where the Air is Contiguous; which argues the Air Colder than the
Water, since it congeals it: Whereas if Water was the Coldest Body, it ought
always Naturally to be Froze, or to begin to freeze, rather in the middle than
at the top, and rather in the main Ocean than in Gulfs, Straits and small
Rivers: For it is observed, That those vast heaps of Ice that float in the Sea,
and which we have so often mentioned, depend not on the Penetration of Cold to
that depth they sometime sink to; but vast pieces of Ice being gathered
together from the shore and small Rivers, and cemented together, depress each
other by their own weight; upon which, the falling Snow, gradually increases
their Bulk.

6. But though I am far from taking Water to be the Primum Frigidum; yet I cannot
agree with Gassendus, who thinks it indifferent as to Heat and Cold: For except
where some adventitious cause Concurs, the Parts of Water being less Agitated
than the Humors about our Sensory, by it, we must adjudge it Cold. And though by
the Heat of the Sun the superficial Parts of the Water are a little warmer; yet
all Diverse Unanimously agree, That it is Colder, at the depth of a few Fathoms.
Besides it is observed in warm Regions to be much warmer at Land than Sea, and
those Countries that lie near the Sea are generally cooler. But as Cold as it
is there, they don't find, That it is able to congeal the Water, though at the
top it is often Froze.

Air not the Primum Frigidum
7. By the Stoics and many of the modern Philosophers, the Air is looked upon
to be the Primum Frigidum. Yet considering how great a Part of it lies under
the Torrid Zone, and that it is for the most Part very Hot, and likewise, that
Water enclosed in a Mixture of Snow and Salt will freeze at the bottom and not
where it is contiguous to the Air; I say, considering these things, it will
appear, That the Air is so far from being the Primum Frigidum, That it is not
the Summum Frigidum. Besides Air condensed to the utmost degree it was possible
by the Coldness of the Air; and shut up in a convenient Glass, has been
condensed further by the Application of other Bodies: Whence it appears, that
the Coldness of the Air depends on the Mixture of some frigorifick Corpuscles
with it, and not on the Specific Texture of it is own Parts. Besides, Water may
be Froze when enclosed in Substances not apt to freeze, and when the Air is not
Contiguous to it.

Nitre not the Grand Efficient of Cold.
8. The next Opinion I shall consider is, That of the learned Gassendus, who
ascribes the frigorifick Virtue of Bodies to the admixture of Nitre: But though I
allow Nitre to be a substance dispersed through most Bodies; yet, since Cold is
only a Privative Quality and an absence of Heat; there are other Agents, which,
by stopping the motion of the Insensible Parts of a Body, may deprive it of
it is power of Heating. Besides, it must be a prodigious Quantity of Nitre, That
would be able to render every Part of the Sea so Cold as it is found to be; rot
to mention, That Nitre is scarce ever found so deep in the Earth as some Seas
extend; besides the Seas afford us very little Saltpeter, but a great deal of
common Salt.

9. And though Gassendus asserts, That Bodies receive the Impressions of Cold,
from Nitrous Exhalations swimming in the Air; yet amongst all the Experiments I
have made, to resolve Nitre into Vapors, I have not found, that it was able to
effect more in the Production of Cold, than other Saline Bodies. And Spirit of
Nitre is so far from having an actual Coldness greater than other Bodies, That
it is potentially Hot. And whether the Exhalations of Nitre will congeal Water
or not; Spirit of Nitre, I have observed, will dissolve Ice, as soon almost as
Spirit of Wine: And though Nitre mixed with Snow or Ice may promote Congelation;
yet it proves not that the Parts of Nitre are frigorifick; since the Experiment
will succeed with Spirit of Wine.

10. Having said, thus much of Gassendus his Opinion, we shall in the next
place, propose some Experiments; which will be a further Confirmation of what
we have been saying.

11. Rock-Petre and Ice, being put into a Bottle, congealed the Vapors on the
outside; but pieces of Saltpeter laid upon Plates of Ice dissolved it. Water
being satiated with Saltpeter, and exposed to the Cold in a Bottle, broke it;
several Chrystals of Saltpeter having shot in the Bottom of it. From these
Experiments it appears, That there are Colder Bodies than Saltpeter, and that
it dissolves Ice, and it is rather Hot than Cold in respect of Ice.

12. On a windy and a cloudy Day, having suspended a Weather-Glass in Water
satiated with Saltpeter we observed, That when it had stood a considerable
time, and was raised by the string up into the Air, the Liquor contained in it
was raised about 2 divisions; and being again immersed in the solution of
Nitre, it was presently raised; so that the Air was Colder, than the solution
of Nitre.

13. But to conclude this Title; though I am far from thinking Nitre to be the
Summum Frigidum; yet I doubt not, but that Parts of it rising from the Earth in
the form of Vapors, may contribute to the refrigeration of the Air. Not but
that there are several other Bodies in the Bowels of the Earth, whose Effluvia
being mixed with the Air and dispersed through it, may cool the Air according
to their Proportions, as much as Nitre: Besides, since common, Salt co-operates
with Snow in the Production of Ice as well as Saltpeter, and according to
Democritus, has Parts of a Cubical figure, which he assigns to Cold Atoms: And
since Gassendus observes, That Saltpeter consists of Parts not altogether so
apt for the production of Cold; these Figures being not Pyramidal but
Prismatical; I say, since these Circumstances all concur, I see no reason, why
common Salt may not be numbered amongst those Bodies, that are apt to produce
Cold.

14. Nay, sometimes it may happen, That more violent degrees of Cold may be
caused by a like Coalition of several sorts of Salts. So the Coldness of Snow
is advanced by a Mixture of Nitre or common Salt, or other appropriated
Additaments. But I must confess, That it is a doubt with me, whether Cold
depends on any such saline Exhalations, or the Effects of frigorifick Atoms;
but to pass by this Scruple at present without any further Notice: I shall add,
that what I have said upon this Title is not so much to confute what Opinions I
have mentioned, as to show, that they are Doubtful.

One Particular referrable to the XVII. Title.

I am told by the Russian Emperor's Physician, That in the Northern Province of
Russia; the Earth is thawed but the depth of two foot, and yet good Corn grows
upon it.

TITLE XVIII. Experiments and Observations touching the Coldness and
Temperature of the Air.
Of the temper of the Air.
1. THOUGH Gassendus and several others assert, That the Air is Indifferent as to
Cold and Heat; yet since Cold is only a Relative Quality, and since the Parts
of the Air, are of themselves in a less degree of Agitation, than the Humors
about our Sensory; I see no reason why it should not be esteemed Cold: For
notwithstanding it may acquire a considerable degree of Heat by the
adventitious Effects of the Sunbeams, or fire; yet we see, that it naturally
tends to coolness it self again. And as for the Coldness of the Air, though I
deny not but that frigorifick Atoms may be mixed with it; yet I judge them not
absolutely or altogether requisite to the Production of Cold; since a bare
Diminution of the motion of it is Parts, is sufficient to produce such a Quality
in higher or more remiss degrees.

2. But the Principal intent of this Section being to produce Experiments and
Observations; I shall begin with the former. A sealed Weather-Glass with Spirit
of Wine in it, being enclosed in a Cylindrical Receiver, when the Air in the
Receiver was exhausted, it subsided the length of a Barly-corn; but rose again
when the Air was let in again; which Effects I attributed to the Expansion of
the Included Air, when the External was drawn out. When the Air was drawn out
of the Receiver, hot Bodies Externally applied, affected not the Weather-Glass;
but when the Air was let in again they caused the Spirit to rise sensibly.

3. To measure the Condensation of the Air by Cold, we made the following
Experiments. And, First we enclosed Air in Weather-glasses hermetically sealed;
which, when it was artificially or naturally refrigerated, and the Apex of the
Weather-glass broke open, we could not discern, by the Water it received, that
it was condensed above a 30th Part of it is former dimensions. A Glass-egg being
inverted into Salt Water, in a Cold Night, the Air was so far condensed in it,
That the Water rose five Inches in the Stem. And Jan. 29 the Air extended into
2057 Spaces was in a frosty Night contracted to 1965 Spaces. So that the
greatest degree of Condensation we could observe was a 22 Part and a little
above a third. But a Mixture of Snow and Salt being applied to the Elliptical
Part of the Glass, the Water rose 4 Inches higher than in the former
Experiment; and the Air was contracted from 1965 Spaces to 1860; so that the
Artificial Cold contracted is more in respect of the Contraction, which the
natural Cold produced, than That Condensation was in Proportion to it is natural
temper or rather a moderate degree of Coldness.

4. But to proceed to Observations: Cold may hinder the Operation of the Sun
upon the Air in the middle of Summer; and I am told, That it has been observed
to Snow in Greenland all Mid-summer Night, and in the Northern Parts of Muscovy
it has been observed, That severe Frosts happened in the close of August. And
further, Capt. Weymouth says, That in the midst of Summer, when they sailed not
near the Latitude of Nova Zembla, their very sails and Tackling were froze: To
which we shall add, that the English when they were sailing to Cherry-Island,
which lies betwixt 74 and 75 degrees Latitude; in July it froze so hard, that
the Ice hung upon their Clothes.

5. As for the degrees of Cold in the Air, Dr. Fletcher tells us, that in
Russia, if they go out of a warm Room into the Cold, it makes them Breath with
difficulty. It is observed at Moscow, That Water thrown up into the Air falls
down congealed, the Air is so Cold; and at Smolensko in Russia, the Spittle
freezes before it can fall from one's Mouth to the Ground.

6. I have observed the Air grows sensibly heavier, in frosty Weather; but
whether it depends on any frigorifick Atoms dispersed through the Air, or not,
I shall leave to be decided by further Trials. In Northern Countries it is
observed, That foggy Weather presently vanishes when Frost begins; the moist
Vapors being, by that, condensed and precipitated, and the Surface of the
Earth so closed up, that other Vapors were repressed, and kept from rising;
and the Air has been by several observed to have been much more clear in the
Winter, here in England, and Sweedland, and elsewhere, than at other times.

7. The Refraction of Luminaries in the Northern Air in Nova Zembla is so
great, that the Dutchmen observed the Sun to appear to them 14 Days sooner
than it ought to have done. And Capt. James tells us, That he observed the
Latitude of Charlton-Island to vary 52 Minutes, and the Sun to rise 20 Minutes
sooner than it ought to rise: Besides several Instances of Refraction, laid
down in the History of the Air.

8. To what we have said, of the Coldness of the Air; we shall subjoyn the
Relations and Observations of Navigators, which we shall either propose as
promiscuous, or in Confirmation of the three following Observations.

1. That the greater or lesser Coldness of the Air in several Climates and
Countries, is nothing near so regularly proportionate to their Respective
distances, from the Pole or their Vicinity to the Equator as Men are wont to
presume. It has been observed, That of Places of an equal distance from the
Northern and Southern Poles, those near the latter are Colder. Though in Moscow,
the Cold is almost intolerable; yet in Edinburgh, which is a degree more
Northwards, the Air is temperate enough, and the Snow seldom lies on the
Ground. Mr. Pool in his Northern Voyage tells us, That it did not freeze near
so hard near the 79th degree as in the 73d. And though Nova Zembla, lies near 4,
5 and 6 degrees more Southerly from the Pole than Greenland, yet the latter
has Grass and Trees and such Beasts as feed upon them; whereas in Nova Zembla
there is no Grass and only such Beasts as feed on Flesh. To which I shall add,
That Josephus Acosta tells us, That under the Line, when the Sun was in the
Zenith and just entered into Aries, in March, he felt himself very Cold; and he
likewise tells us, That under the Burning Zone in Quitto and the Plains of Peru
the Air is temperate; at Potofi very Cold; and in Aethiopia, Brasile and the
Moluccoes very Hot. And he observes further, That Snow lies on the tops of the
Hills, and that it is extremely Cold, when the Sun is for their Zenith under
the Line. Mr. Hudson in his Voyage has observed, That one Day, they were much
disturbed with Ice; and that the next Day, it was very Hot: And we are further
informed by Acosta, That though the Seas of Mozambigus and Ormus in the East, and
Panama in the West, are very Hot; yet that of Peru of the same height is very
Cold. And Capt. James's Observes, That though Charlton-Island is Colder than Nova
Zembla, yet is it of the same Latitude with Cambridge. To which I shall
subjoyn, That an English Navigator tells us, That though Pustozera in Russia is
68 degrees, yet it is well inhabited, and a Town of great Trade. And in
Hudson's Voyage it was observed, that beyond 80 degrees they found it
moderately warm.

2. The next Observation is, That the degree both of Heat and Cold in the Air
may be much greater in the same Climate, and the same Place, at several seasons
of the year, or even at several times of the same Day, than most Men would
believe.

In Proof of this Proposition we shall produce the following Testimonies of
Travelers and of Navigators. And 1. That there is a great variety Weather in
Russia, Dr. Fletcher witnesses, who observes, that though all Winter the Ground
is covered with Snow and the Fields frozen up; yet the Fields in the Summer are
covered with flowers and filled with the delightful noise of Birds; and then
the Weather is as much too Hot, as it was before Cold; June, July and August
being warmer than the Summer in England: And the like is confirmed by the
Observations of others, amongst whom Olearius tells us, that at Moscow he saw
Melons of 40 Pound weight better than those in Italy.

And at Pequin, the Royal City of China, though it is but 42 degrees Latitude;
yet in the Winter, Martinius the Jesuit tells, us it is a hard frost for four
Months together, so that all the Rivers are froze up. And Prosper Alpinus tells
us, that Grand Cairo, which is only 6 degrees from the Tropic of Cancer, though
the Summers are insupportably Hot; yet the Winters are considerably Cold: And
one thing he there takes notice of is, That in that Place they are seldom or
never troubled with Distillations or Rheums. And Purchase tells us, That in
Greenland one Day will be extremely Cold and the next as violent Hot; so that
at Midnight Tobacco may be lighted at the Sunbeams, by the help of a Glass:
To which Relations I shall add, That Capt. James tells us, That in
Charlton-Island, though the Winter was excessive Cold; yet in June it was so Hot,
with Thunder and Lightning, That the Men were forced to go a shore to cool
themselves in the Water.

Alpinus tells us likewise, that in Egypt the Air is some part of the Day
extremely Hot and at other times very temperate and cool. And Olearius tells
us, That traveling over Mount Taurus in Persia; though it was too Hot in the Day
for them to proceed in their Journey; yet at Night they were so benumbed with
the Cold, That they were scarce able to light off their Horses; and the same
Traveller observed at Fallu in Persia both Lightning and Thunder, Winds, Snow,
Rain and Ice, in one Night. And in Charlton-Island though the Heat of the Sun in
June be insupportable in the Day; yet at Night, the Cold is strong enough to
freeze Water, in Vessels, an Inch thick.

3. The third Observation is, That in many Places the Temperature of the Air,
as to Cold and Heat, seems not to depend so much on the Elevation of the Pole,
as upon the Nature and Circumstances of the Winds that Blow there.

It is commonly known, That in this Part of the World, Northerly and
North-easterly Winds are accompained with Cold, and in Winter with Frost: But I
once observed here in England a South Wind when it froze hard; and Capt. James
in his Voyage has observed the like: And Prosper Alpinus observes in Egypt,
That the North-Winds are extraordinary cooling; and that upon the Blowing of
the Aetesian Winds the Plague ceases, at Grand Cairo.

That this cooling Quality depends on the changes it receives from the Places
it passes over, is highly probable, as well as that it acquires other Qualities
the like way. Acosta Lib. 3. Cap. 9. Takes notice of Winds, That, in some Parts
of the Indies, so corrode Iron-gates, That they will crumble away in one's
Fingers. And the same Author tells us, That though in Spain an Easterly-wind is
Hot and troubles one; yet in Murria, it is Cold and healthful; but in
Carthagena not far from the former Place, it is troublesome and unhealthful.
The Meridional (which they of the Ocean call South, and those of the
Mediterranean Sea, Mezzo Giorno) is commonly Rainy and Boisterous; and in the
same City, I speak of, it is wholesome and pleasant. And in Peru, he says, the
South and South-west-winds are very pleasing.

How the Winds come by these Qualities I shall not now dispute; but to give
some light into the matter I shall propose the following Experiment.

Setting a Weather-Glass with a flat Basis upon a Board, and Blowing several
times upon it with a large pair of Bellows, though the Air seemed Cold to my
Hand; yet the Pendulous drop ascended a little, the Air being a little heated
in the Bellows: But if the Clack of the Bellows was so fastened, That the Air
must wholly enter in at the Nose of it; the stream of Air, which was by that
means drawn toward the Weather-Glass from the Window, being cooler, would cause
the Bubble to subside.

But having provided such a Tile as they lay on the ridges of Houses and filled
the hollow side with a Mixture of Snow and Salt, and Part of that Mixture being
placed about the Bellows; I found, That the Air blown upon my Hand was, by that
means, highly refrigerated: And this Air being blown upon the Ball of a common
Weather-Glass, the Water manifestly ascended; but subsided again, when we left
off blowing. But to prosecute the Trial, we drew back the Nose of the Bellows,
and upon that, the Wind blowing along that Cavity upon the Weather-Glass,
manifested a higher degree of Coldness.

But though it from hence appears, That frigorifick Atoms may refrigerate the
Air; yet I believe not, that all Winds must necessarily be cooled so; since the
Cold Air near the Poles swimming upon that which fills the lower Part of the
Atmosphere, may, for want of a Reflection of the Sunbeams, be so Cold, as to
cool the Air suddenly, when by the falling of Rain it is beat down upon us: For
Acosta has observed, upon Mountains higher than the Alps, That the Air was
extremely Cold. And the Hollanders who failed within 17 degrees of the Pole
observed, That their Cold Winds were chiefly Northerly and North-easterly. But,

To conclude this Title, I shall add an instance or two to show, That Cold
Winds receive not so much their Qualities from the Quarters from whence they
Blow, as from the Regions over which they pass. For Mr. Wood tells us, That
though in England the most troublesome and unwholesome Winds came from the Sea;
yet in New England those are the most wholesome: Because the North-east-wind
coming from the Sea thaws the Ice and melts the Snow; but the North-west-wind
coming over the Land causes Cold. And Capt. James observed the like in
Charlton-Island, viz. That the South Wind was Coldest which came over a frozen
Tract of Land.

Particulars referrable to the XVIII Title.
1. The little sealed Weather-Glass being immersed in Water, contained in a
Glass-Vial greased in the inside, when the Water was froze, and the Ball of the
Weather-Glass was incrustated, being taken out, the Ice was broke off: Upon
which the Tinged Liquor immediately rose in the shank of the Weather-Glass; but
presently subsided again below the former Mark; from whence it appears, That
the Air may communicate a greater degree of Cold than Ice it self. 2. Having
placed a Weather-Glass, made by the Standard at Gresham-College, in a Cellar,
where Beer continued unfroze in a very sharp Winter; last Night and this
Morning the Tinged Liquor stood 2 Divisions and above the freezing Mark; but
being removed into the Garden, it subsided to the freezing Mark: But though the
Cellar was warmer than the Air; yet it was not so warm as my Chamber; the
Weather-Glass there standing two Inches above the freezing Mark, in the Morning
before the fire was made; and in the Summer the Tinged Spirit ascended to the
8th 9th and sometimes almost to the tenth Mark. 3. The last Night being
rendered very Cold by Snow, Frost and Wind; this Morning, the Weather-Glass
being removed into the Garden, the Tinged Spirit subsided two Divisions below
the freezing Mark: Yet the Cellar did not become so much Hotter, by an (...);
but that Oil of Aniseeds continued undissolv'd in it till, the next Morning,
though the moderate warmth of Spring or Autumn is sufficient to keep it fluid. 4.
A Weather-Glass being held in the Stream of Water as it came reaking Hot out of
the Pump, the Liquor subsided considerably; and being carried to my Chamber,
the Air there being Colder than the Water, it was depressed lower. 5. Having
held a Weather-Glass in the reaking stream of Pump-Water, the Spirit rose about
5 Inches higher than it did at a Well in Oxford; and being in some measure
immersed in a Spring that usually smoaks in the Winter, it was raised a little
higher. And the Weather-Glass being placed on the North side of the House about
Noon, I found that the temper of the Air then, was much the same with the
temper of the smoking Spring. 6. Feb. 19. The Frost having continued 3 Days,
the Spirit was raised as high, by the warmth of the Spring as it used to be.
The next Day the Spring beginning to smoke, the warmth of the Water raised the
Spirit near a quarter of an Inch higher than it used to rise at the Springhead
some Months ago. And the Water was then much warmer than the Air, for the
Spirit when brought to my Chamber subsided; the Ground without being covered
with a little Snow 7. A Gentleman told me, That he had observed the Tinged
Spirit sometimes higher, when it was frosty, than when it was not. And he
further told me, That the Weather-Glass being left in Water till it was froze,
when it was cleared of the Ice and exposed to the Air, the Spirit manifesty
subsided. The size of the Ball of this Weather-Glass was as big as that of a
large Crab, and the Stem was about 2 foot and long. And the distance betwixt
the station which the Spirit rested at in the Water and the Air was above three
Inches.
A Relation given me by an Ingenious Gentleman lately returned out of Poland.
1. In frosty clear Weather, he observed the Sun and two Parhelions one
Eastward and the other Westward; betwixt ten and twelve a Clock; and when the
Sunshine appeared it was full of glittering Particles of Ice.

2. A Dutch and a Scotch Ship having sailed beyond Greenland, within one degree
of the Pole, they observed, That though there were vast Regions of Ice near the
shores; yet near the Pole, the Sea was open and free enough. From the
North-East they observed, That there came a great rolling Sea, not unlike the
Spanish Seas: And that the Cold was no violenter than that in Greenland. And
further they observed, That sailing from Greenland, the Compass first varied a
Point and then two, and when they came near the Pole, the Compass varied 4
Points, and that toward the East.

The Captain likewise told me, That they are troubled at Sea, sometimes with
thick Fogs, some of which last half a Day, others a Day; and others a whole Day.

And he likewise told me, That lying at Anchor near Bellsound on the coast of
Greenland, near a very high Rock, he and some others got to the top of it;
which they judged to be half a Mile high: And when they came there; they found
the Weather clear and the Sky serene, and so Hot that they were forced to strip
themselves: But below they could discern a thick fogg; which when they came
down, they found was very Cold, and Dark.

A Passage taken out of the Czars-Doctor's Letter.
1. At Vologda in the North-East from Moscow we found the Cold Weather in
December not to last 3 Days; but the Rain was unusual and dangerous. And for 30
years past the Winters have been so moderate, That People are not froze on the
Roads in several Postures; but sometimes they lose their Noses, and have their
Faces froze. 2. The Warmer the Room is in the Day, the thicker the Hoar is at
Night upon the Glass; being sometimes an Inch thick: And if it be a small
Frost, The Nails of the Windows and Doors will be tipped with Frost. The
Falconers say. That the Birds creep under the Snow at Nights. Bears make
themselves Caves against Winter, and I remember I kept one two Days without
meat or drink; he in the mean time, making a Lather with his Tongue and sucking
his Paws. 3. A Wind from the Sea causes a Thaw as well as at Archangel. The Air
is so healthful they use very little Physic, so that the Poorer sort live 80
or 100 years old.
TITLE XIX. Of the strange Effects of Cold
Of the strange Effects of Cold.
THE Dutch tell us, That they found it so Cold in Nova Zembla that when their
Sheets were washed and hung to dry by a fire, one side would freeze as the
other thawed, and that they themselves were so Cold, That they could not warm
themselves by the fire; for they usually smelt their stockings burn, before
they were sensible of the Heat. And Capt. James tells us, That in
Charlton-Island, the one side of Water in a Vessel froze, whilst the other was
next the fire. To these Relations I shall add, That Marcus Polus was told, That
on a Plain, which was betwixt two of the highest Hills in the World; fire would
neither burn so briskly, nor boil things so effectually as in other Places;
which I am the more unwilling to reject as impossible: Because if Snow and Ice
owe their Coldness to something which reigns in the Air, Nature may make the
Air as Cold in any other Northern Climates; Saline Expirations being every
where dispersed through the Earth and Sea. And this Cold is so violent, that
Water being poured on a stool and a Tankard placed upon it; by a Mixture of
Snow and Salt, the Tankard will be so frozen to the stool, That the one being
lift up, raises the other along with it.

2. Gerat de Veer, says, That if they put a Nail into their Mouth it would be
froze, and bring Blood along with it when taken away. And Dr. Fletcher tells
us, That in Muscovy, if one hold a Pot in ones Hand; being froze to it, it will
pull off the skin at Parting. And in Nova Zembla, it has been observed to be
so Cold, That it froze Salt Water two Inches thick.

3. In the Marketplace at Moscow, Olearius tells us, That the extreme Cold
caused a Clift a foot broad and several Inches long; and that considerable
Clifts will be made by the Cold, I am informed by others: And the Dutch in Nova
Zembla acquaint us, That the Ground was so froze, that they were not able to
thaw it by burning Wood upon it.

4. As for the Effects of Cold on compound Bodies, etc. That it will freeze
Beer, Ale, Vinegar, Oil, common Wine, and even Sack and Alicant we have already
shown; and that it has considerable Effects on Wood, Bricks, Stone, Vessels of
Glass, Earth, and even Pewter and Iron themselves. To which I shall add, That
though Cold preserves some Plants; yet an excessive degree of it destroys them.

5. Capt. James tells us, That he found the Cold when at the highest degree
insupportable; and Olearius acquaints us, that sometimes the Cold in Muscovy is
so excessive, That neither motion nor Clothes resist the ill Effects of it; but
in Moscow the Air is very good and healthly, the Plague very seldom happening
there. And Dr. Fletcher tells us, That in Russia it is so Cold sometimes, That
People fall Dead in the Streets, and that the Bears and Wolves invade and
Plunder the Towns in whole Troops. And the Effects of Cold have been found so
strange sometimes, That it has caused Blisters to rise, not only upon the
Hands and Face but their Arms and Legs: Besides these Instances, Capt. James
tells us, That their Clothes would be covered over with Frost, and Iceicles
would so hang to their Hair, That he was forced to shave his Head and Face,
that they might have nothing to hang at. And Purchase says, That their very
shoes would be covered over with a Hoar-Frost on the inside, so that they were
not able to wear them. And I am told, That an Army of 40000 of the Turks all
perished at once by excessive Cold. I am also informed, That a Province of
Poland, of the same height of the Pole with Normandy, is subject to some sort
of Colds, which occasion a peculiar kind of Sickness and at other times Death.
And Cancerous Sores are as fatal as those caused by Hot corroding Humors; and
those that dye of the Cold, either are seized with a drowziness and Coldness of
the Extreme Parts, and dye in a sleep, or having their Guts and Reins first
froze and then Gangreed and Mortified, vomit every thing they take, and then
languish with violent pain and Dye; and their Bodies being opened, their Guts
are black, and as if it were glewed together.

6. What effects Cold has upon other Animals, has not been much observed by
Authors: But a French Author tells us, That the Cold in Vkrain as the Polanders
call it, is sometimes so great, That it destroys Horses and some other tame
Beasts. And the same Author mentions a four-footed Creature, called Bohack,
peculiar to that Province, one of which being dug out of the Ground where he
was froze, (for they usually hide themselves there in the Winter) when they
were about to flea him, the sense of Pain recovered him; and this was presented
to a Polish Lord from whom I had the Relation.

7. It is reported, That in the Northern Countries, the Birds and wild Beasts
are usually turned white: But though I don't wholly reject it as false; yet I
cannot believe it universally true. But this is certain, That good Authors
mention, white Bears and Foxes in Nova Zembla, and white Partridges upon the
Snowy Alps; and I have heard of white Pheasants in Savoy. What may be the
Reason of this Color I shall not dispute, nor shall I determine, whether it be
caused by any seminal Impressions, or the Imagination of the Females, who have
Snow always as an Object before them: But that all Beasts and Fowls in the
Northern Climates are of that white color I find is a Mistake; for I have seen
Deers skins brought from Greenland of a Dun color. Yet one thing which is very
strange is, That in Greenland and Livonia Hares become white in the Winter, and
return to their Natural color again in the Summer. And Capt. James tells us,
of Foxes in Greenland which are pied black and white.

Particulars referrable to the XIX Title.
1. Lieutenant G. Drummon told me, That at Smolensco, the Barrels of Beer,
being frozen a considerable thickness; the Liquor contained within was much
stronger. 2. Two Swedish Ambassadors confirmed to me, That the Hares in
Muscovy, change from their Natural color to white in the Winter, and recover
their own color in the Summer; and that on one side the River Duna which
separates Livonia and Muscovy, the Hares are white, and on the other side of
ordinary colors. 3. It is observed in Russia, That if a Man, touches his
Tongue with the Metalline Head of a Cane, it freezes his tongue immediately; so
that he cannot separate it without much Pain: For the Parts of the Metal being
at rest, and the Spittle whose Parts are in a weak Motion, striking against the
Metalline Body, are wholly deprived of it, and consequently freeze. So in a
Billiard-Table one Bowl in Motion striking against another not in Motion,
communicates as much of it is Motion as it can to the other, and loses it is own;
and so the Vapors and steams in a Room, in frosty Weather striking against the
Glass-Windows, are deprived of their Motion and froze, which is observed to be
much thicker upon the Glass in Russia than here in England.
A Note out of Martinius in his account of China.

This Author tells us, That at Peking, though the Pole be not elevated above 42
degrees; yet for four Months together, from the middle of November, the Rivers
are froze in one Day, so that they bear Coaches and Horses.

A Note taken out of Martinius Cromerus his Polonia.

The Cold is so violent in these Countries sometimes, That the Trees wither at
the Roots, and Water is froze as it falls through the Air; and the Waters are
froze up for two Months, so that they bear Horses laden, and Coaches. And this
Author tells us, That he passed over the Weisell in Massovia with a Coach and
Horses, and other Horsemen. And in Prussia the Fishing in the Ice began after
the beginning of November, and lasted till March was ended.

Another Note out of the same.

1. They catch Fish more commodiously in Winter than Summer; for breaking holes
in several Places in the Ice, a Net being cast into one of them, and ropes
fastened to it, Men with Poles, and Horses, draw the Net from one Place to
another.

2. I am told that at Warsaw, in twelve Hours the Water was froze 4 Inches
downwards. One that sailed to make Discoveries beyond the Arctick Circle, told
me, He could eat as much in one Day, as in ten here; and that after they had
sailed over a deep blew Sea, they came to one as black as Ink, which being
sounded, it was above 70 Fathom. Sack being froze, and thawed again, presently
lost its Vigor.

3. In these Parts the Frost penetrates the Ground five Foot; and the Ice in
Iberia in the River Ob, is said to be a Fathom and a half thick; there being
there but twelve Weeks in the whole Year without Frost: The Rivers have
breathing places a Mile long, out of which Fumes ascend, as out of a Cellar,
when the Door is opened. Death by Cold is not painful, if it be intense. Cold
dries excessively, cleaves the Earth, and causes Timber to crack.

TITLE XX. Experiments concerning the Weight of Bodies frozen and unfrozen.
The Weight of Bodies frozen and unfrozen.
1. TO try whether Bodies upon freezing would grow heavier, since Epicurus and
other Atomists, suppose Congelation to depend upon the crowding in of
frigorifick Atoms; we exposed Eggs to be froze all Night, and in the Morning we
found they had lost four Grains of their Weight, which we suspected to proceed
from the Avolition of some Exhalations through the Shell; since at other times
we observed, That Eggs counterpoised lost eight Grains of their Weight, in some
process of Time.

2. Water froze and weighed, counterpois'd a Grain and a little more, than when
it was thawed: But the Experiment being made in a Glass with a long Stem,
hermetically sealed when the Water was froze; it was as heavy or heavier after
it was thawed; and the same Equality of Weight betwixt frozen and unfrozen
Water, happened in other Experiments.

3. Stones being weighed after exposed to the cold Air, and also in a warm Air,
they seemed to discover an Increase of Weight; but I suspected it proceeded
from Water imbibed into their Pores, since Stones are observed to increase
their Weight in Water: And further, because one that was well polished, and not
apt to imbibe Water, retained barely its own Weight. So that the Doctrine of
the Epicurean Freezing, must be invalid, except he supposes the frigorifick
Atoms, like those of a Lodestone, to be without Weight.

An Appendix to the XX Title.

The foregoing Experiments, may not only satisfy us, That the Doctrine of the
Epicureans is erroneous, but may likewise help us to correct some extravagant
Relations, on the other Hand: For Helmont tells us, That Water thawed in a
Vessel Hermetically sealed, was heavier than before. But perhaps this
Difference might in part depend on the Access of Vapors on the outside the
Glass. In opposition to what Manalphus tells us, I found, That Water froze in a
Metalline Porringer, in one Experiment lost 50, in another 60 Grains of its
Weight; which I attributed to an Avolition of some Parts of the Water, since
when we ordered the Matter so, that no Water could steam out, there was no
considerable Increase or Decrease in the Weight of Water froze or thawed.

Particulars referrable to the XX Title.
1. Quicksilver being weighed in the Air, and afterward counterpoised in
Water, when by the application of a Mixture of Snow and Salt, it began to
freeze; the Bubble weighed of a Grain less than before. A Globe of Snow rammed
into a Mould, whose Diameter was an Inch, weighed 112 Grains. A Globe of Ice of
the same Diameter weighed, 2 Drams, and 5 Grains. 2. After a long Frost and
Snow, the Liquor in the gaged Weather-glass stood below the first Mark; but the
Mercury in the Baroscope stood at near 2/^ below 29 Inches; which perhaps might
be attributed to the high Wind. 3. Four Ounces of Snow being counter poised
were exposed to the Frost all Night, and at 10 or 11 in the Morning, had lost
near 30 Grains, which Parts seemed to have been evaporated; the melted Liquor
in the Bottom of the Scale amounting to no more than 8 Grains. 4. Two Ounces of
Snow depressed flat, so as to form a large Superficies, and counterpoised, in a
Night's time, lost 55 Grains; no Water being found in the Scale; and two Hours
after, the Decrement was 63 Grains, none of the Snow appearing yet to be
melted.
TITLE XXI. Promiscuous Experiments and Observations concerning Cold.
Whether Frost hinder odoriferous Effluvia from exerting their Power.
1. SEveral Flowers being gathered in December and January, and hastily smel^ed
(...) had no sensible effect on the Sensory, which Phenomenon I attributed to
the Frost, hindering a sufficient Quantity of spirituous Sap from rising up into
them; and not that it prevented those spirituous Parts from emitting Effluvia;
since a vigorous fresh Primrose, had an Odor genuine and sweet.

2. Rose Water being froze, when it was wholly Ice, afforded a genuine Scent,
but something fainter, than when it was thawed again; but in making these
Experiments it is requisite, that the Body smelt at, should not be held too
long near the Nose, lest the warmth of one's Face should help to excite those
Odoriferous Parts, and consequently frustrate the Trial.

3. Stinking Water being exposed to the Cold and froze, was altogether
inodorous.

4. It is reported by several, and attested by Olearius, That the Russians and
Livonians, enable themselves to bear Cold extremely, by going out of their
Store naked, immediately into cold Water, and even Ice it self.

5. Having made use of a good burning-Glass to concentre the Rays of the Moon,
I could neither perceive them cold or hot; though Sanctorius tells us, That they
are hot, and that being concentred, and cast upon the Ball of a common
Weather-glass, the Water was sensibly depressed; but since my Glass, for as
much as I can gather from the Narrative, was better than his, I must suspend my
Assent, 'till further satisfied by Experience; for since he tells us, that
several of his Scholars stood by to watch the Event, the Effect might in a
great measure depend on the Warmth of their Breath.

One Particular referrable to the XXI Title.
The Samojedes cloth themselves with Renes Skins, the Hair being outward; and
I have found a Pair of Cangies warmer than furred Gloves. They are chiefly made
use of for the Sledge, though one may walk in the Snow with them, it being so
dry, that a Scarlet being covered all over with it, it will brush off without
wetting or endammaging it.

To the XI Title.
The force of Expansion by Cold.
1. The Barrel of a Gun which was about a Foot long, and of a proportionable
Diameter, had the Touchhole riveted up, and a Screw fitted to the Nose of the
Barrel, which being done, it was filled full of Water, and suspended in a
Perpendicular Line: The Screw having been thrust down as forcibly as a Man
could; in a frosty Night, the congealed Ice raised the Screw considerably, so
that Ice had made it is way out at the sides of the Barrel: But the Experiment
being repeated, and the Intervals of the Screw filled up with melted Beeswax,
the expanded Ice not being able to raise it, the Nose of the Barrel was cracked
obliquely; besides several other Flaws in other Places, which gave way to the
Wind blown into the Barrel to try it.

An Appendix to the XVII Title.
Of the Effects of Nitre in freezing.
Bartholinus citeing an Experiment, wherein the Proportion betwixt Nitre and
Water was 35 to 100; to try the success of it, we mixed a Pound of Saltpeter
with 3 Pounds of Water, and stirring it about constantly, as Cabaeus directs,
in an Hour and half we perceived not the least Ice; whereas, according to him,
it ought to have been wholly froze in less time; but we could not perceive the
Vapors on the outside of the Glass in the least froze.

For a further Trial, we mixed two Ounces of Saltpeter with six of Water in a
Glass-Vial, but by all the shaking we could not produce the least Ice; though
whilst the Nitre was dissolving the Mixture was sensibly colder; and the same
we have observed to happen upon a Dissolution of Common Salt; though the Degree
of Cold was not sufficient for Congelation, which I was satisfied in, by
removing a Thermoscope out of the Mixture of Nitre and Water, into Water which
was placed in Snow and Salt: For by that means the Liquor in the Weather-Glass
subsided in the latter about 3 Inches; so that I am apt to think the Learned
Cabaeus mistook Chrystals of Nitre for Ice.

It is believed by most Watermen, That the Water begins to freeze at the
bottom, because they observe large Pieces of Ice rise from the bottom of the
Water: But the Truth of it is very reasonably questioned, since we not only
see, that Water in Vessels, but in Wells, begins to freeze at the Top; and
several Arguments in proof of the contrary may be found in our Section of the
Primum frigidum. And as for those Pieces of Ice, which they observe to emerge,
that Phenomenon may easily be solved, without supposing the Water to begin to
freez at the Bottom: For since the Water, which runs along the sides of the
Banks being froze, several Stones may stick to it; they by their Weight may
cause it to subside, when it is partly loosned by the Heat of the Sun, and the
Water, by that Rarifaction becomes lighter: Yet, when the Water above is
cooled, and the Water below being warmer, has melted the Ice in some measure,
and loosned some of those Stones which were before froze to it; the Ice
becoming specifically lighter than the Water, must consequently emerge. On
which occasion, I shall here observe, that Capt. James Hall takes notice, That
they found a Stone of three hundred weight upon a Piece of Ice. In confirmation
of our Solution of this Phenomenon, I might allege the Experiments laid down
in the Section of the Duration of Ice. And it were to be wished, that for a
further Decision of this matter, that either Diverse were sent down, or
Instruments which would bring up Ice if any were there.

We took a sealed Weather-Glass, and having inverted the Stem of it when
furnished with Spirit of Wine, so that, that being placed in a Hole purposely
made in a Box, the Ball of the Weather-Glass rested on the Box; about that we
placed a Mixture of Snow and Salt, and found, that presently the Spirit of Wine
was retracted. So that Liquors may be condensed, without the assistance of
their Gravity, to depress and cause the Parts of the Body to sink together: But
whether in this case, the Contraction was assisted by the Tenacity of the
Liquor or the Springiness of some Elastick Particles, will be inquired into in
a more proper Place.

Frogs and Toads being taken up from under Ice, were brisk and lively; and it
is observed, that in frosty Weather they generally lie in the Bottom of Pits,
for their Security.

Paralipomena to the II and XX Titles, of the frost getting into hard and solid
Bodies.
Of the Effects of Frost on solid Bodies.
In England it has been observed, That Wood whose Diameter, was a Foot through
has been froze; and in Poland the Frost has been so powerful, that it has
rendered the Timber so hard, that Hatchets would not cut it; and the Wood with
which the Houses were covered would give Cracks as loud as Pistols. And I am
told by one, that his Bow being froze, if he did not take a great deal of Care
in thawing it, it would break. Marle and Chalk will be shattered with the
Frost, the Texture of those Bodies being by that means opened and rendered more
fit to nourish Plants and Grass. And I am told by an Experienced Mason, that
even free stone, of which Houses are built, will crack and flaw in frosty
Weather. And it is observed in England, That stones dugg up in the beginning of
Summer and seasoned in the Air are not near so subject to flaw as those that
are dug up and worked, whilst the Frost continues. And it is further observed,
That both Earthen as well as Glass-Vessels are considerably impaired by the
Effects of Frost upon them. To which instances I shall add the Testimony of
Maistre Bernard Palissy who says, That though the stones of the Mountain Ardenne
are harder than Marble; yet for fear of Frost they are drawn out of the
Quarries in the Winter: And he further adds, That in the Winter the Rocks
sometimes crack and fall down without being cut. And it has been observed,
That Iron-Instruments brought out of the Cold into a warm Room have been
covered over with a white Hoar; and it is not only confirmed by foreign Artists
but several here, That Cold has so great an Effect on Steel as to make several
Pieces of Metal more brittle than in the Summer; so that they are then forced
to work them another way and to give them a different temper.

Hot Water does not freeze sooner than Cold.
It being a Tradition, and also taught by Aristotle, That Hot Water is sooner
froze than Cold; to determine the matter, I made the following Experiments.

Cold Water being exposed to freeze in one Porringer, boiled Water cooled in
another, and Hot Water in a Third, at 8 a Clock; the Cold Water began to freeze
at after ten; the Boild Water cooled, at past ten; and the Hot Water at an hour
past Eleven. And the like success happened, when the Experiment was tried a
second time in Metalline Vessels: And the Experiment being again tried with
greater exactness, the Cold Water and the rest being exposed to freeze at after
6, the first beganto freeze after 7; the Water heated and cooled again after 7,
and the Hot Water was not froze an hour after Eight.

The like Experiment being tried with Water contained in Glass-Cylinders of an
equal Bore sealed at one end, we found that there was very little difference in
the time of their Congelation, when immersed in a Mixture of Snow Salt and
Water; but once, when the end of one of the Cylinders was drawn smaller than
Ordinary, the smallness of the Pipe occasioned the Hot Water to begin to freeze
sooner than the Cold Water.

Postcript.
Accidentally looking upon the Circulus Pisanus of Berigardus, I found, That
though that Author opposes Aristotle in other Points; yet he agrees with Him,
That Hot Water cooled, will sooner freeze than ordinary Cold Water; but having
tried the Experiment, I observed, That both being exposed to freeze when by a
Weather-Glass I found them of the same temper, my Domestic who attended them,
took notice also that they both began to freeze at one time. And though
Berigardus further wonders, That warm Salt Water should be less subject to
freeze for being Salt; yet from* Experiments already laid down, it abundantly
appears, That though Salt Externally applied promotes it, yet Internally being
dissolved in Water, it prevents Congelation.

Particulars referrable to several Titles.
For a further Confirmation of the VI Title. I shall add that Purchase relates
Lib. 4. Cap. 19. That the Samojeds, when they Bury their Dead, only cover them
with a Pile of stones, and though the Dead Bodies may be seen through them; yet
the Coldness of the Air preserves them from stinking. And the same Author tells
us, That in a certain Island they preserve their Fish and Flesh, by hardening
it in the Air, better than if it were corned with Salt.

In Confirmation of what has been delivered under the VII Title, I exposed
several Vials filled with Water and unstopped, to be froze, and found that the
Bottles were broke in pieces, by the Expansion of the frozen Water; so that the
Phenomenon could not be attributed to Nature's abhorrency of a Vacuum: For if
either the Expanded Water could have made it is way by stretching the Glass, or
leaving the Superficial Ice congealed at first in the Neck, or any other way
easier than to break the Vessel; the Vessel would probably be left entire, I
say probably, because sometimes in such Experiments something may intervene
which requires further Trials and Observations to discover: Since I have in
other Experiments made it appear, That the Water beginning to freeze at the
Bottom rose a considerable height in the Stem without breaking the Bottle, and
I have sometimes had a good deal of a Liquor froze in a stopped Vial without
breaking it, as if the success were varyed by some uncommon Properties in the
Glass, or some peculiar softness of the Ice.

In Confirmation of what is delivered in the VII Title, of the Expansion of
freezing Water, I shall add, That the Capacity of a large Bottle being filled
with Water, except the Neck, and that filled with Oil, the expanding Water not
only elevated the Cork; but raised it several Inches; it being supported by a
Cylinder, partly consisting of Oily, and partly of Watery Particles of Ice.

It is a General Tradition amongst Fishermen, That when Ponds or Rivers are
froze up, except several holes are broke up for the Air to communicate with the
Water, the Fishes will be suffocated; and Olaus Magnus, tells us, That Fishes
are usually found suffocated, when a thaw comes, where Veins of living Water do
not enter.

But I am not satisfied, whether, if the Tradition be true, they may not be
killed either by some Subterraneal Steams or their own Excrementitious Effluvia
prevented, by the Ice, from making their way out of the Water; and it may be
questioned further, whether this Phenomenon may not be caused, by excessive
Cold as well as for want of Air.

Wherefore to satisfy my self, whether the Vulgar Opinion be true or not, I
enclosed some Gudgeons in a large Glass with a long Neck, and having froze the
Water in the Neck by applying a Mixture of Snow and Salt, I found, That the
Fishes lived a considerable time. And the like I observed, when the same Fishes
were contained in an Earthen Vessel with a little Water frozen over: Where the
External Air was wholly separated, and prevented from communicating with the
Water under the Ice; yet one thing observable was, That there was a large
Bubble of Air, under the Ice, which I suppose came from the Fish: For I have
observed, not only these sort of Fish but Lamprels take in Air, and then being
immersed under Water emit Bubbles, both at their Mouths and Gills. Gudgeons
frozen up in Ice in a Basin recovered when it was thawed; but some that
continued 3 Days in Ice revived not. Frogs froze in Water till they were all
enclosed with Ice, and till one of them was stiff with it, recovered when it
was thawed, and Swam about; though before some of them lay with their Bellys
upwards and void of Motion.

As for the weight of Bodies frozen, Capt. James tells us, That Wood, that had
lain all Winter under Ice would sink when cast into the Water. And he likewise
tells us, That the Ice of Wine is so durable, that a Butt of Wine which was
froze in the Winter; continued unthawed in May.

Purchase tells us, of two pieces of Ice which they found lay fast on the
Ground, the one of which was 20 fathom under Water and 12 above, and the other
18 fathom below the Surface of the Water and 10 above it.

It is observed by Purchase and several others, That the Snow lying upon the
Ground in Russia as well as in England makes it fruitful.

Of the separation of Liquors by Cold.
It would be worth while to try, what Effects Cold has upon occult Qualities as
well as manifest ones; and likewise upon Fermentation; since it is observed to
retardate the working of Ale extremely; and it is observed, That Must may be
preserved sweet a long time in a deep Well, or if let down into the Bottom of a
River; and will when taken up, be less apt to ferment than other parcels of
Must kept in the warmer Air.

It has been observed in the Northern Countries, That the most Spirituous Parts
of Liquors, have been separated and Collected together by a Congelation of the
Phlegm; wherefore to try what Cold would Effect in our Climates, I hung out a
Bottle of Beer in a sharp Night; and found, That most Part of it being froze,
the Liquor which was not froze, was very strong and Spirituous; the frozen Part
being Spiritless. But Rectifyed Spirit of Wine tinged with Cochineel being
mixed with Water, Congelation separated not their Parts, nor did it separate
the red and the Watery Parts of Claret. I made several Trials upon Milk and
Blood, as also on Vinegar, in which my Attempts proved insatisfactory: But a
Solution of Salt being made in 24 Parts of Water, so that it was as strong as
the Seawater about us, I caused it to be exposed to freeze in a flat Vessel,
which was the larger, That the Superficies of the Water might be considerable;
and when it was covered with a Cake of Ice, that being taken off, it acquired
another; which, when dissolved, yielded Water, not near so Salt as that which
remained unfroze; and being Hydrostatically weig^ed was considerably lighter.

Having exposed several Vegetable and Animal Substances to be froze, I found,
That by that means I could discover, their succulent juices, and squeez them
out in the form of Ice, which being done; by cutting them transversely and
length ways, I could discover also the Figure and Size, of the Pores in which
those Juices lodged. Amongst the Animal substances exposed to freeze, were the
Eyes, and the Brains of Animals; which by being froze would be fitter to be
dissected; the latter, when cut in two seeming like an Apple froze, the
Ventricles and i^ whole substance being filled with Icy Particles.

Neither an Eye nor a Liver, lean flesh or fish* nor a living Frog; would be
crusted over with Ice, as Eggs and Apples are, when put into Water; after they
had been froze. As for the Reason why flesh is usually much impaired by being
froze, I suppose it to proceed hence, viz. That the Alimental Juice being
expended by freezing has not it is own texture altered only, but even the solid
Vessels which contain it, are thereby bruised and crushed; for from several
Experiments it is evident, That Eggs will be burst by the freezing of the
Alimental Juice, and that the Textures of Stones and Vegetables will be
destroyed by the Powerful Congelation of their respective Juices, which will be
less wondered at, if we consider that Aqueous Parts by their Expansion were
able to burst the Barrel of a Gun: Had I had leisure and convenience I would
have tried what Effects Cold has upon Animals froze to Death; but having
exposed a Rabbet to the Cold all Night, I found that only one Leg was swelled
and a little stiff. But a strangled Rabbet being exposed to be froze, Ice was
produced in several Parts.

It is affirmed by several Modern Writers, That if Water be impregnated with
the Salts of Vegetables; upon Congelation, they will represent the shape of the
Plant they belong to: But notwithstanding I have several times tried the
Experiment, I found it either false or very contingent; since it did not once
answer Expectation. But having exposed a Lixivium of Potashes to freeze; I
found, That the Chrystals upon the Surface of the Water were Prismatical, and
that under those lay a great many thin Parallel Plates of Ice; but not ranged
in such an order as to represent the shape of Trees: And though Bartholinus tells
us, That if a Decoction of Cabbage be froze it will represent a Cabbage; yet I
could never find, That the Experiment succeeded, except that once there appeared
the faint resemblance of a single Leaf. But I have found, That fair Water froze
would represent the shapes of Vegetables oftener than their Decoctions. And though
Berigardus also affirms the same; yet I suspect, That he only wirt, without
trying the Experiments himself.

And yet, I deny not, but that prepossessed Spectators may fancy they see such
things when they do not, for though Sea Salt and Alum consist of Parts of
determinate Figures; yet when dissolved in Water they exhibit Figures too
various and extravagant, not to be referred to Chance. And on this occasion, to
what has been said I shall add, That by Distilling and rectifying Oil of
Turpentine from Sea Salt in a Glass-head, as the degrees of Heat were varyed,
so would the Figures of Trees be represented different on the inside the Glass.
And I have several times produced the shapes of Trees from Bodies belonging to
the Animal Kingdom. And I have found, That though Figures curious enough would be
represented by Spirits, Solutions, Decoctions, Vinegar, Milk and even common
Water; yet it was in vain to hope for the same success, and that the like
Figures should always be afforded by the same Liquor; since very small
Circumstances would vary them considerably: And in trying of such Experiments
as these it may not be amiss to advertise, That it will be convenient, that the
Liquor should be as shallow as it possibly may, That it may be more speedily
froze.

A frozen Egg being Put into Oil of Turpentine instead of common Water it
gathered not about it any crusty Film.

It is observed by Mr. Wood, That though New England be 10 or 11 degrees remoter
from the Pole; yet the Winters are much more piercing and Cold than ours. And
to what has been delivered in the XVIII Title of the infrigidating Power of
Wind, I shall add, That sometimes it has been so much more Cold than at
others, That being blown through the frigorifick Mixture, it would cause not
only the Spirit of Wine to subside; but being blown upon the Ball of another
Weather-Glass; not only the Liquor; but even Mercury it self would be forced to
ascend, though the Vicinity of the frigorifick Mixture could not cause that
Effect. And I have often tried, That when the Temperature of the Air was such,
that though when first blown upon the Ball of a nice Thermoscope; it would not
cause the Liquor to ascend; yet at another season the Tinged Liquor ascended,
as if the Air by being more than ordinarily compressed in the Room, had some
sensible Effect in compressing and contracting the Air included in the
Thermoscope.

To try whether Liquors, by losing their fluidity and becoming consistent would
acquire a greater degree of Coldness, I caused the Ball of a Weather-Glass to
be immersed in Sallet-Oyl, and a Solution of Minium in Vinegar, or of
Quicklime in Water, either of which will coagulate the Oil; but I did not
find, That the Mixture though consistent was Colder than the fluid Ingredients.

To try whether Water was capable of Compression, we took a Glass-Ball with a
long Stem, and filled it with Water within two Inches of the Top; then we
Hermetically sealed it up, and freezing it from the Bottom upwards in a
frigorifick Mixtre, when the included Air was compressed as much as we thought
the Glass would bear, we nipt off the Apex; and found, That thereupon the Air
flew out and the Water rose of an Inch above it is former Surface: So that it
seemed to be compressed of the length of the Aqueous Cylinder; but whether this
Phenomenon might be occasioned, by the Spring of some latent Air in the Pores
of the Water, or whether it might be occasioned by some Springiness in the Ice,
or Whether the Glass being before distended and now reduced to it is former
Dimensions occasioned this Phenomenon, I will not undertake to determine
without further Trials. And,

To what has been observed in this Experiment, I shall add, That if the Apex
were broke off before the Air was much compressed, it would cause no
considerable Noise: And further, when the Experiment was a second time repeated
with one of the same Glasses, and the same Liquor; it would rise and in the
Stem, higher than before, upon breaking of the Apex.

CHAP. VI. An Examen of Antiperistasis, as it is usually taught and proved.
Arguments alleged in Favor of an Antiperistasis.
THOUGH the Doctrine of Antiperistasis be asserted by Aristotle; and some of his
followers urge Reason and Experience in favor of it, yet from what follows it
will appear, That what is offered is not sufficient to maintain his Doctrine.

For first it is Reasoned in favor of it, That nothing can be more requisite
for the Preservation of things, and more agreeable to the wisdom and goodness
of Nature, than to furnish Cold and Heat with a self invigorating Power, which
each of them may exert when encompassed with the other; and that nothing is
more Natural, than for one Quality, when surrounded with a Predominant one, to
retire into the innermost recesses of that Body; where the force of it being
increased, an occasional Exertion of that Power is called Antiperistasis.

But from Reason to proceed to Experience, it is offered by the maintainers of
an Antiperistasis, That in the Summer, when the lowest and uppermost Regions of
the Air are insupportably Hot, the Cold flies to the middle Region of it, and
there defends it self against the other two about it: And as the Cold remains
in the middle Region, by virtue of an Antiperistasis, so Lightning is but an
Explosion of Exhalations pinned up in the Cold.

And to this it is further offered, That the Effects of Antiperistasis are not
only evident in the Air, but the Earth it self; for in the Summer, when the Air
above the Earth is Hot, that in Cellars to which the Cold retreats is of a
contrary Quality; and on the contrary in the Winter, when the Air without is
excessive Cold, that in Vaults and Cellars is warm; and even the Water drawn
from Wells is warm, when at the same time Rivers themselves are covered over
with Ice. And,

To these things it is further offered in Favor of an Antiperistasis, That in
deep Pits as well as Mines, it is observed, that the Air is troublesome hot in
the Winter: And that it is further observed, That the Water in Charlton-Island
has been observed to be much Colder in June when Ice swam in it, than in
December; and that a Well which furnished them with Water in December, afforded
none in July; and further, That in Musco the Cellars are able to defend them in
Winter from the Excessive Cold; and that even in those Gelid Climates, Water
drawn out of Wells usually steams or smoaks if agitated when newly drawn.

Thus much being offered in favor of the Doctrine of Antiperistasis, Those
Arguments exmined.
it is answered on the contrary; first, as to the rational defenses of it, That
there it no necessity that these two Qualities should thus invigorate
themselves, there being no danger of them being lost out of the World; since
without the help of an Antiperistasis, there are several substances, which are
plentifully stocked with matter to supply each Quality: Besides, according to
the course of Nature, contrary Qualities rather destroy than preserve one
another; and even the Peripateticks themselves allow, That all Agents act as
much as they can. And we have several Instances in the Northern Countries, That
the Natural Heat of Animals is destroyed and not increased by the help of Cold;
and though it be commonly alleged, to show that Contraries endeavor to shun
each other, That a drop of Water falling upon a Table keeps in a Globular form;
yet the Reason of that seems only to be this, viz. That the specific Gravity
of the drop is not so far prevalent above it is Tenacity, as to cause it to
spread; besides, it is prevented partly by the Ambient Pressure of the
Atmosphere: And that it is Globous Figure is not owing to its aversion to spread
upon a dry Body, and its disposition to shun Contraries is evident, since it
retains the like Figure when mixed with fluid Oil; and Mercury on the contrary,
though it be apter to retain a Globular Figure upon a Table, yet if put upon Gold
it loses that Figure.

Whether the Phenomenon of slacked Quicklime be an Argument of Antiperistasis.
But to pass by what Reasons may be offered against the Doctrine of
Antiperistasis: To proceed to examine what Experiments and Observations have
been alleged in favor of it; I shall first observe, That though the slacking of
Quicklime with Cold Water be generally looked upon to be an Effect of
Antiperistasis; yet it appears otherwise, since it will cause a much more
violent Ebullition, if boiling Water be made use of instead of Cold; the Parts
of the hot Liquor being much more apt to penetrate and dissolve it, and to set
the Igneous Parts at Liberty; for which Reason, Spirit of Salt causes still a
stronger ferment than hot Water. But to show further, That Water slacks not
Lime, because its Coldness keeps in, and thereby invigorates the Power of the
Igneous fiery Parts of the Lime, I put a piece into Oil of Turpentine, which
did not in the least dissolve it, nor did Spirit of Wine, though upon the removal
of it into Water, it was presently dissolved.

Another Argument Examined.
Another Argument alleged for an Antiperistasis, is the freezing of a Pot to
the Top of a stool at the fire side, by a mixture of Snow and Salt; but this
Experiment having likewise succeeded, where there was no fire near, it could not
be said that the Effect depended upon the force of the fire invigorating the
Cold.

Another Experiment employed by the Asserters of an Antiperistasis is, That if
a Pot of Snow be set over the fire, and a Vial full of Water be placed in the
middle of it, it will upon the melting of the Snow be turned into Ice; but this
Experiment having been often tried, succeeded not; yet though it should, any other
Agent which would melt the Ice would as soon produce the Effect.

What the severel Regions of the Air offer in Favor of Antiperistasis.
But as a further Argument of an Antiperistasis, it is urged, that in the Summer
the lower and third Regions of the Air are Hot, and the middlemost Cold, which
to me seems rather asserted; than proved, for not to insist on this, viz. That
according to the Peripateticks, the Natural State of the Air being Hot, I see
not how it should be Cold in Summer, nor can I see why the Third Region should
be so Hot, since it lies so far from the Superficies of the Earth, that the
reflected Rays of the Sun cannot reach it; and though it be urged that it is Hot,
because Meteors have been kindled there; yet the same Argument would prove the
middle Region Hot, since Meteors and Lightning have been observed there; and
even in the lower Region; it being common in Storms fort hose fires called
Helena, or Castor and Pollux, to hover about the Masts of Ships.

An Aphorism of Hypocrates examined.
It is an Aphorism of the Great Hypocrates, ventres byme esse Calidiores; but
this being grounded upon a Supposition that Digestion depends on Heat, and
therefore it must be greater in Winter, because Men have sharper Appetites; All
that I need to offer to repugn this, is, that Digestion is not performed by
Heat; since several voracious Fishes digest very strongly, whose Stomachs and
Blood is Cold. But though Concoction depended chiefly upon Heat; yet the greater
Heat of the Stomach in Winter could not be attributed to Antiperistasis; but a
Retention of Hot Humors generated in the Heart, which gradually increasing,
produce in all Parts of the Body a more than ordinary Heat, and by that means
prepare a greater Quantity of the Stomachical Menstruum. Bendes Contraries
themselves, in respect of other Qualities, agree in this, That they increase
Appetite, as Spices, Wine, and Vinegar; and also Wormwood and Juice of Limons.
And Fromundus has observed, That he himself has been taken with a (...) upon
walking upon Snow, which since they are not so frequent in the Northern and
Colder Climates, I am apt to believe proceed from some other Particles
conveyed into the Blood along with those frigorifick Atoms.

Hail is thought by the Aristotelians to be generated in the lower Region of
the Air, The Aristotelian Production of Hail examined.
the drops of Rain that fall out of the middle Region being there congealed, by
an Antiperistasis, and that it is only generated in Summer. But on the
contrary, I have observed my self the greatest shower of Hail that ever I saw
to fall in January, when the violence of the Frost had rendered the lower Region
of the Air Cold; at which time a Servant to one of my Domestics told her
Master, That she was led out of her way by an Ignis Fatuus, which, till she
could follow it no further, she took to be a Candle, carried by another Person
before her; where how the Nocturnal Air could kindle a fiery Meteor by it is
Coldness, and congeal Snow by it is Heat, I profess I cannot understand: Besides
were Aristotle's account true, I see not why they should never see it Hail at
Alexandria and Pelusium, places in Egypt, where the lower Region of the Air is
hot enough, and where it rains frequently; besides we have seen Grains of Hail
larger by much than dreps of Rain, and at Lions in France the Virtuosi took
Notice of a shower of Hail whose Grains were as large as a Tennis-Ball; and
Bartholinus tells us, That he himself has observed some so large, That they
weighed a Pound; and to these I shall add, that though Aristotle asserts Hail to
be generated in the lower (...) and Snow in the upper, I have observed Grains
of Ice, which contained Snow in the middle of them.

The next Argument alleged in favor of Antiperistasis, and to be examined, is
the Coldness of Cellars in Summer, and their Heat in Winter.

And first, I deny that the Air in Cellars is cooler in Summer than Winter;
since the reason why we feel it so, is only the Predisposition of our
Sensories, which are comparatively warmer, by being enclosed in so warm an Air
as that they are encompassed with in the Summer: But supposing, that not only
our senses, but Weather-Glasses should inform us, That the Air in Cellars were
Colder in the Summer than Winter; yet it might be accounted for without an
Antiperistasis: for since there are several hot Effluvia sent up from
subterraneal Parts, these restrained and kept from flying away in the Winter,
may alter the temper of the Soil, and Subterraneal Waters; but when by the Heat
of Summer the Pores of the Earth are opened, and way is made for the Avolition
of them; upon that account the Superficial Parts of the Earth may be a little
cooler.

And for a like reason; we may think Cellars hotter in the Winter than the
Summer, if we judge of them by the Testimony of our Senses; since we are not
there affected with those Winds and External Agents of Cold, as in the open
Air; and therefore to one that comes out of the open Air into them, they may
seem Warmer.

But that Cellars are Colder in the Winter than the Summer, when we estimate
the degrees of them by Bodies that are not alike subject to Predispositions as
our Bodies are; will appear from what follows. And first, two sealed
Weather-Glasses being hung out in a frosty Evening, till they were both of an
Equal temper; the one of them removed into a Cellar, in two or three Hours
ascended five or fix Divisions; whilst that which remained in the Air rather
descended than rose; but in the Morning that in the Cellar descended a little,
so that the outward Air instead of Increasing rather Diminished the Heat of the
Cellar: And Oil which in thawing Weather was usually Liquid, being placed in a
Cellar in a frosty Night, was congealed; so that it would subside in other Oil:
And I have further observed, That Oil that was froze in the Cellar upon a thaw
rose instead of subsiding according to the Doctrine of Antiperistasis. And in
Poland it is observed, That in the Winter small Beer freezes in the Cellars;
and the like I have observed in England in a Cellar, which in the Summer kept
Beer cool enough. And I am told, That in Russia, the Cellars are so far from
being so Cold in Summer as in Winter, that they are forced to keep their Beer
in the Summer in Water froze with Snow, and to dig their Barrels out as they
have occasion.

But though we should allow, That some Cellars and Vaults are warmer in Winter
than Summer, yet it does not therefore follow, that it must be the Effects of
an Antiperistasis; since it may be done by the Influence of Subterraneal fires;
for which Reason deep Cellars are generally warmest: And it has been observed,
That the deepest Mines in Hungary are always the hottest; and though the upper
Region in some measure seems Cold, yet that may easily be caused by the
Predisposition of our Sensories, when out of the warm Air we find it
comparatively Colder in the top of the Groove, and in our ascent Colder in
respect of those Regions which are nearer the Influence of Subterraneal fires.
And that the lower Regions are hotter than the uppermost, is not only evident
from what has been elsewhere delivered; but from what Archbishop Vpsal has
observed in the deep Mountains in Poland, from whence they dig Rock-Salt.

And though the Heat of Springs in the Winter may be alleged by some as a cause
of Antiperistasis; yet it is easily otherwise explained, since the Subterraneal
Effluvia of the Earth, as well as the Comparative Coldness of the Air is
sufficient to solve that Phenomenon: And that the Antiperistasis is not so
powerful in the Winter, as to have any effect on the Subterraneal Parts is
evident; since Capt. James tells us, That he had a Well which remained unfroze
all Winter; so that by breaking the Ice on the top they could get fresh Water:
And it is attested by a Latin Author, That in or near the Island Hueena,
wherein the famous Tycho built his Vrani-Burgum, there is one Spring which is
not froze in Winter, and Olaus Magnus tells us, That near Nidrosia, one of the
chief Cities of Norway, there is a Lake that in that Northern Region never
freezes. And Josephus informs us of a hot Spring in Peru, from whence the
Waters issue out boiling hot; yet a Spring which is just by it is Cold as Ice;
so that the Nature of the Soil through which Bodies flow, may have a
considerable stroke in altering the Temper of the Water. And to favor what I
have said of the Reason why Springs steam in the Summer, I shall add, That it
is observed, that our Breath as well as the steams of Issues are visible in the
Winter; though not discernable in the Summer; and the very steams of a laboring
Man have been froze on the outside of his wastcoat whilst he was working. And
it is commonly observed, That the steams of a River are very apparent in the
Evenings, though not discernable at Midday in Summer.

And that the Earth is not only heated by those Subterraneal steams* but that
those Meteors which we frequently see, proceed from Subterraneal Effluvia, will
be rendered probable, by observing, That Miners usually foretell Storms and
alterations in the Air, by the damps which rise in their Mines: And in Cornwall
it is observed by the Fishermen, that those Sulphurous Exhalations which
appear like fire up and down, generally precede considerable Storms. And the
like has been observed on the Coast of Ireland, when a black Cloud like a
Barrel rising out of the Water, a violent Storm presently succeeded.

And an Anonymous Writer tells us, That in Comitatus Zotiensis in Hungary, a
Clift of Ground emits such steams, that Birds and Cats or Dogs being held over
it are killed by the steams of it: And the same Author tells us, That near the
City Buda, there are such hot Springs, that the River Danubius is not able to
keep them cool; and he tells us likewise, that in the River Istroganum, they
may discover hot Springs; by removing the sand with their feet. And I am
informed by credible witnesses, That in the North of England there is a ditch
which emits steams, which are inflamable; and probably there may be other
places which emit such kind of Effluvia, and afford matter for fiery Meteors
and Winds.

And we are told, That not only in Muscovy, a Tract of Water a Mile long
continued unfroze, when the rest was, and emitted hot steams: But Olaus Magnus
tells us of a Lake Veter, which thaws with a considerable noise, That as well
as the River Peking near China, which thaws in one Day, beginning at the bottom
and so thaws upwards; and in these thaws it is observed, That they are foretold
by a great boiling of the Water first under the Ice. And that such Effluvia
being detained from flying away, and kept up in the Earth may contribute to the
Heating of Cellars appears further; since in Muscow, when a Cellar has been
long kept shut; when first the door is opened, the steams will affect the Men
so Powerfully, as almost to suffocate them.

So that from hence it appears, That the Retention of hot Effluvia depend on a
Constipation of the Pores of the Earth; and not on the Disposition of hot
Vapors to fly away from their contrary; since we see that they have no such
Disposition, the Vapors of a Well rather dispersing themselves in the Air than
flying away from it.

But to disprove the Doctrine of Antiperistasis, further, I shall add, That a
rod of Iron, which had a piece of Iron fixed to one end of it, having that end
made red hot, and quenched in Cold Water, the Heat did not recede into the
other end, to avoid the Coldness of the Water.

But a more convincing Experiment is, That a Weather-Glass being suspended in a
wide-mouthed Glass in Water, when that Glass was placed in hot Water, the
Coldness of that in the wide-mouthed Glass, was so far from being drove upon
the Weather-Glass, that the Spirit of Wine did not in the least subside; but
when the Heat of the External Water was diffused through the other, it
manifestly rose. And this Experiment being tried with warm Water in the
wide-mouthed Glass, and Cold Water about that, the Heat was not more intense
about the Weather-Glass; but when the Cold had diffused it self through the
warm Water, the Spirit of Wine subsided.

Postscript
Though from what has been said, it appears, That the Doctrine of Antiperistasis
is not without Reason exploded; yet I shall suspend my Judgment, whether
Cellars are warmer in the Winter than the Summer or not; since the learned
Jesuit Zucchius tells us, That having suspended a Weather-Glass 3 years in a
Cellar, the Water would rise in the Winter and descend in the Summer. And
another tells us, That he knew a Well Colder in Summer than Winter, yet I am
far from believing this Observation universal; since what has been said
evinces the contrary; for, though the superficial Parts of the Earth are subject
to vary in their Temperature, as the Weather influences them; yet Subterraneal
Cavities than are very deep are neither hotter or colder in the Winter or
Summer; and though Zucchius has undertaken to measure it by the assistance of
Weather-Glasses; yet since ordinary Weather-Glasses are subject to be
influenced by the Gravity of the Air, as well as the Heat and Cold of it; and
since some places are fuller of Subterraneal Vapors than others, and
consequently the sudden ascent of Exhalations may presently increase the weight
of it, I think the following Experiment made by the learned Maignan sufficient
to balance what Zucchius has delivered, and therefore I shall deliver it in
the Authors words. Expertus ego sum (says he) Thermometro fidelissimo and a
praecedente hyeme in sequentem aestatem prorsus invariato, instructo etiam tali
aqua, nempe in hoc ipsum, ex praescripto Trebellii ita comparata ut non
exhaletur, neque minuatur, expertus inquam sum, in supradictis optimis cellis
Vinariis maximum, quod ardentissima aestate fuit, frigus non adaequasse illud
quod ibidem erat brumali tempore, ut dixi -- si quidem in Tubo vitrei
Thermometri quatuor circiter palmos longos and in octo gradus Graduumque minuta
diviso, aqua hyeme ascendit ad Gradus 7 cum semisse, aestate autem vix gradum
sextum superavit, cum tamen ad sensum multo magis vigerat frigus istud aestivum.

CHAP. VII. An Examination of Mr. Hobbes Doctrine of Cold.
Mr. Hobbes Doctrine of Cold.
Mr. Hobbes in his Doctrine of Cold tells us, That the Air being put into an
Expansive motion by the Beams of the Sun, it is beaten down upon the Surface of
the Earth; where finding a resistance below, it spreads it self every way
toward the Poles, and as the Parallel Circles grow closer toward the Poles,
so the Air being straightened and more condensed causes a greater degree of Cold.

To which he adds, That as the Air moves betwixt these Parallers, it rakes upon
the Surface of Water, more or less as the Air is more or less straightened; by
which means the Water not only tending toward its Center by its own Gravity,
but being also condensed by the rakeing Pressure of the Air, the Surface of it
is first congealed, and then it gradually descends; and for a like Reason when
Water is immersed in Snow and Salt, the Mixture melting those very Parts which
lodged in the Pores of it, they rakeing against the sides of the Glass, give it
such a motion, as when communicated to the Water contained in it causes it to
congeal. And for a Reason not unlike the former, the Particles of Air contained
in Clouds being in their descent squeezed out, rake the drops of Water in their
passage, and so harden them.

And the Reason why serene weather is Colder than rainy weather, he says is;
because the force of the Wind is broken and dissipated by the falling drops;
which Reason he likewise alleges, why Water in Wells is not froze, the Wind
not being able to beat strongly enough upon the Surface of the Water.

And as for the Reason why Ice is lighter than Water, he attributes it to Airy
Particles, forced into it whilst it is congealing.

But it may easily be urged against this Doctrine, Examined.
that all congealed Liquors, instead of having their Parts pressed inwards, and
so condensed, manifestly expand upon Congelation. And as for Animal Bodies,
such an inward endeavor of the Humors, as his Doctrine supposes, is not
requisite to produce a sensation of Cold; since a decrease of the motion of the
fluids about our Sensories, or an Impulse made upon the sensitive Parts, by
some alteration in the motion of the Blood and Spirits, or a turbulent motion
of some excrementitious Particles hindered from flying away is sufficient; so
some Hysteric Women perceive a Coldness on the top of their Heads and the
Vertebra, when they are otherwise hot; and Avicen tells us, That the biting of
some Vipers in hot Countries causes a sensation of Cold: And I know a Noble Man
who feels an extraordinary Coldness upon him, when he is seized with a fit of
the Stone. And an inward compression of the Parts of a Body is so far from
being sufficient to produce Cold, that compression in some Bodies produces Heat.

But to examine what he assigns as the Grand Cause of Cold, viz. Wind, which
according to him is Air moved in a considerable quantity, and that either
forwards only, or in an undulating motion. But against this Doctrine I have
several things to offer. And first, that several frosts are begun and continued
when the Wind is serene and calm; and that a gentle North-east-wind is much
Colder than a boisterous Southerly Wind. Secondly, That the Wind which issues
out of an Aeolopile is not Cold but Hot, though it moves more violently than the
Wind which is blown from the Mouth.
Thirdly, We have made it appear, That Water will freeze, though sealed up in a
Glass, and though that Glass be enclosed in another, so that the Wind cannot beat
upon it; and even an Egg frozen will be crusted over with Ice, when suspended
in Water, so that the External Air cannot Effect it.

And though he tells us, That all Winds produce Cold: Prosper Alpinus in his
Medicina Aegyptiorum acquaints us, that he has found the Winds in those Torrid
Regions insufferably hot. And Marcus Paulus Venetus tells us, That the Winds
near Ormus have been so hot as to destroy an Army of Men at once: And though some
Winds put into motion feel Cold, yet that depends on the Predisposition of our
Sensories, and the deeper penetration of that fluid into the Pores of the Body,
in respect of which it has a comparative Coldness; and that it is but a
comparative Coldness is evident, since the same Wind blowing upon a
Weather-Glass affects it not at all; except sometimes by accident, when, by
that means, some calorifick Atoms swimming in the Air, are driven away by it.
And though Mr. Hobbes tells us, that all Winds cool by diminishing former Heat,
yet we see, that Water actually Cold, becomes still Colder by freezing, where
the Heat cannot be said to be diminished in a Body actually Cold before.

But to proceed, though Mr. Hobbes says, that Wind is generated upon the Surface
of the Earth by the action of the Sun; yet he tells us not how that Wind must
produce Cold; nor does the motion of it toward the Poles help the matter,
since we have shown, that motion in it self is not sufficient to produce Cold;
and should he say, that the Coldness is derived from the Mixture of freezing
Vapors in it is passage, then those steams would rather be taken for the cause
of Cold, than the Wind; and then I should ask him, Whence the Coldness of those
Cold Vapors proceeded?

Besides, since in his account of the freezing of Water, he says the Parts of
the freezing Water will be raised in Congelation, I see not how it will happen;
since Oil and several other Liquors are contracted by it, and I have not yet
seen any one Instance in which Water was ever congealed by a Compression: Since
when we enclosed Water in a Pewter-Bottle and beat the sides of it together,
till the Water made its way out; we perceived not, that that powerful
compression had in the least inclined the Water to Congelation. And though we
should allow, that the Superficial Parts of the Water might be froze as Mr.
Hobbes tells us, yet I see not how the Air can beat upon Water, severed from,
it by Ice nine or ten Foot thick. Besides, I think it altogether inconceivable,
how Wind by taking upon the outside of a Glass, should cause the Water within
to freeze, since the freezing of Water is an action much different from the
putting of the Glass into a trembling motion; besides we see, that Water will
not be froze by the blowing of a strong Wind against the outside of a Glass,
though it will when enclosed in Liquors where no Wind can come at it, and those
two which are not subject to freeze themselves.

And whereas Mr. Hobbes gives it as a Reason why some Wells freeze not, because
the Wind has not liberty to blow strong enough upon the Water, I shall add,
that those Wells that are subject to be froze when Northerly or Easterly Winds
blow, will freeze, though covered over and sufficiently guarded from the Winds;
and in Cold Winters, whether the Wind blows or not. And,

Whereas Mr. Hobbes tells us, that the lightness of Ice above Water, proceeds
from the bubbles received into it whilst it is freezing; the Contrary is
evident, since Water froze in a sealed Glass, will be plentifully stocked with
bubbles as well as that which is frozen in the free Air.

Postscript
To conclude this History of Cold, I shall instead of some other Experiments
designed for this Treatise, subjoyn an Experiment elsewhere mentioned in the
History of whiteness and blackness, viz. Take a piece of Cork and having burnt
it, till it be reduced to a black Coal, and then having slacked it in fair
Water, it will, by being mixed with Gum-water, form a black Ink, which you may
write what you please with; which writing if it be interlined with a colorless
Solution of Minium in Spirit of Vinegar, upon wetting the Paper with a sponge
dipped in a fluid Liquor, prepared by mixing three Parts of Quicklime and one
of yellow orpiment, and digesting them two or three hours in sixteen Parts of
Water, the invisible Solution of Minium will exhibit black Letters, and the
other black ones will disappear; but whilst this fetid Liquor is preparing, it
must be well shaken several times, that the Quicklime and the powdered
orpiment may the better impregnate it, and then the decanted and filtred Liquor
must be kept for use.

But besides this, there are several other ways of making Ink, which I could be
glad to learn: And I my self have tried that Words might be writ with a
Solution of Minium, which I could render legible by the help of the fire.

CHAP. VIII. An account of Freezing made in December and January, 1662. By Dr.
Merret.
Several Experiments about freezing.
THE following Experiments were made in Weather which was very frosty,
continuing six weeks, yet not without some alternate Relaxations, in
Stone-Windows exposed to the North and North-East-Winds. The Vessels in which
they were tried were Glass-Canes of several Bores, Earthen and Pewter Vessels
etc.

Cold Water exposed to the Air in open Pans was froze in an hour, boiling Water
in two; boiling and Cold Water mixed in; the Cold Water beginning to freeze at
the top and and sides, but the other at the bottom; and when the Water was Cold
at the top. The same succeeded, with Water thrown upon a Table, the Cold Water
being first froze. A four ounce Vial with a Stem a Foot long and half filled,
being exhausted of Air in Vacuo Boyliano, was almost froze as soon as Water
exposed in an open Pan, and appeared white seeming to consist purely of
bubbles. Water in which Arsnick was eight Months infused, congealed into a
white Ice sooner than Water, and so did Solutions of all sorts of Vitriols; and
sooner than Solutions of other Salts; except Alum, which froze into an Ice
whiter than Milk, and stuck so fast to the Pan that I could scarce separate it.

Sandever presently freezeth, but Eris sooner, and Kelp in less time than that;
all of them forming white lumps of Ice. Sal-Armoniack frequently froze before
the rest of them, but once after them. Two drams of common Salt dissolved in
four ounces of Water was in hard frost congealed into a white Ice in about
thirty hours. Stinking Seawater full of Salt being exposed in a Beer-Glass,
was covered with a film of Ice as thick as a Crown in twenty six hours; when
froze it tasted Salt and smelled stinking; but when thawed it had lost the
fetor: In four days more the whole was froze, but that in the bottom tasted
sharper than the rest. The same Water in broad Pans was quite froze through in
thirty six hours, and sooner in a Mixture of Snow and Salt; neither a strong
Solution of Saltpeter, no^ Bay Salt, nor Sal-Armoniack were froze in six days.
But a Solution of Salt of Tartar froze in a little more time than Water; and
being exposed in a Tube it began to freeze at the bottom, top and sides all
once; whereas other Liquors freeze uniformly either at the top or bottom first.

Saltpeter in a Cold season was in twenty eight hours froze into a white Ice,
which was mistaken for Sal-Prunel, and sparkled in the fire as that Salt
usually does. A lixivium of it made with Copperas or Alum singly or mixed, set
in Snow and Salt or Snow alone, was frozen in one Night. Sal-Gem, though Snow and
Salt were mixed with it, and though it were set in Snow and Salt, would not be
brought to freeze. But Phlegm of Vitriol froze sooner than the Solutions before
mentioned

Oil of Vitriol is coagulated sooner than any of the before mentioned Liquors,
except Water; a large Tube being filled with it, and being froze, tasted of a
strong Vitriolate taste; the coagulated Part, was of a paler color than the
other, and both being poured together in a Bottle, it became too hot to hold in
one's hands, this coagulated Part remained unthaw'd a week after the rest of
the Liquors; and another Tube of the same Oil being wholly froze, it subsided
an Inch below its station to which it rose again upon a thaw, but the other
Liquors rose upon congelation.

A flask of small Beer froze in thirty eight hours, but three Parts of Ale
continued unfroze after six days hard Frost; but at four a Clock in the
morning, the unfroze Liquor tasted much stronger and brisker than before it was
froze; the Ice was less firm and fuller of bubbles than common Ice, and being
thawed was very pale and of a quick Aleish taste. A Beer-Glass of Hull-Ale
being exposed to the Cold in a Glass, in twenty four hours was crusted over
with Ice, as thick as half a Crown, and that being taken off, it yielded
another; and so successively, till the whole was froze; these Laminae were all
of the same color and taste, but the lowest was the most tender: This Ale
would not freeze so soon as that which I exposed before. Hull-Ale has a
brackish taste.

Claret exposed in a spoon, in thirty five hours was turned into a soft Ice,
which had the Genuine color and taste of Wine. In thirty eight hours Canary
exposed in a spoon was covered with a thin film, which grew no thicker in four
days. But neither Claret or Canary would freeze in Tubes or Bottles.

Two ounces of Spirit of Wine exposed in a spoon all evaporated in twelve
hours; but the same quantity of Brandy left about a spoonful of Ice void both
of taste and it is Inflammable Quality; but being held betwixt my Eye and a
candle it discovered several bubbles.

An Ox and a Sheep's Eye were both frozen through in one Night, the three
Humors being Opacous, hard and inseparable. The Chrystalline humor was white
like Whitings boiled, the waterish and glassy humor seemed to be made of
flakes of Ice.

Sheeps Blood exposed to freeze, the Serum was turned to Ice, which, being
separated from the Blood and thawed at the fire, congealed a second time into a
Membranous substance; but the Blood was not in the least froze. The Heart and
Blood in the Vena Cava of a Dog and Cat exposed dead to the Air were both
froze: Milk froze into white flakes, being soft and with few bubbles in it, and
retaining the proper taste of Milk. The yolks and Whites of Eggs were froze in
one Night, they thaw best by lying on New Castle Coals or in a deep Cellar: I
am told that Eggs, though they have been froze, will produce Chickens-Eggs held
near the Surface of the Water when froze will acquire a crust of Ice on the
outside, the inward Parts of it still remaining froze; and if those Eggs whilst
froze, be poched, they will be very tough. An Egg and an Apple being suspended
two Foot deep in a Cistern and taken up after twenty four hours, though both of
them were full of Ice within, yet neither of them had contracted Ice on the
outside.

Horse-Radishes and Onions froze, yet Beer in which Horseradish and
Scurvey-Grass are infused will not freeze so soon as strong Beer without them.
Oranges and Limons froze, have a hard and tough rind, and lose their genuine
taste; and when thawed they soon become rotten: Apples Cut in the middle, will
have a thin Ice on both plains, which may be discerned by a knife or the touch.
The skins of these Apples soon turn brown, and they begin to corrupt there. Oil
exposed looked like Butter melted and coagulated again; but in Caves and
Cellars, it would never appear more than Candied. White Wine-Vinegar froze in a
Tube without apparent bubbles. Whatever has a watery humor in it will
coagulate. But what will not, the next Paragraph contains.

Spirit of Wine, Aq. Mariae, Coelestis etc, and Canary in large Vessels,
Soap-Boilers Lees, Spirit of Salt, Vitriol, Saltpeter, Aqua fortis, Spirit of
Sulphur, and Spirit of Soot will not freeze, but the two last afford a
Precipitate; the first of the color and taste of Brimstone, but not
inflammable; the latter a yellowish powder more bitter than the Spirit and
inflammable. But though these Spirits would not freeze, yet being mixed with
twelve Parts of Water, all of them froze except Spirit of Salt, Nitre and Aqua
fortis: I am told that one having dissolved Ice in the North Seas found it Salt.

As for the figures of Liquors froze, Alum appeared in lumps, Saltpeter,
Tartar, Milk, Ale, Wine and Sal-Armoniack in plates. And other Liquors which
composed a soft Ice, seened to be composed of Globuli adhering to each others.
Water, Kelp and Frits resembled the fibers of an Oaken leaf, the interstices
being filled up with smoother Ice, and the middle Fibers, as in Plants,
appeared larger than the others, and made acute Angles at the lesser end of the
leaf. But as for the figures of frozen Urine, those having been accurately
described by the curious Mr. Hook, I shall pass that part of my task by.

I took the Salts of Rosemary, Rue, Scurvey-Grass, Mint and Plantan, and
putting or of an ounce of each into of a pint of their distilled Waters; the
Rue and Plantan being sealed up, none of them froze resembled the Plants they
belonged to; but the Aromatic Waters were much enriched in their scents,
especially the Rosemary; Kelp froze represents the leaves of Alga Marina.

A Recipient full of Water being froze and the top of the Ice broke, there
appeared a Cavity within, which was thick set with Plates of Ice from which
Stiriae appeared on each side like the Teeth of Combs, some of which stood at
such a distance that I could put my finger betwixt them.

A flask full of Water being froze it appeared full of bubbles like tailed
hail-shot, the sharp points of all of them pointing upwards. They had Cavities
which would admit a Pin into them and might be discerned in the Ice, appearing
like black spots: And in the middle of the Ice was contained a Cavity filled
with Water in which were several of these bubbles imperfectly formed.

All the Liquors I made Experiments with, did sensibly rise above the mark,
before they froze, and more after congelation. Vinegar and Urine rose an Inch,
and Lees made of Salts of Rosemary, Kelp and Frits, about of an Inch. Solutions
of Alum and Copperas less, and Saline Liquors in general less than Water,
which rose a full Inch, and small Beer in a narrow Tube four Inches. Oil of
Vitriol alone subsides below the mark, hot Water subsides till it is cool and
then rises again.

Water being froze in Beer-Glasses, rises up and forms solid Triangles, but the
rising of it is more visible in narrow Glasses: Ice in a flask rose four Inches
above the Water-mark, and hung two Inches out of it, but in a Bolt-head it rose
five Inches above the Water-mark. If Glasses be filled about full they seldom
break. Round Spherical Glasses usually break uniformly. A Bolt-head being
filled up to the neck with Water, the top which was twelve Inches above it, was
sealed up; upon which the Water being froze, was raised three Inches into the
neck; and the Glass breaking in the thinnest Part, from that point, several
Lines ran as from a Pole to the Meridian, but none of them went round the
Glass, nor were they all of the same length: In a flask cracked in many places
the cracks were irregular: Glass Bottles and stone-Jugs, kept little order in
breaking, and Metals none at all, but Woods cleave with the Grain.

Two oval Boxes, one of Box and another of Maple, containing each two ounces,
were filled full, and by the Frost in one Night were cracked from the bottom to
the top. A Pepper-Box of Latin, had its neck broke off and the joints at the
bottom loosned. Lead-Pipes above ground were broke in many places, and some
that lay a foot under ground: Brass-Locks and Barrels of Pumps usually break
with the Frost. A Copper-Box of the shape of a Pear was cracked the fourth time
it was froze. The Cylinder of a silver Ink-horn bore the Frost, but a
silverball was considerably extended by the Frost. Tobacco-Pipes and Earthen
Ware were burst with the Frost, and Tiles of Houses and stone-Buildings scale
upon a thaw; for which Reason the North side of Buildings first decay.
Alabaster and Marble that have chinks in them usually break with the Frost, but
solid Marble does not, nor does Frost affect those stones or Bitumens which
will bear a Polish.

Ice laid on a Table, and having Salt strowed upon it, it stuck so fast that it
could not be separated without being broke in pieces; and the Salt made its way
through the Ice down to the board; but if Salt be strowed betwixt the Ice and
the board, it will not be froze to it but thawed. The following Salts cause not
so firm an adhesion as common Salt, viz. Kelp, Sandever, Sal Indus, Gem,
Prunel, Armon. and Potashes. A nail held betwixt my lips could not be removed
without difficulty and Pain.

A Tincture of Cochineel with Spirit of Wine, and another with a little
Sea Salt Water, being froze throughout, retained an equal color in all Parts,
and so did a Tincture of Mades-weed, and Indico. A Decoction of Soot was froze
without any Concentration; yet Mr. Hook, a worthy Fellow of the Royal Society,
has observed the contrary effect.

Eggs and Apples-froze differed not in weight, nor do Bodies weighed in sealed
Glasses. Frost renders Wood, Iron, Steel and the Bones of Animals, more friable
in frosty Weather; especially in those that are tainted with the Lues Venerea.
Frost preserves Bodies from Putrefaction, and confirms the Tone of Animals, and
fattens some; it clears the Air, so that musty Stone-Bottles being filled with
Water and froze, after a Thaw were very sweet; it likewise destroys Animals and
Vegetables, so that in Greenland nothing but Glass grows, as also in Nova
Zembla.

The qualities of Ice.
As for the qualities of Ice, it is slippery, smooth, hard, firm and strong,
diaphanous, interposed betwixt the Eye and a Candle, appears in many round
Circles, from whence proceed Rays, in the form of a Star, a quarter of an Inch
in diameter. I have seen the Ice in the Thames eight Inches thick, and in
Gardenwalks the Earth froze near two Foot thick, but in rich Soils it did not
penetrate above a Foot and a quarter Ice generally swims, but I have seen
Snow-balls, compressed and moistened with Water, sink Congealed Oil of Vitriol
sinks. Ice is colder than Water, and that quality is increased by adding Salt
or Snow. It has no smell, but checks that quality in other Bodies. It yields
both Reflection and Refraction.

North and North-east Winds, the absence of the Sun, the highest Parts of
Mountains, a mixture of Snow and Salt, promote freezing. Water falling upon Ice
or Snow freezes, and a mixture of beaten Ice with Sea Salt, Kelp, Alum,
Vitriol, or Nitre, and Oil of Vitriol, will promote freezing; and if Water be
set upon such Mixtures, it begins to freeze at the Bottom; Salt Petre dissolved
in Water, and agitated in a cold Season, turned not the Water into Ice. A
Bolt-head being placed in Snow in a Pan, though the Pan was set on the Fire, and
thawed gradually, yet the Water in the Bolthead froze not.

Water frozen in Pans, being set on New Castle Coals in a Cellar, and likewise
on Sand, and on the Earthen Floor, they thawed in the same order; and so did
Eggs and Apples. A Siphon may be made of Ice, through which Water will run very
fast. Another use which may be made of Ice is for Refraction, of which Mr. Hook
has given a learned Demonstration.

Having formed Ice into various Figures, the (...) were the same as those
mentioned by Dioptrick Writers. We may likewise make a Speculum of it, by
holding a piece of Paper behind it;

The Learned Bartholinus delivers the following Propositions of it.

1. That the more subtle distilled Spirits gain a clear splendor and elegancy
from Snow placed about them. 2. The Rays of Snow newly fallen, glitter and
dazzle the Eyes: by reason of the multitude of Globuli, by which they are
reflected. 3. A Cabbage putrified in that part which was above the Snow. And I
have observed great Housleek, or American Aloes destroyed by Cold in an upper
Room; and Sea-Onions as well as common Onions will be putrified by the Cold. 4.
Snow yields Vapors plentifully, when melted by the Sunbeams. 5. It melts and
falls off from Ivy. 6. It contains a little Earth in it; which I have found
true by Evaporation. 7. Viscosity with Softness is greater in new than old
Snow, 8. Watercresses and Scurvy Grass will grow under Snow in Gardens; but I
am apt to believe they are at a perfect stand, the nutritious Juice being
congealed. 9. Air is included in Snow. Whites of Eggs being beaten into a
frothy Consistence, and this being laid on a Trencher, soon appeared to be
Snow. A Pail being filled with warm Water, and Hair, Moss and a piece of
Rosemary hung over it, the rising Vapors sticking to them formed a Hoar-frost,
and the like is observed on the Beards of Men, and the Hairs of other Animals.
10. Snow abounds with Fat. 11. Snow with Ice swims on Water. 12. Snow-water
boils Meat sooner, and makes Flesh whiter. I could not find that this bolds in
Fish or Flesh. 13. Snow newly fallen has no taste, but when it has lain on
the Ground, it bites the Tongue. This I could not discern. 14. Worms are
sometimes found in Snow. I could never observe this, 15. A strong Salt may be
drawn from Snow by a peculiar Art. 16. After much Snow plenty of Nuts. It
sometimes fails.
The Duke of Tuscany distilled a Spirit from Wine, only by putting Snow upon
the Alembick; and the Duke of Mantua had a Powder, which would freeze Water in
the middle of Summer.

Weather-Glasses being framed after the Italian mode, and in part filled with
tinged Spirit of Wine; I placed one of them in a North-west Window, and the
other in Mr. Pullyn's Warehouse under St. Paul's Church, in the warmest place;
the Spirit of both, when they were settled on the fifteenth of October. 62.
having the Altitude of three Inches; and when that in my Study-Window was
depressed an Inch, that in the Cellar received no manifest alteration: But when
the other was depressed two Inches, it subsided of an Inch, which was the
lowest Station it subsided to all Winter; and in April following it rose not
above the three Inches it first stood at, above of an Inch, though that in my
Study was raised four Inches. In this Cellar, Liquors that were froze above
Ground, would be thawed in the Morning, The Spirit in the Glass above ground
subsided into the Ball after two days hard Frost. Whence it appears, that
Cellars are not hotter in Winter than Summer. One thing observable was, that
the tinged Spirit had lost its Color in the Cellar.

In January, a Pint-Bottle of Claret, a Glass-Cane filled with Canary, a
Solution of Sal Gem. Train-Oyl, and the Oil of fructus Musae, in a Night's time
were all froze, except the Sal Gem, in the bottom of which chrystallized Salts
appeared. The Oil of the Fruit became very friable, and of a milky-white
Color, but the Train Oil only lost its fluidity, and became of the consistence
of soft Grease. And the same Night, a Bottle of Rhenish Wine, and another of
strong White Wind, were for the most part froze, the Ice tasting weaker than
the Wine; but the Wine being several times froze and thawed again, neither lost
any thing of its Color, Taste, or Strength.

Mr. Hook showed me an oval Glass, which had at one end a narrow Cane an Inch
long, in which Water tinged with Cochineel being froze, the Ice on the outside
was colorless, but in the middle of a deep Tincture; and I have observed the
like in Flasks containing the same Tincture froze.

Flesh, Fish, Eggs, and Apples, being held near the surface of Water, and
immersed in it, are crusted over with Ice; and I have observed that Mortar and
Plaster of Paris will freeze.

I have seen Ice three Yards thick on the Banks of Thames, the Water which
flowed successively over the Ice being froze, and gradually thickening it; and
I have froze a whole flask full of Water, by gradually pouring it into a Pan;
which confirms what Olearius says of making huge heaps of Ice to preserve
Bodies.

Though my Lord Verulam tells us, that Eggs and Apples covered with a wet Cloth
will not freeze; yet I have not observed any difference betwixt them and others.

Oils of Animals, and vegetable Oils by Expression, subside. Syrups freeze not.
Cold affects not Loadstones sensibly in their Operations. Having exposed
distilled Waters of Plantan, Poppies, black Cherries, Nightshade,
Scurvy Grass, and Horseradish to the Cold, in order to make a Standard for
Weather-Glasses, I observed that the Black-cherry-water was froze first, and
the Horseradish and Scurvygrass Waters last. The best way to discover when
Liquors begin to freeze first is, by drawing a Pin through the surface of those
Liquors.

CHAP. IX. A new Frigorifick Experiment, showing how a considerable degree of
Cold may be suddenly produced without the help of Snow, Ice, Hail, Wind, or
Nitre, any time of the year; comunicated in the Transactions of July 18. 1666.
Cold produced by a mixture of Sal-Armon. and Water.
IF a pound of powdered Sal Armoniack be mixed gradually with three pints of
Water, and the Liquor be stirred with a stick or a Whale-bone; whilst the Salt
is dissolving, it will produce a considerable degree of Coldness; which will
not only be sensible to the touch; but if it be contained in a Silver Tankard,
the outside of it will be covered over with a multitude of little drops of
Condensed Vapors, as high as the Mixture reaches; and if some of it be quite
wiped off, before the Mixture has lost its virtue, it will again be covered
over with dew. And if the Ball of a sealed Weather-Glass be immersed in it, the
tinged Liquor will presently descend, lower than it did in common Water, and
upon a Removal of it into the Air again or common Water, the spirit will
manifestly ascend.

And this Coldness is more or less lasting, as the seasons of the Air
contribute to its Coldness, and as the Quantity of the Salt in proportion to
the Water is greater or less; or as it varies in Goodness; or as the Salt is
put in in grosser Powder, and more leisurely. And the degrees of Cold may
easily be discovered, by frequently immerging, and removing a Weather-Glass out
of it into Water, and from the latter into it again. Whether Sal Armoniack
mixed with Sand or Earth will cool Drink better than without, when the Mixture
is sprinkled with Water, I have not yet tried. But I have found the
aforementioned Mixture cool Liquors conveniently enough after Midsummer.

March 27. A sealed Weather-Glass being immersed in Water, the Spirit that
rested at 8 1/^ Inches, descended to 7 ^/8; and then the Sal-Armon. being put
in, within a quarter of an hour, it descended to 2 1/^ Inches, and before that
time, it began to condense the Vapors on the outside of the Glass. And when
the frigorifick Mixture was coldest, Water placed thin on the outside would be
froze in a quarter of a Minute. About 3/^ of an hour after the Salt was put in,
the tinged Liquor being removed out of Water into it, subsided an Inch below
the freezing Mark. At 2 hours after the first Solution it was at 5 Inches, or
4, which Mark the Liquor stood at, in hard and lasting Frosts in the Winter.
Three hours after the first Dissolution, the Liquor stood at the uppermost
freezing Mark. In trying of which Experiment it was observable, that some Water
being shed, it froze the Cucurbite to the Table it stood on.

In another Experiment, before the Weather-Glass was put in, it stood at 8, but
when immersed in Water it sunk to 7 or 6/8; in half a quarter of an hour in the
frigorifick Mixture it subsided to 7, and in an hour below 5, and consequently
within a quarter of the lowest freezing Mark.

Salt which once has been dissolved, may, by being crystallized in an Iron
Vessel, be fit for use again. So March 29. the Thermoscope, which in the Air
stood at 8, in Water subsided to 8, and in the frigorifick Mixture made of
Salt, twice used before, it subsided to 4 Inches; but upon an addition of fresh
Water, it rose gradually.

CHAP. X. Of the positive and privative Nature of Cold.
Arguments alleged in favor of its positive nature answered.
BEfore I proceed to enumerate what Arguments may be alleged either for the
positive or privative Nature of Cold, I shall briefly intimate, that the word
Cold may be either considered in reference to the effect such Bodies have upon
the Sensory, or upon other Bodies: If in the latter, then in frosty Weather the
Sun may be said to warm the Air, because it enables it to melt the Snow, and
thaw Ice, as on the contrary, warm Water is said to be cold in respect of a
Hand that is much hotter.

The first Argument.
But to pass on to Arguments in favor of the positive nature of Cold: The first
Argument alleged is, The considerable Effects it has both upon the Sensory
and other Bodies; so that we may sum our Argument up in the words of
Gassendus. Ii sunt frigoris effectus, quales habere Privatio, quae actionis est
incapax, non potest. To which it is answered, That Heat and Cold depending only
on a greater or less degree of motion of the parts of Matter, than those about
our Sensory; and all Perceptions being carried to, and distinguished in the
Brain, and being various, as that Motion is different, and it being likewise
considered, that when one Body communicates Motion to another, it loses of its
own; it will follow, that when I take a piece of Ice into my Hand, and it is
dissolved by the motion communicated to its Parts, the motion which the Humors
in my hand lost, by putting those of the Water into motion; induces a sensation
of Cold; and consequently there seems to be a privation of that motion which
before caused Heat.

The second Argument.
Another Argument alleged for the positive Nature of Cold, is this from
Gassendus. Cum per hyemem immittimus manum in labentis fluminis Aquam, quod
frigus in ea sentitur, non potest dici mera privatio, aliudque prorsus esse
apparet, sentiri aquam frigidam and sentiri non calidam. Et fac eandem aquam
gelari, sentietur haud dubie frigidior; an dices boc esse nihil aliud quam
minus calidam sentiri? Atqui calida jam antea non erat, quomodo ergo potuit
minus calida effici? To which it is answered, That our Sensories may mis-inform
us; as when a Stick is partly immersed in Water, should we judge of it by what
appears to our Senses, we should conclude it broke; but our Reason rectifying
the Error of our Senses, we are satisfied it is not: Besides Sensations may
depend on alterations in the internal Parts, as well as on the impressions of
outward Objects, as in Hunger, Thirst, Coldness in Agues, and Titilation upon
venereal Thoughts; besides which Argument, that urged against the former
Objection, may be offered against this. And since Water is not so cold as Ice,
it may in a Philosophical Sense be said to be comparitively warmer, and though in
respect of the Humors of our Body it be cold, yet by the same reason we might
conclude warm Water cold, when the Hand is removed out of hot Water into it.

A third.
But in favor of the positive nature of Cold, it is further offered, that Cold
is sometimes introduced into Bodies not hot before.

To which it is answered, That since Fluidity consists in an agitation of the
insensible Parts of a Body, and Heat in a tumultuary one; those Bodies into
which Cold is introduced by Congelation, differ whilst they are fluid, only in
degrees of motion from Heat; and even when Water is froze it is not absolutely
and perfectly cold; since the Ball of a Weather-Glass being immersed in a Glass
of Water, and taken out when the Water was froze about it (the Glass having
been before tallow'd over, to make it part with the Ice) the Ice being broken
off the Ball of the Weather-Glass, the Air which was colder caused the Liquor
to subside. And that there may be sensible Perceptions of several degrees of
Privation of the impressions of outward Objects appears, since we perceive a
sensible privation of Light when the Moon is eclipsed nine Digits, and a more
sensible one when it is totally darkened.

But though I argue for the privative nature of Cold, yet I would not be thought
to mean, that an absolute Privation of Motion is the cause of it, and by which
it is affected; for I rather think them the occasion, than the efficient cause;
the motion of the Blood and Humors being differently modifyed, upon a
privation of their motion, and consequently a different Sensation impressed
upon the Sensory; and that a Privation of the motion of some Parts of matter
about our Sensory may occasion a new Determination of the Motion of those
Fluids, may be inferred from easy Observations; for a Tennis-Ball is variously
determined in its motion according to the Angle of Incidence upon another Body;
and though the Arches of a Bridge be quiescent Bodies, yet by throwing the Water
together, they render its Stream violent enough to turn Mills; and even the
rapid motion of a Bullet may receive a new determination of its motion, by
striking upon the surface of the Water, if, when it was first discharged, it
made a sharp Angle with the Water, so that its Angle of Incidence might not be
too blunt; and that various effects may ensue a Privation of some principal
cause of former Events, appears further from observing, that by stopping the
motion of Water, a Mill presently ceases to move, though no positive violence be
offered to it: And upon a relaxation of the violence of Wind, all that was
performed by the Mill presently ceases for want of Wind: And in Paralytick
cases, a viscous or narcotic Humor obstructing or disaffecting one part of a
Nerve, so that Spirits cannot freely circulate through it, occasions several
odd and terrible Symptoms: And Animals included in an Air-Pump dye barely by a
privation of Air, though nothing else is present to disaffect them. And even
Insects, though void of motion upon a privation of Air, yet when it is again let
into them, they move about as the advantages of their Species enables them; so
that from what has been said it appears, that a privation of the Agitation of
the Humors may occasion a contrary, and probably the effects ascribed to Cold.

A fourth.
The next Argument alleged by Gassendus and to be considered is this. Fac
manuum immitti in aquam nunc calidam, nunc frigidam, quamobrem manus intra
istam, non intra illam refrigeratur? An quia Calor manus intra frigidam
retrabitur, manusque proinde relinquitur calida manus? At quidnam calor
refugit, quod intra frigidam reperiatur nonne frigas? At si frigus est Tantum
Privatio, quidnam calor ab illa metuit? Privatio sane nihil est, atque adeo
nihil agere, unde ejus motus incutiatur, potest. But without supposing
insensible matter to be in the least capable of proscecuting or avoiding what
is hurtful to it; this Objection is easily answered; for the Reason why warm
Water feels hot; and cold affects us upon immerging our hand in it, is, because
the Parts of the one is more, and the Parts of the other less agitated than
those about the Sensory, and the motion of Humors about our Sensory; being
increased we feel a hot sensation; and a cold one upon a Privation of that
motion.

A fifth.
And though it be urged by some in favor of the positive Nature of Cold, that
Water is froze by externally applying to the outside of a Glass a Mixture of
Snow and Salt; yet to show that Argument proves not that Cold acts positively,
I shall add the following explication of des Carts. Quia materia subtilis,
partibus bujus aquae circumfusa crassior aut minus subtilis, and consequenter
plus virium habens, quam illa quae circa nivis parts herebat, locum illius
occupat, dum parts nivis liquescendo partibus salis circumvolvuntur. Facilius
enim per salsae aquae quam per dulcis poros movetur, and perpetuo ex corpore
uno, in aliud transire nititur, ut ad ea loca perveniat in quibus mortui suo
minus resistitur, quo ipso materia subtilior ex nive in aquam penetrat, ut
egredienti succedat, and quum non satis valida fit, ad continuandam agitationem
hujus aquae illam concrescere sinit. And in a similar manner Calces or
Precipitates, or other Powders, are dried by being placed on a piece of Paper,
not that that acts positively upon them, but imbibes the moisture. And I have
seen a Cold Liquor acquire a hardness, its moisture being imbibed by a piece of
Bread immersed in it; as also Spirit of Wine dephlegmed by a Mixture of Salt of
Tartar, without so much as Heat, the Aqueous Parts finding a more ready and
easy passage into the Pores of the Alkaly, than through the Spiritous Liquor.
And I know a saline Body, which when incorporated with Water, the Water will
leave this a consistent mass, and be imbibed by the Spirit of Wine. And for a
further illustration of the Cartesian Explication, I shall add, that Camphire
by floating upon Aqua fortis will become a fluid Oil, and continue in that form
till the subtle Spirit, which, by pervading it, kept it fluid, flies away and
evaporates; for being put into Water, the Spirit leaving the Camphire, and
being imbibed into the Pores of the Water, it becomes a consistent mass again,
which, that it depended not on the Coldness of the Water was evident, since the
same would happen on warm Water. But though Cold should depend primarily on the
influence of frigorifick Atoms, yet since those by acting on the Body cooled,
may produce their effect by expelling calorifick Atoms, the privation of those
calorifick Atoms, is the cause of freezing; so though a Bullet kills a Man, yet
the issue is a privation of life; and when a Room is darkened by extinguishing
the light, the darkness depends on the privation of light.

A sixth.
The last Argument of Gassendus is this, Tametsi multa videantur ex sola caloris
absentia frigescere, nibil ominus nisi frigus extrinsicus inducatur, non tam
profecto frigescere quam decalescere sunt Censenda. Esto enim Lapis, Lignum,
aut aliquid aliud, quod nec calidum nec frigidum sit, id ubi fuerit ad motum
Igni calefiet sane, at cum deinceps calor excedet, neque frigidum ullum
circumstabit, non erit cur dicas ipsum frigefieri, potius quam minus calidum
fieri rediere in suum statum.

But to this it may be answered, that if we speak of Coldness with respect to
sense, I see not why any Body that grows hot by the action of the fire may not
be said, to grow Cold rather than Decalescere, since Heat being only too brisk
an agitation for our Sensory, when upon a removal of that Cause, and a
declining of that motion, it became less agitated than the Humors about our
Sensory, we may not then say it grows Colder and Colder till it become Ice.

But to conclude this Chapter, I shall add, that though I have offered these
Arguments against Gassendus, yet I shall wave determining the Controversy till
further satisfied in some Speculations, and in the Phenomenon of some
Particular Experiments; besides I would first know, from those that would have
Cold to be a positive Quality, whether and on what account those little
fragments of matter are Cold, Whether their frigorifick Atoms have weight? As
also what is their Texture, and whether that Quality may be destroyed; and
whether they be primitive Bodies or not? And why Coldness ensues the Mixture of
two warm Bodies. And in order to the solving of some of which it would be
requisite to enquire, how Water comes by its expansive force upon congelation?
And since Cold is a Privation of motion, why upon the Mixture of certain Bodies
Cold ensues, though their Parts be thereby put into motion.

CHAP. XI. Two Problems about Cold. An attempt to measure the great expansive
force of freezing Water: Of the Production of Cold by the conflict of Bodies
appearing to make an Ebullition.
The first Problem.
THE first Problem I shall propose is; how upon the Mixture of two or three
Bodies, there should ensue a great and tumultuary agitation of small Parts, and
yet even during this conflict, not any sensible Heat; but a considerable degree
of Cold be produced. Concerning which I shall only propose the question,
whether local motion be not Generical; and whether the figure and size of Parts
variously moved may not be able to cause a sensation of Heat, and when
variously modified, a sense of Cold; or whether the sense of Cold depends not
on some frigorifick Atoms which are let lose in the Ebullition and affect the
Sensory, which would otherwise perceive a hot sensation by the effects of the
motion of those Parts, with which cold Aoms are mixed, and which they
overpower.

The second Problem.
The second Problem is, Whence the vast force of freezing Water proceeds? For
since Cold depends on an Imminution of local motion; it is not a little strange
how it should be able to break resisting Bodies, which require local motion to
separate their Parts. And though Gassendus tells us, that they proceed from the
ingress of frigorifick Atoms; yet till Glaciation succeeds, notwithstanding
Water grows colder gradually, it subsides and does not expand: And Spirit of
Wine, and Chemical Oils, the greater degree of Cold they are exposed to
contract the more; and some Oils even when coagulated are condensed instead of
being expanded. And as for what the Cartesians offer for the removal of these
difficulties, it may well be questioned how their Eel-like Particles being
relaxed and their spring weakened, they should be able to expand in spite of
Opposition. So that considering that Water when expanded is full of bubbles, I
was apt to suspect, that the Air contained in them contributed to the effect,
and that a constipation of the Pores of Water might give them a springiness.

The great expansive force of Water froze.
To try the expansive force of freezing Water, we conveyed a Bladder full of
Water into a Brass Cylinder, and fitting a Plugg to it, upon that we placed a
flat Board to hold Weights on, and then the Cylinder being encompassed with a
frigorifick Mixture, upon the freezing of the Water, in one Experiment the
Plugg raised 115 pound, weight and in another 100 pound Averdupois, and in a
third 254 pound weight.

Three saline Bodies, each purified by the fire, being mixed together, Of the
Production of Cold.
produced a cold Effervescense with a hissing noise and a considerable
Intumescense. And in the mean time the Glass which contained it would grow
colder than before, and gather a Dew on the outside, which would reach as high
as the Mixture; but on the concave bottom of the Glass there was no Dew, that
being not sufficiently exposed to the Air; so that the Mixture could not be
supposed to sweat through the Pores of the Glass, since it tasted not in the
least of saline Ingredients: But least our Senses should misinform us of the
degrees of Cold, in this Mixture, we at another time immersed a Weather-Glass,
in which the Liquor subsided above four Inches lower than in common Water. Though
the Acid Liquor it self, being kept all Night in a Room with Water, was of the
same temper with it, which appeared by a Weather-Glass immersed in both
successively. And the Salt it self being cast into Water scarce made it
sensibly colder; nor did the Glass wherein this Salt was kept disclose any
remarkable degree of Coldness. And even the frigorifick Mixture it self, when
the Ebullition was over, appeared not colder than common Water in a Night's
time; so that the Coldness depended purely upon the Texture of the fermenting
Liquor.

And to this I shall add, that though I made use of a Spirit that was drawn off
at the same time with this Salt, and which in the Judgment of my senses
appeared to be of the same kind, yet instead of a cold Ebullition, it produced
a Lukewarm Heat. And to these I shall further subjoyn, that though the Liquor
above mentioned would produce a cold Ferment with the dry Salt, yet with the
Spirit it grew warm; though some of the same frigorifick Spirit kept warm by the
fire till the Liquor in the Weather-Glass rose, yet upon the injecting of some
of the dried Salt it would be manifestly depressed. Nay, tho the Spirit and
Salt were both warm, yet upon their Mixture they would produce a manifest
Coldness.

And to this Experiment I shall add, that Salt of Tartar mixed with Spirit of
Vinegar produced, upon their Ebullition, a degree of Coldness greater than that
of Water, and when a Weather-Glass was removed out of Water into it an hour
after the ferment, the Spirit was depressed about half an Inch; though Salt of
Potashes mixed with Spirit of Vinegar produced Heat, as appeared by the same
Weather-Glass successively immersed in either.

CHAP. XII. Of the Mechanical Origin or Production of Heat.
Of the mechanical Production of Heat.
HEAT being a quality whose nature seems to consist in a mechanical Motion of
the Parts of the Body said to be hot, it may be requisite to note, that the
three following Conditions are necessary in modifying that Motion.

First, That the Motion be more rapid than in Bodies barely fluid; so Water
becomes hot by an increase of the motion of its Parts, which argue their
vehement motion by dissolving Butter, and rising in the form of Vapors: Which
effects are more conspicuous as the degree of Motion is greater or less.
Another Instance to show that the Parts of hot Water are in a more violent
agitation than those of cold, is in Water cast upon a hot Iron; for they
presently acquire such an additional Motion from that hot Body, that it hisses
and boils, yielding Steams copiously. But a stronger instance of the vehement
Agitation of the parts of hot Bodies is in actual Flame, since they move so
impetuously as to dissolve and shatter whatever lies in their way.

A second Condition requisite to render a Body hot, is, that the motion of its
Parts be variously determined; which variety of Determination is apparent in
Fire, which produces the same effects on the same Bodies, whatsoever is their
Situation in respect of that Fire; so a red Coal melts Wax, whether held
above, below, or on one side of it; and that a variously determined Motion is
requisite, appears, if we observe that the rapid motion of Water in a River
which is only one way, contributes not to the increase of its heat.

A third requisite is, that the Parts in such a Motion should be very minute,
so as to be insensible; since it is manifest, that though Sand be put into a
violent motion, it acquires not a heat by it.

This account of heat being considered, it will appear, that a Body may become
hot as many ways as it is capable of having its parts put into such a Motion:
To illustrate which Observation, I shall subjoin some instances of the
Production of Heat several ways; as first by an effusion of Oil of Vitriol upon
Salt of Tartar, Aq. fortis upon Silver.

But to pass over these common Instances, I shall proceed to some not so
frequently known, having first taken notice of the Heat which succeeds an
effusion of cold Water upon Quicklime, which Phenomenon, though it be commonly
held to be an effect of an Antiperistasis, upon the enclosure of the Lime in
cold Water, yet that the effect is produced by another cause appears, since the
like succeeds if hot Water be made use of instead of Cold; and further,
because, though Oil of Turpentine be poured on it cold, no such Effect follows.

EXPERIMENT I.
Though Helmont ascribes the Incalescence of Quicklime upon an Affusion of
Water, to a conflict of an Alkalizate and an acid Salt, set at liberty by being
dissolved in the Water; yet since no such acid appears to be latent in
Quicklime, the account is unsatisfactory: For I might as well suppose an Acid
latent in other Alkalies, in as much as Salt of Tartar mixed with Water, either
in the Palm of ones Hand or in a Vial, affords a sensible Heat.

EXPERIMENT II, III, IV.
Others think that the cause of the Heat of Quicklime proceeds from some fiery
Empyrumatical Atoms lodged in the substance of the Stone, when calcined, and
set at liberty in the form of Effluvia; but this Hypothesis is not without some
difficulties, since no such Heat succeeds an affusion of Water upon Minium, or
Crocus Martis per se, though their increase of weight argues that they are
stuffed with fiery and metalline Particles: To which I shall add, that I knew
two Liquors, which being several times separated, and reconjoined without
addition, did at each Congress acquire a sensible heat; so Salt of Tartar
several times freed from Water, The effects of a mixture of Salt of Tartar and
Water.
will produce Heat when mixed again with that Water; which shows that the
violence of the Fire is not requisite to impress upon all calcined Bodies that
will heat with Water, what passes for an Empyreum. And this Phenomenon I am
apt to believe proceeds from a disposition of the Texture of the Salt being
stocked with store of igneous Parts, which upon an ingress of Water pressed
into the Pores of the Body, by the weight of the Atmosphere, are apt to break
the Texture of that Body, and to put them in motion, so as to produce a
sensible Heat. And that the Ferment depends upon the peculiar Texture of the
Salt, I am persuaded, and a constipation of the Pores of it; since Sal-Armon.
dissolved in Water and boiled to a dry Salt, was not so much impregnated with
fiery Parts, as to cause a Heat upon its mixture with Water again, but a
considerable degree of Cold; and though one would expect a greater cognation
betwixt the Particles of fire adhering to Quicklime, and Spirit of Wine wholly
inflammable; yet the latter poured upon the former did not produce any sensible
incalescence, or dissolution of it; and when this Spirit was soaked into it, I
poured Water upon it, without perceiving the least Heat or the Lime broken,
till within a few hours after; so that the Spirit being sucked into the most
capacious Pores of the Lime, and associating with the Water, rendered it more
unfit to penetrate the minuter Pores, and to dissolve the Lime.

EXPERIMENT V.
Quicklime being immersed in Spirit of Wine in a Retort, and the Spirit and
Phlegm drawn off, the remaining Quicklime, instead of being slacked, was a
more fiery substance than before, for if a piece of it was thrown into Water it
would hiss like a Coal, and heat the Liquor; which property it retained several
weeks, being kept close from the Air. Whence it appears how much the Texture of
Quicklime, and the association of the Spirit of Wine improving that Texture,
contribute to the Phenomenon offorded by Quicklime; and that the Spirit of
Wine was associated with the Quicklime is probable, since Part of it became a
Spiritless Phlegm; and I have observed, Quicklime and Spirit of Wine sometimes
to come over in white fumes. To which I shall add, that in such distillations
the Odor of the Spirit has not only been changed, but its taste rendered more
fiery, and brisk: But the success is not always the same; being diversified
according to difference of the Quicklime, which may be more or less calcined;
or the stone may be of a different nature it self.

EXPERIMENT VI.
But to proceed to other Experiments which show, that Heat may be produced
mechanically. A nail hastily hammered grows hot, the Parts of the metal being
by that force vehemently and variously determined; though the hammer and Anvil be
not warm; so that hence it appears, that it is not requisite a calorifick Body
should be hot it self, the Hammer being able, though cold, to warm the Iron it
beats upon; and so the head of a nail grows hot, when it can pierce no deeper
into wood, the force of the beating Hammer being not spent in depressing the
nail, but putting the resisting Parts into agitation.

EXPERIMENT VII.
And once I caused a piece of Iron to be beaten by three Smiths, till it grew
so hot as to kindle Sulphur upon it.

EXPERIMENT VIII.
And that Heat may be produced by percussion and attrition appears further,
since Iron grows hot by being boiled, a knife by whetting, a Brass nail by
being rubbed, and flints by being struck together.

EXPERIMENT IX.
To show that Heat may be produced without the attrition of contiguous Air, I
placed pitch under Water; and by the Sunbeams cast into a Focus by a burning
Glass upon it, it was not only melted, but seemed to boil and smoke.

EXPERIMENT X.
The Powder of slacked Quicklime, washed from its Salts, being mixed with
Sal-Armoniack and melted together, the cold mass being put into a Glass, upon
an affusion of Water, grew too hot to be touched with ones hand, though the
Sal-Armoniack it self in Water produces Cold.

EXPERIMENT XI.
Sal-Armoniack and filings of Steel being sublimed together, the Caput Mortuum
in which the greatest Part of the Salt remained, instead of increasing the
coldness of Water, being poured upon it several Months after the Caput Mortuum
was first laid up; gave the Water a notable degree of Heat.

EXPERIMENT XII.
Equal Parts of Antimony and Sal-Armoniack being sublimed with several degrees
of Heat in a Glass-Vessel, we obtained three several substances; which being
severally powdered; the Caput Mortuum which was like Antimony, being put into
Water in which a Thermoscope was immersed, scarce raised the Liquor sensibly:
But the yellow sublimate which consisted of the Sulphurous flowers of Antimony
and the more Volatile Salts of the Sal-Armoniack, caused the Weather-Glass in
another parcel of Water to descend a quarter of an Inch, and the lower
sublimate which was black, being put into a third parcel of Water the Liquor in
the Weather-Glass subsided near three Inches. But the like Experiments being
tried with the Caput Mortuum of Minium and Sal-Armoniack, it neither caused the
Liquor in the Weather-Glass to rise or fall; but the sublimate raised from
these ingredients, caused the Liquor to subside a little.

EXPERIMENT XIII.
Whether Solvents dissolve Minerals, and cause that Heat observable in their
Action, by any Antipathy betwixt the Mineral and the Menstruum, or whether it
did not rather proceed from the violent agitation of the parts of the Metal,
either dissolved by the insinuation of its parts into the Pores of the Metal,
or by obstructing the passage of some ethereal Matter through those Pores,
which wanting its usual course dissolves the Metal, by forcing a new way, I
shall not undertake to determine; but having agitated Oil of Vitriol with four
times its weight of Water, thereby it obtained a sensible Heat; from which
Experiment it appears, that the Heat produced by Minerals depends not on a
conflict of Acid and Alkalies, since Water is void of either of those chemical
qualities.

EXPERIMENT XIV.
If a piece of wet Ice be thrown into a Viol, which before contained Oil of
Vitriol, the Oil mixing with the Water dissolves the Ice, and causes a strong
Fermentation, and a violent Heat.

EXPERIMENT XV.
Half an ounce of Spirit of Wine being mixed with an ounce of Oil of Vitriol,
acquired a considerable degree of Heat presently, and almost most filled the
Bottle with Fumes; and the Bottle grew so hot at the last that I could not hold
it in my Hand. The like Succeeded, only in a more remiss Degree, with common
Brandy; and also with Aqua Vitae.

EXPERIMENT XVI.
Though the Chemists teach, that the Incalescence of Bodies depends on an
Antipathy of the mixed Bodies, yet I found an intense Heat ensue the Mixture of
Parts of the same Bodies; viz. Calcined Colcothar, and Oil of Vitriol.

EXPERIMENT XVII.
Oil of Vitriol and Oil of Turpentine mixed together, produce a considerable
degree of Heat.

EXPERIMENT XVIII.
An ounce of rectified Petroleum being mixed with an equal weight of Oil of
Vitriol, the former Liquor seemed to work upon the surface of this, like a
Menstruum upon Metal; the Fumes of the Oil of Vitriol rising into the Ol.
Petrae; and the mutual re-action of both the Liquors caused a moderate
Warmness. And we had almost the like success with Petroleum, and Spirit of
Nitre. But in these last mentioned Trials, Spirit of Salt made use of instead
of Oil of Vitriol had no such considerable Effects.

EXPERIMENT XIX.
Oil of Vitriol caused a considerable Effervescence upon Filings of Steel;
especially if they be soaked in Water: And it will grow sensibly hot with Lime,
Oyster-shells, Chalk, Lapis Calaminaris, etc.

EXPERIMENT XX.
Oil of Vitriol grows hot with Cherries, and likewise with Raisins of the Sun
beat in a Mortar, as well as with several other Vegetable Substances, and very
considerably with Crumbs of white Bread.

EXPERIMENT XXI.
Oil of Vitriol causes a considerable Heat if mixed with minced Flesh.

EXPERIMENT XXII.
Though Sea Salt imparts a Coldness to Water, yet with Oil of Vitriol it causes
Heat; yet with Sal Armon. part of which consists of common Salt, it produces a
Coldness.

EXPERIMENT XXIII.
Common Sulphur acquired a Heat by attritition, and emitted sulphurous Steams
copiously; so that Sulphur it self, as well as other Bodies, ows its Heat to
local Motion.

EXPERIMENT XXIV.
Equal parts of Sal Armon. and Quicklime being fluxed together, an ounce of
the Powder put into Water, caused a violent Heat, though Sal Armon. it self
produces Cold.

EXPERIMENT XXV.
We observed that beaten Sublimate being mixed with powdered Antimony, after it
had stood some time in the Air, the Mixture grew sensibly hot, which
Phenomenon I attribute in part to the Moisture imbibed from the Air, since it
is requisite to make the Experiment succeed, that it should be exposed in a
moist Cellar.

EXPERIMENT XXVI.
Trials have assured me, that in Summer, fine Sulphur and Filings of Steel
being mixed together in Water, will grow intensely hot, if stirred about an
hour after they are mixed; and will likewise emit Steams copiously.

EXPERIMENT XXVII.
Several Trials have convinced me, that a Mercury may be so prepared as to
afford an Incalescence with Gold.

EXPERIMENT XXVIII.
Having distilled from Quicksilver four times its weight of Oil of Vitriol,
and by that means reduced it to a Powder, which upon the account of the Salts
of the Menstruum was white and glistering, and being put into Water in which a
Weather-Glass was immersed, it caused the Spirit to rise manifestly; which is
the more remarkable, because Helmont observes, that the Salt adhering to the
Mercury, corroded in a good quantity, by Oil of Vitriol, if it be washed off
and coagulated, becomes a kind of Alum. And this Phenomenon is still the more
remarkable, because Vitriolum Martis made with Oil of Vitriol and Filings of
Steel, being put into Spirit of Wine, was not impelled up as by the former
Mixture, but after a while rather subsided. Common Sublimate dissolved in
Water, neither sensibly depressed or raised the Spirit of Wine.

CHAP. XIII. Of Mercury growing hot with Gold, communicated in the Transactions
of Feb. 21. 1675/6.
Of Mercury growing hoe with Gold.
HAving obtained a Mercury fine and clean, and even purged by Sublimations and
Distillations, and incorporated a multitude of heterogeneous Particles with it,
so that they could not be discovered, and much less separated, except by a
skilful Artist; I mixed sometimes half and sometimes an equal quantity of Calx
of Gold with this Mercury, in the Palm of my Hand, stirring and pressing it
with the Finger of my other Hand, by which means the Ingredients being mixed,
they grew sensibly hot in a Minute; and I observed, that when they were mixed
in equal quantities, they would produce a much greater degree of Heat, than if
their Proportion was not exact. And the like success ensued, when the Mixture
was preserved from being contiguous to the Skin, by being contained in a piece
of Paper, laid betwixt my Hand and it; and the same succeeded in the Hands of
other Persons. But with Silver, it would not produce an Incalescence.

But though this Mercury grows hot with Gold, yet I much question, whether, as
Chemists call them, Mercurii Corporum, made by extraction from Minerals and
Metals, will grow hot with Gold, as I found Antimonial Mercury did. And I am
far from affirming, that that which is called Philosophic Mercury, or even
those obtained from Gold and Silver are fitter for such uses, than common
Mercury skilfully purged and impregnated with the subtle and active Particles
of congruous Metals and Minerals.

To what has been said of this Mercury, I shall add, that it preserves its
quality of growing hot with Gold two or three Years, and though it be distilled
from Gold again and again. And whereas its usual to take eight or ten parts of
Quicksilver to make an Amalgama with Gold; this Mercury would do it, being
used in an equal Proportion.

As for the manner of preparing this Mercury, I don't think it convenient to
publish it, only this I shall say, that it may be made more ways than one, and
without employing. Antimony, or such solid Metals as Mars. But that of ours, I
observed, succeeded best, in the production of Heat, by being mixed with
Quercetanus's Calx of Gold, viz. by melting Gold with three or four parts of
Silver; for by putting this into Aq. fortis the Silver will be dissolved, and
the Gold remain in the form of a Calx. But lest an Incalescence, produced by
such a Calx, should be supposed to proceed from saline Particles of the Aq.
fortis working on the Quicksilver, I shall add, that it will not produce such
an effect on common Quicksilver; but ours will cause an Incalescence even with
pure Leaf-Gold.

CHAP. XIV. New Experiments to make Fire and Flame ponderable.
EXPERIMENT I.
A Thin Plate of Copper being placed in a Crucible, which had a Hole on purpose
in the bottom of it, this Crucible was inverted into another, which contained
flaming Sulphur, so that the Copper-Plate was exposed to the Flame of it. In
two Hours the Sulphur being consumed, the Copper-Plate was manifestly swelled;
and though its Weight at the first was but a Dram and a half and twenty five
Grains, yet it became thirty two Grains heavier, which is about a fifth part
above its former Weight.

EXPERIMENT II.
Refined Silver being placed over the Flame of Sulphur after the same manner as
the Copper was, in an Hour and a half weighed one Dram five Grains and three
quarters; its weight before being a Dram wanting two Grains. Whether it depends
on the closeness of the Metal, and incongruity of the Pores, that Silver
acquires not proportionably so great a weight as Copper, I shall leave to the
Reader to consider: But from these Experiments it appears, that the Corpuscles
of Fire, like other Menstruums, may be united with the Bodies it works upon.

EXPERIMENT III and IV.
An ounce of Copper Plates, being kept in a shallow crucible in a Cuppelling
Furnace two hours, weighted thirty grains more than before. But an ounce of
filings, in three hours time, were caked into a lump, and weighed forty nine
grains more than before.

EXPERIMENT V.
Calcined Hartshorn, and an ounce of Brick; being two hours in a cupelling
Furnace, the latter neither increased or lost of its weight, but being exposed
to the Air in a scale, by imbibeing the moisture of the Air, in a little time
caused it to preponderate; but the Hartshorn lost near eight grains of its
former weight; which I supposed to be caused by an Evaporation of some moist
Particles of the Air, because by being exposed to the Air a while, it increased
in weight again.

EXPERIMENT VI and VII.
An ounce of Tin being calcined in a Cupel under a Mouffler, in two hours had
gained a dram in weight. And an ounce of Lead placed upon a Cupel made of
calcined Hartshorn was turned into a litharge upon it, and the Part of the
Cupel was lost in the fire, yet the Lead and it weighed seven grains more than
before.

EXPERIMENT VIII.
A Cupel made of ten Parts of Bone-ashes, and one of Charcoal-ashes, with a
sufficient quantity of Ale, weighed about two ounces, and this being placed
under a Mouffler, and weighed again when it was thoroughly hot, it weighed two
grains more, but being kept under the Mouffler two hours longer, and then
weighed whilst red hot, it had gained twenty one grains in weight, and by being
exposed a while to the open Air, it grew three grains heavier than before.

EXPERIMENT IX, X and XI.
Four drams of filing of Steel, in two hours increased in weight one dram, six
grains and a quarter. A piece of silver, which before weighed three drams
thirty two grains and a quarter, in an hour and a half increased to 34 1/^
grains. Another time half an ounce of filings of silver in three hours gained
six grains. A dram of Zink or Spelter in three hours gained six grains.

EXPERIMENT XII.
Two drams of filings of Tutenag, a metal brought from the East Indies, being
kept upon the Cupel two hours, was not melted into lumps, but looked like Cerus
and Minium powdered and mixed together, some Parts appearing white and others
red, the Calx being weighed had gained 28 grains.

EXPERIMENT XIII.
To try whether in Cupellations, all the Lead that is usually employed about
them, flies away in smoke, we heated a Cupel and weighing it, placed two ounces
of Lead and a dram of filings of Copper upon it, and after it had been two
hours in a Cupelling Furnace, though nothing appeared upon the Cupel, worth
weighing distinctly, yet weighing the whole together, they amounted to four
ounces three drams and eleven grains, which wanted but nine grains of the whole
weight of the Cupel and metals, so that allowing for what the Cupel it self
might have gained, the greatest Part seemed to be sunk into the Cupel.

EXPERIMENT XIV, XV and XXI.
To show whether metals separated from an immediate contact with the fire would
have their weight increased by it, we included an ounce of filings of Steel in
two Crucibles luted together, and in two hours being taken out, they had
acquired a dark color, betwixt black and blue, and were increased in weight
five grains, and this Experiment being repeated they gained six grains. Two
ounces of Copper in an hour and half gained eight grains, the like quantity of
Tin being partly reduced to a white Calx, and partly melted in a yellow lump
like Gold, it had gained six grains in weight. But an ounce and four drachms of
this Copper being a second time exposed for two hours to a strong fire in two
Crucibles as before, gained ten grains more in weight, and had diverse dark
colored flakes upon the Metal, which upon handling, for the most part, fell
off. Adrachm of Tin being mixed with two ounces of Lead, though at the first the
mass was dry at the top, and seemed swelled and discolored, yet Tin gives Lead
such an Indisposition to Cupellation, that it answered not our Expectation.

EXPERIMENT XVI, XVII and XVIII.
Copper being made use of which consisted of thinner Plates than the former, an
ounce increased twenty one grains in weight. Half a pound of Block-Tin being
kept in Fusion in a Glass-Retort placed two days in a sand Furnace, it
increased about two grains in weight. I tried likewise to make a Precipitate of
Mercury per se in sealed Glasses, but either by their breaking or other
Inconveniences, it answered not my design.

EXPERIMENT XIX and XX.
A Calx of Tin per se which weighed an ounce, being kept upon a Cupel under a
Mouffler two hours, gained in weight one dram and thirty five grains, and
became much whiter than before. No Part of the Put was melted, much less
reduced into Metal. An ounce of filings of Steel, which had been before exposed
to the fire increased in weight two drams and twenty two grains; the filings
being baked together, and when broke appearing like Iron.

CHAP. XV. Additional Experiments about arresting and weighing of igneous
Corpuscles.
EXPERIMENT I and II.
EIGHT ounces of Block-Tin being cut in pieces and put into a good round Vial,
with a long neck, and being cautiously melted over Quick-Coals, the Glass being
frequently shaken, to promote Calcination, near an hour, the neck of the Vial
being most of the time preserved from the steams of the Coals with a cover of
Paper; the Tin which was partly calcined, increased eighteen grains in weight.
This being done we melted the remaining metal into thin Plates, by which
Operation, it lost three grains of the eighteen it had got; but being a second
time exposed to Calcination in another Vial, it afforded a much greater
Quantity of it than before, and increased in weight to eight ounces and twenty
four grains. In which Trials it is observable, that agitation much contributes
to the Calcination of Metals.

EXPERIMENT III, IV, V.
Eight ounces of Tin being exposed to calcine in a Bolt-head Hermetically
sealed, the Glass flew in pieces, and a yellowish Liquor, which was of an
odious taste and smell, was found in the neck. But the Experiment being a
second time repeated, the Metal being suffered to cool, before the Glass broke,
the weight was twenty three grains more than before, though the whole Calx
amounted to no more than four scruples and eight grains: The top of the Metal
was very asperous and of a dark color, though the neighboring Surface and some
places near the dark colored Calx, which was between the bottom and lowest
part of the lump, was of a Golden color by candlelight. Two ounces of filings
of Tin being exposed to Calcination two hours in a small Retort, at the first
several steams issued out at the small Apex of the Stem, but then the Apex
being sealed up, a yellowish clammy substance thinly spread and which smelled
like fetid Oil of Tartar, was gathered in the neck; and the Glass being broke,
the lump of Metal which was in some measure covered with a gray Calx, weighed
twelve grains more than before.

EXPERIMENT VI and VII.
An ounce of filing of Zinke being kept in a Bolt-head four hours over live
Coals; fumes copiously were emitted out of the unstoped Apex of the Stem; and
the whole remaining Zinke, and the flowers which had ascended being weighed,
wanted five grains of an ounce. But four ounces of Lead being enclosed in
another Retort, it was held over a fire two hours; and then the Apex which was
small being sealed up, the Glass was exposed to the fire two hours longer; in
which time the Surface of the melted metal was dark and rugged, and Part of it
was turned into a dark colored Calx. The Lead being weighed had gained about
thirteen grains in weight.

EXPERIMENT VIII and IX.
Pieces of red Coral being exposed to the fire, till of a dark color, gained
three grains and a half in weight. Fresh and strong Quicklime being placed
upon a Cupel two hours, and which before weighed two drams, increased in weight
twenty nine grains. From whence it appears, that though Lime has been before
exposed to the fire, yet it is capable of having more igneous Corpuscles united
with its substance; from whence we may infer, that though Limestone by
calcination has lost much of its weight, yet it may have recieved a
considerable addition from the fire, which may in Part make amends for those
Corpuscles which have flown away; upon which account it may be uncertain in
other Bodies, which we have made Trials with, how much weight they have truly
received from the fire, since it is uncerain how much of their first weight
might be lost in Exhalations.

CHAP. XVI. A discovery of the Perviousness of Glass to ponderable Parts of
Flame.
EXPERIMENT I.
TO show that Glass is Pervious to the ponderable Part of Flame, I shall to the
Experiments already laid down subjoyn. That having fixed a small Pan which
contained Sulphur, upon another which contained Coals, to continue its Flame; I
contrived it so that nothing but the Flame of the Sulphur should come at the
Retort, and that the fire and smoke of the Coals should be carried off another
way, which being done, two ounces of filings of Tin were Hermetically sealled
up in a Retort, and the Glass being gradually exposed three hours and a half to
the Flame of the Sulphur, there was a good quantity of gray Calx at the bottom,
and upon some Part of the Metal. In which Operation, it gained four grains and
a half. And the Experiment being again repeated, the Metal acquired eleven
grains and a half. And that it may not be thought that the increase of weight
depended upon Particles of Glass dissolved and fixed upon the Calces, I shall
add, that I several times exposed Glasses to the fire without perceiving any
considerable alteration in the weight of the Glass.

EXPERIMENT II.
Though common Sulphur be a Body homogeneous enough, consisting of inflamable
Parts, and an acid near akin to Spirit of Vitriol; yet to vary the Trial, I
made use of inflamable Spirit of Wine, over the Flame of which, a Glass Retort
with an ounce of Tin was held for two Hours; the Calx being considerable in
quantity, was weighed, together with the remaining part of the Tin, which was
hardened into a Lump, and it appeared that it had increased its weight four
grains and a half.

EXPERIMENT III.
An ounce of Lead being sealed up in a Retort, and exposed to the Flame of
Spirit of Wine, seven scruples were turned into a grayish Calx, which being
weighed again with the rest of the Metal, it appeared, the increase of Weight
was six grains. NB. But lest it should be thought, that the Particles of the
Flame, which increased the weight of the Metal, were turned into Metal, I
weighed the Calces in Air and Water, and found, that whereas Lead is to its
Bulk of Water as 11 to 1, this Calx was but as 9 to 1.

From which Experiments it appears, that Metal receives an increase of Weight
from Flame, and that too, through the Pores of Glass. But though I believe that
Glass is penetrable to the Parts of Flame, yet I am far from thinking that it
is pervious either to Chemical Liquors, Quicksilver, or Air.

And this I shall add, that it may be worth while to consider, whether all the
parts of Fire are fine enough to penetrate Glass, since Metals acquire not so
much weight when shut up in Glasses, as when exposed to the open Fire. And it
may be likewise considered, whether the Pores of Glass are naturally large
enough to give way to the Fire's igneous Particles, or whether their Heat and
rapid Motion does not enlarge the Pores of the Glass, and contribute to their
Penetration of it: For I know a Menstruum, which will not work upon a Metal
whilst cold; but when hot it will reduce it to a Powder. And on this occasion I
shall add, that 'till I am further satisfied, I shall forbear to determine,
whether the Rectitude of the Pores of Glass contributes to the Perviousness of
it, and whether metalline Vessels are pervious to the ponderable parts of
Flame, or not. Having laid down these doubts, I shall thence deduce the
following Corollaries.

COROLLARY I. Confirming the Parodox, That Flame may act as a Menstruum, and
make Coalitions with the Bodies it works upon.
From the Experiments laid down it appears, that Flame is capable of acting as
a Menstruum, not only in dissolving, but by associating with the Parts of the
Body it works upon, and thereby to add Substance and Weight to them; and though
it renders not Lead and Tin liquid, yet it may still be accounted a Menstruum,
it not being a constant property of a Menstruum to dissolve the Body into a
liquid; since Tin dissolved in Aqua fortis remains in the bottom in the form of
a white Calx. And when Oil of Vitriol is drawn from Quicksilver, it leaves the
Mercury in the form of a white Powder, but a small Part of which, will be
dissoluble in Water. And one thing observable in this Menstruum is, that
whereas other Menstruums are several times the proportion of the Body
dissolved, in this, the Corrosive makes but a twentieth part of the Body
corroded.

COROLLARY II. Proposing a Paradox about Calcination and Calces.
From our Experiments it appears, that Bodies may be calcined, without having
the greatest part of their Substance driven away, and only the Caput Mortuum,
and some fixed Salts; remaining behind, as the generality of Chemists and
Philosophers teach; since it is evident, that in our Trial, no considerable
Particles flew away, but that the Metal gains more than it loses. And hence we
may have reason to judge of the erroneous opinion of those who suppose
Saccharum Saturni to be the sweet Salt extracted by the Spirit, whereas it
appears, that it plentifully concurs in the Composition of it; so that from
hence it appears, that the Calx of a Metal, may be in some cases not the Caput
Mortuum or Terra damnata, but the Magistery of it, since the bulk of the Body
is preserved, and it only, with a Solvent acquires a new form. And I have
elsewhere made it appear, that the dry Calx of Lead may be turned into a
malleable Metal again, without Flux-powder, or any other Additament.

COROLLARY III.
From the foregoing Trials it likewise appears what will become of the
Epicurean and Cartesian Doctrines of Fire; the one teaching, that though Fire may
penetrate Glass, yet it passes through Metals, without being arrested by them;
and the other, that igneous Particles cannot penetrate Glass.

Whether Fire is arrested in Meat as it roasts or not, I shall not undertake to
determine; but if it does, it may be considerable in reference to Men's Health,
to employ Fire which may be least noxious.

COROLLARY IV.
From hence it likewise appears, that so subtle, spirituous, and fugitive a
Body as Fire, may by uniting with congruous Parts of Matter, form a ponderous
and stable Body; and whether the Sunbeams may have the like effect on several
Bodies it works upon, I shall leave to be considered. And I shall also leave
others to consider, whether all the Particles of Fire and Flame, that are
subtle and agitated enough to penetrate Glass, and fasten themselves to
included Bodies, be reduced by Ignition to the same Form, or else retain
somewhat of their proper Qualities, only I shall add, that in such kind of
Inquiries it may be of use to compare the specific gravities of the Calces of
Metals, made in Glasses, by the operation of Flames, whose Fuels are of very
different Natures.

CHAP. XVII. New Experiments touching the relation betwixt Flame and Air.
BEfore I lay down the Experiments, I shall first proceed to offer the
Difficulties which occurred in the Trials; and first, that some of them in
which the Burning-Glass was employed, I could only try them in clear
Sun-shining Days, the concentred Rays of the Sun being otherwise inconveniently
reflected and partly refracted. Secondly, Where I was forced to employ hot
Irons, if the Cavity of the Receiver was large, the Iron would be cold before
the Air was exhausted; but if it was small, the Cement would be melted; so that
I was forced to make use of a peculiar sort of Cement, which was not so subject
to be melted.

But to these difficulties I shall add, that we must not be too apt to
conclude, that the Receiver in these cases is exhausted sufficiently, when the
Mercury in the Gage is depressed; since that may happen upon the account of the
Air expanded by the Heat of the Iron; and therefore the Air is to be exhausted,
'till the Mercury in the Gage can be depressed no lower.

But if it should be asked, whether a Vacuum may not more conveniently and
speedily be made by Mercury, in the Torrecellian Experiment? I shall answer,
That though the Vacuum be more nimbly made, yet the Phenomenon exhibited there
are apt to be influenced by some extricated Particles of Air expanding
themselves, it being impossible to leave that space wholly void of Air; besides
it appears by a Bubble being broke in my Engine, that it exhausts the Air more
clearly than Mercury; since in a Vacuum made by the latter, the Air included in
a Bubble was never able to expand it self powerfully enough to break it.
Besides, there is one convenience in our Engine, that, as Air extricates it
self, it may be drawn out by plying the Engine as occasion requires, whereas in
the Torrecellian Experiment, the Vacuum is made all at once; besides the
Mercurial Tube is not so proper for the following Experiments as our Engine is.
But to proceed to the Experiments contained under the following Titles.

The I. TITLE. Of the dificulty of producing Flame without Air.
EXPERIMENT I.
An endeavor to kindle Sulphur in Vacuo Boyliano.
A Piece of red hot Iron, half an Inch in Diameter, and an Inch thick, being
conveyed in a glazed melting-Pot into our Receiver, we carefully exhausted the
Air, and letting down flowers of Sulphur in a Paper, the Paper was presently
consumed, and the Sulphur falling into the Concave Surface of the Iron, only
smoaked a little, but did not actually kindle.

EXPERIMENT II.
Another way we made use of to kindle Sulphur in Vacuo was, by putting Flowers
of Sulphur into a Glass-Bubble, and when the Air was exhausted, placing it upon
live Coals, the Heat would not kindle the Sulphur, but raise it in the form of
a yellow Varnish up to the opposite side of the Glass, and by turning that to
the Fire, it would rise again to that side of the Glass which was uppermost.

EXPERIMENT III and IV.
To show how much interest the Air has in the production of Flame, when the
Sulphur was too cool to burn without Air, we took off the Receiver, upon which
it presently flamed: And another time when the Receiver was thrice successively
so far exhausted, that the Sulphur ceased to Flame, each time, that the Air was
again let in, we could discern several flashes of fire, which by their blue
color appeared to be Sulphurous flames.

EXPERIMENT V and VI.
Endeavors to explode Gunpowder in Vacuo.
The Beams of the Sun in the Summer being cast upon Gunpowder in Vacuo, it
first smoaked and then melted, but did not explode whilst I continued the use
of the burning Glass. But another time having conveyed the Iron mentioned
before red hot into our Receiver, as soon as it was exhausted we let down a
piece of Paper with Gunpowder in it, and though the Paper was consumed, and the
Sulphur melted, yet it did not go off. But the Experiment being repeated with a
grain of very good Sulphur, when it had burnt so long that we no longer
expected an Explosion, I let in the Air, and sometime after it went off.

EXPERIMENT VII and VIII.
Several grains of Gunpowder being conveyed into an exhausted bubble, and that
placed upon the live Coals, it flamed considerably and afforded sublimate,
which by the light of a candle exhibited livid colors of a Rainbow. In our
Physico-mechanical Experiments, we mentioned an Experiment where a Pistol was
fired in our Receiver; but the Receiver not being then sufficienly exhausted we
reiterated the Experiment, and found, that when by the help of the Turn-Key,
the Trigger of a primed Pistol was pulled by a string purposely fastened to the
Trigger and Turn-Key, the Powder in the Pan would not go off, yet when a little
Air was let in, the Gunpowder remaining in the Pan, would flash off when the
lock was cocked, and let off as before; yet one thing observable was, that though
the Gunpowder would not explode, when the Receiver was totally exhausted, yet
the violent percussion of the flint would cause sparks of fire to fly from it.

EXPERIMENT IX.
Aurum Fulminans was exploded in the exhausted Receiver with a considerable
noise, by the Sunbeams cast upon it with a burning Glass; and a quarter of a
grain being let down by the Turn-Key upon a piece of Iron red hot, it exploded
with a flash, which was visible; the place where the Experiment was tried being
purposely dark; and a yellowish powder was scattered about the Cavity of the
Receiver.

The II. TITLE. Of the difficulty of preserving Flame without Air.
EXPERIMENT I.
Of the flaming of Sulphur in Vacuo.
FLowers of Sulphur being kindled upon a metalline Plate and conveyed into the
Receiver, when the Air began to be sucked out gradually decayed, till at the
last, the Receiver being totally exhausted, the Flame was extinguished, and
upon a reingress of Air, it only began to smoke again.

EXPERIMENT II.
A larger piece of Iron than that formerly mentioned, being made use of, and
conveyed into a Receiver, a good quantity of Sulphur was let down upon it,
which flamed considerably, and continued not only till the Receiver was
exhausted, but a little after, and till it seemed to be extinguished for want
of fuel.

In trying of which Experiments, the following particulars are to be observed.
First, that the Iron is placed on a Pedastal of Tobacco-pipe-clay not too near
the Glass lest it should break it. Secondly, upon the concave Surface of the
Iron, we placed a Convex-shell which was shaped like a flattish bottom, to keep
the Have from having too large a Surface, and consequently from consuming too
fast. Thirdly, it will be convenient, for the more commodious discerning of the
Phenomenon of this Experiment to try it in a dark place. And fourthly, it is
convenient to advertise that the Sulphur frequently so obscures the Glass with
its fumes, which partly stick to it, that sometimes it is very difficult to
discern what happens within the Glass. Fifthly, it is requisite the Heat of the
Iron should be considerable, that the Flame of the Sulphur may be more lasting;
the flaming of it depending on the Heat of the Iron, and not the force of its
own Flame.

EXPERIMENT III.
A very volatile and saline piercing Liquor being dropped upon filings of
Steel, the Mixture grew hot, and emitted out of the Vial it was contained in,
very fetid steams, which would kindle at the flame of a Candle, and continue to
burn a good while; where we conveyed it into our Receiver, and upon the first
Exsuction of Air it flamed brisker than before; and likewise upon the second
and third; but after it went out, it would not be kindled again, though the Air
was let in upon it.

EXPERIMENT IV.
Spirit of Wine being impregnated with a Mineral, which tinged its Flame, I
conveyed it into the Receiver in a small Glass-Lamp with a slender wick; and
observed, that in half a minute after the Pump was plied, the Flame was
extinguished: But letting Air in and out as occasion required, I observed, that
when the Flame began to decay, the Turn-Key being successively drawn almost
out, the Flame lasted a minute and a half, and sometimes longer. The Turn-Key
being taken out in the beginning, it lasted two minutes or better. A Pipe being
bedded in the Cement at the bottom of the Glass, and having at each end an open
Orifice, almost of the bigness of that which the Turn-Key usually fills, the
Flame burnt very well, and would have continued longer than it did if we would
have permitted it. The Orifice at the top being stopped, the lower was left
open, yet the Flame began to decay, but Air being blown in with a pair of
Bellows, it was presently refreshed again, yet in a minute after it was quite
extinguished.

EXPERIMENT V.
Flame preserved under Water.
Though it is taught that Naptha and Camphire will burn under Water, yet I could
never find that they would; but three ounces of Gunpowder, a dram of well
burnt Charcoal, good Sulphur half a dram, of choice Saltpeter near a dram
and a half, being all powdered and mixed together, a Quill or a Tobacco-pipe
stopped at one end being filled with this Mixture and kindled in the Air, would
burn, till it was wholly consumed, under Water, the force of the Flame keeping
the Water from breaking in upon it at the open end. In which Experiment Flame
seems to be continued without. Air, there being no Air to preserve it under
Water, but what may be lodged in the Pores of the Water; except some moist
Particles betwixt the Particles of the Nitre, in favor of the necessity of Air
to preserve Flame, may be supposed to be rarefied and form Air for a time, as
the rarefied exhalations which flow out of an Aeolipile, which are not true and
permanent Air, but presently return to Water again.

EXPERIMENT VI.
Of the flaming of a Metal in Vacuo.
Having placed the piece of Iron, so often made use of in our Receiver, we
designed to let a parcel of Sulphur fall upon it, but when we went to drop the
Sulphur down, by accident it fell on one side the Iron; and whilst we were
considering what to do, we discerned a a blue Flame in the middle of the Glass,
which continued much longer than that of ordinary Sulphur, and when we opened
the Receiver, we found that it was afforded by a metalline substance which lay
melted in the middle of the concave superficies of the Iron, being a
composition of Lead and Tin; but though these Metals mixed, so opened the Bodies
of each other as to yield a Sulphurous fuel for Flame in Vacuo, yet in the
open Air they would not.

The III. TITLE. Of the difficult Propagation of actual Flame in Vacuo Boyliano.
EXPERIMENT I.
HAving kindled some Sulphur, which was of a peculiar sort, upon the Iron so
often mentioned, I let down a piece of Spunk upon it, when the Receiver was
exhausted; and by being contiguous to the flames it was turned into a substance
as black and brittle as Tinder, and disposed to kindle when touched with fire.

EXPERIMENT II.
Another parcel of the same Sulphur being kindled in Vacuo Boyliano, Camphire,
though in the open Air, disposed to draw the Flame of Sulphur, yet it was not
kindled by hanging in the Flame of it. And a Match being partly dipped in
Sulphur, and let down upon the hot Iron, burnt as far as the Sulphur raught,
but no further.

EXPERIMENT III and IV.
Having placed a piece of Paper upon the Plate of our Pump and whelmed over it
a very clear and thin Receiver, we laid a train of Gunpowder upon the Paper,
and observed, that though by a good Burning-Glass, several grains would be
exploded; yet those would not kindle those that were contiguous to them, the
Propagation of Flame so much depends on the free access of Air. And to confirm
this, I shall add, that a little Instrument made to try Gunpowder, being
charged and primed and suspended in Vacuo, though by the help of a Burning-Glass
the priming would be exploded, yet that would not kindle the Powder contained
in the Box; but when the exhausted Air was let in again, and the Pan new
primed, though the Receiver was shut, it would in that close Air go off readily;
and also in the open Air.

EXPERIMENT V.
Gunpowder being put into two Bubbles, one of which was exhausted and the
other not, they were placed upon Live-coals, upon which, when they had stood a
while, they where both burst in pieces, but without the appearance of any
Flame, which effect seemed to depend on this, viz. That the Heat of the coals
acted not only on a few grains of Powder at once, but upon the whole Area, so
that every Particle being equally acted on, as to sense, they were exploded at
the same time, so the Focus of a Burning-Glass acting uniformly on Aurum
Fulminans, causes it to explode at once, but it may be so ordered, that the
Focus not sufficiently warming one Part, a partial explosion will only ensue.

CHAP. XVIII. New Experiments about the relation betwixt Air and the Flamma
Vitalis of Animals.
EXPERIMENT I.
Animals included in Receivers with Flame and Air.
REctified Spirit of Wine contained in a Glass-Lamp with a thin Wick, and at the
same time, a small Green-Finch, being both conveyed into a Receiver eighteen
Inches high, and which was large enough to contain about twenty pints of Water,
the Flame of the Lamp was extinguished at the end of two Minutes; but the Bird
being brisk at the end of the third Minute, was taken out. And when the Bird
recovered again, the Experiment being repeated, the Flame was extinguished in
two Minutes, but the Bird continued well longer. The Experiment being again
repeated with two Lamps, they were both extinguished in a Minute, but the Bird
continued well five or six times as long.

A Mouse continued well a long time after the Lamp was extinguished. And the
same Mouse being shut up in another Receiver with a Wax-Candle, seemed to have
received no damage ten Minutes after the Candle was out, though the Air was
clouded with the Smoke of it.

EXPERIMENT II.
A Gold-Finch and a Piece of a Candle being included in a Receiver, large
enough to hold two Galons, the Candle was extinguished in two Minutes; but the
Bird in that smoaky Air continued well a good while after. And the like
succeeded with a wax Taper in another Receiver. Being shut up with a piece of a
Candle in another Receiver, which the Air was drawn out of, the Bird outlived
the Flame, but not without Convulsions. And the like succeeded with a wax Taper.

The same Bird being included with a piece of Charcoal two Inches long, and
half an Inch thick, when the Air was so far pumped out, that the Coal was past
being renewed by letting in the Air, the Bird was sick, but presently
recovered. And the same Experiment was repeared with the like success. Whether
the Fire and Flamma vitalis of Animals feed upon distinct parts of the Air or
not, and whether the former destroys its Pabulum sooner or not, I shall leave
to be considered.

EXPERIMENT III, IV, and V.
Of the shining of Glow Worms.
It being the opinion of some, that the shining of Glowworms proceeds from a
kind of Effulsion of the Biolychnium, or Vital Flame; I shall subjoin, That
Glowworms being included in a Receiver in the Dark, as the Air was exhausted,
their Light was diminished, and as it was let in again, renewed. And lest this
should depend on the Glowworm drawing the luminous Part of its Body into the
dark Part, and so obscuring it, I enclosed the luminous Parts by themselves,
and observed the same Phenomenon as before; save that, upon the Reingress of
Air, they seemed more lucid than before. The like Experiments being repeated
with a dead Worm, it at the first retained its Light when the Air was
exhausted, but after a while it diminished and increased as the Light of a live
one, only it shone more vividly, and as the Light of the live one was a
greenish blue, so this afforded a white yellow.

EXPERIMENT VI.
A Mouse being weighed alive, and then strangled, though nothing fell from him,
he seemed 7/16 of a grain lighter when dead. And a young Catlin of about ten or
eleven Ounces weight, lost four grains of its weight whilst a strangling, so
many subtle parts being evaporated by its violent Struglings. So that the
common Tradition that Animals are heavier when dead than alive holds not true.
To this Experiment, I shall add, that having enclosed Silkworms Eggs, and
those small Infects which turn to winged Insects, and form Gnats, in Vacuo,
neither of them hatched or generated as in the open Air.

CHAP. XIX. New Experiments about Explosions.
THE Learned Dr. Willis, and others having endeavored to account for some
Phenomenon by Explosions, I shall lay down the following instances of
Explosions made by Liquors.

EXPERIMENT I.
Strong Spirit of Nitre being put into a Bolt-head, to the quantity of an
Ounce, upon the Affusion of Spirit of Wine, part of it flew up to the Ceiling
of the House, and dropping down upon a Man's Skin burnt him terribly; and as
Spirit of Wine was successively poured in, it grew intensely hot, and emitted
red Fumes, which would take Fire at a Candle held a quarter of a Yard from the
Mouth of the Glass, and would burn there 'till blown out. And an ounce of
Spirit of Nitre being conveyed into another Bolt-head, and a Bladder tied over
the top of it, which contained Alkohol of Wine, a little of it being poured
into the Bolt-head, it caused a vehement Explosion, by which the Bladder was
presently expanded, and the Fumes presently made their way out in the form of
an Orange-colour'd Smoke.

EXPERIMENT II and III.
Oil of Vitriol and Oil of Turpentine being shaken together, produce a strong
Ferment, and an Expansion or Explosion. The Blood of Fishes and Sea Monsters is
actually cold, and yet they move very violently; wherefore in favor of those
that believe Animal Explosions, I shall add, that if Oil of Vitriol and
Sal-Armoniack be mixed gradually, the one being contained in a Bladder, and the
other in a Bolt-head, to which it is tied (as in the first Experiment) when the
Sal-Armoniack falls upon the Oil, it will cause a violent Explosion.

CHAP. XX. New Experiments concerning the relation betwixt Light and Air, in
shining-Wood, and Fishes. Communicated in the Transactions of Jan. 6. 1667/8.
EXPERIMENT I.
Of the relation betwixt Light and Air.
A Piece of good shining Rotten-wood, being conveyed into our Pneumatick Engine,
at the seventh Suction it began to grow more dim, and at the tenth it quite
lost its Light.

EXPERIMENT II.
But as soon as the Air was let in again, the Light appeared again like a
little Flash of Lightning, and more vivid than before. These Experiments being
a second time tried, the Light was diminished at the second Exsuction, and at
the sixth disappeared, which was but six Minutes from the first Exsuction.

EXPERIMENT III.
In a third Trial, the Wood having been kept in Vacuo half an Hour, recovered
its Luminousness upon a readmission of the Air.

EXPERIMENT IV.
A shining Body being included in a Receiver, and the Air exhausted 'till the
Body had almost lost its Luminousness, we left it some time in that rarified
Air, and observed that the Light gradually diminished, though the Receiver was no
further exhausted.

EXPERIMENT V.
Having included shining-Wood in such an Instrument as Mr. Hook has invented
to compress Air, I found, that though the Air was forcibly compressed, the Light
was not sensibly impaired.

EXPERIMENT VI.
Shining-Wood being included in a sealed Glass, for two Days retained its
genuine Luster, but the third Day the Light was more obscure.

EXPERIMENT VII.
What effects the exhausted Receiver would have had on Bolonian Stone, Diamonds
and Glowworms, I had not opportunities to try: But a piece of red hot Iron
being stuck in Tobacco-pipe-Clay, and conveyed into the Receiver, there was no
sensible effect produced by evacuating or replenishing the Receiver.

EXPERIMENT VIII.
Wood being enclosed in a Glass hermetically sealed, and that conveyed into the
Receiver, the Rays of Light were equally visible through the vacuous Medium, as
through the Air when let in again.

EXPERIMENT IX.
We took a Glass Tube sealed at one end, and putting a piece of shining-Wood
into it, we propped it with a Cork, to keep it from falling out; which being
done, we inverted the open end of the Tube into stagnant Mercury, and conveying
it into a Receiver, we exhausted the Air, that that in the Pipe by expanding it
self, might make its way out, through the Quicksilver; which being done, we
observed, that the Wood which lost its Light in the rarefied Air, recovered it
again, when by the Pressure of the external Air the Mercury was buoyed up
within two Inches of the Wood, the rarified Air being thereby condensed again.

EXPERIMENT X.
A shining Fish which was very vivid, lost much of its Luster, when the Air was
drawn out; and a small piece of it, which was less luminous lost its Light in
another Receiver, but recovered it again, when the Air was let in again.

EXPERIMENT XI.
To try whether the Fish which retained its Light in some measure, did it upon
the account of some peculiarity in its Nature, I enclosed a large piece of Wood
in a Receiver, but it lost its Light in Vacuo, and regained it when the Air was
let in again.

EXPERIMENT XII.
Rotten shining Fishes being included in Vacuo twenty four hours, they regained
their Light again when the Air was let in.

EXPERIMENT XIII.
Considering how much Putrefaction contributes to the shining of Fishes, and
the Air to Putrefaction, I took a Fish, and hanging a piece in the Air a little
before the time they usually grow luminous, I included another in Vacuo, to try
whether the Fish would grow luminous there, or whether, though it appeared not to
be so, yet when the Air was let in it would disclose its Light; but the Attempt
being twice made, the one was frustrated by the breaking of the Glass; and the
other, by the peculiar Qualities of a Fish, which in the Air grew not luminous
in the usual time, nor much beyond it.

EXPERIMENT XIV.
A shining Fish being immersed in Water in a wide mouthed Glass, was not at all
affected, upon the exhausting of the Receiver, or when the Air was let in again.

EXPERIMENT XV.
A shining Fish, which lost not its Luster upon the exhausting of the Receiver,
was kept in Vacuo forty eight Hours, in which time it lost its Light wholly,
'till the Air was readmitted, and then it shone again; but the Receiver being
a second time exhausted, it lost its Light in four Hours, but renewed it again
upon a re-access of Air.

The suddenness of this renewed Light, put me in mind of those Lights which are
sometimes seen in Vaults and Caves newly opened, and upon the first ingress of
Air; but those are not so lasting, by reason of the less tenacity of the
substance which yields those luminous Rays.

Another Fish being included in Vacuo three days, renewed its Light when the
Air was let in; but a third did not recover its luminous quality 'till it had
remained sometime in the Air. And two other shining Fishes, being included
three Days in Vacuo, when the Air was let in again, that which was first most
vivid, recovered its Light first; and the other sometime after.

CHAP. XXI. Observations and Trials about the resemblances and Differences
between a burning Coal and shining Wood. Communicated in the Transactions of
Feb. 1667/8
Resemblances.

Resemblances of a shining Coal and Wood.
1. BOTH of them afford Light. 2. Both of them require the presence of the Air
to continue their Light. 3. Being deprived of Light by withdrawing the Air,
they recover it again upon the re-access of it. 4. Both of them will lose their
Light in Water. 5. Coldness of the Air extinguishes not their Light; for,
shining Wood being put into a Glass Tube sealed at one end, and that placed in
a frigorifick Mixture, 'till Water contained in another Pipe was froze, it
still continued Light, though a shining Fish lost its Light in a quarter of an
hour.
Differences.

Their Differences.
1. A live Coal would be extinguished by Compression, but shining Wood will not.
2. Shining Wood will recover its Light when the Air is let in again, but a Coal
will not. 3. Shining wood will contiue to give light in a close Glass, but the
Coal will not. 4. A Coal emits smoke, but the other does not. 5. A Coal
consumes, but the other does not. 6. A Coal is hot, but shining wood is not
warm, which I discovered by applying to the shining wood the Ball of a
Weather-Glass described in the History of Cold, in whose Stem is contained a
Pendulous drop.
CHAP. XXII. Some Observations about shining Flesh, communicated in the
Transactions of December 16. 1672.
A Flesh which shines in the dark.
A Neck of Veal which was observed one Night to be Luminous in the Larder,
afforded the following Phenomenon in a dark Room.

1. It shone in several places; those shining spots varying likewise in bigness
and form. 2. The Parts which shone most were those grisly or bony places which
the Butcher's cleaver had past. And we perceived likewise that the Medulla
Spinalis did shine. One place of a Tendon shone, and several spots in the flesh
distant from the Bone. 3. By the light afforded by these spots, I could discern
several Letters in the Title of the Philosophical Transactions; the most vivid
Rays being of a greenish blue, like the tails of Glowworms. Neither a
Weather-Glass or the touch could discover any more Heat in those Parts than in
others; nor were they in the least putrid. 4. The window of the Larder is
Northward; and the floor a story below the Kitchen, and separated from it only
by a Boarded floor. 5. The Wind was high, and South-west, the Air being hot for
the season. The Moon was past its last quarter, and the Mercury in the
Barometer stood at 29 1/16 Inches. 6. A piece of a shinning bone being cut off
the thickness of half a Crown shone on both sides, and the place it was cut off
shone likewise but more faintly. 7. The Flesh lost some of its light by
rubbing; but imparted no light to my hand: But the Flesh being pressed betwixt
two pieces of Flesh it lost nothing of it is Light. 8. A piece of it, having
lain a quarter of an hour in inflamable Spirit of Wine lost its Luminousness;
but in Water it continued an hour without being impaired. But being conveyed
into our Pneumatick Engine, it was diminished gradually and considerably. 9. I
observed several Luminous places in a Leg of Veal brought out of the same
Larder. 10. A piece of Veal kept all Night in a Phial, shone in the Morning,
and continued its Light till the sixth Day at Night. 11. A Pullet hung up in
the same Larder, appeared also to be Luminous.
CHAP. XXIII. Observations of a Diamond that shines in the dark.
Observations on Diamonds.
HAving met with a Diamond, which, though it would not yield light in the day,
would afford a conspicuous light in the Night, I thought it would be of no
small use in explaining the abstruse Nature of Light. And though a great many
think it no rarity, that there are Carbuncles and Diamonds which shine in the
dark, yet there are some who deny, that there are any shining stones at all, as
Boethius de Boot; Johannes de Laet, and Olaus Wormius, yet Vatemannus and
Garcias ab Horto, pretend to be Eye witnesses of Carbuncles which shone in the
dark; and Marcus Paulus Venetus tells us, that the King of Zeilan had a Rubie
as thick as a Man's arm, and a Palm long. And two Russian Cossacks tell us,
that they heard from the People of Cottay, that their King had a Rubie which
would shine Night and Day. And Benvonuto Cellini, an Italian Writer, gives us
an account of a Carbuncle which afforded a considerable Light in the Night. And
we our selves have been informed of a shining substance found in Scotland.

And I am further told, that a Dutch Admiral had a Diamond, which when he
opened a Coffer under Deck in a dark Room, would shine by its native Light,
which is the more strange, because that is a much colder Climate than the
East Indies; for it is observable, that warmth much contributes to the shining
of such stones, since rubbing will cause some to shine, which when cold will
not; which makes me the less doubt of what is said of right Turquois, viz. That
it changes color as the wearer is sick or well, and loses its splendour after
Death, which is attested by the Observations of Boethius de Boot, and Olaus
Wormius; and though Antonio N^ri tells us, that a Turquois discolored and grown
white, will regain its color, if immersed in Oil of sweet Almonds, yet Wormius
tells us, that a Nephritick stone being dipped in a Decoction of herbs lost its
virtue. And it is observed, that the Texture of Oculus Mundi will be so changed
by being left in Water, that from Opacous it will become Transparent, which
acquired luster it will soon lose in the Air.

Observations made on Mr. Clayton's Diamond.

It was a flat Table Diamond of an Inch long, and less in breadth, of a bad
Water, and less vivid in the day than other Diamonds, being blemished with a
whitish Cloud about the middle of it, which blemish covered near a third part
of the stone.

This Diamond being looked upon in a shady place in the day, and also with a
Microscope, neither any thing peculiar in the stone, nor any light was
perceived.

Secondly, when the Candle was removed in a dark Room, it did not shine without
being rubbed or otherwise prepared.

Thirdly, I could neither produce Light by rubbing together two Pebbles, nor by
a vehement attrition of Rock-Crystal, nor by two Diamonds, as by this stone.

Fourthly, it was hard enough to grave upon Rock-Chrystal with it, and was
endewed with an Electricity.

Fifthly, by rubbing it in the dark, it would be excited to shine like rotten
wood, but much fainter than the scales or slabber of a Whiting, or than
Glowworms; and it presently ceased after the attrition was ended. But being
rubbed brisksly it would continue its Light much longer, so that it lasted
eight times as long as it was a rubbing*

Sixthly, holding it near a faint fire excited its Luciferous Qualities a
little, but by holding it near a Candle it was more apparently excited in a
dark Room; and it acquired a little glimmering by being held near a red piece
of Iron, as also by being contiguous to my naked Body sometime.

Seventhly, by being rubbed till it acquired Luciferous Qualities, it was also
Electrical, but not when it was excited to shine by the Heat of the Fire or a
Candle.

Eighthly, attrition varied its Luciferous Qualities, as the Cloth varied in
color; but on white and red it succeeded best. It was likewise excited in some
measure by being rubbed upon a white wooden Box; and a purely glazed Earth,
which excited it much better than any other Body except white ones.

Ninthly, when it was excited, being plunged into Water, Spirit of Wine, Oils
of all sorts, Acid Spirits, and Alkalizate Solutions, none of them destroyed
its shining properties, but when it was taken out of the Water it was not so
easily excited as before.

Tenthly, neither Spittle nor warm Liquors would extinguish its Light; but
being rubbed with a transparent horn, I could discover Light through it, and
sometimes little sparks of fire.

Eleventhly, being rubbed upon a blue Glass, the faint Light was not visible
through it, but being first excited and then applied to the Glass, the Rays
were tinged in their passage through it.

Twelfthly, by pressing it hard upon a piece of white Tyle it became Luminous,
as also it discovered a short Coruscation when I pressed my finger upon it: And
if I thrust or stuck the point of a Bodkin against it, it would discover a
short, but not a lasting Coruscation, so that its Light seemed to be promoted
by pressure rather than attrition.

The same Experiments being tried with other precious Stones, some Diamonds
would by attrition be brought to a glimmering Light, but others would not; but
neither the other precious Stones, nor Artificial or Natural Crystal would
afford the least glimmering of Light.

CHAP. XXIV. The Aerial Noctiluca, or some new Phenomenon; and a process of a
Factitious self-shining substance.
Of an Aerial Noctiluca.
PHosphorus's are either natural, as Glowworms, some sorts of rotten Wood and
Fishes; or artificial, which are the chief subject of this discourse; and are
either, First, such as will retain a Lucidness sometime after they have been
exposed to the Sunbeams, as the Bolonian Stone, and Phosphorus Hermeticus of
Balduinus, which may be made of Chalk, the latter of which succeeds much better
than the former; for it is presently excited in the Sunbeams, and even at the
flame of a Candle, and continues to shine a considerable time in the dark; yet
this advantage the Bolonian Stone has above the other, that it retains its
Virtue of being excited much longer. Or, Secondly, self-shining substances,
such as are usually called Noctiluca; and are either consistent or liquid, such
as Mr. Crafft brought to London, the consistent one being of a gummy Nature and
constantly lucid; but the other apt to vanish, if exposed to the open Air. To
which I shall add, one of my own preparation, which does not shine it self, but
when exposed to the Air, the Effluvia mixing with it became lucid, which
therefore I call the Aerial Noctiluca: In preparing of which, from some Parts
of a Man's Body, it was not only difficult to hit upon the true degree of Heat,
but the Vessels in which it was raised by Distillation, being not able to hold
out so long as they should, we were forced to save the Luciferous matter, by
small parcels and in distinct Vials.

Observations made on the Liquor which was contained in the second Vial, which
though it was large enough to contain two ounces, had but a spoonful of the
Liquor in it.

1. By Daylight this shining Liquor was not near Diaphanous, but of a muddy
grayish color. And when it was disposed to shine in the dark, the Cavity of
the Vial above the Liquor seemed to be full of whitish fumes, though at other
times transparent.

2. The Vial when close stopped was not Luminous in the dark, but the Light or
Flame appeared as soon as it was exposed to the Air, and the Vial was
unstopped; and that the Accension and Propagation of this Flame depended on the
contact of the Air, appeared, since agitation would not kindle it, but when the
Bottle was unstopped the kindled Flame would gradually be propagated downwards;
and if a few Bubbles of Air were only let in by removing the cork aside and
putting it close in again, the Flame would appear upon the top of the fumes,
without being able to propagate it self much downwards. To which Observations I
shall add, that when the Flame appeared it was most vivid the nearer the Air,
and when it was extinguished, it first disappeared in the bottom, and then
expired at the top. But when the Vial had been unstopped for some time, when it
was stopped again, the Air that had leisurely insinuated it self would cherish
the Flame for an hour or two.

3. It was observable, that when the Air had been long penned up with this
shining Liquor, the spring of it would be so far weakened, that when the Vial
was unstopped, the external Air would presently rush in again, from whence
appears the Interest of the Air, in promoting the shining of this Acry
Noctiluca.

Of the Reason of Noctiluca's
As for the Reason why the Air should* contribute to such Phenomenon, I shall
offer the following Conjectures, viz. That the Saline Parts of the Air, caused
a Fermentation in the fumes of the Liquor, by which means, they being briskly
agitated, are either conveyed to, or unite with the common, Ether, and affect
the Eye jointly; and though Mr. Craft's consistent Noctiluca shines when closed
up from the Air, yet that may be attributed partly to the Viscousness of the
Luciferous matter, which is less apt to be dissipated; which I am the apter to
believe, since it being once exposed to the open Air, it was considerably
wasted and was rendered much more violent; so that it produced considerable
effects of actual Heat. But though I am inclined to believe that the Air
contributes thus to the shining of these Noctiluca's, by putting the Particles
of the fumes into a brisk agitation, yet whether it acts immediately on the
fumid matter it invades, or whether it dissipates it, or acts after the manner
of a Vital Spirit, or further, whether the Air uniting with these fumes forms a
Body fit to be agitated about, by the Ether, I shall leave to be further
inquired into. But to return to our Observations.

4. Though agitation before the Vial was unstopped would not kindle the Light;
yet when it was opened, it would be increased by it. And even when it was in
its dark state, if I poured a little of it upon my hand, and rubbed it with my
finger, it would presently become vivid, and emit store of Luminous Rays, as
well as fumes very offensive to the Nostrils; and when I ceased to rub, and the
Luminous Quality was lost, it would be renewed again by a repeated attrition;
but in a little time its lucid Virtue would decay.

5. As for the degree of the Light of this Luminous matter, it was equal with
that of some rotten wood; and it was observable, that the Rays of it were
reflected but weakly by black Bodies, but appeared very lucid when enclosed in
white ones, though I could not perceive the Rays of it reflected from a redish
Diamond or an Emerauld. This Light in respect of it self was Opacous, but
transparent when held near external Light, and interposed betwixt it and the
Eye.

6. I tried whether the Sunbeams would excite those fumes, which are
Concomitants of its Luminousness, but could not perceive them raised in the
least. As for the Nature of this Liquor I could not perceive it upon my Tongue
either Acid or Alkalizate, but Empyreumatical, almost like that of Spirit of
crude Tartar, its smell being like that of an Empyreumatical Oil, compounded
with a stink like that of stale Urine. It turned not Syrup of Violets green, as
volatile Alkalies, or urinous Salts do; nor did it by other Trials appear to be
an Acid.

7. This Liquor in its lucid State being agitated, several consistent Particles
being by that Agitation raised, and sticking to the sides of the Glass,
appeared to be more lucid than the Fumes. Having wet my Finger with this
Liquor, and rubbed it upon my Hand 'till it became luminous, I immersed my
Finger in Water, upon which the Light was extinguished; but when I took it out
of the Water, and rubbed it again, it became lucid as before.

8. But twice I observed, that there was such a peculiar Temper in the Air,
that it continued to flame twelve or fifteen Hours after it had been stopped
up. And at last this Liquor became so effaete, that it would not yield Light,
'till its Parts were agitated by Attrition, or put into motion by the Heat of
the Fire.

9. To what Observations have been already made, I shall add the following,
made on the Liquor contained in the first Vial.

Observations on the Liquor contained in the first Vial.

1. The Liquor being muddy shone ten hours after it was first poured into the
Vial, and when the Vial was unstopped the Fumes were put into a circular Motion
round the sides of the Glass, like a Whirlwind; which perhaps might depend in
some measure on the violent Ingress of Air, upon opening the Vial; though I have
sometimes observed lucid Rotations of Matter in the Cavity of the Vial, a
considerable time after such Eruptions.

2. The Flames which were afforded by rubbing these Liquors, yielded white
Fumes of a rank offensive Smell; the Color of the Flame being yellow, and
tremulous in their Motion, and inconstant, sometimes flashing out more than at
other times; but it neither burnt the Skin, nor singed fine Linen: So that if
any, it must resemble that Flamma Vitalis which is supposed to reside in
Animals.

3. A Pencil being dipped in this Liquor, and drawn upon white Paper, deposed
only its watery part; but the more gummy Matter in the Pencil being squeezed
out, it seemed to burn like a Candle, and sometimes shooting downwards, as if
it were played about the Hairs that made up that part of the Pencil, which
brought into my Mind those Verses of Virgil,

Ecce levis summo de virtice visus Iuli
Fundere lumen Apex, tactuque innoxia molli
Lambere flamma Comas, etc.
Aeneid. And it was observable, that this Flame would successively appear and
disappear for a considerable time, and sometimes when the wreathing of the
Hairs was violent, the Flame would be accompanied with a momentary, though
sensible Heat, yet it would not fire Gunpowder; though some of the consistent
Matter, whilst it was preparing, being taken out with a Knife, and the Knife
rubbed betwixt the Thumb and Fingers with a blue Calico Apron, the Matter
received such an Impression from that Attrition, as put its parts into so
violent a Motion, that two Holes were burnt in the Apron. Some of the Liquor
contained in the Receiver, and diluted with Water, turned Syrup of Violets
green, and fermented with Acids.

4. Some of this Liquor being contained in a Vial, and conveyed into our
Pneumatick Engine, though the Air could not be so far exhausted, but that there
was a sufficient quantity left behind to kindle the Flame; yet the Commotion
occasioned by Pumping, would be, as if it were ventilated, or blown up, and
made to shine more vividly. And a piece of Paper moistened with this Liquor,
being conveyed into a Receiver, though by the Commotion of the Receiver, the
Flame seemed to be still increased, yet in those Parts betwixt the Folds it
appeared to be much less than in the open Air; and though when moist Air was let
in again the Flame was extinguished, yet upon a removal of the Receiver, when
the Paper was exposed to the open Air it renewed its Flame.

5. Some of this Liquor being at the first filtred, the Substance remaining in
the Filtre being enclosed with it in a wide-mouthed Glass, it became luminous
when exposed to the Air. And another piece of Paper being shut up in another
Glass, when it was spread open in a dark Place, several Flashes sprang out
incessantly and successively, first in one place then in another, and were not
only various in their Figures, but had frequent Emications and Tremblings.

6. Some of this luciferous Matter being dissolved in an aqueous Liquor, which
was transparent when it was settled, though a moderate Agitation would not produce
Light in it, yet being set in a Sand-heat in a Bolt-head 'till the Ball was too
hot to be touched with ones hand, I caused it to be removed into a dark place,
and found that it had acquired a manifest Luminousness, and the Liquor being
variously agitated and broke, several Flakes of Light ascended to the top of
the Stem; and when the Liquor was agitated 'till it was spread over the inside
of the Ball and part of the Stem, it was adorned with luciferous parts of
Matter, which twinkled like so many Stars, and descended in Lines, some of
which were very oblique and pleasant.

7. Once I observed, that when the Liquor contained in a Bolt-Glass was not
very hot, having given it a rude shake, a Spark rose on one side, and spread
all over the Cavity of the Ball. And to what has been observed, I shall add,
that some of this Liquor was having been hermetically sealed up, it retained
its luciferous Qualities a long time.

8. The way to make the Phosphorus Balduini, is the following, viz. Having
dissolved fine white Chalk in Spirit of Nitre, or clean Aqua fortis, it must be
filtred through Cappaper, and the clear Solution is to be evaporated 'till
there remains a dry substance; which being spread over the inside of a round
Vessel which will endure the Fire, you are to give it a peculiar degree of
Heat; and which commonly requires a convenient shaped Vessel, whereby the Flame
or Heat may be reverberated, 'till the Matter has acquired a disposition to
retain Light; and then the Vessel must be covered with a Glass or fine Crystal
Cover, to keep it from the outward Air.

10. The Process which we took to make our Aerie Noctiluca was the following; We
took a considerable quantity of putrified Urine; which was distilled 'till all
the spirituous Parts were drawn off; after which the superfluous moisture was
also abstracted, 'till the remaining Substance was brought to the Consistence
of a thick Syrup, which being well incorporated, with three times its Weight of
white Sand, the Mixture was put into a strong Retort, to which a large Receiver
was joined in a good measure filled with Water: Then the two Vessels being
carefully luted together, and a naked Fire being gradually administered for five
or six Hours, that the Phlegmatic or Volatile Parts might come over first. When
this was done, the Fire was increased, and at the length for five or six Hours,
made as strong and intense as the Furnace was capable of giving; by which means
good store of white Fumes came over, almost like those that appear in the
Distillation of Oil of Vitriol, which when they are past, and the Receiver grew
clear, they were after a while succeeded by another sort, which seemed, in the
Receiver, to give a faint blueish Light, almost like that of little burning
Matches, dipped in Sulphur. And last of all, the Fire being very vehement, a more
ponderous Substance passed over, which fell to the bottom of the Water, which
being taken out, appeared to be luciferous. But whether the shining Faculty
depends on the volatile and spirituous Parts of this Animal Liquor, or of the
fixed Salt, and ponderous faetid Oil, I shall not determine, 'till further
satisfied by Observations.

An Appendix to the Aeerial Noctiluca.

1. Some luciferous Matter, that had a long time lost its shining Faculty,
being heated by the Fire, presently shone vividly enough, and continued to do
so whilst it was sufficiently warm; but in a few Weeks, it likewise lost this
Disposition of Heating. And though some consistent Matter had lost its Power of
shining, yet the Superficies being taken off, the Matter that lay under it
rubbed upon my Hand would presently become luminous.

2. Though this luminous Matter be not feculent, yet it usually leaves some of
its gummy Parts sticking to the sides of the Vial, which may be discovered by
heating the Vial, or if it be broke in pieces, and agitated in another Vessel;
for by that means, the Parts being rubbed one against another, and variously
placed with their sides upwards and downwards, they would every way diffuse a
clear Light.

3. A twelfth part of a Vial being filled with a liquid Phosphorus of another
kind, so that a greater quantity of Air might be contained in it, it continued
to shine without unstopping the Vial. And I sometimes observed several
Exhalations like Clouds, or Aggregates of Smoke, to roll to and fro in the
Cavity of the Vessel; and would grow much more lucid upon shaking the Vial.

4. When it had lost its Light for some time, it filled the Cavity of the Vial,
when unstopped, with Fumes, which like those of the other Noctiluca's, appeared
white in the Light, and luminous in the Dark. A Bolt-head half full of this
luminous Matter being sealed up hermetically, it continued luminous six Days
and Nights; and when a great part of the Liquor was poured off, the remaining
Sediment being spread about the sides of the Glass, by inverting it, they
appeared like so many bright twinkling Stars in a clear Night.

CHAP. XXV. New Phenomena exhibited by an Icy Noctiluca, or a solid
self-shining Substance; and first, some Qualities of the Noctiluca it self.
Some Qualities of the Noctiluca.
HAving by a method, not unlike that taken to produce the Aerial Noctiluca,
obtained the following Qualities in it; and, first, It came over in
Distillation in little Grains of different Shapes and Sizes, and most commonly
irregular, being void of Color, and when held against the Light, transparent;
and the greater Pieces looked so like Ice, that for that reason I called it the
Icy Noctiluca. But though generally it was colorless and transparent, yet some
small Pieces were Opake, and of various Colors compared with each other.

2. This Noctiluca is heavier in Specie than Water; and though consistent, yet
not so hard as common Ice; but it is brittle, and may be spread upon a solid
Body, like the unmelted Tallow of a Candle, it may be melted in hot Liquors
without waste, but in the Air a great Part of it will be consumed. As to sense
it is Cold; but is of such a Texture that it easily becomes hot upon agitation.

3. When held in the Air it yields a vivid Light if wet over, and when first
exposed to the Air, it not only shines, but emits store of Effluvia, as long as
it is kept there; when it is immersed in Water it ceases to shine and also to
smoke, but as soon as it is taken out, it begins a-fresh, and if part be
immersed and part above Water, the latter will shine vividly though the other
will not.

The Qualities of Water in which it had been immersed.
4. The Water in which this Noctiluca had been sometime immersed, had a strong
and penetrant taste like a Mixture of Brine and Spirit of Salt, and relished a
little of Vitriol. Being held in a small Concave Vessel of Silver over lighted
Coals and ashes, it evaporated very slowly, and would not shoot into Crystals,
nor afford a dry Salt; but coagulated into a substance like a Gelly, or the
whites of Eggs, which would be easily melted by Heat. When kept on a hot fire
it would first boil, and then make a crackling Noise, and the Explosions would
be accompanied with flashes of fire and light, which if they were small were
generally blue, like flames of Sulphur, but more vivid, and sometimes bluer;
but the greater flakes appeared yellow and very Luminous, and these Phenomenon
appeared likewise for some time after the Vessel was taken off. When this
matter was almost melted by Heat, if it was permitted to cool, it acquired a
rosinous Consistence, and tinged the Flame of a Candle blue. By the Fire
working upon it, it acquired a Garlic Smell, and being left in the Air all
Night, it turned to a Liquor almost as strong as Spirit of Salt. Being put upon
the Fire again, it would afford the same Phenomenon as before, but some of the
Matter which before broke out in Flashes, sometimes rose only in the form of
Smoke, of a rank Smell. And though the quantity of this Matter was small, yet it
afforded Flashes plentifully for an Hour.

What Liquors it would be dissolved in, and what not.
It would not dissolve in cold Water, though the Water would be thereby
impregnated; so Crocus Metallorum impregnates Wine or Water, without having its
Bulk diminished. It fermented not with Spirit of Sal-Armon. nor did it lose its
luminous Virtue, but would shine when exposed to the Air again. Oil of Vitriol
when cold would not dissolve it, but when hot would melt it; and it would lie
at the bottom of so heavy a Liquor. Aqu. fortis had no visible effect on it,
nor Oil of Turpentine when cold; but the latter being hot, it wholly vanished
in a Night's time, without making any alteration in the Oil. Being put into Oil
of Cloves, and melted by a Fire, when it was cool, and the Vial unstopped, it
yielded not only a Light, that was rendered more acceptable to the Standers-by,
by its grateful Smell; and the like succeeded with Oil of Cloves, in which
Liquor, when impregnated with the Noctiluca, it was observable, that the Vial
being opened in a dark place, it would yield a flash of Flame very vivid, which
would last a Minute; and sometimes, if a Candle were in the Room, the shining
fluid would appear of a pleasant blueish Color; and another thing observable
was, that the Light would vanish, whilst store of white Fumes remained upon the
Liquor, as if the Light chiefly depended on the finest and purest Part. In Oil
of Mace it did not appear luminous, nor in Oil of Aniseeds. This Noctiluca
continued in Spirit of Wine, a considerable time undiminished.

6. This Noctiluca being included in rectified Spirit of Wine, was partly
dissolved; and left some earthly Parts at the bottom of the Liquor, but did not
discolor it: upon unstopping the Vial no Light appeared, but being dropped
into cold Water, the Drops were kindled by it; but those Flashes immediately
disappeared, the Water not being luminous; which Phenomenon, lest it should be
thought to be an effect of Antiperistasis, I dropped the impregnated Spirit
upon hot Water, and found, that the same Phenomenon succeeded. And this
Noctiluca diffuses its Virtue so far, that one Grain impregnated a thousand of
Spirit of Wine. As for the reason why these Flashes so suddenly disappeared, it
might proceed from a sudden dispersion of the Particles of the Spirit through
the Water, and the Avolition of the luciferous Matter. So Camphire dissolved in
Spirit of Wine, and dropped upon cold Water, is left upon the Surface of it,
the Spirit being immediately dispersed through the Liquor.

Experiments discovering a strange subtlety of Parts in the Glacial Noctiluca.

Having dissolved a Grain of our Noctiluca in a Dram of Spirit of Wine, and
added gradually fifty times its weight of Water, the Noctiluca rendered the
whole light, when shaken in the Dark, so that one Grain rendered 100000 times
its weight of Liquor luminous; and what was more strange, was, that not only
the Steams appeared luminous, but the Light seemed in some measure diffused
through the whole Water, which I am apt to believe proceeded from the
Exhalations which shined through that Diaphanous Water, though when the Glass was
shaken the whole Mass appeared luminous. And the Experiment being further
prosecuted, a Grain of the Noctiluca dissolved in Alkohol of Wine, and shaken
in Water, it rendered 400000 times its weight luminous throughout. And at
another Trial I found, that it impregnated 500000 times its weight; which was
more than one part of Cochineel could communicate its Color to, the utmost
being 125000 parts of Water. In which Experiments, of the Noctiluca was
undissolv'd. And had we to the aforementioned Estimate, added the Proportion of
the illuminated ambient Air, the Expansion of this Noctiluca would have been
incomparably greater than the abovementioned number denotes.

But to demonstrate further the strange Subtilty of our Noctilucal Matter, I
shall add, that three Grains of our Noctiluca being placed upon a flat-bottom'd
Glass, that was broader at the Top than the bottom, and shallow, that the
Matter might be more fully exposed to the Air, it was placed in a shelving
Posture, that upon its resolution in the moist Air, it might presently run
down, and not hinder the free Evaporation of the remaining Matter: The Vessel
being thus placed, all the Fragments about ten a Clock at Night began to shine
briskly, and continued to do so 'till reduced to very small Parts; so that so
small a parcel of our Noctiluca continued to shine above a hundred and fifty
Hours. In which time the following Circumstances were observable, First, That
the luciferous Fumes were visible both Night and Day; and rose from the
Particles of the Noctiluca, like Smoke from so many Chimneys. Secondly, This
Smoke was so copious and tenacious, that it lost not that Form 'till it rose a
Foot above the Matter that afforded it; the Motion of it being swift, and
sometimes tending directly upwards, sometimes horizontally, and sometimes
downwards, as if their Motion had been determined by the situation of the
Noctilucal Fragments, by which they were emitted.
And one thing further observable was, that when it had been a long time
exposed to the Air it emitted strong and odorous Exhalations, distinct from the
visible Fumes.

As for the Liquor which dropped from this Noctiluca, and which remained in the
Glass Vessel, I put it into a Concave Silver Vessel, and held it over
Small-Coals and Ashes, where it evaporated not so easily as I expected, but
turned into an unctuous Substance, of a dark reddish Color; and being thence
removed and held over quick Coals, it boiled and crackled like Bay Salt cast
into the Fire, and emitted several successive Flashes. Another piece of this
Noctiluca, which weighed three Grains, being put into a small Glass Funnel,
whose Stem was so fine that it was less than a small Pin's head, and the Pipe
of the Funnel being purposely placed in a Vial, to catch the colliquated
Liquor; and this being set in a South-Window all Day, and placed in my Chamber
at Night, I observed, that it continued luminous no less than 360 Hours. From
whence appeared the extraordinary Minuteness of the parts of our Noctiluca; and
what is more strange, the Weight of ^^r Noctilucous Matter colliquated,
exceeded the Weight of the Noctiluca it self two thirds.

This Noctiluca being spread upon Paper, and held to the Flame of a Candle,
when the Flame came to the Noctiluca, it burnt away in a flashing and
spluttering manner, and cracked like Salt. And some of this Paper being put
upon Embers covered with Ashes, the Noctiluca would take Fire, and communicate
its Flame to the Paper. And to show its inflamability further, I put a Grain of
it into Spirit of Wine, and though it discolored not the Flame of the Spirit,
which was partly red and partly blue, yet when the Spirit was consumed, and the
Flame was contiguous to the immersed Phosphorus, it took Fire, and emitted a
yellow Flame copiously. And a piece of this being set on fire by the Sunbeams
concentrated, it burnt very vividly and clear; and the expiring Flame left
behind it a Caput Mortuum, which formed several Circles like those of a
Sardonix, whereof the largest was white, another yellow, and the third red, all
the three Colors being vivid and pleasant. Some part of the Caput Mortuum
being left in the Spoon, was presently resolved per deliquium, into a Liquor as
sharp as Spirit of Salt; and other parts having free access to the Air appeared
combustible.

Another instance of the Inflammability of it, was by rubbing it in a Mortar,
for by that means it took Fire, and burnt vividly, but was soon extinguished by
the Fire.

Of the burning of Bodies with the Noctiluca.
If our Noctiluca be pressed hard betwixt ones Fingers, or against a Board, it
will feel sensibly hot; and will sometimes be violent enough to scorch the
Skin: And one thing observable is, that Blisters raised by its Heat, are not
only more painful, but harder to be cured than ordinary ones. But though some
parts of this Noctiluca are disposed to take Flame, yet they are not all
equally prone to an Incalescence. To these Observations of our Noctiluca I
shall add, that some of it being rubbed betwixt Folds of Paper for some time,
they took Fire, and so did it when rubbed with Gunpowder, by which means the
Gunpowder was exploded: And once when my Servant carried some of it in his
Pocket, the Glass being broke, the Attrition and Heat of his Body set it on
Fire, by which means several Holes were burnt in his Breeches. To which I shall
subjoin, that six Parts of Sulphur, and one of this being mixed and beaten with
the haft of a Knife, the Noctiluca shone through the Paper, and as soon as
these Ingredients were exposed to the Flame, they immediately took Fire; and
once the Experiment being repeated, the Brimstone did not burn with a slow
Flame, but flashed away like Gunpowder. And once my Laborant having prepared
some of it, and trying to write upon a dry Board, the force of Attrition
kindled the Wood, and afforded not only vividly shining, but burning Letters.

To try what was the Nature of this saline Noctilucal Matter, I dropped some of
it upon Syrup of Violets, and found that it did not turn it green, but of a
fine Carnation Color, as Acid Spirits usually do. And I likewise found, that
it presently destroyed the blue Color, though not the other of the Lignum
Nephriticum. I likewise poured some of this Noctilucous Liquor upon Filings of
Copper, and exposed them to the Air for two or three Days, I found, that though
the Filings were dissolved, yet the Color of the Tincture was not a deep
Azure, as if made with a Volatile Urinous Salt, but seemed to partake of green
and blue. It likewise fermented with Powder of red Coral, and also with Salt of
Tartar. From whence it appears, that the nature of our Salt is not Urinous, but
of the Family of Acids. But to proceed, I enclosed a parcel of this Icy
Noctiluca in a small Vial, and another, together with the Water it came over
with in Distillation, and I observed, that the former lost its Light in four
Days, and the other in about a Week. But to try whether a sufficient Degree of
Heat would not cause our Noctiluca to take Fire, I enclosed some of it in a
Glass-Egg, with Hermes his Seal, and found, that the Ball of the Egg being held
near the Fire, the Noctiluca presently took Flame and burnt much longer than we
expected; and when the Flame was over, we sometimes observed a little Liquor in
the Glass, the rest of the Matter, by the Operation of the Fire, acquiring a
red Color.

Some of this Noctiluca being put into a Glass Egg, and Water poured upon it,
when the Water was heated very hot, and the Noctiluca was melted, we poured the
Water off; upon which the Noctiluca remaining in the Glass, immediately being
exposed to the Air, took Flame, and part of it running out with the Water,
burnt fiercely upon the Surface of it, and with a crackling Noise, the
remaining Caput Mortuum appearing red. To which relations I shall add, that the
Beams of this Noctiluca, passing through an Orange colored Glass, appeared of
a very pleasant Color. And on this occasion I shall subjoin, that though once I
could not obtain any Light from some of this Noctiluca included in a Vial with
Oil of Mace, as with Oil of Cinnamon, yet upon further Trials, I found that it
succeeded. And to what has been delivered on this Subject, I shall further
add, when the Noctiluca was wholly consumed to a Caput Mortuum, that as soon as
it was turned with the other side upwards, it would immediately take Fire
a-fresh.

THE WORKS Of the HONORABLE ROBERT BOIL, Esquire EPITOMIZED.
BOOK V. PART I.
CHAP. I. New Experiments of the Positive or Relative Levity of Bodies under
Water.
Arguments against the Positive Levity of emerging Bodies.
WHEN any Body that is lighter in Specie than Water is immersed in it, and upon
the removal of that force which depressed it, it rises again, it is usually
attributed to the Positive Levity of that Body; but since the instance of Wood
emerging is that which is usually offered as an Argument, to it I shall answer,
That Wood being a Body full of Pores (except some which will not swim in Water)
and upon that account specifically lighter than Water, the Water by the
Pressure of that which is incumbent, getting betwixt the Superficies of the
Vessel, and the Body immersed, causes it to rise, the Water which succeeds it
in its place making a more powerful Pressure against it, than its Specific
Gravity enables it to resist. And that Bodies Specifically lighter than Water
will be thus buoyed up by it, will appear from the Hydrostatical Paradoxes
hereafter to be laid down.

And though it be usually urged, that the Bodies imimmersed are too closely
contiguous to the bottom of the Vessel for the Water to insinuate themselves
betwixt; yet from the following Experiment it will appear, that were the
contiguous Surfaces so close, the positive Levity of the Wood would not be able
to raise it; for two black Marbles, being so exactly polished as to be as
contiguous as possibly they might, we tied a Bladder full of Air to the
uppermost, and then causing them both to be immersed in Water, the positive
Levity of the Bladder, would not cause the Bladder to rise; but as soon as by a
servant the uppermost Marble was gradually slipped half off the Polished
Surface of the lowest, the Water which before was not able to insinuate it self
betwixt the Surfaces of the contiguous Marbles, and to separate them, presently
caused the Bladder to rise with a considerable swiftness and force, above the
Surface of the Water: Which Event, that it did not depend on Nature's
abhorrency of a Vacuum is evident, since that would have an equal force when
the Polished Surfaces were wholly contiguous, the Power of Nature's abhorrency
of a Vacuum being held by its Assertors to be unlimited. And that it was not
the heaviness of the upper Marble, nor want of lightness in the included,
appeared, since when the Surfaces of the polished Marbles were not contiguous,
the Bladder was able to lift up a weight of six or seven pound, besides the
Marble.

And to show, that the Bladder might be raised by the Pressure of the Water,
according to the laws of Hydrostaticks usually buoying up Bodies Specifically
lighter than it self, having pressed out the greatest part of the Air contained
in a Bladder, I tied a piece of Iron to it, and immersed it in a wide-mouthed
Glass, which was so deep that the Bladder was totally immersed, and yet not far
below the Surface of the Water, and this being conveyed into our Pneumatick
Engine, when by exhausting the Air part of the Pressure was taken off, the Air
in the Bladder expanding it self, and taking up more Room in the Water, and
consequently becoming so much more Specifically lighter, and the resistance of
the Water which endeavors to buoy it up becoming respectively greater, it was
together with the suspended weight, raised to the Surface of the Water, and
continued there till the outward Air was let in again; and then the Air being
contracted into its former dimensions, it subsided again. In which Experiment
the positive Levity of the Air was not varyed, but only its relative and
respective weight in reference to its proportion of Water.

And that Rarefaction alters not the positive Levity of Bodies, may appear from
the following Experiment; for having oyled a Bladder, and when the Air was
expressed, tied it to the neck of a Vial, I found, that in the exhausted
Receiver, though the Air in the Vial was so far expanded as to fill the whole
capacity of the Bladder, yet the Vial neither rose higher; nor subsideded lower
when the Air was drawn out, or let in again.

CHAP. II. New Experiments about the Pressure of the Air's Spring on Bodies
under Water.
The Pressure of the Air's Spring on Bodies under Water.
TO show that the Spring and Weight of the Air has manifest effects on Bodies
separated from an immediate contact by the Interposition of Water, I shall
subjoyn the following Experiments.

EXPERIMENT II.
We luted the neck of a Vial, which was capable of containing above a point of
Water, upon that pipe which conveys Air out of the Receiver into the Pump,
which being done, we whelmed over this Receiver our large one, and having
poured in a sufficient quantity of Water, we closed it up with the Turn-key,
that no Air might get out that way, and then the Air being exhausted out of the
Vial, if flew into a great many pieces, the sides of the Glass being not able
to resist the Pressure of the Air, that lay upon the Surface of the Water in
the large Receiver.

EXPERIMENT II.
The greatest part of the Air being squeezed out of a Bladder, and the Bladder
tied to a weight, which kept it something below the Surface of Water contained
in a wide-mouthed Glass; this being conveyed into a Receiver, the Air in the
Bladder expanded, as the Air on the Superficies of the Water was extracted.

EXPERIMENT III.
A Brass Plug being fitted to a Cylinder which was closed with a Plate of the
same Metal at one end; we put a Bladder half blown into the Cylinder, and
placing the Plug upon it, with a weight of a Conical figure upon that; we
poured so much Water into the Receiver in which it was placed, as covered the
top of the Conical weight, but left the Ring which was fixed to the top of it,
and which was fastened to the Turn-key by the help of a string; and things being
thus ordered, when the Air above the water was considerably exhausted, the
Spring of the Air in the Cylinder raised the Plugg and Weights a considerable
height, though the whole weight amounted to twenty eight pounds.

EXPERIMENT IV.
A Glass Vial being closed with Cement, and immersed in a deep Brass Cylinder
of Water, this was conveyed into our Receiver, and when the Air which pressed
upon the Water was drawn off, the Vial in the bottom of the Water was violently
shattered in pieces by the Spring of the included Air, for want of a sufficient
Pressure of the Air incumbent on the Water, to resist the force of that Spring.

EXPERIMENT V.
To show that the Expansion or Rarefaction of Air increases not the positive
Levity of Air, we suspended a Bladder half full of Air, with a Counterpoise, at
a balance in our Receiver, and though when the Air was exhausted, the Bladder
was sufficiently distended; yet it seemed to retain the same weight, whether
dilated or contracted.

CHAP. III. New Experiments concerning an effect of the varying weight of the
Atmosphere upon some Bodies in the Water. Communicated in the Transactions of
Feb. 24.1672/3.
Of the Effects of the differing weight of the Atmosphere on Bodies under Water.
COnsidering that the Pores of most Liquors are plentifully stocked with Aerie
Particles, and that upon that account the Atmosphere may according to its
several degrees of weight have considerable Effects on them, I caused three
small Glass-Bubbles with slender Stems to be blown, which were so equally
poised in Water by their weight, that a little thing would make them emerge or
sink. And I observed, that these being put into Water contained in a
wide-mouthed Glass, sometimes they would emerge and sometimes subside, and
sometimes emerge again, as the Atmosphere varyed in weight or degrees of Heat
and Cold.

And it was easy to observe, that when the Heat of the Air raised one of these
Bubbles, the heat of the Sunbeams would so rarisie the Water included in them,
as to cause some of it to get out, upon which the Bubbles emerged, but when
those Beams were intercepted, the Water being condensed, and getting into the
Bubble again, it would subside. But when their subsiding depended on the weight
of the Atmosphere, if the Mercury in the Baroscope stood high, the Heat of the
Sun would not raise the Bubbles.

N. B. 1. That the Bubbles not being all equally poised, sometimes one and
sometimes two would rise, as the Air was heavier or lighter, and consequently
capable of affecting the lightest only, or all.

2. The Success did not always answer, for when the subsiding depended on some
occult cause, they would continue there, as if some airy Parts had insinuated
themselves into the Water.

3. The fittest time for these Experiments, and in which they best succeed, is
in the Spring, the Air being more subject to vary in its Weight, as well as
other things.

CHAP. IV. New Experiments about the differing Pressure of heavy Solids and
Fluids.
Of the different Pressure of Solids and Fluids.
ONE great reason why some Learned Men believe that the Air has no such a
considerable Pressure on subjacent Bodies as we teach, is, because they think
it would be too heavy for Animal Bodies to live or move under it; but since we
have positive proof of it, we may as well doubt whether the Lodestone be
endewed with an attracting and other Virtues, because we cannot understand how
they are performed. Besides, Men being born under such a Pressure, their Bodies
seem not only accustomed to it, but proportionably strong. But could we suppose
a Man born somewhere, without the incumbent weight of an Atmosphere, doubtless
such Bodies would not be so able as ours to resist its Pressure.

But it is urged by some, that were there such a Pressure of the Atmosphere, it
would cause Pain; but to this it may likewise be answered, that our Bodies
being from the Birth accustomed to it, we only feel Pain upon some new
unaccustomed and additional Pressure; so when we are accustomed to wear heavy
Clothes, we are not sensible of their weight, nor are we sensible of the Heat
of the Blood in our Heart, because it is habitual to those Parts, whereas if our
finger be put into the Heart of a newly dissected Animal, we shall find it
sensibly hot.

But further, from what I have elsewhere laid down, it appears, that a Cubick
Inch of Air will be able to resist the weight of the whole incumbent
Atmosphere, and that a little quantity of Air resists a further compression as
well as a greater; and I have likewise shown, that the Pores of the Parts of
Animals whether fluid or consistent, are plentifully stocked with numerous
Aerial Bubbles, which cause those Bodies to swell or expand in our exhausted
Receiver. And as for those membranous and fibrous Parts which are not
altogether so porous, they are of so strong and firm a Texture, as to resist
external Pressure upon that account. Besides, there is a great deal of
difference betwixt the partial Pressure of a solid Body, and the Pressure of an
Ambient Fluid, which presses uniformly, and is resisted either by the solidity
of the Parts, or the Spring of those Airy Particles contained within their
Pores. And that the uniformness of the Pressure makes it less sensible, is
evident, since it has been observed, that though the Atmosphere is so much
lighter upon the tops of some high Mountains, as not to elevate Mercury so high
in a Baroscope by three Inches, as at the bottom, yet those that have been upon
those Mountains tell us, that they perceived no considerable difference in the
Pressure of the Atmosphere above and below; nor are Miners sensible of any
great weight upon them, though in deep Mines in Mountainous Countries; nor are
Diverse sensible of any Pressure when under Water; but that Air weighs in Air,
and that Water weighs in Water, I have elsewhere made it evident; yet I don't
think that a Diver is violently depressed by the weight of the incumbent Water,
since from what we have elsewhere delivered it appears, that if a Man's Body
were of an equal specific Gravity with the Water, the subjacent Water would
sustain him, but his Body being heavier than an equal bulk of Water, the
Surplusage of weight depresses it; for which Reason, in some Seawater, which
is near of the same specific Gravity with their Bodies, Diverse find it very
difficult to dive. However it is not a little strange, that at so great a depth
as one hundred fathom Diverse should not perceive a sensible Pressure,
especially upon their Thorax and Abdomen: But I am apt to believe that the
inadvertency of some of them, rather than any thing else makes them not take
notice of it; or else the haste which they rise and sink in; since I have been
told by some, that they have perceived a manifest Pressure when they sunk
leisurely. And I was likewise told by another, that when he descended a great
depth under Water, the Blood was squeezed out of his Nose and Eyes; and another
who dived in a Leathern-case told me, that it was so much pressed against his
Thorax and Belly, that he was forced suddenly to come up again.

But since these Relations are not altogether to be relied on, I shall
endeavor to give a Reason why the Pressure is no more sensible; which I take
to be the strong Texture of a Human Body, and the uniformity of the Pressure.
As to the first, to what I have said of the Resistance made by our Bodies to
external Pressure, I shall only add, that a Bladder being tied upon the end of
a Cylinder, about an Inch in Diameter, when the Air was exhausted, the
incumbent Pressure of the Atmosphere was not able to break it, though when a
Man's hand was placed there, he was not able to raise it till some of the Air
was let in again, the Pressure which held his hand down being equivalent to a
Cylinder of Water thirty foot high. But to show the effects of an uniform
Pressure of Liquids upon Solids contained in them, I shall subjoyn the
following Trials.

EXPERIMENT I, II, and III.
Having placed an Egg betwixt two Bladders half blown, in a Brass Cylinder, and
cautiously put a Plug upon them, with as much weight upon it as amounted to
thirty pound, I placed them all in a Receiver, and when the Air was exhausted,
though the expanding Bladders must needs press equally against the Egg and the
Plug, yet the incumbent weight was raised, and the Egg when taken out as whole
as before; the weight it sustained in the Cylinder being not quite so much as
the weight of the Atmosphere. But though the Egg was able to sustain so much
weight when pressed upon uniformly; yet Weights being successively laid upon
the same Egg exposed to the open Air, four Pound weight crushed it in pieces.
And by further Trials we found, that an Egg-shell, which had all the Yelk and
White taken out, as also a thin Glass Bubble, being placed betwixt two
Bladders, as in the first Experiment, neither of them was in the least cracked.

EXPERIMENT IV.
To show that what we have taught of the Nature of Fluids, will hold in Water
as well as Air, if the Pressure be uniform, we enclosed an Egg in a Bladder
almost full of Water, and putting it into the Brass Cylinder, we heaped upon
the Plug as many Weights as amounted to seventy five pound, yet the Egg being
taken out, was as found as when first put in. In which Instance it cannot be
pretended, that the Egg bore no weight, by those that allow not Water to
gravitate in Water, since there was a considerable Pressure made by Metalline
Weights, which every body allows to weigh in Water. From this Experiment, and
the other before mentioned, of an Egg being broke by a partial Pressure, it
appears, that the Strength of the Texture of a Humane Body, together with the
Uniformity of the Pressure of ambient Water, may be the reasons why Diverse feel
no greater Inconveniency under Water; for though their Thorax may be a little
more compressed than other Parts, yet that Part being naturally dilated and
contracted, a little Pressure may make no sensible Alteration: But I have been
told by a Diver, that at a consicerable Depth, he perceived a painful Pressure
upon the Drums of his Ears, 'till he contrived a way to guard them from that
Inconveniency; the reason of which Phenomenon seemed to be no other, than that
in that Part there was not an equal internal Pressure, to resist and
counterballance the external Pressure of the Water.

CHAP. V. An Invention for estimating the Weight of Water in Water, with
ordinary Balances or Weights. Communicated in the Pub. Transact. of Aug. 16.
1669.
A Bubble about the bigness of a Pullet's Egg, with a long Stem turned upon at
the end, was heated; and, when the Air was most of it expelled, sealed up; and
then being by a convenient weight of Lead immersed under Water, it was
suspended at the end of a Balance, and counterpoised; and then the Apex of the
Stem being broke off with a Forceps, so much Water got into the Cavity of the
Bubble, as required four drachms and thirty eight grains to reduce the Balance
to an Aequilibrium. Which being done, we drove out the Water by the help of a
Flame of a Candle into another Glass, which was counterposed, and we found that
it weighed four drachms and thirty grains, which together with what was
evaporated and lost, and the weight of the Apex, amounted to the weight first
mentioned. So that from hence it appears, that Water weights as much in Water,
as it does in the open Air; which according to the best Computation we could
make, succeeded a second time in a larger Bubble.

As for the Objections which Mr. George Sinclair has made to this Experiment,
since it is the Opinion of our Author, that he only differs from him in
Expressions, I shall wave what he there says, as not at all requisite in this
Place; and shall only add what our Author has said, to explain what he means
by Water weighing in Water, viz. That it gravitates or weighs, in as much as it
tends downwards, upon the account of its specific Weight, though it does not
preponderate, that is, the Parcel of Water weighed has but an equal Tendency
downwards with the Ambient Water, but upon an additional Weight it
preponderates as much as the additional weight increases its Tendency toward
the Center.

CHAP. VI. Hydrostatical Paradoxes made out by new Experiments.
BEfore I procced to the Hydrostatical Paradoxes, I shall briefly intimate,
that though I can readily assent to the Hydrostatical Conclusions laid down in
Monsieur Paschall's Discourse; yet as for the Experiments he makes use of to
prove them by, I must own, I am not satisfied with them; since he makes use of
such as require that a Man should sit under Water fifteen or twenty Foot, with
the end of a Tube leaning upon his Thigh. But he neither acquaints us how a Man
shall be able to continue there, or how he shall discern the alterations in the
Mercury or other Bodies, at the bottom. Besides, such Experiments as he
proposes require Tubes twenty foot long, and Vessels as many foot deep, which
are hard to be got in England; nor is it possible to obtain from a Tradesman,
Brass Cylinders or Pluggs, made with so much Mathematical Exactness as he
proposes.

Having therefore contrived a more easy way to demonstrate the Truths contained
in the foregoing Paradoxes; before I proceed to examine them, I shall premise a
word or two by way of Postulatum or a Lemma; which consists of three Parts: The
first of which is, That if a Pipe open at both ends, and held perpendicular to
the Horizon, have the lower of them under Water, there passes an imaginary
Plain, which touching the Orifice of the Pipe, is parallel to the Horizon, and
likewise, as to sense, to the upper Surface of the Water. To which it will be
consonant, secondly, that as long as the Surface of the Water is even, the
Water incumbent on this Plain will equally press on all the parts of it. But,
thirdly, if there be a greater Pressure on one part of this Plain than another,
as when a Stone presses upon it, the Water which lies under that Stone will be
displaced, as the Stone subsides successively, 'till it come to the Bottom. But
on the contrary, if there be less Pressure on one part of that Plain than on
another, the Liquor will be raised on that part so high, 'till the Liquor on
that part of the Plain gravitates equally as the Water incumbent on the other
parts of it; which will appear from the following Experiments.

And first, If a Cylindrical Pipe open at both ends, be held in a perpendicular
Posture, and the lower end be immersed three Inches in Water, the Liquid within
the Tube having a free Communication, will be of an equal height with the
external Water, and in thin Tubes, a little higher. But if Oil be gradually
poured upon the Water without the Pipe, the superficial Plain will have a
greater Pressure upon it without than within, and consequently the Water under
the Tube, finding not so great a Pressure within the Pipe as without, it
gradually rises, 'till the external and internal Pressure upon the imaginary
Plain be equal.

But since this will be further evident from what is contained in the following
Paradoxes, I shall proceed to them, as soon as I have laid down the following
Experiments, to show Air is not a Body devoid of Weight, as some Peripateticks
suppose. The first is, that a Glass Bubble being blown, whose Capacity was
short of two cubical Inches, it was instantly hermetically sealed, whilst hot;
and when it was cool, being placed in a nice pair of Scales, and then the Apex
of the Stem being broke off, the Air rushing in with a noise, caused the Bubble
to preponderate half a Grain, though by breaking of the Stem under Water, it
appeared that the rarified Air remaining in the sealed Glass, possessed one
fourth of its Capacity. Another time the same Experiment being tried, the Air
contained seemed to weigh near three quarters of a Grain; and the Capacity of
the Receiver being filled with common Water, it weighed 905 Grains: So that
allowing the Air contained to take up one fourth, and that the weight of the
remaining Part was, probably the weight of the whole was about a Grain; and
consequently the Water weighed little more than nine hundred times as much as
an equal Bulk of Air.

PARADOX I.
If in a Glass of Water, See Plate 2. Fig. 1.
A B C D (see Plate the second, Fig. the first) a Cylindrical Tube be immersed,
which contains Oil of Turpentine; and that Oil be suspended there, (by keeping
the upper Orifice close, after it has been sucked up to a convenient height)
'till the Pipe is depressed to a convenient Depth in the Water; if the lower
end of the Pipe B Q be immersed 'till it reaches to the imaginary Surface G H,
and the Oil X Q presses no more upon that imaginary Surface, than the Water
without the Tube, then the Oil will be suspended there, and not be able to
depress the Surface of the Water below it; but if the Surface of the Oil in the
Tube be much above the Water, and it presses more upon the imaginary Surface G
H than the Water without, then it will make its way through that Surface, 'till
the Oil within and the Water without are brought to an Aequilibrium again, so
that they both equally press upon the Surface G H; and the like will happen, if
the Tube be raised to the Surface D S, and gradually on to the Surface L M; for
as the Pressure of the external Water grows less and less, as the imaginary
Surface is nearer the top of the Glass, so the Oil in the Tube growing
preponderant, falls out at the lower end of the Tube, 'till the Tube T V being
almost raised to the Surface L M, but a little Water pressing upon that
Surface, the Oil is almost wholly fallen out of the Cylindrical Cavity of it.
But if instead of raising the Pipe P Q, it be depressed to the Position N O,
the Water incumbent on the Surface E F on the outside the Pipe, being more
powerful than the Cylinder or Oil W AE, which is only aequiponderant to a
Cylinder of Water leaning on the Surface G H, the Oil must be buoyed up by the
Pressure of the external Water, and the Space O AE filled with Water, so that
the Oil betwixt W AE, and AE O, being both aequiponderant to a Cylinder of
Water, they may equally press upon the Surface E F with the Water on the
outside. And agreeable to what has been said it is, that the Cylinder of Oil X
Q will be something above the Surface L M, when the Tube is only immersed to
the Surface Q. Since Oil of Turpentine being specifically lighter than Water,
the Cylinder must be longer, to press upon the Surface G H, equally with a
Cylinder of Water, no longer than from the Surface L M to G H. And if a heavier
Liquor than Water were made use of, the Surface X must be more above L M than
in Water, otherwise it would not press equally upon the subjacent Surface. From
whence appears the Truth of the Proposition, for if the Oil be kept suspended
at a different Height as the external Water is deeper, to countervail it; and
if as it is raised from G H to I K, the Oil in the bottom of the Pipe is
pressed out, it must needs follow, that it is pressed down by the weight of the
incumbent Oil, since then the surface of the Water I K, being not equally
pressed upon from without, as by the Oil, it is able to break that Surface and
make its way out.

But before I proceed to the following Propositions, I shall subjoin the
following Advertisements. First, What we say of the Pressure of Fluids upon one
another, is to be attributed to heavy Fluids in general, except some reason
appears for a particular exception in some Places. Secondly, That in slender
Pipes the Surface of the Liquor within, is generally above the Surface of the
external, Thirdly, Small Pipes are the fittest for these Experiments, because
in larger the emerging Oil passing through the Water obscures the Light of what
is designed to be visible. Fourthly, We make use of Oil of Turpentine, rather
than any other Liquor, because clear and colorless, and not apt to stain ones
Clothes; and as for the offensive Smell, that may be corrected with Oil of
Rhodium, or any other odoriferous Oil, though any other Liquor may be made use
of, that will not mix with Water. Fifthly, Oil of Turpentine may be tinged with
Copper, to render the Phenomenon within more visible; for which reason we often
employ a Decoction of Brasil instead of clear Water, or of Log-wood, or red Ink
it self. Sixthly, the Figure of the Glasses may be what you please, but the
Pipes must be broader or longer as occasion requires. Seventhly, The Pipes are
to be filled by sucking up the Air to a convenient Height, and then stopping
the Orifice above with ones Finger; but if it be too high, the Experimenter may
let it out as he pleases, by admitting a convenient quantity of Air in at the
Top, by gradually removing his Finger. Lastly, In such Experiments as require a
considerable disparity betwixt the two mingled Liquors, we may make use of Oil
of Tartar per Deliquium instead of Water, and Spirit of Wine instead of Oil of
Turpentine; these Liquors being not disposed to mingle with one another; and
instead of fair Water 06 we may make use of a filtred Solution of Sea Salt,
when the other is not easily got.
And when we have a mind to vary the Experiment, we may make use of Oil of
Turpentine along with the other two; and by depressing a Tube into them with
Water in the bottom, exhibit very pleasing Phenomenon.

PARADOX II. That a lighter fluid may gravitate or weigh upon a heavier.
The truth of this is evident, since all Bodies have a tendency toward the
Center; by which they are always disposed to press downwards, though sometimes
they have a respective Levity, as when a piece of Wood emerges in Water, yet
nevertheless that relative Levity argues not that it has no weight at all,
since though when a Man stands in a pair of Scales and lifts up a weight,
notwithstaning the Ascent of the weight he will perceive a manifest tendency of
it downwards.

But to make it more plain (See Plate 2d. Fig. 2.) where supposing a Cylinder
of Water I G, See Plate 2. Fig. 2.
to be immersed in Oil of Turpentine to the immaginary Surface E F; the Water
in the Pipe I H being heavier in Specie than the Oil, it will equally ponderate
upon the Surface E F as the lighter Oil K E L I, and if the Pipe be immersed
deeper, the Cylinder of Water being not equiponderant with the extenal Oil, the
Oil will, though a lighter Body in Specie, rise in the bottom of the Tube and
buoy up the Water.

Again the Bubble X which consists of a Glass heavier than Water and Air which
is lighter; See Plate 2. Fig. 3.
or partly of Water it self which is specifically as heavy, as long as the
whole aggregate is lighter than Water of an equal bulk it will float, but if it
grows heavier it will sink, and if any heavy Body presses upon it, which is
specifically heavier than Water, by which the included Air may be compressed,
the Bubble will subside, but when that Pressure is taken off, and the Air
expands it self again, it will as soon emerge, the Water that was before sucked
in being by that means expelled.

But for a further Confirmation of this second Paradox, I shall add the
following Experiment, viz. That having put a Glass-Bubble pretty well poised,
into a Tube filled within a foot of the top with Water, it swam there, till a
good deal of Oil of Turpentine was poured upon the Water, but then more Water
being forced into the Bubble by the weight of the incumbent Oil, it presently
subsided; but when part of that Oil was taken off, the spring of the Internal
Air forcing the impressed Water out again, the Bubble presently immerged. And,

For a further Confimation of this Paradox as well as the first, I shall add,
that a Bubble swimming in a Tube, as in the former Experiment, though depressed
to the bottom by a Wier, yet when that Pressure is taken off again it will rise
up as before; but if it be held under Water till more is poured in, and till it
rises about a foot above it in the Tube, the weight of the incumbent Water will
depress it, but if that Water be gradually taken off, the Bubble will presently
emerge.

If it should be asked why in these Trials I did not make use of Oil of Tartar
per Deliquium, instead of Water? I shall answer, That in such slender Pipes as
the first Experiment was made in, as the Oil of Tartar flowed down one side,
the Oil of Turpentine would rise on the other; which makes me wonder that
Monsieur Paschall should teach, that if a Tube filled with Mercury be immersed
fourteen foot under Water, if the Tube be fourteen foot long, the Mercury will
not wholly run out, but continue to the height of a foot in the bottom of it;
and I the more wonder at it, since probably the Impetus would make it descend;
and since the like would not succeed with much more favorable circumstances,
betwixt Oil of Turpentine and Oil of Tartar.

PARADOX III.
This may be proved from what has been delivered under the first Paradox, for
wherever an imaginary Surface is beneath the real one, the weight of the Water
being incumbent on all other Parts of the same Superficies, that part on which
the immersed Body chances to lean must have a Proportionable endeavor upwards;
and if that endeavor be greater than the specific Gravity of the immersed
Body is able to resist, then it is buoyed up; and though the Gravity of the
immersed Body is so great, as to overpower the tendency of the Water upwards,
yet the tendency of that Water is not therefore to be denied, for as much as it
in some measure resists the subsiding of that Body. And this may be confirmed
by the Experiment tried in the second figure, for as more Oil is externaly
poured on, the Water is impelled and buoyed up in the Pipe by the subjacent
Oil, which could not be, if the Oil did not press against it beneath; and even
when the Water and Oil are in an Aequilibrium, the latter presses upwards, in
as much as it resists the descent of the Water out of the Tube. And the truth
of this Proposition is equally true, whether we suspend Oil in Water or Water
in Oil.

And that the Water makes a resistance to Bodies that descend in it, See Plate
2. Fig. 4.
will appear from the following Scheme; for supposing the Pipe E F to contain
Oil specifically heavier than Water, and when the Oil and Water without were in
an Aequilibrium, the Pipe be raised, drops of Oil will fall out, but much more
slowly than in the open Air, where if the drop G were not specifically heavier
than the Water, it would not break the imaginary Surface of the Water H I. But
further, it not only from hence appears, that since as long as the two Liquors
are in Aequilibrium they are not able to remove each other out of their places;
but from hence we may infer, that a Liquor of an equal specific Gravity with
Water, being placed in any part of that Liquor, would remain in the place
assigned.

But to illustrate what we have said, of Water obstructing the descent of
Bodies heavier than it self, I shall add, that if twelve ounces of Lead be
counterpoised in the Air, when the Lead is let down below the Surface of the
Water, the Scale in the Air will manifestly preponderate; which shows that the
Water hinders the descent of the other. And the resistance of Fluids to the
lower superficies of Bodies may be further confirmed by observing, that Bodies
specifically lighter than Water are raised by it, as Wood and drops of Oil; the
Reason of which seems to be this, that there is a greater Pressure upon the
lowest part N, than upon the upper part of the drop M, because that upon all
the Surface K L there is an uniform Pressure of the Water A K. B L, and upon
all the Parts of the Surface H I there is a greater weight of Water A H. B I,
except at the part N, for there the Oil G, being not so heavy as so much Water,
it is consequently unable to resist the ascent of the Water beneath it, for
which Reason it is buoyed up; and the case being the same with that and any
other Parallel Plain, wherever it is in its ascent, it must be by the same
Reason gradually raised up, for the Oil being pressed against by two Pillars of
Water, the one above and the other below, and the lower being longer by the
thickness of the rising Body, than that which lies upon it, it must
consequently be buoyed up, and more or less swiftly as the lower Basis presses
more or less on the subjacent superficies.

And for the like Reason when two pieces of stick of a different length are
immersed in Water; the longest rises the fastest, for if O P were two foot
high, and Q R but one, and both rested upon the same imaginary Plain, the one
has a Pillar of Water a foot longer to resist its rising than the other, and
as the emerging Body rises slower, as the proportion betwixt the upper and the
lower Pillar of Water is less; so thence may be deduced a Reason why in some
Liquors, whose whiteness depends on the intermixture of drops, are so long a
rising, the minuteness of them rendering the difference of the upper and lower
Pillar of Air inconsiderable, but as these drops by moving up and down unite
into larger, the difference growing more considerable, they are accordingly
buoyed up in less time, and swim upon the top of the Water.

And for the same Reason, See Fig. 3. Plate 2.
that these Bodies float upon Water, a Cubick Inch of Wood is by its specify
Gravity only so far depressed into the Water contained in the Vial A B. C D,
till the Water about it makes an equal Pressure upon the imaginary Surface X W,
and because the Wood is not so heavy in Specie as Water, therefore part is kept
emerging above the superficies of it.

But to show further, that the weight of a floating Body is equal to as much
Water, as its immersed Port takes up the Room of, I shall subjoyn, that having
placed several Marks upon the Surface of a floating Glass, and, when it was
taken off the Water, put just so much Water into it as filled it up to those
Marks, by that means I found, that the weight of the Water which was sufficient
to fill the space possessed by the floating Vessel, below the Surface of the
Water, was equal to the weight of the whole floating Vessel, and all that was
contained in it. And the same end may be obtained another way, viz. By first
filling a Cistern or Pond with Water, by a Vessel of a known capacity, and then
having emptyed it again; for if the Vessel be placed in that Cistern or Pond,
and Water put into the Cistern again till it floats the Vessel, and fills the
Cistern or Pond full, as much as it falls short of the weight of Water first
contained in the Cistern, so much is the weight of the floating Body.

PARADOX IV. That in the ascension of Water in Pumps, etc. There needs nothing
to raise the Water, but a competent weight of an external fluid.
The truth of this Paradox sufficiently appears from what has been before
delivered; however to make it plainer, if possible, I shall add, that if a
tinged Liquor be sucked up about an Inch into a Tube, and whilst the upper
Orifice is covered with ones Thumb, it be depressed in Water till the
superficies of the external Water is above the Surface of the internal, and
then a considerable quantity of Oil be poured upon that, and when ones Thumb is
taken off the upper Orifice of the Pipe, the external Fluids will by their
Pressure, raise the tinged Liquor above the Surface of the Water, though not
quite so high as the Oil: From whence it appears, that a Liquor may be raised
in a Tube by the Pressure of an external fluid, and that lighter than it self
in Specie, which may illustrate what we have said of the rising of Water in
Pumps, where by the Pressure of the Atmosphere the Water is buoyed up, when the
Pressure of the incumbent Atmosphere is taken off the internal superficies by
the rising sucker, and makes way for the Water to ascend within the Pipe.

I took likewise a small Tube, whose Diameter was the sixth part of an Inch,
and having immersed it an Inch in Quicksilver, I put my Thumb upon the upper
Orifice, and kept it there till I had immersed the Tube eighteen Inches in Oil,
by the weight of which pressing against the Quicksilver, it was not only kept
from falling out of the Pipe, but raised a little, and as when the Tube was
raised some of the Mercury would fall out, so when it was depressed the Mercury
would be buoyed up, by the greater weight of the external Liquor upon it. And
indeed that the Water in a Pump may be raised by the Pressure of an external
fluid, will appear more fully to him that shall consider, that in the
Torrecellian Experiment the Pressure of the external Air is able to raise
Mercury in a Tube twenty nine or thirty Digits, which is equiponderant to a
Cylinder of Water thirty three or thirty four foot high.

PARADOX V. That the Pressure of an external fluid, is able to keep an
Heterogeneous Liquor suspended at the same height in several Pipes, though those
Pipes be of very different Diameters.
This is evident from what is represented in Fig. 6. Plate the second, See Fig.
6. Plate 2.
for if the Orifice of that Vessel A B C D be closed up with a Cork, and that
Cork have four holes, in three of which the Pipes are fixed, and in the fourth
the Tunnel, and if, when so much Water has been poured in as reaches to the
Surface E F, Oil be poured through the Tunnel till it reaches to the Surface G
H it will depress the Surface of the Water down lower, and the Oil not being
able to get into the Pipes L. M. N. by its weight, it will cause the Water to
rise to O P Q, the Surface of the Water, which before rested at E F, being
depressed down to I K, upon which imaginary Surface the Water contained in the
Tubes, answerable to their Bulk, making an equivalent Pressure with a Cylinder
of external Oil of the same Bore, the Water must consequently be buoyed up to
the same height in all, except the last Pipe be very small, but the difference
on that account being easily distinguished, it will be no difficult matter to
make an allowance.

N. B. when the Oil is poured through the Tunnel, it will be requisite to put
some Cotton Wool in it, to break the force of the falling stream, lest the
violence of it should prejudice the Experiment.

PARADOX VI. If a Body placed under Water,
And so likewise, If the Water that leans upon the Body be contained in Pipes
open at both ends, the Pressure of the Water is to be estimated by the weight
of a Pillar of Water, whose Basis is equal to the lower Orifice of a Pipe,
(which we suppose to be parallel to the Horizon) and its height equal to a
Perpendicular, reaching thence to the top of the Water; though the Pipe be much
inclined toward the Horizon, or though it be irregularly shaped, and much
broader in some Parts, than the said Orifice.
As for the first part of our Paradox, it is proposed by Stevinus in more
general Terms, and thus demonstrated, (See Fig. 7. Plate the second) where,
supposing A B C D to be a solid Rectangular figure of Water, whose Basis E F is
parallel to the Horizon, and whose height G E is a Perpendicular from the
Surface of that Water, the bottom D E, E F, and F C cannot be charged with a
greater weight than what is respectively Perpendicular, because none of them
can receive an Additional weight from the Water Collaterally, but it must
diminish the weight of Water Perpendicularly incumbent on that other bottom,
else there must be a greater weight upon the Basis D E F C, than is contained
in the Surface A B. C D, which is impossible.

To which instance of the learned Stevinus I shall add the following. For if
Oil be sucked up into the Pipe represented by Fig. 8 Plate the second, and when
it is at a convenient height in the longer Leg, you nimbly stop the upper
Orifice, till it be depressed so low into the Water, that the Oil is but little
above the Surface of the Water, it will rest near that station, when the upper
Orifice is unstopped; and if it be depressed lower than that, the weight of the
incumbent Pillar of Water will force its way into the Pipe, so far as answers
the weight of a Cylinder of Water of an equal Bore with the Oil contained in
the Pipe, and on the contrary, if the Pipe be elevated above its first station,
as much Oil will rise out of the Pipe and emerge, as answers in weight to the
part of the incumbent Pillar of Water removed by that means from gravitating
upon it. And to this I shall add, that though Water is not contained in Pipes,
yet it presses as regularly upon subjacent Bodies as if it were; which will be
evident, if a Vessel of the shape of the Funnel delineated in Fig. the 6th be
employed, for the Liquor contained in the small Stem of that will be able to
sustain the whole incumbent Water: In confirmation of which, we made use of
such a Vessel, as Plate the third, figure the first represents, See Plate 3.
Fig. 1.
and filling the parallel Leg with Oil, and the other as well as the Ball with
Water, the Oil was elevated no higher in the longer Leg, than if the less Leg
had been an uniform Tube of the same Diameter; and when the Experiment was
reiterated with Oil in the Ball, and Water in the long Leg, the weight of that
Oil was not able to raise the Water in the long Leg to an equal superficies
with it self; the Liquors in both these Experiments which was contained in the
capacity of the Ball, being sustained by the concave sides of the Glass. And
the like Experiment being tried with Quicksilver, which was poured into the
shorter Leg C D, till it rought almost to the bottom of the Ball, and as high
in the longer Tube A B, upon an affusion of Water into the longer Leg, the
Mercury was buoyed up into the Ball, till it rought to H E G, where if more
than what was Perpendicularly incumbent on the Tube C had pressed upon it, the
Water would not have been able to keep it at such a height.

But to confirm the second part of our Paradox, See Plate 3. Fig. 2.
we made use of a Glass, such as Plate the third Fig. the second represents,
and having filled the Glass half full of Water, we stopped it with a Cork, in
which the Pipes there delineated were fixed, and likewise the Tunnel, the
bottom of each of the Pipes, being each immersed considerably in Water, and
then pouring in Oil through the Tunnel, we observed, that the Water was
elevated to an equal height from the lower superficies of the Oil which pressed
on the Water; in which Experiment, though the Pipes contained more Water by being
included, yet that Water pressed no more upon the imaginary Plain, than an
erect Pipe of equal Bore with the lower superficies of the Water contained in
it would have done. And if Oil of Turpentine be poised in a Pipe in an erect
Posture, and then by inclination a greater portion of it brought under Water,
yet the external Water will raise the Oil contained in it; and the same was
evident, when Oil of Turpentine being contained in three Pipes of such figures
as Plate the third Fig. the third represents, for in all such cases, See Fig.
3. Plate 3.
where the Pipes are in an inclined Posture, or some Parts of them larger than
ordinary, part of the weight of the Liquors contained weigh upon the sides of
the Vessel, and no more presses upon the subjacent Liquor, than is answerable
to an erect Pipe of equal Bore with the lower Orifice, and of equal height with
an erect Tube, answerable to the length of one end of that Pipe from the other.

To make out what Stevinus has asserted, viz. That if a Cylinder of Water be
placed upon a subjacent Body, the Basis will sustain a weight equal to that
Circular Basis, and to the Perpendicular height of it, we provided a Vessel of
Laton, See Fig. 4. Plate 3.
of the figure represented by Fig. twelve Plate the third, which being
furnished with a close bottom C D, made of a flat piece of Wood, covered with a
soft Bladder, and greased on the lower side near the edges, that leaned on the
rim of Wood G H, contiguous every where to the inside of the Latten, that it
might be easily lifted up from off the rim, and yet at other times lie so close
upon it, that the Water should not be able to get out between them. To the
midst of this bottom was fastened a long string, for a use to be hereafter
mentioned; the Instrument being thus prepared, the Water was poured in at the
top of the Pipe A B, which pressing upon the false bottom C D, against the
subjacent rim G H, contributed to render the Vessel more close, and to obstruct
its own passage, whereupon we tied the upper end of the string I K to a beam,
and put so many weights into the opposite Scale, as were sufficient to raise
the false bottom C D from the rim G H. And then deducting from that weight, the
weight of the false bottom, and the Water contained in the broad Cylindrical
Box B E C H. G D F, we found that the Pressure, which was made upon C D was
much greater than what reading Stevinus would make one expect, and than all the
Water contained both in the Pipe and Cylinder would have been, had it been
contained in an uniform Cylinder.

PARADOX VII. That a Body immersed in a fluid, sustains a Lateral Pressure from
the fluid; and that increased, as the depth of the immersed Body below the
Surface of the fluid increases.
This appears from what is represented by Plate the third, Fig. the fifth, See
Plate 3. Fig. 5.
where Oil being sucked up into the Pipes G F K, and they sufficiently immersed
in the Water contained in the Vessel A B C D, so that the Surface of the Oil I
K, may be but a little above the Water, the Imaginary Pillar of Water H G will
suspend it there, but if the Pipe be raised, the Oil becoming too heavy to be
kept up by so short a Cylinder, the incumbent Cylinder will force it out of the
Orifice G, but if the Pipe be further immersed, the Water will raise the Oil in
the Tube, and fill part of the Cylindrical cavity below it.

To this Experiment I shall add, See Plate 3. Fig. 6.
that having stopped the Mouth of the Vial ABCD, represented by Fig. six, Plate
the third, with a Cork and Cement, and bored with a hot Iron, a hole to receive
the Pipe G H, and the other E F, I stopped the Orifice G with a Cork and Cement
likewise, and then pouring in Water through the Pipe E, till it rose to the
Surface I, the Bubble X was so nicely poised that it swam, but as soon as by
pouring in more Water the Surface was raised to K, the Bubble X subsided to the
bottom: From whence it appears, that the whole Water contained in the Pipe E,
presses upon the whole Water within the Glass, otherwise it could not compress
the Air in the Bubble, and make it sink; and likewise that it not only presses
upon that subjacent, but likewise upon those Parts that are latterally situated
in Respect of it. And that not only the upper Parts of the Water, but even the
Cork that is below the Surface of the Water I, is pressed by the weight of it,
and obliquely too, appears, since if the Orifice G be not closely stopped, the
Water will be raised through it, and if instead of a Cork and Cement, it be
only stopped with ones Thumb, one may perceive an evident Pressure of the Water
against it. And that the subsiding of the Bubble depended on the Pressure of
the Water above it, appeared, since if part of the Water was poured off, by
inclining the Vial, it would presenty emerge again.

And one thing in this Experiment worthy our notice, was, that if the Glass A
B. C D was not wholly filled, but the space betwixt L M filled with Air, yet
the Pressure of such different Fluids may be so easily communicated from one to
the other, that the Bubble would descend equally as if it were filled with
Water.

PARADOX VIII. That Water may be made to depress a Body lighter than it self,
as well as to buoy it up.
The truth of this Paradox will be easily made out by the following
Experiments, for if a Glass Siphon, See Plate 3. Fig. 7.
of the Figure represented by Fig. 7. Plate the third, be filled from H to I
with Oil of Turpentine, and immersed in the Glass A B C D, till the Orifice A
of the shorter Leg be under Water, if then the Orifice E be unstopped, and the
whole Tube E I F G H be depressed gradually, the incumbent, Water H K will
press the Oil out of the shorter Leg H G, into the longer E F. And,

For a further confirmation of this Paradox, as well as the foregoing, and the
second, I shall subjoin; that having provided a Pipe of the Figure represented
by Fig. 8. and sucked so much Oil into it as filled the space L M N P, See Fig.
(...)
I immersed it in Water, and upon the opening the Orifice O, as the Pipe was
gradually depressed, the Oil was pressed out of the Pipe L M to N, and from
thence to what height I pleased in the Pipe O P N.

PARADOX IX.
Considering that since the Surface of a Vessel of standing Water is
(Physically speaking) Horizontal, the Water that presses against the lower part
of the immersed Body must needs be deeper, than that which presses against the
upper, and that this is the Reason why Bodies lighter than Water emerge, I
concluded, that if the Water upon the upper Surface of Oil in a Tube could be
so high as to balance the Pressure of that Water below, Oil might be suspended
betwixt two Parcels of Water. To try the Result, I sucked an Inch of Water into
a Tube, and by stopping the upper Orifice, and by that means suspending the
Water in the Tube, I removed it into a Vessel of Oil, and then opening the
upper Orifice till an Inch of Oil was buoyed up into it, I removed it again
into a Vessel of Water, and immersed it so far in that, till the Water below
the Oil was equal in height to the Water above it, in which station the
Cylinder of Oil and Water being equal in weight with the Pressure of the
external Water, the Oil Q. R. was suspended betwixt the Water S. R. and that
below it P. Q. the Surface of the Water in the Pipe T. S. being so much above
the Surface of the Water A D. as was requisite to make the Oil and Water
contained in the Pipe to press equally on the Surface G. H. with the external
Water, See Plate 4. Fig. 1.
as Plate 4. Fig. 1. represents.

PARADOX X. That the Cause of the Ascension of Water in Syphony,
To demonstrate this, See Plate 4. Fig. 2.
we provided a Glass Tube A B. C* D. of a convenient wideness, and half a yard
or more in depth, as also a Siphon with two Legs F K, and K G, to which is
joined a Pipe E K, and to each of the Legs of that Siphon we tied a Glass Pipe,
sealed at the bottom, and having Water contained in each, to the height there
delineated. Things being thus prepared, Oil of Turpentine must be poured into
the Tube A B. C D, (but that it may not take up too much of the Oil, the bottom
of the Vessel to X Y, may be filled with Water) till it reaches above the top
of the Siphon F K G, and then by the weight of it the Water in the Pipe will be
raised through the Siphon, and run into the lower Vessel H. In which Experiment
the Water is raised through a Siphon by pressure, though at the same time there
be a free communication of Air through the Pipe E K, without danger of a
Vacuum. In which Experiment, if the Reason be asked, why the Water does not
rather run out of the Bipe H, into G, than the contrary? It may be answered,
That though externally the Oil is deeper upon the surface of the Water in the
Pipe H, and consequently presses more upon it, yet the Tube G, on the other
side, instead of having that pressure of Oil, has a Cylinder of Water of an
equal length, which being heavier than Oil, raises the Water out of that Tube
more forcibly than it is raised out of the other. And for the like Reason, when
once the Water is raised in Siphons, though there be a longer Cylinder of Air
upon that end which is immersed in the lower Vessel, yet there is a greater
weight on the other, because besides the incumbent Atmosphere, there is a
considerable Weight of Water: But if the Siphon be above 34 or 35 Foot high the
Water will not flow through it, the pressure of the external Air being unable
to raise Water to such a height. And one thing observable in these Experiments
is, That if when the Water is running through these Siphons, a small hole be
made upon the top of a Siphon, the Air pressing upon the Water within the Pipe
as well as without it, it will cease to run, though the hole be no bigger than
one made with a Needle; which hole if it be stopped with a Needle, the pressure
of the external Air will by that means be taken off, and the Siphon be rendered
fit for use.

PARADOX XI.
To demonstrate what is contained in this Paradox, See Plate 4. Fig. 3.
we must fill the Glass A B C D, (see Plate the 4. Fig. the third,) almost full
of Water, the length of it being near three Foot; in which Water, if we suppose
the Weight E F to be placed upon the surface G H, it will sink by reason of its
specific Gravity, the Water incumbent on other parts of that Plain being not
equiponderant, but if we suppose it to be placed upon the Surface I K, the
Pillars of Water being above nine times as thick as it, they will
counterballance it, for which Reason were there no Water upon it, it would
subside no further; and were a method contrived to keep the Water from pressing
upon it, the like would happen supposing it to lean upon the Surface L M.

And to show, that were the weight so depressed free from incumbent Water, it
would not subside, I shall add the following Experiment; let then the Brass
Body E F, See Plate 4* Fig. 4
(see Plate 4. Fig. 4.) be the cover of a Brass valve, the valve being fastened
with Cement to the Glass Pipe O P, the Body E F, must by pulling a hair fired
to the button of Valve Q close the Orifice of it, and then it being conveyed
under Water a foot deep, the Cement and sides of the Glass O P, will keep the
Water off the upper part of the Body E F, and consequently the imaginary
Surface V W will only be pressed upon by the sole weight of the Body E F, but
the other Parts of that Surface by the incumbent Cylinders of Water, so that
the Body E F will be bore up without the assistance of any thing else but the
Water buoying up against it, but if the Tube be raised till the Body E F be
above the Surface I K, and near X Y, the weight of it being greater than the
weight of the incumbent Pillars of Water, the Body will be no longer supported;
but if upon the first immersion, when the Body E F is let down to the Surface R
S, a weight L be suspended at it, that will not be able to sever the Body from
the Valve; from whence it appears, that there is no need in our
Physico-mechanical Experiments to fly to a Fuga Vacui to explain the Reason why
two exactly polished Marbles when contiguous are so hard to be separated. To
what has been said under this Paradox, I shall add, that when the weight L is
suspended at the button Q, the Body E F will be separated before it rises to
the Surface I K.

APPENDIX I. Objections to evince that the upper Parts of Water press not upon
the lower, Objections answered.
answered.
The first Objection is, that if the upper Parts of the Water pressed upon the
lower, the lower would be condensed; but to this it is answered, that Water
consisting of Parts though minute, yet very solid, it does not therefore follow,
since in a heap of the powder of Diamonds, the lower are no more compressed
than the superficial ones,; besides it has not been found that Water was
capable of being compressed by any force we could use. And though it be further
urged, that Plants grow in the Sea without being depressed, yet that happens,
because the Pressure is not only incumbent but Collateral likewise, and so
contributes to sustain it, and the rather because the Collateral Pressure is
greater than the incumbent.

Another Objection is, that a Bucket of Water weighs no more when full in Water
than the Bucket it self out of it, nor so much. But the Reason of this is very
plain, for supposing A B C D to be a Well, (See Plate the fourth, See Plate 4.
Fig. 5.
Figure the fifth) in which the Bucket which is contiguous to the Plain I K, is
suspended by the string E F, the Water in the Bucket G (if it be made of Wood
which is lighter in Specie than Water) and the incumbent Pillar of Water not
pressing upon the Surface H equally as the Water on the Surface I K, the Water
below must buoy it up. And though the Bucket was made of something heavier than
Water, yet the whole weight of it will not be perceived by the hand above, but
only the Surplusage of weight which surmounts the weight of an equal bulk of
Water. And though the Schoolmen tell us, that this Phenomenon depends on the
indisposition of Water to weigh in its own place, yet I have found, that Lead
being conveyed into melted Butter contained in a wooden Box, and that being
suspended in Water by a Silken-thred at the end of a balance, we observed that
this was as much indisposed to weigh as Water in Water, no more weight than
what surmounted the weight of an equal bulk of Water, being made sensible by
the balance: But when it was partly raised out of the Water or wholly, a
greater weight was requisite to counterballance it; for supposing, that part of
the Bucket N to be above the Surface of the Water L M, a great force is
requisite to sustain it, the weight of Water incumbent on the Surface P Q being
not able to balance it, and consequently the bottom of the Bucket H, will
scarce be pressed upwards half so strongly as before. But if the Bucket be
raised to O, the Water being not at all contiguous to it, cannot contribute to
the supporting of it.

All that is further contained in this Appendix, being only a Repetition of
what has been already delivered on this subject, I shall pass it by as
needless to be repeated again.

APPENDIX II. Why Diverse, and others who descend to the bottom of the Sea, are
not oppressed by the weight of the incumbent Water.
From what has been already delivered it appearing, that Water weighs in
Water, and consequently presses upon Bodies contained in it, I shall therefore,
before I propose my own opinion, briefly take notice of the following.

And first Monsieur Des Caries tells us, See Plate 4. Fig. 6.
that if the Body of a Man were placed in the bottom of the Vessel B, so as to
stop the Orifice A, he would feell the weight of the Water C B A incumbent on
him, but if he were placed at B, he would not be sensible of that weight,
because should his Body descend, the Water betwixt B and C would not descend
with him, but supposing the Orifice A to be stopped with a solid, that would
feel the weight of the Water, because it hindered the descent of the Water
betwixt B and A, but since the Principles already laid down overthrow the
foundation of this Explication, I shall only add, that were the matter of fact
true, the Reason would be, that when his Body was at A, the Man would sustain
the weight of the incumbent Water, without any subjacent Water at A, to buoy up
against him, whereas at B, the subjacent Water buoys up as much as the other
presses down or more.

But Stevinus, Hydrostat. Lib. 5. Page 149. says, Omni Pressu quo corpus dolor
afficitur, pars aliqua corporis luxatur, sed isto Pressu nulla corporis pars
luxatur, isto igitur Pressu corpus dolor nullo afficitur. Sed Exemplo clarius
ita intelliges, esto A B C D, See Plate 4. Fig. 7.
aqua cujus fundum D C in quo foramen E habeat Epistomium sibi insertum, cui
dorso incumbat homo F, quae cum ita sint, ab aquae pondere ipsi insidente nulla
pars corporis luxari poterit, cum aqua undiquaque aequaliter urgeat.

Which solution might hold, if the question was only why the Body of a Diver is
not pressed down to the bottom of the Sea. But as for what he says, viz. That
the equality and uniformness of the Pressure makes it less sensible I am of his
opinion, for though in the Air the Pressure of it is not perceivable for a like
Reason, yet if ones hand be applied to the top of a Receiver, and the Air
exhausted, the Pressure of the incumbent Atmosphere will cause a sensible Pain.

And to show that the uniformity of the Pressure, and the firmness of the
Bodies of Diverse, may enable them to bear the Pressure of the Water, I shall
add, that having included a Tad-pole in an Instrument, See Plate 4. Fig. 8.
such as Fig. 8. Plate the fourth describes, the Plug was so far depressed,
that the Air in the end of the Pipe was compressed into an eighth part of the
space it possessed before, so that the Pressure upon the Water was equal to the
weight of a Cylinder of Water three hundred foot high, yet the Tad-pole moved
up and down as nimbly as before, being not at all indisposed, though its Body
appeared to be compressed into less room than before.

CHAP. VII. An Hydrostatical discourse etc.
ALL that is contained in this discourse, being chiefly a Repetition of what
has been before delivered in other Parts of the Author's Works, and now only
repeated to obviate some Objections of Dr. More's, and the truth's laid down by
our Author in his Hydrostatical Paradoxes, and Physico-mechanical Experiments
being so plain, and these Objections so trivial, it would but be needless to
increase the bulk of the Book, with what may with more Reason be avoided.

CHAP. VIII. A new Essay Instrument, and the Hydrostatical Principle it is
founded on, etc. Communicated in the Transactions of June 1675.
The first Section. Showing the occasion of making this Instrument, and the
Hydrostatical Principle it is founded upon.
A new Hydrostatical. Instrument and its uses proposed.
HAving several years ago made of a Bubble with a long Stem, to estimate the
specific Gravity of Metals, by its easy or more difficult immersion with
them, I applied it likewise to estimate the weight of other Solids, by
observing how Solids suspended at this Bubble would depress it variously
according to their specific Gravities; It being a general Rule in
Hydrostaticks, that any solid Body in Water loses so much of its weight, as a
parcel of Water of the same Dimensions would weigh in the Air, so that Gold
being specifically heavier than Copper, it must lose less of its weight in the
Water than Copper; because proportionably the Ignobler Metal possesses the
space of a greater quantity of Water, whose weight, by weighing it in that
fluid, is lost in the weight of the Body suspended at the Bubble. And
consequently an ounce of Gold must cause that Bubble to be immersed deeper in
Water, than an ounce of Brass or Copper would, the Brass by Reason of its
larger Dimensions losing more of its weight than the Gold.

The second Section. Describing the Construction of this Instrument.
This Instrument may be made of any Metal or other matter, which will float in
the Water, without soaking it in, but the best for the uses hereafter mentioned
are those made of Glass; though they are not so lasting as those that consist of
Copper or Silver.

This Instrument is made of three Parts, a Ball, the Stem, and that which holds
the Pipe, The Ball consists of two Metalline Plates, each of the fashion of a
Unequal Glass; and the Cavity within must be so large, that the Air contained in
it, may be sufficient to hold as much Air as will keep the whole Stem from
sinking under Water; if the Ballast which is to keep the Vessel immersed in an
erect posture is to be contained within the Vessel, the Stem ought to be
hollow, but otherwise to consist of a small Cylinder without any Cavity, and of
a convenient length.

The Instrument I employ for Guineas has its Ball as big as a Hens-egg, and
the Stem about four or five Inches long, being soddered on to a hole in the
Center of the uppermost Unequal part of the Ball; and to the Center of the
lowermost is fixed a piece of Wire to lay the Guiny upon, or a screwed stirrup
to fix it in.

If you have a mind to try pieces of Gold of greater weight, the stirrup ought
to be fixed to a small Cylinder, upon which several pieces of Metal being
fixed, and having holes in the middle, that they may be put on or taken off as
occasion requires, the Instrument may be adjusted to any piece of Gold, though
twice or thrice as heavy as a Guiny.

To adjust this Instrument for the use of Guineas, it must be lightened by the
use of a file, or made heavier by the addition of Ballast, that it may be
sufficiently immersed in the Water without sinking, and then a mark being fixed
on the Stem at the Surface of the Water, a piece of Brass must be substituted
in the place of the Guiny of the same weight, or a grain or two heavier in the
Air, and a mark set at the Surface of the Water, when it is immersed by that
weight.

In which method of adjusting, the following Particulars are to be minded.

First, the Guinea must be placed exactly with its middle in the screw, that it
may not incline the Tube, but let it stand erect. Secondly, Quicksilver
Ballast in Metalline Instruments is apt to dissolve the sodder. Thirdly, the
marks may be made of chewed Mastick fixed in small holes; or by fixing a Silver
or a Golden Wire in a nick made round the Stem. Fourthly, one of the heavyest
Guineas is to be made use of in adjusting this Instrument, and care must be
taken that of an Inch be left above the Water, because all Waters themselves
are not of an equal weight, yet those circumstances vary not the success, since
the difference in the immerging this Instrument in several Waters, is in
considerable in respect of the difference betwixt a piece of Brass and Gold of
an equal weight in the Air, it being an Inch and three quarters. Fifthly,
before we can determine by this Instrument whether the Gold be good, it must be
weighed in the Air, to see whether it be of a just weight, and then this will
discover whether it be genuine, for otherwise we may think the Metal not good,
when it only wants weight in the Air.
The Explication of the Figures

See Plate 1. Fig. 00.
Fig. 1. A B. The Stem or Pipe. C E. The two Parts of the Ball soddered
together. B C D E. The Ball it self. F. The screw. G. The stirrup somewhat out
of its Place. H. The mark to which Copper of the weight of a Guinea in the Air
depresses it. I. The mark to which the Gold sinks it.


Fig. 2. The screw by it self to be taken off or put on the undermost Stem of
the Instrument.

Fig. 3. The Perforated Plates to be put upon the lower Stem as ballast.

Fig. 4. The lower Stem with a Perforated Plate upon it.

Fig. 5. The stirrup which my be made use of instead of the screw.

Fig. 6. A. B. C. The Glass Instrument. D D D. The Coin supported by four
Horse-hairs.


Fig. 7. The undermost Stem of a Glass Instrument, to which a screw is fastened
with Horse-hairs or otherwise.

Fig. 8. A B C D. The Instrument for estimating the specific Gravity of
Liquors. E E The Quicksilver or Water employed as Ballast.


The third Section. Representing the uses of this Instrument, as relating to
Metals.
The first Use.

Is to distinguish true Guineas from Counterfeit.

The second Use.

In examining a piece of Gold lighter than a Guinea; so much Ballast may be
added as will make that amount to the weight of a Guinea, and if the Gold be
heavier, so many of the perforated Plates must be taken off the Stem, that the
Instrument may not be sunk by it, and when a Coin but a little heavier than a
Guinea is to be tried, it may be convenient to place a perforated Plate upon
the upper screw, so that it may lie upon the Ball, and be taken off, or
lightened with a file as occasion requires.

That several pieces of Gold may upon some occasions be fixed at once, the
aperture of the screw ought to be wider, than what will just admit of a Guinea.

If the Instrument be well proportioned, so that a piece of Gold a little
heavier than a Guinea, may not depress it under Water; it may be examined
without altering the weight of the Instrument.

And acording to the method above laid down, a half Guinea may be tried by
placing a true half Guinea with it in the screw.

The third Use.

This Instrument may be adjusted to try Silver Coins which are lighter than
half a Crown, by weighing Silver in it, and marking the Surface of the Water
upon the Pipe, and then observing what difference there is betwixt that, and an
equal weight of an ignobler Metal in the Air. And though several Instruments
would be more convenient for the trying of these different Metals, yet by
altering the Ballast Plates, one may be made to serve the turn.

The fourth Use.

And by the like method an Instrument may be adjusted, to discover whether Tin
be more or less adulterated with Lead, since Tin being the lightest of Metals,
the Lead will depress the Instrument lower if mixed with Tin, as Gold on the
contrary is the heaviest Metal, and is lighter upon the addition of another
Metal.

The fifth Use.

It may enable us to guess at the Qualities of Metalline Mixtures, and the
proportions of the ingredients, for by adjusting how much such a weight of Gold
will depress the Stem, by afterward trying how much lighter in Water the same
weight of allayed Gold in the Air will be, and at the same time observing what
was the proportion of Silver in the Alloy, we may be enabled to judge how much
other pieces of Gold are alloyed by comparing their weight in Water with this
Standard, provided they be of the same specific weight in the Air, with the
Gold unalloyed. And the same measures may be taken to make an estimate of the
alloys of Silver with Copper, or of Copper with Tin.

CHAP. IX. Observations of the growth and increase of Metals.
About the growth of Tin.
I am told by the Master of a Tin Mine, that after a Tin Mine had been quite
drained of its Ore, by washing and vanning about 120 years after, it yielded
rich Ore again, and that a good quantity of stuff being quire drained of its
Ore, and laid on a heap in the Air, in thirty years it afforded Metal again.
And the same Gentleman told me, that having caused the Water which washes the
Earth away from the Ore, to lay down that Earth, by stopping the current of it,
till its own weight made it subside, that Earth being twelve years exposed to
the Air, yielded a good quantity of Metal. And Relations agreeable to these I
have received from another.

Of the growth of Lead.
It has been observed, that Lead Ore cleared of its Metal, and laid in heaps
for some years yields Metal a second time. And J. Gerhard in Decade questionum
p. m. 22. says, Fessularum mons in Hetruria Florentiae civitati imminens,
lapides Plumbarios habet, qui si excidantur brevi temporis spatio novis
incrementis instaurantur. And Agricola, speaking of the growth of Mines in
general, testifies the same; but I am told, that this happens not in all Mines.
And though it be believed that the Reason why the passages into some Mines grow
narrower, is to be attributed to the growth of the Metal, yet I am apt to
believe, that it may be caused by the powerful expansion of some frozen Water
in the Earth, that encompasses those passages; and whereas it is urged as an
Argument of the growth of Metals, that Lead increases its weight by being
exposed to the Air on the tops of Churches, yet I am inclined to believe, that
it rather proceeds from a Cerusse formed by corrosive Parts, uniting with the
Parts of the corroded Metal, and chiefly for this Reason, viz. Because I have
observed, that the Wood which lies about that Lead abounds with an Acid Spirit,
capable of corroding Lead, and that when they have been long exposed to this
Acid, a white Lead may be scraped off better than the common Cerusse, and this
is found on that side the Lead which is next the Wood, and not on that exposed
to the outward Air. And I have observed, that even Alablaster and white Marble
will yield an Acid Spirit, so that we question whether Lead fixed to the feet
of Statues, may not by the help of that acquire a greater bulk, and increase of
weight.

Of the growth of Iron.
We are told, not only by Pliny and Srabo, but Fallopius and Caessalpinus, that
in the Island of Elva not far from the coast of Tuscany, Iron has been
observed to grow; and Agricola attests the like to be observed in Germany. And
Johan. Gerherd. tells us, that he was informed, that not far from Amberga, the
Ore exposed to the Air for some time in heaps requires Metalline Parts.

Of the growth of Silver.
I have been told, that Silver grows in the form of Vegetables, and in a Voyage
to Pern I find the following relation, viz. That in the Mines of Potosi it is
observed, that Earth that was dug out of the Grooves and Shafts, and thrown
aside, has such a propensity to the Production of Metals, that after some
years it would yield Metal.

Of the growth of Gold.
Though there is no Gold to be found on the coast of Guyny in Congo, and other
Parts of Africa, where Writers mention it to be found, yet I am told, that in
Hungary, the Master of that famous Gold Mine of Cremnitz has observed, that
the whole Mountain abounds with Particles of Gold, and that when they have
cleared a great deal of the Soil in one Place of its Metalline Parts, they
throw it into the hole again, and observe, that in a little time it will yield
Gold as before; and Johan. Gerherd. gives us an Instance of the growth of Gold
in Germany.

Postscript
Dr. Brown tells us, that he observed the passages in several Mines grown up,
especially in moist places, and that the yellow Soil near Cremnitz yields some
Gold.

Whether the increase of Metals depends on the influence of the Air, or some
other cause, till further and more strict Observations have been made, I shall
not undertake to determine; but shall only add, that a Marchasite having been
shut up in Vacuo, it acquired a Vitriolate Efforescence betwixt blue and green.

CHAP. X. A Hydrostatical way of estimating Ores.
Ores Hydrostatically estimated.
TO help me to make an estimate of the proportion of Metalline or the Mineral
ingredients of Bodies, I weighed a piece of Rock-Crystal or white Marble, first
in Air and then in Water, by which I found that its weight, to an equal bulk of
Water, was as 2 to 1, or as 11 to 4, and then by weighing Metalline Bodies,
such as Magnets and Emeri, I found that the weight of these in Water was more
than that of Crystal, the proportion of the latter being as four to one; by
which Trials I was enabled to guess that these stones contain Metalline Parts
in them: And by the same method I discovered Metalline Ingredients in some
Bodies which are not generally looked upon as such, as Lapis Hematites, and
American Talc.

And as it is generally a certain sign, that a Body contains mineral
ingredients proportionably as it is heavier than Crystal, so it is no less
certain, that Bodies lighter than Crystal are not impregnated with a Metalline
Ore, as Jet, Succinum, Sulphur Vive, common Sulphur, English Talc, Venetian
Talc, and black Lead, whose weight to Water is but as 1 1^/100 to 1, and which
by certain Trials I have found to be a kind of Talc.

As for the advantages that may be reaped by estimating Ores, they may either
respect Jewellers, Physicians, or Chemists, as when the Metalline Ingrediens
are but small; or Mineralists, whose business it is to extract the Metal, when
by this Hydrostatical way it appears to be sufficiently impregnated. But,
because there are some cruder Metalline Ingredients in some Bodies, as
Antimony, Bismuth, Lapis, Calaminaris and Pyrites, which may deceive an
unskilful Mineralist who estimates them this way, it may be convenient to make
use of other Trials to distinguish them. And since some mineral Ores, when
tried in the lump, appear to be poorly stocked with Metalline Parts, it may be
of use to beat them to powder, and to separate the Metalline Parts, by washing,
or else by fire; for by that means I once found, that a Metalline Ore which was
wrought for Lead, afforded a sufficient quantity of Silver to answer the charge
of working it, and to this caution I must add the following, viz. That since
Marcasites are generally heavier than common Crystal, and by some looked upon
to be plentifully stocked with Metalline Parts, because of their weight, and
the glittering of their Parts, yet they may easily be undecived, by placing
them in a hot fire, for by that means the Sulphurous Parts will be consumed,
and leave behind them a black Calx; but though Marcasites abound not with
Metalline Parts, proportionable to their bulk, yet I have found by experience,
that some of them have afforded not only Copper, Silver, and Gold, but
sometimes a quantity of running Mercury; but whether Marcasites may be of use
in graduating Gold, or not, I shall leave to others to be considered. There is
this Advertisement which I must not omit, and it is that though some are used to
employ flux powders indiffently without understanding the difference of them, I
have tried, that Lead Ore being fluxed with filings of Mars, afforded a larger
quantity of Metal, than with a due proportion of Nitre and Tartar fulminated
together; but one part of good native Cinnabar, finely powdered, being mixed
with a fixed Alkaly of Tartar, and the other with a different flux powder, we
obtained twice as much Mercury from the former, as we did from the latter, though
it was likewise a fixed Alkaly of a mineral Nature.

Some Observations about native Gold.

Observations about native Gold.
Though I once believed, that there was no such thing as a Gold Mine, in which
that Metal was predominant, yet I had a Portion of Ore sent me from the
East Indies with the spar about it, which had I broke it, I question not but
that it contained Parts which were malleable without the help of the fire: one
piece of this had so much Spar about it, that it weighed to an equal bulk of
Water, as 2 91/100 to 1. The color of the Spar was like white Marble tinged
with a dash of yellow, and it differed from Lead Ore, in as much as that is
usually so soft as to be easily cut with a knife, but this was as hard as a
stone, and would yield sparks when struck with a piece of Steel; and it
differed further from Spar of Lead Ore, in as much as it was altogether
incapable of being calcined, though kept in a Crucible red hot for some hours.
Nor would it be dissolved in Acid Menstruums, as Spar of Lead Ore may. A piece
of Spar in which but little Gold was contained, being weighed in Water, was to
its proportion as 2 65/100 to 1, which is but little above the weight of common
Marble.

But though there is such a thing as true Gold Ore, yet I would not discourage
Mineralists from seeking it in Veins of other Minerals, since it has been
found not only in Copper Mines, but veins of Tin and Lead; for in a place in
Scotland several grains of native Gold have been found, near the Surface of the
ground over Lead Mines, some pieces of which being weighed Hydrostatically, one
piece of Scotch Gold, which was native and free from adhering Spar, weighed
three drachms twenty one grains, and another which had Spar sticking to it,
weighed three drachms three grains, and a third of Scotch Gold weighed in Air
forty three grains, in Water thirty nine. Difference 3 x 1/^. Proport. 12 x ^/^
to one. But to distinguish pure Gold from impure, we are to note, that the
Proportion of the finest, according to Mersennus, is as eighteen to one of
Water, but according to ours, as nineteen to one. So that as it comes more or
less short of that Standard we are to estimate its Purity.

And thus by weighing Gold Hydrostatically, we may be able to distinguish, that
Sand-Gold which is brought from Africa, or that from Guinea, from adulterated;
for having once weighed a small Parcel of good, the Weight of that will be a
Standard to distinguish the bad by.

But since a great many ignorant Seamen are concerned in buying Gold, who
understand not how to examine it Hydrostatically, I shall subjoyn the following
method to distinguish it Chymically, viz. By mixing a few Grains with Aq.
fortis, Spirit of fermented Urine, or Spirit of Hartshorn; for if it be
adulterated with Copper or Brass, a few Grains laid upon Paper, and moistened
with this, will be tinged bluish green. And even rank Urine will be able to
extract a blue Tincture from Brass, if made use of instead of the
afore-mentioned Spirits; and the like success will happen with Sal-Armoniack
dissolved in Water.

There are in England such a great variety of Stones, that it would be worth
while to examine them Hydrostatically, and to compare them with Crystal; for I
have found near the high Road an Eagle-Stone, which was not suspected to be of
English growth. And I found a kind of Magnesia near a Potter's Workhouse,
which he afterward made use of to glaze his Pots. And I was brought to a
Mineral Substance, which though it was hard to be known of what Kind it was, yet
I soon discovered it to abound with Vitriol, and that it would yield it much
more plentifully than the Vitriol-Stones found near the Isle of Wight, or those
made use of at the Vitriol-Works near Deptford, and elsewhere. And Ore of
Bismuth has been discovered by a heedful Eye, when common Miners knew not what
kind of Substance it was when they dug it up.

But this Hydrostatical way of estimating Ores may not only be made of use in
judging of Mineral Substances, but those Earths which are the Wombs of them;
since, though they cannot be suspended by a Hair, as solid Grains of Ore, yet a
Jar may be counterpoised in Water, and then being filled with such Earths, the
weight of them may be discovered, by first counterpoising them in the Air, and
then having first wetted them with Water, and conveyed them into the Water in
that Hydrostatical Bucket: And that this Hydrostatical way of weighing Earths
may be of use appears, since it has not only been observed, that a red Mud,
which lay at the bottom of Water, abounded with Iron plentifully, but I have
observed the same in an English Oker. And I have been told, that Diamonds, as
well as Gold, have been found in a red kind of Soil. And I have observed in
England, curiously figured Crystals lodged in a Soil of a red Color.

And it may not only be of use to weigh diverse sorts of Earths in our Bucket,
but also several sorts of Sands; since by a Microscope, I have discerned
several Grains to appear, as if they were made of an Aggregate of Granates; and
I have experienced, not only Hydrostatically, that that black Sand which is
made use of in London, contains good store of Particles of a Martial Nature;
but I have likewise been convinced by fluxing it, and by casting it, whilst it
was melted, into the Conical Part of a Crucible. And I further observed, that
of it would be attracted by a powerful Lodestone.

But a Mineral of a martial Nature has not only been observed in Sand, but
Gold on the Banks of Guiny, and on the Banks of Tagus which runs by Lisbon and
Pactolus; and some has been found on the Banks of the Rhine, and a little
River which runs down from the Mountains in Savoy. But much more Gold may be
got from Sand Chymically, than by picking it up, if the Sand be reduced to
Glass with Litharge or Minium, and then the volatile Gold be obtained by giving
it a Body fit to retain and fix it; such as Silver, out of which I have got by
Quartation, out of as much vitrify'd Sand as filled a Retort, and two or three
fluxing Additaments of small price, sixteen grains of pure Gold. And though by
some it is thought strange, that there should be a necessity of fixing Gold,
yet I have elsewhere made it appear, that by a small addition of another
Substance, Gold may be sublimed without a naked Fire, and form several Crystals
like Rubies.

And if Sands, as well as Earths and Stones, abound with Mineral Ingredients,
it may be convenient to take an account where such Substances are found, and
likewise to take a Sample of them, as also of the Ores of different Mines, and
to try them Hydrostatically; for I have observed, that in English Lead Ores of
several kinds, those in which thirty pound of Lead is only to be got out of an
hundred of Ore, are looked upon as not worth working; those that yield half
their weight of Metal are indifferent; and other Ore which yields from fifty
five to sixty in the hundred is looked upon to be very good; but those that
afford eighty Pound in the hundred, are accounted very rich; but I have not met
with any that afforded more than seventy five in a hundred weight: Which Ore
seemed to consist wholly of Metal, and was made up of Parts of a Cubical
Figure, and much resembling Dies placed one by another.

But besides what has been already proposed, to be inquired after concerning
Metalline Fossils, not only its Proportion is to be considered, but the plenty
or scarceness of the Mineral, the easiness or difficulty of coming at it, as
also its depth and freeness from Waters, its nearness to plenty of Fuel, its
nearness to Water to drive Mills, and to transport it, etc. are to be
considered likewise before one begins to work a Mine.

An Explication of the Instruments employed in these Experiments, and those in
the following Chapter.

(aa) The Beam, See Plate 1. Fig. 00.
(bb) the Dishes, (cc) the Frame to suspend the Beam, upon which (d) a sliding
Socket, (e) its Arms containing (f) a Pulley, over which (g) another Pulley
passes, (h) a Line fastened to (i) a moveable Weight, by which the Beam is
raised up or let down, (k) a Hair to suspend (l) the Body to be weighed in the
Water, held in (m) the Glass Cistern, (n) the Bucket for Liquors, (o) the Box
of grains, (p) the Forceps to manage them, (q) the Pile of Weights, (r) the
Handle of the Balance, (ssss) the Table.

CHAP. XI. Medicina Hydrostatica.
FROM what is contained in the foregoing Chapter, it appearing that white
Marble or Crystal may be a Standard to distinguish mineral Substances from
other Bodies, I shall here subjoin the way of weighing sinking Bodies in Water.

The method of weighing Bodies.
And first, the solid Body to be examined, is to be suspended by a Horse-hair,
at one of the Scales just now described, and there to be counterpoised; then
the Weights being taken out, by deducing from the weight of the Body in Air the
weight of it in Water, by the Remainder divide the whole weight of the given
Body in the Air, and the Quotient will show the Proportion in specific
Gravity, betwixt the examined Solid, and as much Water as is just equal to it
in Bulk. For Example, if the Weight of a Cubick Inch of Rock-Crystal be 1169
grains in the Air, and 738 in Water, the Remainder will be 431 grains; by which
the 1169 grains being divided, the Quotient will be found to be 2 x 71/100 or
near enough 7/10, for the proportion of the Gravity of white Marbles to Water.

In which Direction it is requisite to observe, first, Cautions requisite to be
observed.
That what we have said implys, that the Body weighed must be heavier than
Water. Secondly, Horse-Hairs are more convenient than other strings, because
they are nearer to a specific Gravity with Water. Thirdly, Where the Figure of
a Body disabled us from suspending it by tying a hair about it, we platted a
sort of net of Hairs to hold it in. Fourthly, So much of the Hair as is above
the Water must be counterpoised by a Weight in the other Scale. Fifthly,
Sometimes instead of the Scale I counterpoised the opposite with a weight of
Lead, and suspended the Horse-Hair at the String; but when I did not take off
the Scale, I caused it to be perforated in the middle. Sixthly, Care must be
taken that the Water below touches not the bottom of the Scale, and that the
Body be freely suspended, and wholly immersed in the Water. Seventhly, Care
must be taken, that no Bubbles of Air be contained in the Pores of the Body
weighed, since the success will be apt to fail in some Trials upon that account.

And these circumstances being observed, it will be easy to know, by the
method proposed, the difference betwixt the specific weight of other Bodies
heavier than Water. It being agreeable to that Hydrostatical Paradox of
Archimedes, That a Body, heavier than Water, weighs less in Water than in the
Air, by the weight of as much Water as is equal to it in Bulk or Magnitude. And,

The first Use of this method of weighing Bodies.
By this Method we found, That the weight of Lapis Hematites to Water, was as
four 15/100 to one, and by subliming it with Sal-Armoniack, we found by the
Astringency of it, that it abounded with Metalline Parts of a Martial Nature;
which was further confirmed, by observing that a grain of it turned an Infusion
of Galls black Lapis Lazuli was to its bulk of Water in weight, as three to
one. A Lodestone, which besides Magnetical, has Medicinal Virtues, appeared
to be as four 93/100 to one. Lapis Calaminaris was as four 169/100 to one. In
which Concretes, the Medicinal Virtues seem to depend on the plentiful mixture
of metalline Ingredients; but some Bodies which abound less with Mineral
Substances, may be as operative, by reason of some more active Particles. But,

This Hydrostatical method of weighing Bodies, Calculus Humanus, which weighed
six drams and a half, was in proportion to Water as one 76/100 to one; and
another that weighed four drachms and a half, was to Water as one 69/100 to
one. These Stones, though the productions of Distempers, have been accounted
better than Oriental Bezoar in their Effects. Choice Bezoar Stones, which
weighed three drachms in the Air, being weighed in Water, one of them was as
one 47/100 to one; another somewhat lighter, was as one 53/100 to one; a third,
which was taken out of another Stone, which being weighed in the Air weighed
six drachms wanting nine grains, was in proportion to Water as one 55/100 to
one: So that these have a much less specific Gravity than Fossil Stones.

A third use of this Hydrostatical way of weighing Bodies, Norwegian and the
English Load-stones, to be heavier in specie, than those that came out of
Italy, in which the Island of Elba abounds with Mines, whereof one entire Mass
weighed a great many hundreds of Pounds.

Fourthly, Bezoar, and other valuable Stones.

Fifthly, also whether precious Stones abound more or less with Metalline
Ingredients. But though sometimes Stones that are transparent may not be so
plentifully impregnated with Medicinal and Mineral Effluvia, yet considering
the Activity and great subtlety of some Pigments, the latter may be as
powerful. And that every sensible part of a Body may be impregnated by a small
quantity of Pigment, will appear from the following Experiment, viz. If five
grains of Zaphora be mixed with one ounce and half of Venice Glass finely
powdered, and kept in fusion in a furnace with a violent hot fire, it will give
the whole a fine blue color, and if the proportion of the Zaphora be as one to
six, the Glass will be too deeply tinged to make a handsome Gem. And to show
further, that a small quantity of Metalline matter may be sufficient to impart
a virtue to Glass and even Gems, I shall add, that eight grains of the powder
of a German Granate, being kept in fusion with an ounce of Crystalline Glass,
it gave it a Tincture like that which Steel gives to pure Glass.

From what has been said it appears, how the proportion of solid substances to
Water may be Hydrostatically-distinguished; but since there are other
substances which cannot be so weighed, being either subject to dissolve in
Water, or not fit to be suspended by a Hair, by reason of their form, being
either powders or liquids, to make an estimate of these, I contrived the Bucket
formerly mentioned, and represented in Fig. 00, Plate the first, which being
suspended in Water and counterpoised, we put a known weight of Quicksilver in
it, by which means comparing its weight in Water with its weight in Air, and
dividing the greater number by the difference of its weight in Air from what it
was in Water, and which was thirty four grains, we found the Quotient to be
fourteen and about 1/10, so that the Mercury made use of in this Trial was as
14 11/100 to 1, but common Mercury which is sold in the Shops we have found to
weigh not above thirteen and a half to one, and indeed I have found a notable
disparity in the weight of most common Mercuries, especially those drawn from
Gold; for the Mercury being combined with that Metal becomes heavier than
common Mercury. By the same measure we may know the specific Gravity of any
Liquors which are heavier than Water, and which are unapt to mix with it, such
as Oil of Cinnamon, Cloves, Guajacum, etc.

And by the assistance of the same Bucket, we may be able likewise to weigh
Powders, and estimate their goodness, if we put a known weight of them in the
Air into the Bucket, and pour in gently as much Water as will fill up the Pores
contained betwixt them, and be sufficient to expel the Particles of Air
contained betwixt the small Parts of it; but in all these Trials it will be
requisite to suspend the Scales of the Gibbet delineated in the preceding
Figure, that the Scale may hang the steddier, whilst the Body is a weighing.

But since there are several saline Bodies, as Sublimate, Mercurius dulcis,
Vitriol, Rock-Allom, etc. which cannot be weighed in Water, in such cases,
instead of Water, we may substitute Oil of Turpentine, which though it be of a
different specific Gravity from Water, yet by carefully weighing a parcel of
any substance which is genuine in that Liquor, it may serve for a Standard to
estimate the goodness of other parcels of the same substance by, and it will be
no very difficult matter for one well skilled in numbers, by comparing the
specific Gravity of Oil of Turpentine and Water together, to know what
proportion the Body weighed in Oil, would bear to an equal bulk of common Water.

Another way which may be taken to estimate the specific Gravities of Liquors
is, by making use of a Body that will subside in all Liquors but Quicksilver,
for thus by first weighing that Body in Air, and then in several Liquors, and
having noted the difference betwixt the solid and each of the Liquors, it is
not difficult to find the specific weight of each, and the proportions betwixt
them. And since it is but one solid that is compared thus to the differing
Liquors; whatsoever their Number is, it will not be difficult to compare the
specific Gravities of the Liquors betwixt themselves, and to discover by the
weight of the first, that of any other, which ever one pleases.

But in making choice of such a solid Body, as may serve our present purpose,
care must be taken, that it be such as will not be subject to be consumed by
Effluvia; or too large for a tender Balance; nor so big as to require too much
Liquor to cover it; and lastly, it ought to be of such a Nature, that it may
not be liable to be corroded by sharp and corrosive Liquors, or easily broke,
but such as may be easily obtained, that what Experiments are tried with it may
easily be tried by others, and communicated to Posterity.

The Bodies made use of in trying these kind of Experiments, and which came
nearest what we thought requisite for such Trials was, when we examined common
Water, Rainwater, Spirit of Wine, Wine, Brandy, Vinegar, and the Liquors drawn
from it, Cider, Beer, Ale, Urine, Waters distilled from Vegetable and Animal
substances; Amber: But to estimate the weight of heavier Liquors, we employed a
Glass-Bubble, Hermetically sealed and filled with Mercury. But this being both
hard to be obtained, and harder to be preserved, I made use of the following
Body in such Experiments as are to be recorded for Posterity, viz. A Globe of
Rock-Crystal which was suspended by a hair which passed through a small hole in
it, and which we employed to discover the difference of those Liquors, which we
could obtain greater quantities of, but for others we employed an Hexagonal
Prism, with a kind of Pyramid at the end, and this Body being of such a Figure
we were able to employ it in small Cylinders, in which a small quantity of
Liquor would surround it and cover it. The weight of the Ball of Crystal we
employed was to its bulk of Water as 2 57/100 to 1, and the weight of the Prism
as 2 66/100 to 1.

And this method of weighing Amber in different Liquors, may not only acquaint
us with their specific Gravities, but also from thence we may learn to know
which are most Spirituous. For though a piece of Amber weighed but 6 grains in
Water, yet in common red French Wine it weighed 8, in Nants Brandy 17, and in
rectifyed Spirit of Wine 34.

This Hydrostatical method of estimating, may likewise contribute to discover
the strength of Acid Liquors, those that are strongest causing the solid to
weigh less, as they are stronger, the greater decrement of weight proceeding
from the greater proportion it contains of Salts that are not Volatile. It may
likewise save the wasting of several Liquors, as Spirit of Wine or Brandy, in
trying their goodness. And further it may be employed in estimating the
intensive weight of Wine, Beer, Ale, Mead, Cider, etc. and distinguish their
goodness, without consuming them.

But Amber will not be heavy enough to distinguish the strength of Oil of
Tartar per deliquium, and such heavy Bodies, since they are too heavy for it to
subside in.

Besides, the aforementioned there may be another use made of our
Hydrostatical solid, viz. To show when Menstruums are of a convenient strength.
For that there is a peculiar degree of Spirituousness requisite in some
Solvents is evident, since if Aqua Fortis be too strong, it will not be able to
dissolve Silver, no more than if it be too weak, till it is diluted by an
addition of Water; and it is much more fit to dissolve filings of crude Lead,
when more dilute: So rectifyed Spirit of Wine is not always the most proper
Menstruum for gummy Bodies, since it dissolves only the purest Resin, and
leaves the Mucilaginous Parts behind, which may be as good in Medicine as the
other, and further we see that Gum Arabic and Tragacanth are not so easily
dissolved in good Spirit of Wine as in weak Liquors; and the like may be
observed in dissolving Myrrh.

To what has been said on this occasion, there is one thing to be added, that
when this Expedient is made use of in Oil of Vitriol or Tartar per deliquium,
it is necessary to put something into the Scale to compensate the lightness of
the Horse-hairs, since in such Experiments the specific Gravity of the Liquors
exceed the Gravity of the Hairs, and consequently they will be apt to buoy up
the Body immersed, and misinform us in its true specific weight.

To the aforementioned ways of Hydrostatically estimating Liquors, we may add
the following. And first, it may be done by filling a Vessel with a slender
Stem successively, with different Liquors, and weighing them, as also it may be
done by a Brass Cylinder, made heavier at one end than the other, by which it
may be made to float, and to swim deeper or higher above the Water, as the
Liquor contained is heavier; or another way is by fitting too Bubbles together
with Cement, by which their Stems being joined, and the one caused to sink
lowest by a Ballast of Mercury, as the other is filled with a heavier or
lighter Liquor, it will manifestly preponderate.

Another way proposed by Mersennus, is by weighing a Glass and a Stopple in
Water, and then filling the Bottle quite full, and putting in the Stopple; for
the weight of the Glass and Stopple being deducted from the weight of the
whole, the remaining weight will be the weight of the Liquor proposed. But
instead of this we made use of a round Glass-Ball with a Glass Stopple, which
being first weighed in Air and Water, and counterpoised there, we were able to
discover the weight of the Liquor contained, and its proportion to the bulk of
the Liquor it was weighed in; and if the Bubble were too light to subside in
some heavy Liquors, we would bring it to a just weight by a Ballast of Mercury.
But since such Vessels as these are very hard to be got, and some other
inconveniences attend it, we think it less satisfactory than those other ways
we made use of and proposed before.

A sixth Use that may be made of these Hydrostatical Trials, etc. As also we
may compare and weigh the Juices of Fruits of different kinds, and the
subordinate Species of each kind, as also the several Juices in their several
states of Crudity or Maturity: But the use of this Hydrostatical Bucket being
very tedious and difficult, to those that are not very skilful in making
Experiments, the other will be more useful which are tried with Amber.

But to what has been already delivered on this subject I shall add, that though
in several Trials made with precious substances, a nice Balance is requisite,
yet in most cases the difference betwixt Bodies is great enough to be discerned
by a Balance, not altogether so nice; for let the Balance be never so nice,
there is difference in the Textures and Compositions of Bodies of the same
Denomination, for which, as well as in defect of a nice Balance, allowances
are easily made.

But perhaps it may be objected by some, against the method I have been
proposing, that since I generally weigh most Bodies in Water, it will be a hard
matter to make them with any exactness, since it has been observed, that most
Waters themselves differ in specific Gravity. But to this I shall briefly
answer, that I have not perceived so considerable a difference as will
frustrate these Experiments, in which we require not a Mathematical, but a
Physical certainty.

CHAP. XII. Hydrostatical Stereometry applied to the Materia Medica.
IT being usual for Physicians in the descriptions of several Parts of the
Materia Medica, to signify the size of Bodies by very indeterminate Terms, I
thought that they might be assisted by Hydrostaticks, to give descriptions much
more exact and satisfactory; and for that end having made two hollow Brass
Cubes, whose Cavities, being Cubical Inches, contained 256 grains, or a Cubical
Inch of Water, it being a Law in Hydrostaticks, that whatever Body is weighed
in Water, it loses so much of its weight, as an equal bulk of Water weighs, I
concluded it would thence follow, that whatever solid was weighed in Water, if
in that fluid it lost 256 grains of its weight, it might be said to be a
Cubical Inch; and as it lost more or less, so it might be said to be of a
Magnitude proportionable; for if it weighed but 128 grains less in Water, it
might be said, to be of such a bulk of Water; but if it weighed 256 wanting
thirty two grains, that being an eight of a whole Cubick Inch of Water, the
bulk of the Body may be said to be of a Cubick Inch. And if the Body weighs one
ounce thirty two grains (amounting to 512 grains) or one ounce and a half forty
eight grains (amounting to 768 grains) the bulk of the Body will be equal to
two or three Cubical Inches. And if after the Division there remains a
Fraction, it will not be difficult to estimate it, and to know the exact bulk
of the Body, since the Cubical Inch consists of such aliquot Parts, as are
easily and regularly divided and subdivided.

And thus we may easily know the bulk of a Body that is heavier than Water, but
if it be specifically lighter it will be a difficult matter. The method
Mersennus proposes is this, viz. First, weigh the Body to be examined in the
Air. Secondly, take a piece of Lead of a determinate weight, and able to sink
the other Body in Water. Thirdly, weigh the Plate in Water, and the weight it
loses in Water, will be the weight of Water equal in bulk to the Body weighed.
Fourthly, tie together the Plate of Lead and the lighter Body, and note the
weight of the Aggregate. Fifthly, weigh the Aggregate in Water, and substract
the weight of it there, from its weight in the Air, and the difference will be
the specific weight of the said Body in Water. Sixthly, from this difference,
substract the formerly found specific Gravity of the Plate alone in Water, and
the remains will give you the weight of the lighter Body in the same Liquor.
And then dividing the obtained weight of the light Body in Water by 256
grains, and it will give you the solid content of that naturally floating Body.
To illustrate this method, I shall subjoin the following Experiment.

I. The Oaken Cube in Air weighs seven drachms, thirteen grains and a half. 193
II. The weight of the Lead in Air, four drachms. 240 III. The weight of the
Lead in Water (three drachms and a half, ten grains) 220 which being
subtracted from its weight in Air, leaves for its specific weight in Water.
-- 020 IV. The Aggregate of the two in Air is 433 V. The weight of both
together in Water is -- 162 which being subtracted from its weight in Air,
gives the difference of both the Aggregates. -- 271 VI. The difference betwixt
the weight of Lead alone in Air, and in Water, or which is all one, the
specific weight of the Plate alone, viz. -- 020 Being subtracted from the
difference of the Aggregates in Air and in Water, gives for the weight of the
Cube proposed -- which wants but four and a half of the weight of a Cubical
Inch of Water. 251

The same method that has been taken with solids not subject to dissolve in
Water, may be taken with Alloms, etc. Which is only by employing Oil of
Turpentine instead of Water; for a Cubical Inch of that weighing 221 grains
and, the difference of the weight of a solid in the Air, and in that Oil, being
divided by that Number, the Quotient will give you the solid contents of the
Examined Body.

But to discover the weight of Bodies, which are apt to imbibe too much of the
Liquor they are weighed in, we may guard them from it by a thin coat of
Beeswax, and having first taken the weight of the Wax in Air, and then fastened
it to a Plate of Lead, substract the weight of as much Water as is equal in
bulk to the Wax, and proceed with the Body contained, and the Plate of Lead as
before taught; and having thus obtained the Weight of the proposed Body in
Water, by dividing it by 256 grains, by the help of the Quotient we may obtain
the solid contents of the proposed Body. Another way I devised for to learn the
solid contents of a Body, without imbibing Water into it, was, by finding the
weight of a Cubick Inch of Mercury, and also the specific weight of the
Vessel, and then pouring upon the Body contained in that Vessel as much Silver
as it would hold, by knowing the weight of that Quicksilver from the weight of
the whole which the Vessel would contain, one might be acquainted, to how much
Mercury the matter contained was equal.

Having thus proposed a Hydrostatical way of trying Bodies, I shall leave it to
others to contrive an Instrument more apt for such uses than I have done: And
shall to what I have said add, that these kind of Experiments do not always
equally answer in success, being apt to be diversifyed, as well by the want of
uniformity in the Qualities, and specific weight of Bodies of the same
Denomination, as by the difference in Water in intensely Hot and Cold Weather;
as also upon the account of less exact Balances. But another reason is the
difference of weights of the same Denomination, for we are told by a diligent
Mathematician, that, cum omnia grana, vel semina, quae reperiri solent in
atriis venalibus Lutetiae, and stateram expendisset, vix granum ullum, inter
ejusdem Speciei grana grano alteri exact respondisset, in incertis Ludere
noluit. And the same Author tells us, that 688 Roman grains are but equal to
576 French grains, and this estimate of their difference by another Balance
was found to be thirty six grains false: And the same Author receiving two
accounts of the number of grains contained in a Roman ounce, the one told him
there were 612, the other 576. And though our weights as well as those made use
of by Gheraldus, have twenty four scruples in an ounce, yet he divided his
scruples into twenty four grains, whereas we divide ours but into twenty. And
Mersennus, p. 37. lib. 16. tells us, that cum autem dixi Chelinum, undecim dici
denariorum, credunt tamen alii december duntaxat, nil assero. And.

To what has been said, I shall only add, that though this method of weighing
Bodies be not Mathematically exact, yet it comes as near Physical exactness as
we can expect, and may be of use till some more nice way of Trials be found out.

A Table representing not only the Weight of several Bodies in Air and Water,
but their Proportions in Weight to an equal Bulk of Water.
A Weight In Air in Gr. In Water in Grains. Proportion. AMber 306 12 1 4/100 to
1. Agat 251 156 2 64/100 to 1. A piece of Allomstone 280 152 2 18/100 to 1.
Antimony good and supposed to be Hungarian One 391 295 4 7/100 to 1. B Bezoar
stone 187 61 1 48/100 to 1. A piece of the same 56 22 1 64/100 to 1. A fine
Oriental one 172 60 1 53/100 to 1. Another 237 61 1 34/100 to 1. C Coral red
129 80 2 63/100 to 1. Crystal 256 140 2 21/100 to 1. Weight In Air in Gr. In
Water in Grains. Proportion. Cornelian 148 103 3 29/100 to 1. Calculus humanus
2570 1080 1 72/100 to 1. Coco-shell 331 85 1 34/100 to 1. Native Crabs Eyes 77
36 1 89/100 to 1. Crabs Eyes Artificial 90 54 2 48/100 to 1. Calx of Lead 138
123 8 94/100 to 1. Copper Stone 65 49 4 09/^^0 to 1. Common Cinnabar 802 702 8
1/50 to 1. Cinnabar of Antimony 197 169 7 3/100 to 1. Cinnabar Native 197 171 7
57/100 to 1. Coral White 336 204 (...) 54/1002 to 1. Another piece fine 139 85
2 17/100 to 1. Calculus humanus 302 97 1 47/100 to 1. Copper Ore 1436 1090 4
15/100 to 1. Copper Ore Rich 413 314 4 17/100 to 1. Cinnabar Native, very
sparkling 226 194 7 6/100 to 1. G Gold Ore not Rich, brought from the East
Indies 1100 682 2 63/109 to 1. Another Lump of the same 1151 717 2 65/100 to 1.
Granati Minera 217 147 3 1/10 to 1. Granate Bohemian 4 36/100 to 1. H Weight In
Air in Gr. In Water in Grains. Proportion. Haematites English 1574 1156 3
76/100 to 1. I Ivory 1732 83 1 91/100 to 1. L Lapis Manati 450 293 2 26/100 to
1. A Fragment of the same 218 123 2 29/100 to 1. Another 345 197 2 33/100 to 1.
Another from Jamaica 2011 1127 2 27/100 to 1. Lapis Lazuli one piece 385 256 2
98/100 to 1. Lead Ore 686 590 7 14/100 to 1. Another Lapis Calaminaris 477 380
4 92/100 to 1. Lapis Judaicus 261 164 2 69/100 to 1. M Marcasites 814 631 4
45/100 to 1. Another from Stalbridge 243 189 4 to 1. Weight In Air in Gr. In
Water in Grains. Proportion. Another more shining than ordinary 287 227 4
18/100 to 1. Mercury revived from Ore Manganese a piece 321 230 3 13/100 to 1.
Mineral Cornish, like a shining Marcasite 145 129 9 6/100 to 1. O Osteocolla
195 108 2 24/100 to 1. Ore Silver choice from Saxony 458 366 4 9^/100 to 1.
Another Piece 1120 960 7 to 1. Ore Lead from Cumberland Rich 1872 1586 1/^
54/100 to 1. R Rhinoceros horn 8563 4260 1 99/100 to 1. Rock-Chrystal, another
Piece 256 140 2 20/100 to 1. S Saphir Weight In Air in Gr. In Water in Grains.
Proportion. Seed-Pearl Sulphur vive 371 185 2 to 1. Germane very fine 306 152 1
98/100 to 1. Slate Irish 779 467 2 49/100 to 1. T A Piece of Talc like Lapis
Amianthus 596 334 2 28/100 to 1. Talc Venetian 802 508 2 73/100 to 1. Talc
Jamaican 1857 1238 3 to 1. New English Tin Ore, Mr. Huberts. 812 613 4 8/100 to
1. Tin Ore black Rich. 1293 984 4 18/100 to 1. Another piece Choice. 2893 2314
5 to 1. Tutty a piece 104 83 5 to 1. Tin-glass 468 419 9 56/100 to 1. V Vitrum
Antimonii per se 357 282 4 76/100 to 1. Vitriol Engl. a very fine piece 1093
512 1 ^8/100 to 1. Unicorns horn a piece 407 195 1 91/100 to 1.

THE WORKS Of the HONORABLE ROBERT BOIL, Esquire EPITOMIZED.
BOOK V. PART II.
CHAP. I. An account of a strangely Self-moving Liquor communicated in the
Transactions of November 26. 1685.
Of a Self-moving Liquor.
AN Ingenious Mathematician having mixed several Ingredients in an Earthen Pot
over Coals, the matter took fire, and began to blaze furiously; which obliged
him to stiffle the flame, and remove it from the fire; and when it was cold, he
several times successively and at some distance of time observed, that the
Liquor moved variously and briskly; and some seeds being thrown upon it, they
formed a sort of scum; part of which being removed, and the Liquor placed in a
warm Laboratory, I observed the following Phenomenon.

1. The scum which remained on it being broke, part would be carried to the
left hand, and part to the right, by the motion of the Liquor. 2. When it came
from under the scum, it moved very briskly, as if its motion upwards had been
checked by it. 3. The Liquor consisting partly of Oil, and partly of Bituminous
Ingredients, their motion might not only be the better discerned, but some of
those Oily Parts rising up to the top of the Liquor would diffuse themselves
orbicularly, and form a great Halo adorned with the vivid colors of a
Rainbow, and these would continue till they lost themselves successively under
the scum. 4. The motions of this Liquor were frequently Vortical, which
appeared by the motion of some Parts of the scum. And the Liquor all this while
was actually Cold. 5. Some of this Liquor being poured into a Cylindrical
Glass, it moved not as before, but being poured into a shallow wide-mouthed
Glass, it moved more briskly and variously than before in the Earthen Vessel.
6. It moves more briskly or slow as the Weather varies in temper, and in all
has continued its motion ten days; and it continued this motion when poured
out of a Vial into a convenient Glass seven or eight weeks after, but very
languidly, and soon began to slacken its motion in point of swiftness; and from
the first to the last time this Liquor was observed to move, it was about five
Months.
CHAP. II. Of the preserving of Birds, and other small Faetus's.
Of preserving Birds. etc.
IN order to make Observations about young Faetus's, I preserved Chickens taken
out of the Shell at several times, and on several days after Incubation, by
keeping them in Spirit of Wine to which I sometimes added Spirit of
Sal-Armoniack prepared with Quicklime, and that the Liquor might not be
discolored, I usually remove them twice into fresh Spirits, before I design to
preserve them in it.

CHAP. III. A Conjecture concerning the the Bladders, of Air found in Fishes.
Communicated in the Transactions of May 25. 1675.
Of the Bladders of Fishes.
TO show whether a Fish moves in the Water, by expanding or by a constriction of
himself, and whether the Bladder within him be contracted and expanded
according to the several depths he swims at, we contrived the following
Experiment, viz. To put several Fishes into a Bolt-head, filled with Water, and
whose Stem is drawn out very fine, and sealed up when filled with Water; for if
when the Fish sinks, the Water in the small Tube subsides, we may conclude he
contracts himself; and if when he rises, the Water rises also, we may conclude
that he expands himself.

CHAP. IV. Laudanum Helmontii Junioris: Communicated in the Philosophical
Transactions of October 1674.
Preparations of Laudanum.
TAKE of Opium four ounces, of the Juice of Quinces four pound, cut the Opium
small, and digest it in the Juice of Quinces ten days or more, then filtre it,
and having infused in it, of Cinnamon, Nutmegs, and Cloves each one ounce, let
them infuse six days, and then having let it just boil a little, filtre it, and
evaporate the moisture till the Mass is of what consistence you desire, and
incorporate with it two or three ounces of Saffron well powdered, and make it
up into a Mass. The Dose of this Laudanum, if kept liquid, is from five to ten
drops or less; and of the Pills a less quantity is required.

CHAP. V. Observations of an Earthquake made at Oxford, and communcated in the
Transactions of April 2. 1666.
Observations of au Earthquake.
RIding betwixt Oxford, and a Lodging in the Country, which was four Miles off;
the first two Miles it was colder than at other times all that Winter, but
before I got home the Wind turned and Rain began to fall. And in an hour after
I perceived a trembling in the House where I was, and soon after there happened
a brisk Storm. At Brill, a place higher than where I was, the Earthquake was
more sensible, the Stones in the floor of a Gentleman's House being perceived
to move: This Hill abounds with several kinds of Mineral substances; and I am
told that from that place the Earthquake extended it self several Miles.

CHAP. VI. Passages relating to the Art of Medicine.
Passages relating to the Art of Medicines.
THOUGH the following passages may be of small use to the Ingenious, and
Experienced Masters, yet since they may be fervicable to younger Physicians, I
shall for their Information impart them.

EXPERIMENT I.
A tall well set Gentleman about twenty four years old, having by a fall broke
his Skull in several places, which were several times Trepaned, and large
Chasms made in it by the taking away of several pieces, in about three days
time he was seized with a Palsy on one side, so violently as to be deprived of
motion and almost of sense, except that in his Leg he had some short
remissions. And this Palsy continued about twenty four weeks, about which time
his head being further laid open, they found a Splinter of a bone much like the
scale of a Fish, which stuck so fast and close to the Dura Matter, that an
effusion of Blood accompanied the taking of it away, but that being stopped in
about three days time his Palsy began to leave him, and he is now very strong
and healthy, though the Callus which supplies the place of his Skull be very
large. From whence it appears, what great effects may spring from a very slight
cause. But, besides the aforementioned Observations, it was further to be taken
notice of, that the Parts whilst the Palsy continued were not only deprived of
sense and motion, but were very much extenuated by a continued Atrophy, which
loss of substance they acquired again upon a Cessation of the Paralytick
affection. And it was further to be observed, that all the difference betwixt
those and other Parts was, that they were more subject to be cold. To which we
may add, that though he was frequently let blood, he continued to have a good
stomach; nor did the affection of the Brain cause the least Vomiting, or
Convulsions.

EXPERIMENT II.
To show the great and terrible effects of sudden Passions of the mind, I shall
relate the following. History, viz. That a Woman having taken a Boy to a River
side with her, which she loved very well, the Boy accidentally falling into the
Water unseen by her, when she missed him she was taken with a dead Palsy,
which could not be removed.

EXPERIMENT III.
But to show what contrary effects violent Passions of the mind may have, I
shall add, that a Gentleman who was in his youth taken with so violent a
Sciatica, that he could not go, but was carried to Church, and looked upon as
Incurable; yet once, when he was in the Church, news being brought that the
enemy was entered into the Town, (which was a Frontier Garrison,) and designed
to Massacre all in the Church, they all fled and left him behind them, who
being as much afraid of himself as the rest, got off his seat, and walked along
like other Men, and this I received from the Person affected forty years after
the said fright, who in all that time suffered not the least relapse of the
Distemper.

It might be of no small advantage to Physic, would Philosophers, amongst
those Experiments which they lay down, as relating to what they write purposely
about, communicate those which they think of use to Physicians, though they
should be less pertinent to the Subject under Consideration; for which reason,
I shall for the future communicate such, desiring this short Advertisement may
be my Apology.

A desined Chemical Medicine.

EXPERIMENT IV.
Though Vomitive Medicines are not a little dangerous, yet since in several
Diseases they are altogether requisite, I shall here lay down a Preparation
which is as effectual, and yet safer than any other Liquor, and much to be
preferred before an Infusion of Crocus Metallorum.

The Preparation is this, Distill two parts of Antimony, and three of Spirit of
Wine, in a Glass-Receiver, 'till the distilled Menstruum is succeeded with red
Flores, and filtrating the Liquor through Cap-Paper, lay it up for use close
stoped. It may be given from four to eight or ten Drops, in a spoonful or two
of Wine, Black-Cherry Water, or Spring Water, drinking some of the same Liquor
after it, to wash it down; it works very soon, and evacuates plentifully and
effectually without danger. It has had not only very good success in Surfeits
and several other Cases, but cured a Person of an intermitting Fever, which
put on various Types, and continued to afflict the Patient three Years,
notwithstanding great quantities of the Jesuit's Powder had been frequently
given. But here it is requisite to add this short Advertisement, viz. That the
Powder, if kept long, being apt to precipitate, it must either be made use of
whilst the Liquor is fresh, or the Bottle must be shaked well when it is used.

A designed Chemical Medicine.

Considering the great esteem and value of Mineral Waters, I contrived a way to
imitate them, by making use of Ingredients, very harmless in themselves, and
likely to make no less innocent a Composition.

The Trial was this, Having digested in a Bolt-head, two days, one part of
Filings of Iron, with ten of distilled Vinegar, and then increased the Heat
'till the transparent Liquor appeared to be of an Orange Color, we poured part
of it off, lest the Menstruum being too much impregnated, the Metal should be
precipitated. This Orange-Colour Tincture being kept for use, we dropped four
Drops into eight Ounces and a half of common Water, which made an artificial
Spaw, whose Taste not only agrees with that of the Natural Spaws, but it will,
like Tunbridge or the German Spaw, turn a Tincture of Gauls Purple.

EXPERIMENT V.
The Bezoar Stone being a Medicine of great use, not only in malignant Fevers,
but the Plague; and by reason of its dearness apt to be counterfeited, I shall
add the following way of distinguishing betwixt good and bad, viz. by
disgesting about fifty grains finely powdered, with six drachms of Spirit of
Nitre, in a digestive Furnace; for after they have been mixed some time, the
Spirit begins to dissolve the Powder, and extracts a red Tincture; which being
placed in a Northward Window about eight and forty Hours, shoots into
Chrystals, much like those of Saltpeter.

To show that the purging or astringent Qualities of Bodies, depend on the
Disposition of the Patient as well as of the Agent, I shall intimate, that a
certain Lady having eat a Toast with Cinnamon upon it, was so violently purged
for about two days, that it brought Convulsions and a Spasmus Cinycus upon her,
which was not removed in three Years.

A Physician, to whom I communicated several things, sent me the following
Account in a Letter from Dublin, dated Feb. 27. 1682. viz. That he found the
good Effects of Ens Veneris in removing the Subsultus Tendinum, in a Febris
Petechialis, which was fatal to many for about fourteen Months.

The Method I took in this Fever was, if the Patient was costive, first to
prescribe a Glister, and a large blistering Plaster between the Shoulders,
keeping it running 'till the Declension of the Distemper; all this time I
prescribed Emulsions of Aqua Aronis, Card. Bened. Citri, totius and Sir.
Gratorum cum Aceto, Orange and Butter-milk Posset, etc. I avoid the use of all
those things that quicken the Circulation of the Blood; and I rather prescribe
Blistering to prevent, than cure Affections of the Genus Nervosum, because the
Matter being once fixed in those Parts, they become ineffectual.

A designed Chemical Medicine.

Considering that the Menstruums usually employed in opening, and preparing the
Body of Steel were Acids, I tried to do it in the following method. Having
dissolved fresh filings of Steel in a warm place, in a sufficient quantity of
Spirit of fermented Urine highly rectifyed per se, the filtrated solution had a
taste different from all other Chalybeat preparations, and being set in a cold
Window, in three days precipitated a powder of a green color, yet the
decantated Liquor by Evaporation would not in the least Cristalize. This
Preparation has effects quite different from those Preparations made by Acids,
and is much more agreeable to some Persons.

A designed Chemical Medicine.

That I might try whether a Metalline Sulphur might be obtained from Steel, I
pitched upon a Menstruum void of Sulphur, that if the Preparation should yield
Sulphur, it might not be suspected to come from the Menstruum. Wherefore I
dissolved Steel in Spirit of Sea Salt, and upon Evaporation obtained very
curious Cristals, from which we drew by Distillation in a Retort, a good
quantity of Liquor, which came over in the form of Steams, which had a very
Sulphurous smell, which being rectifyed and mixed with Aqua Fortis would
dissolve Gold, and give it the color of Silver; which may intimate to us, how
much the Vitriols of Metals may differ according to the difference of the
Menstruums which dissolve them, since our green Vitriol affords Liquors
different from that made with Oil of Vitriol. Besides which, it may be worth
while to note, that though neither common or Roman Vitriol will dissolve in
Spirit of Wine, which is Inflamable, yet our Vitriol would readily, and here it
will not be unnecessary to hint by the by, that a solution of our saline
Vitriol may not improbably be of use in Wounds, being a very powerful
Astringent, and fit to prevent the breeding of Worms in Wounds, disposed to
abound with such in cold Climates.

But what we chiefly designed in this Experiment, and what is most to be taken
notice of is, that the dry substance, raised by the fire, was distinguished by
accidents into three kinds of substances. First, a Powder which when exposed to
the Air turned yellow. Secondly, a deep colored substance betwixt red and
brown, of Parts much grosser than the former. Thirdly, a substance of a shining
red, whose Parts were very fine and subtle.

The Caput Mortuum was changed into a Talky substance, consisting of Lamelloe,
situated and connected much after the same manner, as the thick Plates which
make up Muscovia Glass.

CHAP. VII. Experiments and Observations Solitary.
EXPERIMENT I. A notable Comminution of Gold into Powder, that will sink in
Water.
A Comminution of Gold into Powder.
WE dissolved a grain of refined Gold in Aqua Regia, adding about two spoonfuls
of Water to the Solution, in which Mixture a small piece of Metal being
suspended, it in a few days afforded a deep colored Precipitate, which was so
light that it was a considerable time in subsiding, and as easily raised in the
form of Mud upon an Agitation of the Vessel; where it was to be noted, that
though upon an Agitation the Liquor at the first seemed Opacous, yet in a little
time it appeared to be of a fine Purple color, so that the Particles of Gold
were so far divided, as by being scattered through two ounces of Water to give
a Tincture to it.

EXPERIMENT II. A Proof of the Metalline Nature of Granates.
The Metalline Nature of Granates, c. and
In Confirmation of what I have elsewhere delivered, viz. That the Virtue of
Gems depends on a Mixture of Metalline Juices, with the Particles of those Gems
whilst in fluid forms, I shall take notice, that a Granate of a dark color,
being applied to a Lodestone, it so strongly attracted it, as not without
violence to be separated from it.

EXPERIMENT III.
I am told by an Ingenious Gentleman, that he saw a flat Saphir in the
East Indies, which had a small Cavity in the middle of it filled with a fluid
substance, which was not so apt to petryfie as the rest.

EXPERIMENT IV.
To prove that Fishes hear under Water, I shall here lay down a Relation which
I received from an Ingenious Gentleman, who in a Garden near Genoa, observed
the Gardener to assemble the Fishes in the Pond together, by a certain noise
which he made.

EXPERIMENT V.
To illustrate and confirm what has elsewhere been observed, concerning the
various colors refracted by the minute and Parts of Solids, I shall here note,
that a Globe of Rock-Crystal being sawn in two, the new superficies refracted
the Rays of the Sun, so as to exhibit colors more lively than those of a
Rainbow, which were refracted this way, or that, as the superficies of the
Stones were differently situated in reference to the Sunbeams, and the like
Phenomenon succeeded the like Trials with a Touchstone. Which Experiments may
confirm what has elsewhere been delivered, concerning colors of Bodies
depending on a peculiar modification of Rays of Light, on the superficies of
Bodies different from each other in other Qualities.

EXPERIMENT VI.
Having put into a Glass-Vessel an Oculus Mundi, whose Diameter was about a
third part of an Inch, the Color of which was white, and its figure Unequal, by
degrees the whole was turned brown; and in nine minutes time being taken out of
the Water was Semidiaphanous, which being a gain put into the Water, and after
a little less than half an hour taken out again, was almost as yellow and
Diaphanous as Amber. But being for some time exposed to the Air, it began
gradually to grow Opacous, and to be marked in several places with white
streaks, which by degrees expanding themselves, united so as to make the whole
Surface of the Stone of a cream white.

EXPERIMENT VII. Remarkable Observations about Hurricanes.
Observatious about Hurricanes.
I am informed by the Governor of the Bermudas Islands, that these are the
foreruners of them. First, at some distance from the shore the Sea would swell.
Secondly, the Water about a day after would beat violently against the shore
and adjacent Rocks, which could neither be attributed to Winds or Tides or any
other cause; besides which it would sometimes on a sudden invade the shore
successively, as suddenly subsiding again without any manifest cause, where it
is observable, that as the incroachment upon the Shore is greater, the recess
of the Water is proportionable. Thirdly, an unpleasant smell in the Air would
preceed the Hurricane. Fourthly, long and visible streaks appeared in the Air
of very different Colors, as white, blue, red or green, without the least
appearance of Clouds.

EXPERIMENT VIII. A Monstrous Pearl.
Of a Monstrous Pearl.
Yester day was brought to me a Pearl of an Orient color, except one spot which
I suposed was the place where the Umbelical Cord fastened it to the Shell, it
was an Inch and a half long, and about 8/10 of an Inch broad.

EXPERIMENT IX. A strange Observation about the Influence of the Moon.
Observations on the Influence of the Moon.
I am informed by a Gentleman, that upon a fall had several pieces of his Skull
taken out, that he not only observed pricking Pains at the full of the Moon
about the Meninges, but likewise, that the Surgeons perceived an
Intumescence, and expansion of those Parts.

EXPERIMENT X. An uncommon Experiment about Heat and Cold.
For a further Confirmation of our Doctrine of the Origin of Heat and Cold, Of
Heat and Cold.
I shall lay down the following Experiment; we immersed the Ball of a
Thermoscope Hermetically sealed in a Cylindrical Vessel, which contained Oil of
Vitriol, and presently cast Sal-Armoniack into the Oil, upon the Mixture of
which there succeeded a violent Ebullition, and likewise a gradual succession
of coldness, which was both perceived by touching the Vessel, and likewise by
the descent of the Spirit of Wine in the Thermometer; yet this Mixture instead
of a cold Effervescensce, presently upon the addition of an equal quantity of
Water, became violent Hot.

CHAP. VIII. A Collection of Chemical Experiments.
A collection of Chemical Medicines.
MY design in following Experiments, being rather to lay down such as may be
instructive to the Reader, than Ostentations of my own skill, I shall give this
short Advertisement, that I have upon that account rather made choice of such
as are easy, than those that are difficult to be prepared, those being more
proper for my design, which is to lay down Fundamentals for compiling of
natural Philosophy, because they are likely to be most Intelligible; for it
does not always happen, that that which is most pleasing to the Eye is most
useful, for though Gold and Diamonds are valuable in themselves, yet a piece of
Steel or Flint are in effect in some respects, of greater use to Mankind.

EXPERIMENT I. To dissolve crude Gold with dry Bodies.
Though Chemists so much boast of their Aurum Potabile, Crude Gold dissolved by a
dry Body.
as to think it a curious preparation, yet it is possible to make one without
the help of a furnace, or so much time, after the following manner. Having
ground four Parts of pure Nitre with two of Rock-Allom, and one of
Sal-Armoniack, I put the Mixture into a new Crucible, keeping it in a moderate
Heat, till the Mixture contained in it was dry, which being taken out, and
presently pulverised, it afforded a Golden Tincture in highly rectifyed Spirit
of Wine.

EXPERIMENT II. Luna Cornea by Distillation.
Luna Cornea by Distillation.
Three ounces of Silver being put into a Retort upon six ounces of strong
Sublimate, by a strong Fire the Sublimate was carried to the top of the Vessel,
leaving the Silver half melted, and turned into a Semidiaphanous horny
Substance, which would melt at the flame of a Candle like Wax.

N. B. That if there be any Phenomenon in this or other Experiments, above what
the Title promises, the Apology I make for them is, that as they may tend to
the promoting of natural Philosophy as well as the other, so I was not willing
to pass them by without Notice.

EXPERIMENT III. Mercury growing warm with Silver.
Mercury growing warm with Silver.
Having gradually mixed the precipitate of Silver made with Copper, with two
drachms of Antimonial Mercury in a Man's hand, till it had reduced to a
yielding consistence three quarters of its own weight, we put the Amalgama
which was noted to be sensibly warm during the Mixture, and of an uniform
consistence, into a Glass Vial, which in two Nights time became a hard and
brittle Concrete.

EXPERIMENT IV. The lasting Disposition of a certain preparation of Mercury to
grow Hot with Gold.
I sent a Mercury to the Royal Society, which was prepared with a great deal of
pains in my Furnaces, Mercury growing Hot with Gold.
which being mixed in one hand with a due proportion of Calx of Gold, might be
perceived to acquire a sensible Heat, which faculty it retained being
Hermetically sealed in a Glass Egg ten or twelve years. And what is more
remarkable is, that the Mercury being separated by Distillation, would when
mixed again with Gold reiterate the former Incalescence.

EXPERIMENT V. An uncommon method of working upon Antimony.
A particular way of working upon Antimony.
In the common method of operating upon Antimony, the Air not only influencing
the fire in its Operation, but also bearing up several of its Particles which
work upon each other as in a Medium, I took the following method to try what
effects the fire would have upon it, viz. I laid S S S of common Chalk and
Antimony powdered, in an Earthen Pot, and placed it in a digestive Furnace,
where it continued about twenty four hours, having taken care that the first
and last Stratum should be of Chalk, and that the Layer of Antimony should be
pretty thin.

EXPERIMENT VI. A method very uncommon of making a Calces of Gold.
Calces of Gold.
Preparations of Gold being usually taken for extraordinary Medicines, I shall
lay down one, which is a Calces prepared without the help of corrosives
Menstruums. Having dissolved Gold in Aqua Regia, and distilled off so much of
the Menstruum as to leave the Gold dissolved in so much of it, as to resemble a
thick Oily Liquor, upon which Inflamable Spirit of Wine. being poured, a red
Calx presenly subsided; and the like Precipitation succeeded upon mixing Spirit
of Wine again upon the decanted Liquor, which was very much sweetened by the
first Infusion; and this Calx is not only more subtle, but milder and safer
than common Preparations, and may be made yet more safe, if Spirit of Wine be
soccessively poured upon it, and consumed by Deflagration, for by that means
the residue, if there be any of corrosive saline Parts will be carried off; but
there is one thing to be noted here, which is, that amongst this Calx there
were several Particles which shined like Gold, so that there ought to be more
than ordinary care in the Preparation to dissolve the Gold perfectly. N. B.
This Menstruum is not only in this but several other Preparations preferable to
common A R, because the Inflamable Spirit being mixed with it renders it more
Spirituous.

EXPERIMENT VIII.
To try how much Volatile Salt might be dissolved in Water, we put a quantity
of them both together in a moderate Heat, and found that an ounce and a dram
might be dissolved in three ounces of Water.

EXPERIMENT VIII.
Salt of Tartar being dissolved in Spirit of French Verdigrease, two or three
times successively, and the Spirit being as often drawn off by Distillation,
the Salt remained in a disposition to be dissolved in rectifyed Spirit of Wine,
and apt to be brought to Fusion.

EXPERIMENT IX. To make an Inflamable Spirit of Roses.
A quart of Ale-Yest, being kept in fermentation five or six days together,
with two bushels of Damask Roses and red Rose Buds well beaten, yielded an
Inflamable Spirit being distilled per Vesicam.

EXPERIMENT X. About the Chemical Analysis of Pearls.
A Chemical Analysis of Pearls.
From two ounces of Oriental Pearls distilled in a Retort in a sand Furnace, we
obtained a black Oil which swam upon an Opacous and muddy Spirit, both being in
weight about twenty three grains; and from the top of the Retort to the bottom
was extended a film of Oil which was about three grains, being of a fetid smell
and discoloring Spirit of Wfne with a redish brown Tincture, the Oil and
Spirit also resembled Hartshorn in smell, and the latter had all the Qualities
of a Volatile Alkaly, as to turn Sublimate white and Syrup of Violets green,
and to ferment with Spirit of Salt. The Caput Mortuum which was black being
calcined became white, being of a hot and bitterish taste, and capable of
turning Syrup of violets green. As also when mixed with a Solution of sublimate
it would yield an Orange colored precipitate.

CHAP. IX. Of Strange Reports.
RELATION I.
I have been informed by a Physician who lived at Bruxels, Strange Reports.
that he has prepared three or four Resuscitable Plants, and I am likewise
told by a certain Virtuoso, that he saw two which an Ingenious Apothecary in
Namur had prepared, viz. Carduus Benedictus and Camomile, and though Quercetan
alleges, that for the production of such and their continuance, actual Heat is
requisite, yet this Apothecary put the ashes of those Plants into such a
Liquor, that upon an agitation of the Bottle the dispersed Particles of the
ashes would convene into such an order, as to represent the Plant whose ashes
they were, and that they would continue so till the Vessel was agitated aagain.

RELATION II.
I am informed by Chemist of good Credit, that he was not only told by a
Virtuoso of Switzerland, that he had a piece of Malleable Glass, but laying it
upon an Anvil, and striking it with a Hammer, he found it to receive the
Impression, and to grow thinner after a few blows, though the edges were
cracked like those of Silver when over Hammered

RELATION III.
I am told by a Pious Man who stayed in London in the Year 1665, when the
Plague raged there, that in some places the Infection was so strong as to stain
the very Walls, so that a Pesthouse be-ing only divided by a Wall, he
perceived several spots on the Walls of his Study, he visited at least a
thousand, and only took half a spoon-of Brandy about six times a day, and the
quantity of a Nutmeg of the Root of Spanish Angelica, a grain of which he
usually held in his mouth, when he visited Infected Persons.

RELATION IV.
I am informed by a Person of credit, that he distilled for a German Physician
a certain Mineral, which he gave me a description of, which afforded three
drachms of a Liquor which put into a Glass-Bubble with a neck, would upon the
full Moon rise up into the neck a considerable height, which Expansion it lost
as the Moon decreased.

RELATION V.
An ingenious Gentleman, who had distilled a certain Bismute or Tin-Glass for a
German Prince, there being a Mine of it in his Territories, informed me that
the Liquor distilled from it, being rectified would swell and subside upon the
increase and decrease of the Moon.

RELATION VI.
I am informed by an Ingenious Person who resided in Prussia some time, that
several Swallows which were found upon breaking of the Ice enclosed in it,
recovered and flew about the Room when thawed, though none of them survived
four days, some of them dying sooner.

RELATION VII.
I am informed by a Traveller that returned from Jamaica, that he saw a
Silk-Cotton Tree which was twenty one yards about, which grew upon a certain
Mountain; and that the ordinary sort are as large as Oak trees in England.

RELATION VIII.
I received the following account from an East India Merchant, viz. That at
Campar and Rakan on the East-Coast of Sumatra, there constantly happens a
violent Indraught of the Sea called Bunna which approaches with a terrible
noise, in three Parts, the first and last of which are more moderate than the
second which is very high and terrible, and comes with such force, that no
Vessel, except Anchor be weighed is able to resist it, and this Bunna
constantly returns at new and full Moon. The reason of which the Relator
attributes to the greatness of the Spring-Tides, which come rouling over Banks
of Sand, which choke up the mouth of the River.

RELATION IX.
I am informed by a Gentleman, that being at Sea near the Coast of Mosambique,
the Captain observing a dark speck in the Sky a distance off, taking it for a
sign of an approaching Storm, took in the sails, and though the Sky was for some
time after calm, yet on a sudden a Hurricane arose, which turned the Ship
several times round, as if it had been in a Whirl-Pool, and this Storm
continued near two hours.

RELATION X.
I am informed by a Physician, that he saw in the Country near Armsterdam, a
sort of Mercury in the custody of a Farmer, which was of a Golden color
throughout, and would if put upon the fire in a proper Vessel precipitate in
the form of a red Powder.

And I am likewise told by a Judicious Physician, that he saw in the possession
of a Stranger, a sort of Mercury whose small Globules were of a green color.

CHAP. X. Various Observations about Diamonds.
Observations about Diamonds.
DIamonds being not only the most Noble but Valuable amongst Gems, it may be
worth our while to consider them a little, and to relate what Observations I
have been able to make about them. And,

I. It is observed, that Diamonds are so much harder than other Bodies, that
they require a greater force to cut and polish them than other Gems. II. It is
observed by one who has long dealt in Diamonds, that those which are now
brought over are much softer than those of the old Rock. III. The Tradition is
false, that Diamonds cannot be cut without being softened in Goats Blood, the
contrary being found by Diamond cutters, and an Experienced Diamond-cutter has
informed me, that he uses to polish Diamonds with the dust which he obtains by
pounding of boared Diamonds in an Iron Mortar. IV. Though it be a general
received Opinion, that Diamonds have a weight proportionable to their Solidity,
yet I find amongst my Experiments, that a Diamond being weighed Hydrostatically
in Wattr was to its proportion of that Liquor as 2 22/23 to 1, so that it did
not equal its treeble proportion of Water in weight. V. I am informed that if
Diamonds be Cloudy, sometimes one as big again as a Pea, will be at least four
grains heavier than another of an equal size. VI. The natural shape of Diamonds
is uncertain, since most of them which we see are only broken pieces, whose
figures are very irregular, yet I have seen some which seemed to consist of
Triangles terminating in solid Angles, and I am told by one who cuts a great
number, that those which are of a regular Figure are usually four cornered.
VII. It is observed, that in Diamonds there is a regular tendency of Fibers or
thin Plates, which lie parallel to each other, which may be called the grain of
them which way they may easily be divided, though not against that grain without
difficulty. VIII. As to the color of Diamonds, though it generally be so well
known, as not to need to be described, yet in the East Indies some have been
observed to be of a pale blue color: And Monsieur Tavernier says, he has seen
one of a very red color, and a Relation of mine wore a Diamond in a Ring which
was of a Golden yellow; besides which varieties of colors, I have observed one
amongst a great many in the East India House whose color was green. IX. And I
have seen a Diamond brought from the East Indies, which had six Triangular
sides and a Cavity in one of them, in which Diamond the Fibers might easily be
discerned. And the Merchant to which this belonged, told me he had seen one
brought from Borneo, which before it was Polished was black, though after it
appeared to be a clear Stone. X. To conclude this Chapter, I shall add the
following Relation, which will contenance what I have elsewhere related, viz.
That the Virtue of Gems may probably arise from Metalline Tinctures
incorporated with the matter of them, whilst it was soft and fluid; the
Observation is, that having applied a Lodestone to a small Diamond which was
pretty dull, it would not only be taken up by it, but would at a considerable
distance leap up to it. To these Observations I shall only add, that there are
several other Observations which are scattered up and down my Writings, which I
shall not repeat here, they properly enough belonging to those writings.
THE WORKS Of the HONORABLE ROBERT BOIL, Esquire EPITOMIZED.
BOOK V. PART III.
CHAP. I. Of the Original and Virtue of Gems.
Of the Original* of Gems.
THOUGH I am far from believing, that Gems are endowed with so many Medicinal
Virtues as are usually ascribed to them; yet I believe they may have
considerable Effects on Humane Bodies, which Virtues they may receive from the
Intermixture of Mineral and Metalline Parts, whilst they were in a fluid form.
And that precious Stones have once been in a fluid form, may be argued hence,
viz. First, from their Diaphaneity; fluid Bodies being more apt to have their
Parts ranged in an order requisite to transparency, than solid Bodies; as
Silver dissolved in Aqua Fortis, and Lead in Spirit of Vinegar, not only become
transparent, but may form Diaphanous Crystals. Secondly, from their External
figure; it being usual for Bodies to form more regularly and curiously shaped
Crystals when in a fluid, than a solid Ambient substance; for which Reason, if
a Glass-Bottle be filled with a Solution of Nitre, and the Water has been
pretty well consumed by boiling, the Salt will shoot into a Mass, whose side
next the Glass answers the form of it, but that next the Water will be set with
Prismatical Crystals of a Nitrous figure: And I have seen Indian Granates taken
out of a lump of Heterogeneous matter, some of whose Surfaces were Triangles,
others Paralellograms, etc. according the figures of the Cells they were
contained in.
And I have seen not only Bristol Stones, but Cornish Diamonds curiously shaped
like Crystals of salt Petre: And I have likewise seen Rubies very Geometrically
shaped; and amongst other Rarities, a Diamond whose Surface consisted of
several Triangular Planes, which contained several lesser within them, which
for the most part met at a Point, and formed an obtuse solid Angle. And I have
observed, that most Diamonds have angular and determinate shapes.

And in favor of the Hypothesis already laid down, I shall add, that precious
Stones being dissolved in a Particular Menstruum, they shoot into Crystals like
those of Nitre, but insipid. And I have observed, that though Bristol Stones have
on the upper part, six smooth sides which were so cut as to represent six
smooth Triangles, which terminate like those of a Pyramid in a Virtex, yet the
lower Part which was next the matter it adhered to, made it appear less
transparent, and conformable in figure to the Cavity of its womb, this is more
remarkably evident, when clusters of these Crystals grow out of one Mineral
lump. And to this I shall further add, that I have seen a Mass which consisted
of two flat Parallel Cakes, which seemed to be composed of a dirty kind of
Crystalline substance; and out of each Cake there grew toward the other a
great number of Stones, which having a little space about them, were regularly
shaped, and of the color of a German Amethyst. And I have a Stone which
consists of four Parts, the lowest being like a flake of coarse Stone, only
adorned here and there with very minute glittering Particles, as if of a
Metalline Nature; over this is spread a thin white Opacous bed, and the third
is made up of a long series of Crystals thick set, and which look whitish; and
upon these which are not much thicker than a Barly-Corn, lies another made up
of Crystals like Amethysts, some higher tinged than others, and more elevated
where they had most Room to shoot; those that were most elevated being hard
enough to grate lines upon Glass. And I have found in the Cavities of concreted
Stones Crystals which were set round the sides of them, and seemed to be formed
of a Lapidescent Juice, which was Percolated through the substance of the
Stones, and formed curiously shaped Crystals. And I am told by a digger, that
he has observed several clusters of these Crystals which stuck to no part of
the Rock, but seemed to be hastily formed in a soft Mould.

But thirdly, not only the External but their Internal Texture favors our
Hypothesis; since it seems to imitate that of those Bodies which have been
formerly fluids: For it has been observed, that several Particles of Salt
sticking together have not only formed large lumps, but Sal-Gem and lumps of
the Isle of Mayow Salt being broke seemed to be made up of the like Parts. And
tho a solution of Silver usually shoots into thin Plates, yet it may be so
ordered, that several of these joining together may form larger Crystals, whose
outsides may be finely shaped like some peculiar kind of Vitriol. And though
transparent Bodies are usually thought to be of an uniform Texture, yet I have
observed, that a thin Muscovy Glass Plate, which was so thin as to be scarce
visible, might be further divided into Plates; and the like has been observed
in other Stones; and to this I shall add, that I have been able to perceive the
grain of a large Grizolette with my Eye, as well as in Hyacinths and Saphirs;
and English Granates when they are broke, appear manifestly to be made up of
flakes or Plates; and so do even Diamonds themselves, which are observed to
cleave much more easily with the grain than against it, as Wood is observed to
do, which is made up of an assimilated Juice which was first fluid: But it is
observed in some Diamonds, that the flakes are not wholly Parallel, but in the
substance of the Stone, sometimes make Angles; for which reason some of them
break in pieces before they will cleave through.

Fourthly, it seems requisite, that these Stones should have been in solutis
Principiis, that they might be tinged with Mineral Juices. Which proposition
suggests several Observations; and First, That most Gems lose their color, or
have it altered by the fire, and though it may be suggested, that the loss of a
color may be effected without the addition of a Pigment, by a change of the
superficial Texture of a Body; (as when red Ink is beaten into a froth, or when
Crystal receives several flaws in its Surface, by being suddenly cooled in
Water, and becomes white, or in Cochinele, and puts on a pleasing color, by
the insinuation of the Tincture into the cracks and flaws) yet Indian Granates
are observed to change their redish for a dark and dirty Iron color, and Agats
being kept a competent time in the fire became white, except where Mineral
Veins ran, where it was observed, that the color was not destroyed but
changed, and became a deep red, though I suspected that a more lasting fire would
have turned them white, and the like change of color has been observed in
Pebbles, and other Stones, some of which losing their Transparency by Ignition,
acquired a deeper color upon their Extinction in Water. And to countenance
what I have laid down, it may be further offered, that Gems are generally found
near Mines, or Mineral Veins; and though they are not sufficiently skilled in
digging Mines to discover what they otherwise probably might, yet I have seen
several Amethysts which were taken out of Ground abounding with Iron and Tin
Ores; and those softer Gems called by Mineralists Fluores, are often to be
found in or near Metalline Veins, finely tinged with Mineral Juices, which were
they in hot Countries and sufficiently hardened with the Sun, they might pass
for Emaralds, etc. And I remember, that I once prepared a Menstruum no more
corrosive than white Wine, which being poured upon well colored Granates
extracted a lovely Tincture from them. And Benvenuto Cellini tells us, that he
saw a Rubie which was not of the usual color but white, as also he acquaints
us, that he has seen Berils, Topazes, and Amethysts of the same color; and
Rubies and Saphirs have been observed to be of the same degree of hardness, so
that they were looked upon to be the same kind of Stone though differently
tinged; and that the same kind of Stone may be differently tinged appears,
since Diamonds have been observed to be yellowish, more yellow and perfectly
yellow, bluish, greenish, and some as green as Emaralds. And one who lived near
the River Siam or Pegu in the East Indies told me, he had seen Stones taken out
of the Water partly void of color, and partly of the color of a Rubie. And
besides what I have observed in Agats and Opacous Gems, as to the differing
colors of the same Stone; I wear a Sardoinx in a Ring, the uppermost part of
which is black, the middlemost of a Chestnut, and the other of a blue color,
almost like a Turquois, and each of these of an uniform breadth and Parallel to
each other, and even amongst Saphirs though they are commonly azure, yet a white
Stone has been called by the same name, because of the same degree of
hardness. And to these I shall add, that in Italy I have seen a large piece of
Crystal, whose Pyramidal part was of a trnsparent green; the Vertex being
richly tinged like an Emerald; but the further the color spread from the
Vertex, the more dilute and pale it grew, so that the Base was transparent and
like ordinary Crystal; agreeable to which Josephus Acosta says, that Emeralds
seem to grow in Stones like Crystals, and by little and little to thicken and
refine. He likewise says, he has seen some half white and half green; others
all white, and some green and very perfect. And I have seen a Saphir so odly
tinged with Mineral fumes, that it might well be taken for a Chalcedonian, though
of the hardness of a Saphir.

And to show further, that solid Gems may include Heterogeneous matter in them;
I shall add, that not only I but others have perceived something in the Body of
Rock-Crystal, which by varying the posture of that Stone might be rendered
visible; and the like has been seen in Grisolets brought from the East Indies:
And in a hard Stone brought from thence, and designedly broke, I found several
clear and transparent Crystals, which had their Points inwards, and were
Arguments that they had swam in some Liquors, whose incoagulable Parts were
either imbibed by the Ambient matter or penetrated it. And to illustrate what I
have said I shall add, that I have not only seen a Fly in shape and size much
like a Grass-hopper, enclosed in solid Amber, but variously and curiously
colored with his wings displayed. And I have seen white Amethists in which
there appeared to be several lines, some of a brownish and some of a reddish
color, which looked like hairs, some lying Parallel to each other, and others
more inclining; and I am apt to believe, that even Diamonds are not void of
Particles of Heterogeneous matter, which is countenanced not only by odd Clouds
which I have seen in a great many of them, but the different specific Gravity
of those of the same Water, the difference amounting to a Carrat betwixt
Diamonds of the size of two ordinary Pease.

But, besides what has been already offered, to prove that Gems have been once
in a fluid form, it may be further alleged, that the Mineral Particles which
they are so uniformly tinged with are convincing Arguments, since it is
inconceivable how they should otherwise be so impregnated. And to what has
been already delivered; I shall further add, what is delivered by a French
Author, viz. That the Stones which are found in the Earth have their Water
colored by the Earth, whether it be fat and black, or abounds with black or
red Sand, and in some the Gems have been observed to be black or yellow; but
though this Author has said thus much which countenances our Hypothesis, yet I
must not omit to advertise, that though he asserts Diamonds to be not only the
hardest but heaviest of Stones, I must yet say, that they are not the heaviest
as may be Hydrostatically discovered.

But perhaps against what we have said, It may be urged, first that the figures
of these Crystals are so curious, that a Plastic or Seminal Power seems
requisite to the forming of them; which were it requisite, it might be
answered, that that Plastic Power may be lodged in fluid as well as solid
substances, since the solid Parts of Animal Bodies as well as Plants are formed
of liquid substances; but that the figures of these Crystals may be owing to an
apt convension and coalition of fluid Particles may be argued hence, viz. Since
common Salt, by the help of Oil of Sulphur or of Vitriol and Water, will shoot
into Crystals with Points like Diamonds, and not unlike native Crystal in shape
and transparency; but if the Quality or proportion of the Oil of Vitriol be
varyed, they will shoot into Crystals sometimes of one shape and sometimes of
another, for the most part fiuely figured. And to show that the regular figure
of Sea Salt contributes not to such figurations, I shall add, that having
dissolved some Stony Stiriae, found in Caves or Grottoes, in Spirit of
Verdigrease, and evaporated the clear solution in a digestive Furnace after the
ordinary manner, it yielded rather a coagulated Mass, than any thing like
Crystals; whence it appears, that a concourse of circumstances may be
sufficient to determine the figures of consistent Bodies, made of fluid ones;
especially since when I allowed a longer time for the fluid to shoot in, it
afforded a good number of distinct Crystals; long, transparent, and curiously
shaped.

And not only the external figure of Crystalized Bodies may be accounted for,
without he help of a Plastic Power, but their internal Construction likewise,
since diverse Bodies upon a slow coalition will form Concretes, some of which
will consist of streaks, and others of flakes; as lumps of Sal-Armoniack, which
though a factitious Body, when broke will appear to be full of streaks, like
those Stiriae observed in petrifying Water. And I have made artificial
Concretes of Salts alone, or of Salts or Minerals, as Stones, or Antimony which
look very like Talk, being white Bodies made up of a multitude of streaky
Particles, lying long ways one upon another as in that Mineral, and I have not
only found Concretes shaped like Rhomhus's or Lozenges, composed of a multitude
of flat and extremely thin Plates, but have imitated such by Art. And I have
observed, that though generally Crystals of Silver form flakes seemingly simple
like scales of Fishes, yet when they have shot leasurely they are Geometrically
enough shaped, and made up of thin flakes sticking one to another. And
Tin-Glass which naturally consists of a multitude of shining and polished
flakes, will, though beaten to Powder, and melted, upon its Refrigeration form
several broad and shining flakes, which lying one upon another, cross each
other at various Angles, as the matter happens in several Portions to be
variously refrigerated. And the like instances may be observed in some Mixtures
of Copper, Iron, and other Minerals; and very conspicuously in good Regulus
Martis Stellatus, whose internal structure appears upon breaking of it, to be
made up of shining flakes, almost of a specular Polish. And though whilst we are
looking on some Concretes, the Stony Stiriae in some places have a streaky and
in others an angular Configuration, yet I have seen several of them made up of
Parts confusedly jumbled together, and if there be a due disposition in the
components Parts to such Configurations, they may be brought to Concretes in a
far shorter time than any one would expect or believe; so that a solution of
Silver being heated hot, and removed suddenly into cold Water, one might not
only very easily, but plainly see the Silver shoot with ones naked Eye; but
even a strong Solution of Sal-Armoniack, or some Urinous Spirit, being spread
upon the outside of a Glass in which a frigorifick Mixture is contained, will
in less than a minute of an hour be coagulated into Crystals of a determinate
figure, according to the Nature of the Liquor that afforded it.

But if against these instances it be urged, that though they are taken from
saline Bodies, which are for the most part disposed to convene into smooth
Surfaces, and Angular shapes, and are easily wrought on by External Cold, yet
it may seem strange, that the figure of a Mould or Womb should alter the
Internal Construction of solid Minerals and Gems; but that it may is evident,
since, though Tin-Glass consists of several smooth and bright Planes, which
sometimes meet, and sometimes lie across each other, at very different Angles,
yet having beaten a sufficient quantity of it to Powder, and when it was melted
cast it into Iron Moulds, whose Cavities were each an Inch in Diameter, it
formed a Bullet, which when varily broke seemed to be made up of a multitude of
shining Planes, so shaped and placed that they rought every way like so many
Radius's of a Sphere tending from a Center to the Circumference, so that they
seemed gradually to decrease, as they were removed further and further from the
Circumference. But if the melted Tin-Glass was permitted to cool in a Crucible,
the hardened matter would form several Planes irregularly and confusedly
associated together. And the like Experiment being tried with Regulus of
Antimony it succeeded, though not so uniformly as with Tin-Glass: And melted
Sulphur being hardened in the same Moulds, the Concreted Mass seemed when broke
to consist of flakes like Straws lying Parallel to each other: But how the
flakes of Tin-Glass came to be so regularly situated; and whether the outside
being first condensed, the contiguous Liquor was connected by apposition,
successively as it moved within the crusted Surface, or whether it was
otherwise effected, I shall not now stay to examine; but to what I have said I
shall add, that having broke several Marchasites of a peculiar sort, I found
them to consist of several rows of Planes reaching from the inermost Parts to
the External Surface; and in those which were somewhat Cylindrically shaped on
the outside, these Ranks of Gold colored Particles, in the several Planes of
the broken Mineral seemed like Semi-Diameters issuing out from from a row of
Physical Points, conceived to be placed on an Imaginary Line; lying almost like
the Axes of a Cylinder between the apposite ends; as if the Wombs wherein those
Marchasites were found, contained the fluid matter as in Molds, and as if it
Concreted there, as Tin-Glass or Regulus did in the Molds.

But though from hence it may appear, that though the figures of such Concretes be
curious enough, yet they may easily be accounted for without a seminal
Principle, yet I find not the uniformity of the figrue always so great as is
imagined, but rather to depend on the different Figure and Texture of the Wombs
they are contained in; for comparing American, African, and European Granats
together, I found that one which weighed eleven grains and a half, tho it
seemed to have been coagulated in a fluid Medium, and to consist of twelve
Plains, at the concourse of two or three of which it seemed to have been broken
off from the Root or Womb, yet it was not of the Dodecahedron of Geometricians;
for whereas that consists of twelve equilateral and equiangled Pentagons;
almost all the Planes that made up our Granate, were quadrilateral, and not of
a regular shape or Magnitude; for one of them seemed to have five sides; others
resembled a Rhombus, some a Rhomboides* but most were a little bigger than the
Trapezia But, besides the want of uniformity in these Stones, I observed
amongst Cornish Diamonds, that some of them were curiously and Geometrically
shaped like Rock-Crystal, having each six sides, whereof every two that were
opposite were equal to each other; and though the Stone had a Pyramidal
Termination, made up of several resembling and curiously figured Planes, that
terminated in a solid Angle or Apex, yet the greatest number of the Titular
Diamonds were made up of very irregularly shaped Stones; for though most of them
had six long Planes, yet the opposite were most of them irregular and unlike;
and though the Apex was made up of Planes apart usually Angular, yet being
compared with each other they were far from being uniform; though it appeared
that they shot in a fluid Ambient, except at the bottom where they were fastened
to the Rock. And I have observed a great irregularity in the Area of the
Superficial Planes, or their figures, or both, in Diamonds brought from the
East Indies.

Having shown that the figures of Stones are far from discountenancing our
conjectures of their Originals, I shall proceed to show, that they help to
confirm them; since I have seen a small Cornish Diamond so bedded in a large
one, that it left a Cavity in it when separated, and on the contrary I have
sometimes seen a large one so joined to a smaller as to form a Cavity within
it, which is a likely Argument, that the one being first hardened, afterward a
soft matter was collected together, and being contiguous, hardened in such a
form as to contain part of the other in the Cavity, which was formed whilst the
one was fluid, and the other was hardened; which may be illustrated by
considering, how Nitrous or Aluminous Salts fasten themselves about pieces of
sticks, and leave a Cavity proportionably to the solid contained: To which I
shall add, that I have seen a Stone which was taken out of a Silver Mine, which
had coagulated about the Branches of a Silver Wire, which was produced by
Nature in the Mine.

Another Argument of the fluid state of Gems, and their Impregnation with
Mineral Stems, may be drawn from their Specific Gravity, for whereas common
Rock-Crystal is to its bulk of Water as two and almost two thirds to one, the
weight of an American Granate was as four to one. And though by this method a
tinged Gem has not so great a difference in its proportion to Water, yet it
may nevertheless be impregnated with Mineral Particles, for I found by
Hydrostatically weighing Water impregnated with Iron, that it was not much
heavier than common Water.

Another Argument may be drawn from the Medicinal Virtues of Stones, and the
Metalline or Mineral substances, as well from Opacous Stones as Opacous Gems,
etc. as the Turquois, the Onyx, the Sardonix, etc. as also Cats Eyes, Opates,
etc. And indeed I much question whether Diaphaneity depends on the essence of a
Gem; since it may rather proceed from the Position of the Parts of a Pigment,
and the situation of the Pores in reference to the Beams of Light: But waving
a further consideration of this matter, I shall rather subjoyn, that precious
Stones and even Diamonds themselves, have sometimes great clouds, which makes
them in those Parts almost Opacous, without out being less of the Nature of
true Diamonds. And it is observable that Cornelians and Agats are some of them
transparent, and some of them Semidiaphanous, as the Portion of the Mineral
Pigment is greater or less, or as it is more or less inconveniently mixed. And
I have seen even a Sardonix transparent, and on the contrary, figured Granates
which were both of them Diaphanous: And I have some by me of several Countries,
which though they are in some places Diaphanous, yet in the main they are almost
as dark as ordinary Stones. And I question not, but that if the Glassy Nature
of Gems did not render common Menstruums inaccessable, Mineral Particles might
be extracted from them; and when they are considerable, I question not but that
they may be obtained from solid and transparent Gems; for having kept Granats
in a hot Crucible till they changed their color and afforded a very fine
Powder, that being digested with rectifyed Spirit of Wine, afforded a curious
Tincture; and burnt Granats gave Aqua Regis a Tincture, which in some measure
resembled a solution of Gold; but a drop of the Liquor being put to a great
many drops of Tincture of Galls, it turned them as black as Ink, if not
blacker. And the like measures being taken with Granates which were looked upon
by some to be Rubies, the Tincture colored an Infusion of Galls not quite so
black as the other; but a white Powder was precipitated at the same time; and
by the use of an urinous Spirit a redish substance, which being dried in the
Air formed Bodies like Moss, and here and there small Mushrooms prettily
colored. And from other Granates I obtained a Tincture, which after
evaporation did in the Cold afford saline Concretions, but so small that their
figures could not be determined. And probably, were trials made, other Mineral
Concretes might be wrought on by appropriated Menstruums, for though the Spar
that is found in Lead Mines next the Veins of Ore be Semidiaphanous, and
usually breaks in smooth and Glassy Superficies, and looks like a Talck, and
also for the most Part is made up of figured Particles shaped like Rhombuus's
or Rhomboides, yet I found it was a more open Body than Talk, being dissolved
in Spirit of Salt, without the assistance of Heat.

But I am apt to believe, that besides the methods already mentioned, there are
other methods to discover the Metalline Ingredients of a Body, by Fusions and
proper Additaments. And to conclude this Chapter, I shall subjoyn the following
Experiment, viz. Having dissolved Stony Stiriae of petrifyed Water, in Spirit
of French Verdigrease, and after a gentle Evaporation, placed it in a cool
place, it yielded ^stals, figured much like those of pure Nitro^, (...) some of
this Stony solution being mixed wi^^ a solution of Copper, they did not
precipitate each other, but upon Evaporation yielded Crystals transparent and
colorless, and that were richly adorned with a greenish blue Tincture of the
Metal.

CHAP. II. Containing a Conjecture about the Causes of the Virtues of Gems.
FROM what has been elsewhere, and in the preceding Chapter laid down, it
appears, that the Earth does not only abound with several Mineral and Metalline
substances, a great many of which are undiscoverd, and a great many already
known, but also that several Mines are furnished with Water, which being
impregnated variously, may be no dispicable Menstruums, but may likewise concur
to the Production of Mineral Bodies, and not only serve as corrosive
Menstruums, but pure Solvents to Mineral Earths. And that common Water is able
to impregnate it self not only with Saline but Mineral Parts, is evident from
the various tastes of Waters, and their uses; some being fitter for brewing;
others for washing; some for dying particular Colors, and some to temper
Steel; and others again for other uses: And amongst the most remarkable ^ies
are Thermae and Acidulae reckoned up by various Authors, as also Salt Springs,
and those Waters of Hungary and other Parts, which yield a Vitriol, which is a
substance compounded and decompounded, containing a saline, a Sulphurous, a
Metalline, and an Earthy Part; and if Water may be thus impregnated with
Metalline Parts, it is no difficulty to apprehend how a Lapidescent Humor,
being sufficiently mixed with and proportioned to it, may be coagulated into
Stony Stiriae, and from such like Coalitions may arise those precious Stones,
and transparent Gems; for the Virtue of specific Juices are so powerful, that
I have seen Vegetable substances sufficiently hardened by them to grave on
Iron; and I had a substance which I looked upon to be a petrifyed Gum, which
was hard enough to grave on Glass.

And if the Parts of Minerals may thus, by being dissolved in Water, be mixed
with a petrifyed Body, by this means Gems may not only be impregnated, but
thence receive their Medicinal Virtues, as the Nature of the Mineral is
different in Qualities and abounds in Quantity, which Original of their Virtues
may be rendeed probable, not only by what has been said in the foregoing
Chapter, but by their different colors.

And that their Impregnation with Mineral Parts, enobles them with Medicinal
Virtues, is evident from the Testimony of Experience, and is rendered probable
by the Effects of a Loadstone, which tho a much harder substance than some
Gems, emits Effluvia very copiously, and has not only manifest Effects on
Iron, but Humane Bodies. And even those Pebbles with which they counterfeit
Diamonds, have been caused in a trice to emit copious and strongly scented
Steams; and even Diamonds the hardest of Gems, may by rubbing be caused to emit
Electrical Effluvia. And though it be thought by some, that the digestion of a
Man's Stomach is not able to extract the Metalline Parts, yet there may be a
greater Congruity betwixt the Juices of our Bodies, and the Mineral substances
with which they were impregnated, than we are aware of; besides we see that the
Stomach has manifest Effects on Chalybeate Preparations, and even crude Steel
it self. And I have obtained a Tincture from several hard Bodies, and even Gems
themselves, by a Liquor distilled from a Vegetable substance, as temperately
qualifyed as Bread. And that the natural Heat of our Bodies, may contribute to
the extracting of the Virtues of precious Stones, I am persuaded, since it
makes an evident alteration in the hardest of them, so as to render a Diamond
Electrical; and I have had one which by warm Water would be excited to shine in
the dark.

And indeed it is not altogether improbable, that Gems having the most subtle
Mineral Steams in them, being not dispersed by the action of fire, they may be
more Effectual considering their quantity, than Preparations of Metals which
have undergone a Fusion. And their Virtues may sometimes be much different,
upon the account of a great quantity of Mineral Particles, since Vunzerus tells
us, that amongst those Stones which are called Nephritick Stones, some are much
more effectual than others, besides the petrifick Juices themselves may have
distinct natures, and peculiar Qualities, upon the account of their Coalitions
with Adventitious Liquors. And if petrifying Liquors may have such manifest
effects on several Bodies one would think indisposed to petrify, why may not
such a Liquor subdue transparent Minerals abounding with Saline, Sulphurous,
and Bituminous Bodies, which being excited may emit their most subtle Parts;
and as in the Earth there are severl Bodies compounded by the action of
Subterraneal fires, those petrifyed may enable the Body with correspondent
Qualities; on which occasion I here subjoyn, that I have seen a saline
substance which was formed in the Bowels of the Earth, like that which is
artificially made. And I have seen Volatile Salts and Sulphurs shoot into
transparent Crystals in a fluid Medium after Distillation, which have been more
curiously figured than several Gems. And if it be objected in disfavour of the
Medicinal Virtues of Gems, that they grow no lighter when they are said to emit
Effluvia, I shall add, that, not to urge that the Antimonial Cup impregnates
Wine without losing of its substance, and that Mercury will give Water a Virtue
of killing Worms, by being boiled in it, though by these means it loses nothing
of its weight, I shall rather demand how it appears, that Bodies grow no
lighter by the loss of their Effluvia. And though in some cases the Gem may be
lighter than Crystal, yet it is no argument of their more languid Effects,
since the specific Gravity of those Bodies they are impregnated with, may be
of a saline Nature, and specifically lighter than Crystal: And I shall in
favor of this add, that I have several times made Bodies colorless like
Crystal; and curiously and regularly figured, which were of a compound Nature,
and abounded with an easily separable and strongly scented Sulphur. And on this
occasion I shall further add, that though when Gems are specifically heavier than
Crystal, it is an Argument of a Metalline substance mixed with them; yet
sometimes those mineral Particles may be so spirituous, as not to increase
their specific Gravity, for I have seen a ferruginous Water, which, though
strongly impregnated, was little heavier than common Water.

And now, if, together with what has been delivered in this Chapter, we
reflect on what follows concerning the Atmospheres of consistent Solids, and
the efficacy of Effluviums, it will not be absurd to ascribe to precious Stones
some Medicinal Virtues, especially to those that disposed to emit copious
Effluvia.

And to show that what we have delivered, may not only be applied to
transparent but opacious Gems; and to render our Hypothesis not only probable,
but possible, I shall intimate, First, That I have seen lapidescent Juices so
penetrating, as to turn several Animal and Vegetable Substances into Stone;
amongst which, one was a new Cheese, which could be distinguished no otherwise
from another Cheese, but by its stony Hardness; and I have a piece of Wood
petrified, which retains its grain, and is hard enough to grave upon Iron or
Glass, and to resist the action of the Fire, and likewise to strike Fire like
an excellent Flint.

But to render this Hypothesis further probable, I shall subjoin the following
Arguments. And, First, It appears from the Method taken, to weigh Bodies in our
Medicina Hydrostatica, where White Marble was proposed as a Standard, to
determine whether Metalline parts were in Bodies or not; for a piece of White
Marble being in proportion to its Bulk of Water, as 2 72/100 to 1; and
Boodstone, as 5 2/10 to 1; a Loadstone, as 4 and 6/10 to 1; Lapis
Calaminaris, as 4 7/10 to one; and Lapis Tutice as 5 to 1; It follows that
those must proportionably be impregnated with Mineral Parts, heavier in specie
than Stone; and for that Reason I have found some Stones of the same kind
specifically heavier than others, as they were impregnated in Solutis
Principiis, more or Iess with mineral Parts. But it will not be amiss here to
advertise, That some Stones lighter in specie than Fossils, may be compounded
with mineral Parts, and thence deduce their Medicinal Virtues; and others may
be impregnated with mineral Parts, lighter in specie than Marble, and
consequently their mineral Nature cannot be Hydrostatically determined as yet,
which is to its Bulk of Water, as 1 22/100 to 1, and yields no inconsiderable
Proportion of Oil.

A Second Argument for the Confirmation of our Hypothesis, may be deduced from
the Necessity of it, to explain several Phenomenon, as why Diamonds and other
Gems shouldbe included in Rocks or Clusters of hard Stones, which must be soft,
or could not, at the first, admit a hard Gem to lodge amongst their Parts; and
I shall further urge the Necessity of it, from several Gems which I found in an
odd kind of Mineral, sent me from an American Colony. And it is not improbable,
that Opacous Gems are petrified Earths, since they vary so much in their
Dimensions, so that I have heard of a Spleen-stone which weighed 80 Pound
weight. And I have seen a Medicinal Stone, which being sawed asunder, its
internal Parts were full of Cavities; whence it appeared to be made up of
porous Earth petrifi'd, and not of an indurated Liquor. From our Hypothesis the
following Phenomenon may be explained, viz. Why sometimes one part of a Gem is
tinged with a Metal, and another is not, since in making Artificial Gems, the
Mineral Pigment has tinged one Part without discoloring the other. And I have
now by me a lump of petrifi'd Matter, which consists of several Stones, which
though first petrified apart, and afterward joined together by a petrescent
Liquor, bear an uniform polish, without discovering betwixt their Parts the
least Commissures; and an acquaintance of mine discovered several loose Stones,
where this was found, which were separately of the same Nature, and afterward
hardened into stony Masses, by the intervention of a petrescent Liquor.

And I have an Agat by me, which seems to consist of several Layers of Clay or
Earth, lying parallel to each other, and petrified partly into Transparent, and
partly into Opacous Stones; and to favor this conjecture, I shall add, that I
have seen several Layers of mineral Earths one upon another, within the compass
of an Inch, which lay in different postures, in reference both to the Horizon,
and each other; and sometimes the exterior ones successively surrounded the
interior; and several of these have been found in a small compass of Ground;
and by a like Method, differently colored Chalcedonians and Jaspers may be
accounted for. And from hence may be deduced a Reason why Marchasites and
Flints, Wood and Shells, have been found enclosed in other hard Stones. And on
this occasion I shall add, that Stones which were partly Diaphanous, and partly
Opacous, being calcined, the diaphanous Parts became White; and some others
which were before tinged, had their Parts heightened so, as after Calcination
to be of a rich and permanent Red; and this difference of Colors was not only
remarkable in the thin Layers, but in the specks, and irregularly shaped
Clouds, whether Greenish or Bluish.

And to illustrate an Observation formerly made on Diamonds bedded one within
another, I shall urge what is observed in Cryftalizing Salts, where, as well as
in a Metalline Solution, I have observed, that when a number of Crystals had
shot after the first Evaporation, several successive Layers shot upon those; in
the latter of which Solutions, the Crystals of one Layer were not only fastened
to the others, but differed considerably, as well in their Shape as Postures.
In this Metalline Solution the Mineral was only one, and the Menstruum simple;
but had the first been Compound, there would have been a greater diversity, as
likewise Crystals of a compound Nature; as when a Solution of Saltpeter and
Sea Salt in Water is set to Crystalize, where besides Salts of resulting
Figures, a considerable part of the Sea Salt coagulates in the Form of
imperfect Cubes about the Bottom, before the nitrous Particles shoot into
Crystals of their own shape. And I shall further add, That Crystallization may
not only be promoted by Evaporation, but by soaking part of the Water up either
by immersing it, or by placing dry Earth under the Solution, or some other
porous Body. And by some Analogy to these Instances, we may conceive how some
of the superfluous Moisture of a Petrescent Liquor, being dispersed, the
remaining may be more apt to coagulate; but by a moist Season or supervening
Cold, the moisture ceasing to be further dispersed, the Coagulation may be for
a time suspended, and upon that account, upon the second Crystallization, may
yield Crystals less regular, and apt to convene uniformly with the others, than
in Artificial concretions performed in distinct Vessels. And on this occasion I
shall add, That I have had Fire-stones brought from several Places, in one of
which, the internal Texture was very different from the more Central Texture;
and in another, I not only observed one Spherical Stone contained within
another, but of a different Texture, and distinguished by a visible Commissure,
though the Commissure was not so uniform as to admit these two to be separated.

But perhaps it may be objected against what we have delivered, That these
Bodies are found where petrifying Springs are not. Against which it may be
offered, not to urge that Men and Beasts have been petrified upon the sudden
invasion of a petrifying Spirit, that Rainwater may bring such Particles along
with it. Since over a Bath in Hungary, that abounded with petrifying Particles,
the Steams which were arrested by the building over it, were turned into stony
Concretes; which may give us Reason to think, that petrifying Vapors raised
from the lower Parts of the Earth, meeting with rightly disposed Matter, may
form Stones, without the help of Rain or Springs; which Conjecture may be
favored, by relating, that I have not only found an Earthy and Sulphurous
Sediment in the bottom of Rainwater, but I have observed that a distilled
Liquor being kept some time in a Vial well stopped, the Steams penetrated the
Cork, and formed whitish Stiriae, very slender and of a surprising length. And
that petrescent Springs are not always requisite, will appear, since I have
found transparent Stones in a dry Soil, which lay upon a Rock; and I have found
that a solution of stony Stiriae in Spirit of Verdigrease, being poured upon
Bolus Armenus, contained in a Glass, when the superfluous moisture was exhaled,
several transparent and untinged Crystals appeared, dispersed through that Red
Earth. And the best petrified Wood that I know of, was taken up out of a Plot
of sandy Ground, where there was not the least signs of a petrifying Spring.
And though some Stones seem to grow as from a Root, yet these may easily be
supposed to have been formed in certain Molds; and that after their formation,
the Winds or Rains washed away the looser Soil from their upper Parts. Besides
it might be easily shown, that stony Concretions might be produced by the
mechanical action of the Air upon the stony Parts, that successively apply
themselves to the Matter that first begins to coagulate; and began to be
forsaken by that moisture that accompanied those Parts, and was necessary to
their due Application to their casual Roots; in imitation of which I have
obtained from saline and stony solutions, dry Turfs prettily sigured, and
diaphanous or White; as also slender Stiriae that seemed to grow out of the
solid Glass.

But further, sometime petrifying Particles may be so diluted with ordinary
Water, as not to discover themselves 'till they have fit Bodies to work upon:
For I have received transparent and petrified Cristals from a Lake in the North
of Ireland, which grew to the Rocks in the bottom, but had no ill effects on
the Fish which swam in that Water; and it is easy to suppose, that whether
Water which lies in the Cavities of Rocks be impregnated with petrifick
Particles from Springs, Rainwater, or subterraneal steams; I say it is easy
to conceive, how these, after an Exhalation of the superfluous moisture, may
petrifie the adjacent Soil, and form different Stones, according to the
particular Nature of the petrescent Liquors, and the disposition and structure
of the Soil they invade; in which Soil if any Heterogeneous Matter be lodged
whether Vegetable, Animal, or Mineral Substances, they must needs be found in
that petrified Soil when broken up: Nor is it requisite that this Soil should
be all petrified at once; for it may be petrified gradually, as the Position or
porousness of the Body give advantage to the petrifying Body that works upon
them; so that from hence it appears, how medicinal Stones of different Colors,
Consistencies and Effects, may be formed, and seem entire Bodies. And I have a
Stone by me which contains a perfectly shaped Serpent coiled up in it, but
without a Head; which appears to have been formed before the Stone, in as much
as in the upper and lower Parts of the Stone, there are Cavities left, which
together form one Cavity, of the size and shape of the contained Body; and that
the Serpent and the Stone about it, were petrified at several times, may be
argued from the different Texture of the petrified Animal, it being a clearer
kind of Stone than that of the Mold; and even that Part of the Mold it self
which is contiguous to the included Body is whitish, and abounds with shining
grains or flakes, in both which respects it differs from the other Parts.

But to proceed, in those several places in which Stones are plentifully found,
in times past pretrescent Liquors may have been, since not only Earthquakes,
Inundations, sinking of Grounds, but the incroaching of the Land on the Water,
as well as fiery Eruptions, have been able to dry up Pools and Lakes, and to
divert the course of Springs and Rivers, so as to leave not the least footsteps
where they flowed before.

Another Argument which will favor: the Hypothesis already laid down, may be
deduced from this, that by proper Menstruums Mineral Parts may be drawn from
some of these Stones, so a Solution of Boodstone turned an Infusion or Galls
blackish, and so did a Lodestone Emeri and Marchasites opened with corrosive
Menstruums. And Lapis Calaminaris kept in Fusion with Copper, changes it yellow
for a Golden color, and makes it Brass; and adds to its specific Gravity
considerably. And Quicksilver is known to be distilled from Ore found in the
Mines of Friuli. But as we before intimated, there are several Stones, which
owe their Virtues to a Mixture of Bodies specifically lighter than Crystal;
which is evident, since not only Brimstone, but Bitumens, are specifically
lighter, the proportion of Brimstone being as two to one, and that of Asphaltum
as one and a little less than 4/10 to 1. And even some Bodies specifically
Lighter than Crystal, may owe their Virtues to Mineral Particles, since they
may be mixed with Ingredients specifically Lighter than Crystal, which may
compensate the Surplusage of theirs; for I have had a piece of blackish
East-Indian Flint, and likewise an English one of the same color, the one of
which weighed as 2 6/10 to 1, and the other as 2 7/10 to 1, which is equal to
the specific Gravity of Crystal; so that the Blackish color seemed to proceed
from some Mineral smoke that had pervaded it, which may give us Reason to
believe, that the matter of Medicinal Stones may be tinged with Mineral Vapors
before it is hardened: And that several subterraneal Bodies may be raised in
the form of Vapors, will appear from what has elsewhere been delivered; and
that Quicksilver will, we are assured by the effects of Fumigations in the
Lues Venerea; and that it may be incorporated with Stones, may be observed in
some kinds of native Cinnabar. And I have found that not only artificial but
natural Sal-Armoniack, may be raised in the form of Exhalations by the help of
fire. And that Sal-Armoniack, Sulphur and Mercury, may be sublimed into a Gold
like substance, appears from the Preparations of Aurum Musicum, and that the
Earth abounds with Mineral Exhalations of various kinds, appears from what has
been elsewhere delivered; as well by us as several other Authors; and since the
Earth abounds with so great a Number of Minerals, there is no question but some
of them may be able to penetrate and tinge some indurated Stones; and that a
small quantity of a Mineral may be sufficient to tinge a great quantity of a
Stony substance, will appear from several Experiments already delivered.

But to proceed to the last Argument to be alleged on this occasion, I shall
add, that it appears that opacous Gems receive their Virtues from Mineral
Particles, since most of them consist of Mineral Bodies petrified. And though
most of these Bodies differ little from artificial ones, we are not therefore
to deny them Medicinal Virtues, since several Medicinal and specific Virtues
are attributed to Chemical Preparations, and that artificial Bodies may be
endewed with Medicinal Virtues, appears from Galen, who delivers the ashes of a
Cray-Fish as an Antidote against the biting of a mad Dog: And even Treacle is
esteemed not only as an Alexipharmick, but endewed with specific Virtues, upon
the account of its manifest as well as occult Qualities. And to what I have
said, I shall add, that several Stones of the same kind differ in the goodness
of their Medicinal Qualities, as Lapis Nephriticus; and several of them have
Virtues which seem to belong to other kinds, when they are impregnated with the
like Exhalations; so that I have seen a Boodstone which would stop
Hemorrhagies when made use of without the Persons knowledge, yet by its color
it seemed to be of another kind of Stone.

But to the foregoing Particulars I shall add, that subterraneal Exhalations
may be so powerful and penetrating, as to petrifie both Animal and Vegetable
Substances, as appears from petrifyed Skulls, Bones, and pieces of Wood; and
that Vegetable substances may be hardened into Stones is evident, since Lapis
Lyncurius, a Stone near Naples, being rubbed and moistened, and then exposed to
the Sun in a due season, will yield Mushrooms fit to be eaten, so that the
seminal Principles of Vegetables may be petrifyed, without losing a power of
exerting themselves when they find an opportunity: And these kind of Stones are
sometimes found to be of an extraordinary bigness. And that other Earths,
subject to be petrifyed, may be endewed with Medicinal Virtues appears, since I
knew a Clay-Pit in which a Bed of Clay yielded by distillation a Volatile and
strong Salt, which was a good Cordial, and a great opening and Diaphoretick
Medicine. And that sublimable Salts, Sulphurs and Bitumens, may be met with in
the Bowels of the Earth and in the Bodies of Stones, I have found by their
Chemical Examens. And that Metalline Parts may concur to the Composition of a
Medicinal Stone, may appear from native Sulphur, (which is it self a compound
Body) besides a good proportion of Mineral Earth.

CHAP. III. Of the Atmospheres of Consistent Solids.
Of the Atmospheres of consistent Bodies.
THAT fluid Bodies, such as Water, Wine, Urine, etc. emit Effluvia, is too
evident to want proof; and that even consistent and solid Bodies emit Effluvia,
will appear from what follows, since not only Leaves of Plants, but
Ambergrease, etc. are manifestly odoriferous. And not only Volatile Salts are
sensibly diminished, by being exposed to the Air, but Camphire which is a tough
tenacious Body. And even from the Electrical Qualities of Amber, hard Wax, etc.
it appears that they emit corporeal Effluvia; which sensibly affect the
Nostrils when violently rubbed.

And as further instances of the Effluvia of consistent Bodies, we may add,
that not only Apples but Eggs lose of their weight in Winter, and so does Wood;
for having caused a Cup to be made of it, and Counterpoised it, it grew
sensibly and gradually lighter, so that though it wanted two drachms of two
ounces, yet it lost forty grains of that weight in ten hours. And even Ice
which weighed two ounces in a frosty Night, lost ten grains of its former
weight, though not in the least thawed. And it is known to those that deal
amongst Lead and Tin, that those Bodies emit very hurtful Effluvia, and
Cold-share Iron has been observed to smell so rank whilst red hot, that the
Smith could scarce endure to work it; and not only Iron, but Brass and Copper,
when heated smell very unpleasantly.

And to these instances I shall add, that besides Load-Stones, black Marble, as
well as other Stones, whilst a Polishing, will emit sensible Effluvia, which is
evident by the smells they emit. And amongst other Bodies which convince us,
that they emit sensible Effluvia by their smell, I shall enumerate those
Conical Stones called Thunder-Stones, which upon attrition emit a Sulphurous
smell; and so did a Substance which much resembled a Marchasite: And I made a
Mixture of a Metalline Body and a coagulated Mercury, which had considerable
effects on the Eyes as well as other Parts, near which it was worn as an
Appensum. And Vitrum Saturni, made with a good quantity of Minium, is not
devoid of Electricity; nor is Brass free from an offensive smell, when its
Parts are put into a violent concussion by turning.

And amongst Electrical Bodies I have seen some of so close a Texture, and so
hard, that they would strike fire, and Aqua Fortis it self would not work upon
them, as Cornelians, Rock-Crystal, etc. And even so hard Bodies as Diamonds are
found to be Electrical. And I have observed, that Concretions called Cugoli,
made use of by Glass-men in the East Indies emits a smell upon attrition; and
so will a Calculus Humanus; and Iron it self if held to a grinding Stone
without the use of Water. And Marchasites likewise upon an attrition emit a
Sulphurous Odor.

And even so fixed Bodies, as Regulus of Antimony, and its Glass, communicate
to Liquors Emetick and Purgative Emanations; and Glass it self, which is fixed
enough to endure the force of the Fire, upon Attrition, emits offensive
Effluvia.

And the Heat of the Sun and Fire have so great a stroke in exciting the
Atmospheres of Bodies exposed to them; that Amber being exposed to the former,
and Glass to the latter, they both became Electrical.

And I question not, but that if a great many Bodies, not yet tried, were
carefully weighed, they would appear sensibly to emit Effluvia; though the waste
made by some Bodies is so small, as to be scarce discernable, if at all, as in
Loadstones, Ambergrease, etc. Those requiring a long time to make their
Consumption discernible, in which time we are not sure but the Weights
themselves may have lost of their weight, as well as the Counterpoise, and
consequently not be able to discover the loss those sustain.

But there are several other, besides statical, ways of trying whether Bodies
emit Effluvia or not; and there are several peculiar ways requisite to cause
them to emit them; as Glass, etc. affect the Nostrils upon an Attrition. I had
a Diamond, as well as a Ruby, which would be excited by a gentle heat in my
Pocket, or only by strokeing my Finger over the former, though sometimes they
would fail to be so easily or uniformly excited; and it is not a little
strange, that upon the Tread of a Hare or Partridge, Effluvia should be so long
emitted, as to give a Scent to Dogs several Hours after.

And if Load-stones and other Bodies may have Constant Atmospheres which are
only to be discovered by particular Bodies; several other Substances, not yet
taken notice of, may emit Effluvia, which by peculiar Methods may be discovered.

CHAP. IV. Of the Strange Subtlety of Effluviums.
Of the subtlety of Effluviums.
THE subtlety of the Effluviums will be most aptly represented, by considering,
I. The strange extensibility of some Bodies, whilst their Parts remain
tangible. II. The Multitude of visible Corpuscles, that may be afforded by a
small Portion of Matter. III. The smallness of the Pores, at which the Effluvia
of some Bodies will get in. IV. The small Decrement of Bulk or Weight that a
Body may suffer, by parting with great store of Effluvia And, V. The great
quantity of Space that may be filled, as to Sense, by a small quantity of
Matter, when rarified or dispersed.


And First, I have observed that a Grain of Silver Wire amounted to 27 Foot, or
324 Inches; and since half an English Inch may be divided into a 100 Parts by
diagonal Lines, it must consist of 64800 true Metalline Parts, which may be
well conceived to be made of Parts yet more minute. And I had a gilt Wire, an
Ounce of which made a Wire 1000 paces long, allowing Five Foot to a Pace, and
720 Foot above; and had this Wire been drawn out to an equal smallness with the
Silver Wire, the Gold would have been divided to an indefinite number of Parts,
being sufficient to cover the superficial Area of so long a Wire. And I have
known Silk to be drawn out of the Mouth of a Worm, which, though it weighed but
two Grains and a half, was 300 Yards long.

But to evince the great extensibility of Matter, we took six beaten Leaves of
Gold, the sides of whose Squares were 3 Inches and 2/8, which Number being
reduced to a Decimal Fraction, viz. 3125/100, and multiplied by it self,
affords 10^5^/10000 for the Area of each, and this multiplied by 6, the Number
of the Leaves amounts to 6313750/10000 square Inches for the Area of the six
Leaves of Gold; which weighed but 1 Gr.; so that 4 Grains was extended to above
50 square Inches. And if each of these Inches may, by Lines drawn from opposite
Points, be divided each into 100 Parts, one Grain of Gold must be divided into
500000 little squares, discernable by a good Eye; and if an Inch were divided
into 200 Parts, as I have one by me that is, then a Grain may be divided into
2000000 of squares. And to be satisfied further of the extensibility of Gold, I
enquired, and was told that 8 Grains of Gold would gild an Ounce of Silver Wire
as fine as a Hair, and which would reach betwixt 90 and 100 Miles. But
supposing the Wire to be as fine as that first mentioned, and that 8 Grains of
Gold went to gild it; a sheath of Gold weighing but 8 Grains, may be extended
so as to reach 60 times as much (in weight) of Silver Wire as it covers; and
consequently, a grain of that Wire being twenty seven foot long, the ounce of
Gold would reach to 777600 foot i. e. 155 miles; and if this Gold Wire were cut
into as small thongs or lists as posibly it might be, it must reach to a
stupendous length.

But secondly, to show into what a number of visible Corpuscles a Body may be
divided, we put an ounce of Water into an Aeolipile, and having placed it upon
a Chafing Dish of Coals, we observed that Vapors streamed out or above sixteen
minutes; and considering a few intermitting gusts afterward, and what drops of
Water were condensed in the top of it, I guessed, that had the whole been
driven out in Vapors they would have continued twenty minutes; N. B. to the
Orifice of the Aeolipile we applied a long Tube twenty Inches long and an Inch
in Diameter, the remoter end being continued about six Inches longer, and so
far expanded that its Diameter was four or five Inches; and by the help this
Pipe we were able though not actly to measure the Extension of the rarefied
Vapors. To this instance I might add the prodigious expansion of some
Inflamable Bodies, when turned into actual flame, as Spirit of Wine, etc. Which
being burnt in a Glass Lamp, so contrived that the Surface of the Liquor was
still Circular, the waste made in of an hour was very small, though the Physical
superficies of the Liquor must needs be successively rarefied and expanded, and
fly away in streams; and if so little of this Liquor was able to afford matter
for flame so long, the same bulk of a more compact Body may easily be supposed
to be capable of being expanded to much greater Dimensions. And to these
instances I shall add, that half a grain of Gunpowder being exploded under a
Vessel, whose Basis was eight Inches and its Altitude twenty; and its figure
such, that it was more Capacious than a Cone of that size, the exploded
Gunpowder was observed to fill the whole Cavity of the Vessel as to sense, and
successively issued out of the upper Orifice for half a quarter of an hour, so
that the Diameter of it being two Inches, many Myriads of visible Corpuscles,
must be conceived to throng out in so long a time as they crowded out one after
another: But to make a kind of an estimate of the Expansion of this Substance,
we filled the Vessel full of Water, and found that the weight of it amounted to
320000 half grains: And if we suppose the specific Gravity of the Gunpowder
to be as much again as that of Water, we my probably guess the smoke to posses
500000 times the space that the Gunpowder did. And as a further Argument of
the great minuteness of small Parts of matter, I shall urge the smallness of
Cheese-mites; which being so small as not to be discernable to a naked Eye, but
when they move, must be made of extremely fine Parts, otherwise there would not
be room enough for an Organical Body; and if an Organical Body furnished with
all the Parts requisite for the Preservation of Life be contained in so small a
compass, how minute must they be at the first, since the Eggs out of which they
are formed bear but a small proportion to them, when perfectly formed, and even
comparative Observations tell us, that a Mite being ten days a hatching, the
Rudiments of its Body at the first must bear but a small proportion to the bulk
of that small Egg; and to this I shall add, that though these Creatures be so
very small, yet I have been able to discern single hairs growing upon their
Legs.

Another instance of the Extension of matter minutely divided is this, viz. We
dissolved a grain of filings of Copper in Spirit of Sal-Armoniack; pouring the
Solution into a tall Cylinder four Inches in Diameter, and successively filling
it four times with distilled Water, still pouring it off into a Conical Glass;
which being done, and the weight of the Glass Cylinder deducted from the Joint
weight of the Liquor contained in it, we found that one grain of Copper was
able to give a Tincture to 28534 times its weight of Water, though its specific
Gravity is not half so much as that of fine Gold: and if we estimate the
proportion not by weight but the bulk of these Bodies, the bulk of Water to
Copper being as nine to one, the aforementioned number multiplied by nine will
give us the proportion betwixt the tinged and tinging the Body, so that one
grain of Copper gives a color to 256806 parts of Limpid Water, and by
prosecuting this Experiment further, I found that it was able to give a
manifest Tincture to above 385200, and a faint but discernable one to above
513620 times its bulk of Water.

To show that the Effluvia of Bodies may enter in at very small Pores, I shall
intimate the effects of Cantharides held in the hands of some Persons; and on
the Neck of my own Bladder when applied outwardly to my Neck. And not only
Scaliger tells us of Spiders in Gascony, whose Virulent Poison would penetrate
the Shoes of those that trod upon them, but Piso speaking of a Fish called
Amoreatim, and by the Portugals Peize sola, he says, Quae mira sane Efficacia
non solum Manum vel levissimo attactu, sed and pedem, licet optime calceatum,
Piscatoris incaute Pisciculum conterentis, Paralysi and stupore afficit, instar
Torpedinis Europeae, sed Minus durabili, Lib. 5. Cap. 14.

And to show that some Emanations, even of solid Bodies, may be subtle enough
to get through the Pores even of the closest Bodies; I shall add, that a needle
being Hermetically sealed up in a Glass Tube, and that laid upon Water, a
Lodestone would cause the Needle to leap up in it, and by the help of the
Lodestone, I could lead the Tube from one part of the Surface of the Water to
another, as I moved the Lodestone. And to show that the Magnetical Effluvia of
the Earth, may penetrate so close and compact a Body as Glass, I shall add,
that a Cylindrical piece of Iron being sealed up in a Glass Cylinder, and held
in a Perpendicular Posture, it acquired such Magnetical Virtues, as to become a
North Pole, and according to Magnetical Laws to drive away the North Point of a
Needle; but being inverted, and held under the Point of a Needle, it became a
South Pole, and attracted it.

Another Proof of the great subtlety of Effluviums, may be taken from the small
decrease of Weight, by parting with store of such Emanations; as Vitrum
Antimonii, Crocus Metallorum, and Quicksilver, the two first of which give a
Vomitive Virtue to a vast quantity of Wine, without growing sensibly lighter,
and so Quicksilver impregnates Water with a Virtue of killing Worms. And a
piece of Ambergrease which weighed about 100 or 120 Grains, being suspended
three days in the open Air, lost not sensibly of its Weight, notwithstanding
the quantity of odoriferous Steams it must have parted with in that time. Assa
Foetida, in about six Days, lost about half a quarter of a Grain; one Ounce of
Nutmegs, in six Days, lost 5 Grains; and an Ounce of Cloves, 7 grains. And though
Loadstones emit Effluvia without a sensible loss of weight, yet I suspect, that
as these Magnetical Particles fly out of one Pole, they enter in at the other,
and so make the Pores of the Lodestone their constant Thorow-fares. To these
Instances I shall add, that a Grain of Copper being dissolved in a spoonful of
a Menstruum, and that put into a Glass-Lamp, the Metal tinged the Flame, which
continued half an Hour and six Minutes; so that supposing the Flame to have
streamed through a Cylindrical Pipe so long, that small parcel of Metal must be
divided into a vast Number of small Parts; for Water, which ran through a
Cylinder, whose Diameter was but half as great as that of the Flame, amounted
to above Nine Gallons, or Seventy two Pounds.

The last Particular I shall insist upon, to show the strauge subtlety of
Effluviums, is the great quantity of space a small parcel of Matter may be
extended to, and as to Sense possess it; this we may be enabled to guess at, by
considering how long a Dog will distinguish the Scent of Partridges, Hares,
etc. after they have left the Place, and will almost give one sufficient
grounds to guess how long the Animal has been gone from thence before. And I
am told that a Blood-hound will not only perceive the Seent of a Man that has
gone over a piece of Ground several Hours before, but that the scent of a Deer
will continue upon the Ground from one Day to the next. And if we consider that
the eighth part of a Grain, can scarce be supposed to be left on the Ground
where such an Animal has stood, and likewise at what distance it may be
scented, and how long that scent continues, it will be sufficient to convince
us of the extraordinary minuteness of those Parts of Animals, which were
rendered more apt to be dissipated in Effluviums, by their having been first
strained through the Pores of their Bodies. Nor is it less remarkable, that
Birds, especially Crows, are able to discover the smell of Gunpowder at a
considerable distance; and that they are, I am satisfied by my own
Observations, as well as the Relations of others.

And on this occasion I shall add, That Julius Palmarius, in his Tract de
Morbis Contagiosis, observes, that Horses, Beeves, Sheep, and other Animals,
have grown mad by eating the Straw that mad Swine have lain on; which may give
us Reason to suspect, that the Feet of distempered Animals may leave an
Infection upon the Grass they tread on.

But to prosecute the chief aim of our Discourse, I shall add, That since
Corpuscles that are too minnte to be visible, may affect an Organ of Sense; it
is not improbable, but that there may be a great many which may be so fine as
not to affect any one of our Senses, and consequently may continue an
Atmosphere much longer than we are able to take notice of. So Forestus tells us
of a Pestilential Contagion that was a long time preserved in a Cobweb. And
Alexander Benedictus tells us of a Flock-Bed, which, when several Years after
the Plague, it was beaten, it presently infected the Bystanders. And Sennertus
tells us that in Vratislavia, in six Months, six Thousand Men dyed of the
Plague; and that from that time, the Infection was preserved in a Linen Cloth,
and being displayed in another Place, 13 Years after, it infected that Place
likewise. And Trincavella tells us, that an Infection was preserved a long time
in Ropes, by which dead Persons were let down into their Graves. And an
Instance of the like kind we are furnished with by Diemerbroeck, who acquaints
us that an Apothecary of his, turning over some Straw, upon which a Bed had
lain which held an infected Person, the Steams immediately caused Blisters upon
his Legs, and a Carbuncle which was a Fortnight in healing. And to conclude
this Chapter, I shall add, that I have a pair of Spanish perfumed Gloves, which
have continued their scent about Thirty Years, though they were not so much as
shut up in a Box.

CHAP. V. Of the great Efficacy of Effluviums.
THOUGH Particles of Matter which are minute, are looked upon to be unable to
have any considerable Effects; O the great Efficacy of Effluviums
yet I shall endeavor to show, that they may have considerable Effects. I.
Upon the account of their great Number. II. Their Penetrating Nature. III. The
Celerity and Modification of their Motions. IV. The congruity of their Bulk and
Shapes to the Pores of the Body they are to act upon. V. The Motion of one Part
of a Body which they cause to act upon the other. IV. Their Aptitude to cause
themselves to be assisted by more Catholic Agents;
though they may perform several things considerable upon these Accounts; yet
sometimes two or three, or more, concur to the producing of the same effect.

And, First, From what has been delivered in the foregoing Chapter, it
appears that the Effluvia of Bodies are very minute, and consequently it will
follow, they must be numerous, and that a great number of small Agents, when
they act per Modum unius, may have considerable Effects, is evident; since
inundations of whole Country* may be caused by Showers of Rain when drops fall
in multitudes; and aggregates of small Sands, not only bound the Seas, but form
Banks, upon which the greatest Ships are sometimes split; and though the Effects
of a single Grain of Gunpowder is immaterial, yet prodigious things may be
done by a great number of them; and though Vapors are made up of very small
Particles, which seem to be inactive, yet in moist Weather, they cause Salts to
melt, wood to swell, and Viol-strings, if they be stretched too much, to break.
And it has been observed, that the invisible Steams of a newly whited Room are
so offensive, that People who slept in such Places, have been found dead in the
Morning, being suffocated with those Fumes; and though the Vapors which can issue
out of such Bodies at once, cannot be sufficient to produce such Effects, yet
if we consider that they continually succeed each other, as Wind out of an
Aeolipile; their Number and Minuteness may enable them to cause considerable
Effects.

And that the subtlety and penetrating Nature of Effluvia, contribute much to
their Effects; appears, since good Aquafortis and Spirit of Nitre are so
penetrating, as in a little time to pervade the Corks with which the Bottle
they are contained in are stopped, and to reduce them to a Pap. And running
Mercury has been found in the Heads of those that have been too much exposed
to Mercureal Fumes. And in the Laboratories of Chemists, the Steams of Sulphur,
Antimony, Arsnick, etc. make those stagger that less cautiously unlute the
Vessels in which they have been sublimed or distilled. To which Instances may
be added, the infectious Steams in the Plague which suddenly infect the
internal Parts; and likewise the sudden. Effects of a Torpedo. And I prepared a
Sal-Armoniac so powerful, that it restored a faculty of Smelling to one that
had lost it a considerable time; which Virtues it had, besides those more
common ones, of affecting the Eyes, Mouth and Stomach. And on this occasion, I
shall subjoin, that the Steams of Water assisted by warmth, are sufficient to
dissolve hard and solid Bodies, so that by Philosophical Calcination, solid
pieces of Hartshorn are made so friable, as to be easily reduced to Powder,
only by being hung over the Steams of distilled Waters: And to this I shall
add, that under several Places in the Torrid Zone, the Dew is so penetrating,
that it causes Knives to rust in their Sheaths, and Swords in their Scabbards,
and even Watches in their Cases: And in England I have known hard Bodies become
friable by the insinuation of Vapors into their Pores; and I have known solid
and Mineral Bodies burst, by the powerful insinuation of Effluviums.

And that the Celerity of the Motion of minute Bodies, may contribute much to
their Effects, appears from the Effects of Gunpowder, Aurum Fulminans, Flames,
Whirl-Winds, and Winds. And I have made it appear, that those Odoriferous
Steams which swim in the Air, and affect our Nostrils, are in too languid a
Motion, 'till enabled to affect the Sensory more powerfully, by running through
the Nostrils in a Stream; and I have likewise made it appear, that
Setting-Dogs, etc. will be much more affected with a Scent, when the Wind Blows
from the scent toward their Nostrils, than when it comes the contrary Way, the
current of the Wind causing the Odoriferous Steams to affect the Sensory more
briskly. And Electrical Bodies exert that Faculty more strongly after
Attrition, the emission of their Electrical Steams being by that means excited:
And the Learned Faber has observed, that if a Hare was suspended near an
Electrick when the Effluviums were too briskly agitated, it would not be
attracted, but driven away from it. And I know a certain substance made by
distillation, whose smell in the Cold is very inoffensive, but when it is warm,
it emits Steams more strong and penetrating than Sal Ammoniac. And I have known
solid Substances stink egregiously when excited to emit their Effluvia by
Attrition. And as celerity of motion contributes to the Effects of subtle
Bodies, so does the different modification of that Motion; for as a Stick or a
Javelin, has different Effects when they fly with one end first, from what
they have when they twirled round with a certain Rotation; and the sounds of
Musical Instruments are different, according to the different determination of
their Motion, And the Impressions made upon the ambient Air.

And that, besides what we have already taken notice of, the congruity or
incongruity of the Particles of Matter, in reference to the Bodies they are to
work upon, contribute much to their Effects, appears from the Effects of
Lightning: For I have seen two tall drinking Glasses so altered in their shape
by the influence of Lightning, that the one was a little widened near the
bottom, and the other so far bent, that it stood awry; the Beams of Lightning
being able, in the twinkling of an Eye, to melt Glass; though in Glass Furnaces
the Fire is sometime before it can produce that Effect. And I once saw Lead
melted by Lightning, which left the Glass unaffected; and likewise other
combustible stuff that was near it; and though it left these Things untouched,
yet it threw down part of a Wall, belonging to the House, by passing through
it. And it is a common Observation, that Thunder, either by giving a
determinate Concussion to the Air, or transmitting some Effluvia, turns Beer
sour; but having sealed some up in Glasses Hermetically, the Thunder was not
able to affect the Liquor contained in them; and it is a common practice to
prevent Beer from sowring upon Storms of Thunder, to place Chafing-Dishes of
Coals under the Barrels, the sulphurous steams, being by that means so
altered, as either not to be able to penetrate the Barrel, or not able to alter
the Liquor.

Another Way, by which considerable Effects are caused by Effluvia, is by
exciting such a Motion in the Body they work upon, as to make one part of it
act upon another. Instances of which may be brought from inanimate Bodies, as
well as living ones, since some vigorous Loadstones destroy the attractive
Virtues of an Excited Needle in a trice; or give it a Virticity quite contrary
to the former, without touching it; and these magnetical Emissions which must
needs be very minute, since they are subtle enough to penetrate Glass, are able
to take up a considerable weight of Iron; so that I have seen a light one which
would take up Eighty times its weight.

But the chief Instances I shall now insist on, are those wrought upon Animals;
for it is evident, that our Organs of smelling are chiefly affected by such
minute Particles of Matter as the finest Odours consist of; nor do they always
affect us as Odours, since violent smells, whether stinking or sweet, are able
to cause very troublesome Head-achs. And the smell of a very pleasing Perfume
may produce in a humane Body, which before was well and strong, both faintness,
swoons, loss of sensible Respiration, Intumescence of the Abdomen, seeming
Epilepsies, Convulsive motions of the Limbs, etc. And I had a Sal-Armoniack
which would in a little time remove Hysteric fits, and recover People, who by
the bystanders were judged to fall down in Epileptical fits, which sudden
effects seem to depend on the consent of the Genus Nervosum. But, besides these
effects of Odorous Bodies upon Women, I know a Man of a strong Body and a
sanguine Constitution, who will be put into a violent Headache by the smell of
Musk; and another to whom the smell of Roses was as offensive; and I know a
Lady, who would presently swoon at the smell of Roses, if they were not
speedily removed. And as these slight smells have proved offensive, so it is
not much less considerable that the smell of Sal-Armoniack cures the Headache.
Besides, the aforementioned effects of Effluvia, it is observed, that Women
have miscarryed upon the stink of a Candle carelessly extinguished. And I not
only know a Gentleman who will Vomit upon the smell of Coffee, but a Physician
who will Vomit and Purge, if he does but smell at Electuarium Lenitivum: And I
know another whom the smell of the grease which is about the wheels of a
Hackney-Coach will make sick, and cause to Vomit, if it does but pass by him.
And not only smoke is offensive to the Eyes and Lungs; but the invisible steams
of Sal-Armoniack. And besides, the aforementioned instances of the effects of
Effluvia upon the Genus Nervosum, I shall add one of their Effects on the
humors; for I know an Apothecary who upon the smell of Roses, has such a
Colliquation of Humors in his Head, that they set him a coughing, make him run
at the Nose, and give him a sore Throat, and also by an affluence of humors
make his Eyes sore.

And as Effluvia may be enabled to perform several things on the account of the
structure of particular Bodies; so they may effect several things, by Virtue of
the Fabric and Laws of the Universe, for Bodies by Effluvia may be rendered
fit to be wrought on by Light Magnets, the Atmosphere, Gravity, or some other
Catholic Agent of the Universe. And to what instances have already been given
of Bodies working upon others placed at a distance, I might add the effects of
contiguous Bodies, as Bloodstones, Cornelians, Nephritick Sons, Lapis
Malacensis, and some Amulets, and other solid Substances externally applied by
Physicians, as Cantharides, etc.

CHAP. VI. Of the determinate Nature of Effluviums.
Of the determinate Nature of Effluviums.
THOUGH Aristotle and his followers, have only distinguished the Exhalations of
this Globe into those which he calls fumes, and which rising from the Earth, he
terms hot and dry; and those Vapors which rise from the Water, which he calls
hot and moist, in these words, (...); yet besides these slight differences,
since the Earth contains several Bodies, which have each of them distinct
Atmosphere, we may probably conceive them to have their distinct and
determinate natures; and even in fluid Bodies Heterogeneous Parts may swim,
which notwithstanding their fluidity may retain their determinate Nature, since
Rock-Allom and Saltpeter being dissolved together in Water, upon a gentle
Evaporation, will each of them shoot into Crystals of their respective and
determinate Natures.

And that Effluvia retain their determinate natures, though so small as to swim
in the Air or Water, appears, since upon their Reunion they are of the same
Nature with the Body that emitted them; as Water raised in Vapors condenses
again into drops of Water: And Quicksilver in Distillation, if it be raised
with a convenient fire, will almost all be found in the Receiver, in the form
of running Mercury: And if when Chemists are either making an Amalgama, or
forcing the Mercury away from it by the fire; they hold a piece of Gold in
their Mouths, it will be white as if it were Silvered over. And not only
Sulphur, but Camphire sublimed in close Vessels, unites into a Substance of the
same Nature as the other, and though a Body be compounded of a Metal and another
Mineral, and two or three Salts; yet upon the Purification of the Mixture from
its grosser Parts, if the remaining and finer Parts be minute enough and finely
shaped, the wholly Liquor will ascend; and yet in the Receiver altogether
recover its pristine form of a transparent fluid, composed of differing Saline
and Mineral Parts, which is evident in the Distillation of Butter or Oil of
Antimony very well rectified; for this Liquor will pass into the Receiver
diaphanous and fluid, though, besides the Particles of the sublimate, it abounds
with Antimonial Particles, carried over and kept invisible by the corroding
Salt: And I am told, that Tin will retain its own Nature in the form of fumes
or flowers, which is evident, since that white sublimate which is gathered
above the Furnaces where the Ore is brought to Fusion being melted down, will
yield store of Tin.

And besides these ways, the determinate natures of Effluviums, may be
distinguished by their sensible Qualities, since the Exhalations which rise
from several Bodies produced by Art, appear to be of different colors; though no
external Heat is employed to raise them; for the fumes of Spirit of Nitre well
rectified, when cold and stopped up, appear in the Vial to be of a redish
color; and when the Vessel is unstopped they will ascend in the form of a
redish, or Orange tawny Smoke. And Spirit of Salt or Oil, will when exposed to
the open Air, ascend in the form of a white Smoke; and so will a Volatile
Tincture of Sulphur made with Quicklime; and both this and that of Saltpeter
do by their smell, as well as operation, discover of what Nature they are; and
I have observed, that the essential Oil of Wormwood, being drawn off in a
Copper Alembick Tinned, was not only green, but retained that color when
rectified in a Glass-Vessel; and though these essential Oils be but the condensed
Effluvia of Vegetables, yet they retain the genuine taste of the Bodies from
whence they were drawn. And not only Wormwood but Amber may communicate their
taste, by Effluvia raised without the help of Heat; for Wormwood having been
kept in a close Room, not only affected the Nostrils strongly, but the Tongue
with a bitter taste, and Amber kept in Spirit of Wine impregnated it
sufficiently to give it a genuine taste, as well as smell; and that most
essential Oils retain their genuine Odours is very evident.

And that the Effluvia of Bodies may affect even the Touch of Animals, may not
only be argued from the effects perceived by some People upon changes of
Weather, but by that memorable passage related by Diemerbroeck, who after he
was cured of the Plague, it left such a change in some Parts of his Body, that
he says, Ab illo periculo ad contagiosos mihi appropinquanti in emunctoriis
successit dolor, vix fallax Pestis indicium. To which I shall add, that I knew
one who could hear very soft whispers when ill of a Fever, though the sound and
healthful standers by could not; and I was told by a Lady, that she could tell
by her smell, whether one that came to visit her had been in any place where
the Ground was covered with Snow. And I knew a Gentleman, whose Eyes were so
tender during a Distemper he had in them, that he could discern and distinguish
colors in the dark. And I am told, that a Blood-Hound found out a Man barely
by scent, though he had passed through a Market Town, and several Crowds of
People. And further instances may be brought from Observations made on
Bloodhounds, some of which will scent a Deer twenty four hours after. And a
Gentleman told me, that he knew when his Dogs were in pursuit of a Fox or a
Hare, because they ran with their Noses nearer the Ground after the latter, the
scent of it not being so strong. And I prepared a Body of a Vegetable
Substance, which, though actually cold, would impart its color to a Metalline
Plate; though separated from it by the interposition of a piece of Paper.

But perhaps it may be Objected by some, that these Effluviums may be altered
by uniting with each other in the Air. To which it may be answered, That they
may nevertheless reserve their determinate natures, though they act conjointly or
so near it, that their distinct Operations cannot be perceived; as when two
strings of a Musical Instrument are struck at the same time, they both of them
seem to make only one Impression upon the Ear. And if Spirit of Nitre be
dropped into Oil of Tartar per deliquium, upon an Evaporation of the
superfluous moisture, the Acid and Alkalious Particles will form Nitrous
Concretions, whose taste will be different from that of either of the separate
Ingredients: And so if an equal proportion of Sal-Armoniack, be added to a
strong solution of Potashes or Salt of Tartar, a subtle urinous Spirit will
come over in Distillation; and also a Caput Mortuum, which is almost wholly a
compounded Salt, differing enough from either of the Ingredients, especially
the Alkalizate, in taste and other Qualities. And to these Instances I shall
add, that several flowers being aptly mixed in a Nosegay, and held at a
distance they make a confused and joint impression upon the Organ of smelling;
and so do Perfume made up of several Ingredients; and Spirit of fermented
Urine, and of Wine being well dephlegmed, will incorporate like Wine and Water,
without affording the least dry Sediment; but if in a convenient Vessel, they
be exposed to a moderate Heat, the ascending fumes will adhere to the upper
part of the Glass, in the form of a white but tender Sublimate, different from
either of the Liquors not only in consistence but taste and smell. And if
Spirit of Salt and Nitre, be elevated by Distillation in the form of fumes, the
condensed Liquor will dissolve Gold, though neither Spirit of Nitre nor of Salt
would do so. And to demonstrate the Coalition of steams in the Air, I shall
add, that having filled two Vials, the one with Spirit of Salt, and the other
with Spirit of Sal-Armoniack well rectified, the ascending fumes which before
were invisible, working one upon another in the Air, formed visible steams,
which appeared like Smoke, but when they were removed a greater distance from
each other, the separate and invisible steams were no longer discernable. And
one thing relating to this Experiment which was remarkable was, that a drop of
Spirit of Salt hanging at the end of a Glass stick, being held over the Orifice
of a Vial with a long Neck, the ascending Vapors of Sal-Armoniack would form a
Smoke, which would be visible till it was a quarter of a yard above the Glass;
but if the drop was held within the Neck of the Vial, the aforementioned fumes
would fall into the Ball of the Glass, like a stream of Liquor, and spread it
self like a mist upon the Surface of the Sal-Armoniack. Which Experiment may
help us to account for the sudden Invasion of Meteors and Clouds, especially in
reference to the coming in or ceasing of several Epidemical diseases; and more
particularly the Plague, which seems to depend on the Occult temper, and
alterations of the Air, differently impregnated with subterraneal Effluvia.

An Instance of which is related by Diemerbroeck, who tells us of a Plague
occasioned by washing of foul Linen with Soap, the Fumes of the Smoke uniting
with other Effluvia in the Air, causing that Effect; to which might be added,
what is observed about the ceasing of the Plague at Grand Cayro in Egypt, but
enough of that having been already delivered in another Place; I shall add
here, that I have made a stain upon a Body by the invisible steams and Effluvia
of another cold Body; I altered the Color of that Stain by the invisible and
cold steams of a Third.

And to countenance my Conjecture of the Cause of Meteors, besides what has
been said of subterraneal Effluvia in another Place, I shall add the following
Citation from Agricola; who having mentioned, out of Ancient Historians, the
raining of White and Red Liquors, subjoins. Vt autem majorem fidem habeamus
Analium monumentis facit res, res illa decantata, quae Patrium memoria in
Suaevia accidit; Aer enim ille stillavit guttas, quae lineas vestes crucibus
rubris, quasi sanguineis imbuebant. And it will not be thought strange that
subterraneal Salts, Bitumens and Sulphurs, may be raised into the Air, if so
fixed a Body as common Earth may, which the newly cited Author testifies. And
that the odoriferous Particles of Plants reserve their determinate Nature much
longer than we are wont to imagine, may appear; since one drop of Oil of
Cinnamon, gave not only a taste to 14000 times its Bulk of Water, but withal,
diffused a great number of odoriferous Particles through the ambient Air.

The Last way we shall mention to evince the determinate Nature of Effluviums,
is from their Effects on other Bodies. As the stupefying Effluvia of the Fish
Amoreatim mentioned by Piso. The effects of Opium and Hypnoticks upon a Boy,
who whilst he was distilling them, cast him into a sleep. And the Root and
Juice of Mandragora is said to cast those that take it into a deep Sopor like a
Lethargy; and Levinus Lemnius tells us, that the Apples of the same Plant being
laid in his Study, made him so sleepy, that he could scarce recover himself:
Aurelaeus tells us, that the Poison of a Mad Dog has been conveyed to one in
the form of Effluvia; and Calius Aurelianus acquaints us, That some have become
mad by being wounded only by the Claws of a mad Dog; and that one fell into an
Hydrophobia, solo odore ex rabido cane attracto. And Matthiolus tells us of one
who was poisoned only by putting his Hand into the Mouth of the mad Dog,
without being bit; and to this I shall add, that Sennertus relates, that a
Painter having opened a Box, in which Realgar had been contained, the Fumes
being snussed up his Nostrils, presently caused a giddiness in his Head, and
fainting Fits.

To these Instances I shall add, That several have been purged by the smell of
Black Hellebore; and as Sennertus witnesses by the Odor of Coloquintida; and
there are several other Things which purge when only externally applied: And it
is attested by approved Writers, that the Shadow of a Wallnut-Tree, with the
Leaves on it, is very hurtful to the Head. And it is not only observed, That
Birds will not so much as light upon those Poisonous Trees in the West Indies,
called the Manchinello-Tree; and it is looked upon as safe for Men to eat of
Fruit found in a strange Country, if it appears that the Birds have been
pecking at them before. And Nicolaus Florentinus tells us of one, who drawing
into his Nostrils the Smoke of a burnt Spider, he was much disordered, and fell
into a fainting Fit, and was much disordered about the Heart, his Pulse being
likewise weak; though after he was cured by a mixture of Treacle, Diamosc. and
the Powder of Zedoary. And I saw a Berry called Maccu-buy in Ireland, which
being pounded in a Mortar, caused the Head and Face of one that stood hard by,
to swell enormously. And,

To what has been delivered of the determinate Nature of Effluviums, I shall
add, that Amber, Musk, Civet, etc. will communicate a Perfume to Gloves, tho at
a distance off them; and contagious Distempers, as the Plague, Smallpox, or
Measles, may not only be communicated by immediate Contact, but by steams which
issue from the Body of the sick Person.

But to conclude this Chapter, I shall add the following Experiment, Viz.
Having shut up an Ounce of a Volatile Tincture of Sulphur in a Vial, capable of
holding at least twice as much, and having placed a Paper at some distance, and
unstopped the Vial, the spreading Fumes presently caused what was writ with
invisible Ink to become legible. And so would several Letters writ with a
Solution of Sublimate in Water, some of them being more, and others less Black,
according to their distances from the smoking Liquor and other Circumstances:
And when the Paper thus writ upon, was held over the Orifice of the Vial, though
the Letters were on the upper side, yet in a quarter of an Hour, they became
legible; and as in some cases, this smoking Liquor, with a solution of
Sublimate, will produce a Precipitate of a Silver Color, so in some of the
Colorless Ink we found the like Color. And I have performed the like with a
couple of Liquors, wherein was neither Sulphur nor Sal-Armoniac, nor Sublimate.
And as a farther Proof of the great penetrancy of Effluviums, I shall add, that
having a Paper which was writ on with this invisible Ink, betwixt six folds of
Paper, these Fumes penetrated it in Ten Minutes, and turned the Ink Black; and
another piece of the same Inked Paper, being placed betwixt the Leaves of a
Book, the steams penetrated Twelve in three Minutes, and turned the Ink
blackish.

CHAP. VII. Of the Porousness of solid Bodies.
Of the Porousness of Solids.
THAT even solid Bodies are not destitute of Pores, I am inclined to believe,
because most solid Bodies, as Gems, etc. have once been in fluid Forms; and
since Fluids are generally made up of Particles of a determinate size and
shape, they must needs leave some Pores betwixt them.

Another Reason why I am inclined to think most Bodies porous, is their
specific gravity; which would not vary were the Parts of them equally
compressed and closed together, but since Copper is heavier than Iron and Gold,
as nineteen to one to its proportion of Water, and Copper only as nine to one,
it must follow, that the matter of Iron possesses as much space again as Gold
and more. And though hardness is urged by some as an Argument of their Substance
being condensed, yet I have elsewhere shown, that though Diamonds are the hardest
Bodies, they are far from being the heaviest, which is the only sign whether
they be condensed or not.

And since Metals themselves are made up of a Coalition of several Parts, it is
impossible they should be so Physically adapted, as totally implere spatium;
since were Cubes made of Marble, it is impossible they should be so exactly
Polished as every where to be contiguous, since the Bodies employed to Polish
them are observed to make little furrows upon them, and consequently leave
little Intervals or Pores.

And that Wood is not void of Pores will appear, since Quicksilver has been
observed to penetrate the sides of a hollow Cylindrical piece of Wood, and when
the Air was drawn out of my Pneumatical Instrument, the external pressed so
hard upon the outside of a Board which covered it, that though it was of strong
Wood, and of a considerable thickness, yet it made its way into the Cavity of
the Receiver, through the Pores of the Wood; and to these Instances I shall
add, that the fumes of a Smoking Liquor tinged a Copper Halfpenny, through a
broad thin shaving of Deal, though we could not discover any sensible
Perforation; and the same Experiment being again repeated with two, and a third
with three shavings, they tinged the Copper Halfpenny, though not in so little
time, nor quite so conspicuously. And,

That baked Clay is not void of Pores is evident, since Oil will soak through
strong and well baked Earthen Vessels, and so will Solutions of Nitre and some
other Salts; and very few except Hassian Crucibles will keep Salt of Tartar
long in Fusion without being penetrated by them. And Vitriol and Saltpeter
have been observed to lose much of their weight when distilled in Earthen
Vessels, the subtle and spirituous Parts flying away through their Pores. And I
am told, that those Juggs that are made of Earth, hardened sufficiently to
strike fire with a good Stell, have their Pores pervaded by the most subtle
Parts of Spirituous Liquors; and it has been found by Experience, that
Spirituous Cider has sweat through the sides of Stone Bottles; which
manifested it self by its taste: And I have found, that Silver dissolved and
turned into a horny Substance with Aqua Fortis, being kept in Fusion in an
Hassian Crucible, several Particles penetrated the Pores of it, and appeared on
the outside.

And to prove that natural Stones are porous, I shall intimate, that I had a
Vessel made of Stone sent from the West Indies, through whose Pores Water would
sweat; and if the Transparency or Opacity of Bodies proceeds from a rectitude
or crookedness of Pores, which makes them fit or unfit to transmit the Rays of
Light, Oculus Mundi will be an Argument of the Porosity of Stones; since whilst
it is dry and in the Air it is opacous, but when it has lain a while in the
Water it becomes transparent like Amber, but soon loses its Diaphaneity when
exposed to the Air again, and so Paper wet with Water becomes more transparent,
but loses of that Transparency when dried again; and to favor this
explication, I shall add, that an Oculus Mundi having been weighed after it was
taken out of the Water, it appeared to be heavier than before. And since
several Stones, as Granates, Emeri, etc. contain Mineaal Parts, it is
impossible they should be exactly contiguous without leaving some Pores betwixt
them and the Parts of the Stone; and for the like Reason all artificial Gems
made by Fusion, and tinged with Heterogeneous Pigments must be supposed to be
furnished with Pores; and since natural Gems are made up of Stony Ingredients,
and Mineral Parts, for the same Reason we must suppose them to be furnished
with Pores likewise; and the like may be concluded in reference to all
Heterogeneous and compound Substances; as Marcasites, Load-Stones, etc. And
that white Marble is not void of pores may be argued not only from its easy
Solution by Aqua Fortis, Spirit of Salt, etc. but from its aptness to be tinged
with Vapors, that are not fretting, so that red and other colors may be
soaked into it as Oil is into Wood. And having cemented some clear Fragments of
native Crystal with a composition of some Volatile Minerals, together with a
Salt or two, and having suffered the Crucibles to cool leisurely, several of
the Fragments were stained here and there with different colors, some more and
others less dull; but whether the Tincture these pieces of Crystal received
proceeded from some of the finest of the Mineral Parts, imbibed into the Stone
when flawed with too much haste; and whether upon cooling those flaws did not
grow too close to be discernable to the Eye, I shall not determine, but shall
add, that it has been observed, that Rubies when Polished upon the Wheel, and
very hot, have seemed full of cracks, which upon their cooling wholly
disappeared.

And that Metals themselves are porous may be argued, from their aptness to be
dissolved in proper Menstruums. And especially by laying Sulphur and thin
Plates of Copper SSS, in a Crucible upon which another was luted, to keep the
Sulphur from taking fire; for having kept them thus about three hours in a
heat, which was sufficient to melt the Sulphur, but not the Metal, when it was
taken away from the fire and cooled, we found, that the Sulphur had so
penetrated the Body of the Copper as to turn most of it into a brittle
Substance, which would crumble away with ones fingers, being altered not only
in Texture but color, some being of a dirty dark color, others of a violet,
and many of the Plates when they were broken, seemed to have been divided into
two Plates, and to have a manifest distance betwixt them, and we could likewise
discern the fibers of the Metal, extend themselves from one side of the Copper
Plates to the other. And that the Sulphur penetrated into the Pores of the
Copper Plates might not only be discerned by their increase of weight, and
bulk, but a Blue Flame which would discover it self when they were laid upon
quick Coals. And by a like Experiment, we found that the Body of Silver, Tin,
and Lead, might be penetrated. And not only Sulphur, but Arsnick will penetrate
thus into the Body of Metals. And I know a Pigment which tinged the Body of
Copper, so as to give it the Color of Gold: And Perfumes do not only continue
long in the Pores of Glasses; but I am told by one, that he had a Watch, whose
Metalline Case was richly perfumed. And I remember I made a Substance much like
Gold, which retained several Mercurial Particles in it, and being cast into a
Ring, it was observed to have manifest Effects on the Eyes of several Persons.
And I am told that the Offspring of the Granadine Moors, had an Art of
curiously perfuming the Weapons they forged; and the same Nobleman who told me
this, acquainted me that he had a Fowling-piece whose Barrel was perfumed, but
its smell was much fainter after it had been scoured.

And, Lastly, To show that even common Glass is not void of Pores, I shall
reduce what I have to say, and comprise it under the following Propositions.

PROP. I. It Is very probable, that Glass may be pierced into, at some distance,
even by visible and tangible Bodies.
And besides the Arguments already offered to evince the porosity of Bodies, I
shall add, That a certain Spirit of Salt being kept in a Glass in a cool Place,
it corroded some Parts so much as to leave them as thin as a piece of Paper;
and lined with a white Substance, which seemed to be some of the Alkali of the
Glass and Sand corroded by the Saline Spirits of the Menstruum, and coagulated
with them into this odd kind of concrete; and this wrought no higher than the
Liquor contained in the Glass. And besides this, I had another Vial corroded by
a distilled Liquor of Vitriol, which contained more Phlegm than Oil; and to
this Relation I shall add, That a Pound of Dantzick Vitriol, and a Pound of
Sea Salt, the one calcined lightly, and the other decrepitated, being distilled
in a well coated Retort, by degrees of Fire, giving at the last a very strong
one; when the Vessel was taken off, we found that the Heat had here and there
melted it; and that the Fluxed Caput Mortuum had corroded the Glass, fetching
off Films from it; and those Parts which did not appear to the Eye manifestly
wasted; seemed by their brittleness to have been penetrated; so that their
Texture was spoiled by the Saline and Vitriolate Particles.

PROP. II. Common Glass is not ordinarily permeable by Chemical Liquors, though
strong and subtle, nor by the directly visible or odorable expirations of
Bodies; though absolutely speaking, it is permeable to some corporeal Substances.
And, First, It is manifest, not only that several Spirituous Liquors and
Menstruums, may be kept in Glass Vessels without sweating through them, but
even distilled in them; and I have found that neither Salt of Tartar would lent
by being held in a Glass Bubble in the Water, nor would Sal-Armoniac penetrate
it, so as to make its way out. But it is to be considered, that some
Circumstances may vary these Observations, as when the Texture of Glass is too
lax and open; or when the Bodies are vehemently agitated with Heat, or are too
subtle; and have a certain congruity with the Pores of the Glass. For I have
seen a sort of Glass so soft, that not only hot Liquors, but moderately
Corrosives would work upon it; and I have heard, that some sort of Glass is apt
to be prejudiced by corrosive Liquors. And I was told by one, That he several
times observed Gold to penetrate the Pores of Glass; and I have observed Fumes
to make their way through the Pores of ordinary Glass, upon distilling of
Spirit of Hartshorn with a strong Fire.

And that the Pores of Glass are penetrated by some Substances, is evident, by
the Effects of Cold and Heat, on Bodies contained in sealed Glasses; and that
so gross a Body as the Effluviums of Earth will penetrate Glass, and work on
Iron contained in it: And Light it self appears evidently to be contained in
closely sealed Glasses; and by a cantinued Heat, I have found the Parts of Fire
to penetrate Glass, and add to the weight of Iron sealed up; and having tried
this Experiment with Filings of Copper, I found that their Color was much
altered, some of them being adorned with exceeding vivid Dies; which they yet
retain without being increased in weight, as if they were not able to stick
themselves fast enough in the Pores of the Metal, to add to its Gravity. And I
had a Liquor which would vary its Color, as if something in the Air was
successively communicated to it, and receded again.

And to these, other Instances may be brought from what may be observed in
painting Glass; for the Pigment being laid upon the Glass, and that placed upon
a Bed of Lime, and then continued in a violent Heat, the Pores of the Class
will be so opened, as either to imbibe the Parts of the Pigment, or to vitrifie
and mix with it: And I have found, that by laying prepared Silver upon Glass,
and placing that upon live Coals; when it was nealed a while, by giving it a
sufficient degree of Heat, the Glass will acquire a Yellow, and almost a Golden
Color, which is not to be washed off; the way of preparing this Silver, is not
always the same, the Glass-painters usually adding to it Antimony, Yellow Okre,
or the like. But since the Color proceeds from the penetration of the Silver
into the Pores of the Glass; I usually make use of the Powder of Silver
calcined, by burning Sulphur upon thin Plates; and I have often colored Glass
barely by the use of Leaves of Silver laid upon the surface of the Glass, and
moistened with something to keep it from flying away. And I have often observed
that though the Glass betwixt and the Light appeared Yellow, yet being held from
it, it appeared Blue; which is a Confirmation of what we have inferred from the
variation of Colors, in a Tincture of Lignum Nephriticum; Viz. That they may
be solved by Mecharical Principles. And that the Color of Glass tinged,
proceeds from an Incorporation of the Parts of a Pigment with it, though they
penetrate not the whole Substance, but tinge the superficies, (as I observed in
Glass Plates, which were part of the Windows of St. Paul's Church before it was
burnt) may be urged, since the Parts of the Silver may be wrought on by the
fixed Salts in the Glass, and afford different Colors, according to the
difference of the Bodies that work upon them, as Copper with Spirit of Urine,
give a deep Blue; with Spirit of Salt, a fair Green; and with Aqua Fortis, a
Color partaking of both. And in making Glass of Lead, with Minium and White
Sand, or Crystal, the Glass will be of an Amethystine Color, but if you add a
due proportion of calcined Copper, the Metal will give it a good Green; so as
to pass for no bad E^ner^uld* and I remember, that distilling some Gold in a
Retort, amalgamed with such Mercury as would grow Hot with it in the Cold; the
Matter did, before it flew away, perfectly stain an Inch in the Diameter of the
bottom of the Glass, with a Color, which, held from the Light, appeared like
that of the better sort of Turquoises; but when interposed between the Window
and the Eye, appeared of a some what Golden Color. And Gold incorporated with
Mercury, and kept in digestion, when the Fire was once very vehement, it burst
the Vessel, and flew away, but tinged the lower part of the Glass quite
through, with a glorious Red Color, not inferior to that of Rubies.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Porousness of Animal Bodies.
Of the Porosity of Animal Bodies.
THE First Argument I shall urge for the Porosity of Animal Bodies, is from
their Structure; for since they are most of them compounded of dissimilar, or
similar Parts, we cannot suppose those so exactly united as not to leave Pores
and Intervals betwixt them, whose Number and Variety must be very great.

A Second Argument of their Porosity, may be deduced from the apposition and
consumption of their Nutriment; and which may be illustrated by observing that
those moist Particles with which the Earth is moistened, being agitated by the
Heat of the Sun and Air, those that happen to be commensurate to the Pores of
the Root are impelled into it, and thence conveyed into the other Parts of
the Tree, being conveyed in the form of Sap, which passing through new
strainers receives alterations requisite to turn it into Wood, Bark, Leaves,
Fruit, etc. And in young thriving Animals it cannot be imagined, how the
nourishment should be conveyed to all the Parts, without supposing them
furnished with Pores for its reception and passage.

Another Argument of the Porosity of Animal Bodies, may be brought from the
plenty of Humors carried off by sweat, and insensible Transpiration. And by
the help of good Microscopes we may discern Pores in the skins of Animals, and
especially in the inward sides of Gloves which are nothing but skins dressed;
and they are further evident, since Quicksilver readily passes through the
Pores of Sheeps skins, and leaves the dross behind in the Leather; and the like
I have tried with the skin of a Man's Arm tanned, which Pores according to
Steno and Malpighius, are the Excretory Vessels of the Glandulae Miliares
contained in the skin. And that the skins and shells of Eggs are not void of
Pores, appears, since the moisture contained is so far dissipated through them
as to diminish their weight. And Sanctorius in his Medicina Statica tells us,
that if the Meat and Drink taken one day amounts to eight Pound, five Pound
will be carried off by insensible Transpiration. And he elsewhere says, that in
the space of twenty four hours ^n the Winter time a healthful Body may exhale
fifty ounces or more, a great part of which is carried off through the Pores of
the Membranes of the Aspera Arteria: And if ones finger in hot Weather be held
to the Surface of any cold Body, it will presently be sullyed over with the
steams that issue out of the Pores of the skin. And their Porosity is further
confirmed by observing, how soon those black and blue spots in the skin
occasioned by bruises are removed: for which use Helmont employs white Bryony
root, and I have seen a Poultess of chopped Hyssop and fresh Butter remove the
Pain, and black color of a contusion in a little time.

And not only the Skins but the Membranes of Bodies are stocked with Pores,
since the Bladder of a dead Animal appears to be full of them; for if Salt of
Tartar be put into a Bladder, and it be then immersed in Water enough of it
will penetrate the Bladder to dissolve the Salt and render it Liquid; and the
like succeeded, but much more slowly when the Experiment was tried with Sugar;
and some say, that Syrups made this way, instead of using ordinary Water, are
much more preferable. And as a further instance of the Porosity of the shells
of Eggs, I shall add, that one having been immersed in very sharp Vinegar, though
the shell was part of it consumed, yet being taken out and wiped, it was
considerably swelled and heavier than before, the Menstruum being imbibed and
insinuated into the Pores of it. And I am not only told, that the Chinese had
a way of salting Eggs, but I found by coating one over with Clay, after it had
lain some time in Brine, the substance contained tasted evidently Salt. And I
know a Physician who was affected with a giddiness upon the use of Clysters of
Sack, and another told me, that having applied Tobacco to the sore Leg of one
of his Patients, it caused her Stomach to turn, or actual Vomiting; and another
told me, that he used to Vomit himself, by applying Decoctions of Tobacco to
his wrists or other extreme Parts, and it is a common custom to Purge Children
by the Application of external things; and it has been observed, that Bathing
the sore Heads of Children, with a Decoction of Tobacco has caused a
giddiness. And a Virtuoso told me, that having taken another by the Hand, which
was gently besmeared with Oil, it gave him three or four stools presently.

And to what has been delivered of the Porosity of Membranes, I shall add the
aptness of Lute-strings, to imbibe into their Pores moist Particles; and also
the Metastasis or Translations of Morbifick matter in diseased Bodies; as the
matter which causes a Fever, being discharged upon the Brain causes a
Delirium; and other Distempers as it is discharged upon the Pleura, the
Membranes of the Chest, the Throat or Guts.

Another Argument of the Porousness of Animal Bodies, may be drawn from their
aptness to imbibe Effluvia from without, as when Cantharides externally applied
affect the Bladder; to which instance may be added the effects of Plasters, and
Ointments, and Pericarpia; for I have often cured Agues with a Mixture of
^^^ians, Hops, and Bay Salt; and it is vulgarly known, that Mercury externally
used in Ointments will salivate. To which may be added the effects of Periapta
and Appensa; of Bloodstones in stopping of Hemorragies, and of another kind of
Stone made use of by the Indians in Obstructione Menstruum. And I have found my
self that the Moss of a dead Man's skull would stop an Hemorrhage, as soon as
warmed by the contiguous skin. And Zwelfer tells us of one who preserved
several from the Plague, by using Helmonts Troches of Toads in Amulets; and
several of these Troches being put upon the Plague sores of the infected, they
were afterward cured by the use of vulgar Remedies.

And to these I shall add, that having drawn a Spirit from a Mixture of flowers
of Brimstone, powdered Sal-Armoniack, and good Quicklime in equal quantities,
by degrees of fire in a Retort till the sand be red hot, if a piece of Copper
be foulded up in Sheeps Leather, and held over the Vial it is contained in, the
Metal will be tinged with the rising fumes, without discoloring the Leather;
and the same will succeed, only more slowly, through a double fold of Leather:
And all the alteration the Leather received from these pervading fumes was,
that they gave it a sulphurous smell. And this Experiment may favor the
accounts we have of the Effects of Lightning, which has been observed to
discolor the money in Men's Pockets, without burning them; and the same effect
has been taken notice of by some, who have ascended a burning Mountain in
America. And it is observed, that Lambs Leather hung up in the Air, acquires a
moisture, which adds considerably to its weight.

And to these instances may be added, the effects of Cantharides upon some that
only carried them in their Pockets, the Effluviums of them having caused them
to piss Bloody Urine. And as a further Confirmation of the Porousness of Bodies
I shall subjoyn, that the Permeating Liquor above mentioned had the like effect
upon Copper, through the tough skin of an Egg, and likewise through a wet
Sheeps Bladder; and to confirm what I have said, of the Porousness of Animal
Bodies I shall add, that a Gentleman who had a long time a Perforation in his
Thorax, and was wont to inject medicated Liquor often to cherish the Parts, and
likewise to wear a silken Bagg stuffed with Aromaticks upon the Orifice, he not
only had the Taste of the Liquors in his Mouth, but the Aromatic Bag, when
fresh, would perfume his Breath in Respiration. And Galen tells us, that Honey
and Water having been injected into the Thorax, have been discharged through
the Aspera Arteria by coughing. And in a Man who was troubled with a dry short
Cough, we found some white curdled Matter betwixt the Pleura and the
intercostal Muscles, which seemed to occasion the Cough by some noxious
Effluvia transmitted to his Lungs.

And to these Instances I shall add, that it seems probable that these Humors
collected in the Abdomen of an Hydropical Person, can be carrled off no other
way but through the Pores of Membranes, upon the use of Diuretic and Purging
Medicines. And an Instance not much inferior, is the Translation of the Matter
of an Empyreuma, so as to be voided by stool or Urine; and I have observed my
self, that when I have been present at the Dissection of a Dog, whose Blood
smelled very rank, the Excrements evacuated by siege, some time after, would
retain that Odor. And a famous Surgeon and Anatomist relates, That one who was
ill of a Dropsey, judged to arise from a Schirrus of the Spleen; by applying a
large Sponge dipped in Quick-lime-water, to the Region of the Spleen, the
Schirrus was dissolved, and the Hydropical Humor evacuated. And Galen tells us,
that part of the Humors collected, upon the breaking of a Bone, is discharged
through the Skin, whilst the Callus is a forming.

And not to repeat what Arguments have been already made use of, to prove the
Porosity of Animal Substances in general; that the Nails of Animals are porous,
may be argued from their aptness to be tinged with a Solution of Silver in Aqua
Fortis, or of Gold in Aqua Regis; the former giving them a dark and black
Color; and the latter, tinging them with Purple Spots; which would continue,
'till by the growth of the Nail, they were forced to be pared off. And one
thing in these Tinctures worthy our Notice is, that though the Menstruums are
Acid, and Corrosive, yet the Tinctures are not, the Taste of the Tincture of
Silver being bitter, and the other styptick.

And the same method may be taken to prove the porosity of Ivory; since a
Tincture of Silver in Aqua Fortis will tinge it with a dark and blackish
Color, which is not to be washed off. And I have long since tried, that a
Solution of Gold will give it a sine purple Color; and that too when both the
Ivory and the Liquor were cold. Copper dissolved in Aqua Fortis, stains Ivory
with a bluish Color. And even in the Cold without the Use of Corrosives, I
have stained Ivory with a permanent Blue, like a Turquois, by suffering a
Solution of Copper in Sal-Armoniac to dry upon it.

But to return to the Porosity of Bones; it may be argued from the Marrow found
in the Cavities of them; since nourishment must needs be conveyed to it, and it
is not improbable that Blood Vessels penetrate at the least some depth into the
substance of Bones, though the Juice received from them, may afterward be
conveyed through the more internal Parts of them; for we see that the Lower Jaw
is perforated by a Nerve, and also a Vein and an Artery to carry and return
Blood for the Nourishment of the Teeth; and I have been told that Blood Vessels
have been observed by good Anatomists, to enter into the substances of larger
Bones; and Blood has not only been observed in the cavities of the Bones of
younger Animals, but in the spungy Substance of several larger Bones. To which
may be added in favor of their Porosity; the blackness which they acquire when
put into a competent heat, and the fatness which they afford; as also their
specific Lightness, and their aptness to be corroded with sharp Menstruums.
And Bones are observed in moist Weather, not only to grow heavier, but they
imbibe the moisture of the Air so much, as evidently to swell. And to these
Instances I shall subjoin what Observations I have made on large Ox-bones. Nov.
15. we weighed two (entire or unbroken) Marrow-bones, and found the one to
weigh twenty nine Ounces half a Dram, and the other twenty four Ounces four
Drams and thirty Grains. November 24. The former weighed twenty nine Ounces six
Drams, and the latter twenty five Ounces, one Dram, and thirty Grains. December
28. The former weighed twenty nine Ounces, three Drams, and fifty five Grains;
and the latter twenty four Ounces, seven Drams, and thirty nine Grains. June
7th, The next Year the former weighed twenty nine Ounces, two Drams; and the
latter twenty four Ounces, seven Drams; from whence it appears, that Bones are
Porous, since they imbibe and lose moist Effluvia again. And that there may be
Vessels fine enough in the substance of Bones, to convey Nourishment, may be
rendered probable, by what the Learned Sennertus has observed, viz. That Hairs
being cut in the Plica Polonica, they have been observed to bleed, so that they
seem to be made up of a Bundle of cylindrical Pipes. And as a further Instance
of the Porosity of Bones, I shall add, that Mercury has been found lodged in
the Bones of those that have been salivated in the Pox. And the same is
attested by Eustachius Rudius (apud Sennet.) Lib. 5. de Morbis Acutis, Cap. 15.
And what has been said may serve to favor the Use of Amulets and Periapta; or
at least discountenance their being too suddenly rejected.

CHAP. IX. Of the Natural History of Human Blood.
PART. 1. Containing a List of Titles for the History of Human Blood.
Of the Natural History of Human Blood.
BEfore I proceed to enumerate the Titles laid down for a Natural History of
Human Blood, it may be requisite to advertise, that the first Set which I call
primary, and to which those in the Appendix are secondary ones, consist of such
as offer themselves to the View at the First sight, which need not be either
nicely Methodical, or accommodated to any Hypothesis. The second Class consists
of such as are to be ranged into a better order, being of a greater extent and
more comprehensive, so that one Topic may be branched into several subordinate
ones, or secondary Titles. And from the Materials drawn together under this
Head, may be deduced a Set of Titles, reduced into an inchoate Natural History
of the Subject they have Relation to.

And since the Subject to be treated of is very difficult or comprehensive, as
the Generation of Living Creatures, Magnetism, Fermentation, Gravity, etc. it
may be useful, if not necessary, to interpose betwixt the Titles of the last,
and those of the first Order, a Set of Titles that may be called of the middle
Order or Classis; in which the Nature of the Subject is more narrowly looked
into.

Titles of the first Order for the Natural History of the Blood of Healthy Men.
Titles for the Natural History of Blood.
I. Of the Colors of Human Blood, Arterial and Venal. II. Of the Taste of Human
Blood. III. Of the Odours of Human Blood. IV. Of the Heat of freshly emitted
Human Blood; which is observed to be much violenter after it has run a while,
than when it first began. The Blood that came out of the Veins of a young
Gentlewoman, falling upon the Ball of a Thermoscope, caused the Liquor to
ascend above an Inch nearer the smaller and upper Ball of the Glass. And in
another Trial it was raised almost as high as to the Ball of an ordinary
Thermoscope; but being held in the Blood of a healthful and lusty Man, the Heat
raised the tinged Liquor a good way into the upper Ball; which was higher than
the Heat of the Air in the Dog Days usually does, and the Blood of a healthful
Man continued its Heat so lo long, that it raised the tinged Liquor three or
four Fingers breadth when it was coagulated. V. Of the inflamability, and some
other Qualities of Human Blood. A piece of Human Blood being dried 'till it was
fit to be powdered, and then held in the flame of a Candle, it took Fire, and
afforded a flame not much unlike that which caused it, burning with a Crackling
noise, and here and there melting; and if it was laid upon live Coals, and now
and then blown, it would yield a very yellow Flame, and during its
Deflagration, would seem to fry upon the Coals, and in a great measure to melt
into a Black Substance almost like Pitch. And some of the Powder of Blood being
cast into the flame of a Candle, they took Fire in their passage, and flashed
not without some noise, as if they had been Rosin. VI. Of the Aerial Parts
naturally mixed with Human Blood; and also found in its distinct Parts. VII. Of
the Specific Gravity of Human Blood entire. It may be different in several
Persons, according to their Sex, Age, Constitution, etc. as also in the same
Person, according to the time of the Year, the Day, or, as it is taken out at a
less or greater distance from a Meal. But to make an Estimate of its Specific
Gravity, we took the Blood of a sound Man, and put it into an oblong Glass; and
when it was settled, we marked with a Diamond, that part of the Glass to which
the Liquor wrought; and then weighing the Glass, and the Blood contained in a
very Tender Balance; we poured out the Blood, and having washed the Vessel, we
filled it up to the same Mark, and then weighed it in the same Balance; and
then weighing the Glass, and deducting that from the weight of the Glass, and
the two Liquors, the Water weighed nine Ounces, six Drams, and fifty Grains.
And the Blood equal to it in Bulk, weighed ten Ounces two Drams, and four
Grains, so that the Blood being three Drams and fourteen Grains heavier, it was
about ^/2^ part heavier than Water. VIII. Of the Specific Gravity of the
Fibrous and Red part; and of the serous part of the Blood. IX. Of the
Consistence of entire Human Blood. X. Of the Disposition of Human Blood to
Concretion; and the time wherein it was performed. XI. Of the Liquors and Salts
that coagulate Human Blood. Clotted Blood being kept some Hours in Spirit of
Wine, which is a Menstruum fit to dissolve some Bodies, it was taken out as
hard as if it had been dried by the Fire. XII. Of the Liquors and Salts that
obstruct or dissolve its Coagulation. XIII. Of the Liquors, etc. that preserve
Human Blood. XIV. Of the Mixture that Human Blood may receive from Aliments.
XV. Of the spontaneous or Natural Analysis of Human Blood into a serous and a
fibrous Part. XVI. Of the respective Quantities of the serous and fibrous part
of Human Blood. XVII. Of the differences betwixt the serous, and the Red part
of Human Blood. XVIII. Of the Artificial or Chemical Analysis of Human Blood;
and first of its Spirit. XIX. Of the Volatile Salt of Human Blood, and of its
Figures. This Salt is so fusible, that one part of it may be brought to boil,
whilst the other flies way; and this Observation will hold in most Volatile
Salts. And though this Salt, when sublimed, looks white and Clean, and a very
homogeneous substance, yet I am apt to think, that it is made up of Parts of
Matter of sizes and shapes different enough, for having weighed some Grains of
re-sublimed Salt of Human Blood, that seemed pure, its smell was very strong
and diffusive, so that one would have expected it to fly away in a little time,
but we observed that it was very little diminished in seven or eight days time;
yet what remained had lost its Odor, but retained a saline Taste; and being
put upon a Solution of Sublimate in common Water, turned it White, so that its
diffusive and penetrant Humor seemed to depend on some more volatile Parts of
the Blood. But it may be a Question to be solved by further Experience, whether
the fixedness of this Salt may not proceed from the Coalition of an Acid Salt
in the Air.

A Dram of Volatile Salt of Human Blood sublimed in a Lamp-furnace, was put
into common Water, and when a Thermoscope was brought to its right temper,
being immersed in this mixture, the tinged Spirit of Wine manifestly subsided
about 2/10 parts of an Inch; though a considerable part of the Salt lay
undissolved in the bottom of the Water. And when the Liquor would descend no
further, we added to the Solution strong Spirit of Nitre, 'till it would no
longer make a manifest Conflict with the Salt; and then we observed, that
whilst the Conflict lasted, the Spirit of Wine rose above three Inches and a
half higher than the station it stood at before. The figure of this Salt may be
either considered in reference to single Grains, or an Aggregate of them, when
they are raised and sublimed to the top of the Glass; the latter of which may
be best observed, when they fasten themselves to the inside of the Glass that
is set to receive them; for in the beginning of the Operation, one may observe
the little saline Concretions to lie in rows, sometimes straight enough, and
sometimes more or less crooked, with different Coherings and Interferings, so
that they sometimes represent either Trees, or their Branches or Hartshorn,
etc. which are casual figurations depending on several accidental causes and
circumstances, as the degree of fire made use of to sublime the Salt, the
quantity of the ascending matter in reference to the Capacity of the Vessel
that receives it. And the like diversity of Configurations I have observed
amongst the Salts of other Volatile Salts, as well as those of Human Blood. And
as for the single grains of the Salt of Human Blood, I discovered a good many
of them to be finely shaped; but whether they were accidental or not,
experience must determine. But these figures were only observed in the
sublimate of the first Distillation, for those obtained by rectifying the Salt
and distilling it again, were of a considerable bigness and solidity though
differently shaped, some of them being Cubes, others Parallelopipeds, others
Octoedrons, being almost like grains of Allom; but most of them prettily
shaped; being comprehended by Planes, smooth, finely figured, and aptly
terminating in solid Angles, as if the concretions had been cut and polished.

Another way I took to discover the figures of the Salts of the Blood, was to
rectify the Spirit, so that it may be fully satiated with the Salt, whilst the
Liquor continues warm; for when it is refrigerated, a number of saline
Concretions of different sizes, several of which shoot into very smooth
Crystalline Plates prettily figured, having their broad and parallel Surfaces
of an Hexagonal or an Octogonal figure, regular enough.

A dram of dry Volatile Salt of Blood, being dissolved in some distilled
Water, we dropped into it good Spirit of Nitre, till the two Liquors would no
longer manifestly act one upon another, and when the conflict ceased, we slowly
evaporated the superfiuous moisture, which steamed almost all away before the
saline part would coagulate. At length it became dry, and the middlemost part
appeared in the form of thin Crystals, not unlike those of Salt Petre; but the
rest which was by much the greatest part of the Concretion, seemed to be a
confused mass without any distinct figure; and this mass weighed but twelve
grains above a dram; so that Volatile Salt of Blood may be satiated with a
fifth part of its weight of the saline Parts of Spirit of Nitre. This Salt
exposed to the open Air in a window was very apt to run per Deliquium, and a
little of it being put upon a live Coal, it melted and seemed to boil; and
toward the end made a noise, and afforded a flame yellower than that of common
Nitre.

XX. Of the Phlegm of distilled Human Blood. XXI. Of the two Oils of Human
Blood. By distillation in a Retort, it affords an Empyreumatical and a very
fetid Oil, whose color is almost black; which seems to be occasioned by the
increase and opacous redness of the Liquor, since some of it being spread thin
upon Glass, and held against the light, appeared yellow, or of a reddish
color, as they lay thicker or thiner upon it, but when it was well dried
before committed to Distillation, it yielded a greater quantity of Oil, so that
once out of a Pound of not over-dryed Blood, we obtained an ounce and a half of
Oil, and from another we had a much greater quantity of Oil. And having once
prepared Blood by a convenient Digestion, and rectified very carefully the
distilled Liquor that came over with the flame of a Lamp, I obtained amongst
other things two Oils of very different colors; the one being of a pale Amber
or yellow color, and the other of a deep red; and though these Oils were both of
them afforded by the same Blood, and were clear and pure enough; yet they would
swim in distinct Masses one over another, and if mixed by shaking would again
separate like Oil and Water. Whether the difference in specific Gravity
betwixt these two Oils, kept them from mixing permanently, as well as it kept
them distinct before they were mixed; or whether the seeming incongruity
proceeded from the Texture of these Liquors I shall not now stay to dispute.

To show that the Oil of Human Blood contains several saline Particles, capable
of being separated from it, we put a parcel of unrectified Oil, to a convenient
quantity of distilled Water, and having mixed them sufficiently by agitation,
so that the Water might rob the Oil of its separate saline Particles, the event
was that after the Liquors were well settled, the Water was found to be
impregnated with saline Particles, that it obtained by dissilution from the
Oil; so that it acquired a moderatly brisk taste, and would readily turn Syrup
of Violets green; and precipitate a white Powder out of a solution of
Sublimate; but whether the like will succeed with other Empyreumatical Oils or
not, drawn from Bodies belonging to the Animal Kingdom, I shall leave others to
determine.

Having put some unrectified Oil of Human Blood into a concave piece of Glass,
and then dropped as much Oil of Vitriol into it, as might amount to a third or
fourth part of the fetid Oil, we stirred them together with a slender piece of
solid Glass, upon which the Mixture emitted store of whitish fumes or Smoke;
and acquired a considerable degree of Heat, so that though it amounted to not
much more than a spoonful, yet I was not able to hold my finger under that Part
of the Glass, that contained the Liquor.

Having taken some Empyreumatical Oil of Human Blood unrectified, though it was
dark, and gross, and muddy, yet it would easily in the cold dissolve in
rectified Urinous Spirits, to which it gave a reddish color deep enough.

XXII. Of the fixed Salt of Human Blood. To obtain but one ounce of it, there
is requisite to employ a considerable quantity of Blood; and duly prepared by a
very obstinate fire; for the Caput Mortuum being kept three or four hours in
the fire, it will yield no fixed Salt at all: But having by an obstinate
Calcination obtained three or four drachms of this Salt, I found that it was of
the Nature of common or Sea Salt, though a little different; for it tasted like
it, and a strong solution did not readily turn Syrup of Violets green, nor
precipitate a Brick color, or brownish yellow, no more than a white Powder,
out of a solution of Sublimate; nor did the Spirit of Salt dissolve it as an
Alkaly. And having put a little Oil of Vitriol upon our dried Salt, it
immediately, as it several times did upon common Salt, corroded it with great
violence, and with much foam and Smoke. We also dropped a little of it
dissolved in Water, upon a solution of Silver made in Aqua Fortis, upon which a
white Powder was immediately precipitated: And having put some Leaf-Gold upon
Aqua Fortis, which would not work upon it, whilst it was swimming there without
being so much as discolored, I put a little of our powdered Salt into it,
which being thereby turned into a kind of Liquor, did without the assistance of
Heat, presently dissolve it. XXIII. Of the Terra Damnata of Human Blood. From
twenty four ounces of dried Blood, we got after two days Calcination, but two
drachms and nine grains of Earth; which probably was not pure Earth, since it
had a red color like that of Colchotar of Vitriol. XXIV. Of the Proportion of
the differing Substances Chymically obtained from Human Blood. they are scarce
to be determined, not only because of the sometimes great disparity, as to
proportion, that may be met with of the fibrous part to the Serum, in the Blood
of several Persons; but of the same, according to different Circumstances, and
also, because it is hard to distill the pulverised part of the Blood; since no
one has so much as taken notice of the Necessity of shifting the Retort, to
gain as much Volatile Substance as may be obtained; and leave as little as may
be in the Caput Mortuum. For having distilled a quantity of dried Blood, the
same Heat which made the lower part pass in the form of Exhalations into the
Receiver, made the matter to swell, so that it lifted up a considerable
quantity of Black Matter to the upper part of the Vessel, which a common
Distiller would have called a Caput Mortuum, though to a discerning Eye, it
appeared to be of the same Nature with the Matter first put in, though blackened
by the ascending Fumes, therefore taking it out, and mixing it with the
remaining Substance, that was more of the Nature of Caput Mortuum; it was
committed again to Distillation in another Retort, whereby we obtained more
Oil, etc. And perceiving that even this Caput Mortuum had upon the top of it, a
pretty deal of Matter, which was not sufficiently despirited, I caused it to be
distilled again in a fresh Retort, in which it afforded a not contemptible
quantity of Volatile Matter. And having thus in three Retorts distilled twenty
four Ounces of dried Human Blood, we obtained of Volatile Substances, viz.
Spirit, together with a little Phlegm, White Salt, and very high colored Oil
thirteen Ounces and one Dram, besides several parcels of thick Oil that stuck
to the Retorts and the Receiver, which we judged to be seven Drams more; so
that the whole Quantity of the Volatile Part amounted to fourteen Ounces, of
which the Oil was six Ounces six Drams, and the clear Liquor six Ounces, three
Drams and a half, besides the Volatile Salt, which, when the Spirit was drained
from it, appeared white but wet; so that it was not possible to determine
exactly, neither how much Liquor it yet retained, nor how much it self weighed;
but it will be no hard matter to guess near the Truth to any Man that knows,
that having carefully sublimed the Salt, there remained in the Glass two Drams
and five Grains of Phlegmatic Liquor; which was not wholly void of Salt; and
of Volatile Salt in a dry form, we obtained one Ounce and two Drams and a half;
the Caput Mortuum amounting to eight Ounces and a half, and somewhat more,
which being calcined for two or three Days together, afforded not White, but
brounish-red Ashes, whence we obtained seven Drams of White and fixed, but not
a truly lixiviate Salt; and two Drams and nine Grains of Earth. But indeed
considering the great proportion of each of these Substances lost in
distillations, it will, upon that account, be a hard matter to determine the
true proportion of the Principles of Human Blood. XXV. Of the Fermentation or
Putrefaction of Human Blood and its Phenomenon. XXVI. Of the Mechanical Uses of
Human Blood, as in Husbandry, etc. XXVII. Of the Chemical Uses of Human Blood.
XXVIII. Of the Medicinal Uses of Human Blood. XXIX. Of the difference betwixt
Human Blood, as its found in sound Persons, differently constituted, and
circumstantiated, as Men, Women (when Monstrous and when not) Children, Moors,
Negroes, etc. XXX. Of the affinity and difference betwixt the Blood of Men, and
that of several other Animals, as Quadrupeds, Birds, Fishes, and Sanguineous
Insects. XXXI. Paralipomena relating to the History of Human Blood. XXXII.
Micellaneous Observations, Experiments and Enquiries about Human Blood.
Were this Treatise applied to any other than extravasated Blood, to these we
might add the following Titles.

I. Of the process of Sanguification, or the series of changes that the Aliment
successively undergoes, from its first being taken in at the mouth, till it be
turned into Blood. II. Of the motions of the mass of Blood, and particularly
its Circulation. III. Of the Chyle, Lympha, and other Liquors, that are
supposed to enter and mingle with the Blood. IV. Whether Phlegm, Gall and
Melancholy, be constituent Parts of the Blood. V. Whether some other
Substances may not, with as much reason be admitted into the composition of the
Blood.
Titles of the first Classis, for the natural History of Human Urine.
1 Titles for the Natural History of Human Urine.
I. Of the colors of Human Urine. II. Of the taste of Human Urine. III. Of the
Odours of Human Urine fresh and putrified. IV. Of the Heat and Cold of Human
Urine. V. Of the specific Gravity of Human Urine. VI. Of the Consistence of
Human Urine, as to Density, Viscosity, etc. VII. Of the Aerial Parts contained
in Human Urine. VIII. Whether Human Urine is a fit Liquor for Fermentation
properly so called. IX. Of the differences betwixt fresh and stale Human Urine.
X. Of the Fermentation or Putrefaction of it, and the time it requires. XI. Of
its Spontaneous separation of Parts. XII. Of its Vulgar Analysis by
Distillation. XIII. Of some other ways of distilling Human Urine. XIV. Of the
proportion of the Principles, or Ingredients of Human Blood. XV. Of the Spirits
of Human Urine. XVI. Of the Phlegm of Human Urine. XVII. Of the Volatile Salt
of Human Urine. XVIII. Of the fixed Salt of Human Urine. XIX. Of the compounded
Salts of Human Urine. XX. Of the shining Substance obtainable from Human Urine.
XXI. Of the Salt that is Predominant. XXII. Of the Empyreumatical Oils of Human
Urine. XXIII. Of the Mellago, or Rob of Human Urine, and its uses. XXIV. Of the
Terra Damnata. XXX. Of some accidental differences of Human Urine, as it is
emitted in the Morning, or at certain distances from Meat, or after the use of
certain Aliments, or Medicaments, as Asparagus, Turpentine, etc. Or at
different seasons of the year, as Winter, Summer, etc. XXVI. Of the affinity of
Human Urine with diverse other Bodies, especially Vegetables and Minerals.
XXVII. Of the Hostility of Human Urine with Acids, etc. XXVIII. Of the affinity
and difference betwixt Human Blood, Urine, Gall, Milk, etc. and diverse Liquors,
or Juices belonging to the Animal Kingdom; particularly of the comparison
betwixt Human Urine and that of Beasts. XXIX. Of the Mechanical uses of Human
Urine. XXX. Of the Chemical uses of Human Urine, and its Parts, especially as a
Menstruum. XXXI. Of the Medicinal uses of Human Urine External and Internal.
XXXII. Paralipomena relating to the History of Human Urine. XXXIII. Promiscuous
Observations, Experiments and Enquiries about Human Urine.
The second Part of the Natural History of Human Blood, containing
Miscellaneous Experiments and Observations about Human Urine. The third Part
containing Promiscuous Experiments and Observations, about the Serum of Human
Blood.
HAving separately weighed the Serum, and the consistent part of the Blood, the
latter weighed four ounces, six drachms and a half, and the former three
ounces, six drachms. And having taken the same measures with the Blood drawn
from another Person, the fibrous part weighed four ounces, five drachms, and
the Serum four ounces. But from these Experiments it does not follow, that the
fibrous part is alone heavier than the Serum; since a great deal of the latter
is dispersed through the Pores of the former, which appears, since four ounces,
five drachms, and thirty four grains of the fibrous part of Blood being
distilled in a digestive Furnace, the dried Blood remaining weighed but one
ounce, three drachms, and thirty four grains; whereas the serous Liquor
distilled from it amounted to three ounces, fifty three grains; and the like
trial being again repeated with another parcel of Blood, the dried mass
amounted to one ounce, six drachms, and fifty grains; and the Phlegmatic
Liquor distilled from it, to seven ounces.

Red Sealing-Wax suspended at a Hair, weighed in the Air one dram, fifty six
grains; in Water thirty five; in Serum thirty three. And having made use of an
Instrument purposely made, when common Water weighed 253 grains, an equal bulk
of Serum weighed 302; and the Serum of the Blood of another Person being
weighed, it wanted but two grains of the weight of the former.

Serum which was tinged with Blood being strained through Cap-Paper, the Liquor
which passed through it was of a yellow color.

Spirit of Salt being dropped into Serum, coagulated some Parts, which subsided
in the form of Cheese-Curd; and Oil of Vitriol had the same effect, but more
powerfully: But Spirit of Sal-Armoniack rather made it fluid. Oil of Tartar per
Deliquium produced a white Curd, by uniting with some Parts of the Serum, but
not so powerfully as the other had done. Spirit of Wine rectified produced a
copious white Curd, but so soft that it swam upon the top of the Liquor.

Upon an infusion of a solution of Sublimate, it yielded a white Curd; but some
of the Serum of Human Blood being poured upon filings of Iron, the Liquor
dissolved some of the Steel; which appeared, since upon an addition of some of
an infusion of Galls, the Liquor which before was muddy and thick, laid down a
whitish Sediment; and a convenient quantity of the infusion being added, the
two Liquors united into a consistent Body, wherein the Eye discovered no
distinct Liquor at all.

But having put some of our Liquor upon filings of Copper, which, when wrought
upon by Bodies that have in them any thing of Urinous Salt, usually give a
conspicuous Tincture, we accordingly found, that the Metal was in a few hours
discolored by the Menstruum; and afterward it began gradually to grow more
blue, and in a day was of a deep Ceruleous color: And to show that this color
proceeded from some Volatile Salt latent in the Serum, we mixed some of it with
Syrup of Violets, and found that it appeared of a fine green. And one thing
observable in the Serum impregnated with Copper was, that I kept it several
weeks in my Window without perceiving that it in the least sunk.

About two ounces of Serum was left in a South Window three weeks in the Month
of July; but did not appear in the least putrified; but had let down a
considerable Sediment, and in three or four days after it stunk offensively;
and that at the same time it was void of Acidity appeared, since it would not
take off the blue color of a Tincture of Lignum Nephriticum. This fetid Serum
being distilled in a low Cucurbite, the Liquor that first came over was so
little Spirituous or Saline, that it would not in an hours time turn Syrup of
Violets green; yet that it was not without a Volatile Alkaly appeared, since
being dropped into a good solution of Sublimate, it caused it to lay down a
white precipitate.

Serum of Human Blood filtred through Cap-Paper, being distilled in a small
Retort placed in a Sand Furnace; we obtained only a few drops of a darkish red
Oil, some of which subsided to the bottom of the other Liquor, but the greater
part swam upon it; and after a good deal of insipid Phlegm had been drawn off,
there came over a good proportion of Spirituous Liquor, which smelled almost
like the Spirit of Blood, and contained a pretty deal of Volatile Alkaly; so
that it would readily turn Syrup of Violets green, and cause a white
precipitate, and ferment with Spirit of Salt. And this Spirit being rectified
in a small Head and Body, a good quantity of a thick Substance like Honey was
left in the bottom of the Glass, which was for the most part of a dark red, and
seemed to contain more Oil than appeared upon the first Distillation. The
Liquor that came over the Helm was purer, but not stronger than the first; but
having put it into a Glass-Egg with a slender Neck, and given the Vessel a
convenient Situation in hot Sand, we obtained a Volatile Alkaly, that sublimed
into the Neck in the form of a white Salt; from whence it seems to follow, that
the serous part of the Blood affords the same Elementary Principles or Similar
Substances, both as to number and kind, as the fibrous and consistent part,
though not as to quantity; that of the Oil and dry Salt being less in a
determinate proportion of Serum, than of Blood.

Though it be necessary, to loosen the Spirit of Urine from the more drossy Parts
of it, that before Distillation it should putrefie for about six weeks, yet if
fresh Urine be poured upon Quicklime a great part of the Spirit will presently
be united, and ascend in Distillation: Encouraged by which Observation, I mixed
Serum with Quicklime, upon which there ensued a transient Heat; and this mixed
Body being committed to Distillation, first it afforded a Phlegm in a gentle
fire; and then in a stronger, a moderate quantity of Liquor, that was thought
to smell manifestly of the Lime, but had not a brisk taste; and this was
accompanied with a greater quantity of fetid Oil than was expected. The other
Liquor being slowly rectified, the Spirit which first came over had a strong
and piercing smell, but less rank than common Spirit of Human Blood: Its taste
was somewhat fiery, and being dropped upon Spirit of Violets it presently
turned it green; in a solution of sublimate with Water, and another of
Quicksilver in Aqua Fortis, it presently made two white precipitates. And
being mingled with some good Spirit of Sea Salt, there appeared a thick and
whitish Smoke, but neither any visible conflict nor bubbles; yet the color of
the Spirit of Salt seemed much heightened by this operation. And here I shall
observe, that having set the lately mentioned Mixture of the Spirit of Serum
and of Salt to evaporate, the Salt afforded by it was not like that of
Sal-Armoniack, but the color produced in the Mixture whilst fluid, was so
heightened in the Concrete, that it appeared of a Blood-red color; but of such
a confused shape, that it could not be reduced to any kind of Salt; by all
which Phenomenon this Spirit of the serous part of the Blood, seems to be very
near of kin to that of the concreted mass.

To try whether the fixed Salt of Potashes would have the same effect on Serum
of Human Blood, to four Parts of Liquor we put one of Salt, and having
distilled them slowly in a Glass-Head and Body, we obtained a good store of a
Liquor, but not near so strong as that drawn off from Quicklime; and having
rectified this Spirit by a gentle Heat, the two first spoonfuls which rose were
not Spirituous* but Phlegmatic; nor would it turn Syrup of Violets green, though
it afforded a light Sublimate when put upon a solution of Sublimate.

Having put one part of Salt of Potashes into three of Human Urine, and slowly
distilled them in a Head and Body; first a Spirituous Liquor ascended; which
being set aside, we continued the Distillation till the remains appeared dry:
in which operation we obtained not one drop of oil; besides which it was
observable that this Spirit of Urine was not near so fetid, as that made the
common way; and that that Liquor which came over at the latter end of the
Distillation, was so unlike that which the Serum of the Blood affords us, that
it was not only considerably strong, and manifestly stronger than that which
first ascended, but had a penetrateing and fiery taste which left a lasting
impression upon the Tongue, and made a notable Ebullition with Spirit of Salt,
which the Spirit of Urine drawn from Quicklime did not; and whereas in the
last Liquor I never observed any Volatile Salt to ascend in a dry form, in the
operation made by the help of Salt of Potashes, there ascended without
Rectification, several grains of Volatile Salt, one of which was Crystalline
and very large, so that it appeared to be like a Plate curiously figured; but
some lesser corns of Salt hiding one part of it, I could not clearly discern
whether it were Hexagonal or Octagonal. And this Experiment being repeated a
second time, the Liquor ascending was more Phlegmatic, though we both times
applied Salt of Potashes taken out of the same Vessel, and the Urine of the
same Person; but this Liquor being rectified per se, afforded more of a brisk
saline Spirit, from which we obtained a pretty quantity of Volatile Salt in a
dry form, and of a very white color.

Having put betwixt two and three ounces of Serum of Human Blood into a
Bolt-head, capable of holding four times as much, and having sealed the Glass
Hermetically, and set it aside, we observed the following Particulars.

First, No alteration appeared in the Liquor for twelve Months, nor were any
Worms or Magots bred in it; and though it be generally believed, that Insects
naturally breed in the fluid Parts of Human Bodies, yet I have observed, that
if Blood be so exactly closed up, that Flies cannot blow upon it, and that too
before it is putrified, or blowed upon, it will not breed them.

But, Secondly, In this Liquor there appeared not the least Mother which
usually accompanies Putrefaction; but the tip of the sealed Glass being broken
off, a pretty deal of Air rushed out with a considarable noise; and that this
Air had been considerably compressed, whilst it was penned up appeared, since
upon its eruption a multitude of bubbles remained on the Surface of the Liquor,
as upon the opening of Botled Drink, or other Liquors, when the Vessels they
are contained in come to be unstopped. And to these Observations, I shall add,
that some Sheeps Blood being shut up in Vacuo, upon a gentle Putrefaction, the
Elastick and Aerial Particles that were produced blew it up, with a surprising
noise. But, Thirdly,

The smell of our Serum was strong but not Cadavarous; rather resembling that
of the Tincture of Sulphur made with Salt of Tartar and Spirit of Wine, or some
such Sulphurous preparation.

Fourthly, This Serum being committed to Distillation in a small Glass Head and
Body in a digestive Furnace, the Liquor which first came over, first smelled
strong enough, yet tasted not at all brisk or spirituous, like that distilled
from putrefied Urine, nor did it presently give a manifest greenness to Syrup
of Violets; but in a solution of Sublimate, it had the same effect with Spirit
of Urine or a Volatile Salt. And having mixed some of it with Syrup of Violets,
spread all night upon white Paper, and another parcel of it with filings of
Copper, the former in the Morning was turned green; and the latter was so far
dissolved, as to leave a large blue stain upon the Paper.

One part of Salt of Tartar being dissolved in eight Parts of Serum of Human
Blood, and stirred over a gentle Heat, it was not turned red by it as Milk is.
That Blood will be coagulated by Heat in a short time into a kind of Gelly, is
a common Observation. But having put Spirit of Human Blood into Serum, and kept
it a convenient time over a fire, the Volatile Alkaly seemed to make the
coagulation more slow. And this effect was more considerable, when we tried
another parcel of Serum with Salt of Tartar instead of Spirit of Blood.

The fourth Part, containing the History of the Spirit of Blood, begun.
BEfore I proceed to the Titles belonging to this Part of the History, it will
be requisite to advertise,

First, that the Spirit made use of in the following Trials and Observations,
was drawn from Human Blood without any Sand, Clay, or other Additament; and
that the fir^^ Distillations were performed in Retorts placed in Sand, care
being taken that the Vessels should not be too much filled, because Blood if
not well dried is apt to swell, and pass into the neck of the Retort, if not
into the Receiver.

Secondly, It is to be observed, that the Blood we made use of, was such as was
drawn from People, who frequently bleeded by way of prevention.

Thirdly, There is so great a Cognation betwixt the Spirit, and Volatile Salt
of Human Blood, that the latter seems to be the former only in a dry form.

A List of Secondary Titles, concerning the Spirit of Human Blood.
Of the History of Human Blood
I. Whether Human Blood may be so ordered by Fermentation or Putrefaction, as
that in Distillation, a Spirit either Urinous or Vinous may ascend before the
Phlegm. II. Whether Spirit of Human Blood be really any thing, but the Volatile
Salt and Phlegm well commixed. III. Of the Species of Saline Bodies, to which
Spirit of Human Blood is to be referred. IV. Whether Spirit of Human Blood be
differing from Spirit of Urine, and other Spirits that are called Volatile
Alkalies. V. Of the quantity of Spirit contained in Human Blood, whether
accompanied with Serum or dried. VI. Of the specific Gravity of Spirit of
Human Blood. VII. Of the Odor, Taste, Color, transparency and consistency of
the Spirit of Human Blood. VIII. Of the dissolutive power of the Spirit of
Human Blood. IX. Of the Tinctures that may be drawn by Spirit of Human Blood.
X. Of the coagulative power of the Spirit of Human Blood. XI. Of the
precipitating power of Spirit of Human Blood. XII. Of the Affinity betwixt
Spirit of Human Blood, and some Chemical Oils and Urinous Spirits. XIII. Of the
relation betwixt Spirit of Human Blood and the Air. XIV. Of the Hostility of
Human Blood with Acids, whether in the form of Liquors or Fumes. XV. Of the
Medicinal Virtues of Spirit of Human Blood externally applied. XVI. Of the
Medicinal Virtues of Spirit of Human Blood internally given in Pleurisies,
Head-achs, Coughs, Fevers, Scurvies, Cachexies, Dropsies, Fits of the Mother.
XVII. Paralipomena, and promiscuous Experiments and Observations concerning the
Spirit of Human Blood.
TITLE I. Whether Human Blood may be so ordered by Fermentation or
Putrefaction, as that in Distillation a Spirit either Vrinous or Vinous may
ascend before the Phlegm.
COnsidering that Fevers have been looked upon to proceed from a Fermentation
in the Blood; and likewise, that Human Urine which has a great Cognation with
Human Blood, will not whilst fresh afford a Spirit, till the Phlegm be first
drawn off; this Subject of this Title may not appear Groundless. But I am not
much encouraged to expect a Vinous or ardent Spirit from Human Blood, nor am I
sure there is any such thing as Fermentation in Human Blood. And on this
occasion I shall add, that having once kept Blood Hermetically sealed up in a
Glass for twelve Months, when it came to be opened, it smelled so offensively,
that we could not make any trial upon it; and another time having digested, in
a pretty large Vial Hermetically sealed some Sheeps Blood; when it had been a
good while in the digestive Furnace, it suddenly broke with a considerable
noise, and blew off the long neck of the Vial. And here, to what has been laid
down, I shall add, That some Ounces of Serum of Blood being added to a fourth
Part of Raisins of the Sun stoned, and kept in a Glass, in a warm Room for
several days; the event of this trial was, that within in a few Days the
Raisins began to emerge, and whilst they floated, yielded a considerable
quantity of springy and permanent Air; from whence it appeared, that there had
been some Degree of Fermentation. But when this Serum came to be distilled,
though it did not stink as if it had been putrified, yet the Spirit which first
ascended, tasted not like a-Viscous Spirit, nor like a mere Phlegm. Whether the
Fermentation observed in this Liquor, depended on the whole Serum, or only on
the Aqueous Parts distinct from it, I shall leave to Experience to determine.

To try whether Digestion or Putrefaction would so open the Texture of Blood,
as to make it part with its Spirit more easily, and before the Phlegm, I kept a
quantity of Serum for that purpose, four times as long as was sufficient to
make Urine part with its Spirit before its Phlegm, but the Liquor which came
over by a gentle heat, had but little strength either in Smell or Taste; nor
would it readily turn Syrup of Violets Green; yet like a Volatile Alkaly, it
would soon turn a Solution of Sublimate in fair Water, into a White, Opacous,
and almost Milky Liquor.

TITLE II. Whether Spirit of Human Blood be really any thing but the Volatile
Salt and Phlegm well commixed.
FOR several Reasons I am inclined to believe, that the Spirit of Human Blood
is totally composed of a Volatile Salt, and a Phlegm which is not so pure and
Elementary, but that some Particles of Oil, and others of Salt, may be mixed
with it; and whether by frequent Rectifications this Phlegm may be rendered
Homogeneous I much question, since I am not sure, but that in frequent
Distillations, some Particles of the Fire mny be from time to time associated
with the Liquor; and even in the first Distillation, the Fire uniting with the
Liquor, may form one different from the Ingredients or Principles of the Body;
and I have found that Woods afford by distillation, a Liquor which is not an
Oil, nor an Acid, or an Alkaly, and yet no true Phlegm, but an Adiaphorous
Liquor. And on this occasion to show, That the Composition of a Body may as
well be made known by investigating the way of generating or producing it, as
by that of Analyzing or resolving it; I shall add, that having dissolved as
much Volatile Salt of Human Blood in distilled Water, as the Liquor would take
up, and then having distilled it in a conveniently shaped Vessel, with a
regulated degree of Heat, the Distillation afforded us such a Liquor as was
desired, since by Smell and Taste it appeared to be a good brisk Spirit of
Human Blood. And this Experiment was again repeated with the like success.

TITLE III. Of the Species of Saline Bodies, to which the Spirit of Human Blood
is to be referred.
THOUGH it be generally allowed that Saline Spirits are of two sorts, yet it may
not be amiss to add, That some of them are Acid in Taste, as Spirit of Nitre,
Vitriol, etc. Others are rather like common or lixiviate Salts; and their
different Effects and Operations are much less alike than their Taste, for upon
their mixture, there ensues a manifest conflict, and usually one will
precipitate the Bodies, the other will dissolve. And amongst Salts called
Alkalies, some are fixed in considerable Degrees of Fire, and others, who take
Acid and Alkalies for the true Principles of mixed Bodies, call the one Fixed,
and the other Volatile Alkalies. And though I, who question this Doctrine, often
call the Salts made by Combustion, simply Alkalies, or lixiviate Salts, and
those that ascend, sometimes Vrinous, and sometimes Volatile Salts, yet since
the Names of Fixed Alkalies and Volatile ones are in request now, I shall now
make use of them in that Sense.

These Things being premised, I shall proceed to observe, that notwithstanding
that some Physicians and Chemists ascribe Digestion to an Acid Ferment in the
Stomach, yet the Spirit of Human Blood is referrable to that Classis, which
many call Volatile Alkalies, since it generally performs what Volatile Alkalies
are said to do; for it will ferment with Acids, turn Syrup of Violets Green,
and precipitate a Solution of Sublimate in common Water.

Were I sure that the Ferment of the Stomach were Acid, I should be apt to
believe, that the Blood retains something of Acidity in it; but yet that would
not be an Argument why I should not refer the Spirit of Human Blood to the
Class of Alkalies, because so few Acid Particles would either be destroyed by
the Alkalizate ones, that are so abundant in the Spirit, or at least they would
be so very much predominant as to give us Reason on their account to
denominate, the Mixture Alkalious. As if some drops of Spirit of Vinegar were
mixed with stale Urine, they would be either deprived of their Acidity by some
Particles of a contrary Nature, or be so overpowered by the Fugitive Salts they
abound with, that the Mixture might well be referred to the Classis of Volatile
Urinous Salts.

TITLE IV. Whether the Spirit of Human Blood be differing from Spirit of Urine,
and other Salts called Volatile Alkalies.
UPON this Occasion I shall offer, that not to intimate that a Body may have
many similar Qualities, in respect of another Body, and yet distinct Operations
on a third Substance: I say, not to intimate that, there may be a considerable
difference betwixt Volatile Salts or Spirits, as they are commonly prepared,
and when prepared as they may, by reiterated Rectifications, and other ways of
Depuration by a dextrous Chemist, to bring them to a greater degree of Purity
and Simplicity; a greater degree I say, because it may be difficult to bring
them to an absolute Purity, since unheeded commixtures may be made, upon the
Account of some Corpuscles of Fire with the Body they work upon.

And that there is a manifest difference betwixt Spirit of Human Blood and
other Alkalies, as Spirit of Urine and Hartshorn, is evident to several People
who, though they abhor the Odor of Spirit of Blood, yet they will with Pleasure
hold their Noses a great while over Spirit of Urine and Sal-Armoniack. And though
from a due proportion of Spirit of Urine or Sal-Armoniack with Spirit of Salt,
I have got a Salt which shoots into the shape of that of Urine or Sal-Armoniack
yet I have seldom, if ever, obtained a Salt of the like shape from a Mixture of
the Spirit of Humane Blood with that of Common Salt, for tho upon an
Evaporation of the superfluous Moisture, the Salts would coagulate together,
yet the Concretion seemed confused, and not of the Regular shapes of those
Salts, resulting from a Mixture of the Spirit of Sea Salt with Urinous Spirits.
And Helmont tells us, that the Spirit of Human Blood will cure Epilepsies,
which Spirit of Urine will not do.

TITLE V. Of the Quantity of Spirit contained in Human Blood, whether
accompanied with its Serum, or dried.
THIS is not easy to determine, since some Men's Blood is much more Phlegmatic
than others, or more Serous, which may of it self be more Spirituous, according
to the Complexion, Age, Sex, etc. of the Person that Bleeds.

Twelve Ounces of Healthy Human Blood, afforded us seven Ounces and a half of
Phlegm, and consequently about Four Ounces and a half of dry stuff. And havi^g
distilled in a Retort, in a Sand Furnace, seven Ounces of well dried Blood, we
obtained about an eighth part of Spirit, which, though not rectified, left in the
Receiver and Viol I kept it in, a good deal of Volatile Salt undissolved, which
a Phlegmatic Liquor would not have done. And if Spirit of Blood be but a Salt
and Phlegm united, We may well suppose, that Human Blood yields a far greater
Proportion of Spirit than this, since from the seven Ounces of dried Blood, we
obtained about five Drachms of Volatile Salt, which had it been united with a
due quantity of Phlegm, it would probably have afforded us near two Ounces more
of a Liquor deserving the Name of Spirit.

TITLE VI. Of the Consistence and Specific Gravity of Human Blood.
A Compact Body, which in the Air weighed fifty eight Grains, and in Water
weighed six Grains and, in rectified Spirit of Human Blood weighed but five
Grains and; and what was considerable, was, That a piece of Amber would not
subside to the Bottom, but kept floating upon the Top, and if plunged into it,
would emerge again.

As for the Degree of the Fluidity of the Blood, or its immunity from
Tenaciousness, though diverse other Alkalizated Liquors, as Oil of Tartar per
deliquium, fixed Nitre resolved per deliquium, a Solution of Potashes, are
sensibly unctuous, and but languidly fluid, yet I observed that Spirit of Human
Blood did not appear more Unctuous than common Water. And whereas it is
commonly found, That as Liquors are more spirituous, so the Bubles raised by
Agitation, soonest disappear; I have observed that the Spirit of Blood was
almost as soon clear of them as Spirit of Wine; and when some Drops of it were
let fall, they manifestly appeared less than Drops of Water.

To discover the subtlety of the Parts of Human Blood, we so prepared common
Water, by Infusions made in it without Heat, that by putting one single Drop of
our Rectified Spirit of Human Blood into ten Ounces and four Scruples of the
prepared Water, and lightly shaking the Viol, there appeared throughout the
Liquor a manifest Color, whereof no Degree was discernible before; so that it
dispersed it self through a thousand times as much Water, and produced a
manifest Change in the Color of it: And though this Computation is made upon the
common supposition that a Drop of Water weighs a Grain, yet though it weighs more
a little, the Difference is recompensed, since having dropped ten Drops of
common Water into a common Balance well adjusted, and having likewise dropped
ten Drops of this Spirit, we found that the last were not only less in bulk,
but lighter, since they weighed not above four Grains, so that the Proportion
to which it extended it self, may be said to be as one, to betwixt 4000 and
5000; and this subtlety of the Parts of the Spirit of Human Blood will appear
to be yet much greater, if we consider, that some Part even of this Drop must
needs be Phlegm.

TITLE VII. Of the Odor, Taste, Color, and Transparency of the Spirit of
Human Blood.
THat the Spirit of Human Blood is in respect of some Liquors potentially Cold,
since it refrigerates them, and with reference to others potentially Hot, since
being mixed with them it renders them Hot, may appear from the following
instance; for having put the lower end of an Hermetically sealed Weather-Glass
into a slender Cylindrical Glass, we poured as much moderatly strong Spirit of
Blood into it as covered the Ball, and then dropped on that Liquor some good
Spirit of Salt, upon which ensued a conflict accompanied with a Noise, Bubbles,
and Heat, which made the Spirit of Wine presently ascend above two Inches and a
half; which Experiment seems to be the more remarkable, because several other
Volatile Alkalies being mixed with Acids, produce a notable degree of coldness;
and whereas I had several times found by Trial, that the Spirt of Verdigrease
would, with Volatile Salt of Sal-Armoniack or Urine, produce a real coldness.
This Spirit of Verdigrease being mixed in the small Cylindrical Glass, with
Spirit of Blood moderately strong, not only produced a hissing Noise and store
of Bubbles, but an actual Heat, upon which the Liquor in the Thermoscope
ascended above an Inch and a half, though both the Liquors employed amounted not
to above two spoonfuls.

TITLE VIII. Of the dissolutive power of Spirit of Human Blood.
THAT this Spirit is not only a good Medicine for several Diseases, but is also
a good Menstruum, will appear from the following instances. And first, having
poured Spirit of Human Blood upon Crude Copper, in about a quarter of an hour
the Liquor was tinged blueish, which color grew higher and higher, till in
some hours it was deeply Ceruleous. And to this I shall add, that having
dropped a drop or two of Spirit of Blood upon a piece of bright Copper, within
about half a minute of an hour, the Verge of the moistened part of the Surface
appeared blueish, and in a little time after, the rest of the wetted Part
acquired a fine Azure.

Having poured Spirit of Blood upon filings of Zinke or Spiltre, it presently
began to work manifestly in the cold; and when assisted by a little Heat, it
dissolved the Zinke briskly, and not without producing store of bubbles, being
also a little discolored by the operation of this Experiment.

Having put a piece of clotted Blood, which had been exposed to the Air, into a
slender Vial of clear Glass, and then poured on a little rectified Spirit of
Human Blood, and shook the Glass a little, the blackness of the superficial
part of the Blood presently disappeared, and became a florid Scarlet, and the
Liquor was tinged with a fairer red, and from a succession of bubbles passing
from time to time out of the cold into it, seemed to work somewhat like a
Menstruum, but in a little time after the Blood was degenerated from its former
color to a little more dark one. But another clot of Blood, one side of which
was red and the other black, being put into the Vial, and Spirit of Blood
poured upon it, the red side had its color improved, but the other continued
black and dirty. And I once preserved twelve drachms of Blood in two of the
Spirit of Blood, and found that twelve months after it remained fair and
florid, and little less than totally fluid; and when the Vessel was opened
there appeared little sign of Putrefaction, but only a small clot was fastened
to the bottom, the rest passing readily through a strainer; so that the Spirit
seemed to have a great embalming Virtue, since it was able to preserve six
times its weight of a Body so apt to putrefie: But to what has been observed,
I shall add, that having committed the Mixture to Distillation, the first Liquor
was a kind of Phlegm, which was succeeded by a Spirituous Liquor and Volatile
Salt in a dry form.

Having poured some of our Spirit upon filings of Iron, where they were not in
the least Rusty, and kept them together a while in digestion, we found, as we
expected, that that Liquor by working upon them had produced a light substance,
something paler than a Crocus, and there appeared likewise in the Liquor good
store of thin Plates, which after a gentle Agitation, being held against the
Sunbeams, exhibited the colors of the Rainbow very vividly; but the taste of
the Liquor appeared not at all Martial.

TITLE IX. Of the Tincture that may be drawn with Spirit of Human Blood.
SPirit of Blood being put upon Saffron presently acquired a yellow color; and
from Tu merick, a Tincture like a solution of Gold, which may doubtless prove a
good Medicine in the Jaundice; and some of this Spirit being put upon powder of
Blood, it presently extracted from it a color as red as that of French Claret,
but when I made use of another parcel of Spirit well rectified, I found that it
extracted not a Tincture so soon; and after several hours the color it
obtained was brown, which in some hours after was heightened into redness, and
in a longer time it became almost as red as the former Tincture.

To show that Spirit of Human Blood may extract Tinctures out of the hardest
Bodies, we put filings with it into a small Egg, and kept them all night in
digestion in a moderate Heat; and the next day we found the Liquor tinged with
a deep brownish red; and those filings which stuck to the sides of the Vessel
and were above the Liquor, were turned by the Exhalations of this Spirit into a
yellow Crocus: But the Mixture being kept some days longer in the same Vessel,
the color of it was grown Opacous, and appeared to be black when it was looked
upon in a considerable bulk; but it seemed of another color when looked upon
as it was spread thin upon white Paper. Some of this Ticture being poured upon
an infusion of Galls, it would not make it of an Inky color, nor was the
precipitate, which presently fell to the bottom, of an Inky color. From which
Experiments it appears, that it is unsafe either to suppose, that if
Chalybeates be dissolved in the Body, it must be by some Acid Juice, or to
conclude, that if Steel be dissolved by the Liquors of our Bodies, they must be
ex predominio Alkalizate, since a Liquor that is very different from Acids
dissolves it; but without touching further upon this account, I shall rather
commend it to the consideration of Physicians, to pitch upon some other method
of explicating the effects of Chalybeates upon Human Bodies, and whether
martial Medicines may not be made use of, which are prepared by Volatite
Alkalies, instead of Acids.

Spirit of Human Blood being kept in digestion with powder of Amber, it
extracted no considerable Tincture, but whether the fault was in the fineness
of the Amber, or the weakness of the Spirit, I shall leave undetermined.

Some Spirit of Human Blood being put upon some of that Gum called Seed-Lac
soon became tinged, which I supposed to proceed from a superficial color of
some Parts of the Gum, proceeding from some adhering Blood of the little winged
insects, who by their bitings occasioned this Gum, upon the twigs of the Trees
where it is found; so that the color seems not to be given by the Gum, but the
Blood of those Animals, and may probably be a good solvent Medicine, since most
of the insects used in Physic consists of Parts very subtle and penetrating,
and of considerable Efficacy.

TITLE X. Of the Coagulating power of the Spirit of Human Blood.
HIghly rectified Spirit of Human Blood, being well mingled by shakeing it with
a convenient quantity of Urinous Spirits, there will presently ensue a
Coagulation or a concretion of Parts, either of the whole Mixture or a Portion
of it, into corpuscles of a Saline form, which cohering loosely together make
up a mass of a fluid and consistent soft temper; in which form it will continue
in a cool place several months.

TITLE XI. Of the Precipitating power of Spirit of Human Blood.
IT has a power of Precipitating, as other Volatile Spirits, most Bodies
dissolved in Acid Menstruums; I say most, because there is no need this rule
should be general, or hold when the Body is of such a Nature, that it may be as
well dissolved by an Acid as an Alkaly; and that there are such Bodies appears,
since Spirit of Human Blood will dissolve both Copper and Zink, which may be
likewise dissolved by Aqua Fortis and other Acid Menstruums.

But that this Spirit will precipitate other Bodies dissolved in Acid
Menstruums, I am convinced by several trials made on red Lead dissolved in
Vinegar, Silver in Aqua Fortis, Gold in Aqua Regia, and Tin dissolved in an
appropriated Menstruum, and several other Bodies. And out of a Solution of
common Salt made in Water, we could readily precipitate with the Spirit of
Blood, a Substance which looked like a white Earth, and such a Substance I
obtained in a far greater quantity, from that which the Salt-makers call
Bittern, which usually remains in their Salt Pans, when they have taken out
about as much Salt, as would coagulate in figured grains. This Spirit of Human
Blood does likewise precipitate a Solution of Dantzik Vitriol in Water, but
that Solution is not a total one.

TITLE XII. Of the Affinity between Spirit of Human Blood, and some Chemical
Oils and Vinous Spirits.
THAT there is an Affinity betwixt Spirit of Human Blood, and Spirit of Wine,
appears, since we have formerly observed that being put together, they will
concoagulate, and continue united a long time; and though a rectified Spirit of
Wine will not draw a Tincture from Blood, yet Spirit of Blood will. But as for
Lixiviate Liquors such as are made of Salt of Tartar, fixed Nitre, etc. we find
not that they will strictly associate with it. Spirit of Blood readily mixes
with that Adiaphorous Spirit formerly mentioned; but dephlegmed Spirit of Blood
mixed by agitation with its Oil, will presently separate again, though with
Spirit of Wine it will permanently unite, tho these two Liquors belong to a
different, viz. the one to the Animal, and the other to the Vegetable Kingdom.

With the essential Oils of Aromatic Vegetables, the Spirit seems to have a
greater Affinity; for an equal proportion of this Liquor, and of Oil of
Aniseeds, drawn in an Alembick per Vesicam, being shaken together, they made a
soft or Semifluid coagulation, which continued in that form for a day or two;
and would probably have longer done so, if I had not had occasion to proceed
further with it.

To show that Spirit of Human Blood may either communicate some of its saline
Parts to essential Oils, or work a change in them; I digested a while in a
Glass with a long neck some recstified Spirit of Human Blood, with a convenient
quantity of Oil of Aniseeds drawn in an Alembick, and found that the Oil grew
colored of a high yellow, and afterward attained a high redness; which may
afford us a hint of the cause of some changes of color, that are produced in
the Liquors of the Body.

To take off the stinking quality of Human Blood, and to render it more
grateful, we mixed with it in a Glass about an equal quantity or half as much
Oil of Aniseeds, and having shaken them together in the Glass, we placed it in
a Furnace with a gentle Heat, by which means the slight Texture of the Coagulum
being dissolved, part of the Oil appeared floating upon the top, whence being
separated by a Tunnel, the Liquor was whitish and without a stinking smell; it
smelling and tasteing strong of Aniseeds, though the saline Particles retained a
considerable degree of their brisk and penetrating taste.

Another way I took to deprive Spirit of Human Blood of its offensive smell
was, by employing a Medium to unite it with essential Oils; for having
dissolved an eighth part of Oil of Aniseeds in highly rectified Spirit of Wine,
and added an equal quantity of Spirit of Human Blood, and upon a convenient
agitation we suffered the Mixture to settle a considerable time, after that it
appeared, that some of the Oil swam in drops distinct from the other Liquors,
which consisted of a Mixture of the two Spirits impregnated with a few
particles of Oil which they had detained. This Liquor abounded with little
Concretions made by the Coagulation of the Sanguineous and Vinous Spirits;
which by a gentle Heat were sublimed in the form of a Volatile Salt, to the
upper Part of the Glass; and this Salt had not only a much less penetrating
Odor, than the mere Volatile Salt of Human Blood, but had quite lost its
stink, and yet retained a considerable quickness, and something of the scent of
Aniseeds; and the remaining Liquor was likewise deprived of its ill smell, and
moderately imbued with that of the Oil.

To try whether there would be any Affinity between our Spirit, and the highly
rectified Oil of Petroleum, I shaked a convenient quantity of them together in
a new Vial, upon which they presently turned into a white Mixture; and though
after a few hours the greater part of the Oil swam above the Spirit, yet there
appeared betwixt the two Liquors a good quantity of whiteish Matter, which
seemed to be produced by the Union of many Particles of the Spirit and Oil,
which were most disposed to combine.

TITLE XIII. Of the Relation betwixt Spirit of Human Blood and the Air.
TO try whether the Air will have any considerable effect on the Spirit of
Human Blood after Distillation, as it evidently has on the Blood before, I
spread thinly upon a piece of white Paper some small filings of Copper, and
wetting them well without covering them quite over, with a few drops of Blood;
by that means they being well exposed to the free Air; the Action of the Liquor
was so much promoted, that within a minute or two it did even in the cold
acquire a blueish color; and in fewer minutes than one would have expected,
that color was so heightened as to become Ceruleous; but another parcel of the
same filings being put into a Vial, the intercourse of the Air being excluded,
the Liquor would not in some hours acquire so deep a color.

Having in a clear Cylindrical Vial of about an Inch Diameter, put more filings
of Copper than was requisite to cover the bottom, and poured so much Spirit of
Blood upon them as rought about a fingers breadth above them, it in a few hours
acquired a rich color, which after a day or two began to grow more faint, and
afterward gradually declined, till it was almost lost; yet the Liquor was not
altogether limpid or colorless, as I have often had it with Spirit of Urine or
Sal-Armoniack, and these remains of blueishness I attributed to the effects of
the Air included in the Bottle, with so small a quantity of Liquor. And though I
thought it not impossible, but that length of time might destroy it is
blueishness, yet unstopping the Vessel, I observed, that in two minutes of an
hour, the Surface of the Liquor where it touched the fresh Air became
Ceruleous; and in a quarter of an hour the whole Body of the Liquor had
attained a deeper color than that of the sky, which color grew sensibly paler
again when the Vial was stopped: But one thing I must add is, that I have found
the Experiment to succeed with some Analogy, when another Volatile Spirit has
been made use of, in which there was no Volatile Salt of Human Blood; but the
Experiment being repeated the Air produced a green and not a Ceruleous color,
which makes me suspend my Judgment till satisfied by further experience,
whether the event of the former trial depended on any Affinity of the Spirit
with Blood or not. And here I shall add, that a parcel of Spirit of Human Blood
being kept in Vacuo Byliano, when the Air was pumpt out, it afforded fewer and
less bubbles than an equal quantity of common Water.

TITLE XIV. Of the Hostility of the Spirit of Human Blood with Acids, whether
they be in the form of Liquors or Fumes.
IT exercises its Hostility against more than one sort of Acid Spirits, as
Spirit of Salt, of Nitre, Spirit and Oil of Vitriol, Aqua Fortis, Aqua Regis,
etc. And not only against Facitious but natural ones, as the Juice of Lemons,
upon its Mixture with which there presently ensued a great commotion with
noise. But there is not only an Hostility evident betwixt the Parts of these
Liquors, but also their Effluvia; for if Spirit of Salt of Nitre be put into a
Vial somewhat wide mouthed, and Spirit of Blood rectified into another, when
these Liquors are held near one another, their invisible Emanations joining
together will form a manifest Smoke.

Some pure Volatile Salt of Human Blood being just satiated with Spirit of
Nitre, we slowly evaporated the superfluous moisture, which being done, we took
the compound Crystals which the Mixture afforded, and put it into a Bolt-Head
with a slender and a long neck, and then adding to it a convenient quantity of
Salt of Tartar, and as much distilled Water as made the Mixture Liquid enough,
the Salt of Tartar detained the Spirit of Nitre, and a good proportion of the
Volatile Salt ascended in a dry form to the neck of the Vessel.

Spirit of Blood and Nitre being mixed together, there ensued a conflict, in
which thick white fumes rose plentifully, and circulating in the Vessel, ran
down the sides of it in a white stream; until the fumes ceased to rise again,
the Mixture in the mean time appearing reddish. Being settled and seeming to
have been so discolored by a fattish Substance, we put to it a little rain
Water, and having by filtration separated the Faeces, and slowly evaporated the
thus clarified Liquor, the saline Parts shot into Crystals like those of
Saltpeter; but after a while seemed yellow, as if tinged with the Oil. N. Though
on several occasions the Spirit of Blood appears Oily, yet I not long since
dissolved another parcel of Blood, whose Liquor was clear and limpid a year
after.

Some of the before mentioned Crystals being put upon well kindled Charcoal,
presently melted and burnt away like Saltpeter, but the flame seemed not so
halituous, and differed in color, being not at all blue but yellow; and after
the Deflagration ceased, there remained upon the Coal a lump of dirty colored
matter, which had scarce any taste, nor was that little it had Alkalious. This
brittle Substance being held in the flame, became red hot without any sensible
imminution, and so it did upon a live Coal.

TITLE XV. Of the Medicinal Virtues of Spirit of Human Blood outwardly applied.
SINCE we meet not with any Acid Substance, except in the Pancreatick Juice of
a sound Person: And since the fixed Salt of Blood does much resemble Sea Salt,
whether its Spirit be Acid or no; and since several Parts of the Body whether
Solid or Liquid, afford a Liquor impregnated with store of Volatile Salt; it is
not amiss to think that the Spirit of Human Blood, may have considerable
effects in several Diseases, even when externally applied. And that Spirit of
Sal-Armoniack has been found successful in assisting several People in
Apoplexies, Epilepsies, etc. when applied to or put up the Nostrils, it is
confirmed by the experience of several learned and able Physicians; and upon
the like reason I prepared a Volatile Salt sublimed from a compound Salt,
obtained from Spirit of Blood satiated with Nitre. And for a like purpose, to
bring over the Saline Part of Blood in a liquid form, we mixed two Parts of
dried Blood with three of Spirit of Blood, and distilling them with a pretty
strong fire, we obtained a pretty deal of Spirit, unaccompanyed with any
Volatile Salt, in a dry form; and this Spirit seemed to have a stronger taste
and smell before rectification, than Spirit of Human Blood prepared another way
had after rectification; and had we made use of more Lime, I question not but
that we should have obtained a more piercing Spirit, since it would have
retained more of the Oil and the superfluous moisture.

And on this occasion I shall add, that I have often found Headaches cured by
the separated application of Spirit of Human Blood; which is likewise good in
Hysteric and Hypochondriacal Cases, and in fainting Fits; and if the smell of
it makes it too nauseous, that may be corrected according to the method already
laid down in this Chapter, to which I shall add, that a few drops of Oil of
Rhodium, being dissolved in Alcohol of Wine, if that be mixed with Spirit of
Human Blood, it will give it a very grateful and odoriferous smell.

And here I shall add, that Medicines made of Amber have been found successful
not only in Convulsions, and other Distempers of the Genus Nervosum, but the
Tincture of it in Spirit of Wine, has proved successful enough in Diseases
both of Men and Women. And this Tincture may not inconveniently or
unsuccessfully be added, to correct the Odor and increase the Virtues of
Spirit of Human Blood; and tho Oil of Amber will not mix readily with Spirit of
Wine, yet if they be shaken together and left to settle at leisure, though they
settle in distinct masses, yet the Spirit would even in the cold extract a high
and a yellow Tincture, little different from the Oil it self, which may be
mixed with the Spirit of Blood, till the smell of the Amber be predominant.

To what has been said of the external use of Spirit of Human Blood I shall
add, that if the Oil in these Mixtures should be too much predominant, it may
be easily separated by running it through a Tunnel, whose Orifice at the bottom
is formed so small and sharp, as to give way for the Spirit to run off first,
which may when thus separated be kept in a distinct Vessel. And since if the
Vinous Spirit be sufficiently rectified, there will by the Coagulation of the
Saline and Urinous Parts, be produced a kind of Salt, you may either pour the
Liquid part into another Vessel, and then use them separate, or else separate
the Salt by sublimation in a dry form; and Spirit of Human Blood thus separated
will have a fragrant brisk and piercing Odor. But,

To conclude, this Spirit is not only good in respect of the Virtues ascribed
to its scent, but it may be good likewise when used as a fomentation, as Spirit
of Sal-Armoniack has been effectual in removing the Pains of the Gout, and in
the Erisipelas. And since upon the account of its Alkalizate Nature it may be
good to correct Acidities, it may be for that purpose made use of both by
Physicians and Surgeons.

TITLE XVI. Of the Medicinal Virtues of Spirit of Human Blood inwardly used.
I Have been long apt to think, that the same peccant matter may produce
several Distempers as its effects are diversified, partly by its greater or
lesser quantities, as well as more or less active qualities, and partly by the
particular Natures, or Structures, and Scituations of the Parts that it
invades; which seems to be favored by the frequent Metastases of Morbifick
matter in several Distempers, since the same Acid or sharp Humors sometimes
occasion a Colic, sometimes after that a Palsy, at other times a Cough, a
flux of the Belly, an Opthalmia, a Violent Headache, Convulsions, etc. As the
peccant Humor falls upon this or that part, upon which account one or two
Medicines may be able to cure several Distempers, especially if endewed with
any variety of active Virtues; and upon these grounds I am inclined to believe,
that the Spirit of Human Blood may be a good Remedy in several internal
affections of the Body; and indeed Volatile Alkalies in general have been so
prosperously made use of in Physic, since the year 1656 as to invite several
Physicians to employ them instead of other Medicines, which clog and weaken the
Patient, and want several advantageous qualities, which may be found in
Volatile Alkalies.

And indeed Spirit of Human Blood mortifies Acid Salts, which occasion several
Diseases: It is likewise a great Resolvent, and fit to open Obstructions which
produce not a few Diseases; it is also Diaphoretick and Diuretic, and able to
discharge several noxious Salts, and to expel several Malignant and Contagious
Particles of matter. It resists Putrefaction and Coagulation; and gives a
briskness and Spirituousness to the Blood, which promotes free Circulation,
upon which account it is a good Cordial and an Antidote against some Poisons:
It is very friendly to the Genus Nervosum, and to cure its Distempers, and
Balsamic in some sort of Asthams, it neither causes great evacuations, nor
does it clog the Stomach; or is disadvantageous in any manifest qualities. And
it may likewise be very good in such cases as Spirit of Sal-Armoniack has been
found successful in. Helmont commends it in Epilepsies, which he says, it will
cure in Adult Persons: And I have known it cure an inveterate Consumptive
Cough, and a very bad Headache, which had a long time baffled very eminent
Physicians. But besides the Virtues it has when simply used, its Virtues may
be enobled and diversified by a long digestion, or frequent Cohobations of the
Spirit with the Oils, Salt or Phlegm of the same Concrete; or, by uniting it
with Acids, as Spirit of Nitre, or Vinegar; Verdigrease, Oil of Vitriol, etc.
either used in a Liquid form, or when reduced by evaporation into Crystals.

Or the Virtues of it may be enobled, by uniting our Spirit with Metalline
Solutions, as of Gold, Silver, or Mercury; and with Solutions of Minium made
with Spirit of Vinegar; by a Mixture of which Liquor and a slow evaporation of
them, I have obtained finely shaped Crystals.

Or, again either by uniting with it Sulphur opened with Salt of Tartar; or by
dissolving in it Metalline Bodies, as Copper, Zinke, and Iron. Or by adding
about a double weight of Alcohol of Wine; for these Liquors being shaken
together, will in a very great measure coagulate into a Salt, which will retain
a considerable degree of quickness and penetrancy. And why such Salts as these
should not be efficacious I see no reason, since such a kind of a Mixture, though
made with another Urinous Spirit has had extraordinary effects in Fevers. nor
is the Liquor this Salt leaves behind useless in Medicine when well dephlegmed.

But this Spirit may be rendered still more commodious, if impregnated with
essential Oils; and by that means several Oily Volatile Salts may be produced,
which may be useful in peculiar Distempers, as those Oils respect this or that
part in their Medicinal Virtues.

CHAP. X. An Appendix to the Memoirs for the Natural History of Human Blood:
Containing, first, particulars referable to the second Part of the foregoing
History.
EXPERIMENT I.
HAving caused twelve Ounces of dried Blood to be carefully distilled, the
Substances obtained from it, were of Volatile Salt and Spirit together five
Ounces; the Liquor poured off from the wet Salt being thirteen Drachms, fifty
four Grains, so that the Salt was three Ounces, two Drachms, and six Grains; of
fetid Oil there were two Ounces; of Caput Mortuum four Ounces, and two Drachms;
so that about six Drachms of the whole was consumed in the Operation. The Caput
Mortuum being calcined yielded but six Drachms and a half of ashes, the fixed
Oleaginous Parts being consumed by the accension; the color of the ashes was
reddish when cool, though in the fire they appeared white as soon as the Oil was
consumed, these ashes being turned into a Lixivium, afforded five scruples of
white fixed Salt, besides a little which got into the contiguous Sand, which
being recovered by Water, and reduced to a Salt made a scruple more. So that
there remained for the Terra Damnata fourteen Scruples and a half, which is a
good deal above twice the weight of the Salt; whence it appears, that the pure
fixed Salt is but between the fifty seventh and fifty eighth part of dried
Blood, and therefore probably amounts to no more than about the 170th part of
the mass of Blood; and the fixed Earth is to dried Blood as about nineteen and
about a half to one.

EXPERIMENT II.
A parcel of Blood weighing ten Ounces and seventy three Grains, being slowly
distilled to dryness in a Head and Body on a digestive Furnace, afforded of
Phlegmatic Liquor seven Ounces, two Drachms, and forty seven Grains; and of
Caput Mortuum or dry Substance two Ounces, two Drachms. This pulverable matter
being distilled in a Retort by degrees of fire yielded two Drachms, forty eight
Grains of Oil. The Spirit being poured off, the Salt weighed but forty eight
Grains, and the Salt being washed out with the distilled Water, we obtained
thence by Sublimation into the neck of a Glass-Egg one Dram, five Grains of
dry Salt. The Caput Mortuum weighed six Drachms, twelve Grains, which being
carefully calcined yielded two Scruples and four Grains of ashes; which were
red, and these being elixivated afforded eighteen Grains of Salt, besides the
remaining Earth, which is of a red color with an Eye of Purple,

Particulars referrable to the Primary Title of the Natural History of Human
Blood.

EXPERIMENT I.
Spirit of Vinegar put upon Blood, turned its red color of a dark or dirty
color.

EXPERIMENT II.
Juice of Limons poured upon the superficies of Blood, impaired its florid
color.

EXPERIMENT III.
Juice of Oranges changed Blood less than Limons.

EXPERIMENT IV.
The black part of clotted Blood exposed to the Air, presently became of a
pleasant and florid color.

EXPERIMENT V.
Spirit of Sal-Armoniack dropped upon black clotted Blood, presently rendered
it florid, but not so much as the open Air.

EXPERIMENT VI.
Fixed Alkalies or lixiviate Salts resolved per Deliquium, turned it red, but
not so florid as the Urinous Spirit.

EXPERIMENT VII.
The Juice of Scurvey Grass fresh drawn, inclined the black Surface of clotted
Blood to redishness.

EXPERIMENT VIII.
Blood being closed up with an eighth or fourth part of Spirit of Wine about
three years, was coagulated, but neither stank nor was it in the least
putrified.

EXPERIMENT IX.
A small piece of concreted Blood being left three days in Spirit of Wine, was
rendered moderately hard and friable throughout.

EXPERIMENT X.
Upon trial we found, that an Ounce of distilled Water would dissolve at least
two Drachms of Volatile Salt of Human Blood; and by the help of Heat it was
able to dissolve twenty five Grains more, nor did any of this Salt shoot into
Crystals upon its Refrigeration.

EXPERIMENT XI.
The aforementioned Solution being put into a Retort, to be drawn off with a
pretty quick heat, we obtained a distilled Liquor, that contained almost all
the Volatile Salt, except a little which escaped in a dry form; and this Liquor
being as strong as moderate Spirit of Human Blood, it may give us a hint, what
proportion of a Liquor to Salt may be sufficient for such a Spirit. And one
thing here may be worthy our notice, viz. That the Liquor which was too much
impregnated with Salt, having been exposed to the Air in a frosty Night, we
perceived at the bottom of the Glass a good deal of Volatile Salt shot into
Crystals, though the Crystals that were this way obtained were fine and clear,
and some of them larger than Spangles; yet being very numerous and sticking
together, we could not discover the shape of particular Grains, nor whether
they were all of the same shape, but diverse of them appeared to be flat thin
Plates, with fine rectilinear Angles, so that we conjectured if the whole
Plates could have been seen, their broadest Surface would have been found
Hexagonal, or of some Polygone figures very near of kin to that.

EXPERIMENT XII.
An Ounce of distilled Water was shut up in a Glass-Egg, with as much Salt as
could be dissolved in it, and exposed to congeal in a frosty Night; but the
Salt was neither congealed nor the Water, though afterward it was removed into a
frigorifick Mixture, which would perhaps have froze Beer, or Ale, or the weaker
sort of French Wine; yet we did not perceive the least Glaciation.

EXPERIMENT XIII.
Though Sea Salt dissolved in Water renders it less subject to be froze, yet
being joined with Ice or Snow, and externally applied, it conduces to the
freezing of it. Wherefore we mixed about a Scruple of Salt of Human Blood with
Ice, to try whether it would have the like effect, and accordinly we found,
that a slender Pipe of Water being immersed in it, the Water in the bottom of
the Pipe was froze.

EXPERIMENT XIV.
Some of the fibrous part of Human Blood, being exposed to the Air in an open
and shallow Glass in a frosty Night, the next Morning it was lightly frozen,
and the Surface of the Ice prettily figured with resemblances of Combs with
Teeth on both sides, not much unlike Sal-Armoniack coagulated in common Water.

And not here to mention what has been said, by some, of the Virtues of Human
Blood, I shall propose a couple of Medicines to be prepared from it, one of
which may perhaps have no inconsiderable effects: The first Medicine I
attempted to make, was by putting to Salt of Tartar Oil of Human Blood instead
of Oil of Turpentine, and by stirring them long together in the open Air, to
make such a saponary concretion as Matthew's Corector, which is esteemed and
employed with good success by some London Physicians. The other Medicine I
endeavored to make, was by uniting by long digestion the Salt, Spirit, and Oil
of Human Blood into a Mixture, which some Chemists call a Clyssus.

Particulars referrable to the third Part of the History.
EXPERIMENT I.
THE Blood of a young Man, when cool, having its Serum and fibrous Parts
separately weighed, the latter weighed about six Ounces, and the serous part
not many Drachms from that weight.

EXPERIMENT II.
The very ingenious Mr. Hook and my self, having often observed on the Surface
of frozen Urine, figures which much resemble Combs or Feathers; considering the
Affinity usually agreed on betwixt the Serum of Human Blood and Urine, we
exposed some of it, strained through a linen rag to separate the Grumous part,
to the Air, in a shallow Vessel several Nights consecutively, and observed,
that being froze, there appeared upon the Ice contiguous to the Air, certain
figures which did not ill resemble those of conglaciated Urine.

EXPERIMENT III
To try whether Serum as well as Urine, might not as well be made use of for
invisible Ink, we traced some Characters with it upon white Paper; and when
they were dried, we held the unwritten side over the flame of a Candle, keeping
it always stirring, that it might not take fire, upon which the Letters on the
upper side appeared of a dark color, though not of an Inky blackness.

Particulars referrable to the fourth Part of the History.
SINCE according to the several ways of distilling Human Blood, the Spirit of
Salt, etc. produced, may be considerably diversified; I distilled three
Portions of Human Blood, each with a different additament.

The first which was distilled with Quicklime, we shall subjoyn the following
account of, viz. Four Ounces of coagulated Blood, being mixed with an equal
proportion of Quicklime, we distilled them by degrees of fire in a Retort
placed in Sand, by which means we obtained a proportion of reddish Spirituous
Liquor, which seemed not very Phlegmatic, together with some Oil, the quantity
of which was but small, the rest being probably detained by the Lime, and a
small Portion of that little Oil that came over sunk in the Spirit, the rest
swiming upon it. The Spirit being set in a digestive Furnace in a small Head
and Body, to rectify with a gentle Heat, the Receiver was three or four times
removed; and we observed, that the first Spirit that came over was not near so
fetid, as that which ascends when it is distilled per se; and the like was
observed in the succeeding Portions, the Oil being detained behind by the
Quicklime; the rectified Spirit was clear and colorless, and had a taste much
stronger than its smell, and so strong that it made me think some Volatile
Alkalious Parts of the Quicklime were carried up with it, to be satisfied of
which we dropped some of it upon a Solution of Sublimate with fair Water; and
on the first contact we perceived a precipitate a little inclining to yellow,
as Quicklime in a greater quantity usually turned it: But afterward the
Precipitate appeared white, like that made with ordinary Volatile Liquors of an
Urinous Nature.

Some of this Spirit put into a Glass-Egg, afforded not any Volatile Salt in a
dry form, and the trial being continued, we found, that the Spirit by the
action of the fire lost its limpidness, and became muddy or troubled.

Another Portion of it being mixed with a highly rectified ardent Spirit, upon
their being kept all Night in the cold, no coagulation ensued, nor could we
perceive any, when it had been kept several hours in a moderate Heat. But the
Mixture acquired a yellow color, and let fall a pretty deal of darkish powder.

Some of this Spirit being mixed with good Spirit of Salt, they smoaked at
their first meeting, but produced neither bubbles or noise.

Another Portion being mixed with Oil of Vitriol, there was produced a great
smoke, and an intense degree of Heat without any visible Ebullition, or any
bubbles or noise, but the color of the Oil was heightened and grew almost red.

From whence it appears, that this Alkalizated Spirit of Blood is very
different from simple Spirit of Blood; but whether upon this account it becomes
a more violent, or a less safe Medicine, further Experience must discover.

EXPERIMENT II.
Two Ounces of Tartar calcined to whiteness by an equal weight of Nitre, being
distilled in a Retort in a Sand Furnace, with an equal weight of dried and
powdered Blood, it appeared that Quicklime acts on this occasion otherwise on
Blood than other Alkalies do; for whereas the Blood distilled with that yielded
a strong Spirit before rectification, and unaccompanyed with dry Salt; this
Mixture afforded us at the first Distillation a weaker Spirit, but so much
Volatile Salt with it as covered the whole internal Surface of the Receiver.
Besides there was a manifest difference in their Caput Mortuums: And though the
Spirit drawn from Quicklime did not ferment with Acids, yet this Salt upon an
affusion of Spirit of Salt would.

EXPERIMENT III.
An equal quantity of the powder of Human Blood and Oil of Vitriol being mixed
together, in a little time they grew warm; and then placing the Retort in a
Sand Furnace, by degrees of fire we obtained a Spirit, which was preceded by a
good deal of Phlegmatic Liquor of an odd Sulphurous smell, and very strong
and lasting. The Caput Mortuum seemed to be of a very compounded Nature. But
one thing observable in our Experiment was, that though Oil of Vitriol usually
exercises a fixative Power, on many Bodies wherewith it is mixed in
Distillation, yet this Experiment afforded us a pretty quantity of Volatile
matter in the form of a white Salt, but of an uncommon smell and taste.

EXPERIMENT IV.
We prepared an Aurum Fulminans, by precipitating a Solution of Gold made in
Aqua Regia with Spirit of Human Blood, and by dulcifying the precipitate with
common Water, and then drying it leisurely.

EXPERIMENT V.
Having immersed the Ball of a Weather-Glass in Spirit of Blood contained in a
wide mouthed Glass, we poured on some Spirit of Verdigrease, which made a
conflict with it and excited bubbles; there was likewise produced a degree of
warmth not insensible on the outside of the Glass; and the Liquor was raised in
the Thermoscope a considerable height, though when the conflict was over it began
moderately to subside again.

EXPERIMENT VI.
Having gradually mixed Spirit of Blood, with as much Spirit of Nitre as it
would work on it, they produced bubbles with a considerable noise, and when the
Liquors had settled in a cool place, it appeared, that an Oil had been separated
from it in this operation; since a red color was not only produced by it, but
the Surface of the Liquor was covered with such a film, as Liquors copiously
impregnated with Antimony or other sulphurous Bodies usually are. And when it
was looked upon with Eyes conveniently placed in reference to it and the Light,
it appeared to be adorned with vivid colors of a Rainbow, as Red, Yellow,
Blue, and Green; and that too in their natural order.

EXPERIMENT VII.
Spirit of Human Blood which had been kept twelve years, being when it was
looked upon not well stopped, it appeared to be a Spiritless Phlegm, but not of
a red florid color, and but little wasted.

EXPERIMENE VIII.
Spirit of Human Blood being exposed to the Air in a frosty Night, in which Oil
of Vitriol was froze, it was not in the least altered or coagulated by it, but
being put into a frigorifick Mixture, it was presently frozen.

EXPERIMENT IX.
A piece of black clotted Blood, being put into Spirit of Human Blood, it
became of a florid color, and retained that all Night.

EXPERIMENT X.
Spirit of Blood being poured upon powdered Blood, presently dissolved part of
it, and acquired a deep pleasant color. But Spirit of Wine being poured upon
another parcel, acquired not a Tincture, till urged with Heat; and then only a
yellow one; but common Water presently dissolved a pretty deal of another
parcel.

EXPERIMENT XI.
Spirit of Human Blood poured on lumps of Vitriol, dissolved them slowly
without a froth; but upon the powder the solution was quicker and with a froth.
And both the Solutions were of a more lovely blue than the Mineral it self; nor
was there a dark Precipitate as in a Mixture of ordinary Vitriol and Spirit of
Urine.

EXPERIMENT XII.
Spirit of Human Blood employed for an invisible Ink, is much better than Serum
of Blood.

EXPERIMENT XIII.
Having immersed the Ball of a Weather-Glass in distilled Water contained in a
wide mouthed Glass, upon an affusion of two or three spoonfuls of Spirit of
Human Blood, the tinged Spirit of Wine did presently subside in the Stem,
within a little, as I have observed it with Spirit of Urine. And here it may
not be amiss to take notice, that the reason why I employ distilled Water
instead of common Water or Pump Water, is, because it is not impregnated with
Salts, which may vary the success of the Experiment.

EXPERIMENT XIV.
Spirit of Blood being poured upon filings of Copper, and stopped up in a Glass
extracted a Ceruleous Tincture, which in a few days gradually growing fainter,
I opened the Glass upon which its Ceruleous color was renewed, and extended it
self downwards toward the bottom of the Vial, and so strong as to render the
Liquor almost Opacous. And though the Liquor was stopped up several days after,
yet it lost not its color.

EXPERIMENT XV.
Some of the same Spirit being poured upon Lapis Armenus, extracted from it a
lovely and a deep blue, almost like a Solution of filings of crude Copper in
the same Menstruum.

Postscript
To conclude this Chapter I shall add, that though I have laid down these notes
with what exactness was possible, yet I question not, but that the Blood of
several, and even of the same Animals is so different at different times, that
were they to be tried over again they would scarce have the same effects; yet
it will not be a just reason to discourage others in further Trials, since the
advantage natural knowledge may attain by it, will be a sufficient reward.

CHAP. XI. Of the Reconcileableness of Specific Medicines, to the Corpuscular
Philosophy.
Of specific Medicines.
BEfore I descend to show that the notion of Specific Medicines is agreeable to
specific Medicines, I shall first represent, that I am induced to believe that
there are such, by the common Observations of a great many learned Men and able
Physicians; and to favor this common Observation, viz. That there are such
Substances which have peculiar effects, which can be ascribed to no manifest
Qualities, I shall urge the effects of Poisons taken in a very inconsiderable
quantity. And I am told, that something that fell from a Spider into a Man's
Eye caused him to lose his sight, to which I shall add, that Spiders are
observed to kill flies, much sooner than cutting off their Heads, or running
them through with Pins will do it. To which instances we may add, that most
Poisons are cured by appropriated Antidotes; and as perfumes cause ill symtoms
in many Histerick Women, so the fumes of Feathers burnt relieve them. And I
have found that the smell of Spirit of Hartshorn or Sal-Armoniack, has
recovered People made sick by fragrant Odours. But beyond all other Arguments
is experience; for Galen tells us, That the ashes of a burnt Craw-Fish will
cure the biting of a mad Dog, and that their effects are much more
considerable, if to ten Parts of burnt Craw-Fish we add five of Gentian and one
of Frankincense. And Diascorides commends them against the same Disease that
the Pergamenian does. And though the stings of Scorpions usually produce very
acute Pains and formidable Symtoms, yet the mischief is easily remedied, either
by crushing the Body of the Scorpion upon the Hurt, or by anointing the Part
with Oil of Scorpions, though the Liquor appears not to have any sensible
Qualities, to which their Efficacy may be ascribed.

And to these Instances I might add, that Verginian Snake-weed cures the sting
of a rattle Snake, and the Jesuit's Powder is a specific in Agues. And though it
be argued against the Virtues of specific Medicines, that they are altered by
the ferment of the Stomach, and other strainers of different Textures, and that
a great deal is carried off by Excrements, or is assimilated and converted into
the Substance of our Bodies; yet to these things it may be answered, that not
only Ointments, Plasters, Periapta, etc. work upon the mass of Humors; but
even those Medicines which are allowed to work by manifest Qualities, perform
what they do upon the account of their Particles alterering, and differently
disposing the Humors of our Bodies, and in doing of that they are liable to
the same objections offered against specific Medicines. Besides, it is
observable that Rhubarb, will tinge the Urine of those that take a considerable
Dose. And there is a Fruit called prickled Pears in the English American
Colonies, which passes by Urine, so much unaltered, that the People think, when
strangers to it, that they piss Blood. And Elaterium so much impregnates the
Milk of a Nurse, that it will Purge the Child that takes it. And I remember
that in the confines of Savoy and Swizerland, when the Cattle fed on a Herb
called wild Garlic, the butter would sensibly taste of it. And in Ireland they
have a kind of Sea-Fowl which feed upon Fishes, which is so little altered, as
to make some question whether it be Flesh or Fish.

And though it be further urged against Specific Medicines, that so little is
dispersed through the habit of the Body, that it can have no considerable
effects; yet their Efficacy may answer for their smallness in quantity. For I
am told that the Negroes have a Poison, which though it work slow, is
nevertheless Mortal, and this they conceal under the Nails of their Fingers,
and drop into the Aliment of those they have spite to. And I know a Vegetable
Substance, half a Grain of which will be too violent a Purgative; and sometimes
Mortal: And though English Vipers are looked upon as no Poison, yet by the Wound
of a single Tooth I knew one who was taken with violent Vomitings. To which may
be added the terrible effects of Scorpions in the Island of Java. And we see
that several Women, otherwise strong and lusty, will fall into Swoons upon the
smell of Musk or Civet, though all the Effluvia that affect them, would not
amount to the hundredth part of a Grain; and by Effluvia, perhaps not more
plentiful these Symptoms may be again removed. And the Portions of Crocus
Metallorum in Wine, or of Quicksilver in Water, though small have very
considerable effects, so that when a Child who obstinately refused all
Medicines, drank small Beer impregnated with Mercury, he was much relieved in a
violent worm Fever.

That their Operations may be Mechanically solved, is proved in the following
Propositions.
Having said thus much of specific Medicines, I shall now proceed to lay down
some things in the following Propositions, to show that they be mechanically
explicated: But first I shall premise, that I would not have the Body to be
considered as a dull lump of matter, but as an admirably contrived Mechanical
Engine, consisting of Parts exquisitely contrived and adapted to their
particular Uses; and that the effects of Bodies upon it may be considered in
reference to that Disposition of their Parts.

This being premised there is no need to think, that all specificks act after
the same manner, or the same way, and sometimes the specific may operate by a
joint and in a compound way. But to proceed to the following Propositions.

PROP. I. Prop. I.
Sometimes the specific Medicine may cure by discussing or resolving the
Morbifick matter, and thereby making it fit for Expulsion by the greater common
shores of the Body, and the Pores of the Skin.
Thus the Blood impregnated with Medicinal Particles, may act upon gross
Humors which obstruct the Parts, and are not to be resolved without specific
Solvents, which by their figure and agitation may get in betwixt and separate
those Viscous Parts; so Blood impregnated with Sal-Armoniack dissolves Copper,
not by manifest Qualities; but by Virtue of the Shape, Bulk, Solidity, and
other Mechanical affections of its Parts, which concur to enable it to disjoyn
the Parts of a Body, of such a determinate Texture. And indeed there are not
only a great number of Menstruums very different from one another, but their
effects evidently appear not to depend upon manifest Qualities, since it
several times happens that a Menstruum less Acid, may dissolve this or that
Body, which a much stronger Menstruum will not work upon; so Water will
dissolve the white of an Egg, which Spirit of Wine will coagulate, and so will
Spirit of Salt and Oil of Tartar it self; and thus dephlegmed Spirit of Urine
will more readily dissolve filings of Copper than Spirit of Vitriol, and yet
the latter will speedily dissolve Crabs Eyes, though the other leaves them
untouched; so Quicksilver will dissolve Gold in the cold, though Aqua Fortis
assisted by Heat leaves it untouched; yet Aqua Fortis will dissolve Iron, and
Quicksilver will not. And Brimstone will be dissolved by common Oil, though not
by Aqua Fortis. And I know a Liquor of which one may safely drink a Wine Glass
full, though it will have such an effect upon Stones and Metals as can scarce be
matched.

And if specific Medicines may act upon Humors in the Body, after the manner
of Menstruums, we may easily guess why they have peculiar Virtues, viz. By
reason of their aptness to work upon peculiarly disposed Bodies, so, as I have
elsewhere noted, Aqua Fortis will not work upon Silver if too strong, till
diluted with Water.

And as the dissolution of a Body may partly depend in its disposition, to be
acted on by such a Menstruum, from thence may be deduced a reason, why a
Medicine which has good effects in one Disease may have but indifferent ones
in others; for tho pure Spirit of Wine will easily dissolve Gumm, Guajacum, and
that Rosinous matter lodged in the Pores of the Wood, yet the same Menstruum
will not work upon the Wood it self. And if so, no wonder that those Medicines
which cure one Distemper in one Person, will not cure it in another, since a
Variation in the Texture of the Morbifick matter, is enough to vary the effects
of the Medicines. And that a slight alteration of Texture varies the effects of
a Menstruum appears, since, though Spirit of Nitre or Salt separate will each
dissolve Copper; and though the Spirit of Nitre will dissolve Silver, yet if
Spirit of Salt be added to it, it soon loses that Quality.

And here, though some object against specific Medicines, that since they rove
up and down in the Blood, they cannot act well on particular Humors, yet if we
suppose the Medicines act by impregnating the Blood, and that they turn it into
a kind of Menstruum, it is possible that both the Menstruums may be
appropriated to the peccant Humor, so as to resolve it more easily than any
other Humor of the Body. As if you take some Bone ashes, Crocus Martis,
Saw-dust, Powdered Sea Salt, and filings of Gold, and mix them together, common
Water will dissolve the Salt and leave the others untouched, and Quicksilver
will alone dissolve the Gold: And those that work in Spanish Gold Mines tell
us, that Quicksilver poured upon powdered Ore of Gold and Copper mixed, it
will scarce meddle with the latter, till the former is licked up.

And from what has been said, we may be furnished with a reason of the effects
of Periapta Amulets and Appensa, especially if we consider what has already
been delivered of the Effluviums of Bodies, and the Porosity of Animal Bodies;
and though these Effluvia be very small in quantity, yet their effects may be
more considerable, in as much as they are neither altered nor consumed, by
previous digestions, and circulating through Parts, in which they might be in a
great measure dispersed, and carried off a-long with the Excrements.

PROP. II. Sometimes a specific Medicine may mortify the over Acid, or other
immoderate Particles, that infect the mass of Blood, and destroy their
Coagulatory or other Effects.
Though I believe not that all Distempers are, yet I question not but that a
great many are caused either by Acids, or their ill effects or Productions; and
which may be cured by specific Medicines two ways, viz. either by mortifying
them by a positive Hostility, such as Alkalizate Salts, whether fixed as the
lixiviate Salts of Plants, or Volatile, as those of Urine, etc. Or, by taking
off or blunting their edges; as a Knife may lose its power of cutting, by
putting it in a sheath, or sticking something upon the edge; for the edges of
an Acid may be taken off, as well by being lodged in a Porous Alkaly, as by
having their edges broken off; and thus it is that Minium takes off the Acidity
of Vinegar; Chalk takes off the edge of Aqua Fortis, and Lapis Calaminaris
lessens the Acidity of Spirit of Salt and Spirit of Nitre; and that Acids are
rather sheathed than altered by these Bodies, I am apt to believe, because as
Glauber tells us, they may by a strong fire be drawn out of Lapis Calaminaris
much stronger and more dephlegmed than before.

And though it may be urged by those that plead against specific Medicines, that
they act by a manifest Quality, viz. their Alkalious Nature, or their Acid; yet
there is so great a variety betwixt Acid and Alkalious Medicines themselves,
that I am persuaded they perform a great deal upon the account of something
else, besides their Acid or Alkalious Nature, since Aqua Fortis will not
dissolve God though it will Silver, but if it be altered by an addition of Spirit
of Salt, it will dissolve Gold and not Silver. And a different Modification may
not only make a difference betwixt Acids, but a contrariety; since Spirit of
Salt will precipitate Silver, which Aqua Fortis has dissolved: And Spirit of
Nitre will precipitate out of Butter of Antimony, an Antimonial powder with a
considerable Conflict and Effervescence; yet this Butter of Antimony is so
highly Acid, that a little quantity of it put into a little Water makes it so
sower, that many Chemists call it Acetum Philosophorum. And as there are
several kinds of Acids and of Alkalies too, so every Alkaly will not mortify
the same Acid; for though Chalk will precipitate a Solution of Copper in Aqua
Fortis, yet a Volatile Alkaly will not. And indeed when I consider what
difference there naturally is betwixt Acids, it is not unreasonable to expect,
that there may be Acid Humors produced in the Body utterly unknown to us, and
which may require a specific Alkaly to correct them, as it is observed, that
though neither Spirit of Vinegar, nor Spirit of Salt, nor Oil of Vitriol, will
dissolve a Calculus Humanus, yet Spirit of Nitre will, and by that means loses
its Corrosiveness.

And to what has been said, I shall add, that I am of opinion that particular
Acids may be the occasion of Distempers, which they are by some rather taken to
be Remedies; for though Acids are looked upon to be of an incisive Nature, and
though in some cases I am willing to allow them those Virtues; yet I believe that
Obstructions and the Diseases depending therein, are caused by Acids
coagulating, some fluids disposed to be thickened by them; which might be
exemplified by the Coagulation I have made of some Acid Salts, as Spirit of
Salt, of the white of an Egg, which by being beaten is reduced to an Aqueous
consistence: And Milk will be coagulated not only by Spirit of Salt, but Rennet
and Juice of Limons, and it has been found by experience, that some Acids
transmitted into the mass of Blood, have coagulated it in living Animals.

But though I believe a great many Distempers are occasioned by Acids, yet I
conceive some are occasioned by Acid Salts uniting with other Saline Bodies; as
Spirit of Salt, and Spirit of Urine produce a Sal-Armoniack. And Spirit of
Nitre with Salt of Tartar dissolved in common Water will coagulate with it into
Saltpeter; and the same Spirit of Nitre with Spirit of Urine will produce a
very fusible Salt, different from either of the Ingredients; and Oil of Vitriol
or Oil of Tartar per Deliquium will produce Tartarum Vitriolatum; in which both
the Acidity and Alkaliousness of the Ingredients are much infringed, the Body
resulting from the composition being different from both the Ingredidients: And
if besides these instances we consider how many different Substances may be
produced by Nature, I am apt to believe, that specific Qualities are requisite
to alter or destroy them, in the Medicines made use of for that purpose.

And to what has been said, I shall further add, that I have mixed two Liquors
together neither of which were Acid or Alkalious, and yet the resulting Body
was a consistent Coagulum. And I have prepared a certain Liquor, which upon the
affusion of Spirit of Urine will be turned into a Gelly. And the like I have
produced without the help of either an Acid or an Alkaly. And I have had a
Substance prepared without the help of a Volatile Alkaly, which would in a
trice coagulate highly rectified Spirit of Wine; and as Spirit of Salt will
coagulate the white of an Egg, so will dephlegmed Spirit of Wine; so that an
Animal Substance may be coagulated without an Acid.

PROP. III. Sometimes a Specific Medicine may help the Patient, Prop. III.
by Precipitating the peccant matter out of his Blood, or the other Liquors of
the Body in which it harbors.
Though Precipitation be generally a Consequent of the Mortification of Acids or
Alkalies, by Corpuscles of a contrary Quality, yet some Acids and Alkalies may
be mixed without a precipitation of any thing; and several Precipitations may
be caused without any such manifest Hostility. As in certain mixtures of Spirit
of Sal-Armoniac made with Salt of Tartar or Potashes, and Spirit of Nitre, or
Aqua Fortis; and also when Spirit of Urine and Salt, are mixed in a certain
proportion, make Sal Ammoniac, which the Phlegm of those Liquors will keep
swimming; and that there may be Precipitations without any appearance of
contrariety, is evident, when Silver being dissolved in Aquafortis, the
Menstruum is diluted with Thirty or Forty Parts of Distilled Water; for if
clean Plates of Copper be immersed in the Solution, the Metal will be slowly
precipitated out of it, in the form, not of a Calx, but pure shining Scales of
Silver; and if you rub Dantzick Vitriol upon the Blade of a Knife well wetted
with Water, the Steel in a trice will be overlaid with a reddish substance,
which by its Color and Signs appears manifestly cupreous. And here I shall
add, that there are in Nature, Precipitants which silently precipitate some
Bodies dissolved in Urinous Menstruums.

And though against the Use of Precipitating Medicines, it may be urged, that the
Heterogenous Particles precipitated, may be of dangerous consequence, yet they
may be less pernicious than those hostile Particles that produce the Disease.
And further, they may not be so big, but that it is possible for them to be
carried out of the mass of Blood, since those Mineral Substances dissolved in
Tunbridge Waters, and the Sulphurous ones in the Bath, chiefly perform their
effects by being dispersed through, and acting on the several Parts of the Body.

But moreover it is possible Precipitations may be made in the mass of Blood,
without the Medicine getting into it, which is observed in the use of Chalybeat
Medicines; where were it urged, that they pass through the Pores of the Guts,
then there is no reason why there are not Pores in the Body large enough to
carry off the Precipitated Parts of the mass of Blood.

And not only Sennertus makes use of Medicines in Fevers, to Precipitate the
febrile matter, but Kergerus very solemnly declares that he cured thousands
only by a Precipitating Medicine.

And that Precipitating may be of use in Physic, I am the more inclined to
believe, if a Putrefaction of Humors be rightly assigned as the cause of some
Distempers; because I know a Liquor which being dropped into stinking Water,
Precipitated a light Feculency out of it, upon which the Liquor was wholly
freed from its stink, nor could I perceive that the Feculency it self had any;
and what was more remarkable was, that the taste of this Precipitant was
neither Bitter, Acid, Urinous or Lixiviate.

PROP. IV. Sometimes the Specific Remedy may work by peculiarly strengthening
and cherishing the Heart; the part affected, or both.
That a Medicine may have peculiar effects on this or that Part, I am inclined
to believe for the following reasons. First, because the several Parts of the
Body are of differently framed, and have different Humors lodged in them; and
consequently the Parts of a Medicine dispersed through the Body, may be more
aptly appropriated to be received or detained in those Parts; and the Parts
being thus strengthened may be more able to resist the influence of Morbifick
Humors, by which means they are thrown upon more ignoble Parts, for which
reason, some Persons are seized with the Gout; and I know a Gentleman, who though
he could drink Wine without much hurt, yet Brandy would cause him to have a
severe Toothache.

But to illustrate what I was saying, of the disposition of some Parts of
Medicines to associate themselves with those Parts they seem friendly to; I
shall add, that in nourishing Children, Milk does not only afford grosser
Faeces, and various other Excrements as Urine, Mucous, and a Humor by
insensible Transpiration, but Particles which upon their being assimilated
increase the bulk of the Body; and whereas it is observed, that some Cartilages
in Children acquire a Bony hardness in older Persons, this change cannot be
supposed to be the bare effect of Exsiccation.

And as Specific Medicines may confirm the strength of a Part, so they may
conduce to the restoreing of strength to the weak Part, by removing Distempered
Humors; and this they may do, not only by altering the whole mass of Blood,
but their peculiar disposition to act on the Distempered Humor And as the
Morbifick matter is diversified, according the disposition of the part it is
lodged in, so must the Medicine be Specifically appropriated. And as they
contribute to the removal of a Distempered Humor, so consequently they will to
the strengthening of the fibers of those Parts; either by giving them a
firmness; or by correcting their immoderate Heat or Cold; or correcting the
Humors lodged in the Pores of the Part, or by taking away the Convulsive or
inordinate motions of the Parts; or by relaxing, or otherwise altering their
Pores, or causing the matter lodged there to be expelled by a gentle or violent
agitation; as when Cantharides cause an Excretion of Urine, or Gravel, by
irritating the fibers of the Bladder: And the effects of this Medicine alone
are sufficient to prove, that there may be Specific Medicines which chiefly
respect particular Parts; since Cantharides pass through the Body, without
affecting any other part but the Bladder.

And though at the first a Medicine may chiefly respect a particular part,
without altering the Blood, yet when once it has caused a change in it, the
Blood it self, as it successively circulates through that Part, may in some
measure act Specifically upon it. And though a Medicine may communicate to the
Blood Particles of matter so modified, that they may not immediately relieve
the Part, by either strengthening it, or causing the Distempered matter to be
carried off by a gentle irritation, yet it may do it by both these ways, as
when Rhubarb is taken, it not only purges the Liver of Choler, but strengthens
the Tone of the Parts by its astringency. And Osteocalla is observed to be a
Specific, by promoteing the Generation of a Callus, to cement broken Bones.

PROP. V. Sometimes a Specific Medicine may act, Prop. V.
by producing in the mass of Blood such a disposition, as may enable Nature, by
correcting, expelling, or other fit ways, to surmount the Morbifick matter, or
other cause of the Disease.
And this is agreeable enough with what most Moderns hold, viz. That Distempers
chiefly depend upon the Temper and ill Constitution of the Humors. And a
change in the Humors may be effected.

By furnishing the Blood with some sort of active Corpuscles, which may agitate
and ferment it, and to quicken the Circulation of the Blood. Upon which
occasion it may be necessary to advertise, That the Medicines usually made use
of for that purpose being very hot; there are several Constitutions of
Patients, and several other Circucumstances, upon which account they do more
harm by their Heat, than good by their Spirituousness; besides the sluggishness
and want of fermentation in the Blood, may proceed from causes which this sort
of Medicine will not correct; for I have tried, that a Vinous Spirit would not
dissolve Blood which was a little dried, nor draw a Tincture from it, though an
Urinous Spirit presently did; so that a Specific Medicine in such a case may
perform what is intended, without the inconveniences which other Medicines are
liable to: For we know that experienced Physicians, call some Medicines cold
Cordials, as Sorrel, which has an Acid taste; and it is possible sometimes
those Humors whch make the Blood sluggish may not be of a cold, but a hot
Nature, in which cases hot Remedies may rather increase than diminish their ill
effects; as if the white of an Egg be reduced to Water by beating, Spirit of
Wine will instead of diminishing increase its Viscidity. And I once prepared a
Vegetable Substance, which upon an addition of Wine became much more Viscous
than before.

But to proceed, a Specific Medicine may alter the mass of Blood, by
contributing to its Tenacity, without respect to its Fermentation; for if the
Blood be too thick, it cannot readily pass through the small Capillary Vessels,
by which Circulation is in a great means retarded; as on the other Hand, if it
be too thin, it gets out of the Capillary Vessels, and first Stagnates, and
then Putrifies; but these ill consequences may be prevented, by such Medicines
as either on the one Hand divide the Parts of the Blood, and make them more
minute, or on the other such as associate them, and stick them together.

Another way by which a Specific Medicine may rectify the state of the Blood,
is, by working so upon the Heart, as to make it transmit Blood more
advantageously; and that either by corroborating its fibers, or dissolving some
ill distempered matter, that obstructs the Contraction of it; and that a small
alteration in the Constitution of the Heart, may do much in respect of the
Circulation of the Blood, will be easily granted by any one, that does but
consider what insensible Agents actuate it. And that the almost insensible
Obstruction of Circulation produces considerable effects in the Body is
evident, from the effects of Sorrow, which presently puts the whole Body out of
order; and also from the effects of Joy or shame, both of which promote the
Circulation of the Blood; and it has been observed, that Joy has had so
sudden and considerable an effect, as to take off the sharpness of Hunger; and
that Medicines may affect the Heart after the same manner, I am inclined to
believe; especially since I knew a Lady, who was so affected upon the smell of
perfumed Gloves, that the Blood flew into her Face, and put such a color into
it as if she had blushed. And if the state of the Blood may be thus altered, it
may much contribute to the removal of some very troublesome Distemper, induced
for want of a due Circulation of the Blood.

PROP. VI. Sometimes a Specific Remedy may unite with the peccant matter, and
compose a Quid Nutrum, which may be less offensive to Nature, though not so
easily expelled.
And this seems to me to be the most genuine effects of a Specific Medicine;
and when peccant Acids are lodged in the Spleen, or any other part less sapid,
Alkalies may unite with them, without creating any manifest disturbance; and
form a harmless Liquor; as Aqua Fortis, by being digested and distilled with a
very ardent Spirit, loses its corrosive Acidity and ill scent, and becomes a
harmless, sweet, and fragrant Liquor; and I knew one who relieved a Nephritick
Patient, with the use of inflamable Spirits. And I have elsewhere shown, that
Spirit of Wine acts not upon all Acids uniformly, but variously, according to
the Nature and proportion of the Acid. And Spirit of Wine mixed with rectified
Spirit of Urine, will in a great measure take off the corroding Qualities of
it, and composes a Salt which is weaker than the Spirit, and being sublimed or
reduced to a Liquor, becomes a good Medicine; and with a little skill will make
a very good Menstruum in several Chemical Experiments.

A few Grains of Glass of Antimony taken inwardly, will both Vomit and Purge,
but if instead of Spirit of Wine we make use of that of Vinegar, and when by
digestion the Liquor is sufficiently impregnated, it be abstracted, Antimonial
and Acetous Corpuscles will emerge, several Grains of which may be taken
without either Vomiting or Purging; from whence it appears, that all Correctors
are not to be esteemed Alkalies, since Acids themselves prove to be Correctors
too. And after a like manner not improbably, the Poisons of Animals and others
may be subdued.

And it is not improbable, that by a Combination of a Distempered Humor with a
Medicine a Salutiferous Liquor may be formed, and though sometimes a Medicine is
altered before it comes to the part affected, yet that alteration may render it
Medicinal: An instance of the former we have in the Preparation of Mercurius
Dulcis, where by uniting Poison with Quicksilver, an Efficacious Medicines is
made; and an Illustration of the latter may be brought from that Odor which it
gives to the Urine of the Person who takes it, different from any smell it had
of it self before.

And though against what has been been said, for Specific Medicines some may
offer that there are some which are only externally applied; yet from what has
been said, of the Porosity of Bodies and the effects of Effluvia, it will
easily appear how they may influence the Body, and alter the Humors which
circulate in it; and to what is there offered we may reasonably add, the ill
effects of Amulets of Arsenick mentioned by Diemerbreck, and the effects of
Cantharides upon some Persons who only wore them in their Pockets.

And indeed there are a great many Medicines externally Specificks, which one
would not take to be so, as Camphire, which internally is very hot and good in
some Malignant Fevers, yet outwardly it is used to take off Heat Pimples in the
Face, and in cooling Ointments, and against Burns; and Spirit of Wine, tho very
hot when internally used, yet it, if presently applied, takes out the fire of
Burns. And so mild a Body as Bread, if chewed and outwardly applied, has
considerable Virtues in external affections. And I have several times eaten a
thing without any such effect, which a Physician told me externally applied
would Purge Children, being neither offensive in color, smell or Gripeing.

And to these instances I shall add, That Galen tells us, that an Epileptick
Boy was free from such Fits, as long as he wore only Piony Root as an Appensum.
And I knew one who was Paralitick, that was suddenly relieved in violent
Cramps, only by handling the Tooth of a River-Horse; and I as well as others
have been relieved in the Cramp, by putting a Ring made of an Elks Hoof upon my
finger. And I knew another cured of an Incontinentia Vrinae, by the sole use of
an Appensum. And a Lady had a Scrophulous Tumor dispelled, only by successively
applying the Body of a dead Man to the part affected, till the cold sensibly
penetrated into it. And I my self had not only a violent Haemorrhage speedily
stopped, by holding moss of a dead Man's Skull in my hand; but a Gentleman told
me, that if when he was let Blood he held it in his hand, no Blood would flow
out till he laid it aside. And another told me, that he had been freed from a
Palpitation of his Heart, which usually fell upon him after a few hours sleep
with great terror, only by wearing smooth and flat Cornelians in a bag over the
pit of his Stomach.

Galen tells us, That Jaspers worn after the same manner are good for the
Stomach; and Monardes tells us, that the Bleeding of the Hemorrhoids have been
stopped, by wearing a Ring made of a Boodstone upon the fingers. And not only
Boethius and Johannes de Laet commends Lapis Nephriticus, but the experienced
Monardes and others. And Untzerus tells us, that by wearing this Stone some
Parts of the Stone were made so minute as to be expelled out at the Eyes: And
that one that had a Catarrh was Purged fourteen times in one day by wearing of
it; and it had the like effect, though not so strongly upon another. But,

To conclude this Discourse, I shall here advertise the Reader, that though I
have laid down several ways by which Specific Medicines might operate, yet I
think not those always singly effectual, but that sometimes they jointly
contribute to the producing of the effect; without enlarging upon this account
I shall only subjoyn, that I hope from what has been already delivered it may
appear, that the Doctrine of Specific Medicines is not irreconcilable to the
Principles of the Corpuscular Philosophy.

CHAP. XII. A short account of Ambergrease communicated in the Transactions of
October 6. 1673.
I Received the following account from one of the Committee of the East India
Company. Ambergrease is not the Scum or Excrement of the Whale, etc. but issues
out of the Root of a Tree, which always shoots out its Roots toward the Sea,
seeking the warmth of it, thereby to deliver the fattest Gum that comes out of
it. Which Tree otherwise by its copious fatness might be burnt and destroyed.
Wherever it is shot into the Sea, it is very tough, and can scarce be loosened
from the Root, except by its own Weight or the Motion of the Sea.

If you Plant the Trees, where the stream sets to the shore, it will cast it up
to great advantage. March 1. 1672. in Batavia Journal, Advice From, etc.



FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
THE Works of the Honorable Robert Boil Esquire Vol. 1st. and 2d. Sold by J.
Phillips at the Kings-Arms, and J. Tailor at the Ship in St. Paul's Churchyard.

The Table.
A
AIR not the Primum Frigidum. Page 103 Of the Air's Temper. p. 107 The Doctrine
of Antiperistasis examined. p. 145 Of the Pressure of the Airs Spring on Bodies
under Water. p. 268, 271 Of the ^tmospheres of Consistent Solids. p. 412 Of
Ambergrease. p. 551
B
To preserve Birds, etc. p. 353 Of the Bladders of Air in Fishes. Ibid. The
natural History of Human Blood. p. 459 Of the Color of Human Blood. p. 460
516. Of its Taste. Ibid. Of its Odor. Ibid. Of its Heat. Ibid. Of its
Inflamability. Ibid. Of the Acid Parts naturally mixed with Human Blood. p. 461
Of its Specific Gravity. Ibid. Of the Specific Gravity of the Consistent
part. p. 462 Of the Consistence of Human Blood. Ibid. Of its Disposition to
Concretion. Ibid. What Liquors or Salts Coagulate it. Ibid. What hinder its
Coagulation. Ibid. What Liquors preserve it, etc. Ibid. Of the Volatile Salt of
Human Blood. Ibid. Of the Phlegm and Oils of Human Blood. p. 465 Of the fixed
Salt of Human Blood. p. 467 Of its Terra Damnata. p. 468 What substances may be
Chymically obtained from it. Ibid.
C
Of the Mechanical Production of Cold p. 1, 189 Cold produced by a Solution of
Sal-Armoniack. p. 2 -- by a Mixture of Spirit of Salt and Urine. p. 3 -- by
Spirit of Rock Allom. Ibid. -- by oil of Vitriol and Sal-Armoniack. p. 4.
Potential Coldness Mechanically explained. p. 5 Degrees of Cold neither to be
judged of by our Sensory nor Weather-Glasses. p. 11 Of the degrees of Coldness
in several Bodies. p. 48 Of the Circumscription of the Sphere of activity of
Cold. p. 53, 85 Of the Preservation of Bodies by Cold p. 55 Of the Contraction
of Liquors by Cold. p. 66 Of the Expansive force of Congelation. p. 83 What
Mediums Cold may be diffused through. p. 88 Of the strange effects of Cold. p.
120 Promiscuous Experiments concerning Cold. p. 129 Mr. Hobbes's Doctrine of
Cold examined. p. 158 Of the Positive and Privative Nature of Cold. p. 180
D
Observations about Diamonds and other shining Bodies. p. 138, 139, 141.
E
What the success of Experiments depends on. p. 9 The Earth not the Primum
Frigidum. p. 100 Earth the Summum Frigidum. p. 102 Experiments about
Explosions. p. 232 Of the strange Subtlety of Effluviums. p. 415 Of their
Efficacy. p. 424 Of their determinate Nature. p. 431
F
Of Bodies capable of Freezing others. p. 38 Of Bodies disposed to be Frozen.
p. 42. Of Bodies not disposed to be Frozen. p. 45 The effects of Frost on Solid
Bodies. p. 123 Several Experiments about Freezing. p. 164 Fire and Flame made
Ponderable. p. 205, 206, 210. Of the Relation betwixt Flame and Air. p. 218,
220, 223. Flame preserved under Water. p. 225 Of the Propagation of Flame in
Vacuo. p. 226, 227 Of the Relation betwixt Air and the Flamma Vitalis of
Animals. p. 229
G
The effects of Gunpowder dissolved in Water. p. 4. Of the Perviousness of
Glass. p. 213 A comminution of Gold into Powder. p. 363 Of the Nature of
Granates. Ibid. Of the Origin of Gems. p. 380 Of the Virtues of Gems. p. 397
H
Heat produced by a Mixture of Saltpeter and oil of Vitriol. p. 4 Of the
Mechanical production of Heat. p. 191 Hydrostatical Paradoxes made out. p. 279
A new Hydrostatical Instrument, and its uses proposed. p. 311 Observations
about Hurricanes. p. 365
I
Of the Levity of Ice and its cause. p. 68 Observations and Experiments
concerning Ice. p. 91 What Liquors soonest dissolve Ice and Snow. p. 96 The
Qualities of Ice. p. 172
L
The Expansion and Contraction of Liquors measured. p. 75 Of the Relation
betwixt Light and Air. Of the Levity of Bodies under Water. p. 265 A self
moving Liquor. p. 351 A Preparation of Liquid Laudanum described. p. 354
M
Of Mercury growing hot with Gold. p. 203 Of the growth and increase of Metals.
p. 318 Medicina Hydrostatica. p. 329 The weight of several Bodies weighed in
Air and Water. p. 346 Passages relating to the Art of Medicine. p. 355 Of
Specific Medicines. p. 528 Their operations Mechanically solved. p. 531 That
by their uniting with a Distempered Humor, a third Body may be produced not so
offensive to Nature. p. 547
N
Nitre not the Grand Efficient of Cold. p. 104 Of the effects of Nitre in
Freezing. p. 131 Of the Aerial Noctiluca. p. 245 Of the Reason of Noctilucas.
p. 247 Of the Icy Noctiluca. p. 255 Of the Subtlety of its Parts. p. 259
O
Oly of Vitriol and Sal-Armoniack mixed together. p. 8 A Hydrostatical way of
estimating Ores. p. 321
P
Of the Primum Frigidum. p. 99 A Chemical Analysis of Pearls. p. 370 Of the
Porosity of Bodies. p. 440 Of the Porosity of Animal Bodies. p. 450 The effects
of Putrefaction and Fermentation on Human Blood. p. 485
R
What Refrigeration depends on. p. 6 Strange Reports. p. 373
S
Of the different Pressure of Solids and Fluids. p. 272 Of the Serum of Human
Blood. p. 474 Of the Spirit of Human Blood. p. 483 Spirit of Human Blood what.
p. 487 Of what Classis of Saline Bodies it is of p. 488 Whether different from
Spirit of Urine, etc. p. 490 Of its proportion to the Substance it is drawn
from. p. 491 Of its Consistence and Specific Gravity. p. 492 Of its Odor,
Taste, and Color. p. 494 Of its dissolving power. p. 495 Of the Coagulating
power of Spirit of Human Blood. p. 499 Of its Precipitating power. p. 500 Of
its affinity with some Chemical Oils, etc. p. 501 Of the Relation betwixt
Spirit of Human Blood and Air. p. 504 Of its Hostility with Acids, etc. p. 506
Of its Medicinal Virtues. p. 508, 511
T
The effects of a Mixture of Salt of Tartar and Water. p. 193 What Tinctures
may be drawn with Spirit of Human Blood. p. 497
V
Titles for the Natural History of Human Urine. p. 472
W
Of the ascent of Water in Weather-Glasses. p. 30 Of the Expansion of Water and
other Freezing Liquors. p. 62, 187 Of the Expansive force of Freezing Water. p.
79 Water not the Primum Frigidum. p. 702 The weight of Bodies froze and
unfroze. p. 126 Whether ^ot Water freezes sooner than Cold. p. 134 Of the
weight of Water in Water. p. 277
FINIS.

