A SERMON Preached in the Parish Church of St. Swithin, London, March 10th
1694/5. Upon the Much Lamented Death Of our Most Gracious Queen. By THO.
BOWBER. M. A. Formerly of Wadham College Oxon.

LONDON: Printed for William Rogers, at the Sun over against St. Dunstan's
Church in Fleetstreet. 1695.

To the Right Honorable Sir John Summers, Knight. Lord Keeper of the Great SEAL of
ENGLAND, and one of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.
My Lord,
IT needs not create Wonder in any, to find your Lordships great Name in the
Front of this Sermon, who will but consider the Faithful Service you did, and
the great veneration you had for that Excellent Princess, of whom (in Mournful
Accents) it speaks. The Performance, how mean soever, is the natural product of
just Grief and Sorrow for the Common Loss of us all, and therefore needs not
fear a favorable acceptance from your Honor. But my Lord, there is another
Reason, that entitles this Dedication to your Lordship: I must always
gratefully remember a singular instance of your Favor and Kindness to me, and
I thought I could not better express my Gratitude, than by making a public
Acknowledgment thereof. The Discourse, I here present your Lordship with, has
nothing to recommmend it, but Truth and Plainness: Astonishing Grief, such as
ours, slights and disdains the mean and useless Ornaments of empty Rhetoric:
My chief Aim and Design in Preaching it, was to make Men better; to which Pious
end, they having so great an Example set before them for their imitation, I
hope, it may conduce, now, in Submission to the importunities of several (some
of which for their Piety and Friendship had great influence over me) it appears
in public. That God Almighty may long continue your Lordship the Delight of
this Kingdom, for the Impartial distribution of Justice, and the Reformation of
the Abuses and Corruptions of the late Times, is the most sincere and hearty
prayer of, My Lord,

Your Lordships most Humble, Devoted, and Obliged Servant THO. BOWBER.

2 Chronicles. XXXV. 24. The latter part of the Verse. And all Judah and Jerusalem
Mourned for Josiah.


MAN, tho formed in respect of his Body of Corruptible Principles, yet these
did the Almighty so equally Poise, so harmoniously Attemper, that the Divine
Workmanship, had it not dashed itself in pieces, might have been for ever free
from Corruption. For in so blissful a Condition God Created Man, with such
light of Understanding, holiness of Will, Affections so Regular, and with such
Strength and Ability to have withstood the Temptations of the Serpent, that he
might not only have seated himself in Immortality, but have conveyed it down to
his Posterity. But aspiring to a more high and exalted degree of Happiness,
than the all-wise God had thought fit to place him in, he fell from his
Original Excellency, and Forfeited his Incorruptibility. That Decree Genesis 2. v.
17. In the day thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely dye, took then
immediately Life and Vigor, and an universal Mortality came into the World;
every one became obnoxious to Death, and all past Generations are but Monuments
of its Reign and Triumph: The Young Dye with the Old, the Rich with the Poor,
the Wise with the Foolish, Good Josiah as well as Wicked Ahab. Could Goodness
or Greatness, Youth or Beauty, or any other Human Excellency, have been any
security against Death, our most Incomparable Princess had still Sat upon that
Throne, which She sola tely Adorned with Her Royal Presence; but to our
unspeakable Grief, and the Astonishment of all round about us, She was quickly
snatched away by Death, and no doubt in Mercy, as good Josiah was, that her Eyes
might not see the Evil, which (we know not how soon) may befall us, without a
speedy Reformation. Her Prayers doubtless, as well as Josiah's, had a mighty
Energy in them to turn away the fierce Anger of God, and to incline Him to
Mercy: Yet whatever Benefit we we might reap from them in Her Lifetime, we
were soon Deprived of Her, and that in a time when we thought Happiness at
Hand, and our selves Embracing it. A Lovely Scene of Affairs had but just
presented itself, with a very Charming Aspect; a Check was given to our Enemies
abroad, the King (to the great Rejoicing of His Royal Consort and People)
returned home in Safety, and a Loyal Parliament Assembled, ready and prepared
to Execute whatever might truly tend to the Honor of the Nation, and the
Interest of Church and State; so that the Hearts of all good Men did
exceedingly Rejoice, and they already anticipated that Happiness, which they
expected (without interruption) to Enjoy. This was the goodly posture of
Affairs, when we were all surprised by an unexpected turn of Providence: And
this was the State of Judah, when Josiah was gathered to his Fathers; the Jews
then promised themselves some long Prosperity, when on a sudden, a fatal Arrow
from the Egyptian Host, cut off their King and Hopes together. It was indeed
said of him, That he should be gathered to his Grave in peace, for he had no
open Enemies, none that made War against him, yet not harkning to the words of
Pharaoh Neco, who went up to War against the King of Assyria, by the River
Euphrates; not harkning, I say, to his Words, from the Mouth of God, would
needs Fight him in the Valley of Megiddo, where receiving a sore Wound, he was
carried in a Chariot to Jerusalem, where he dyed and was buried in one of the
Sepulchers of his Fathers; and what great Impression his Death made upon all
the People is here Expressed: And all Judah and Jerusalem Mourned for Josiah.

Which words teaching us that it has been the Practice of the Church,
mournfully to Resent the Death of Religious Princes, the Method I shall confine
my self to in the Prosecution of them, will be

1st. Of all to offer some Reasons in General, to show, That the Death of good
Princes is matter of great Mourning and Lamentation, to a People or Kingdom.

2dly. I shall Enquire more particularly, into the great Cause the Jews had to
Mourn for the Death of good Josiah.

3dly. Upon the sad Occasion of the Death of our late most Excellent Princess;
I shall set before you the great reason we all have to Mourn for so Great and
Irreparable a Loss.

4thly. and Lastly, I shall apply what has been spoken in Two or Three Natural
Inferences.

1st. The Death of Religious Princes is matter of great Mourning and
Lamentation; and surely were it not so, there had never been such Lamentations
for their Death Recorded in the Sacred Scriptures: When Moses the Servant of
the Lord Dyed, the Children of Israel are said to weep for him in the Plains of
Moab thirty days, Deuteronomy. 34. v. 8. When Samuel Dyed, all the Israelites were
gathered together, and Lamented him, 1 Samuel 25. v. 1. When Hezekiah slept with
his Fathers, all Judah and the Inhabitants of Jerusalem did him Honor at his
Death, 2 Chronicles. 32. v. 33. And this Mourning for Josiah in the Text, was a very
great Mourning, it is said to be as the Mourning of Hadradrimmon in the Valley
of Megiddon, Zech. 12. v. 11. Eus. Ecc. Hist. de vita Constantini lib. 4. cap.
65.67.
And when Constantine the Great Dyed, how greatly did the Tribunes, Centurions,
the whole Order of Judges and Magistrates Lament his Death; all places were
filled with doleful Shrieks and Lamentations, that the common Good of them all
was taken from them.

These Instances plainly prove, That to make doleful Resentments upon occasion
of the Death of good Princes, was the practice of the Church of God; and a
Practice it is as Old and Ancient as the Church it self, for it is founded upon
the Law of Nature; How pleasing and agreeable to Nature is it, to Weep and
Grieve for the Death of our Natural Parents, especially if they be Good? Much
more then surely, if we have any true Zeal for Religion, any regard for the
Public Good, ought we to express our Grief, when the Fathers of our Country
are by Death taken from us.

For 1st. A Religious Prince is a great Blessing to a Nation, a promised Mercy,
Isaiah 49. v. 23. It Is said, Kings shall be thy nursing Fathers, and their
Queens thy nursing Mothers. A Godly Prince is an unspeakable Blessing, such a
ray of Divine Love and Favor to a Nation, as bespeaks a very peculiar and
distinguishing Providence presiding over it. Because the Lord loved Israel for
ever, therefore made he thee King (speaking to Solomon) to do judgment and
justice, 1 King 10. v. 9. or to establish them for ever, as it is rendered 2 Chronicles. 9. v. 8. When Princes are endued with Wisdom, Piety, and the Fear of
God, it is at once the greatest Luster and Glory to themselves, and the greatest
Mercy and Blessing which a People can enjoy. Blessed be thou O Land, when thy
King is the son of Nobles, and thy Princes eat in due season for strength, and
not for drunkenness. On the other hand, An Irreligious Prince is a sure Token
of Gods heavy Displeasure against a People, and of sore Judgments and
Desolations to be poured out upon them. Woe unto thee, O Land, when thy King is
a Child, and thy Princes eat in the morning, Eccl. 10. v. 16. when thy King is
a Child, that is in Understanding; such was Rehoboam in the midst and strength
of his Age, a Child of one and forty Years old.

2dly. Princes have a very great Influence upon their People, either to diffuse
and spread the true Religion, or Idolatry and Profaneness throughout their
Territories. Thousands, nay almost whole Nations and Kingdoms imitating and
following their Examples; for what Entertainment Religion meets with at Court,
the like for the most part it finds throughout the Kingdom. A Religious King
therefore is a mighty Instrument both to establish the true Religion and to
engage his Subjects in the ways thereof, by setting over them faithful Pastors,
Men of Learning, Integrity and Piety, such as shall feed them with the
spiritual Food of sound Knowledge, and win them by the Prevalency of their own
good Examples. Jehosophat a Religious Prince sent Princes, and with them
Levites and Priests, to Teach in all the Cities of Judah; and Asa his Father a
good King commanded Judah to seek the Lord God of their Fathers, and to do the
Law and the Commandments; and what great Influence it had on the People, you
may find in the 2 Chronicles. 15.12, 13. verses. Thus Josiah made all that were
present in Israel to serve, even to serve the Lord their God, and all his days
they departed not from following the Lord the God of their Fathers: but in his
Sons days, who did Evil in the sight of the Lord, they returned to Idolatry,
for all the chief of the Priests and the People transgressed very much, after
all the abomination of the Heathen, and Polluted the house of the Lord, which
he had hallowed in Jerusalem. In Vide Eusebius. Zozom. Theodor. Ecc. Hist. et
Magdeburg. Ecc. Hist.
the Reign of Constantine the Great, the first Christian Emperor, what
Numbers, what Multitudes of Proselytes were daily added to the Church? And what
effectual Care was there taken to suppress Heresies, and to reconcile
differences in Opinion? (but yet) in the time of the Arian Emperors, the
wonderful growth of Arianism gave occasion to that Complaint of St. Hierom,
that almost the whole World Mourned to see itself become Arian. Thus in Julian
the Apostates Reign they returned to Idolatry, and did with the utmost Zeal
espouse it, Contending as eargerly for Error as Truth itself.

3ly. Religious Princes are the Defense of a People; they are as the Walls of a
Nation, as the Chariots and Horsemen thereof: The Psalmist Ps. 47. v. 9 calls
them the Shields of the Earth; for by their Prayers they engage the
Irresistible Strength of Heaven to be on their Side. Whilst the Governors and
Princes of Israel and Judah were Religious, and kept close to the Service of
God, they were Victorious and Triumphant, as in the Days of Joshua and the
Elders who outlived him; and as in David's, Asa's, Jehosaphat's, and
Hezekiah's Reigns: But when they forsook the Lord their God, his Word and
Ordinances, they soon fell as a Prey into the greedy Jaws of the Assyrian
Monarchs, by whom they were carried away Captive. At least good Princes stave
and keep off the Execution of Judgments upon a Nation, when they cannot by all
their Prayers and Tears turn them away; Hezekiah, when such black Clouds of
Wrath did hang over Judah and Jerusalem, that Micah Prophesied chap. 3. v. 12.
That Zion should be Plowed as a Field, and Jerusalem should become heaps, and
the Mountain of the house, as the high places of the Forest, did yet so far
prevail, that Peace and Truth Flourished in his Days. And in Josiah's Reign,
when that Nation was in such deep Arrears to the Almighty, that the Execution
of all the Threats and Judgments Denounced against them, was ready to take
place; yet by Prayer and Humiliation did this good King so far mitigate the
Divine Wrath, that it did not lay hold on them, during his Life. When good
Princes are taken away from a People, it is like the breaking down the Bounds of
the Sea; a passage is thereby laid open for the Divine Wrath to break in upon,
and overwhelm them: Well therefore may the Death of good Princes be thought
matter of great Mourning and Lamentation to a Kingdom or People. I proceed

2dly To enquire more particularly into the great cause of the Jews Universal
Mourning for the Death of Josiah, to which Enquiry we shall receive abundant
satisfaction, if we do but Contemplate the greatness of the Loss they sustained
by his Death, which I shall endeavor to set forth by describing,

First, His Great and Extraordinary Piety.

Secondly, His Zeal against Idolatry.

Thirdly, His Public Spirit.

Fourthly, The time of his Death.

First, He was a Prince of most Illustrious Piety, one of the brightest Stars
that did ever Shine on the Throne of Israel or Judah. There are some special
remarks of his Piety: In the Eighth Year of his Reign, that is, the Sixteenth
Year of his Age, (for he was eight years old when he began to Reign) whilst he
was yet young, he began to seek after the Lord; Solomon also sought the Lord
God of his Fathers, whilst he was young, but his Piety was strangely Clouded
and Eclipsed in his elder years; for it came to pass when Solomon was old, that
his Wives turned away his heart after other Gods, 1 Kings 11. v. 4. But
Josiah's Seeking of the Lord was as clear as the Morning, as bright as the Sun,
it knew no Declension. His Piety did surpass that of all the Kings of Israel
and Judah which were before him: The Holy Ghost gives this High and Honorable
Character of him, that like unto him there was no King before him, that turned
to the Lord with all his Heart, and with all his Soul, and with all his Might,
according to all the Law of Moses, neither after him arose there any like him.
Other Kings there were in Israel and Judah of very high Elevations in Gifts and
Graces, whose Hearts were sincere and perfect with the Lord, and lifted up in
his Ways, yet they had some foiles, their Beauty was sullied with some spots
and blemishes: But this good King was unspotted in his Reputation, and so
innocent in his Life, that we cannot charge him with any thing unbecoming his
Profession.

Secondly, He was a very Zealous Prince, a Burning Lamp of Zeal for the Glory
of God, and Purity of his Worship, the most Zealous of the Kings that did ever
sit on the Throne of Israel or Judah, in rooting out Idolatry. In the twelfth
year of his Reign, he began to purge Judah and Jerusalem from the high places,
and the groves, and the carved Images, and the molten Images; and they brake
down the Altars of Baalim in his Presence, and the Images that were on high
above them, he cut down; and the Groves, and the carved Images, and the molten
Images he brake in pieces, and made dust of them, and strewed it upon the
Graves of them that had Sacrificed unto them; and he burnt the bones of the
Priests upon their Altars, and cleansed Judah and Jerusalem, 2 Chronicles. 34. v. 3,
4, 5. Of other Reforming Kings it is noted, That they took away the Altars of
the strange Gods, the high places, brake down the Images, and cut down the
Groves: Howbeit the High Places were not taken away, they took away some, but
not all; but this good King destroyed all the Monuments, all the Relics of
Idolatry, as you may read at large in the 2 Kings chap. 23. from the 4th. to
the end of the 20th. verse.

Thirdly, He was of a very public Spirit, for when he understood by the words
of the Law, That great was the Wrath of the Lord that was to be poured out upon
Judah and Jerusalem, because their Fathers kept not the Word of the Lord, he
commanded Hilkiah the Priest and others saying, go, enquire of the Lord for me,
and for them them that are left in Israel and Judah concerning the words of the
book that is found; And he endeavored partly by Penitential Tears, and deep
Humblings of himself, to allay the Divine Wrath and Indignation (for his heart
was tender, and he did humble himself before God) and partly by entering into a
Covenant with God: the sum and tenor of which was, to walk after the Lord, and
to keep his Commandments and his Statutes, with all his Heart, and with all his
Soul, and to perform the words of the Covenant, which are written in the Book
of Moses: And he caused all that were present in Jerusalem and in Benjamin, to
enter into the Covenant, and to stand to it; and the Inhabitants of Jerusalem
did according to the Covenant of God, the God of their Fathers, as you may find
it written, 2 Cron. 34. verses 31, 32. All this did this good King to avert,
were it possible, imminent Judgments and threatened Desolations; but he came to
the Throne in such an ill time, when they had so highly offended the Majesty of
Heaven, and so increased his Anger through their many Sins and repeated
Provocations, that notwithstanding all this great Reformation, and the keeping
of such a Passover as never was kept in Israel, since the days of Samuel the
Prophet, yet the Lord turned not from the fierceness of his great wrath,
wherewith his anger was kinled against Judah, because of all the provocations
that Manasses had provoked him withal.

Fourthly, Josiah was taken away when their Hopes and Expectations of some
lasting Prosperity, both in Church and State were advanced to the highest
pitch; Therefore Jeremiah thus Laments his Death, The breath of our nostrils,
the anointed of the Lord was taken in their pits, of whom we said, under his
shadow we shall live among the Heathen, Lam. 4. v. 20. I am apt to think, that
this was not spoken of Zedekiah, as some would have it; for under such a Wicked
and Idolatrous Prince, they could not promise themselves any safety; and when
Josiah Dyed, all their swelling hopes of future Prosperity expired and dyed
with him; then the Godly amongst them expected nothing but a Deluge of Sin and
Misery to break in upon them; For their splendid Reformation was only
superficial, a mere veil of Hypocrisy, as Jeremiah who Prophesied in Josiah's
Days, complains, Her treacherous sister Judah has not turned to the Lord with
her whole heart, but feignedly or in falsehood, Jer. 3. v. 10. Having given some
Account of the Jews great and universal Mourning for the Death of Josiah, I come

Thirdly, To set before you the reasons of our Mourning for the Death of our
late most Excellent Princess; which well weighed are of force to dissolve three
Kingdoms into Tears; For

First, She was a Princess of most Illustriand Singular Piety; She Sacrificed
the Flower of Her Age and Time to the Service of the Great God, from whom She
had Her Being: No Person had a greater sense of Religion, or was more sincere
in Her Devotions, in which she was as constant, as the returns of Day and
Night; the lofty Elevations of her Soul, and her daily flights to Heaven did
plainly show, that Her Conversation was there also, and that She had Communion
and Fellowship with God the Father, and with Jesus the Mediator of the New
Covenant. Her Life was so exactly Correspondent to Her Profession, that She
became the greatest Ornament and Example of true Piety, that these later Ages
have produced. That Honorable Character given Josiah, that like unto him there
was no King before him, may in some respect well become Her: For She was the
first of all the Kings and Queens that sat upon the British Throne, who
appointed Afternoon Sermons to be Preached every Sunday at her Chapel in
White Hall, which She was pleased to Honor and Countenance with Her Royal
Presence. Now that She did so greatly promote and encourage Religion amongst
us, is a plain proof, an undeniable Argument, that (like Her Pious Grandfather,
that great Luminary of Religion, both in his Life and Death) She truly loved
that Church, in the Communion of which She was Baptized, Educated, and so lived
and dyed: Nothing was wanting in Her to bring Religion into the greatest Vogue
and Reputation. Had it pleased the Almighty to have lengthned out Her Life,
Vice must have sneaked into Corners, and the Person of Honor, and the
Gentleman had needed no other Distinction but their Virtues, than which nothing
can be more becoming them.

Secondly, She was a very Zealous Princess, so Zealous against the Idolatry of
the Romish Church, that in that case like Levi of old (for which he is so
highly extolled in Sacred Writ) She knew neither Father or Mother: When Israel
fell first to Idolatry, and Moses said who is on the Lord's side? The Sons of
Levi stood on the Lords side, and appeared against Idolatry; even so our Queen
by appearing against Idolatry, proved Herself to be on the Lord's side, and
that in a time of imminent Peril and Danger.

Thirdly, She was of a very Public Spirit, for when the Roman Eagle began to
expand its spreading wings, and we were possessed with the justest Fears and
dangers, she with an humble Trust and Confidence in Divine Mercy, readily
parted with whatever was dear to her, nay, with her Royal dearest Husband for a
time; who in the most dreadful Season of the Year, ventured on a very dangerous
Expedition, seconded with innumerable Difficulties, to rescue us from the daily
Rapes committed upon our Laws and Liberties, and to preserve and continue the
beauty of the Gospel among us, for which the Hearts of all good Men did then
tremble, as much as the Heart of Eli for the Ark of God, when he understood it
was in danger of being taken by the Philistines: with so much gallantry and
greatness of Mind, mixed with the most submissive Resignation to the Will of
Heaven, did this most tender Wife and truly Wise Princess behave herself, in
order to prevent a near-approaching Bondage, worse than that of Israel in
Egypt, for that was only on their Bodies, but this on our Souls: And it might
have been of as long continuance too, as theirs in Egypt was; when for the long
space of four hundred years, they Groaned under the heavy yoke and burden
thereof. The Queen, considering the large and capacious Endowments of Her Mind,
had doubtless as clear and bright perceptions as any Person; what great dangers
Her truly Loving, and as truly beloved Husband would (in all probability)
expose His Royal Person to; yet so fixed, so intense (to the Eternal Honor of
Her Sex) were Her Thoughts, upon the Glory of God, and the Public Good; that
she found no satisfaction within Herself, till our Rights, which did then
Bleed, were Asserted, and the Welfare of all the Protestants in Europe, which
then lay at Stake, was in some good measure secured. Had She lived to have seen
a settled Peace, what great and glorious things might both Church and State have
expected from Her?

Fourthly, She came to the Throne by a signal hand of Providence; so very
visible and conspicuous were the Rays of Divine Wisdom, Power and Goodness in
bringing it to pass, that the worst of Men must (with Pharaoh's Magicians) cry
out, this is the finger of God. We were then in a very low and helpless
Condition, our Hair was shorn, our Strength quite gone, all outward means
failed us, and we saw nothing but Death and Destruction before us; and yet this
was the Critical Minute, wherein Infinite Wisdom found out a way for our
Deliverance; and the Thunder of God's Power, the Arms of his Omnipotency brake
asunder whatever hindered it: Salvation arose as light out of darkness, for God
in Judgment remembered mercy. Now that our Illustrious Princess was taken from
us, soon after so great a Diliverance as this, may strike Dread into our
Hearts, and chill our Spirits! For tho She was gathered to Her Grave in Peace,
yet for ought we know, it may be a sad Presage of many Miseries and Calamities
ready to betide us: Mercies and Deliverances, when abused, turn into Judgments.
In Josiah's days God offered the Jews Mercy, but whatever ties and Obligations
lay upon them to reform and amend, they would not hearken to the voice of God,
nor turn from their Evil ways, which proved their utter Ruin and Destruction:
And I pray God that our ingratitude and unreformedness under our late great
Deliverance, may not end in one of the sorest Judgments, that ever yet befell
this Nation; if it be so, we have none to blame but our selves, but yet from
former instances of Gods Love and Goodness toward us, we need not doubt, but
that he has still Mercy in store for us: The only thing wanting is an Heart
truly sincere, and duly qualified to receive the same at his hands.

Fourthly and Lastly, What remains further to be added, is to consider the
Lessons and Instructions to be learnt from this Discourse; the more closely we
apply to our selves what has been spoken, the greater Benefit we shall reap
from it.

First Then, If the Death of Religious Princes be matter of great Mourning: We
may hence take just occasion to upbraid the folly of such, who are so far from
condoling the death of our most Religious Princess, that they Rejoice and
Triumph at it. For the Conviction of Men so degenerate, and void of all Natural
Affection to their Country, as well as Prince, it may not be inexpedient or
unseasonable to argue thus: That if the thickest Darkness be more desirable
than Light, if the heaviest Bondage be a more discreet choice than liberty; or
the sight of Fields streaming with Blood, be more amiable and lovely than
Peace, then here is a sort of Men who may rejoice; but if to be deprived of the
brightness and purity of the Gospel, to be harassed with Antichristian
Tyranny, and and to be involved in Confusion and Blood be sore Judgments (which
every one that loves his Religion and Country must own) upon a Nation, then
they ought to pay the just Tribute of Tears, to the Death and Obsequies of our
Great and Merciful Princess.

Secondly, Did all Judah and Jerusalem Mourn for the Death of Josiah? Let then
all Persons among us, of what Rank and Quality soever, learn to Mourn for the
Death of our Royal Sovereign the Queen.

Let the Nobles Mourn, for their Mighty Princess is fallen, whose chief care
was to support the Protestant Interest and Religion throughout all Europe.

Let the inferior Dispensers of God's Word and Sacraments Mourn, for they have
lost the best of Queens, who was a true tender Nursing Mother to the best of
Churches.

Let the more immediate Attendants on Her Majesty mourn, for they have lost a
Queen, whose great design was not only to make them Great and Honorable here,
but also truly Religious, that they might be blessed and happy for ever.

Let the Officers of the Army mourn, for she Clothed them in Scarlet, and put
on Ornaments of Gold upon their Apparel.

Lastly, Let all the Inhabitants of the Land Mourn, For the Beauty of Israel,
the Glory of our Nation is now clad and wrapped up in Mourning.

And now having filled our Hearts with a deep sense of Grief, for the Death of
our Pious Princess, what we are chiefly and more especially to Bewail, is our
Sins, which are the true cause of all the mischief done us; and will, if not
timely and sincerely repented of, do us more. Let us then lay our Hands upon
our Breasts, and weep bitterly, that the Floods of Impiety are risen to such an
height, that they break through all Banks, all Bounds, all Laws, as if they had
got the Ascendency of the Word, and were out of the reach, and above the check
of an Almighty Power. Jeremiah complaining of the many and heinous Sins of
Judah, tells us, that Profaneness was gone forth into all the Land, and that
Men were grown Impudent in Sinning; Were they ashamed, when they had committed
abominations? nay, they were not ashamed, neither could they blush, Jer. 8. v.
12. And can we when we reflect upon the common Practices of this dissolute Age,
and how greatly Iniquity abounds among us, think our selves deserving a better
Character? It is manifest, that there is an excess of Corruption and Degeneracy
among us, that neither the most endearing Mercies, nor the most terrible
Judgments can reclaim us; that Religion, notwithstanding the great helps and
advantages it meets with (than which, perhaps no Age had ever greater) is in a
very low and languishing Condition, hardly able to come up to the Character of
the Church of Laodicea, being fallen from luke-warmness, to somewhat farther
distant from the Temper, which God requires: So that without endeavoring to
aggravate that, which already exceeds all Number and Measure, we may safely sit
down with this persuasion, that we, as well as the Jews have done enough to
make God angry with us; and least we should continue to provoke his Anger
against us, let us not only Mourn for our own Sins, and the Sins of the Land,
by fits and starts, but let us instantly manifest the truth, reality, and
sincerity of our Sorrow, by an outward entire Reformation of Life, and an
inward change of Mind; this will prove the most effectual Method, to turn away
the fierceness of God's Anger, that we Perish not.

Thirdly and Lastly, Are Religious Princes a mighty Blessing to a Nation? This
then should teach us to set a very great and due value upon our present
Sovereign, and to fix all that Love and Affection that was divided between the
Royal Pair upon him alone; it was for our Sins, as well as the Trial of his
Christian Valor, that Heaven so unexpectedly smote him in the most tender
part, to allay and sweeten therefore so severe an affliction, Let us esteem the
early acknowledgments of Duty and Loyalty among the least of those many and
innumerable Services we stand indebted to him; let us prize him as God's
Vicegerent, as the anointed of the Lord, as the Breath of our Nostrils: Let us
offer our most humble and devout Prayers to God for him, beseeching him to
Crown His Arms with success both by Sea and Land; that he may be a terror to
his, and our Enemies, to cover him with his Providence, as with an impenetrable
Shield, to preserve his Sacred Person from all the Plots and Attempts of his
Enemies both at home and abroad, and after a long and happy Reign here on
Earth, to change a Fading into an Incorruptible Crown of Glory, to be worn in
the highest Heavens. Now to God the Father, God the Son, God the Holy Ghost,
three Persons, but one Eternal God, he ascribed all Glory and Honor, Dominion
and Majesty, both now and for ever.

FINIS.

