A FREE ENQUIRY Into the Vulgarly Received NOTION OF NATURE; Made in an ESSAY,
Addressed to a FRIEND.

By R. B. Fellow of the Royal Society.

Audendum est, and veritas investiganda; quam etiamsi non assequamur, omnino
tamen propius, quam nunc sumus, ad eam perveniemus. Galenus. Imprimatur.

Carolus Alston, R. P. D. Hen. Episc.
Land. a Sacris, Jan. 29. 1685.


LONDON, Printed by H. Clark, for John Tailor at the Globe in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1685/6.

THE PREFACE.
I Have often wondered, that, in so Inquisitive an Age as This, among those
many Learned Men, that have with much Freedom, as well as Acuteness, written of
the Works of Nature, (as They call Them,) and some of Them of the Principles
too, I have not met with any, that has made it his business to write of Nature
Herself. This will perhaps hereafter be thought such an Omission, as if, in
giving an Account of the Political Estate of a Kingdom, One should Treat
largely of the Civil Judges, Military Officers, and other Subordinate
Magistrates, and of the particular Ranks and Orders of Inferior Subjects and
Plebeians, but should be silent of the Prerogatives and Ways of Administration
of the King; or, (to use a Comparison more suitable to the Subject,) as if One
should particularly treat of the Barrel, Wheels, String, Balance, Index, and
other Parts of a Watch, without examining the Nature of the Spring, that sets
all These a moving. When I say this, I do not forget, that the Word Nature is
every where to be met with in the Writings of Physiologers. But, though they
frequently employ the Word, they seem not to have much considered, what Notion
ought to be framed of the Thing, which they suppose and admire, and upon
Occasion celebrate, but do not call in Question or discuss. Weighing therefore
with my self, of what great Moment the framing a right or a wrong Idea of
Nature must be, in Reference both to the Speculative and Practical Part of
Physiology; I judged it very well worth the while, to make, with Philosophical
Freedom, a serious Enquiry into the Vulgarly Received Notion of Nature; that,
if it appeared well-grounded, I might have the Rational Satisfaction of not
having acquiesc'd in It, till, after a previous Examen; if I should find it
confused and ambiguous, I might endeavor to remedy that Inconvenience, by
distinguishing the Acceptions of the Word; if I found it dubious as to its
Truth, I might be shy in trusting too much to a distrusted Principle; and, if I
found erroneous, I might avoid the raising Superstructures of my Own, or
relying on those of Others, that must owe their Stability to an unsound and
deceitful Foundation. And, because many Atheists ascribe so much to Nature,
that they think it needless to have Recourse to a Deity, for the giving an
Account of the Phenomenon of the Universe: And, on the other side, very many
Theists seem to think the commonly Received Notion of Nature, little less, than
necessary to the Proof of the Existence and Providence of God; I, who differ
from both these Parties, and yet think every true Theist, and much more every
true Christian, ought to be much concerned for Truths, that have so powerful an
Influence on Religion, thought my self, for Its sake, obliged to consider this
Matter, both with the more Attention and with regard to Religion.

And yet, being to write this Treatise as a Physiologer, not a Christian, I
could not rationally build any positive Doctrine upon mere Revelation, which
would have been judged a Foreign Principle in this Enquiry. Only, since the
Person, I intentionally addressed my Thoughts to, under the Name of
Eleutherius, was a good Christian, I held it not impertinent, now and then,
upon the by, to intimate something to prevent or remove some Scruples, that I
thought he might have, on the score (I say not of Natural Theology, for That is
almost directly pertinent, but) of the Christian Faith. But these Passages are
very few, and but transiently touched upon.

Since the Reader will be told by and by both That, and Why the Papers, that
make up the following Treatise, were not written in one continued Series of
Times, but many Years were interposed between the Writing of some of Them, and
that of Those which precede and follow Them: I hope it will be thought but a
venial Fault, if the Contexture of the whole Discourse do not appear so
Uniform, nor all the Connections of its Parts so apt and close, as, if no
Papers had been lost and supplied, might reasonably be looked for.

I expect the Novelty of diverse of the Sentiments and Reasonings, proposed in
the following Discourse, will be surprising, and incline Many to look upon the
Author as a bold Man, and much addicted to Paradoxes. But, having formerly, in
a distinct Essay, delivered my Thoughts about Paradoxes in general, I shall not
now engage in that Subject, but confine my self to what concerns the ensuing
Paper. I say then, in short, That in an Opinion, I look upon its being New or
Ancient, and its being Singular or commonly Received, as Things that are but
Extrinsical to its being true or false. And, as I would never reject a Truth,
for being generaly Known or Received, so will I not conclude an Opinion to be a
Truth, merely because great Numbers have thought it to be so; nor think an
Opinion Erroneous, because it is not yet Known to Many, or because it opposes a
Tenent embraced by Many. For I am wont to judge of Opinions, as of Coins: I
consider much less in any One, that I am to Receive, whose Inscription it
bears, than what Metal it is made of. It Is indifferent enough to me, whether
'twas Stamped many Years or Ages since, or came but Yesterday from the Mint.
Nor do I regard through how many, or how few, Hands it has passed for Current,
provided I know by the Touchstone, or any sure Trial, purposely made, whether
or no it be genuine, and does or does not deserve to have been Current. For, if
upon due proof it appears to be Good, its having been long and by Many received
for such, will not tempt me to refuse it. But, if I find it Counterfeit,
neither the Princes Image or Inscription, nor its Date (how Ancient soever,)
nor the Multitude of Hands, through which it has passed unsuspected, will
engage me to receive It. And one disfavouring trial, well made, will much more
discredit It with me, than all those specious Things, I have named, can
recommend It.

By this Declaration of my Sentiments about Paradoxes in General, I hope it
will be thought, that the Motive I had to Question that Notion of Nature, which
I dissent from, was not, that this Notion is Vulgarly Received. And I have this
to say, to make it probable, That I was not engaged in this Controversy, by
any Ambition of appearing in Print an Heresiarch in Philosophy, by being the
Author of a strange Doctrine, that the following Discourse was written about
the Year 1666. (that is, some Lustres ago,) and that not long after, the Youth,
to whom I dictated it, having been inveigled to steal away, unknown to me or
his Parents, into the Indies, (whence we never heard of him since,) left the
loose Sheets, wherein (and not in a Book) my thoughts had been committed to
Paper, very incoherent, by the Omission of diverse necessary Passages. Upon
which Account, and my Unwillingness to take the Pains to supply what was
wanting, those Papers lay by me many Years together neglected, and almost
forgotten; 'till the Curiosity of some Philosophical Heads, that were pleased
to think they deserved another Fate, obliged me to tack them together, and make
up the Gaps that remained between their Parts, by retrieving, as well as, after
so many Years, my bad Memory was able to do, the Thoughts I sometimes had,
pertinent to those purposes. And indeed, when I considered of how vast
importance it is in Philosophy, and the Practice of Physic too, to have a
right Notion of Nature; and how little the Authority of the generality of Men
ought, in so nice and intricate a Subject, to sway a free and impartial Spirit;
as I at first thought myself obliged, since others had not saved me the labor,
to make a Free Enquiry into this Noble and Difficult Subject, so I was
afterward the more easily prevailed with, by those that pressed the
Publication of it. With what Success I have made this Attempt, I must leave
others to judge. But if I be not much flattered, whatever becomes of the main
Attempt, there will be found suggested here and there, in the following
Discourse, some Reflections and Explications, that will at least oblige the
zealous Assertors of the Vulgar Notion of Nature, to clear up the Doctrine, and
speak more distinctly and correctly about Things that relate to it, than
hitherto has been usual. And that will be Fruit enough to recompense the
Labor, and justify the Title, of a Free Enquiry. In Prosecution of which,
since I have been obliged to travel in an untrodden Way, without a Guide,
'twill be thought, I hope, more pardonable than strange, if, in attempting to
discover diverse general Mistakes, I be not so happy as to escape falling into
some particular Ones myself. And, if among These, I have been so unhappy, as to
make any that is injurious to Religion, as I did not at all intend it, so, as
soon as ever I shall discover it, I shall freely disown it Myself, and pray
that it may never mislead Others. What my Performance has been, I have already
acknowledged that I may be unfit to judge; but, for my Intentions, I may make
bold to say, they were, to keep the Glory of the Divine Author of Things from
being usurped or entrenched* upon by His Creatures, and to make His Works more
thoroughly and solidly understood, by the Philosophical Studiers of Them.

I do not pretend, and I need not, that every one of the Arguments, I employ in
the following Tract, is cogent, especially if considered as single. For
Demonstrative Arguments would be unsuitable to the very Title of my Attempt;
since, if about the Received Notion of Nature, I were furnished with
unanswerable Reasons, my Discourse ought to be styled, not a Free Enquiry into
the Vulgar Notion of Nature, I consider, but a Confutation of It. And a heap of
bare Probabilities may suffice to justify a Doubt of the Truth of an Opinion,
which they cannot clearly evince to be False. And therefore, if any Man shall
think fit to Criticize upon the less Principal or less necessary Parts of this
Treatise, perhaps I shall not think my self obliged to be concerned at It. And
even, if the main Body of the Discourse itself shall be attacked from the
Press; I, who am neither Young nor Healthy, nor ever made Divinity, Philosophy,
or Physic, my Profession, am not like to oppose him in the same Way: Since, as
I ought not to wish, that any Errors of mine (if this Essay teach any Such,)
should prevail; so, if the Things I have delivered be True for the Main, I need
not despair but that, in such a Free and Inquisitive Age as Ours, there will be
found Generous Spirits, that will not suffer weighty Truths to be oppressed,
though the Proposers of them should, by averseness from Contention, or by want of
Time or Health, be themselves kept from defending them. Which I have thought
fit to take Notice of in this Place, that the Truth (if I have been so happy,
as to have found and taught It,) may not suffer by my Silence; nor any Reader
surmize, that, if I shall leave a Book Unanswered, I thereby acknowledge it to
be Unanswerable. But This regards only the main Substance of our Essay, not the
Order or Disposition of the Parts: Since, if any shall censure That, I shall
not quarrel with him about It. For indeed, considering in how preposterous an
Order the Papers, I have here tacked together, came to Hand; and how many
Things are upon that score unduly placed, I shall not only be content, but must
desire, to have this Rhapsody, of my own loose Papers, looked upon but as an
Apparatus, or Collection of Materials, in order to [what I well know this
maimed and confused Essay is not,] a complete and regular Discourse. Yet (to
conclude,) I thought, that the affording even of a little Light, in a Subject
so Dark and so very Important, might keep an Essay from being useless; and that
to fall short of Demonstration would prove a pardonable Fault, in a Discourse,
that pretends not to Dogmatize, but only to make an Enquiry.

Sept. 29, 1682.
A Free Enquiry Into the Received NOTION OF NATURE.
SECT. I.
I Know not Whether or no it be a Prerogative in the human Soul, that, as it is
itself a True and Positive Being, so it is apt to conceive all other things, as
True and Positive Beings also. But, Whether or no this Propensity, to frame
such kind of Idea's, suppose an excellency, I fear it occasions mistakes; and
makes us think and speak, after the manner of True and Positive Beings, of such
things, as are but Chimerical, and some of them Negations or Privations
themselves; as Death, Ignorance, Blindness, and the like.

It concerns us therefore, to stand very carefully upon our Guard, that we be
not insensibly misled by such an innate and unheeded Temptation to error, as we
bring into the World with us. And consequently I may be allowed to consider,
whether, among other Particulars, in which this deluding Propensity of our
minds has too great, though unsuspected, an Influence upon us; it may not have
imposed on us, in the Notion we are wont to frame concerning Nature. For this
being the fruitful Parent of other Notions, as Nature herself is said to be of
the Creatures of the Universe; the Notion is so general in its Applications,
and so important in its Influence; that we had need be jealously careful, of
not over-easily admitting a Notion, than which there can scarce be any that
more deserves to be warily examined, before it be thoroughly entertained.

Let me therefore make bold to enquire freely, Whether That, of which we affirm
such great Things, and to which we ascribe so many Feats, be that almost Divine
thing, whose works among others we are; or a Notional thing, that in some sense
is rather to be reckoned among our works; as owing its Being to Human
Intellects.

I know, most men will be forestalled with no mean prejudices against so
venturous an Attempt; but I will not do Eleutherius the Injury, to measure Him
by the prepossessed generality of Men; yet there are two scruples which I think
it not amiss to take notice of, to clear the way for what shall be presented
you in the following Discourse.

And first, it may seem an ungrateful and unfilial thing, to dispute against
Nature, that is taken by Mankind for the Common Parent of us all. But though it
be an undutiful thing, to express a want of respect for an acknowledged Parent,
yet I know not, why it may not be allowable to question One, that a Man looks
upon but as a pretended one, or at least does upon probable grounds doubt,
Whether she be so or no; and, 'till it appear to me that she is so, I think it
my duty to pay my gratitude, not to I know not what, but to that Deity, whose
Wisdom and Goodness, not only designed to make me a Man, and enjoy what I am
here blessed with, but contrived the World so, that even those Creatures of
his, who by their inanimate condition are not capable of intending to gratify
me, should be as serviceable and useful to me, as they would be, if they could
and did design the being so; and you may be pleased to remember, that, as men
may now accuse such an Enquirer, as I am, of impiety and ingratitude toward
Nature: So the Persians, and other Worshipers of the Celestial Bodies, accused
several of the Ancient Philosophers, and all the Primitive Christians, of the
like Crimes, in reference to the Sun; whose Existence, and whose being a
Benefactor to Mankind, was far more unquestionable, than that there is such a
Semi-Deity as Men call Nature: And it can be no great disparagement to me, to
suffer on the like Account with (...) good Company, especially, when several of
the considerations that Justify them, may also Apologize for me. I might add,
that, it not being half so evident to me, that what is called Nature is my
Parent, as that all Men are my Brothers, Act. 17.
by being the Offspring of God; (for the (...) of Aratus is adopted by St.
Paul) I may justly prefer the doing of them a service, by disabusing them, to
the paying of Her a Ceremonial Respect. But setting Allegories aside, I have
sometimes seriously doubted, whether the Vulgar Notion of Nature has not been
both injurious to the Glory of God, and a great Impediment to the solid and
useful Discovery of his Works.

And first, it seems to detract from the Honor of the great Author and
Governor of the World; that Men should ascribe most of the admirable things
that are to be met with in it, not to him, but to a certain Nature, which
themselves do not well know what to make of. ^Tis true that many confess, that
this Nature is a thing of His establishing, and subordinate to Him; but, though
many confess it when they are asked, Whether they do or no? yet, besides that
many seldom or never lifted up their eyes to any higher Cause, he that takes
notice of their way of ascribing things to Nature, may easily discern, that,
whatever their words sometimes be, the Agency of God is little taken notice of
in their thoughts: And however, it does not a little darken the Excellency of
the Divine management of things, that, when a strange Thing is to be effected
or accounted for, men so often have recourse to Nature, and think she must
extraordinarily interpose to bring such things about: Whereas it much more
tends to the Illustration of God's Wisdom, to have so framed things at first,
that there can seldom or never need any extraordinary Interposition of his
Power. And, as it more recommends the skill of an Engineer, to contrive an
Elaborate Engine, so as that there should need nothing to reach his ends in it,
but the contrivance of parts devoid of understanding; than if it were
necessary, that ever and anon a discreet Servant should be employed, to concur
notably to the Operations of this or that Part, or to hinder the Engine from
being out of order: So it more sets off the Wisdom of God in the Fabric of the
Universe, that he can make so vast a Machine, perform all those many things
which he designed it should, by the mere contrivance of Brute matter, managed
by certain Laws of Local Motion, and upheld by his ordinary and general
concourse; than if he employed from time to time an Intelligent Overseer, such
as Nature is fancied to be, to regulate, assist, and control the Motions of
the Parts. In confirmation of which, you may remember, that the later Poets
justly reprehended their Predecessors, for want of skill, in laying the Plots
of their Plays, because they often suffered things to be reduced to that Pass,
that they were fain to bring some Deity (...) upon the Stage, to help them out.

(Nec Deus intersit, nisi dignus vindice nodus,) etc. And let me tell you
freely, that, though I will not say, That Aristotle meant the mischief his
Doctrine did, yet I am apt to think, that the Grand Enemy of God's Glory made
great use of Aristotle's Authority and Errors, to detract from it.

For as Aristotle, by introducing the Opinion of the Eternity of the World,
(whereof he owns himself to have been the first Broacher) did, at least in
almost all Men's Opinion, openly deny God the Production of the World: So, by
ascribing the admirable Works of God, to what he calls Nature, he tacitly
denies him the Government of the World. Which suspicion, if you judge severe, I
shall not, at more leisure, refuse to acquaint you, (in a distinct Paper) why I
take diverse of Aristotle's Opinions relating to Religion, to be more
unfriendly, not to say pernicious, to It, than those of several other Heathen
Philosophers.

And here give me leave to prevent an Objection, that some may make, as if, to
deny the received Notion of Nature, a Man must also deny Providence; of which
Nature is the Grand Instrument. For in the first place, my Opinion hinders me
not at all from acknowledging God to be the Author of the Universe, and the
continual Preserver and Upholder of it; which is much more than the
Peripatetick Hypothesis, which (as we were saying) makes the World Eternal,
will allow its Embracers to admit; and those things which the
School-Philosophers ascribe to the Agency of Nature, interposing according to
Emergencies, I ascribe to the Wisdom of God in the first Fabric of the
Universe; which He so admirably contrived, that, if He but continue his
ordinary and general concourse, there will be no necessity of extraordinary
interpositions, which may reduce him, to seem as it were to Play After-Games;
all those Exigencies, upon whose account Philosophers and Physicians seem to
have devised what they call Nature, being foreseen and provided for in the
first Fabric of the World; so that mere Matter, so ordered, shall in such and
such Conjunctures of Circumstances, do all that Philosophers ascribe on such
occasions to their almost Omniscient Nature, without any knowledge of what it
does, or acting otherwise than according to the Catholic Laws of Motion. And
methinks the difference betwixt their Opinion of God's Agency in the World, and
that which I would propose, may be somewhat adumbrated, by saying, That they
seem to imagine the World to be after the nature of a Puppet, whose Contrivance
indeed may be very Artificial, but yet is such, that almost every particular
motion the Artificer is fain (by drawing sometimes one Wire or String,
sometimes another) to guide, and oftentimes overruled, the Actions of the
Engine; whereas, according to us, it is like a rare Clock, such as may be that
at Strasbourg, where all things are so skilfully contrived, that the Engine
being once set a Moving, all things proceed according to the Artificers first
design, and the Motions of the little Statues, that at such hours perform these
or those things, do not require, like those of Puppets, the peculiar
interposing of the Artificer, or any Intelligent Agent employed by him, but
perform their functions upon particular occasions, by virtue of the General and
Primitive Contrivance of the whole Engine. The Modern Aristotelians and other
Philosophers would not be taxed as injurious to Providence, though they now
ascribe to the ordinary course of Nature, those regular Motions of the Planets,
that Aristotle and most of his Followers (and among them the Christian
Schoolmen) did formerly ascribe to the particular guidance of Intelligent and
Immaterial Beings, which they assigned to be the Movers of the Celestial Orbs.
And when I consider, how many things, that seem Anomalies to us, do frequently
enough happen in the World, I think it is more consonant to the respect we owe
to Divine Providence, to conceive, that as God is a most free, as well as a
most wise Agent, and may in many Things have ends unknown to us: He very well
foresaw, and thought fit, that such seeming Anomalies should come to pass,
since he made them (as is evident in the Eclipses of the Sun and Moon) the
Genuine consequences of the Order, He was pleased to settle in the World; by
whose Laws the Grand Agents in the Universe were empowered and determined, to
act according to the respective Natures he had given them; and the course of
things was allowed to run on, though that would infer the happening of seeming
Anomalies, and things really repugnant to the Good or Welfare of diverse
particular Portions of the Universe. This, I say, I think to be a Notion more
respectful to Divine Providence, than to imagine, as we commonly do, that God
has appointed an Intelligent and Powerful Being, called Nature, to be as his
Vicegerent, continually watchful for the good of the Universe in general, and
of the particular Bodies that compose it; whilst in the mean time, this Being
appears not to have the skill, or the power, to prevent such Anomalies, which
oftentimes prove destructive to multitudes of Animals, and other Noble
Creatures, (as in Plagues, etc.) and sometimes prejudicial to greater Portions
of the Universe, (as in Earthquakes of a large spread, Eclipses of the
Luminaries, great and lasting Spots on the Sun, Eruptions of Vulcan, great
Comets or new Stars that pass from one Region of Heaven to another.) And I am
the more tender of admitting such a Lieutenant to Divine Providence, as Nature
is fancied to be, because I shall hereafter give you some Instances, in which
it seems, that, if there were such a thing, she must be said to act too blindly
and impotently, to discharge well the Part she is said to be trusted with.

I shall add, that the Doctrine, I plead for, does much better than its Rival
comply with what Religion teaches us, about the extraordinary and supernatural
Interpositions of Divine Providence. For when it pleases God to overruled, or
control, the established course of things in the World, by his own Omnipotent
Hand, what is thus performed may be much easier discerned and acknowledged to
be miraculous, by them that admit, in the ordinary course of Corporeal Things,
nothing but Matter and Motion, whose Powers Men may well judge of; than by those
who think there is besides, a certain Semi-Deity, which they call Nature, whose
Skill and Power they acknowledge to be exceeding great, and yet have no sure way
of estimating how great they are, and how far they may extend. And give me
leave to take notice to you, on this occasion, that I observe the Miracles of
our Savior and his Apostles, pleaded by Christians on the behalf of their
Religion, to have been very differingly looked on by Epicurean and other
Corpuscularian Infidels, and by those other Unbelievers who admit of a Soul of
the World, or Spirits in the Stars, or, in a word, think the Universe to be
Governed by Intellectual Beings, distinct from the Supreme Being we call God.
For this later sort of Infidels have often admitted those matters of Fact,
which we Christians call Miracles; and yet have endeavored to solve them by
Astral Operations, and other Ways not here to be specified: Whereas the
Epicurean Enemies of Christianity have thought themselves obliged, resolutely
to deny the matters of Fact themselves; as well discerning, that the things,
said to be performed, exceeded the Mechanical Powers of Matter and Motion, (as
they were managed by those, that wrought the Miracles,) and consequently must
either be denied to have been done, or be confessed to have been truly
Miraculous.

But there may hereafter be occasion, See the III, the IV, and also the last
Section of this Treatise.
both to improve the things already said, and add others, to satisfy
Theological scruples about our Hypothesis.

I formerly told you, that 'twas not only to the Glory of God, (as that results
from his Wisdom, Power, an^ Goodness, expressed in the World) that I suspected
the Notion of Nature, that I am examining, to be prejudicial, but also to the
Discovery of his Works. And you will make no great difficulty to believe me, if
you consider, that, whilst Men allow themselves so general and easy a way, or
rendering accounts of things that are difficult, as to attribute them to Nature;
shame will not reduce them to a more industrious scrutiny into the Reasons of
Things, and curiosity itself will move them to it the more faintly: Of which we
have a clear and eminent Example, in the Ascension of Water in Pumps, and in
other Phaenomena's of that kind, whose true Physical Causes had never been
found out, if the Moderns had acquiesced, as their Predecessors did, in that
imaginary one, that the World was Governed by a Watchful Being, called Nature,
and that she abhors a vacuum, and consequently is still in a readiness, to do
irresistibly whatever is necessary to prevent it: Nor must we expect any great
Progress, in the discovery of the true Causes of natural Effects, whilst we are
content to sit down with other, than the particular and immediate ones.

It Is not that I deny, that there are diverse things, as the number and
situation of the Stars, the shapes and sizes of Animals, etc. About which, even
a Philosopher being asked can say little, but that it pleased the Author of the
Universe to make them so; but when we give such general Answers, we pretend not
to give the particular Physical Reasons of the things proposed, but do in
effect confess we do not know them. To this I add, that the veneration,
wherewith Men are imbued for what they call Nature, has been a discouraging
impediment to the Empire of Man over the inferior Creatures of God. For many
have not only looked upon it, as an impossible thing to compass, but as
something of impious to attempt, the removing of those Boundaries which Nature
seems to have put and settled among her Productions. And whilst they look upon
her as such a venerable thing, some make a kind of scruple of Conscience, to
endeavor so to emulate any of her Works, as to excel them.

I have staid so long, about removing the first of the two scruples I formerly
proposed against my present attempt, that, not to tire your Patience, I shall
in few words dispatch the second, which is, That I venture to contradict the
sense of the generality of Mankind: To which I answer, That in Philosophical
Inquiries, it becomes not a Naturalist to be so solicitous, what has been, or
is believed, as what ought to be so; and I have also elsewhere, on another
occasion, showed, how little the sense of the generality of Men, ought to sway
us in some Questions: But that which I shall at present more directly reply,
is, First, That it is no wonder, Men should be generally prepossest with such a
Notion of Nature, as I call in question, since Education (especially in the
Schools) has imbued them with it from their Infancy, and even in their maturer
years they find it taken for granted, and employed not only by the Most but by
the Learned Writers, and never hear it called in question by any; and then it
exceedingly complies with our Innate Propensity, to think that we know more
than we do, and to appear to do so. For to vouch Nature for a Cause, is an
Expedient, that can scarce be wanting to any Man, upon any occasion, to seem to
know what he can indeed render no good reason of.

And to this first part of my Answer, I shall subjoin this second. That the
general custom of Mankind, to talk of a Thing as a real and positive Being, and
attribute great matters to it, does but little weigh with me; when I consider,
that, though Fortune be not any Physical thing, but a certain loose and
undetermined Notion, which a Modern Meta-Physician would refer to the Classis
of his non Entia, yet not only the Gentiles made it a Goddess, (Nos te facimus,
Fortuna, Deam, Coeloque locamus,) which many of them seriously Worshipped, but
eminent Writers, in Verse and in Prose, Ethnic and Christian, Ancient and
Modern, and all sorts of Men, in their common Discourse do seriously talk of
It, as if it were a kind of Antichrist, that usurped a great share in the
Government of the World; and ascribe little less to It, than they do to Nature.
And not to speak of what Poets, Moralists and Divines tell us of the Powers of
Ignorance and Vice, which are but Moral defects: Let us consider what things
are not only by these Men, but by the generality of Mankind seriously
attributed to Death, to which so great and fatal a Dominion is assigned; and
then if we consider too, that this Death, which is said to do so many and such
wonderful things, is neither a Substance, nor a Positive Entity, but a mere
Privation; we shall, I trust, the less believe, that the Feats ascribed to
Nature do infer, that there is really such a Physical Agent as is supposed.

And now having, as I presume, cleared our Enquiry, as far as it is yet
necessary, [and 'twill be further done hereafter] from those Prejudices, that
might make the Attempt be censured before it be examined, I proceed to the
Inquiry it self; wherein I shall endeavor (but with the brevity my want of
leisure exacts) to do these six things. First, To give you a short account of
the great Ambiguity of the word Nature, arising from its various acceptions.
Secondly, To show you, that the Definition also, that Aristotle himself gives
of Nature, does not afford a clear or satisfactory Notion of it. Thirdly, To
gather from the several things, that are wont to be affirmed of, or attributed
to, Nature, the received Notion of it, which cannot be well gathered from the
Name, because of its great ambiguity. Fourthly, I will mention some of those
Reasons, that dissuade me from admitting this Notion of Nature. Fifthly, I
shall endeavor to answer severally the chief things, upon which Men seem to
have taken up the Idea of Nature, that I disallow. And, Sixthly, I shall
propose some of the chief Effata or Axioms, that are wont to be made use of,
concerning Nature in general, and shall show, how far, and in what sense I may
admit them.

And here it may be opportune, to prevent both mistakes and the necessity of
interrupting the Series of our Discourse, to set down two or three
Advertisements.

1. When any where in this Tract I speak of the Opinions of Aristotle and the
Peripateticks, as I would not be thought to impute to him all the sentiments of
those that will be thought his followers, some of which seem to me to have much
mistaken his true meaning; so (on the other side) I did not conceive, that my
Design obliged me to inquire anxiously into his true sentiments, whether about
the Origin of the Universe, (as whether or no it were selfexistent, as well as
Eternal) or about less important Points: Since, besides that his expressions
are oftentimes dark and ambiguous enough, and the things he delivers in several
passages do not seem always very consistent; it sufficed for my purpose, which
was to question Vulgar Notions, to examine those Opinions, that are by the
generality of Scholars taken for the Aristotelian and Peripatetick Doctrines,
by which, if he be misrepresented, the blame ought to light upon his
Commentators and Followers.

2. The Rational Soul or Mind of Man, as it is distinct from the sensitive
Soul, being an immaterial Spirit; is a substance of so Heteroclite a kind, in
reference to things so vastly differing from it as mere Bodies are, that since
I could neither, without injuring it, treat of it promiscuously with the
Corporeal Works of God, nor speak worthily of it, without frequently
interrupting and disordering my Discourse by Exceptions, that would either make
it appear intricate, or would be very troublesome to you or any other that you
may think fit to make my Reader; I thought I might, for others ease and my own,
be allowed to set aside the considerations of it in the present Treatise: And
the rather, because all other parts of the Universe being, according to the
received Opinion, the Works of Nature, we shall not want in them Subjects more
than sufficiently numerous, whereon to make our Examen. Though I shall here
consider the World but as the great System of things Corporeal, as it once
really was, toward the close of the sixth day of the Creation, when God had
finished all his material Works, but had not yet Created Man.

SECT. II.
I. A Considering Person may well be tempted to suspect, that Men have
generally had but imperfect and confused Notions concerning Nature; if he but
observes, that they apply that Name to several things, and those too such, as
have some of them very little dependence on, or connection with, such others.
And I remember that in Aristotle's Metaphysics, I met with a whole Chapter
expressly written, to enumerate the various Acceptions of the Greek word, (...),
commonly rendered Nature; of which, if I mistake not, he there reckons up six.
In English also we have not fewer, but rather more numerous significations of
that Term. For sometimes we use the word Nature, for that Author of Nature,
whom the Schoolmen, harshly enough, call Natura Naturans; as when it is said,
that Nature has made Man partly Corporeal, and partly Immaterial. Sometimes we
mean by the Nature of a thing, the Essence, or that which the Schoolmen
scruple not to call the Quiddity of a thing, namely, the Attribute or
Attributes, on whose score it is, what it is; whether the thing be corporeal or
not; as, when we attempt to define the Nature of an Angle, or of a Triangle, or
of a Fluid Body as such. Sometimes we confound that which a Man has by Nature,
with what accrues to him by Birth; as, when we say, that such a Man is noble by
Nature, or such a Child naturally forward, or sickly, or frightful. Sometimes
we take Nature for an Internal Principle of Motion; as, when we say, that a
Stone let fall in the Air, is by Nature carried toward the Center of the
Earth; and, on the contrary, that Fire or Flame does Naturally move upwards
toward Heaven.

Sometimes we understand by Nature, the Established course of things, as, when
we say, that Nature makes the Night succeed the Day: Nature has made
Respiration necessary to the Life of Men.

Sometimes we take Nature for an Aggregate of Powers belonging to a Body,
especially a Living one; as, when Physicians say, that Nature is strong, or
weak, or spent; or that in such or such Diseases, Nature left to her self, will
do the Cure. Sometimes we take Nature for the Universe, or System of the
Corporeal works of God; as, when it is said of a Phoenix, or a Chimera, that
there is no such thing in Nature, ( i. e.) in the World. And sometimes too, and
that most commonly, we would express by the Word Nature, a Semi-deity, or other
strange kind of Being, such as this Discourse examines the Notion of. And
besides these more Absolute Acceptions, if I may so call them, of the word
Nature; it has diverse others (more Relative) as Nature is wont to be set in
Opposition or Contradistinction to other things; as, when we say of a Stone
when it falls downwards, that it does it by a Natural motion; but that if it be
thrown upwards, its motion that way is violent. So Chemists distinguish Vitriol
into Natural and Fictitious, or made by Art, (i. e.) by the Intervention of
Human Power or Skill; so it is said, that water kept suspended in a sucking
Pump, is not in its natural place, as that is, which is Stagnant in the Well.
We say also, that Wicked Men are still in the state of Nature; but the
Regenerate, in a state of Grace: That Cures wrought by Medicines, are Natural
Operations; but the miraculous ones, wrought by Christ and his Apostles, were
Supernatural. Nor are these the only Forms of Speech, that a more diligent
Collector, than I think it necessary I should here be, might instance in, to
manifest the Ambiguity of the word Nature, by the many and various things it is
applied to signify; though some of those already mentioned, should be judged too
near to be co-incident. Among Latin Writers I found the acceptions of the word
Nature to be so many, that I remember, one Author reckons up no less than
fourteen or fifteen. From all which it is not difficult to gather, how easy
it is for the generality of Men, without excepting those that write of Natural
Things, to impose upon others and themselves, in the use of a word so apt to be
mis-imploy'd.

On this occasion I can scarce forbear to tell you, that I have often looked
upon it as an unhappy thing, and prejudicial both to Philosophy and Physic;
that the word Nature has been so frequently, and yet so unskilfully employed,
both in Books and in Discourse, by all sorts of Men, Learned and Illiterate.
For the very great Ambiguity of this term, and the promiscuous use Men are wont
to make of it, without sufficiently attending to its different Significations,
makes many of the Expressions wherein they employ it, (and think they do it
well and truly) to be either not intelligible, or not proper, or not true:
Which Observation, though it be not heeded, may, with the help of a little
attention, be easily verified; especially because the Term Nature is so often
used, that you shall scarce meet with any Man, who, if he have occasion to
discourse any thing long of either Natural or Medicinal Subjects, would not
find himself at a great loss, if he were prohibited the use of the word Nature,
and of those Phrases whereof it makes the principal part. And I confess I could
heartily wish, that Philosophers, and other Learned Men (whom the rest in time
would follow) would by common (though perhaps Tacit) consent, introduce some
more Significant, and less ambiguous Terms and Expressions in the room of the
too licenciously abused word Nature, and the Forms of Speech that depend on it.
Or would, at least, decline the use of it, as much as conveniently they can;
and where they think they must employ it, would* add a word or two, to declare
in what clear and determinate sense they use it. For without somewhat of this
kind be done, Men will very hardly avoid being led into diverse mistakes, both
of things, and of one another; and such wranglings about Words and Names, will
be (if not continually multiplied) still kept on foot, as are wont to be
managed with much heat, though little use, and no necessity.

And here I must take leave to complain, in my own excuse, of the scarce
superable Difficulty of the Task, that the design of a Free Inquiry puts me
upon. For it is far more difficult than any one that has not tried, (and I do
not know that any Man has,) would imagine, to Discourse long of the Corporeal
Works of God, and especially of the Operations and Phaenomena's that are
attributed to Nature, and yet decline making oftentimes use of that Term, or
Forms of Speech whereof it is a main part; without much more frequent, and
perhaps tedious, Circumlocutions; than I am willing to trouble you with. And
therefore I hope you will easily excuse me, if, partly to shun these, and to
avoid using often the same words too near one another, and partly out of
unwillingness to employ Vulgar Terms, likely to occasion or countenance Vulgar
Errors; I have several times been fain to use Paraphrases or other Expressions,
less short than those commonly received: And sometimes for one or other of
these Reasons, or out of Inadvertence, missed of avoiding the Terms used by
those, that admit and applaud the Vulgar Notion of Nature: whom, I must here
advertise you, that partly because they do so, and partly for brevity's sake, I
shall hereafter many times call, Naturists: Which Appellation I rather choose
than that of Naturalists; because, many, even of the Learned among them, as
Logicians, Orators, Lawyers, Arithmeticians, etc. are not Physiologers.

But if on this occasion you should be very urgent to know, what Course I would
think expedient, if I were to propose any, for the avoiding the Inconvenient
use of so Ambiguous a Word, as Nature: I should first put you in mind, that,
having but very lately declared, that I thought it very difficult, in
Physiological Discourses especially, to decline the frequent of that Term; you
are not to expect from me the satisfaction you may desire in an Answer. And
then I would add, that yet my unwillingness to be altogether silent, when you
require me to say somewhat, makes me content to try, whether the mischief
complained of, may not be in some measure either obviated or lessened, by
looking back upon the (Eight) various significations, that were not long since
delivered of the Word Nature, and by endeavoring to express them in other
Terms, or Forms of Speech.

1. Instead then of the Word Nature taken in the first sense, [for Natura
Naturans,] we may make use of the Term it is put to signify, namely, God;
wholly discarding an Expression, which, besides that it is harsh and needless,
and in use only among the Schoolmen, seems not to me very suitable to the
profound Reverence we owe the Divine Majesty; since it seems to make the
Creator differ too little by far from a Created (not to say an Imaginary) Being.

2. Instead of Nature in the second sense, [for, That on whose account a Thing
is what it is, and is so called,] we may employ the Word Essence, which is of
great Affinity to it, if not of an adequate import. And sometimes also we may
make use of the Word Quiddity, which, though a somewhat Barbarous Term, is yet
frequently employed, and well enough understood, in the Schools; and, which is
more considerable, is very comprehensive, and yet free enough from Ambiguity.

3. What is meant by the Word Nature taken in the third sense of it, [for, what
belongs to a living Creature at its Nativity, or accrues to it by its Birth,]
may be expressed sometimes, by saying, that a Man or other Animal is Born so;
and sometimes by saying, that a Thing has been Generated such; and sometimes
also, that it is thus or thus Qualified by its Original Temperament and
Constitution.

4. Instead of the Word Nature taken in the fourth Acception [for, an Internal
Principle of Local Motion] we may say sometimes, that this or that Body Moves
as it were, or else that it seems to Move, spontaneously (or of its own accord)
upwards, downwards, etc. or, that it is put into this or that Motion, or
determined to this or that Action, by the concourse of such or such (proper)
Causes.

5. For Nature in the fifth signification, [for, the established course of
Things Corporeal] it is easy to substitute what it denotes, the established
Order, or the settled Course of Things.

6. Instead of Nature in the sixth sense of the Word [for, as Aggregate of the
Powers belonging to a Body, especially a Living one] we may employ the
Constitution, Temperament, or the Mechanism, or the Complex of the Essential
Properties or Qualities, and sometimes the Condition, the Structure, or the
Texture of that Body. And if we speak of the greater Portions of the World, we
may make use of one or other of these Terms, Fabric of the World, System of
the Universe, Cosmical Mechanism, or the like.

7. Where Men are wont to employ the Word Nature in the seventh sense [for, the
Universe, or the Systeme of the Corporeal Works of God] it is easy, and as
short, to make use of the Word World or Universe; and instead of the Phenomenon
of Nature to substitute the Phenomenon of the Universe, or of the World.

8. And, as for the Word Nature taken in the eighth and last of the
forementioned Acceptions [for, either (as some Pagans styled Her) a Goddess,
or a kind of Semi-Deity] the best way is not to employ it in that sense at all;
or at least as seldom as may be, and that for diverse Reasons, which may in due
place be met with in several Parts of this Essay.

But though the foregoing Diversity of Terms and Phrases may be much increased,
yet I confess it makes but a part of the Remedy, I propose, against the future
mischiefs of the confused Acception of the Word Nature, and the Phrases
grounded on it. For besides the Synonymous Words, and more literal
Interpretations lately proposed, a dextrous Writer may oftentimes be able to
give such a Form (or, as the Modern Frenchmen speak, such a Tour) to his
manyways variable Expressions, as to avoid the necessity of making use of the
Word Nature; or sometimes so much as of those shorter Terms, that have been
lately substituted in its place. And to all this I must add, that though one or
two of the eight forementioned Terms or Phrases, as Quiddity and Cosmical
Mechanism, be Barbarous or Ungenteel; and some other expressions be less short
than the Word Nature: Yet it is more the Interest of Philosophy to tolerate a
harsh Term, that has been long received in the Schools in a determinate sense,
and bear with some Paraphrastical Expressions, than not to avoid an Ambiguity
that is liable to such great inconveniences as have been lately, or may be
hereafter, represented.

There are, I know, some Learned Men, who, (perhaps being startled to find
Nature usually spoken of so much like a kind of Goddess,) will have the Nature
of every thing, to be only the Law that it receives from the Creator, and
according to which it acts on all occasions. And this Opinion seems much of kin
to, if not the same with, that of the famous Helmont, who justly rejecting the
Aristotelian Tenent of the Contrariety or Hostility of the Elements, will have
every Body, without any such respect, to act that which it is commanded to act.
And indeed this Opinion about Nature, though neither clear nor comprehensive
enough, seems capable of a fair Construction. And there is oftentimes some
resemblance between the orderly and regular Motions of inanimate Bodies, and
the Actions of Agents, that, in what they do act, conformably to Laws. And even
I sometimes scruple not, to speak of the Laws of Motion and Rest, that God has
established among things Corporeal, and now and then, (for brevities sake, or
out of Custom) to call them, as Men are wont to do, the Laws of Nature: Having
in due place declared, in what sense I understand and employ these Expressions.

But to speak strictly, (as becomes Philosophers in so weighty a matter) to say
that the Nature of this or that Body, is but the Law of God prescribed to it,
is but an improper and figurative Expression. For, besides that this gives us
but a very defective Idea of Nature, since it omits the general Fabric of the
World, and the Contrivances of particular Bodies, which yet are as well
necessary as Local Motion itself, to the production of particular Effects and
Phaenomena's; besides this, I say, and other imperfections of this Notion of
Nature, that I shall not here insist on, I must freely observe, that, to speak
properly, a Law being but a Notional Rule of Acting according to the declared
Will of a Superior, it is plain, that nothing but an Intellectual Being can be
properly capable of receiving and acting by a Law. For if it does not
understand, it cannot know what the Will of the Legislator is; nor can it have
any Intention to accomplish it, nor can it act with regard to it; or know, when
it does, in Acting, either conform to it or deviate from it. And it is
intelligible to me, that God should at the Beginning impress determinate
Motions upon the Parts of Matter, and guide them, as he thought requisite, for
the Primordial Constitution of Things: and that ever since he should, by his
ordinary and general Concourse, maintain those Powers, which he gave the Parts
of Matter, to transmit their Motion thus and thus to one another. But I cannot
conceive, how a Body, devoid of understanding and sense, truly so called, can
moderate and determine its own Motions; especially so, as to make them
conformable to Laws, that it has no knowledge or apprehension of. And that
Inanimate Bodies, how strictly soever called Natural, do properly act by Laws,
cannot be evinced by their sometimes acting Regularly, and, as Men think, in
order to determinate Ends: Since in Artificial things we see many Motions very
orderly performed, and with a manifest Tendency to particular and pre-design'd
Ends; as in a Watch, the Motions of the Spring, Wheels and other parts, are so
contemperated and regulated, that the Hand upon the Dyal moves with a great
Uniformity, and seems to moderate its Motion, so as not to arrive at the
Points, that denote the time of the day, either a minute sooner, or a minute
later, than it should do, to declare the hour. And when a Man shoots an Arrow
at a Mark, so as to hit it, though the Arrow moves toward the Mark, as it
would if it could and did design to strike it, yet none will say, that this
Arrow moves by a Law, but by an External, though well directed, Impulse.

SECT. III.
II. BUT possibly the Definition of a Philosopher may exempt us from the
perplexities, to which the Ambiguous expressions of common Writers expose us. I
therefore thought fit to to consider, with a somewhat more than ordinary
attention, the Famous Definition of Nature that is left us by Aristotle, which
I shall recite rather in Latin than in English, not only because it is very
familiarly known among Scholars, in that Language, but because there is
somewhat in it, that I confess seems difficult to me, to be without
Circumlocution rendered intelligibly in English: Natura (says He) est
Principium and causa Motus and Quietis ejus, 2 Phys. c. 1. l. 3.
in quo inest, primo per se, and non secundum accidens. But though when I
considered that according to Aristotle, the whole World is but a System of the
Works of Nature; I thought it might well be expected, that the Definition of a
thing, the most important in Natural Philosophy, should be clearly and
accurately delivered; yet to me this celebrated Definition seemed so dark, that
I cannot brag of any assistance I received from it, toward the framing of a
clear and satisfactory Notion of Nature. For I dare not hope, that what, as to
me, is not itself intelligible, should make me understand what is to be
declared or explicated by it. And when I consulted some of Aristotle's
Interpreters upon the sense of this Definition, I found the more considerate of
them so puzzled with it, that their Discourses of it seemed to tend, rather to
free the Maker of it from Tautology and Self-contradiction, than to manifect
that the Definition itself is good and instructive, and such as affords a fair
account of the thing Defined. And indeed, though the immoderate Veneration they
cherish for their Master, engages them to make the best they can of the
Definition given by him, even when they cannot justify it without strained
Interpretations, yet what every one seems to defend in gross, almost every one
of them censures in parcels; this Man attacking one part of the Definition, and
that Man another, with Objections so weighty, (not to call some of them so
unanswerable) that if I had no other Arguments to urge against it, I might
borrow enough from the Commentators on it, to justify my dislike of it.

However, we may hereafter have occasion to consider some of the main parts of
this Definition, and in the mean while, it may suffice that we observe, that
several things are commonly received as belonging to the Idea, or Notion of
Nature, that are not manifestly or not at all comprehended in this Aristotelian
Definition, which does not declare, whether the Principle or Cause (which
Expression already makes the sense doubtful) here mentioned is a Substance, or
an Accident; and if a Substance, whether Corporeal or Immaterial, nor is it
clearly contained in this Definition, that Nature does all things most wisely,
and still acts by the most compendious ways without ever missing of her end,
and that she watches against a vacuum for the welfare of the Universe, to omit
diverse other things, that you will find ascribed to her in the following
Section: To which I now proceed.

That the great shortness of this Third Section may not make it too
disproportionate in length, to the others, this Tract consists of; I shall in
this place, though I doubt it be not the most proper that could be chosen,
endeavor to remove betimes the Prejudice, that some Divines and other Pious
Men may perhaps entertain, upon the account, as they think, of Religion,
against the care I take, to decline the frequent use of that Word Nature, in
the Vulgar Notion of it: Reserving to another and fitter place some other
things, that may relate to the Theological scruples, if any occur to me, that
our Free Inquiry may occasion.

The Philosophical Reason that inclines me to forbear, as much as conveniently
I can, the frequent use of the Word Nature, and the Forms of Speech that are
derived from it, is, That it is a Term of great Ambiguity: On which score I have
observed, that, being frequently and unwarily employed, it has occasioned much
darkness and confusion in many Men's Writings and Discourses. And I little
doubt, but that others would make the like Observations, if early Prejudices
and universal Custom did not keep them from taking notice of it.

Nor do I think my self obliged, by the just Veneration I owe and pay Religion,
to make use of a Term so inconvenient to Philosophy. For I do not find that for
many Ages the Israelites, that then were the only People and Church of God,
made use of the Word Nature in the Vulgar Notion of it. Moses in the whole
History of the Creation, where it had been so proper to bring in this first of
second Causes, has not a word of Nature. And whereas Philosophers presume, that
she, by her Plastic Power and Skill, forms Plants and Animals out of the
Universal Matter; the Divine Historian ascribes the Formation of them to Gods
immediate Fiat. Genesis i. 11. And God said, let the Earth bring forth Grass, and
the Herb yielding Seed, and the Fruit tree yielding Fruit after his kind, etc.
And again, Verse. 24, God said, Let the Earth bring forth the living Creature
after its kind, etc. Verse. 25, And God (without any mention of Nature) made the
Beast of the Earth after his kind. And I do not remember, that in the Old
Testament, I have met with any one Hebrew word that properly signifies Nature,
in the sense we take it in. And it seems, that our English Translators of the
Bible were not more fortunate in that, than I; for, having purposely consulted
a late Concordance, I found not that Word Nature in any Text of the Old
Testament. So likewise, though Job, David and Solomon, and other Israelitish
Writers, do, on diverse occasions, many times mention the Corporeal Works of
God, yet they do not take notice of Nature, which our Philosophers would have
his great Vicegerent in what relates to them. To which, perhaps it may not be
impertinent to add, that, though the late famous Rabbi Menasseh Ben Israel, has
purposely written a Book of numerous Problems touching the Creation, yet I do
not remember that he imploys the Word Nature, in the received Notion of it, to
give an account of any of Gods Mundane Creatures. And when St. Paul himself,
who was no stranger to the Heathen Learning, writing to the Corinthians who
were Greeks, speaks of the Production of Corn out of Seed sown, he does not
attribute the produced Body to Nature, but when he had spoken of a grain of
Wheat, 1 Cor. xv. 37, 38.
or some other seed put into the ground, he adds, that God gives it such a Body
as he pleases, and to every seed its own Body, i. e. the Body belonging to its
kind. And a greater than St. Paul, speaking of the gaudiness of the Lillies,
(or, as some will have it, Tulips) uses this Expression, If God so cloth the
grass of the Field, etc. Matt. vi. 28, 29, 30. The Celebrations that David,
Job, and other Holy Hebrews, mentioned in the Old Testament, make an occasion
of the admirable Works they contemplated in the Universe, are addressed
directly to God himself, without taking notice of Nature. Of this, I could
multiply Instances, but shall here, for brevity's sake, be contented to name a
few, taken from the Book of Psalms alone. In the hundredth of those Hymns, the
Penman of it makes this, That God has made us, the ground of an Exhortation, To
enter into his Gates with Thanksgiving, and into his Courts with Praise, Psalm.
lxxix. 34. And in another, Let the Heaven and Earth praise God, [that is, give
Men ground and occasion to Praise Him] congruously to what David elsewhere says
to the Great Creator of the Universe. All thy work's shall praise thee, O Lord,
and thy Saints shall bless thee, Psalm. cxlv. 10. And in another of the Sacred
Hymns, the same Royal Poet says to his Maker, Thou have covered me in my
Mothers womb. I will praise thee, for I am fearfully and wonderfully made,
mavelous are thy works, and that my soul knows right well, Psalm. cxxxix.
13, 14.

I have sometimes doubted, whether one may not on this occasion add, that, if
Men will need takes in a Being subordinate to God, for the management of the
World; it seems more consonant to the Holy Scripture, to depute Angels to that
charge, than Nature. For I consider, that, as to the Celestial Part of the
Universe, in comparison of which the Sublunary is not perhaps the
ten-thousandth part; both the Heathen Aristotelian's, and the School
Philosophers among the Christians, teach, the Celestial Orbs to be moved or
guided by Intelligences, or Angels. And as to the lower or sublunary World,
besides that the Holy Writings teach us, that Angels have been often employed
by God for the Government of Kingdoms, (as is evident out of the Book of
Daniel) and the Welfare and Punishment of particular Persons; one of those
Glorious Spirits, is, in the Apocalypse, expressly styled the Angel of the
Waters: Rev. xvi. 5.
Which Title diverse Learned Interpreters think to be given him, because of his
Charge or Office, to oversee and preserve the Waters. And I remember, that in
the same Book there is mention made of an Angel, that had Power, Rev. xiv. 18.
Authority, or Jurisdiction, ((...)) over the Fire: And though the Excellent
Grotius gives another conjecture of the Title given the Angel of the Waters;
yet in his Notes upon the next Verse save one, Verse 7.
he teaches, That there was an Angel appointed to preserve the Souls that were
kept under the Altar there-mention'd. And if we take the Angel of the Waters to
be the Guardian or Conserver of them, (perhaps as the Romans (in whose Empire
St. John wrote) had special Officers to look to their Aqueducts and other
Waters;) it may not be amiss to observe (upon the by) that he is introduced
Praising his and his fellow-Spirits Great Creator: Which is an Act of Religion,
that, for ought I know, none of the Naturists, whether Pagan or even
Christians, ever mentioned their Nature to have performed.

I know it may on this occasion be alleged, that subordinata non pugnant, and
Nature being God's Vicegerent, her Works are indeed his. But that he has such a
Vicegerent, it is one of the main businesses of this Discourse to call in
Question, and till the Affirmative be solidly proved, (nay, and though it were
so) I hope I shall be excused, if with Moses, Job, and David, I call the
Creatures, I admire in the visiible World, the Works of God, (not of Nature)
and praise rather Him than Her, for the wisdom and goodness displayed in them:
Since among the Israelites, till they were overrun and corrupted by Idolatrous
Nations, there was for many Ages a deep silence of such a Being, as we now call
Nature. And I think it much more safe and fit, to speak as did those, who for
so long a time were the peculiar People of God, than which the Heathen Poets
and Philosophers, who were very prone to ascribe Divinity to his Creatures, and
sometimes even to their own.

I mention these things, not with Design to engage in the Controversy, about
the Authority or Use of the Scripture in Physical Speculations, but to obviate
or remove a prejudice, that (as I formerly intimated) I fear may be taken up,
upon the account of Theology or Religion, against my studiously unfrequent
employing the word Nature, in the vulgar sense of it; by showing, that, Whether
or no the Scriptures be not designed to teach us higher and more necessary
Truths than those that concern Bodies, and are discoverable by the mere light
of Reason; both its expressions and its silence give more countenance to our
Hypothesis, than to that of the Naturists.

SECT. IV.
III. HAving shown, that the Definition given of Nature by Aristotle himself,
as great a Logician as he was, has not been able to satisfy so much as his
Interpreters and Disciples, what his own Idea of Nature was; 'twould be to
little purpose to trouble you and my self, with enquiring into the Definitions
and Disputes of other Peripateticks, about so obscure and perplexed a Subject;
especially, since it is not my business in this Tract, solicitously to examine
what Aristotle thought Nature to be, but what is to be thought of the vulgarly
received Notion of Nature; and though of this, the Schools have been the chief
Propagators, for which Reason it was fit to take notice of their Master
Aristotle's Definition; yet the best way, I know, to investigate the commonly
received Opinion of Nature, is, to consider what Effata or Axioms do pass for
current about Her; and what Titles and Epithets are unanimously given Her, both
by Philosophers and other Writers, and by the generality of Men that have
occasion to Discourse of Her and Her actings.

Of these Axioms and Epithets, the principal seen to be these that follow.

Natura est sapientissima, adeoque opus Naturae est opus Intelligentiae.

Arist. de Coelo, l. II. c. 11.
Natura nihil facit frustra.

Natura fine suo nunquam excidit.

Arist. de Coelo l. II. c. 5. it. de Genesis l. II. c. 10.. 22.
Natura semper facit quod optimum est.

Natura semper agit per vias brevissimas.

Natura neque redundat in superfluis, neque deficit in necessariis.

Omnis Natura est conservatrix sui.

Natura est morborum medicatrix.

Natura semper invigilat conservationi Vniversi.

Natura vacuum horret.

From all these Particulars put together, it may appear, that the vulgar Notion
of Nature may be conveniently enough expres'd by some such Description as this.

Nature is a most wise Being, that does nothing in vain, does not miss of her
Ends; does always that which (of the things she can do) is best to be done; and
this she does by the most direct or compendious ways, neither employing any
things superfluous, nor being wanting in things necessary; she teaches and
inclines every one of her Works to preserve it self. And, as in the Microcosm
(Man) it is she that is the Curer of Diseases, so in the Macrocosm (the World,)
for the conservation of the Universe, she abhors a Vacuum, making particular
Bodies act contrary to their own Inclinations and Interests, to prevent it, for
the public Good.

What I think of the Particulars, that make up this Paneygrical Description of
Nature, will (God permitting) be told you in due place; my present work being
only to make you the clearest Representation I can, of what Men generally (if
they understand themselves) do, or with Congruity to the Axioms they admit and
use, ought to conceive Nature to be.

It Is not unlike that you may expect, or wish, that on this occasion, I should
propose some Definition or Description of Nature, as my own. But declining (at
least at present) to say any thing, Dogmatically, about this matter, I know not
whether I may not, on this occasion, confess to you, that I have sometimes been
so Paradoxical, or (if you please) so Extravagant, as to entertain, as a
serious Doubt, what I formerly intimated, viz. Whether Nature be a Thing, or a
Name? I mean, whether it be a real Existent Being, or a notional Entity,
somewhat of kin to those fictitious Terms, that Men have devised, that they
might compendiously express several things together, by one Name? as when, for
Instance, we speak of the Concocting Faculty ascribed to Animals; those that
consider, and are careful to understand, what they say, do not mean I know not
what Entity, that is distinct from the Human Body, as it is an Engine curiously
contrived, and made up of stable and fluid parts; but, observing an actuating
power and fitness in the Teeth, Tongue, Spittle, Fibers and Membranes of the
Gullet and Stomach, together with the natural Heat, the Ferment, or else the
Menstruum,) and some other Agents, by their Cooperation, to cook or dress the
Aliments, and change them into Chyle; observing these things, I say, they
thought it convenient, for brevity's sake, to express the Complex of those
Causes, and the Train of their Actions, by the summary Appellation of
concocting Faculty.

Whilst I was indulging my self, in this kind of Ravings, it came into my mind,
that the Natuists might demand of me, How, without admitting their Notion, I
could give any tolerable Account of those, most useful, Forms of Speech, which
Men employ, when they say, That Nature does this or that; or, That such a thing
is done by Nature, or according to Nature, or else happens against Nature? And
this Question I thought the more worth answering, because these Phrases are so
very frequently used by Men of all sorts, as well Learned as Illiterate, that
this Custom has made them be thought, not only very convenient, but necessary;
insomuch, that I look upon it as none of the least things, that has procured so
general a reception to the vulgar notion of Nature, that these ready and
commodious Forms of Speech suppose the Truth of it.

It may therefore, in this place, be pertinent to add, That such Phrases, as,
that Nature, or Faculty, or Faculty, or Suction, does this or that, are not the
only ones, wherein I observe, that Men ascribe to a notional thing, that which,
indeed, is performed by real Agents; as, when we say, that the Law punishes
Murder with Death, that it protects the Innocent, releases a Debtor out of
Prison, when he has satisfied his Creditors (and the Ministers of Justice) on
which, or the like occasions, we may justly say, That it is plain that the Law,
which, being in it self a dead Letter, is but a notional Rule, cannot, in a
Physical sense, be said to perform these things; but they are really performed
by Judges, Officers, Executioners, and other Men, acting according to that
Rule. Thus, when we say, that Custom does this or that, we ought to mean only,
that such things are done by proper Agents, acting with Conformity to what is
usual, (or customary) on such Occasions. And, to give you an yet more apposite
Instance, do but consider, how many Events are wont to be ascribed to Fortune
or Chance; and yet Fortune is, in reality, no Physical Cause of any thing, (for
which Reason probably it is, that Ancienter Naturalists than Aristotle, as
himself intimates, take no notice of it, when they treat of Natural Causes,)
and only denotes, that those Effects, that are ascribed to it, were produced by
their true and proper Agents, without intending to produce them; as, when a Man
shoots at a Deer, and the Arrow lightly glancing upon the Beast, wounds some
Man that lay beyond him, unseen by the Archer; it is plain, that the Arrow is a
Physical Agent, that acts, by virtue of its Fabric and Motion, in both these
Effects; and yet Men will say, that the slight hurt it gave the Deer, was
brought to pass according to the course of Nature, because the Archer designed
to shoot the Beast; but the mortal Wound, it gave the Man, happened by Chance*
because the Archer intended not to shoot Him, or any Man else. And, whereas
diverse of the old Atomical Philosophers, pretending (without good Reason, as
well as against Piety) to give an account of the Origin of things, without
recourse to a Deity, did sometimes affirm the World to have been made by
Nature, and sometimes by Fortune, promiscuously employing those Terms: They did
it, (if I guess aright) because they thought neither of them to denote any true
and proper Physical Cause, but rather certain Conceptions, that we Men have, of
the manner of acting of true and proper Agents. And therefore, when the
Epicureans taught, the World to have been made by Chance, it is probable, that
they did not look upon Chance, as a True and Architectonick Cause of the System
of the World, but believed all things to have been made by the Atoms,
considered as their Conventions and Concretions into the Sun, Stars, Earth, and
other Bodies, were made without any Design of Constituting those Bodies.

Whilst this Vein of framing Paradoxes yet continued, I ventured to proceed so
far, as to Question, Whether one may not infer, from what has been said, That
the chief Advantage a Philosopher receives from what Men call Nature, be not,
that it affords them, on diverse occasions, a Compendious way of expressing
themselves? Since (thought I,) to consider things otherwise than in a Popular
way, when a Man tells me, that Nature does such a thing, he does not really
help me to understand, or to explicate, how it is done. For it seems manifest
enough, that whatsoever is done in the World, at least wherein the rational
Soul intervenes not, is really effected by Corporeal Causes and Agents, acting
in a World so framed as Ours is, according to the Laws of Motion settled by the
Omniscient Author of things.

When a Man knows the contrivance of a Watch or Clock, by viewing the several
pieces of it, and seeing how, when they are duly put together, the Spring or
Weight sets one of the Wheels a work, and by that another, till by a fit Conse
cution of the Motions of these and other parts, at length the Index comes to
point at the right Hour of the Day: The Man, if he be wise, will be well enough
satisfied with this knowledge of the Cause of the proposed Effect, without
troubling himself to examine, whether a Notional Philosopher will call the
time-measuring Instrument, an Ens per se, or an Ens per accidens? And whether
it performs its Operations by virtue of an internal Principle, such as the
Spring of it ought to be? or of an external one, such as one may think the
appended Weight? And, as he, that cannot, by the Mechanical affections of the
parts of the Universal matter, explicate a Phenomenon, will not be much helped
to understand, how the Effect is produced, by being told, that Nature did it:
So, if he can explain it Mechanically, he has no more need to think, or (unless
for brevity's sake) to say, that Nature brought it to pass, than he, that
observes the Motions of a Clock, has to say, that it is not the Engine, but it is
Art, that shows the Hour; whereas, without considering that general and
uninstructive Name, he sufficiently understands how the parts, that make up the
Engine, are determined by their Construction, and the Series of their Motions,
to produce the Effect that is brought to pass.

When the lower end of a Reed, being dipped, for Instance, in Milk or Water, he
that holds it, does cover the upper end with his Lips, and fetches his Breath,
and hereupon the Liquor flows into his Mouth: We are told, that Nature raises
it to prevent a Vacuum, and this way of raising it, is called Suction; but,
when this is said, the word Nature does but furnish us with a short Term, to
express a concourse of several Causes; and so does in other Cases, but what the
Word Suction does in this. For neither the one, nor the other, helps us to
conceive, how this, seemingly spontaneous, Ascension of a heavy Liquor is
effected; which they that know, that the outward Air is a heavy fluid, and
gravitates, or presses, more upon the other parts of the Liquor, than the Air,
contained in the Reed, (which is rarefy'd by the Dilatation of the Sucker's
Thorax) does upon the included part of the Surface, will readily apprehend,
that the smaller pressure will be surmounted by the greater, and, consequently
yield to the Ascension of the Liquor, which is, by the prevalent external
pressure, impelled up into the Pipe, and so into the Mouth, (as I, among
others, have elsewhere fully made out.) So that, according to this Doctrine,
without recurring to Nature's Care, to prevent a Vacuum, one that had never
heard of the Peripatetick Notions of Nature, or of Suction, might very well
understand the mentioned Phenomenon. And if afterward he should be made
acquainted with the received Opinions, and Forms of Speech, used on this
occasion, he would think, that so to ascribe the Effect to Nature, is needless,
if not also erroneous; and that the common Theory of Suction can afford him
nothing, but a compendious Term, to express, at once the Concourse of the
Agents, that make the Water ascend.

How far, I think, these extravagant Reasonings may be admitted, you will be
enabled to discern, by what you will hereafter meet with, relating to the same
Subjects, in the VII. Section of this Discourse. And therefore, returning now
to the rise of this Digression, namely, That it is not unlike you may expect, I
should, after the Vulgar Notion of Nature, that I lately mentioned, without
acquiescing in it, substitute some Definition or Description of Nature, as
Mine: I hope you will be pleased to remember, that the Design of this Paper
was, to examine the Vulgar Notion of Nature, not propose a new one of my own.
And indeed the Ambiguity of the Word is so great, and it is, even by Learned
Men, usually employed to signify such different things; that, without
enumerating and distinguishing its various Acceptions, 'twere very unsafe to
give a Definition of it, if not impossible to deliver one that would not be
liable to Censure. I shall not therefore presume to Define a thing, of which
there is yet no settled and stated Notion agreed on among Men. And yet, that I
may, as far as I dare, comply with your couriosity, I shall tell you, that if I
were to propose a Notion, as less unfit than any I have met with, to pass for
the principal Notion of Nature, with regard to which, many Axioms and
Expressions, relating to that Word, may be not inconveniently understood, I
should distinguish between the universal, and the particular Nature of Things.
And, of universal Nature, the Notion, I would offer, should be some such as
this, That Nature is the Aggregate of the Bodies, that make up the World,
framed as it is, considered as a Principle, by virtue whereof, they Act and
Suffer according to the Laws of Motion, prescribed by the Author of Things.
Which Desrciption may be thus Paphras'd, That Nature, in general, is, The
Result of the Universal Matter, or Corporeal Substance of the Universe,
considered as it is contrived into the present Structure and Constitution of
the World, whereby all the Bodies, that compose it, are enabled to act upon,
and fitted to suffer from, one another, according to the settled Laws of Motion.
I expect, that this Description will appear Prolix, and require to be heedfully
perused: But the Intricateness and Importance of the Subject hindered me from
making it shorter, and made me choose rather to presume upon your Attention,
that not endeavor to express my self intelligibly and warily, about a Subject
of such moment. And this will make way for the other (Subordinate) Notion, that
is to attend the former Description: Since the particular Nature, of an
Individual Body, consists in the general Nature, applied to a distinct portion
of the Universe. Or rather, supposing it to be placed, as it is, in a World,
framed by God, like Ours, it consists in a Convention of the Mechanical
affections (such as Bigness, Figure, Order, Situation, Contexture, and Local
Motion) of its parts, (whether sensible or insensible) convenient and
sufficient to constitute in, or to entitle to, its particular Species or
Denominations, the particular Body they make up, as the Concourse of all these
is considered as the Principle of Motion, Rest, and Changes, in that Body.

If you will have me give to these two Notions more compendious Expessions, now
that, by what has been said, I presume, you apprehend my Meaning; I shall
express, what I called General Nature, by Cosmical Mechanism, that is, a
Comprisal of all the Mechanical Affections (Figure, Size, Motion, etc.) that
belong to the matter of the great System of the Universe. And, to denote the
Nature of this or that Particular Body, I shall style it, the Private, the
Particular, or (if you please) the Individual Mechanism of That Body; or, for
Brevity's sake, barely the Mechanism of it, that is, the Essential.
Modification, if I may so speak, by which, I mean, the Comprisal of all its
Mechanical Affections convened in the Particular Body, considered, as it is
determinately placed, in a World so constituted, as Ours is.

It Is like, you will think it strange, that in this Description I should make
the present Fabric of the Universe, a Part, as it were, of the Notion I frame
of Nature, though the generality of Philosophers, as well as other Men, speak
of Her, as a plastic Principle of all the Mundane Bodies, as if they were Her
Effects; and therefore they usually call them, the Works of Nature; and the
Changes that are observed in them, the Phenomenon of Nature. But, for my part,
I confess, I see no need to acknowledge any Architectonick Being, besides God,
Antecedent to the first Formation of the World.

The Peripateticks, whose School either devised, or mainly propagated, the
Received Notion of Nature, conceiving (not only Matter, but) the World to be
Eternal, might look upon it, as the Province, but could not, as the Work of
Nature, which, in their Hypothesis, is its Guardian, without having been its
Architect.

The Epicureans themselves, that would refer all things, that are done in the
World, to Nature, cannot, according to their Principles, make what they now
call Nature, to have been Antecedent to the first Formation of our present
World. For, according to their Hypothesis, whilst their numberless Atoms wildly
roved in their infinite Vacuity, they had nothing belonging to them, but
Bigness, Figure and Motion: And 'twas by the Coalition, or Convention of these
Atoms, that the World had its Beginning. So that, according to them, it was not
Nature, but Chance, that Framed the World; though afterward, this Original
Fabric of things, does, by virtue of its Structure, and the innate and
unloseable motive power of Atoms, continue things in the same state for the
main; and this course, though casually fallen into, and continued without
Design, is that, which, according to their Hypothesis, ought to pass for Nature.

And, as mere Reason does not oblige me to acknowledge such a Nature, as we
call in Question, Antecedent to the Origin of the World; so neither do I find,
that any Revelation, contained in the Holy Scriptures, clearly teaches, that
there was then such a Being. For, in the History of the Creation, it is expressly
said, that In the beginning God made the Heavens and the Earth; and, in the
whole Account that Moses gives of the progress of it, there is not a word of
the Agency of Nature; and, at the later end, when God is introduced, as making
a re-view of all the Parts of the Universe, it is said, Genesis i. 31.
that God saw every thing that he had made; and it is soon after added, that He
blessed and sanctified the Seventh Day, Genesis ii. 3.
because, in it, (or rather, just before it, as I find the Hebrew Particle
elsewhere used,) He had rested from all his Works, which God created and made.
And though there be a passage in the Book of Job, Job. xxxviii. 4, 6, 7.
that, probably enough, argues the Angels (there called, the Sons of God) to
have existed, either at the beginning of the first Day's Work, or some time
before it; yet it is not there so much as intimated, that they were Cooperators,
with their Maker, in the Framing of the World, of which they are represented as
Spectators and Applauders, but not so much as Instruments. But since
Revelation, as much as I always reverence it, is, I confess, a Foreign
Principle in this Philosophical Enquiry, I shall wave it here, and tell you,
That, when I consult only the Light of Reason, I am inclined to apprehend the
First Formation of the World, after some such manner as this.

I think it probable, (for I would not Dogmatize on so weighty, and so
difficult a Subject,) that the Great and Wise Author of Things, did, when he
first Formed the universal and undistinguished matter, into the World, put its
Parts into various Motions, whereby they were necessarily divided into
numberless Portions of differing Bulks, Figures, and Scituations, in respect of
each other. And that, by his Infinite Wisdom and Power, he did so guide and
overrule the Motions of these Parts, at the beginning of things, as that
(whether in a shorter or a longer time, Reason cannot well determine) they were
finally disposed into that Beautiful and Orderly Frame, we call the World;
among whose Parts some were so curiously contrived, as to be fit to become the
Seeds, or Seminal Principles, of Plants and Animals. And I further conceive,
that he settled such Laws or Rules, of Local Motion, among the Parts of the
Universal Matter, that by his ordinary and preserving Concourse, the several
Parts of the Universe, thus once completed, should be able to maintain the
great Construction, or System and Economy, of the Mundane Bodies, and
propagate the Species of Living Creatures. So that, according to this
Hypothesis, I suppose no other Efficient of the Universe, but God himself,
whose Almighty Power, still accompanied with his Infinite Wisdom, did at first
Frame the Corporeal World, according to the Divine Idea's, which he had, as
well most freely, as most wisely, determined to conform them to. For, I think,
it is a Mistake to imagine, (as we are wont to do) that what is called, the
Nature of this or that Body, is wholly comprised in its own Matter, and its (I
say not Substantial, but) Essential Form; as if from that, or these only, all
its Operations must flow. For an Individual Body, being but a Part of the
World, and encompassed with other Parts of the same great Automaton, needs the
Assistance, or Concourse, of other Bodies, (which are external Agents) to
perform diverse of its Operations, and exhibit several Phaenomena's, that belong
to it. This would quickly and manifestly appear, if, for Instance, an Animal or
an Herb could be removed into those Imaginary Spaces, the Schoolmen tell us
of, beyond the World; or into such a place, as the Epicureans fancy their
Intermundia, or empty Intervals, between those numerous Worlds, their Master
dreamed of. For, whatever the Structures of these living Engines be, they would
as little, without the Co-operations of external Agents; such as the Sun,
Ether, Air, etc. be able to exercise their Functions, as the great Mills,
commonly used with us, would be to Grind Corn, without the assistance of Wind
or running Water. Which may be thought the more credible, if it be considered,
that by the mere Exclusion of the Air, (though not of Light, or the Earth's
Magnetical Effluvia, etc.) procured by the Air-pump, Bodies placed in an
extraordinary large Glass, will presently come into so differing a state, that
warm Animals cannot live in it; nor flame (though of pure Spirit of Wine) burn;
nor Syringes draw up Water; nor Bees, or such winged Insects, fly; nor
Caterpillars crawl; nay, nor Fire run along a train of dried Gunpowder: All
which I speak upon my own experience. According to the foregoing Hypothesis, I
consider the frame of the World already made, as a Great, and, if I may so
speak, Pregnant Automaton, that, like a Woman with Twins in her Womb, or a Ship
furnished with Pumps, Ordnance, etc. is such an Engine as comprises, or
consists of, several lesser Engines. And this Compounded Machine, in
conjunction with the Laws of Motion, freely established and still maintained,
by God among its Parts; I look upon as a Complex Principle, whence results the
settled Order, or Course, of things Corporeal. And that which happens according
to this course, may, generally speaking, be said to come to pass according to
Nature, or to be done by Nature, and that which thwarts this Order may be said
to be Preternatural, or contrary to Nature. And indeed, though Men talk of
Nature as they please, yet whatever is done among things Inanimate, which make
incomparably the greatest part of the Universe, is really done but by
particular Bodies, acting on one another by Local Motion, Modifi'd by the other
Mechanical Affections of the Agent, of the Patient, and of those other Bodies,
that necessarily concur to the Effect, or the Phenomenon produced.

N. B. Those, that do not relish the knowledge of the Opinions and Rights of the
Ancient Jews and Heathens, may pass on to the next or V. Section, and skip the
whole following Excursion, comprised between double Paratheses's, which, though
neither impertinent nor useless to the scope of this Treatise, is not
absolutely necessary to it.

[In the foregoing (III.) Section of this Treatise, I hope I have given a
sufficient Reason of my backwardness to make frequent use of the Word Nature,
and now, in this (IV.) Section, having laid down such a Description, of Nature,
as shows that her Votaries represent her as a Goddess, or at least a
Semi-Deity: 'Twill not be improper in this place, to declare some of the
Reasons of my dissatisfaction with the Notion or Thing it self, as well as with
the use of the Name; and to show, why I am not willing to comply with those
Many, that would impose it upon us as very friendly to Religion.

And these reasons I shall the rather propose, because not only the Generality
of other Learned Men, (as I just now intimated) but that of Divines themselves,
for want of Information, or for some other cause, seem not to have well
considered so weighty a matter.

To manifest therefore the Malevolent Aspect, that the Vulgar Notion of Nature
has had, and therefore possibly may have, on Religion; I think fit, in a
general way, to premise, what things they are, which seem to me to have been
the Fundamental Errors, that misled the Heathen World, as well Philosophers as
others. For, if I mistake not, the looking upon merely Corporeal, and
oftentimes Inanimate Things, as if they were endowed with Life, Sense, and
Understanding; and the ascribing to Nature, and some other Beings, (whether
real or imaginary) things that belong but to God, have been some, (if not the
chief) of the Grand Causes of the Polytheism and Idolatry of the Gentiles.

The most Ancient Idolatry, (taking the word in its laxer sense) or at least
one of the earliest, seems to have been the Worship of the Celestial Lights,
especially the Sun and Moon: That kind of Aboda zara, (...) (as the Jewish
Writers call strange or false Worships) being the most Natural, as having for
its Objects, Glorious Bodies, Immortal, always regularly moved, and very
beneficial to Men. There is Recorded, in the Holy Scripture, a Passage of Job,
who is probably reputed to be, at least, as Ancient as Moses, which seems to
argue, that this Worship, of the two great Luminaries, was practiced in his
time, and looked upon as Criminal by Religious Men, and, as our English Version
renders the Hebrew Words, Punishable by the Civil Magistrate. If, says Job, I
beheld the Sun when it shined, or the Moon walking in brightness: And my heart
has been secretly enticed, or my mouth has kissed my hand, etc. Job xxxi. 26,
27. And that this Idolatry was practiced in Moses's time, may be gathered from
that Passage in Deuteromy. And lest thou lift up thine eyes unto Heaven, and
when thou see the Sun, and the Moon, and the Stars, even all the Host of
Heaven. should be driven to worship them, and serve them, etc. Deuteronomy. 4. 19.
The Sabaeans, or, as many Critics call them, the Zabians, are by some very
Learned Men thought to have been the earliest Idolaters: And the ablest of the
Jewish Rabbis, More Nevoch. lib. iii. cap. 30.
Maimonides, makes them to be so Ancient, that Abraham was put to Dispute
against them. And their Superstition had so overspread the East, in Moses's
time, that the same Maimonides judiciously observes, that diverse of the
Ceremonial Laws, given to the Jews, were instituted in opposition to the
Idolatrous Opinions, Magical Rites, and other Superstititions, of these
Zabians. Of this, he (seconded therein by our Famous Seldom) gives several
Instances; to which, Histor. Orientalis. lib. i. cap. 8.
some are added by the Learned Hottinger. But this only upon the By; my
purpose, in mentioning these Zabians, being to observe to you, that they looked
upon the Planets, and especially the Sun and Moon, as Gods, and Worshipped them
accordingly, taking them for Intelligent Beings, that had a great Interest in
the Government of the World.

This may be proved out of some Eastern Writers, especially Maimonides, who, in
one place, Lib. iii. cap. 36.
asserts the Zabians to have Adored the Sun and Moon, and the Host of Heaven, 2
King. xvii. and 16. 2 Chronicles. xxxiii. and 3.
(as the Scripture styles the Celestial Lights) as true Gods. And this we
shall the less wonder at, if we consult another place of the same Learned
Author, Mor. Nevoch. lib. iii. cap. 25.
where he informs the Readers, that these Idolaters (the Zabians or Chaldaeans)
made Statues of Silver and Gold, those for the Sun, and these for the Moon;
which, being Consecrated by certain Rites and Ceremonies, did invite, and, as
it were, attract the Spirits of these Stars into those Shrines: Whence they
would speak to their Worshippers, acquaint them with things Profitable, and
even Predict to them things to come. And of some such sort of speaking-Images,
some learned Critics suppose the Teraphim (as the Original Text calls them) to
have been, Genesis xxxi. and xix. verse. 30.
that Laban so prized, as to call them his Gods: Which it is guessed Rachel
stole from her Father, lest, by consulting them, he might learn what way her
Husband and his Company had taken in their flight. And the same great Rabbi,
having informed his Readers that he saw several Books of the Zabian
Superstition, somewhere mentions one or two, that treated of speaking-Images.
And 'twas perhaps from these Zabians, or their Disciples, that Zeno, the
Founder of the Stoical Sect, taught, as Stobaeus informs us, that the Sun,
Moon, and the rest of the Stars were endowed with Understanding and Prudence.
And Seneca, an eminent Champion of that rigid Sect, Sen. de Benef. lib. vii.
cap. 21.
reprehends Epicurus and Anaxagoras, (whose Disciple he was in that Opinion)
that they held the Sun to be a burning Stone, or an aggregate of Casual Fires,
and any thing rather than a God.

I am sorry, I could not avoid thinking the Great Hippocrates, to have been
involved in the great Error we are speaking of, when in his Book De Principiis
aut carnibus, near the beginning, I met with this Passage. Videtur sane mihi
id, quod ((...)) calidum vocamus, immortale esse, and cuncta intelligere and
videre, and audire and scire omnia, tum praesentia tum futura. According to
which Supposition, he presently attempts to give some such Account of the
Origin of the World's Frame, as he could in a very few lines; and then spends
the rest of the Book, in giving particular Accounts, how the Parts of the Human
Body come to be Framed, wherein, though I commend the Attempt in general,
because, without acquiescing in I know not what Faculties, he endeavors to
give an intelligible and particular Account, how things come to be performed
and produced; yet I cannot but look on this Book, as a Remarkable Instance of
this Truth, that, without having recourse to the True God, a satisfactory
Account cannot be given of the Original or Primitive Production of the Greater
and Lesser World, since so great a Naturalist as Hippocrates, by the help of
his Idolized (...), was unable to perform this Task, with any satisfaction to
an Attentive and Intelligent Enquirer. And Galen himself, who was not
unacquainted with Moses's Writings, and lived where Christianity was propagated
through a great Part of the World; Galen, I say, even in that admirable Treatise,
De usu Partium, where he so excellently Declares and Celebrates the most Wise
Author of Things, was so far transported with the Error, which infected so
many other Heathen Philosophers, that he Phancied the Earth itself, though he
speaks contemptibly of it, had a certain Soul or Mind, imparted to it by the
Superior Bodies, which, he says, is so conspicuous, Galenus de usu Partium, l.
xvii. apud Lacunam in Epitome Oper. Galeni.
first in the Sun, next in the Moon, and afterward in the other Stars; that by
their Beauty the Contemplator will be induced to think it reasonable, that the
more pure their Corporeal Substance is, it is inhabited by a Mind, so much the
better and more perfect, than that of these Terrestial Bodies. And having
spoken of the reasoning Nature, that shined in Plato, Aristotle, Hipparchus,
Archimedes, etc. He thus infers. Si igitur in tanta colluvie (quo enim alio
nomine quis appellet id quod ex carne, sanguine, pituita, ac bile utraque est
conflatum) men's gignatur, adeo eximia and excellens; quantam ejusdem putandum
est esse excellentiam in Sole, Luna, allisque etiam Sideribus? (to which he
subjoins) Mihi quidem, dum haec mecum voluto, non exigua quaedam men's talis,
per ipsum etiam nos Aerem ambientem, esse extensa videtur. Fieri enim non
potest, quum lucis ipsius Solis sit particeps, quin vim etiam ab ipso assumat.

But this upon the By. Nor did this Opinion, of the Divinity of the Celestial
Bodies, die with the Zabians, or the Greek Philosophers. For I found, by some
Questions I proposed to an Inquisitive Person, who, having lived many years in
China and several of the Neighboring Kingdoms, had acquired Skill enough in
the Tongues to converse with the Natives; I found, I say, that in a solemn
Conference he had with some of the more Eminent and Philosophical Doctors of
the Chinese Religion, they frankly professed, that they Believe the Heavenly
Bodies to be truly Divine, and to be Worshipped, and that upon this particular
Ground, That they imparted to Men such good things, as Light, Heat, Rain, etc.
and the Productions and Consequences of these. And this Belief they declared,
they thought more Rational, than that of the Europeans, who Worship a Deity,
whose neither Shape, nor Color, nor Motion, nor Efficacy on Sublunary things,
were at all visible. It agrees very well with the Opinion of the Ancient
Greeks, who, as Origin relates, Origin. cont. Celsum. l. v.
called the Sun, Moon, and the Stars (...), Conspicuous and Sensible Gods. And
we are taught by Eusebius, that the Ancient Egyptian Theologizers, Prae parat.
l. iii. c. 4. Damascius vita Isidori apud Photium: Colunt prae coeteris Diis
Aegyptii Osirim and Isin (i. e. Solemn and Lunam,) illum omnia condere, and
figuris numerisque materiam adornare arbitrati.
whose Religion was near of kin to that of the Chaldeans, if not borrowed of
it, looked upon the Sun and Moon, whom they Worshipped under the Names of
Osiris and Isis, not only as the Chief Gods, but as the Makers and Governors
of much, if not of all, of the rest of the Universe.

I will not here enquire, whether these Old Heathen Philosophers did, besides
the Stars and other Beings, that they adored as Gods, Believe one only Numen or
Supreme Deity. But that may suffice for my present purpose, which seems
manifest, viz. that they ascribed to Sensible Beings, Attributes peculiar to
the True God; that this was occasioned by their thinking them Intelligent and
Governing, and that these Inferior Beings were, by far, the most usual and
familiar Objects both of their Discourses and their Worship, and that they did
(to use the Phrase of the Apostle of the Gentiles) Worship the Creature
besides, or more than, (for the Greek Word (...) may signify either) the
Creator, Romans i. 25.
who by Moses, the Prophets, and the Apostles, expressly declares a dislike of
this Worship, and even in that more specious and seemingly excuseable kind of
it, which was in use among the Ten Tribes, that Professed, and perhaps
Believed, their Worship to be directed to the one Supreme God, and him the true
God of Israel. But this also upon the By.

This Belief, that the World and diverse of its Principal Parts, Sed nec illam,
quam ejusdem Numinis (Solis) beneficio adeptus sum, sortem conditionemque parvi
facio; quod ex eo genere, penes quod Terrarum Dominatus atque Imperium est,
temporibus nostris ortum acceperim. Julian. ad Regem Solemn.
as the Sun, Moon, Stars, etc. were animated and endowed with Intelligent
Minds, was so Contagious, that, not only it helped to seduce the Emperor Julian
from Christianity to Heathenism, (insomuch that He gives the Sun solemn Thanks
for His Advancement to the Roman Monarchy;) but it infected very Learned Men
among the Jews and Christians. Of the former, I shall need to name but two; the
first being the Famousest and Judiciousest of the Ancienter Rabbis,
Maimonides, in whom, I confess, I wondered to find this Assertion, That the Sun
and Stars were animated Beings, More Novochim. l. 3. c. 29. (ni fallor.
endowed with Understanding and Will: And the other, being-reputed the Chief
and the most Learned of the Moderns, Menasseh Ben Israel, (with whom I have
Conversed at Amsterdam) who in his Problems, Page M. 98.
De Creatione; has this notable Passage. -- Quod de Intelligentiis tradunt id
vero mera Fabula est; nam Coeli, secundum Rabbi Mosem, and rei veritatem,
habent animas proprias rationali vita praeditas, sicut alibi a me
demonstrabitur. And a Greater Man than Maimonides, Origin himself,
Origen-contra Celsum. l. v.
among the Christians, not only in one place adventures to say, Siquidem etiam
Coelestes Stellae Animalia sunt Rationalia, virtute praedit^ illustrata
Cognitionis Lumine, a S^^^entia illa quae est Splendour aeterni Luminis; but in
another proceeds so far, that I found (not without surprise) that He says, The
Christians sing Hymns to God the Lord of all, Origin. contra Celsum. lib. 8.
and God the Word; no otherwise than do the Sun, Moon, and Stars, and the whole
Heavenly Host, since all these, being a Heavenly Quire, do with just Men
celebrate the Supreme God, and his only Begotten [Son.] The Boldness of these
unjustified Paradoxes I the the less wonder at, when I consider, what has for
many Ages been taught by the School Philosophers, from Aristotle; namely, that
the Celestial Spheres had their peculiar Intelligences, that is, Rational,
Immortal, Powerful and Active Beings. It Is true, that in the Jews and
Christians, I have been speaking of; the malignity of the Error, they embraced,
was Corrected and Mastered by the sound and Orthodox Principles they held
together with it. But still it is dangerous for those, that would be Loyal to
Him, Exodus xx.
that styles himself a Jealous God, to Adopt Premises that have been able to
Mis-lead such Great Persons, and from which many Famous Philosophers have
plausibly enough drawn Consequences very repugnant to true Religion. Nor are
Christians themselves so much out of danger of being seduced by these
Heathenish Notions, about an Intelligent World, but that (not again to mention
the Apostate Emperor) even in these times there is lately sprung up a Sect of
Men, as well professing Christianity, as pretending to Philosophy; who (if I be
not mis-inform'd of their Doctrine) do very much symbolize with the Ancient
Heathens, and talk much indeed of God, but mean such a One, as is not really
distinct from the Animated and Intelligent Universe; but is, on that account,
very differing from the True God, that we Christians Believe and Worship. And,
though I find the Leaders of this Sect to be looked upon, by some more Witty
than Knowing Men, as the Discoverers of unheard of Mysteries in Physics and
Natural Theology; yet their Hypothesis does not at all appear to me to be new,
especially when I remember, besides the Passages of the Ancients, cited in this
Paper, some others of the same Import, such as is particularly that of Lucan.

Estque Dei seeds, ubi Terra, and Pontus, and Aer,
Et Coelum, and Virtus: Superos quid quaerimus ultra?
Jupiter est quodcunque vides, quocunque moveris.
The great Affinity between the Soul of the World, so much talked of among the
Heathen Philosophers, and the thing that Men call Nature, makes it fit for me
to take notice, in this place, of the Influence which the Belief of that
Imaginary Soul had upon the Gentiles with reference to Religion.

That diverse of the Ancient Philosophers held the World to be Animated, has
been observed by more than one Learned Man. But that which makes more for my
present purpose, is, that the same Old Sages did also (at least for the most
part) Believe, that this Mundane Soul was not barely a Living, but a most
Intelligent and wisely Active Being. This may be easily enough discerned by
him, that shall heedfully peruse Diogenes Laertius's Lives of the Philosophers,
and particularly of Zeno. But at present I shall rather make use of an Author,
who, though he be very seldom cited for Philosophical History, seems to me to
have been very well versed in it. The Writer I mean, is the Acute Sceptick
Sextus Empiricus, (who is thought to have lived about Plutarch's time, and by
some, to have been his Nephew;) who recites a long Ratiocination of Xenophon,
which, whether it be solid or not, is at least ingenious and plausible, but too
prolix to be Transcribed in this place, where it may suffice to say, that he
thus concludes: Est ergo Mundus mente praeditus and Intelligens, Sextus Empir.
adversus Mathemat. lib. 8.
etc. which Assertion Sextus himself thus proposes for him; Si non esset aliqua
Men's in Mundo, neque ulla Men's in te esset. Est autem in te Men's aliqua; ergo
est etiam in Mundo. Et Ideo Mundus est Mente and Intelligentia praeditus. The
same Sceptick introduces Zeno Cittiens. discoursing thus; quod immittit semen
ejus quod est particeps rationis, est ipsum quoque rationis particeps. Mundus
autem emittit Semen ejus quod est particeps rationis; est ergo Mundus rationis
particeps. To which Testimonies I might add many others out of the same Author,
who, in the same Discourse, tells us, That the Stoics held the World to be an
Animal. But the Opinion that the Old Philosophers, we have been speaking of,
held of the World's being endowed with an Understanding or Rational Soul, will
be yet more evident by what I now proceed to allege, to manifest how this
Opinion of theirs led them to the Worship of another, than the True God.

Sextus Empiricus, in the lately cited Discourse of Xenophon, infers from the
Worlds being an Intelligent Being, that it is also a Divine One; for to the
lately recited Conclusion, Est ergo Mundus mente praeditus and intelligens, he
immediately subjoins this Other, P. M. 326.
Et ideo Deus. And alittle after, repeating their Discourse that defended this
Argumentation of Xenophon against an Objection, he concludes their Reasoning
thus; Ideo Mundus est mente and Intelligentia praeditus: Cum sit autem Mente
and Intelligentia praeditus, est etiam Deus. Quemadmodum (says also Phurnutus
the Philosopher,) nos anima gubernamur, sic and Mundus animam habet, quae
vindicet illum ab interitu; and haec vocatur Jupiter. To which agrees that in
Cicero's Academick Questions; Mundum esse sapientem, and habere mentem, quae
seipsam Fabricata sit, and omnia moderatur, regat. And the Reasoning of the
Stoics in St. Augustine is very ryclear to the same purpose; August. de Civit.
Dei. l. 7. c. 2.
Dicunt (says he, speaking of the Embracers of that Sect) omnia Sidera parts
Iovis esse, and omnia vivere atque rationales animas habere, and ideo sine
Controversia Deos esse. And Socrates is introduced by Aristophanes, as no less
than Invocating the Air and the Ether together, in these words.

O Rex, O Imperator, Aer vaste, quae Terram contines suspensam,
Nec non splendide Ether.
Which brings into my Mind that plain Confession of the Poet Manilius.

Qua pateat, Mundum divino Numine verti,
Atque ipsum esse Deum.
To all these I shall add that notable and express Passage of the Elder Pliny;
Nature. Hist. l. 2. c. 1.
Mundum and hoc quod alio nomine Coelum appellare libuit, cujus circumflexu
teguntur omnia, Numen esse credi par est, aeternum, immensum, neque genitum,
neque interiturum unquam. Sacer est, aeternus, immensus, totus in toto, vero
ipse totum, finitus and infinito similis, extra, intra, cuncta complexus in se,
idemque Naturae opus, and rerum ipsa Natura.

If it be objected, that the Passages, I have cited out of Heathen
Philosophers, concern the Soul of the World, and not Nature; I Answer, that the
Affinity of these Two is so great, that diverse of the Old Sages seem to have
confounded them, and not to have made account of any other Universal Nature,
than the Soul of the World. And however, the great and pernicious Errors they
were led into, by the Belief that the Universe itself, and many of its nobler
Parts, besides Men, were endowed, not only with Life, but Understanding and
Providence, may suffice to make us Christians very Jealous of admitting such a
Being, as that which Men venerate under the Name of Nature: Since they ascribe
to it as many wonderful Powers and Prerogatives, as the Idolaters did to their
Adored Mundane Soul. But I shall give a further Answer to the above proposed
Objection, if I can show, how Sacrilegiously they abused the Being we are
speaking of, as well under the very Name of Nature, as under that of the Soul
of the World. On this occasion I remember a Passage in Nature. Quaest. l. 2. c.
45.
Seneca, that I did not expect to meet with, where, speaking of some Ethnic
Opinions about Thunder, Non Iovem, (says he) qualem in Capitolio colimus,
fulmina mittere, sed custodem rectoremque Vniversi, animam ac Spiritum Mundani
hujus Operis Dominum and Artificem, cui nomen omne convenit. To which, within a
few lines after, he adds, Vis illam Naturam vocare? Non peccabis, est enim ex
quo nata sunt omnia, cujus Spiritu vivimus. Vis illam vocare Mundum? Non
falleris, ipse enim est totum quid, totus suis partibus inditus and se
sustinens vi sua. And the same Author elsewhere, De Benef. l. 4. c. 7.
Nihil (says he) Natura sine Deo est, nec Deus sine Natura, sed idem est
Vterque. And, in another of the Roman Sages, we have this Passage; Natura est
Igitur quae continet Mundum omnem, eumque tuetur, and quidem non sine sensu ac
ratione. And the Opinion, not of a Private Philosopher, but of the Sect of
Stoics, is thus delivered by Lactantius: Lib. 7. Cap. 1.
Isti uno Naturae nomine res diversissimas comprehenderunt, Deum and Mundum,
Artificem and Opus, dicunique alterum sine altero nihil posse, tanquam Natura
sit Deus Mundo permistus. Nam inter dum sic confundunt, ut sit Deus ipsa men's
Mundi, and Mundus sit Corpus Dei; quasi vero simul esse caeperint Mundus and
Deus. And, to let you see, that in this our Free Enquiry, I do not, without
Cause, here and there style Nature sometimes a Semi-Deity, and sometimes a
Goddess, and talk of some Men's Idolizing Her; I shall here annex part of a Hymn
of Orpheus's, addressed immediately to Nature.

(...), etc. which his Interpreter thus renders into Latin; O Natura omnium
Matter Dea, artificiosa admodum Dea,
Suscitatrix honorabilis, multa creans, Divina Regina,
Omnidomans, indomita gubernatrix, ubique splendens.


And after a few Lines; Aetheria, Terrestiis, and Marina Regina, etc. I know
Aristotle, and his Commentators, do not so directly Idolize Nature, as did
Orpheus (or whoever was the Ancient Author of the Hymns, that bear his Name;)
but yet I doubt they pass further than they can justify, when they so freely
and often assert, that Natura est sapientissima, that Opus Naturae est opus
Intelligentiae, that Natura fine suo nunquam excidit, that Natura semper quod
optimum est facit, (to which may be added other-like Axioms:) And when they
most commonly call the Works of God, the Works of Nature, and mention Him and
her together, not as a Creator and a Creature, but as two Coordinate
Governors, like the two Roman Consuls; as when they say frequently, and without
scruple, (what I find to have been first by Aristotle himself)* that Deus and
Natura nihil faciunt frustra; Deus and Natura nihil prorsus faciunt frustra.
Arist. de Coelo, lib. ii. cap. 5.
to which Phrase may agree that Expression of Ovid, where, speaking of the
Chaos, whilst the Bodies, that composed it, lay shuffled together, and were not
yet packed, he says, Hanc Deus and melior litem Natura diremit.

To the recital of the Irreligious Errors of the Ancient Heathens, about the
Divinity of the World, and some of its Principal Parts, as the Sun, Moon,
Stars, Ether, etc. I should add a redargution of them; if I thought it
necessary, in this place, solemnly to refute Opinions, some of which are
altogether precarious, and others very improbable. Those Greek and Latin
Philosophers, that held the Sun to be a Fire, were much at a loss to find out
Fuel to maintain the Flame. But those Zabians and Chaldeans that thought him
endowed, not only with a living Soul, but with Understanding and Will, must, if
they had duly considered things, have been much more puzzled, to find not only
Food for so vast a Body, (above 160 times bigger than the Terraqueous Globe)
but to find in him the Organs necessary to the preparation and digestion of
that Food, and to the other Functions that belong to Animal-Nutrition. And, if
we admit the Cartesian Hypothesis, the Way whereby the Sun, fixed Stars, and
Planets, are Generated, will sufficiently manifest them to be neither
Intelligent nor Living Bodies. And, perhaps, I could here propose a quite other
Hypothesis, about the Nature of the Sun, and the Fuel of its Fire, that may be
countenanced by some Phenomenon and Experiments, without making him other than
an Igneous, and altogether Inanimate Body, whose Flame needs to be repaired by
Fuel furnished to it nearer hand, than from the Sea or Earth. But I purposely
omit such Objections against the Opinion I oppose, as, though drawn from the
Dictates of sound Philosophy, about the Origin of things, may be questioned
without being to be cleared in few words. It Is also without proof, that it is
presumed and asserted, That the Celestial Bodies, newly mentioned, are endowed
with Understanding and Prudence, especially, so as to be able to know the
particular Conditions and Transactions of Men, and hear and grant the Prayers
of their Worshippers. And the Moon, which was one of their Principal Deities,
and by them preferred before all the other Planets and Stars, the Sun excepted,
is so Rude and Mountainous a Body, that it is a wonder that Speculative Men, who
considered how many, how various, and how noble Functions belong to a sensitive
Soul, could think, a Lump or Mass of Matter, so very remote from being fitly
Organized, should be Animated and Governed by a true living and sensitive Soul.
I know that both these Deifiers of the Celestial Globes, and also the Heathen
Disciples of Aristotle, besides diverse of the same mind, even among the
Christians, say great and lofty things of the Quintessential Nature of the
Heavenly Bodies, and their consequent Incorruptibility; of the Regularity of
their Motions, and of their Divine Quality of Light, that makes them refulgent.
But the persuasion they had, of this Quintessential Nature of the Superior Part
of the World, was not, if I guess aright, grounded upon any solid Physical
Reason, but was entertained by them for its Congruity to the Opinion they had
of the Divinity of the Celestial Bodies: Of which, Aristotle himself, See Lib.
xi. cap. 3.
especially in his Books De Coelo, speaks in such a way, as has not a little
contributed, among his Followers; to such an excessive Veneration for those
Bodies, as is neither agreeable to true Philosophy, nor friendly to true
Religion. He himself takes notice, that the Pythagoreans held our Earth to be
One of the Planets, Aristot. de Coelo. l. xi. c. 13.
and that it moved about the Sun, which they placed in the middle of the World.
And since this Hypothesis, of the Earths Motion, was in the last Age revived by
Copernicus, not only those great Men Keplerus, Galileo, and Gassendus, but most
of the best Modern Astronomers; and, besides Descartes and his Sect, many
other Naturalists have embraced this Hypothesis: Which, indeed, is far more
agreeable to the Phenomenon, not only than the Doctrine of Aristotle, (who was
plainly mistaken about the Order and Consistence of the Heavens) but than the
Ancient and generally received Ptolomaick System. Now, supposing the
Terraqueous Globe to be a Planet, he that considers, that it is but a round Mass
of very Heterogeneous Substances, (as appears by the differing Natures of its
great constituent Parts, Land and Sea) whose Surface is very rude and uneven,
and its Body opacous, unless as it happens to be enlightened by the the Sun,
Moon, and Stars, and so very Inorganical for so much as Nutrition, that it
seems wholly unfit to be a living Animal, much less a Rational one. I say, he
that considers such things will scarce be forward to ascribe Understanding and
Providence, much less a Divine Nature, to the other Stars. As for Instance, to
the Moon, which our best Telescopes manifest to be a very Craggy and
Mountainous Body, consisting of Parts of very differing Textures, (as appears
by her brighter Parts and permanent Spots) and which of herself is Opacous,
having no manifest Light, but what she borrows from the Sun, and perhaps from
the Earth.

As for the boasted Immutability of the Heavenly Bodies, besides that it may be
very probably called in question by the Phenomenon of some (for I do not say
every one) of the Comets, that by their Parallax were found to be above the
Moon, and consequently in the Celestial Region of the World; besides this, I
say, the Incorruptibleness and Immutability of the Heavenly Bodies is more than
probably disproveable by the sudden and irregular Generation, Changes and
Destruction, of the Spots of the Sun: Which are sometimes so suddenly
destroyed, that, I remember, in the Year 1660. on the 8 th of May, having left
in the Morning a Spot, whose Motions we had long observed through an excellent
Telescope, with an expectation, that it would last many days visible to us, we
were surpised to find, that when we came to observe it again in the Evening,
it was quite dissipated, though it seemed thick; and by comparing it to the
Sun, we estimated the extent of its Surface to be equal to that of all Europe.
As to the constancy of the motions of the Stars; if the Earth, which we know to
be Inanimated, be a Planet, it moves as constantly and regularly about the Sun,
(in that which they call the Great Orb,) as the other Planets do, or as the
Moon does about the Earth. And I consider, that though we should suppose our
Globe not to be a Planet, yet there would manifestly be a constant motion, and
Regular enough, of a great Part of it: Since (bating some Anomali's, that
Shores, Winds, and some other Extrinsick things, occasion,) there is a Regular
Ebbing and Flowing twice a Day, and also Spring-Tides twice a Month, of that
vast Aggregate of Waters, the Ocean; which perhaps is not inferior in Bulk to
the whole Body of the Moon, and whereof also vast Tracts are sometimes observed
to Shine.

And Lastly, Whereas a great Proof of the Divinity of the Stars is taken from
their Light; though I grant it to be the noblest of Sensible Qualities, yet I
cannot think it a good proof of the Divine, or very Excellent, Nature of Bodies
endowed with it, whether they be Celestial or not. For whereas the Zabians and
Chaldeans Considered and Adored the Planets, as the Chief Gods, our Telescopes
discover to us, that, except the Sun, (if he be one, rather than a Fixed Star)
they Shine but by a borrowed Light; in so much that Venus, as vividly Luminous
as it appears to the naked Eye, is sometimes seen (as I have beheld it) Horned
like the Moon in no long time after her Change. And at this rate also the
Earth, whether it be a Planet or no, is a Luminous Body, being enlightened by
the Sun: And possibly, as a Body forty times bigger, communicates more Light to
the Moon, than it receives from Her, as is probably Argued from the Light seen
on the Surface of the Moon in some of Her Eclipses. And, though in the Night,
when the darkness has widened the Pupils of our Eyes, and the Moon Shines with
an unrivaled Luster, she seems exceeding Bright, yet she may be, for ought I
know, more Opacous than the solid Part of the Terrestrial Globe. For I
remember, that I have more than once heedfully observed a small Cloud in the
West, where the Moon then was, about Sunset; and comparing them together, the
little Cloud, as Opacous and Loose a Body as it was, reflected the Light as
strongly to my Eye, as did the Moon, that seemed perhaps to be not far from It,
both of them appearing like little whitish Clouds, though afterward, as the
Sun descended lower and lower beneath the Horizon, the Moon grew more and more
Luminous. And, speaking of Light Indfienitely, it is so far from Arguing a
Divine Nature in the Bodies that are endowed with it, whether, as the Planets,
by participation from an External Illuminant, or as the Sun, from an Internal
Principle; that a burned Stone, witness that of Bolonia, will afford, in
proportion to its Bulk, incomparably more borrowed Light than one of the
Planets. And a Light from its Internal Constitution may be found, not only in
such abject Creatures as Insects, whether winged, as the Cucupias of
Hispaniola, or creeping, as our Glowworms; but also in Bodies Inanimate and
Corrupted, as in rotten Wood, in stinking Whitings, and diverse other putrified
Fishes. I cannot now stay to Enquire, how the Zabians, and such Idolaters as
they, could make out the Connection, Symmetry, and Subordination or Dependence
of the several Parts of the World, composed of so many different and distant
Beings, endowed not only with Animal Souls, but with their Distinct and
Peculiar Understandings and Wills, and many of them also with Divine Nature.
Nor shall I consider, how strange a Monster, rather than an Animal and a Deity,
those many Heathen Philosophers and their Adherents must make of the Universe,
who held it to be but one; and yet were of the Paradoxical Opinion, that (as
has been elsewhere noted) is roundly professed by Stobaeus, at the very
beginning of his Physical Eclogues, (...), etc. i. e. Jupiter (quidem) totus
Mundus est: Animal ex Animalibus; Numen ex Numinibus compositum.

These, I say, and the like Objections against the Pagan Doctrine, I must not
now insist on, because I perceive that I have slipped into a somewhat long
Digression, which yet perhaps may not be altogether unseasonable or useless,)
which therefore I shall here break off, to resume and conclude the Discourse,
that this Section was allotted to, which I might easily have enlarged, but I
presume there is enough said in it already, to let you see, that it is a
dangerous thing to Believe other Creatures, than Angels and Men, to be
Intelligent and Rational; especially to afcribe to any of them an
Architectonick, Provident and Governing Power. And though I readily
acknowledge, that that there is no great danger, that well Instructed
Christians should, like some Heathens, Worship Nature as a Goddess; yet the
things I formerly alleged, to show it unsafe to cherish Opinions, of kin to
those that misled a Multitude even of Philosophers, make me fear too many, and
not a few of the Learned themselves, may have a Veneration for what they call
Nature, much greater than belongs to a mere Creature: If they do not, to use a
Scripture Expresssion, Romans 1. 25.
Worship the Creature, above or besides the Creator, who, and not the World,
nor the Soul of It, is the True God. And though I should grant, that the
received Notion of Nature does neither subvert, nor much endanger any Principle
of Religion: Yet that is not enough for the purpose of those Naturists I Reason
with, since they are here supposed to make it a fault in others, not to ascribe
to the Nature they Venerate, as much as themselves do: And they represent their
own Notion of it, not only as Innocent, but as very Useful, if not necessary to
Religion.]

SECT. V.
IV. I Come now, Eleutherius, to acquaint you with some of the Reasons, that
have made me backward to entertain such a Notion of Nature, as I have hitherto
Discoursed of. And I shall at present comprise them under the following five.

I. The first whereof, is, That such a Nature, as we are speaking of, seems to
me to be either asserted, or assumed without sufficient Proof. And this single
Reason, if it be well made out, may, I think, suffice for my turn. For, in
matters of Philosophy, where we ought not to take up any thing upon Trust, or
believe it without Proof, it is enough to keep us from believing a thing, That
we have no positive Argument to induce us to assent to it, though we have no
particular Arguments against it. And, if this Rule be to take place in lesser
Cases, sure it ought to hold in this, where we are to entertain the belief of
so Catholic an Agent, that all the others are looked upon but as its
Instruments, that act in subordination to it; and which, being said to have an
immediate Agency in many of the Phenomenon of the World, cannot but be supposed
to be Demonstrable by diverse of them. I have yet met with no Physical
Arguments, either Demonstrative, or so much as considerably Probable, to evince
the Existence of the Nature, we examine. And, though I should admit the use,
that some Divines contend for, of the Holy Scriptures in Philosophical
Controversies, yet I should not be persuaded of the Existence of the Nature, we
Dispute of. For, I do not remember, that the Scripture any where declares to
us, that there is such a thing, (in the sense by me questioned) though (as I
formerly noted more fully in the IV. Section,) in Genesis and some other
places, where the Corporeal Works of God are expressly treated of, (though in
order to Spiritual ends) one might probably enough expect to find some mention
of God's Grand Vicegerent in the Universe of Bodies, if he had established any
such. But, whatever be the true cause of the Scriptur's silence about this
matter, the silence itself is sufficient to justify me, for examining freely,
by Reason, a thing that is not imposed on my belief by Revelation. And, as for
the Physical Arguments that may be brought in favor of the questioned Notion
of Nature, I shall, e're long, examine the Principal of them, and show that
they are not Convincing. To these things may be added, as to the Proof drawn
from the General Opinion about Nature, That, being a Popular, not a Physical
Argument, it may indeed pass for current with the Vulgar, but ought not to do
so with Philosophers.

II. The second Reason is taken from the Unnecessariness of such a Nature, as
is pretended. For, since a great part of the Work of true Philosophers has
been, to reduce the Principles of things to the smallest Number they can,
without making them insufficient; I see not, why we should take in a Principle,
of which we have no need. For, supposing the common Matter of all Bodies to
have been at first divided into innumerable minute Parts, by the Wise Author of
Nature, and these Parts to have been so disposed of, as to form the World,
constituted as it now is; and especially, supposing that the Universal Laws of
Motion, among the Parts of the Matter, have been established, and several
Conventions of Particles contrived into the Seminal Principles of various
things; all which may be effected by the mere Local Motion of Matter, (not left
to itself, but skilfully guided at the beginning of the World) if (I say) we
suppose these things, together with God's ordinary and general Concourse, which
we very reasonably may: I see not, why the same Phenomenon, that we now observe
in the World, should not be produced, without taking in any such Powerful and
Intelligent Being, distinct from God, as Nature is represented to be. And,
'till I see some Instance produced to the contrary, I am like to continue of
this mind, and to think that the Phenomenon, we observe, will genuinely follow
from the mere Fabric and Constitution of the World. As, supposing the Sun and
Moon to have been put, at first, into such Motions about the Earth, as
Experience shows they have; the determinate Celerity of these Motions, and the
Lines, wherein they are performed, will make it necessary, that the Moon should
be sometimes Full, sometimes scarce Illuminated at all to usward, sometimes
Horned, and, in a word, should exhibit such several Phases as every Month she
does, and that at some times She and the Sun should have a Trine, or a Quadrate
Aspect, etc. and that now one, and now the other of them, should at set times
suffer an Eclipse: Though these Eclipses were by the Romans and others of old,
and are by many Unlearned Nations at this day, looked upon as Supernatural
things; and though also Aristotle, and a multitude of his Followers, fancied,
that such Regular Motions could not be maintained without an Assistent
Intelligence, which He and They therefore Assigned to each of the Heavenly
Orbs. And indeed the difficulty, we find, to conceive, how so great a Fabric,
as the World, can be preserved in Order, and kept from running again to a
Chaos, seems to arise from hence, that Men do not sufficiently consider the
unsearchable Wisdom of the Divine Architect or (...) (as the Scripture styles
him) of the World, Heb. xi. 10.
whose piercing Eyes were able to look at once quite through the Universe, and
take into his Prospect both the beginning and end of Time: So that perfectly
fore-knowing, what would be the Consequences of all the possible Conjunctures
of Circumstances, into which Matter, divided and moved according to such Laws,
could, in an Automaton so Constituted as the Present World is, happen to be
put; there can nothing fall out, unless when a Miracle is wrought, that shall
be able to alter the Course of things, or prejudice the Constitution of them,
any further, than He did from the Beginning foresee, and think fit to allow.

Nor am I sure, that the received Notion of Nature, though it be not necessary,
is at least very useful, to explicate Physical Phenomenon. For, besides that, I
shall show e're long, that several Explications, where recourse to it is
presumed to be the most advantageous, are not to be allowed: To give the Nature
of a Things for the Cause of this or that particular Quality, or Operation of
it, is to leave Men as ignorant as they were before; or, at least, is to
acknowledge, that a Philosopher can, in such Cases, assign no better particular
and immediate Causes of Things, than a Shepherd or a Tradesman, that never
learnt Natural Philosophy, can assign of the same things, and of a Thousand
others. And though it be true, (as I formerly also intimated) that, in many
Cases, Philosophers themselves can answer no otherwise, to such Questions as
may be Proposed to them, than by having recourse to the Nature of the Thing;
yet such Answerers do not declare the proper Cause of a Dark Phenomenon, but
only that he, who imploys them, does not yet know it: And so this indefinite
Notion of Nature, which is equally applicable to the resolving of all
difficulties, is not useful to disclose the thing, but to delude the Maker of
the Question, or hide the ignorance of the Answerer.

III. My third Argument is, That the Nature, I question, is so dark and odd a
thing, that it is hard to know what to make of it, it being scarce, if at all,
intelligibly proposed, by them that lay most weight upon it. For it appears not
clearly, whether they will have it to be a Corporeal Substance, or an
Immaterial One, or some such thing, as may seem to be betwixt both; such as
many Peripateticks do represent substantial Forms, and what they call real
Qualities, which diverse Schoolmen hold to be (at least by Miracle) separable
from all Matter whatsoever. If it be merely Corporeal, I confess, I understand
not, how it can be so Wise, and almost Omniscient an Agent, as they would have
it pass for. Besides that, if it be a Body, I would gladly know, what kind of
Body it is, and how, since, among Bodies, there can be no Penetration of
Dimensions, this Body can so intimately pervade, as they pretend Nature does,
all the other Bodies of the World? And to this I would add diverse other
Questions, that would not be easily answered. (But I shall resume this Third
Argument in another place.) If it be said, that Nature is a Semi-substantia, as
some of the Modernest Schoolmen are pleased to call substantial Forms, and real
Qualities; I roundly answer, that I acknowledge no such Chymerical and
Unintelligible Beings, and shall only desire you to apply to them a good part
of the Discourse, made in certain Papers, occasioned by a Chymico-Physical
Essay about Saltpeter, against the pretended Origin, and inexplicable Nature,
of the imaginary substantial Forms of the Peripateticks. It remains therefore,
that this Nature, we speak of, if it be any thing positive, should be an
Immaterial Substance. But to have Recourse to such an one, as a Physical Agent,
and not only a Determiner, but the Grand Author, of the Motion of Bodies, and
that, especially in such familiar Phenomenon, as the Ascension of Water in
Pumps, the Suspension of it in Watering-Pots for Gardens, the running of it
through Siphons, and I know not how many others) and to Explain its Casuality,
as they speak, will, I think, prove a Work exceeding difficult: Though I shall
not here spend time to show you the farther inconveniences of such a
Supposition, being to do that hereafter; and, in the meanwhile, contenting
myself to observe, as to many of the Naturists, That, though their Doctrine may
favor it, they seem rather content to talk darkly, and uncertainly, of what
they call Nature, than by clearly-Defining it, expose it to Objections not
easy to be answered, and who foresee the advantage, that the unsetledness of
the Notion gives them, to pretend Knowledge, or disguise Ignorance.

IV. Since many of the most Learned amongst the Naturists are Christians, and
not few of them Divines too, it may not be improper (which else I should,
perhaps, think it would be,) to add, in this place, that the next thing, for
which I dislike the Vulgar Notion (or Idea) of Nature, is, That I think it
dangerous to Religion in general, and consequently to the Christian.

For this Erroneous Conceit defrauds the True God of diverse Acts of Veneration
and Gratitude, that are due to Him from Men, upon the account of the Visible
World, and diverts them to that Imaginary Being they call Nature, which has no
Title to them; for, whilst Nature is supposed to be an Intelligent Thing, that
wisely and benignly Administers all that is done among Bodies, it is no wonder
that the generality of Philosophers, and, after their Example, of other Men,
should admire and praise Her, for the wonderful, and for the useful things that
they observe in the World. And, in effect, though Nature, in that sense of the
Word I am speaking of, be never (that I remember) to be found in the Sacred
Writings; yet, nothing is to be more frequently met with (and that adorned with
Titles and Encomiums) in the Books of Philosophers, than Nature and Her
Effects. And, if we consider, that, whatever has been said, by some, in excuse
of Aristotle himself, yet the generality of the Peripateticks, from whom the
Vulgar Notion of Nature is chiefly received, made the World to be Eternal, and
referred all the Transactions among the Bodies it contains, to what they called
Nature. Whence, 'twill not be difficult to perceive, that, if they do not quite
exclude God, yet, as they leave him no Interest in the first Formation of the
Universe; so they leave him but very little in the Administration of the Parts
it consists of, especially the Sublunary Ones. So that, instead of the True
God, they have substituted, for us, a kind of a Goddess, with the Title of
Nature: Which, as they look upon as the immediate Agent and Director in all
excellent Productions, so they ascribe to Her the Praise and Glory of Them.

Whether this great Error, in a Point of such Importance, may not Undermine the
Foundation of Religion, I think it may not irrationally be suspected. For,
since the most General and Efficacious Argument, that has persuaded
Philosophers, and other Men, that there is a God and a consideration of the
Providence, is afforded by the visible World, wherein so many Operations and
other Things are observed, that are managed (or performed) with such Conduct
and Benignity, as cannot justly be ascribed but to the Wisdom and Goodness of a
Deity: They that ascribe these Things to mere Nature, do much weaken the force
of that Argument, if they do not quite take away the necessity of acknowledging
a Deity, by showing, that, without any need of having Recourse to Him, of the
Administration of the World and of what is performed among Things Corporeal, an
Account may be given. Though, when Men are put upon considering the matter, and
pressed to declare themselves more clearly, they are ashamed to affirm, that
God and Nature are the same Thing, and, will confess, that She is but his
Vicegerent; yet, in Practice, their Admiration and their Praises are frequently
given to Nature, not to God: In like manner, as, though the Sun be the Fountain
of Light, and the Moon derives all Hers from the Sun; yet the Sea, in Its grand
Motions of Ebbing and Flowing, appears to respect the Moon, and not the Sun:
For thus, the generality of Men, though they will acknowledge that Nature is
inferior and subordinate to God, do yet appear to regard Her more than Him.

To be short, Nature uses to be so frequently recurr'd to, and is so magnified
in the Writings of Physiologers, that the excessive Veneration Men have for
Nature, as it has made some Philosophers (as the Epicureans) deny God, so, it is
to be feared, that it makes many forget Him: And, perhaps, a suspicious Person
would venture to add, That, if other Principles hindered not (as, I know, that
in many, and, think, that in most, of the Christian Naturists they do,) the
Erroneous Idea of Nature would, too often, be found to have a strong tendency
to shake, if not to subvert, the very Foundations of all Religion; mis-leading
those that are inclined to be its Enemies, from overlooking the Necessity of a
God, to the Questioning, if not to the denial, of his Existence.

V. My Fifth and Last Argument is taken from hence; That I observe diverse
Phenomenon, which do not agree with the Notion or Representation of Nature,
that I Question. For, if indeed there were such an Intelligent, Powerful and
Vigilant Being, as Philosophers are wont to Describe Nature to be, diverse
things would not be done, which Experience assures us are done.

And here I shall once for all give an Advertisement, which I desire may be
called to mind, whenever there shall be Occasion, in the following part of this
Tract, which is this; That, because Inanimate Bodies are usually more simple,
or less compounded, and of a slighter and less complicated or curious
Contrivance, than Animals or Plants, I thought fit to choose most of the
Instances I employ, rather among lifeless Bodies, whose Structure and Qualities
are more easy to be Intelligibly and with Brevity Discoursed of, than among
living Creatures, whose Textures, being Organical, are much more intricate and
subtle. And this Course I did not scruple to take, because the Celebraters of
Nature give her a Province, or rather an Empire, as large as the World, and
will have her Care and Jurisdiction reach, as well to Inanimate as to Living
Bodies; and accordingly most of the conspicuous Instances they Allege, of her
Providence and Power, are taken from Bodies destitute of Life; as when they
tell us, That the Ascension of Water in Sucking-Pumps, and the Sustentation of
it in Gardeners Watering-Pots, are caused by Nature's abhorrence of a Vacuum:
That heavy Bodies (unhinder'd) fall to the Ground in a Perpendicular Line,
because Nature directs them the shortest way to the Center of the Earth; and
that Bubbles Rise through the Water, and Flames Ascend in the Air, because Nature
directs these Bodies to re-join themselves to their respective Elements; to
omit other Instances of this sort, that there will be occasion to mention
hereafter: Till when, these may suffice to warrant my taking most of my
Instances from Inanimate Bodies; though I shall not confine my self to these,
especially when I shall come to Answer Objections that are taken from living
Creatures.

The foregoing Advertisement will be, I hope, found conducive to clear the way
for my Fifth Argument, lately proposed, which concludes, that, if indeed there
were such a Being, as Nature is usually Represented to be, several things would
be otherwise Administered in the Universe, than Experience shows they are.

To enumerate all the Particulars that may be proposed to make this good, would
swell this Discourse much beyond the Bulk to which my Haste obliges me to
confine it. But, to make you amends for the Paucity of Instances, I shall now
name, by the kind of them, I shall propose such as, for the most part, are
taken from those very things, whence the Wisdom and Vigilance of Nature is wont
to be confidently Argued, which I the rather do, that by such I may make way
for, and shorten the Answers I am to give to the Arguments e're-long to be
Examined.

First then, Whereas the great Care and Vigilance of Nature, for the common
Good of the Universe, is wont to be Demonstrated from the watchful Care she
takes, to prevent or replenish a Vacuum, which would be very Prejudicial to the
Fabric of the World: I Argue the quite contrary from the Phenomenon, that
occur about a Vacuum. For whereas it is Alleged, that Nature, in great Pumps,
and in the like Cases, lifts up the heavy Body of Water in spite of its
tendency toward the Center of the Earth, to obviate, or fill up a Vacuity; and
that out of a Gardener's Pot, or Inverted Pipe, stopped at one end, neither the
Water, nor even Quicksilver, that is near fourteen times as heavy, will fall
down, lest it should leave a Vacuum behind it; I demand how it comes to pass,
that, if a Glass-Pipe be but a Foot longer than 34 or 35 Feet; or an Inverted
Tube, filled with Quicksilver, be but a Finger's breadth longer than 30
Inches, the Water in the one, and the Quicksilver in the other, will subside,
though the one will leave but about a Foot, and the other but about an Inch, of
deserted Space, which they call Vacuum, at the top of the Glass. Is it
possible, that Nature, that in Pumps is said to raise up every Day so many
Hundred Ton of Water, and, if you will believe the Schools, would raise it to
any height, (left there should be a Vacuum) should not have the Discretion, or
the Power, to lift up, or sustain, as much Water as would serve to fill one
Foot in a Glass-Tube, or as much Quicksilver as an Inch of a slender Pipe will
contain, to obviate or replenish the Vacuum, she is said so much to abhor?
sure, at this rate, she must either have very little Power, or very little
Knowledge of the Power she has. So likewise, when a Glass-Bubble is blown very
thin at the Flame of a Lamp, and Hermetically sealed whilst it is very hot, the
Cause, that is rendered, why it is apt to break, when it grows cold, is, that
the inward Air, which was before rarefied by the Heat, coming to be Condensed
by the Cold, left the space deserted by the Air, that thus Contracts itself,
should be left void, Nature, with violence, breaks the Glass in pieces. But, by
these Learned Men's favor, if the Glass be blown but a little stronger than
ordinary, though at the Flame of a Lamp, the Bubble, as I have often tried,
will continue unbroken, in spite of Natures pretended abhorrency of a Vacuum:
Which needs not at all to be recurr'd to in the Case. For the Reason, why the
thin Glass-Bubble broke not when 'twas hot, and did when it grew cold, is
plainly this; That, in the former state, the Agitation of the Included Air, by
the Heat, did so strengthen the Spring of it, that the Glass was thereby
assisted and enabled to resist the weight of the Incumbent Air: Whereas, upon
the Cessation of that Heat, the Debilitated Spring of the Internal, being
unable to assist the Glass, as formerly, to resist the Pressure of the External
Air, the Glass itself being too thin becomes unable to support the Weight or
Pressure of the Incumbent Air, the Atmosphaerical Pillar, that leans upon a
Bubble of about two Inches Diameter, amounting to above one Hundred Pound
Weight; as may be manifestly concluded from a late Experiment that I have
tried, and you may meet with in another Paper. And the Reason, why, if the
Bubble be blown of a due thickness, it will continue whole after it is Cold,
is, that the thickness of it, though but faintly assisted by the weakened Spring
of the Included Air, is sufficient to support the Weight of the Incumbent Air,
though, several times, I have observed, the Pressure of the Atmosphaere, and
the resistance of the Bubble, to have been, by Accident, so near the
aequipollent, that a much less outward Force, than one would imagine, applied
to the Glass, as, perhaps, a Pound, or a less Weight, gently laid on it, would
enable the outward Air to break it, with Noise, into a Multitude of pieces.
And, now give me leave to consider, how ill this Experiment, and the
abovementioned Phenomenon, that happen in Glass-Pipes, wherein Water and
Quicksilver subside, agree with the Vulgar Apprehension, Men have of Nature.
For, if in case She did not hinder the falling down of the Water, or the
Quicksilver, there would be no such Vacuum produced, as She is said to abhor;
Why does She seem so solicitious to hinder it? And why does She keep three or
four and thirty Foot of Water in Perpendicular height, contrary to the nature
of all heavy Bodies, suspended in the Tube? And, Why does she furiously break
in pieces a thin sealed Bubble, such as I come from speaking of, to hinder a
Vacuum? if in case She did not break it, no Vacuum would ensue. And, on the
other side, if we admit her Endeavors, to hinder a Vacuum, not to have been
superfluous, and consequently foolish, we must confess, that, where these
endeavors succeed not, there is really produced such a Vacuum, as She is said
to abhor. So that, as I was saying, either She must be very indiscreet to
trouble Herself, and to transgress Her own ordinary Laws, to prevent a danger
She need not fear; or Her strength must be very small, that is not able to fill
a Vacuity, that half a Pint of Water, or an Ounce of Quicksilver, may
replenish; or break a tender Glass-Bubble, which, perhaps, a Pound Weight on
it, would, with the help of so light a Body as the Incumbent Air, crush in
pieces.

The other Grand Instance, that is given of the Wisdom of Nature, and Her
watchfulness for the Good of the whole World, is, the Appetite She has
Implanted in all heavy Bodies, to descend to the Center of the Earth, and in
all light Ones, to ascend toward Heaven; or, as some would have it, toward
the Element of Fire, contiguous to the Orb of the Moon. But, for positive
Levity, 'till I see it better proved, than it has hitherto been, I allow no
such thing Implanted in Sublunary Bodies; the praepollent Gravity of some,
sufficing to give others a Comparative or Respective Lightness. As a piece of
Oak, or the like Wood, being let go in the Air, falls down by its own Gravity,
or rather by virtue of the Efficient of that Gravity; but if it be let go under
Water, it will, though it be never so great a Log or piece of Timber, ascend,
with a considerable force, to the top of the Water; which, I hope, will not be
ascribed to a positive Levity, since, when it descended in the Air, 'twas by
its Gravity that it did so. But not to insist on this, nor to take notice, how
wisely Nature has Implanted into all heavy Bodies an Appetite to Descend to the
Center of the Earth, which, being but a Point, is not able to contain any one
of Them; not to urge these things, I say, I will only invite you to consider
one of the most familiar things that occur among heavy Bodies.

For, if, for Example, you let fall a Ball upon the Ground, it will Rebound to
a good height, proportionable to that from whence you let it fall, or, perhaps,
will make several lesser Rebounds, before it come to rest. It it be now asked,
Why the Ball, being let out of your Hand, does not fall on this or that side,
or move upwards, but falls directly toward the Center of the Earth, by that
shortest Line, (which Mechanitians call Linea Directionis) which is the
Diameter of the Earth prolonged to the Center of Gravity of the Ball? 'Twill be
readily Answered, That this proceeds from the Balls Gravity, i. e. an Innate
Appetite, whereby it tends to the Center of the Earth the nearest way. But then
I demand, Whence comes this Rebound, i. e. this Motion upwards? For, it is
plain, it is the Genuine Consequence of the Motion downwards, and therefore is
increased according as that Motion in the Ball was increased, by falling from a
greater height: So that it seems, that Nature does, in such Cases, play a very
odd Game, since She forces a Ball, against the Laws of heavy Bodies, to ascend
diverse times upwards, upon the Account of that very Gravity, whose Office it is
to carry it downwards the directest way: And, at least, She seems, in spite of
the Wisdom ascribed to Her, to take Her M^asures very ill, in making the Ball
move downwards with so much violence, as makes it, diverse times, fly back from
the place She intended it should go to. As if a Ball which a Child can play
with, and direct as he pleases, were so unweildy a Thing, that Nature cannot
manage it, without letting it be hurried on with far greater violence, than her
Design requires.

The Reflection, I have been making on a Ball, may ( mutatis mutandis, as they
speak) be applied to a Pendulum. For, since it is unanimously affirmed, by all
that have written of it, that it falls to the Perpendicular, upon the Account
of its Gravity: It must not be denied, that it is from a Motion proceeding from
the same Gravity, that the swinging Weight passes beyond the Perpendicular, and
consequently ascends, and oftentimes makes a multitude of Diadroms, or
Vibrations; and consequently, does very frequently ascend, before it comes to
rest in the Perpendicular: Which is the Position wherein its Gravity is best
complied with, and which therefore it had been best settled in at first.

I shall not here mention those Grand Anomalies, or Exorbitances, even in the
vaster Bodies of the Universe; such as Earthquakes, that reach some Hundreds
of Leagues, Deluges, Destructive Eruptions of Fire, Famines of a large spread,
Raging Pestilences, Celestial Comets, Spots in the Sun, that are recorded to
have obscured it for many Months; the sudden Appearing, the Dis-appearing, and
the Re-appearing of Stars, that have been judged to be as high, as the Region
of the fixed Ones. I will not, I say, enquire how far these Anomalies agree to
the Character wont to be given of Natures Watchfulness and Vigilance, because,
probably, I may have hereafter a fit opportunity to do it, and must now proceed
to the remaining Instances I promised you, which are taken from what happens to
Animals: As soon as I shall have dispatched some Considerations and
Advertisements, that seem necessary to be premised, to what I have to offer
about that difficult Subject.

If the past Discourse give rise to a Question, Whether the World, and the
Creatures that compose it, are as perfect as they could be made? The Question
seems to me, because of the Ambiguity of the Terms, too intricate to be
resolved by a single Answer. But yet, because the Problem is not wont to be
discussed, and is, in my Opinion, of Moment, in reference to Natural Theology;
I shall venture briefly to intimate some of the Thoughts that occurred to me
about it: Having first declared, that I am, with reason, very backward to be
positive in a matter of this Nature, the Extent of the Divine Power and Wisdom
being such, that its Bounds, in case it have any, are not known to me.

This premised, I consider, that the sense of the Question may be, Whether God
could make the Material World, and the Corporeal Creatures It consists of,
better and more perfect that they are? speaking in a general way and absolute
sense: Or else, Whether the particular Kinds or Orders of the Creatures, in the
World, could any of them be made more perfect or better, than they have been
made?

To Answer the Question in the first-nam'd sense of it, I think it very unsafe
to deny, that God, who is Almighty and Omniscient, and an Owner of Perfections,
which, for ought we know, are participable in more different manners and
degrees than we can comprehend, could not Display, if it be not fitter to say
Adumbrate, them, by Creating a Work more excellent than this World. And, his
Immense Power and Unexhausted Wisdom considered, it will not follow, either,
that because this World of Ours is an admirable piece of Workmanship, the
Divine Architect could not have bettered It; or, because God himself is able to
make a greater Masterpiece, this exquisitely contrived System is not admirably
Excellent.

But the proposed Question, in the other sense of it, will require some more
words to resolve it. For, if we look upon the several Species of Visible
Creatures, under a more absolute Consideration, without respect to the Great
System of the Universe, of which they are Parts, or to the more particular
Designs of the Creator; it seems manifest, that many sorts of Creatures might
have been more perfect than they are, since they want many completing things,
that others are endowed with; as an Oyster, that can neither hear, nor see, nor
walk, nor swim, nor fly, etc. is not so perfect a Creature, as an Eagle, or an
Elephant, that have both those Senses that the Oyster wants, and a far more
active Faculty of changing places: And, of this inequality of perfection in
Creatures of differing kinds, the Examples are too obvious to need to be
enumerated. But if the Question be better proposed, and it be inquired, not
whether God could have made more perfect Creatures, than many of those he has
made, for that, it is plain, He could do, because He has done it; but, Whether
the Creatures were not so curiously and skilfully made, that 'twas scarce
possibly they could have been better made, with due regard to all the wise Ends
He may be supposed to have had in making them, it will be hard to prove a
Negative Answer.

This I shall endeavor to illustrate by a Supposition. If one should come into
the well-furnish'd Shop of an excellent Watch-maker, and should there see a
plain Watch, designed barely to show the Hour of the Day; another, that strikes
the Hours; a third that is also furnished with an Alarm; a fourth, that,
besides these, shows the Month Current, and the Day of it; and lastly, a fifth,
that, over and above all these, shows the Motions of the Sun, Moon and Planets,
the Tides, and other Things, which may be seen in some Curious Watches. In this
Case, I say, the Spectator, supposing him judicious, would, indeed, think one
of these Watches far more Excellent and Complete than another; but yet he would
conclude each of them to be perfect in its own own kind, and the Plain Watch to
answer the Artificer's Idea and Design in making it, as well as the more
Compounded and Elaborate one did. The same thing may, in some Circumstances, be
further Illustrated, by considering the Copy of some excellent Writing-Master,
for, though there we may find some Leaves written in an Italian Hand, others in
a Secretary, and, in others, Hands of other Denominations; though one of these
Patterns may be much Fairer, and more Curious than another, if they be compared
together; yet, if we consider their equal Conformity to the respective Idea's
of the Author, and the suitableness to the Design he had of making each Copy,
not as Curious, Sightly and Flourishing as he could, but as Conformable to the
true Idea of the sort of Hand he meant to exhibit, and the Design he had to
show the Variety, Number and Justness of his Skill, by that of the Patterns he
made Complete in the respective Kinds; we shall not think, that any of them
could have been bettered by him: And if he should have made a Text-Hand as fair
as a Roman-Hand, by giving it more Beauty and Ornament, he would not have made
it better in its Kind, but spoiled it, and, by a Flourish of his Skill, might
have given a Proof of his want of Judgment.

But, to return thither whence I began to make this Excursion, perhaps,
Eleutherius, you will object against the Examples I have produced before it,
that the Exceptions, I have taken at some of the Proceedings of Nature, may be
as well urged against Providence, and exclude the One as well as the Other,
from the Government of the World.

But to this I Answer, that this Objection is Foreign to the Question, which is
about Men's Notion of Nature, not God's Providence; which, if it were here my
Task to Assert, I should establish It upon Its proper and solid Grounds: such,
as the Infinite Perfections of the Divine Nature, which both engage and enable
Him to Administer His Dominion over all things; His being the Author and
Supporter of the World; The exquisite Contrivance of the Bodies of Animals,
which could not proceed but from a stupendous Wisdom; The supernatural
Revelations and Discoveries He has made of Himself, and of His particular care
of His Creatures, by Prophecies, Apparitions, true Miracles, and other ways,
that transcend the Power, or overthrow, or, at least, overruled the Physical
Laws of Motion in Matter: By these, I say, and the like proper Means, I would
evince Divine Providence. But being not now obliged to make an Attempt, which
deserves to be made very solemnly, and not in such haste as I now write in. I
shall, at present, only observe to you, that the Case is very differing between
Providence and Nature, and therefore there is no necessity, that the
Objections, I have made against the Later, should hold against the Former. As,
(to give you a few Instances of the Disparity) in the first place, it appears
not, nor is it likely, that it is the Design of Providence to hinder those
Anomalies and Defects, I have been mentioning: Whereas, it is said, to be the
Duty and Design of Nature, and Her only Task, to keep the Universe in Order,
and procure, in all the Bodies that compose it, that things be carried on, in
the best and most regular way that may be, for their Advantage. Secondly,
Nature is confessed to be a Thing inferior to God, and so but a subordinate
Agent, and therefore cannot, without disparagement to Her Power, or Wisdom, or
Vigilance, suffer diverse things to be done, which may, without Degradation to
God, be permitted by Him; who is not only a self-existent and Independent
Being, but the Supreme and Absolute Lord, and, if I may so speak, the
Proprietor of the whole Creation: Whence both Melchizedec and Abram style Him,
(Genesis xiv. 19, 23.) not only the most High God, but, (...) Koneh, Possessing
(or, as our Version has it, Possessor of) Heaven and Earth: And Who, when He
made the World, and established the Laws of Motion, gave them to Matter, not to
Himself. And so, being obliged to none, either as His Superior, or Benefactor,
He was not bound to Make, or Administer, Corporeal Things after the best
manner, that He could, for the good of the things themselves: Among which,
those that are capable of Gratitude, ought to Praise and Thank Him, for having
vouchsafed them so much as they have, and have no Right to except against His
having granted them no more. And, as being thus obliged to none of his Works,
He has a Sovereign Right to dispose of them; so, He has other Attributes, which
He may justly Exercise, and both intend And expect to be Glorified for, besides
his Goodness to Inferior Creatures: and His Wisdom may be better set off to
Men, and perhaps to Angels or Intelligences, by the great Variety of His
Contrivances in His Works, than by making them all of the excellentest Kind: As
Shadows in Pictures, and Discords in Music, skilfully Placed and Ordered, do
much recommend the Painter, and the Musician. Perhaps it may be added, That the
permitting the Course of Things to be somewhat violated, shows, by the Mischief
such Exorbitances do, how good God has been in settling and preserving the
orderly Course of Things. Thirdly, As God is a most Absolute and Free, so He is
an Omniscient, Being; and, as, by His Supreme Dominion over the Works of His
Hands, He has a Right to dispose of them, as He thinks best for His own Glory,
so upon the score of His unfathomable Wisdom, He may have Designs, and, if I
may so speak, Reaches, in the Anomalies that happen in the World, which we Men
are too short-sighted to discern; and may exercise as much Wisdom, nay, and as
much Providence (in reference to Man, the Noblest Visible Object of His
Providence) in sometimes (as in Divine Miracles) receding from what Men call
the Laws of Nature, as He did at first in establishing them: Whereas the Office
of Nature, being but to preserve the Universe in General, and Particular Bodies
in It, after the best manner that their respective Conditions will permit; we
know, what it is She aims at, and, consequently, can better discern, when She
misses of Her Aims, by not well Acting what is presumed to be Her Part.
Fourthly, We must consider, that, as God is an Independent, Free and Wise, so
He is also a Just Agent; and therefore may very well be supposed to cause many
Irregularities and Exorbitances in the World, to punish those, that Men have
been guilty of. And, whereas Nature is but a Nursing-Mother to the Creatures,
and looks e'ne upon wicked Men, not in their Moral but in their Physical
capacities, God expressly declares, in the Sacred Scriptures, that, upon Adam's
Fall, He Cursed the Ground, or Earth, for Man's sake, Genesis iii. 17, 18. and
that there is no penal evil in the City that is not derived from Him, Amos iii.
6. He is not overruled, as Men are fain to say of Erring Nature, by the
headstrong Motions of the Matter, but sometimes purposely overrules the
regular Ones, to execute His Justice; and therefore Plagues, Earthquakes,
Inundations, and the like destructive Calamities, though they are sometimes
Irregularities in Nature, yet, for that very Reason, they are designed by
Providence; which intends, by them, to deprive wicked Men of that Life, or of
those blessings of Life, whereof their Sins have rendered them unworthy. But,
whilst I mention Designs, I must not forget, that Mine was only to give you a
Taste of the Considerations, by which one may show, that such things, as
manifest Nature to act unsuitably to the Representation that is made of Her,
may yet, when attributed to Divine Providence, be made out to have nothing
inconsistent with It.

And yet, somewhat further to clear this weighty matter, and particularly some
things, but briefly hinted in what I have been lately Discoursing, I think it
fit, before I descend to the Particulars, that I am to employ against the
Vulgar Notion of Nature, to premise somewhat by way of Caution, that I may do
some Right (though I can never do enough,) to Divine Providence; and take care
betimes, that no Use, Injurious to It, may be made of any thing that my
Argument has obliged me, or will oblige me, to say about that Imaginary Thing,
Vulgarly called Nature, either in This or the VI. Section, or any other Part of
our present Enquiry.

I conceive then, that the Divine Author of Things, in making the World, and
the particular Creatures that compose it, had respect to several Ends; some of
them knowable by us Men, and others hid in the Abyss of the Divine Wisdom and
Counsels. And that of those Ends, which are either manifest enough to us, or,
at least, discoverable by Human Sagacity and Industry, some of the Principal
are, The manifestation of the Glory of God, The Utility of Man, and The
maintenance of the System of the World; under which is comprised, the
Conservation of particular Creatures, and, also, the Propagation of some Kinds
of them.

But this General Design of God, for the welfare of Man and other Creatures, is
not (as I conceive) to be understood, but with a twofold Limitation.

For, First, though Men, and other Animals, be furnished with Faculties or
Powers, and other Requisites, to enable them to preserve themselves, and
procure what is necessary for their own welfare, yet this Provision, that God
has been pleased to make for them, is made with reference to what regularly, or
what most usually, happens to Beings of that Species or Sort that they belong
to; but not with regard to such things as may happen to them irregularly,
contingently, and (in comparison of the others,) unfrequently. Thus it is, in
General, far better for Mankind, that Women, when they are brought to Bed,
should have their Breasts filled with Milk, to give Suck to the newborn Babe,
than that they should not; though sometimes, as, if the Child die in the
Delivery, or presently after, and in some other Cases also, the plentiful
recourse of Milk to the Mothers Breasts proves troublesome and inconvenient,
and sometimes also dangerous, to her. Thus a Head of Hair is, for the most
part, useful to the Person, whether Man or Woman, that Nature has furnished
with it, though, in some Cases (as of Consumptions, and in a few other
Circumstances) it happens to be prejudicial to the Wearer; and therefore
Physicians do often, with good success, prescribe, that it be shaven off. Thus
the Instinct, that Hens have to Hatch their Eggs and take care of their Young,
is, in General, very useful, if not necessary, for the Conservation of that
Species of Birds; and yet it sometimes mis-guides and deludes them, when it
makes them take a great deal of pains to Brood upon those Duck-eggs, that
Housewives, (having taken a way the Birds own Eggs) lay in her Nest, which
makes her very solicitous to Hatch and take care of Ducklings, instead of
Chickens. Thus it is an Institution that ordinarily is profitable for Man, that
his Stomach should nauseate or reject things that have a loathsome taste or
smell, because the generality of those things, that are provided for his
Nourishment, are well, or, at least, not ill-tasted; and yet, on some occasions
of Sickness, that disposition of the Stomach to refuse, or vomit up, nauseous
Purges, and other dis-tastful Medicines, (as such Remedies are usually loathsome
enough) proves very prejudicial, by being a great impediment to the Recovery of
Health. And thus (to be short) the Passions of the Mind, such as Fear, Joy and
Grief, are given to Man, for his Good; and, when rightly used, are very
advantageous, if not absolutely necessary, to him: Though, when they grow
unruly, or are ill-manag'd, as it but too often happens, they frequently prove
the Causes of Diseases, and of great Mischief, as well to the passionate Man
himself, as to Others.

The second Limitation (which has a natural Connection with the former,) is
this, That the Omniscient Author of Things, who, in His Vast and Boundless
Understanding, comprehended, at once, the whole System of His Works, and every
Part of it, did not mainly intend the Welfare of such or such particular
Creatures, but subordinated His Care of their Preservation and Welfare, to His
Care of maintaining the Universal System and Primitive Scheme or Contrivance of
His Works, and especially those Catholic Rules of Motion, and other Grand
Laws, which He at first established among the Portions of the Mundane Matter.
So that, when there happens such a Concourse of Circumstances, that particular
Bodies, fewer or more, must suffer, or else the settled Frame, or the usual
Course of Things, must be altered, or some general Law of Motion must be
hindered from taking place: In such Cases, I say, the Welfare and Interest of
Man himself (as an Animal) and much more That of inferior Animals, and of other
Particular Creatures, must give way to the Care, that Providence takes of
Things of a more General and Important Nature or Condition.

Thus (as I formerly noted) God established the Lines of Motion, which the Sun
and the Moon observe, though he foresaw, that, from thence, there would
necessarily, from time to time, ensue Eclipses of those Luminaries; which he
chose rather to permit, than to alter that Course, which, on several accounts,
was the most convenient. Thus a blown Bladder, or a Football, falling from a
considerable height upon the Ground, rebounds upwards, and so, contrary to the
Nature of Heavy Bodies, moves from the Center of the Earth, lest the Catholic
Laws of Motion, whereby the Springyness and Reflection of Bodies, in such
Circumstances, are established, should be violated or entrenched upon.

Thus, He thought not fit to furnish Sheep with Paws, or Tusks, or Swiftness,
or Animosity, or Craft, to defend or preserve themselves from Wolves and Foxes,
and other Beasts of Prey. And tame and fearful Birds, such as Hens, are so ill
provided for defense, that they seem designed to be the food of Hawks, Kites,
and other rapacious Ones. Thus Oysters, having neither Eyes nor Ears, are not
near so well provided for, as the generality of Beasts and Birds, and even most
other Fishes. And thus Silkworms (to name no other Catterpillars,) usually (at
least in these Countries,) live not much above half a Year, being less
furnished with the Requisites of longaevity, than the generality of Birds, and
Beasts, and Fishes.

I have thought fit to lay down the two foregoing Limitations, partly, because
they will be of use to me hereafter, and, partly, because they contain
something, that may be added to what has been lately Represented on behalf of
the Divine Providence (as it falls under the Naturalist's Consideration.) For,
by these Limitations, we may perceive, that it is not just, presently to deny,
or censure the Providence of God, whenever we see some Creatures less
completely furnished to maintain themselves; or some Cases less provided for,
than we think they might be; or seeming Anomalies permitted, which we look upon
as mischievous Irregularities. For the Welfare of Men, or of this or that other
Particular sort of Creatures, being not the Only, nor, in likelihood, the
Principal End of God, in making the World; it is neither to be admired nor
reprehended, that He has not provided for the safety and convenience of
Particular Beings, any further, than well consists with the Welfare of Beings
of a more considerable Order, and, also, will comport with his Higher Ends, and
with the maintenance of the more General Laws and Customs, settled by Him among
Things Corporeal: So that diverse seeming Anomalies and Incongruities, whence
some take occasion to Question the Administration of Things, and to deny the
Agency of Providence, do not only comport with it, but serve to accomplish the
Designs of It.

I have the more expressly declared my Mind on this occasion, because, indeed,
of the two main Reasons, which put me upon so difficult a Work, as I foresaw
this Treatise would be, as one was, the Love I bear to Truth and Philosophical
Freedom; so the other was, a just Concern for Religion. For thinking it very
probable, that, in so Inquisitive an Age as This, some Observations, like Mine,
about Nature itself, might come into the minds of Persons ill-affected to
Divine Providence, who would be glad and forward to wrest them, and make a
perverse use of them; I thought it better, that such Notions should be heartily
proposed, by One that would take care to accompany them with those Cautions,
that may keep them from being injurious to Religion.

Having premised the two foregoing Advertisements, to obviate Misconstructions;
I hope, I may now safely proceed to Particulars; whereof, for Brevity's sake, I
shall here mention but a few, leaving you to add to them those others, that
occur in other parts of this Treatise.

In the first place then, I shall take notice, that there are several Instances
of Persons that have been choked with a Hair, which they were unable, either
to cough up, or swallow down. The reason of this fatal Accident, is, probably,
said to be the Irritation that is made, by the stay of so unusual a thing, as a
Hair, in the Throat; which Irritation occasions very violent and disorderly, or
convulsive, Motions to expel it, in the Organs of Respiration, by which Means
the continual Circulation of the Blood, necessary to the Life of Man, is
hindered, the Consequence whereof is speedy Death. But this agrees very ill
with the Vulgar Supposition of such a Kind and Provident Being, as they
represent Nature, which is always at hand to preserve the Life of Animals, and
succor them in their (Physical) dangers and distresses, as occasion requires.
For since a Hair is so slender a Body, that it cannot stop the Throat, so as to
hinder, either, the free passage of Meat and Drink into the Stomach, or, that
of the Air to or from the Lungs; (as may be argued from diverse no-way Mortal
Excrescences and Ulcers in the Throat,) were it not a great deal better for
Nature, to let the Hair alone, and stay, 'till the Juices of the Body have
resolved or consumed it, or some favorable Accident have removed it, than like
a passionate and transported Thing, oppose it, like a Fury, with such blind
violence, as, instead of ejecting the Hair, expels the Life of him, that was
troubled with it?

How the Care and Wisdom of Nature will be reconciled to so improper and
disorderly a Proceeding, I leave Her Admirers to consider. But it will appear
very reconcilable to Providence, if we reflect back upon the lately given
Advertisement. For, in regard of the use and necessity of Deglutition, and in
many Cases of Coughing and Vomiting, it was, in the General, most convenient,
that the Parts that minister to these Motions, should be irritated by the
sudden Sense of things that are unusual, though, perhaps, they would not be
otherwise dangerous or offensive, because (as we formerly noted,) 'twas fit,
that the Providence of God should, in making Provision for the Welfare of
Animals, have more regard to that, which usually and regularly befalls them,
than to extraordinary Cases or unfrequent Accidents.

Though most Women are offended with the Stink of the smoking Wick of a
Candle, which is no more than Men also are, yet it has been frequently
observed, that Big-bellied Women have been made to Miscarry, by the smell of an
extinguished Candle, which would before have indeed displeased, but not
endangered, the same Persons: So that it seems, Nature is, in these Cases, very
far from being so prudent and careful, as Men are wont to fancy Her, since, by
an Odor, (which, if calmly received, would have done no harm to the Teeming
Woman,) She is put into such unruly Transports: And, instead of watching for
the Welfare of the Teeming Woman, whose Condition needed a more than ordinary
measure of Her care and tenderness, She violently precipitates her poor Charge
into a danger, that oftentimes proves fatal, not only to the Mother, but the
Child also.

The improper, and oftentimes hurtful, Courses that Nature takes, in Persons
that are sick, some of one Disease, some of another, will be, hereafter, taken
notice of in opportune places; and therefore, for the present, I shall only
observe, that Nature seems to do Her Work very weakly, or bunglingly, in the
Production of Monsters, whose Variety and Numerousness is almost as great as
their Deformity, or their Irregularity; insomuch that several Volums have been
written, and many more might have been, to give the Description of them. How
these gross Aberrations will agree with that great Uniformity, and exquisite
Skill, that is ascribed to Nature, in her seminal Productions, I leave the
Naturists to make out. I know, that some of them lay the fault upon the
stubbornness of the Matter, that would not be obsequious to the Plastic Power
of Nature, but I can hardly admit of this Account from Men of such Principles,
as they are that give it: for it is strange to me, they should pretend, that
Nature, which they make a kind of Semi-Deity, should not be able to mould and
fashion so small, and soft, and tractable, a Portion of Matter, as that wherein
the first Model and Efformation of the Embrio is made; when, at the same time,
they tell us, That it is able, in Sucking-Pumps, to raise, and, if need be,
sustain, whole Tons of Water, to prevent a Vacuum: And can, in Mines, toss up
into the Air, Houses, Walls, and Castles, and, perhaps, the Rocks they are
built on, to give the kindled Gunpowder the Expansion, that its New state
requires.

Other Arguments, that, by a light Change and easy Application, may be made
use of and added to these, against the Vulgar Notion of Nature, may be met with
in diverse Parts of this Treatise, and especially in the VII. Section; for which
Reason (among others) I decline lengthning this Part of my Discourse with the
mention of them.

I foresee it may be said, that, unless we admit such a Being as Nature, to
contrive and manage Things Corporeal, and, in a Regular and Methodical way,
direct them to their respective Ends, there will appear no visible Footsteps or
Proof of a Divine Wisdom in the Corporeal World. And this Argument, I confess,
is so specious, that 'twas one of the things that made me the longest hesitate,
what I should think of the Received Notion of Nature. But having further
considered the matter, I saw it might be answered, that the curious Contrivance
of the Universe, and many of Its Parts, and the orderly Course of Things
Corporeal, with a manifest Tendency to determinate Ends, are Matters of Fact,
and do not depend upon the Supposition of such a Being, as they call Nature;
but, setting aside this or that Hypothesis, may be known by Inspection, if
those that make the Inspection be Attentive and Impartial: As, when a Man sees
a Humane Body skilfully Dissected by a dexterous Anatomist, he cannot, if he be
intelligent and unprejudiced, but acknowledge, that there is a most curious and
exquisite Contrivance in that Incomparable Engine, and in the various Parts of
it, that are admirably fitted for distinct and determinate Functions or Uses.
So that I do not at all, nor indeed can, suppress the manifest Tokens of Wisdom
and Design, that are to be observed in the wonderful Construction and orderly
Operations of the World and Its Parts: But I endeavor to refer these
Indications of Wisdom to the true and proper Cause. And whereas, in the
Hypothesis of the Objectors, there may be three Causes assigned of these
Specimens or Footsteps of Wisdom, namely, God, Nature, and Chance; if,
according to the Doctrine by me proposed, Nature be laid aside, the Competition
will remain only between God and Chance: And sure he must be very dull, or very
strongly prejudiced, that shall think it reasonable to attribute such admirable
Contrivances and such regular Conducts, as are observable in the Corporeal
World, rather to Chance, (which is a blind and senseless Cause, or indeed no
proper Cause at all, but a kind of Ens rationis) than to a most Intelligent
Being, from which the curiousest Productions may with Congruity be expected:
Whereas, if such a Celebrated Thing, as Nature is commonly thought, be
admitted, 'twill not be near so easy to prove the Wisdom (and consequently the
Existence) of God by His Works, since they may have another Cause, namely, that
most watchful and provident Being, which Men call Nature. And this will be
especially difficult in the Peripatetick Hypothesis of the Eternity (not of
Matter only, for in that the Atomists and others agreed with them, but) of the
World. For, according to this Account of the Universe, there appears no
necessity, that God should have any thing to do with it, since he did not make
this Automaton, but it was always Self-existent, not only as to Matter, but to
Form too: And as for the Government or Administration of the Bodies it consists
of, that is the proper business of Nature. And if it be Objected, that this
Being is by its Assertors acknowledged to be subordinate to God; I shall
answer, That, as, upon the Reasons and Authorities I elsewhere deliver, See the
IV. Section.
it may justly be questioned, Whether many Philosophers, and perhaps some Sects
of them who are Adorers of Nature, confessed Her to be but the Substitute of a
Superior and Divine Being? So, this distinction and subordination is not so
easy to be proved against those that side with those other Ancient
Philosophers, who either acknowledged no such thing, or expressly denied it.
Besides that, this Objection supposes the Existence and Superiority of a Deity,
which therefore needs to be proved by other ways; whereas in the Hypothesis I
propose, the same Phenomenon that discover admirable Wisdom and manifest
Designs in the Corporeal World, do themselves afford a solid Argument, both of
the Existence and of some of the grand Attributes of God, with which the rest,
that properly belong to Him, have a necessary Connection.

SECT. VI.
V. HAving, in the foregoing Section, proposed some of the Considerations, that
have dissatisfied me with the Received Notion of Nature, it may now be justly
expected, that I should also consider, what I foresee will be alleged in Its
behalf, by the more Intelligent of Its Favorers. And I shall not deny the
Objections, I am going to name against my Opinion, to be considerable,
especially for this Reason, that I am very unwilling to seem to put such an
Affront upon the generality as well of Learned Men as of Others, as to
maintain, that they have built a Notion of so great weight and importance upon
slight and inconsiderable Grounds.

The Reasons, that I conceive may have induced Philosophers to take up, and
rely on, the Received Notion of Nature, are such as these that follow.

And the first Argument, as one of the most obvious, may be taken from the
general Belief, or, as Men suppose, Observation, that diverse Bodies, as
particularly Earth, Water, and other Elements, have each of them its natural
Place assigned it in the Universe; from which Place, if any portion of the
Element, or any mixed Body, wherein that Element predominates, happens to be
removed, it has a strong incessant Appetite to return to it; because, when it is
there, it ceases either to gravitate, or (as some Schoolmen speak) to
levitate, and is now in a place, which Nature has qualified to preserve it,
according to the Axiom, that Locus conservat locatum.

To this Argument I answer, that I readily grant, that, there being such a
Quantity of very bulky Bodies in the World, 'twas necessary they should have
Places adequate to their bigness; and 'twas thought fit by the wise Architect
of the Universe, that they should not be all blended together, but that a great
Portion of each of them should, at the beginning of things, be disposed of and
lodged in a distinct and convenient Place. But when I have granted this, I see
not any necessity of granting likewise, what is asserted in the Argument
above-propos'd. For Inanimate Bodies having no Sense or Perception, (which is
the Prerogative of Animadversive Beings) it must be all one to them in what
Place they are, because they cannot be concerned to be in one Place rather than
in another, since such a preference would require a knowledge, that Inanimate
things are destitute of. And, for the same reason, a Portion of an Element,
removed, by force or chance, from what they call its proper Place, can have no
real Appetite to return thither: For, who tells it it is in an undue Place, and
that it may better its Condition by removing into another? And who informs it,
whether that Place lies on this hand of it, or that hand of it, or above it, or
beneath it? Some Philosophers indeed have been somewhat aware of the weakness
of the Argument, drawn from the vulgarly proposed Instance (which yet is the
best that is wont to be employed,) of Earthy Bodies, which being let fall from
the top of an House, or thrown into the Air, do of themselves fall, in a direct
Line, toward the Center of the Earth; and therefore they have strengthened this
Argument, as far as might be, by pretending, that these Bodies have not indeed,
as former Philosophers were wont to think, an Appetite to descend to the Center
of the Earth, but to the great Mass of their Connatural Bodies. I I will not
therefore accuse these Philosophers of the inconsiderate Opinion of their
Predecessors, who would have Nature make all heavy Things affect to lodge
themselves in the Center of the Earth, which (as was formerly noted,) being but
a Point, cannot contain any one of them, (how little soever it be;) but yet the
Hypothesis of these Moderns is liable, though not to that, yet, to other
weighty Objections.

For the First Argument, I lately employed, will hold good against these
Philosophers too, it not being conceivable, how an Inanimate Body should have
an Appetite to re-joyn Homogeneous Bodies, neither whose situation, nor whose
distance from it, it does at all know.

Secondly, It does not appear that all Bodies have such an Appetite, as is
presumed, of joining themselves to greater Masses of Connatural Bodies; as, if
you File the end of an Ingot or Bar of Silver or of Gold, the Filings will not
stick to their own Mass, though it be approached never so near, or made to
touch them, and much less will they leap to it, when it is at a distance from
them. The like may be said almost of all Consistent Bodies we are acquainted
with, except the Loadstone and Iron, and Bodies that participate of one of
those two.

Thirdly, It Is obvious to them that will observe, that, that which makes Lumps
of Earth, or Terrestrial Matter, fall through the Air to the Earth, is some
general Agent, whatever that be, which, according to the wise disposition of
the Author of the Universe, determines the Motion of those Bodies, we call
heavy, by the shortest ways that are permitted them, toward the Central part
of the Terraqueous Globe; Whether the Body, put into Motion downwards, be of
the same, or a like, or a quite differing nature, from the greater Mass of
Matter, to which, when it is aggregated, it rests there? If, from the side of a
Ship, you let fall a Chip of Wood out of your Hand, when your Arm is so
stretched out, that the Perpendicular, or shortest Line, between that and the
Water, lies never so little without the Ship, that Chip will fall into the Sea,
which is a fluid Body, and quite of another Nature than itself, rather than
swerve in the least from the Line of Direction, as Mechanicians call it, to
rejoyn itself to the great bulk of Wood, whereof the Ship, though never so big,
consists. And, on the other side, if a Man, standing upon the Shore just by the
Sea, shall pour out a Glass of Water, holding the Glass just over his Feet,
that Water will fall into the Sand, where 'twill be immediately soaked up and
dispersed, rather than deviate a little, to join itself to so great a Mass of
Connatural Body, as the Ocean is.

And as to what is generally believed, and made part of the Argument that I am
answering, That Water does not weigh in Water, because it is in its own natural
Place, and Elementa in proprio loco non gravitant. I deny the matter of Fact,
and have convinced diverse curious Persons by Experiment, See the Appendix to
the Hydrostat. Paradoxes.
that Water does gravitate in Water, as well as out of it, though indeed it
does not praegravitate, because it is Counter-ballanc'd by an equal weight of
Collateral Water, which keeps it from descending.

And Lastly, For the Maxim, that Locus conservat locatum; besides that, it has
been prooflesly asserted, and therefore, unless it be cautiously explained, I
do not think my self bound to admit it; besides this, I say, I think, that
either the proper Place of a Body cannot be inferred, as my Adversaries would
have it, from the Natural tendency of a Body to it; or else it will not hold
true in general, that Locus conservat locatum; as when, for Instance, a poor
unluky Seaman falls, from the Mainyard of a Ship, into the Water, does the Sea,
to which he makes such have, preserve him or destroy him? And when in a foul
Chimney, a lump of Soot falls into the Hearth, and presently burns up there,
can we think that the Wisdom of Nature gave the Soot an Appetite to hasten to
the Fire, as a greater Bulk of its Connatural Body, or a Place provided by
Nature for its Conservation.

And now I speak of such an Innate Appetite of Conjunction between Bodies; I
remember, what I lately forgot to mention in a fitter place; That Bubbles
themselves may overthrow the Argument, I was Answering. For if a Bubble happens
to arise from the bottom of a Vessel to the upper Part of it, we are told, that
the Haste, wherewith the Air moves through Water, proceeds from the Appetite it
has to quit that Preternatural Place, and re-joyn the Element, or great Mass of
Air, detained at the very Surface of the Water by a very thin skin of that
Liquor, together with which it constitutes a Bubble. Now I demand, how it comes
to pass, that this Appetite of the Air, which, when it was at the bottom of the
Water, and also in its passage upwards, is supposed to have enabled it to
Ascend with so much eagerness and force, as to make its way through all the
incumbent Water, (which possibly was very deep,) should not be able, when the
Air is arrived at the very top of the Water, to break through so thin a Membrane
of Water, as usually serves to make a Bubble, and which suffices to keep it
from the beloved Conjunction with the great Mass of the External Air?
especially since they tell us, that Natural Motion grows more quick, the nearer
it comes to the End or Place of rest; the Appetites of Bodies increasing, with
their approaches to the Good they aspire to; upon which account, Falling
Bodies, as Stones, etc. are said (though falsesly) to increase their swiftness,
the nearer they come to the Earth. But if, setting aside the Imaginary Appetite
of the Air, we attribute the Ascension of Bubbles to the Gravity and Pressure
upwards of the Water, it is easy Hydrostatically to Explicate, why Bubbles
often move slower when they come near the Surface of the Water, and why they
are detained there; which last Phenomenon proceeds from this, that the
Pressure of the Water being There incosiderable, it is not able to make the Air
quite Surmount the Resistance made by the Tenacity of the Superficial Part of
the Water. And therefore in good Spirit of Wine, whose Tenacity and
Glutinousness is far less than that of Water, Bubbles rarely continue upon the
Surface of the Liquor, but are presently broken and vanish.

And to make this presumed Appetite, of the smaller Portions of the Air to
unite with the great Mass of it, appear the less probable; I shall add that I
have often observed, that Water, in that state which is usually called its
Natural State, is wont to have store of Aerial Particles mingled with it,
notwithstanding the Neighborhood of the External Air, that is incumbent on the
Water, as may appear by putting a Glass full of Water into the Receiver of the
new Pneumatical Engine. For the Pressure of the External Air being by the Pump
taken off, there will, from time to time, disclose themselves in the Water, a
multitude of Bubbles, made by the Aerial Particles, that lay concealed in that
Liquor.

And I have further tried, as I doubt not but some others also have done, that,
by exactly enclosing, in a conveniently shaped Glass, some Water, thus freed
from the Air, and leaving a little Air at the top of the Vessel, which was
afterward set by in a quiet place; the Corpuscles of that incumbent Air did,
one after another, insinuate themselves into the Water, and remained lodged in
it; so little Appetite has Air, in general, to flee all Association with Water,
and make its escape out of that Liquor; though, when sensible Portions of it
happen to be under Water, the great inequality in Gravity, between those two
Fluids, makes the Water press up the Air. But, though 'twere easy to give a
Mechanical Account of the Phenomenon of mingled Air and Water, yet, because it
cannot be done in few Words, I shall not here undertake it; the Phenomenon
themselves being sufficient, to render the Supposition of my Adversaries
improbable.

Another Argument, in favor of the Received Opinion of Nature, may be drawn
from the strong Appetite, that Bodies have to recover their Natural state, when
by any means they are put out of it, and thereby forced into a State that is
called Preternatural; as we see, that Air being violently compressed in a blown
Bladder, as soon as the force is removed, will return to its first Dimensions:
And the Blade of a Sword being bent by being thrust against the Floor; as soon
as the force ceases, restores itself, by its innate power, to its former
straightness: And Water, being made Hot by the fire, when it is removed thence,
hastens to recover its former Coldness.

But though I take this Argument to have much more weight in it, than the
foregoing; because it seems to be grounded upon such real Phenomenon of Nature,
as those newly recited, yet I do not look upon it as Cogent.

In Answer to it therefore, I shall represent, that it appears by the Instances
lately mentioned, that the Proposers of the Argument ground it on the
affections of Inanimate Bodies. Now, an Inanimate Portion of Matter being
confessedly devoid of Knowledge and Sense, I see no Reason, why we should not
think it incapable of being concerned to be in One state or constitution,
rather than Another, since it has no knowledge of that, which it is in at
present, nor remembrance of that, from which it was forced; and consequently,
no Appetite to forsake the Former, that it may return to the Latter. But every
Inanimate Body, (to say nothing now of Plants and Bruit Animals, because I want
time to launch into an ample Discourse) being of itself indifferent to all
Places and States, continues in in that Place or State to which the action and
resistance of Other Bodies, and especially Contiguous Ones, effectually
determine it.

As to the Instance afforded by Water, I consider, that before it be asserted,
That Water, being Heated, returns of itself to its Natural Coldness, it were
fit, that the Assertors should determine, what degree or measure of Coldness is
Natural to that Liquor; and this, if I mistake not, will be no easy Task. It Is
true indeed, that, in reference to us Men, Water is usually Cold, because its
minute Parts are not so briskly agitated, as those of the Blood and Juices,
that are to be found in our Hands, or other Organs of Feeling. But, that Water
is actually cold in reference to Frogs, and those Fishes that live in it, whose
Blood is cold as to our Sense, has not, that I know of, been proved, nor is
easy to be so. And I think it yet more difficult to determine, what degree of
Coldness is natural to Water, since this Liquor perpetually varies its
Temperature, as to Cold and Heat, according to the temper of the Contiguous or
the Neighboring Bodies, especially the Ambient Air. And therefore the Water of
an unshaded Pond, for Instance, though it rests in its proper and natural
Place, as they speak, yet in Autumn, if the Weather be fair, the Temperature of
it will much vary in the compass of the same Day, and the Liquor will be much
hotter at Noon, than early in the Morning, or at Midnight; though this great
diversity be the Effect only of a Natural Agent, the Sun, acting according to
its regular Course. And, in the depth of Winter, it is generally confessed, that
Water is much colder than in the Heat of Summer; which seems to be the Reason
of what is observed by Watermen, as a wonderful thing, namely, that in Rivers,
Boats equally Laden will not sink so deep in Winter as in Summer, the cold
Condensing the Water, and consequently making it heavier in specie, than it is
in Summer, when the Heat of the Ambient Air makes it more thin. In diverse parts
of Africa, that Temperature is thought natural to the Water, because it is that
which it usually has, which is far hotter than that which is thought natural to
the same Liquor in the frigid Zone. And, I remember, on this occasion, what
perhaps I have elsewhere mentioned upon another, that the Russian Czars chief
Physician informed me, that in some Parts of Siberia, (one of the more Northern
Provinces of that Monarch's Empire, Water is so much more Cold, not only than
in the Torrid Zone, but than in England, that two or three foot beneath the
surface of the Ground, all the Year long (even in Summer itself,) it continues
Concreted in the form of Ice, so Intense is the Degree of Cold that there seems
natural to it. This odd Phenomenon much confirms what I lately intimated, of
the Power of Contiguous Bodies, and especially of the Air, to vary the Degree
of the coldness of Water. I particularly mention the Air, because, as far as I
have tried, it has more Power to bring Water to its own Temperature, than is
commonly supposed. For though, if, in Summertime, a Man puts his Hand into
Water, that has lain exposed to the Sun, he will usually feel it Cold, and so
conclude it much colder, than the Ambient Air; yet, that may often happen upon
another Account, namely, that the Water being many Hundred times a more Dense
Fluid than the Air, and consisting of Particles more apt to insinuate
themselves into the Pores of the Skin, a greater Part of the Agitation of the
Blood and Spirits, contained in the Hand, is communicated to the Water, and
thereby lost by the Fluids that part with it. And the Minute Particles of the
Water, which are, perhaps, more Supple and Flexible, insinuating themselves
into the Pores of the Skin, which the Aerial Particles, by Reason of their
Stifness, and perhaps Length, cannot do; they come to affect the somewhat more
Internal Parts of the Hand, which, being much Hotter than the Cuticula or
Scarf-skin, makes us feel them very Cold; as, when a Sweating Hand is plunged
into Lukewarm Water, the Liquor will be judged Cold by Him, who, if his Other
Hand be very Cold, will with it feel the same Water Hot. To confirm which
Conjecture, I shall add, that, having sometimes purposely taken a Sealed
Weather-glass, whose included Liquor was brought to the Temperature of the
Ambient Air, and thrust the Ball of it under Water, kept in the same Air, there
would be discovered no such Coldness in the Water, as One would have expected;
the former Reason of the sensible Cold the Hand feels, when thrust into that
Liquor, having here no Place. To which I shall add, that having, for Tryal's
sake, made Water very Cold, by dissolving Sal-armoniac in it, in Summer time,
it would, after a while, return to its usual degree of Warmth. And, having made
the same Experiment in Winter, it would return to such a Coldness, as belonged
to it in that Season: So that it did not return to any Determinate degree of
Coldness, as Natural to it, but to that Greater or Lesser, that had been
Accidentally given it by the Ambient Air, before the Sal-armoniac had
Refrigerated It.

As to the Motion of Restitution, observable upon the Removal or Ceasing of the
Force in Air violently compressed, and in the Blade of a Sword forcibly bent; I
confess it seems to me a very difficult Thing, to assign the true Mechanical
Cause of It. But yet, I think it far more likely, that the Cause should be
Mechanical, than, that the Effect proceeds from such a Watchfulness of Nature,
as is pretended. For First, I question, Whether we have any Air here Below,
that is in Other than a Preternatural or Violent State; the Lower Parts of our
Atmospherical Air being constantly compressed by the weight of the Upper Parts
of the same Air, that lean upon them.

As for the Restitution of the bent Blade of a Sword, and such like Springy
Bodies, when the force that bent them is removed; my Thoughts about the Theory
of Springynes belong to another Paper. And therefore, I shall here only, by way
of Argument ad Hominem, consider, in Answer to the Objection; That if, for
Example, you take a somewhat long and narrow Plate of Silver, that has not been
hammered, or compressed, or, which is surer, has been made red-hot in the Fire,
and suffered to cool leasurely, you may bend it which way you will, and it will
constantly retain the last curve Figure, that you gave It. But if, having again
straightened this Plate, you give it some smart strokes of a Hammer, it will, by
that merely Mechanical Change, become a Springy Body: So that, if with your
Hand you force it a little from its Rectitude, as soon as you remove your Hand,
it will endeavor to regain its former Streightness. The like may be observed
in Copper, but nothing near so much, or scarce at all, in Lead. Now upon these
Phenomenon, I demand, Why, if Nature be so careful to restore Bodies to their
former State, She does not restore the Silver Blade or Plate to its Rectitude,
when it is bent this way or that way, before it be Hammered? And why a few
strokes of a Hammer (which, acting violently, seems likely to have put the
Metal into a Preternatural State,) should entitle the Blade to Nature's
peculiar Care, and make Her solicitous to restore it to its Rectitude, when it
is forced from It? And Why, if the Springy Plate be again Ignited and
Refrigerated of itself, Nature abandons Her former Care of It, and suffers it
quietly to continue in what crooked Posture, One pleases to put it into? Not,
now, to demand a Reason of Nature's greater Partiality to Silver, and Copper
and Iron, than to Lead and Gold itself, in Reference to the Motion of
Restitution; I shall add to what I was just now saying, that even in
Sword-Blades it has been often observed, That though, if soon after they are
bent, the force that bent them be withdrawn, they will nimbly return to their
former straightness; yet, if they (which are not the only Springy Bodies, of
which this has been observed,) be kept too long bent, they will lose the Power
of recovering their former streightness, and continue in that crooked Posture,
though the force that put them into it cease to act: So that, it seems, Nature
easily forgets the care She was presumed to take of it, at first.

There is an Axiom that passes for current among Learned Men, viz. Nullum
violentum durabile, that seems much to favor the Opinion of the Naturists,
since it is grounded upon a Supposition, that what is violent, is, as such,
contrary to Nature, and, for that Reason, cannot last long. And this trite
Sentence is, by the Schools and even some Modern Philosophers, so particularly
applied to Local Motion, that some of them have, not improbably, made it the
Characteristick token, whereby to distinguish Natural Motions from those that
are not so; that the Former are perpetual, or at least very durable, whereas
the Later, being continually checked more and more by the Renitency of Nature,
do continually decay, and within no long time are suppressed or extinguished:
But, on this occasion, I must crave leave to make the following Reflections.

1. It may be justly Questioned, upon Grounds laid down in another Part of this
Essay, Whether there be any Motion, among Inanimate Bodies, that deserves to be
called Violent, in Contradistinction to Natural; since among such, all Motions,
where no Intelligent Spirit intervenes, are made according to Catholic, and
almost, if not more than almost, Mechanical Laws.

2. Methinks, the Peripateticks, who are wont to be the most forward to employ
this Axiom, should find but little Reason to do so, if they consider how
unsuitable it is to their Doctrine, That the vast Body of the Firmament and all
the Planetary Orbs are, by the Primum Mobile, with a stupendous swiftness,
whirled about, from East to West, in four and twenty Hours, contrary to their
Natural tendency; and, That this violent and rapid Motion, of the incomparably
greater Part of the Universe, has lasted as long as the World itself, that is,
according to Aristotle, for innumerable Ages.

3. We may observe here below, that the Ebbing and Flowing of the Sea, which is
generally supposed to proceed either from the Motion of the Moon, or that of
the Terrestrial Globe, or some other External Cause, has lasted for some
Thousands of Years, and probably will do so, as long as the present System of
our Vortex shall continue. I consider also, that the other great Ocean, the
Atmosphere, consists of numberless Myriads of Corpuscles, that are here below
continually kept in a violent State; since they are Elastical Bodies, whereof
the Lower are still compressed by the weight of the Higher. And, to make a
Spring of a Body, it is requisite that it be forcibly bent or stretched, and
have such a perpetual endeavor to fly open, or to shrink in, that it will not
fail to do so, as soon as the External Force, that hindered it, is removed.
And, as for the States of Inanimate Bodies, I do not see, that their being or
not being Natural can be, with any certainty, concluded, from their being or
not being very Durable. For, not to mention, that Leaves that wither in a few
Months, and even Blossoms that often fade and fall off in few Days, are as well
Natural Bodies, as the solid and durable Trees that bear them; it is obvious,
that, whether we make the State of Fluidity, or that of Congelation, to be that
which is Natural to Water, and the other that which is Violent; Its change from
one of those States into another, and even its return to its former State, is
oftentimes, at some Seasons, and in some Places, made very speedily, perhaps in
an Hour or less, by Causes that are acknowledged to be Natural. And Mists,
Hail, Whirlwinds, Lightning, Falling-Stars, to name no more, notwithstanding
their being Natural Bodies, are far from being lasting, especially in
comparison of Glass, wherein the Ingredients, Sand and Fixed Salt, are brought
together by great violence of Fire. And the Motion that a thin Plate, or
slender Wire, of this Glass can exercise, to restore itself to its former
Position, when forcibly bent, is (in great part) a lasting Effect of the same
violence of the Fire. And so is the most durable perseverance of the
Indissolubleness of the Alcalisate Salt, that is one of the two Ingredients of
Glass, notwithstanding its being very easily dissoluble in Water and other
Liquors, and not uneasily e'ne in the moist Air itself.

There is a distinction of Local Motion, into Natural and Violent, that is so
generally received and used, both by Philosophers and Physicians, that, I
think, it deserves to have special Notice taken of it in this Section; since it
implicitly contains an Argument for the Existence of the Thing called Nature,
by supposing it so manifest a Thing, as that an Important Distinction may
justly be grounded on It.

This implied Objection, I confess, is somewhat difficult to clear; not for any
great Force, that is contained in It, but because of the Ambiguity of the
Terms, wherein the Distinction is wont to be employed: For most Men speak of
the proposed Distinction of Motion, in so obscure, or so uncertain a way, that
it is not easy to know what they mean by either of the Members of It. But yet
some there are, who endeavor to speak Intelligibly, (and for that are to be
commended) and define Natural Motion to be That, whose Principle is within the
Moving Body itself; and Violent Motion, That which Bodies are put into by an
External Agent or Cause. And, in in regard these speak more clearly than, the
rest, I shall here principally consider the lately mentioned Distinction, In
the Sense They give It. I say then, that, even according to this Explication, I
am not satisfied with the Distinction: For, whereas it is a Principle received,
and frequently employed, by Aristotle and his Followers, Quicquid movetur ab
alio movetur; it seems, that, according to this Axiom, all Motion may be called
Violent, since it proceeds from an External Agent; and indeed, according to
the School Philosophers, the Motion of far the greatest Part of the Visible
World, though this Motion be most Regular and Lasting, must, according to the
proposed Distinction, be reputed Violent; since they assert, that the Immense
Firmament itself, and all the Planetary Orbs, (in comparison of which vast
Celestial Part of the World, the Sublunary Part is little more than a Physical
Point,) is perpetually (and against its Native Tendency,) hurried about the the
Center of the World, once in Twenty four Hours, by an External, though
Invisible, Agent, which they therefore call the Primum Mobile. And as for the
Criterion of Natural Motion, that, Its Principle is within the Moving Body, it
may be said, that all Bodies, once in the State of Actual Motion, whatever
Cause first brought them to It, are moved by an Internal Principle: As, for
Instance, an Arrow, that actually flies in the Air toward a Mark, moves by
some Principle or other residing within itself; for, it does not depend on the
Bow 'twas shot out of, since 'twould continue, though That were Broken, or even
annihilated; nor does it depend upon the Medium, which more resists than
assists its Progress, as might be easily shown, if it were needful; and, if we
should suppose the Ambient Air either to be annihilated, or (which in our Case
would be Aequialent,) rendered incapable of either furthering or hindering its
Progress, I see not why the Motion of the Arrow must necessarily cease, since
in this Case there remains no Medium to be penetrated, and on that account
oppose its Progress. When in a Watch that is wound up, the Spring endeavors to
unbend or display itself; and when the String of a drawn Bow is broken or let
go, the Spring of the former, and the woo^y Part of the later, does each return
to a less crooked Line. And though these Motions be occasioned by the forcible
Acts of External Agents, yet the Watch, Spring, and the Bow, have in themselves
(for ought appears to those I Reason with,) an inward Principle, by which they
are moved till they have attained their Position. Some, perhaps, would add,
that a Squib, or a Rocket, though an artificial Body, seems, as well as a
falling Star, to move from an Internal Principle: But I shall rather observe,
that, on the other side, External Agents are requisite to many Motions, that
are acknowledged to be Natural, as, to omit the Germination and Flourishing of
diverse Plants, as Onions, Leeks, Potato's, etc. though hung up in the Air, by
the heat of the Sun in the Spring; to pass by this, I say, if in the
Pneumatical Engine or Air-Pump, you place diverse Insects, as Bees, Flies,
Catterpillars, etc. and withdraw the Common Air from the Receiver, they will
lie moveless, as if they were dead, though it be for several hours, whilst they
are kept from enjoying the presence of the Air: But, when the External Air is
permitted again to return upon them, they will presently be revived, (as I have
with pleasure tried,) and be brought to move again, according to their
respective Kinds; as if a Fly, for Instance, resembled a little Windmill in
this, that being Moveless of itself, it required the Action of the Air to put
its Wings and other Parts into Motion. But, to insist no farther on these
Arguments ad Hominem, we may consider, that, since Motion does not essentially
belong to Matter, as Divisibility and Impenetrableness are believed to do; the
Motions of all Bodies, at least at the beginning of Things, and the Motions of
most Bodies, the Causes of whose Motions we can discern, were impressed on
them, either by an External Immaterial Agent, God; or by other Portions of
Matter (which are also Extrinsecal Impellers) acting on them.

And this occasion invites me to observe, that, though Motion be deservedly
made one of the Principal Parts of Aristotle's Definition of Nature, Natura est
Principium quoddam and Causa, cur id moveatur and quiescat, in quo inest, etc.
Aristot. Auscult. lib. II. cap. 1.
yet Men are wont to call such Motions Natural, as are very hard to distinguish
from those, they call Violent. Thus, when Water falls down to the Ground, they
tell us, that this Motion is Natural to that Liquor, as it is a heavy Body; but
when a Man spurts up Water out of his Mouth into the Air, they pronounce that
Motion, because of its tendency upwards, to be contrary to Nature. And yet when
he draws Water into his Mouth, by sucking it through a long Pipe held
Perpendicularly, they will have this Motion of the Water, though directly
upwards, to be not Violent, but Natural. So when a Football, or Blown Bladder,
being let fall upon a hard Floor, rebounds up to a good height, the Descent and
Ascent are both said to be Natural Motions, though the former tends toward the
Center of the Earth, and the later recedes as far as it can do from it. And so
if from a considerable height you let fall a Ball of some close Wood, that yet
is not too heavy, as Oak or the like, into a deep Vessel of Water, it will
descend a great way in that Liquor, by a Natural Motion; and yet its contrary
Motion upwards ought not to be esteemed Violent, since, according to the
Schools, being lighter in Specie than Water, it is Natural to it to affect its
proper Place, for which purpose it must ascend to the top of the Liquor, and
lie afloat there; and yet it is from these tendencies to opposite Points, (as
the Zenith and the Nadir) that Men are wont to judge many Motions of Bodies to
be Natural or Violent.

And indeed, since it must be indifferent to a Lifeless and Insensible Body, to
what place it is made to move, all its Motions may, in some respect, be said to
be Natural, and in another, Violent: For as very many Bodies of visible Bulk
are set a moving by External Impellents, and, on that score, their Motions may
be said to be Violent; so the generality of Impelled Bodies do move either
upwards, downwards, etc. toward any Part of the World, in what Line or Way
soever they find their Motion least resisted; which Impulse and Tendency, being
given by virtue of what they call the general Laws of Nature, the Motion may be
said to be Natural.

I might here take notice, that, according to the Epicurean Hypothesis, it need
not at all be admitted, that Motion must be produced by such a Principle, as
the Schoolmens Nature. For, according to that great and ancient Sect of
Philosophers, the Atomists, every indivisible Corpuscle has actual Motion, or
an incessant endeavor to change Place, essentially belonging to it, as it is an
Atom: Insomuch that in no case it can be deprived of this Property or Power.
And all sensible Bodies being, according to these Physiologers, but casual
Concretions or Coalitions of Atoms; each of them needs no other Principle of
Motion, than that unloseable endeavor of the Atoms that compose it; and
happen, on the account of Circumstance, to have the Tendency of the more
numerous, or at least the predominant, Corpuscles, determined one way. And to
these I might add some other such Reflections. But I shall, in this place, say
no more concerning Motion, not only because, even after having considered the
differing Definitions, that Aristotle, Cartesius, and some other Philosophers,
have given of it, I take it to be too difficult a Subject, to be clearly
explicated in few words; but because the only occasion I had to mention it
here, was, to show that the vulgar Distinction of it into Natural and Violent
is not so clear and wellgrounded, as to oblige us to admit (what it supposes,)
that there is such a Being, as the Naturists assert.

I come now to consider the Argument, that may be drawn in favor of the
Received Notion of Nature, from the Critical Evacuations which happen at
certain times in Diseases, and the strange Shifts that Nature sometimes makes
use of in them, to free Herself from the Noxious Humors that oppressed Her.

This Argument I willingly acknowledge to be very considerable. For we really
see, that in Continual Fevers, especially in hotter Climates, there do usually
happen, at certain times of the Diseases, Notable and Critical Commotions or
Conflicts, after which the Morbifick Matter is disposed of and discharged by
Ways strange and surprising, to the great and speedy Relief of the Patient, if
not to his perfect Cure; as may appear by many Instances, to be met with in the
Observations of Physcians about Fevers, Pleurisies, etc. Upon this Account, I
take the Argument drawn from Crises's to be much the weightiest, that can be
urged for the Opinion from which I Dissent, and therefore I shall employ the
more words in clearing this important Difficulty.

In order to this, I desire it may be kept in mind, that I do not only
acknowledge, but teach, that the Body of a Man is an incomparable Engine, which
the most wise Author of Things has so skilfully framed, for lasting very many
Years, that, if there were in it an Intelligent Principle of Self-preservation,
(as the Naturists suppose there is) Things would not, in most Cases, be better
or otherwise managed, for the Conservation of the Animals Life, than they
generally are. So that the Question is not, Whether there is a great deal of
Providence and Wisdom exercised, in the Crises's of Diseases, but upon what
Account it is, that these apposite Things are performed? The Universal Opinion
of Physcians is, that it is that Intelligent Principle they call Nature, which,
being solicitous for the Welfare of the Patient, and distressed by the quantity
or hurtfulness of the Morbifick Matter, watches Her opportunity (especially
when it is concocted) to expel it hastily out of the Body, by the most safe and
convenient Ways, which, in the present condition of the Patient, can be taken.
And I, on the other side, attribute Crises's to the Wisdom and ordinary
Providence of God, exerting Itself by the Mechanism, partly of that great
Machine, the World, and partly of that smaller Engine, the Human Body, as it is
constituted in the Patients present Circumstance. And the Reasons that hinder
me, from acquiescing in the general Opinion of Physicians about Crises's, are
principally these.

First, I observe that Crises's, properly so called, do very seldom happen in
other than Fevers, and the like acute Diseases; where, according to the common
Course of Things, the Malady is terminated, in no long time, either by
Recovery, or Death, or a change into some other Disease: But
Chronical-sicknesses, such as Coughs, Dropsies, Gouts, etc. unless they happen
to be accompanied with Feverish Distempers, are not wont to have Crises's;
which argues, that Nature does not make Critical Evacuations, upon the account
of such Care and Watchfulness, as Physicians ascribe them to: Since She
neglects to employ so Salutary an Expedient in Diseases, that are oftentimes no
less Dangerous and Mortal, than diverse acute Diseases, which She attempts to
Cure by Crises's.

Next I consider, that Critical Evacuations may be procured by the bare
Mechanism of the Body. For, by virtue of That, it will often happen, that the
Fibers, or motive Organs of the Stomach, Bowels, and other Parts, being
Distended or Vellicated by the Plenty or Acrimony of the Peccant Matter, will,
by that Irritation, be brought to contract themselves vigorously, and to throw
out the Matter that offends the Parts, either by the Emunctories or
Common-Shores of the Body, or by whatever Passages the proscribed Matter can
be, with most ease, discharged. Thus, when some Men find their Stomachs
burdened with a Clog of Meat or Drink, they use to thrust their Fingers into
their Throats, and, by that Mechanical way, provoke the Stomach to disburden
itself of its offensive Load, without being beholden to Natures Watchfulness
for a Crisis, which probably She would not (at least so seasonably) attempt.
And thus, whereas it is usual enough, for Crises's to be made in Fevers by
large Haemorrhagi's at the Nose, and sometimes at other Parts, which is
ascribed to Natures Watchful Solicitude for the Patients Recovery; I must take
leave to add, that it has been diverse times observed, that, even after Death,
large Bleedings have succeeded, at the Nose and other Parts of the Body: Which
shows, that such Excretions may be made by virtue of the Structure of it, and
the Turgescence and Acrimony of the Humors, without any Design of Nature, to
save the Life of the Patient, already Dead.

Indeed, if it did appear by Experience, that all, or almost all, the Crises's
of Diseases, did either expel the Morbifick Matter, or at least notably relieve
the Patient, the Critical Attempts of Nature would much favor the Opinion Men
have conceived of her Vigilance and Conduct: But unwelcome Instances daily
show, that, as some Crises's are Salutary, (as they call them) so others prove
Mortal. And among those that do not directly or presently kill the Patient,
there are diverse that leave him in a worse Condition, than he was before. And
therefore, I wonder not, that Physicians have thought themselves obliged to lay
down several Circumstances, as necessary Requisites of a laudable Crisis, if
any of which be wanting, it is not thought of the best kind; and if the contrary
to some of them happen, it is to be judged either pernicious, or at least
hurtful. For, whereas there are two general Ways, supposed to be employed by
Nature in making Crises's, the one by expulsion of the Peccant Matter out of
the Body, and the other by the settling of the Matter somewhere within it:
Neither of these two Ways is constantly successful.

And therefore Experience has obliged Physicians to divide Crises's, not only
into perfect, that fully determine the event of the Disease, and imperfect,
that do but alter it for the better or the worse; but into Salutary, that quite
deliver the Patient, and Mortal, that destroy him. And to a Perfect and
Salutary Crisis, some Learned Men require no less than six Conditions; namely,
that it be preceded by Signs of Coction of the Peccant Matter; that it be made
by a manifest and sufficiently copious Excretion or Translation; that it be
made upon a Critical Day, as the seventh, fourteenth, twentieth, etc. that it
leave no Relics behind it, that may endanger a Relapse; that it be made
safely, that is, without dangerous Symptoms: And lastly, that it be suitable to
the Nature of the Disease, and the Patient. By this it may appear, that it is no
common thing to meet with a Perfect and Salutary Crisis, so many laudable
Conditions must concur in it; and indeed Nature does usually take up with but
imperfectly good Ones, and it were happy if She made not better, provided She
made no worse. But it is found, by sad Experience, that She rouses Herself up to
make a Crisis, not only upon improper, and, as Physicians call them,
Intercident Days, such as the Third, Fifth, Ninth, etc. or upon those they call
Empty or Medicinal Days, which seldom afford any Crisis, and much seldomer a
good One, but also when there appear not any signs of Coction, or at least of
due Coction, and by these unseasonable Attempts weaken the Patient, and
increase the Malady, or perhaps make it speedily Mortal. Nor will it justify
Nature, to say, with some Learned Physicians, that these Attempts are
Accidentally brought on by the Acrimony or Importunity of the Morbifick Matter,
by which She is provoked, before the time, to endeavor an Expulsion of it. For
if Nature be indeed so Prudent and Watchful a Guardian, as She is thought, She
ought not to suffer Herself to be provoked to act Preposterously, and make
furious Attempts, that lavish to no purpose, or worse than no purpose, that
little strength the Patient has so much need of. And therefore Physicians do
oftentimes very well, when, to act agreeably to the Dictates of Prudence, they
forget, how much Wisdom they are wont to ascribe to Nature, and employ their
best Skill and Remedies to suppress or moderate the inordinate Motions, or the
improper and profuse Evacuations, that irritated Nature rashly begins to make.
And though the Crises's that are made by a Metastasis of the Peccant Matter, or
by lodging it in some particular Part of the Body, whether External or
Internal, be oftentimes, when they are not Salutary, somewhat less Hurtful,
than those that are made by Excretion; yet these do frequently, though perhaps
more slowly, prove Dangerous enough, producing sometimes inward Imposthumes,
and sometimes External Tumors, in Parts that are either Noble by their
Functions, or by their Situation, or Connection, or Sympathy with others, that
are not to be without Hazard or great Inconvenience oppressed.

I know that Physicians make it a great Argument of Nature's Providence and
Skill, that She watches for the Concoction of the Peccant Matter, before She
rouses Herself up to expel it by a Crisis. What is to be meant by this Coction
of Humors, (for it ought not to be confounded with the Coction of the
Aliments) they are not wont so clearly to declare. But, as I understand it,
when they say that a Portion of Peccant Matter is brought to Coction, they
mean, that it has acquired such a Disposition, as makes it more fit, than
before, to be separated from the sounder Portion of the Mass of Blood, or from
the consistent Parts, to which it perhaps formerly adhered, and to be
afterward expelled out of the Body. This may be partly exemplifi'd by what
happens in some recent Colds, where the Lungs are affected, in which we see,
that, after a few days, the Phlegm is made more fluid; and that which is lodged
in the Lungs, (not sticking so fast to the inside of the Aspera Arteria) is
easily brought up by Coughing, which could not dislodg it before. And in
Fevers, that separation in the Urine, formerly Cloudless, that Physicians look
upon as a good sign of Coction, seems to be produced by some part of the
Peccant Matter, that, beginning to be separated from the Blood, mingles with
the Urine, and is not usually distinguished from it, whilst this Liquor is
warm; but when it is grown cold, does, on the score of its Weight or Texture,
somewhat recede, and appear in a distinct Form, as of a Cloud, a Sediment, etc.
But whatever they mean by Coction, it is plain enough, by what has been lately
noted, that, on many occasions, Nature does not wait for it, but unseasonably,
and oftentimes dangerously, attempts to proscribe the Matter that offends Her,
before it be duly prepared for Expulsion.

I come now to that Circumstance of Crises's, that is thought the most
Wonderful, which is, that Nature does oftentimes by very unusual Ways, and at
unexpected Places, discharge the Matter that offends Her, and thereby either
Cures, or notably Relieves, the Patient. And it must not be denied, that, in
some cases, the Critical Evacuations have somewhat of Suprising in them; and I
shall also readily grant, that, N. B. [Divine Providence may expressly
interpose, not only in the infliction of Diseases by way of Punishment, but in
the removal of them in the way of Mercy.] But, setting aside these
extraordinary Cases, I think it not absurd to conjecture, that the performances
of Nature, in common Crises's, may be probably referred, partly to the
particular condition of the Matter to be expelled, and partly (and indeed
principally) to some peculiar Disposition in the Primitive Fabric of some
Parts of the Patients Body, or some unusual change made in the Construction of
these Parts by the Disease itself, or other Accidents; which Original or
Adventitious disposition, of the Sick Man's Body, not being visible to us, at
least whilst he is alive, we are apt to ascribe the unexpected Accidents of a
Crisis, if it prove Salutary, to the wonderful Providence of Nature. And, if it
happen to be other than Salutary, we are wont to overlook them. To illustrate
this Matter, we may consider, that plentiful Evacuations, procured by
Medicines, are a kind of Artificial Crises's: We see, that some Bodies are so
constituted, that, although the peccant Humor, wrought on by the Medicine,
ought, as the Physician thinks, to be expelled by Siege, and indeed is wont to
be so, in the Generality of those that take that kind of Medicine, as, for
Instance, Rhubarb or Senna; yet the peculiar disposition of the Patient's
Stomach will make that an Emetick, which was intended to be, and regularly
should be, a Cathartick. Nor does this Constitution of the Stomach equally
regard all Purging Medicines; for the same Stomach, that will reject them in
the Form, for Instance, of a Potion, will quietly entertain them, being in the
Form of Pills. And to this let me add what we observe of the Operation of
Mercury; which though, if it be duly prepared, it is usually given to procure
Salivation, especially to Succulent Bodies; yet there are some Patients,
wherein, instead of Salivating, 'twill violently and dangerously work
downwards, like a Purge, or make some other unexpected Evacuation. And I have
seen a Patient, who, though Young and very Fat, could not be brought to
Salivate, neither by the Gentler ways, nor by Turbith-Mineral and Other harsher
Medicines, though administered by very skilful Physicians and Chyrurgeons. And
this Peculiarity may be as well Contracted, as Native. For some Persons,
especially after Surfeits, having been rufly dealt with, or at least tired out
with a Medicine of this or that kind of Form, will afterward Nauseate and
Vomit up the like Medicine, though in other Bodies it be never so far from ^^ing
Emetick. We see also, that sometimes Sudorifick Medicines, instead of procuring
Sweat, prove briskly Diuretic, and sometimes either Purging or Vomitive. From
all this we may Argue, that the qualities of the irritating Matter, and much
more the particular disposition of the Patients Body, may procure Evacuations
at unexpected Places. I remember too, that, among the Observations I have met
with of famous Physicians, there are Instances of Periodical and Critical
Evacuations, at very inconvenient, as well as unusual, Vents; as some Women are
Recorded to have had their Menses, sometimes at the Eyes, sometimes at the
Navil, and sometimes at the Mouth; of which there seems no cause so probable,
as some peculiar Structure, whether Native or Adventitious, of the Internal
Parts concerned in that discharge; and of such unusual Structures, Anatomists
must have seen Many, since I my self have observed more than One or Two. If
these uncommon Ways of disposing of the Morbifick Matter were always Salutary
to the Patient, the Argument grounded on them would have more weight: But
though most Men take notice of this sort of Crises's, but when they are Lucky,
yet an Impartial Observer shall often find, that ill-condition'd and hurtful
Crises's may be made by unusual and unexpected ways. And, in some Translations
of the Morbifick Matter to distant and nobler Parts, perhaps it will be as
difficult to show, by what Channels or known Ways the Matter passed from one to
another, as it is to determine, how it was conducted to those Parts, at which it
was the most happily Vented.

In the foregoing Discourse about Crises's, there is, I confess, much of
Paradox; and 'twas unwillingly enough; that I made an Excursion, or In-road,
into a Subject that has been looked upon as the Physicians peculiar Province.
And, you may remember, that not far from the beginning of this little Book, I
told you, that I was willing to decline meddling with Other, than Inanimate
Bodies: Living Ones being, as of a less simple Sort, so of a more intricate
Speculation; which Reflection will, I hope, excuse me to you, if you find, that
my proposed Brevity, or the difficulty of the Subject, has had any great
Influence on what I write, about Health, Diseases and Crises's. And, as for the
Sons of Aesculapius, it may be represented to them, in my favor, that, besides
that I have treated of Sickness and Crises's, rather as a Physiologer than a
Physician, I could not leave them unconsider'd, without being thought, if not
to betray, at least to be wanting to, the Cause I was to plead for.

If it should be disliked, that I make the Phenomenon of the merely Corporeal
Part of the World, under which I comprize the Bodies of Animals, though not the
Rational Souls of Men, to be too generally referred to Laws Mechanical; I hope
you will remember, for me, several things dispersed in this Treatise, that may,
when laid together, afford a sufficient Answer to this Surmize; and
particularly, that almost all the Modern Philosophers, and among Them diverse
eminent Divines, scruple not to forsake the spread Opinion, That the Celestial
Orbs were moved and guided by Intelligences; and to explicate, by Physical
Causes, the Eclipses of the Sun and Moon, the Production or Apparition and
Phenomenon of Comets, and other Things, that the Romans, as well as other
Heathens, both Ancient and Modern, have ascribed to the immediate Agency of
Divine Causes. This allows me to observe to you, that, since these Modern
Naturalists and Divines are wont to explicate the Phenomenon of the vast
Celestial Bodies, by their Local Motions and the Consequences of Them; They
do, as well as I, endeavor to account for what happens in the incomparably
greatest Part of the Universe, by Physico-Mechanical Principles and Laws. And,
even in the Terrestrial Part of the World, which we Men inhabit, most of the
Moderns, that have freed themselves from the Prejudices of the Schools, do not
stick to give Statical, Hydro-Statical, and other Mechanical Explications of
the Ascension of Water in Pumps, the Detention of it in Watering-Pots, whose
upper Orifices are closed, and of other various Phenomenon, which were formerly
unanimously ascribed to Nature's wonderful Providence, expressed in Her care to
hinder a Vacuum.

But perhaps you will think it fitter for me to provide against their Censure,
who will dislike what I have written about Crises's, not because I have
ascribed too much to merely Physical Causes, but (on the contrary,) because I
do not strictly confine my self to Them. For I doubt, that if you should show
these Papers to some of your Friends, that affect to be strict Naturalists,
they will think it strange, that in one of the Clauses in the foregoing
Discourse about Crises's, (I mean, that to which this Mark N. B. is prefixed,)
I admit that their Events may sometimes be varied by some peculiar
Interposition of God. But yet I own to you, that the Clause, it is like they
would take Exceptions at, did not unawares slip from my Pen. For it is my settled
Opinion, that Divine Prudence is often, at least, conversant in a peculiar
manner about the Actions of Men, and the things that happen to Them, or have a
necessary Connection with the One, or the Other, or Both. And though I think it
probable, that in the Conduct of that far greatest Part of the Universe, which
is merely Corporeal, the Wise Author of it does seldom manifestly procure a
Recession from the settled Course of the Universe, and especially from the most
Catholic Laws of Motion: Yet, where Men, who are Creatures, that He is pleased
to indow with Free Wills, (at least in reference to things not Spiritual,) are
nearly and highly concerned; I think he has, not only sometimes by those signal
and manifest Interpositions we call Miracles, acted by a Supernatural way, but,
as the Sovereign Lord and Governor of the World, does diverse times, (and
perhaps oftener than mere Philosophers imagine) give by the Intervention of
Rational Minds, as well united, as not united, to human Bodies, diverse such
determinations to the Motion of Parts in those Bodies, and of Others, which may
be affected by Them, as by Laws merely Mechanical, those Parts of Matter would
not have had: By which Motions, so determined, either Salutary or Fatal
Crises's, and many other Things, conducive to the Welfare or Detriment of Men,
are produced.

The Interposition of Divine Providence, in cases of Life and Death, might be
easily shown to Christians out of diverse Passages of Scripture, which expressly
proposed long Life as a Reward to Obedient Children, The Fifth Commandment, in
Exodus xx.
and to other Righteous Persons among the Jews, and threatens bloody and
deceitful Men, Psalm v. 6.
that they shall not live out half their days; Psalm lv. 23.
and which relates, that a King of Israel had his Disease made Mortal by his
Impious recourse to the false God of Eckron; and that, 2 Kings i. 16.
upon Hezekiah's Prayers and Tears, God was pleased to add fifteen Years to his
Life, Isa. xxxviii.
and grant a special Benediction to an outward Medicine, applied to his
threatening Sore. To which Passages diverse may be added out of the New Testament
also, and especially that of St. James, James v. 25.
who exhorts the Sick to seek for Recovery by Prayer; and that of St. Paul,
where, speaking to the Corinthians of the unworthy Receivers of the Sacrament
of the Eucharist, he tells them, that, For that cause, diverse were become sick
and weak among them, 1 Cor. xi. 30.
and many also died. But though the nature of this Discourse dissuades me from
employing here the Authority of Scripture, yet it allows me to observe, (what
is considerable on this occasion) that Natural Theology and Right Reason
comport very well with our proposed Doctrine. For, as I lately intimated, and
do more fully show in another Paper, A Discourse relating to Miracles.
God has left to the Will of Man the direction of many Local Motions in the
Parts of his own Body, and thereby of some others; though the Mechanical Laws,
on which the ordinary Course of Things mainly depends, do not only regulate the
Motions of Bodies, but the Determinations too: And since Man himself is
vouchsafed a Power, to alter, in several Cases, the usual Course of Things, it
should not seem incredible, that the latent Interposition of Men, or perhaps
Angels, or other Causes unthought of by Us, should sometimes be employed to the
like purposes by God, who is not only the All-wise Maker, but the Absolute, and
yet most Just and Benign, Rector of the Universe, and of Men.

To conclude the Excursion, which I hope will not appear useless, that has been
occasioned by the Discourse of Crises's, I think it becomes a Christian
Philosopher, to admit, in general, that God does sometimes in a peculiar,
though hidden way, interpose in the ordinary Phenomenon and events of Crises's;
but yet, that this is done so seldom, at least in a way that we can certainly
discern, that we are not hastily to have recourse to an extraordinary
Providence, and much less to the strange care and skill of that questioned
Being called Nature, in this or that particular Case, though perhaps
unexpected, if it may be probably accounted for by Mechanical Laws, and the
ordinary Course of Things.

And here, though in a place less proper than I might have chosen, if I had
timely remembered it, I shall, both in reference to the extraordinary Accidents
that sometimes happen in Crises's, and more generally to the seemingly
irregular Phenomenon of the Universe, venture to offer you a Notion, that
perhaps you will not dislike. I think then, that, when we consider the World,
and the Physical Changes that happen in It, with reference to the Divine Wisdom
and Providence; the Arguments for the Affirmative ought, in their kind, to have
more force than those for the Negative. For it seems more allowable, to argue a
Providence from the exquisite Structure and Symmetry of the Mundane Bodies, and
the apt Subordination and Train of Causes, than to infer from some Physical
Anomalies, that Things are not framed and administered by a wise Author and
Rector. For the Characters and Impressions of Wisdom, that are Conspicuous in
the curious Fabric and orderly Train of Things, can, with no probability, be
referred to blind Chance, but must be to a most Intelligent and Designing
Agent. Whereas, on the other hand, besides that the Anomalies, we speak of, are
incomparably fewer, than those Things which are regular, and are produced in an
orderly Way; besides this, I say, the Divine Maker of the Universe being a most
free Agent, and having an Intellect infinitely Superior to Ours, may, in the
Production of seemingly irregular Phenomenon, have Ends unknown to us, which
even the Anomalies may be very fit to compass.

Thus, when a Man, not versed in the Mathematics, looks upon a curious
Geographical Globe, though, as soon as he perceives that the differing
Bignesses, and particular Confines of Kingdoms and Provinces, and the apt
Situations, true Distances and Bearings of the Cities and Towns he knows by
Sight or Fame, be rightly set down; he cannot but conclude, from these
Impresses of Art or Skill, that this was the Work of a designing Artificer. But
though he also sees on the same Globe several Circles, as the Tropicks, the
Zodiac, the Meridians, etc. if he be a sober Man, he will not think that these
were made by Chance only, because he knows not the Reasons or Uses of Them, or
because some of the Lines, as those Curve-Lines the Seamen call Rumbs, are not,
like the other, Circular, but do odly, and with a seeming Irregularity,
intersect them: But will rather think, that the Artist, that had knowledge
enough to represent the Globe of the Earth and Waters, in a Body not two foot
in Diameter, had also skill enough to draw those Lines, with some Design worthy
of the same Skill, though not obvious to those that are unacquainted with his
Art.

I did not incogitantly speak of Irregularities, as if they might sometimes be
but seeming Ones. For I think it very possible, that an Artificer of so vast a
Comprehension, and so piercing a Sight, as is the Maker of the World, might, in
this great Automaton of His, have so ordered Things, that diverse of Them may
appear to us, and as it were break out, abruptly and unexpectedly, and at great
distances of Time or Place from one another, and on such accounts be thought
Irregular; which yet really have, both in his Preordination, and in the
Connection of their Genuine Causes, a reference that would, if we discerned it,
keep us from imputing it either to Chance, or to Nature's Aberrations. To
illustrate this a little, let us consider, that if, when the Jesuits, that
first came into China, presented a curious striking Watch to the King, he that
looked to it had wound up the Alarm, so as to strike a little after One; if, I
say, this had been done, and that these Chinese, that looked upon it as a
living Creature, or some European Animal, would think, that when the Index,
pointing at two of the Clock, likewise struck the same Hour, and so three,
four, and onward, they would judge that these Noises were regularly produced,
because they (at equal Intervals of time) heard them, and whenever the Index
pointed at an Hour, and never but then; but when the Alarm came unexpectedly to
make a loud, confused, and more lasting Noise, they could scarce avoid
thinking, that the Animal was sick, or exceedingly disordered: And yet the
Alarming noise did as properly flow from the Structure of the little Engine,
and was as much designed by the Manager of it, as those Sounds of the Clock,
that appeared manifestly Regular.

SECT. VII.
I proceed now to the Sixth and Difficultest part of my Task, which is to show,
That the most general and current Effata and Axioms concerning Nature, that are
wont to be employed in the Writings of Philosophers, may have a fair Account
given of them, agreeably to the Doctrine I have hitherto proposed, though these
Axioms do some of them suppose, and others seem strongly to support, the
received Notion of Nature.

To clear the way for the ensuing Explications, I must desire you to recall to
mind the two Cautions I have formerly offered you (in the Fifth Section,)
wherewith I would have the common Doctrine, about the Ends or Designs of
Nature, to be understood or limited. And therefore I shall not here repeat,
what I there said, but only add in two words, that if those, and some few other
such things, had been observed and duly considered, they might perhaps have
prevented much of the Obscurity, and some of the Errors, that relate to the
Notion of Nature.

I hope you have not forgot, that the design of this Paper was, to examine the
Vulgar Notion of Nature, not to establish a new One of my own. And indeed the
Ambiguity of the Word is so great, (as has in the Second Section been made
appear) and it is, even by Learned Men, frequently employed to signify such
different Things; that, without Enumerating and Distinguishing its various
Acceptions, it were very unsafe to venture a giving a Definition of it, and
perhaps it were very impossible to give any, that would not be liable to
censure. I shall not therefore here presume to define a Thing, of which I have
not found a stated and settled Notion so far agreed on amongst Men, but that I
was obliged, out of Aristotle and Others, to compile, in the Fourth Section, a
Collective Representation of the vulgarly received Idea, or Notion of Nature:
And afterward to draw up, as well as I could, instead of an accurate
Definition, tolerable Descriptions of what, on most occasions, may be
intelligibly meant by It. Wherefore, desiring and presuming, that you will
retain in your Mind, and, as occasion shall require, apply, in the following
Part of this Essay, the Things already delivered in the Fourth Section, I will
not trouble you with the Repetition of Them.

But before I descend to treat of the particular Effata or Sentences, that are
Received concerning Nature's Actings, it may not be improper, nor unuseful, to
try if we can clear the way, by considering in what sense Nature may, or may
not, be said to act at all, or to do this or that. For, for ought I can clearly
discern, whatsoever is performed in the merely Material World, is really done
by particular Bodies, acting according to the Laws of Motion, Rest, etc. that
are settled and maintained by God among Things Corporeal. In which Hypothesis,
Nature seems rather a Notional Thing, than a true Physical, and distinct or
separate, Efficient; such as would be, in case Aristotle's Doctrine were true,
one of those Intelligences, that he presumed to be the Movers of the Celestial
Orbs. But Men do oftentimes express themselves so very ambiguously or
intricately, when they say, that Nature does this and that, or, that She acts
thus and thus; that it is scarce (if at all) possible to translate their
Expressions into any Forms of Speech, adequate to the Original and yet
Intelligible. For which Reason, though I have in the Section said something to
the same purpose with what I am now to propose, yet the difficulty and weight
of the Subject makes me think it may be expedient, if not necessary, in this
place somewhat more fully to declare what Men do, or should, mean, when they
speak of Nature's acting, or of a Thing's being Naturally done or performed, by
giving their Words and Phrases sometimes one Interpretation, and sometimes
another.

I. Sometimes when it is said, that Nature does this or that; it is less proper
to say, that it is done by Nature, than, that it is done according to Nature. So
that, Nature is not here to be looked on, as a distinct or separate Agent, but
as a Rule, or rather a Systeme of Rules, according to which, those Agents, and
the Bodies they work on, are, by the Great Author of Things, determined to act
and suffer.

Thus, when Water is raised in a Sucking-Pump, it is said, that Nature makes the
Water ascend after the Sucker, to prevent a Vacuum; though in reality this
Ascension is made, not by such a separate Agent, as Nature is fancied to be,
but by the Pressure of the Atmosphere, acting upon the Water, according to
Statical Rules, or the Laws or the Aequilibrium of Liquors, settled by God
among Fluids, whether Visible or Pneumatical. So, when the strict Peripateticks
tell us, that all the Visible Celestial Orbs, being by a Motion, that they
call Violent, hurried about the Earth every four and twenty Hours from East to
West; each of the Planetary Orbs has a Natural Motion, that is quite contrary,
tending from the West to the East: If they will speak congruously to their
Master's Doctrine, they must use the term Natural in the sense our Observation
gives It: Since Aristotle will have the Celestial Orbs to be moved by external
or separate Agents namely, Spiritual Intelligences. Our Observation may be also
illustrated by other forms of Speech, that are in use; as when it is said, that
the Law takes care of Infants and Lunaticks, that their indiscreet Actions or
Omissions should not damnifie their Inheritances; and, that the Law Hangs Men
for Murder, but only Burns them in the Hand for some lesser Faults; of which
Phrases the Meaning is, that Magistrates and other Ministers of Justice, acting
according to the Law of the Land, do the things mentioned. And it tends yet
more directly to our purpose to take Notice, that it is common to ascribe to Art
those things that are really performed by Artificers, according to the
Prescriptions of the Art, as when it is said, that Geometry (as the Name
imports,) measures Lands, Astrology foretells Changes of Weather and other
future Accidents, Architecture makes Buildings, and Chemistry prepares
Medicines.

II. Sometimes, when diverse Things, such as the Growth of Trees, the
Maturations of Fruits, etc. are said to be performed by the course of Nature,
the Meaning ought to be, that such things will be brought to pass by their
proper and immediate Causes, according to the wonted Manner and Series or Order
of their Actings. Thus it is said, that, by the course of Nature the Summer days
are longer than those of the Winter: That, when the Moon is in Opposition to
the Sun, (that is in the Full Moon,) that Part of Her Body which respects the
Earth, is more Enlightened than at the New Moon, or at either of the
Quadratures: And lastly, That when She enters more or less into the Conical
Shadow of the Earth, She suffers a total or a partial Eclipse. And yet these
and other Illustrious Phenomenon may be clearly explicated without recourse to
any such Being as the Aristotelians Nature, barely by considering the
Situations and wonted Motions of the Sun or Earth, and the Moon, with reference
to each other, and to the Terrestrial Globe.

And here it may not be amiss to take notice, that we may sometimes usefully
distinguish between the Laws of Nature, more properly so called, and the Custom
of Nature, or, if you please, between the Fundamental and General Constitutions
among Bodily Things, and the Municipal Laws, (if I may so call them,) that
belong to this or that particular sort of Bodies. As, to resume and somewhat
vary our Instance drawn ftom Water; when this falls to the Ground, it may be
said to do so by virtue of the Custom of Nature, it being almost constantly
usual for that Liquor to tend downwards, and actually to fall down, if it be
not externally hindered. But when Water ascends by Suction in a Pump, or other
Instrument, that Motion, being contrary to that which is wonted, is made in
virtue of a more Catholic Law of Nature, by which it is provided, that a
greater Pressure, which in our case the Water suffers from the weight of the
Incumbent Air, should surmount a lesser, such as is here the Gravity of the
Water, that ascends in the Pump or Pipe.

The two foregoing Observations may be farther illustrated, by considering, in
what sense Men speak of things which they call Praeter-natural, or else
Contrary to Nature. For diverse, if not most, of their Expressions of this kind,
argue, that Nature is in Them taken for the Particular and Subordinate, or, as
it were, the Municipal Laws established among Bodies. Thus Water, when it is
intensly Hot, is said to be in a Praeter-natural State, because it is in One
that it is not usual to It, and, Men think, does not regularly belong to It;
though the Fire or Sun, that thus agitates It and puts it into this State, is
confessed to be a Natural Agent, and is not thought to act otherwise than
according to Nature. Thus, when a Spring, forcibly bent, is conceived to be in
a State contrary to its Nature, as is argued from its incessant Endeavor to
remove the compressing Body; this State, whether Praeter-natural, or contrary
to Nature, should be thought such, but in reference to the Springy Body. For
otherwise it is as agreeable to the grand Laws, that obtain among Things
Corporeal, that such a Spring should remain bent by the degree of Force, that
actually keeps it so, as that it should display itself in spite of a less, or
incompetent, Degree of Force. And to omit the Six Non-natural Things, so much
spoken of by Physicians, I must here take notice, that though a Disease be
generally reckoned as a Praeter-natural Thing, or, as Others carry the Notion
further, a State contrary to Nature; yet, that must be understood only with
reference to what customarily happens to a human Body: Since excessively cold
Winds, and immoderate Rains, and sultry Air, and other Usual Causes of
Diseases, are as Natural Agents, and act as agreeably to the Catholic Laws of
the Universe, when they produce Diseases, as when they condense the Clouds into
Rain or Snow, blow Ships into their Harbor, make Rivers overflow, ripen Corn
and Fruit, and do such other Things, whether they be hurtful or beneficial to
Men. And, upon a like Account, when Monsters are said to be Praeternatural
Things; the Expression is to be understood with regard to that particular
Species of Bodies, from which the Monster does enormously deviate, though the
Causes, that produce that Deviation, act but according to the general Laws,
whereby Things Corporeal are guided.

3. I doubt, whether I should add as a Third Remark, or as somewhat that is
referrable to one or both of the Two foregoing, that sometimes, when it is said,
that Nature performs this or that Thing, we are not to conceive, that this
Thing is an Effect really produced by other than by proper Physical Causes or
Agents; but, in such Expressions, we are rather to look upon Nature, either as
a Relative Thing, or as a Term employed to denote a Notional Thing, with
reference whereunto Physical Causes are considered, as acting after some
peculiar manner, whereby we may distinguish their Operations from those that
are produced by other Agents, or perhaps by the same, considered as acting in
another Way. This, I think, may be Illustrated by some other received
Expressions, or Forms of Speech. As, when many of the Ancient, and some of the
Modern, Philosophers, have said, that Things are brought Fatally to pass; they
did not mean, that Fate was a distinct and separate Agent, but only, that the
Physical Causes performed the Effect, as, in their Actings, they had a
necessary Dependence upon one another, or an inviolable Connection that linked
them together. And on the other side, when Men say, as they too frequently do,
that Fortune or Chance, Differunt autem Fortuna and Casus, quia Casus latius
patet. Quod enim a Fortuna est, Casu est: hoc autem non omne est a Fortuna.
Arist. Auscult. lib. ii. cap. 4.
(...) or (...) (for Aristotle and his Followers distinguish Them, ascribing to
the former, what unexpectedly happens to Deliberating or Designing, and to the
later, what happens to Inanimate or Undesigning Beings,) has done this or that:
Considerate Philosophers do not look upon Fortune or Chance as a true and
distinct Physical Cause, but as a Notional Thing, that denotes, that the proper
Agents produced the Effect without an Intention to do so, (as I have more fully
declared in the Fourth Section.)

One may, for ought I know, without Impertinence, refer to this our Third
Observation, That many Things are wont to be attributed to Time; as, when we
say, that Time ripens some Fruits that are too early gathered; that it makes
many things moulder and decay, (Tempus edax rerum;) that it is the Mother of
Truth; that it produces great Alterations, both in the Affairs of Men, and in
their Dispositions and their Bodies: To omit many other Vulgar Expressions,
which represent Time as the Cause of several Things, whereof really it is but
an Adjunct or a Concomitant of the Effects, (however Coincident with the
successive Parts of Time, and so, some way, related to It) being indeed
produced by other Agents, that are their true and proper Efficients.

Sometimes likewise, when it is said, that Nature does this or that, we ought
not to suppose, that the Effect is produced by a distinct or separate Being;
but, on such Occasions, the Word Nature is to be concei^^d to signify a
Complex or Convention of all the Essential Properties, or necessary Qualities,
that belong to a Body of that Species whereof the real Agent is, or to more
Bodies respectively, if more must concur to the Production of the Effect. To
this sense we are to expound many of those Forms of Speech, that are wont to be
employed, when Physicians, or others, speak of what Nature does in reference to
Diseases, or the Cure of them. And, to give a right sense to such Expressions,
I consider Nature, not as a Principal and Distinct Agent, but a kind of
Compounded Accident, that is (as it were) made up of, or results from, the
diverse Properties and Qualities that belong to the true Agents. And, that the
Name of a Compounded Accident may not be startled at, I shall, to explain what
I mean by it, observe, that, as there are some Qualities or Accidents, that, at
least in comparison of others, may be called Simple, as Roundness,
Streightness, Heat, Gravi^^, etc. so there are others, that may be conceived as
Compounded, or made up of several Qualities united in one Subject: As, in
diverse Pigments, Greenness is made up of Blew and Yellow, exquisitely mixed;
Beauty is made up of fit Colors, taking Features, just Stature, fine Shape,
graceful Motions, and some other Accidents of the Human Body and its Parts.
And, of this sort of Compounded Accidents, I am apt to think, there are far
more, than, at the first mention of them, one would imagine. And to this kind
of Beings, the Expressions, that Naturists do on diverse occasions employ,
incline me to think, that, what is called Nature has a great Affinity, at least
in reference to those Occasions. On which Supposition, one may conceive, that,
as when it is said, that Health makes a Man Eat well, Digest well, Sleep well,
etc. Considering Men do not look upon Health as a Distinct and Separate Cause
of these Effects; but, as what we lately called a Compounded Accident, that is,
a Complex of all the Real and Genuine Causes of good Appetite, Digestion,
Sleep, etc. insomuch that Health is not so properly the Cause of these, as
their Effect or Result: So in diverse Things that Nature is said to do, we need
conceive no more, than that the Effects are produced by Physical Bodies and
Qualities, or other proper Causes; which, when we consider as conspiring, or
rather concurring, to produce the same Effect, by a Compendious Term we call
Nature.

By these and the like ways of Interpretation, I thought fit to try, whether I
could give an Intelligible and Commodious sense to diverse of the Maxims or
Sentences; and other Forms of Speech, that are employed by those, that, on many
Occasions, and in differing Expressions, say, That Nature does this or that,
and acts thus and thus. But I confess, that to clear all those ambiguous and
unskilfully framed Axioms and Phrases, I found to be so intricate and difficult
a Task, that, for want of Time, and perhaps too of Patience, I grew weary
before I had prosecuted it to the utmost. For which Reason, though it is not
improbable, that some Light may be given in this dark Subject, by what I have
been now saying, (as immature and unfinished, as it is) especially if it be
reflected on in Conjunction with what has been formerly delivered (in the
Fourth Section) about Nature, General and Particular; yet I shall, at present,
make but very little use of the Things that have been now said, in expounding
the Axioms I am particularly to consider in this Seventh Section; hoping, that
I may, by the help of other Mediums, dispatch my Work without them. And, to do
it the more easily; I shall, without tying myself to the Order wherein they are
marshalled after the beginning of the Fourth Section, treat of them in the
Order wherein I think their Explications may give most Light to one another, or
in That, wherein the Papers that belonged to them were retrieved.

The first of the received Axioms I shall consider, is, that which pronounces,
that Omnis Natura est conservatrix sui; where, by the Word Nature, I suppose,
they understand a Natural Body, for otherwise I know not what they meant: Now
this Axiom easily admits of a twofold Interpretation. For, either it may
signify no more, than that no one Body does tend to its own Destruction, that
is, to destroy Itself: Or else, that in every Body there is a Principle called
Nature, upon whose Score, the Body is vigilant and industrious to preserve Its
Natural State, and to defend Itself from the Violence and Attempts of all other
Bodies that oppugn It, or endeavor to destroy or harm It.

In the former of these two Senses, the Axiom may be admitted, without any
prejudice to our Doctrine. For since according to our Hypothesis, Inanimate
Bodies can have neither Appetites, nor Hatreds, nor Designs, which are all of
them Affections, not of Bruit Matter but of Intelligent Beings; I, that think
Inanimate Bodies have no Appetites at all, may easily grant, that they have not
any to destroy themselves.

But, according to the other Sense of the proposed Axiom, 'twill import, that
every Body has within itself a Principle, whereby it does desire, and with all
its Power endeavor, to compass its own Preservation: And both to do those
things, that tend thereunto, and oppose all endeavors, that outward Agents, or
internal Distempers, may use in order to the Destruction of It.

And as this is the most Vulgar Sense of this Axiom, so it is chiefly in this
Sense, that I am concerned to Examine It.

I conceive then, that the most Wise Creator of Things did at first so frame
the World, and settle such Laws of Motion between the Bodies, that, as Parts,
compose It; that by the Assistence of his General Concourse, the Parts of the
Universe, especially those that are the Greater and the more Noble, are lodged
in such Places, and furnished with such Powers, that, by the help of his
general Providence, they may have their Beings continued and maintained, as
long and as far forth, as the Course he thought fit to establish, amongst
Things Corporeal, requires.

Upon this Supposition, which is but a reasonable one, there will appear no
necessity to have any recourse, for the Preservation of particular Bodies, to
such an Internal Appetite and Inbred Knowledge in each of them, as our
Adversaries presume. Since, by virtue of the Original Frame of Things, and
established Laws of Motion, Bodies are necessarily determined to act on such
Occasions, after the Manner they would do, if they had really an Aim at
Self-preservation: As you see, that, if a blown Bladder be compressed, and
thereby the included Air be forced out of its wonted Dimensions and Figure, it
will uncessantly endeavor to throw off, and repel, that which offers Violence
unto It; and first displace that Part of the compressing Body, that it finds
Weakest; though in all this, there be no Appetite in the Air, (as I elsewhere
show;) no more than in the Bladder, to that particular Figure, to maintain
itself in which it seems so concerned.

Thus, it is all one to a ^lump of Dough, whether you make it into a round Loaf,
or a long Roll, or a flat Cake, or give it any other Form: For whatever Figure
your Hands or your Instruments leave in It, that it will retain, without having
any Appetite to return to that, which it last had. So, it is all one to a piece
of Wax, whether your Seal Imprints on It the Figure of a Wolf, or that of a
Lamb. And, for Brevity's sake, to pass by the Instances that might be drawn
from what happens to Wood, and Marble, and Metals, as they are differently
shaped by the Statuaries Art and Tools; I will only observe, that the Mariner's
Needle, before it is excited, may have no particular Propensity to have respect
to one Part of Heaven, more than another; but when it has been duly touched
upon a Lodestone, the Flwer-de-Luce will be determined to regard the North,
and the opposite Extreme the South. So that, if the Lilly be drawn aside,
toward the East or toward the West, as soon as the Force, that detained it,
is removed, it will return to its former Position, and never rest, 'till it
regard the North. But, in spite of this seeming Affection of the Lilly to that
Point of the Horizon, yet, if the Needle be duly touched upon the contrary Pole
of the same or another vigorous Lodestone, the Lilly will presently forget its
former Inclination, and regard the Southern Part of Heaven; to which Position
it will, as it were, spontaneously return, having been forced aside toward the
East, or toward the West, if it be again left to its Liberty. So that, though
it formerly seemed so much to affect one Point of Heaven, yet it may, in a
trice, be brought to have a strong Propensity for the Opposite: The Lilly
having, indeed, no Inclination for one Point of Heaven, more than another, but
resting in that Position, to which it was last determined by the prevalence of
Magnetical Effluvia. And this Example may serve to illustrate and confirm, what
we have been lately saying in General.

II. Another Received Axiom concerning Nature, is, That She never fails or
misses of Her End, Natura sine suo nunquam excidit. This is a Proposition,
whose Ambiguity makes it uneasy for me to deliver my Sense of It. But yet, to
say somewhat, if by Nature we here understand that Being, that the Schoolmen
Style Natura Naturans, I grant, or rather assert, that Nature never misseth its
End. For the Omniscient and Almighty Author of Things, having once framed the
Word, and established in It the Laws of Motion, which he constantly maintains,
there can no Irregularity, or Anomaly, happen, especially among the greater
Mundane Bodies, that he did not from the Beginning foresee and think fit to
permit, since they are but genuine Consequences of that Order of Things, that,
at the Beginning, he most wisely Instituted. As I have formerly declared in
Instances of the Eclipses of the Sun and Moon; to which I could add Others, as
the Inundations of Nilus, so necessary to the Health and Plenty of Egypt. And
though, on some special Occasions, this Instituted Order, either seemingly or
really, has been violated, as when the Sun is said to have Stood still in the
days of Joshua, and the Red Sea to have Divided itself to give free Passage to
the Israelites, led by Moses; yet these things having been rarely done, for
weighty Ends and Purposes, by the peculiar Intervention of the first Cause,
either guiding or overruling the Propensities and Motions of Secundary Agents;
it cannot be said, that God is frustrated of his Ends by these designed, though
seeming, Exorbitances, by which he most Wisely and Effectually accomplishes
Them. But, if by Nature be meant such a Subordinate Principle, as Men are wont
to understand by that Name, I doubt the Axiom is in many Cases false; for
though it it be true, as I have often said, that the Material World is so
constituted, that, for the most part, Things are brought to pass by Corporeal
Agents, as regularly, as if they designed the Effects they produce, yet there
are several Cases, wherein Things happen quite otherwise.

Thus it is confessed, that when a Woman is with Child, the Aim of Nature is, to
produce a Perfect or Genuine human Foetus; and yet we often see, that Nature
widely missing Her Mark, instead of That, produces a Monster. And of This we
have such frequent Instances, that whole Volumes have been published, to
recount and describe these gross and deformed Aberrations of Nature. We many
times see, (and have formerly noted,) that in Fevers, and other acute
Diseases, She makes Critical Attempts upon improper Days, and in these
unseasonable Attempts does not only, for the most part, miss of her End, which
is to Cure the Patient, but often brings him to a far worse Condition, than he
was in, before She used those miscarrying Endeavors. To this may may be
referred the Cheats Men put upon Nature; as when, by Grafting, the Sap, that
Nature raises with Intention to feed the Fruit of a white Thorn. (for
Instance,) is by the Gardener brought to nourish a Fruit of quite another Kind.
So, when Maulsters make Barley to sprout, that Germination, whereby Nature
intended to produce Stalks and Ears, is perverted to a far differing Purpose,
and She deluded. And now, to annex some Arguments ad Hominem, we are told, that
Nature makes every Agent aim at assimulating the Patient to itself, and that
upon this account, the Fire aims at converting Wood, and the other Bodies it
works on, into Fire: But, if this be so, Nature must often miss of Her End in
Chemical Furnaces, where the Flame does never turn the Bricks, that it makes
red-hot, into Fire; nor the Crucibles, nor the Cuples, nor yet the Gold and
Silver, that it thoroughly pervades, and brings to be of a Color, the same, or
very near the same, with its own, and keeps in a very intense Degree of Heat,
and in actual Fusion. And, even when Fire acts upon Wood, there is but one Part
of it turned into Fire, since, to say nothing of the Soot and concreted Smoke,
the Ashes remain fixed and incombustible. And so, to add another Instance ad
Hominem, when we are told, that Nature makes Water ascend in Sucking-Pumps, ob
fugam Vacui, She must needs (as I formerly noted to another Purpose,) miss of
Her Aim, when the Pump exceeds Five and Thirty, or Forty, Foot in Height; for
then, though you Pump never so much, and withdraw the Air from the upper Part
of the Engine, the Water will not ascend to the Top; and consequently, will
leave a Cavity, for whole replenishing She was supposed to have raised that
Liquor Two or Three and Thirty Foot.

III. Another of the celebrated Axioms concerning Nature, is, that She always
acts by the shortest or most compendious Ways, Natura semper agit per vias
brevissimas. But this Rule, as well as diverse Others, does, I think, require to
be somewhat explained and limited, before it be admitted. For, it is true, that,
as I have frequently occasion to inculcate, the Omniscient Author of the
Universe has so Framed It, that most of the Parts of it act as regularly in
order to the Ends of It, as if they did it with Design. But, since Inanimate
Bodies, at least, have no Knowledge, it cannot reasonably be supposed, that
they moderate and vary their own Actions, according to the Exigency of
particular Circumstances, wherewith they must of necessity be unacquainted, and
therefore it were strange, if there were not diverse Occurrences, wherein they
are determined to Act by Other, than the shortest, Ways that lead to particular
Ends, if those Other Ways be more congruous to the General Laws or Customs,
established among Things Corporeal. This I prove by Instances taken from
Gravity itself, which is, perhaps, that Quality, which of all others is most
probably referred to an inbred Power and Propension. For it is true, that if a
Stone, or another heavy Body, be let fall into the free Air, 'twill take its
Course directly toward the Center of the Earth; and, if it meet with an
inclining Plane, which puts it out of its Way, it will not for all that loss
its Tendency toward the Center, but run along that Plane, by which Means its
Tendency downwards is prosecuted, though not, as before, in a perpendicular
Line, yet in the shortest Way it is permitted to take. These obvious
Phenomenon, I confess, agree very well with the Vulgar Axiom, and possibly were
the chief Things that induced Men to frame it. But now let us suppose, that a
small Bullet of Marble or Steel, after having for a pretty space fallen through
the Air, lights upon a Pavement of Marble, or some such hard Stone, that lies,
as Floors are wont to do, Horizontal; in this Case, Experience shows, (as was
formerly noted on another occasion) that the falling Stone will rebound to a
considerable Height, (in Proportion to That it fell from) and falling down
again rebound the second time, though not so high as before; and, in short,
rebound several times, before, by settling upon the Floor, it approaches, as
near as is permitted it, to the Center of heavy Bodies. Whereas, if Nature did
in all Cases act by the most Compendious ways, this Bullet ought not to rebound
at all; but, as soon as it found, by the hardness of the Floor, it could
descend no lower, it ought to have rested there, as in the nearest place it
could obtain to the Center of the Earth, whence every Rebound must necessarily
remove it to a greater Distance. And so likewise, when a Pendulum, or Bullet
fastened to the end of a String, is so held, that the String is (praeter
propter) Perpendicular to the Horizon, if it be thence let fall, it will not
stop at the Perpendicular Line, or Line of Direction, which is supposed to
reach from the Nail or other Prop, through the Center of the Bullet, to the
Center of the Earth, but will pass beyond it, and vibrate or swing to and fro,
'till it have passed again and again the Line of Direction, for a great while,
before the Bullet come to settle in it, though, whenever it removes out of it,
toward either hand, it must really ascend or move upwards, and so go further
off from the Center of the Earth, to which, it is pretended, its innate
Propensity determines it to approach, as much and as soon as is possible. But
this Instance having been formerly touched upon, I shall now observe, to the
same purpose, that having taken a good Sea-Compass, [and the Experiment
succeeded with a naked, yet nicely poised, Needle] and suffered the Magnetic
Needle to rest North and South; if I held the proper Pole of a good Loadstone
at a convenient Distance, on the right or left hand of the Lilly, this would be
drawn aside from the North Point toward the East or West, as I pleased; and
then the Loadstone being removed quite away, the Lilly of the Needle would
indeed return Northward, but would not stop in the Magnetic Meridian, but pass
on diverse Degrees beyond it, and would thence return without stopping at the
Meridian Line: And so would, by its Vibrations, describe many Arches still
shorter and shorter, 'till at length it came to settle on it, and recover that
Position, which, if Nature always acted by the most Compendious Ways, it should
have rested at the first time, that by the removal of the Loadstone it had
regained it. But the Truth is, that, at least, Inanimate Bodies, acting without
knowledge or design of their own, cannot stop or moderate their own Action, but
must necessarily move as they are determined by the Catholic Laws of Motion,
according to which, in one Case, the Impetus, that the Bullet acquires by
falling, is more powerful to carry it on beyond the Line of Direction, than the
Action of the Causes of Gravity is to stop it, as soon as it comes to the
nearest place they can give it to the Center of the Earth. And something like
this happens in Levity, as well as Gravity; for if you take an oblong and
conveniently shaped piece of light Wood, as Firr or Deal, and, having thrust or
sunk it to the Bottom of a somewhat deep stagnant Water, give it Liberty to
ascend, it will not only regain the Surface of the Water, where, by the Laws of
Gravity, it ought to rest, and did rest before it was forced down, but it will
pass far beyond that Surface, and in part as it were shoot itself up into the
Incumbent Air, and then fall down again, and rise a second time, and perhaps
much oftener, and fall again, before it come to settle in its due place, in
which it is in an aequilibrium with the Water, that endeavors to press it
upwards.

Another of the Sentences that are generally received concerning Nature, is,
that She always does what is best to be done: Natura semper quod optimum est
facit. Natura semper id facit quod est optimum eorum quae fieri possunt. Arist.
de Coelo. lib. ii. C. 4. See also Arist. de Genesis lib. ii. cap. 10.. 22.
But of this it will not be safe for me to deliver my Opinion, 'till I have
endeavored to remove the ambiguity of the Words; for they easily admit of two
different Senses, since they may signify, that Nature in the whole Universe
does always that which is best, for the conservation of It in its present
State; or, that in reference to each Body in particular, Nature does still what
is best, that is, what most conduces to the Preservation and Welfare of that
Body. If the first of these Senses be pitched upon, the Axiom will be less
liable to Exception. But then, I fear, it will be difficult to be positively
made out, by such Instances as will prove, that Nature acts otherwise than
necessarily according to Laws Mechanical; and therefore, 'till I meet with such
Proofs, I shall proceed to the other Sense that may be given our Axiom, which,
though it be the most usual, yet, I confess, I cannot admit, without it be both
explained and limited. I readily grant, that the All-wise Author of Things
Corporeal has so framed the World, that most things happen in it, as if the
particular Bodies that compose it, were watchful both for their Own Welfare,
and That of the Universe. But, I think, withal, that particular Bodies, at
least Those that are Inanimate, acting without either Knowledge or Design, their
Actions do not tend to what is best for them in their private Capacities, any
further than will comport with the general Laws of Motion, and the important
Customs established among Things Corporeal: So that to conform to these, diverse
Things are done that are neither the Best, nor so much as Good, in reference to
the welfare of particular Bodies.

These Sentiments I am induced to take up, not only by the more Speculative
Considerations, that have been formerly discoursed of and therefore shall not
here be repeated, but by daily Observations and obvious Experience.

We see oftentimes, that Fruit Trees, especially when they grow old, will for
one Season be so overcharged with Fruit, that soon after they decay and die;
and even whilst they flourish, the excessive Weight of the too numerous Fruits
does not seldom break off the Branches they grow upon, and thereby both hinders
the Maturity of the Fruit, and hastens the Death of the Tree: Whereas, this
fatal Profuseness would have been prevented, if a wise Nature, harbored in the
Plant, did, as is presumed, solicitously intend its Welfare.

We see also in diverse Diseases, and in the unseasonable and hurtful Crises's
of Fevers, how far, what Men call, Nature oftentimes is, from doing that,
which is best for the Sick Man's Preservation. And indeed, (as has been
formerly noted on another Ocsicaon,) in many Diseases, as Bleedings,
Convulsions, Cholera's, etc. a great Part of the Physicians Work is, to appease
the Fury, and to correct the Errors, of Nature, which being, as 'twere,
transported with a blind and impetuous Passion unseasonably produces those
dangerous Disorders in the Body, that, if She were wise and watchful of its
Welfare, She would have been as careful to prevent, as the Physicians to remedy
Them.

Add to all this, that, if Nature be so Provident and Watchful for the Good of
Men and other Animals, and of that Part of the World, wherein they live; How
comes it to pass, that from time to time, She destroys such Multitudes of Men
and Beasts, by Earthquakes, Pestilences, Famine, and other Anomalies? And, How
comes it so often to pass in Teeming Women, that, perhaps by a Fright, or a
longing Desire, or the bare Sight of any outward Object, Nature suffers Herself
to be so disordered, and is brought to forget Her Plastic Skill so much, as,
instead of well-form'd Infants, to produce hideous Monsters, and those
oftentimes so misshapen and ill-contriv'd, that not only Themselves are unfit to
live one Day, or perhaps one Hour, but cannot come into the World without
killing the Mother that bare Them. These and such other Anomalies, though (as I
have elsewhere shown,) they be not repugnant to the Catholic Laws of the
Universe, and may be accounted for in the Doctrine of God's General Providence;
yet they would seem to be Aberrations, incongruous enough to the Idaea the
Schools give of Nature, as of a Being, that, according to the Axiom hitherto
considered, does always that which is best. But it is time that we pass from
that, to the Examen of another.

Though I have had occasion to treat of Vacuum in the Fifth Section, yet I must
also say something about it in This, because I there considered it, but as it
is employed by the Peripateticks and others, to show the Necessity of the
Principle they call Nature. But now I am to treat of it, not so much as an
Argument to be confuted, as on the score of its belonging to a (very plausible)
Axiom to be considered; although I fear, that, by reason of the Identity of the
Subject, (though considered in the Fifth Sect. and here, to differing purposes)
I shall scarce avoid saying something or other, co-incident with what has been
said already.

V. The Word Vacuum being ambiguous, and used in differing Senses, I think it
requisite, before I declare my Opinion about the generally received Axiom of
the Schools, that Natura Vacuum horret, (or, as some express it, abhorret a
Vacuo) to premise the chief Acceptions in which, I have observed, the Term
Vacuum to be made use of. For it has sometimes a Vulgar, and sometimes a
Philosophical or strict, Signification. In common Speech, To be empty, usually
denotes, not to be devoid of all Body whatsoever, but of that Body that Men
suppose should be in the Thing spoken of, or of That which it was framed or
designed to contain; as when Men say that a Purse is empty, if there be no Money
in it; or a Bladder, when the Air is squeezed out; or a Barrel, when either it
has not been yet filled with Liquor, or has had the Wine or other Drink drawn
out of it. The Word Vacuum is also taken in another sense by Philosophers that
speak strictly, when they mean by it, a Space within the World, (for I here
meddle not with the Imaginary Spaces of the Schoolmen, beyond the bounds of
the Universe,) wherein there is not contained any Body whatsoever. This
Distinction being premised, I shall inform you, that taking the Word Vacuum in
the strict Sense, though many, and, among them, some of my best Friends,
pressed me to a Declaration of my Sense about that famous Controversy, An
detur Vacuum, because, they were pleased to suppose, I had made more Trials
than others had done about it, yet I have refused to declare myself, either Pro
or Contra, in that Dispute. Since the decision of the Question seems to depend
upon the stating of the true Notion of a Body, whose Essence the Cartesians
affirm, and most other Philosophers deny, to consist only in Extension,
according to the three Dimensions, Length, Breadth, and Depth or Thickness:
For, if Mr. Des Cartes's Notion be admitted, 'twill be irrational to admit a
Vacuum, since any Space, that is pretended to be empty, must be acknowledged to
have the three Dimensions, and consequently all that is necessary to Essentiate
a Body. And all the Experiments, that can be made with Quicksilver, or the
Machina Boyliana (as they call it,) or other Instruments contrived for the like
Uses, will be eluded by the Cartesians, who will say, that the space deserted
by the Mercury, or the Air, is not empty, since it has Length, Breadth, and
Depth, but is filled by their Materia Subtilis, that is fine enough to get
freely in and out of the Pores of the Glasses, as the Effluvia of the Loadstone
can do. But though, for these and other Reasons, I still forbear (as I lately
said I have formerly done,) to declare either way in the Controversy about
Vacuum, yet I shall not stick to acknowledge, that I do not acquiesce in the
Axiom of the Schools, that Nature abhors a Vacuum.

For, First, I consider, that the chief, if not the only, Reason, that moves
the Generality of Philosophers to believe, that Nature abhors a Vacrum, is,
that in some Cases, as the Ascension of Water in Sucking-Pumps, etc. they
observe, that there is an unusual endeavor, and perhaps a forcible Motion in
Water and other Bodies, to oppose a Vacuum. But I, that see nothing to be
manifest here, save that some Bodies, not devoid of Weight, have a Motion
upwards, or otherwise differing from their usual Motions, (as in Determination,
Swiftness, etc.) am not apt, without absolute necessity, to ascribe to
Inanimate and Senseless Bodies, such as Water, Air, etc. the Appetites and
Hatreds that belong to Rational, or or least to Sensitive, Beings; and
therefore, think it a sufficient Reason, to decline employing such improper
Causes, if without them, the Motions, wont to be ascribed to Them, can be
accounted for.

2. If the Cartesian Notion of the Essence of a Body be admitted by us, as it is
by many Modern Philosophers and Mathematicians, it can scarce be denied, but
that Nature does not produce these oftentimes Great, and oftener Irregular,
Efforts to hinder a Vacuum; since, it being impossible there should be any,
'twere a fond thing to suppose that Nature, who is represented to us as a most
wise Agent, should bestir Herself, and do Extravagant Feats, to prevent an
impossible Mischief.

3. If the Atomical Hypothesis be admitted, it must be granted, not only that
Nature does not abhor a Vacuum, but that a great Part of the Things She does
require it, since they are brought to pass by Local Motion; and yet there are
very many Cases, wherein, according to these Philosophers, the necessary
Motions of Bodies cannot be performed, unless the Corpuscles, that lie in their
way, have little empty Spaces to retire, or be impelled into, when the Body,
that pushes them, endeavors to displace them. So that the Effatum, That Nature
abhors a Vacuum, agrees with neither of the two great Sects of the Modern
Philosophers.

But, without insisting on the Authority of either of them, I consider, that,
for ought appears by the Phenomenon employed to demonstrate Nature's abhorrency
of a Vacuum, it may be rational enough to think, either that Nature does not
abhor a Vacuum, even when She seems solicitous to hinder It; or, that She has
but a very moderate Hatred of It, in that Sense wherein the Vulgar Philosophers
take the Word Vacuum.

For if we consider, that, in almost all visible Bodies here below, and even in
the Atmospherical Air Itself, there is more or less of Gravity, or Tendency
toward the Center of our Terraqueous Globe, we may perceive, that there is no
need that Nature should disquiet Herself, and act irregularly, to hinder a
Vacuum: Since, without Her abhorrence of It, it may be prevented or
replenished, by Her affecting to place all heavy Bodies as near the Center of
the Earth, as heavier than they will permit. And even without any Design of
Hers, not to say without Her Existence, a Vacuity will be as much opposed, as
we really find it to be, by the Gravity of most, if not of all, Bodies here
below, and the Confluxibility of Liquors, and other Fluids. For, by virtue of
their Gravity, and the Minuteness of their Parts, they will be determined to
insinuate themselves into and fill all the Spaces, that they do not find
already possessed by other Bodies, either more ponderous in Specie than
themselves, or, by reason of their firmness of Structure, capable of resisting
or hindering their Descent. Agreeably to which Notion we may observe, that,
where there is no danger of a Vacuum, Bodies may move, as they do, when they
are said to endeavor its Prevention. As, if you would thrust your Fist deep
into a Pail full of Sand, and afterward draw it out again; there will need
nothing but the Gravity of the Sand to make it fill up the greatest Part of the
space deserted by your Fist. And if the Pail be replenished, instead of Sand,
with an Aggregate of Corpuscles more Minute and Glib than the Grains of Sand,
as for Instance, with Quicksilver or with Water, then the Space, deserted by
your Hand, will be, at least as to Sense, completely filled up by the
Corpuscles of the Liquor, which, by their Gravity, Minuteness, and the Fluidity
of the Body, they compose, are determined to replenish the Space deserted by
the Hand, that was plunged into either of those Liquors. And I elsewhere show,
that, if you take a Pipe of Glass, whose Cavity is too narrow to let Water and
Quicksilver pass by one another in It; if, I say, you take such a Pipe, and
having (by the help of Suction,) lodged a small Cylinder of Mercury of about
half an Inch long in the lower Part of It, you carefully stop the upper Orifice
with the Pulp of your Finger, the Quicksilver will remain suspended in the
Pipe. And, if then you thrust the Quicksilver directly downwards into a
somewhat deep Glass, or other Vessel, full of Water, till the Quicksilver be
depressed about a Foot or more beneath the Surface of the Water; if then you
take off your Finger from the Orifice of the Pipe which it stopped before, you
shall immediately see the Quicksilver ascend swiftly five or six Inches, and
remain suspended at this new Station. Which Experiment seems manifestly to
prove, what I did long ago devise and do now allege it for: Since here we have
a sudden Ascent of so heavy a Body as is Quicksilver, and a Suspension of It
in the Glass, not produced to prevent or fill a Vacuum, for the Pipe was open
at both Ends, the Phenomenon being but genuine Consequences of the Laws of the
Aequilibrium of Liquors, as I elsewhere clearly and particularly declare.

When I consider, how great a Power the School-Philosophers ascribe to Nature,
I am the less inclined to think, that Her abhorrence of a Vacuum is so great,
as they believed. For I have shown in the Fifth Section, that Her aversion from
It, and Her watchfulness against It, are not so great, but that, in the sense
of the Peripateticks, She can quietly enough admit it in some Cases, where,
with a very small Endeavor, She might prevent or replenish It, as I have
particularly manifested in the forecited Section. I just now mentioned a
Vacuum in the Sense of the Peripateticks, because when the Torricellian
Experiment is made, though it cannot, perhaps, be cogently proved, either
against the Cartesians, or some other Plenists, that, in the upper Part of the
Tube, deserted by the Quicksilver, there is a Vacuum in the strict
Philosophical Sense of the Word; yet, as the Peripateticks declare their Sense,
by diverse of their Reasonings against a Vacuum, mentioned in that Section,
'twill to a heedful Peruser appear very hard for them to show, that there is
not One in that Tube. And, as by the School-mens Way of Arguing Nature's hatred
of a Vacuum, from the Suspension of Water and other Liquors in Tubes and
Conical Watring-Pots, it appears, that they thought that any Space here below,
deserted by a visible Body, not succeeded by another Visible Body, or at least
by common Air, may be reputed Empty. So, by the Space deserted by the
Quicksilver at the top of the Pipe of a Baroscope Thirty One Inches long, One
may be Invited to doubt, Whether a Vacuum ought to be thought so formidable a
Thing to Nature, as they imagine She does, and ought to, think It? For what
Mischief do we see ensue to the Universe upon the producing or continuance of
such a Vacuum, though the deserted Space were many time greater than an Inch,
and continued many Years, as has diverse times happened in the taller sort of
Mercurial Baroscopes? And those Peripateticks that tell us, that, if there were
a Vacuum, the Influences of the Celestial Bodies, that are absolutely
necessary to the Preservation of Sublunary Ones, would be Intercepted, since
Motion cannot be made in Vacuo, would do well to prove, not suppose, such a
Necessity; and also to consider, that in our Case the top of the Quicksilver,
to which the Vacuum reaches, does usually appear Protuberant; which shows, that
the Beams of Light (which they think of great Affinity to Influences, if not
the Vehicle,) are able to traverse that Vacuum, being in spite of It reflected
from the Mercury to the Beholder's Eye. And in such a Vacuum, as to common Air,
I have tried that a Lodestone will emit his Effluvia and move Iron or Steel
placed in It. In short, it is not Evident, that here below Nature so much
strains Herself to hinder or fill up a Vacuum, as to manifest an Abhorrence of
It. And, without much peculiar Solicitude, a Vacuum, at least a Philosophical
One, is as much provided against, as the Welfare of the Universe requires, by
Gravity and Confluxibility of the Liquors and other Bodies, that are placed
here below. And as for those that tell us, that Nature abhors and prevents a
Vacuum, as well in the Upper Part of the World as the Lower, I think we need
not trouble ourselves to answer the Allegation till they have proved It. Which
I think will be very hard for Them to do; not to mention, that a Cartesian may
tell Them, that 'twere as needless for Nature to oppose a Vacuum in Heaven as
in Earth, since the Production of It is every where alike Impossible.

VI. I come now to the celebrated Saying, that Natura est Morborum Medicatrix,
taken from Hippocrat. Hippocrat. Epidem. lib. 6.. 5. t. 1.
who expresses it in the plural, (...). And because this Axiom is generally
Received among Physicians and Philosophers, and seems to be one of the
principal Things, that has made them introduce such a Being as they call
Nature, I think it may be Time well employed, to consider somewhat attentively,
in what Sense, and how far, this famous Sentence, may, or should not, be
admitted.

First then, I conceive it may be taken in a Negative Sense, so as to import,
that Diseases cannot be cured in such Persons, in whom the Aggregate of the
Vital Powers or Faculties of the Body is so far weakened or depraved, as to be
utterly unable to perform the Functions necessary to Life, or at least to
actuate and assist the Remedies employed by the Physician to preserve or
recover the Patient. This I take to be the Meaning of such usual Phrases, as,
that Physic comes too late, and, that Nature is quite spent. And in this Sense
I readily acknowledge the Axiom to be true. For, where the Engine has some
necessary Parts, whether Fluid or Solid, so far depraved or weakn'd, as to
render it altogether unable to cooperate with the Medicine, it cannot be
rationally expected, that the Administration of that Medicine should be
effectual. But in this, I presume, there is no Difficulty worthy to detain us.
I proceed therefore to the positive Sense, whereof our Axiom is capable, and
wherein it is the most usually employed. For Men are wont to believe, that
there resides, in the Body of a sick Person, a certain Provident or Watchful
Being, that still industriously employs itself, by its own Endeavors, as well
as by any occasional Assistence that may be afforded it by the Physician, to
rectify whatever is amiss, and restore the distempered Body to its Pristine
state of Health. What I think of this Doctrine, I shall leave you to gather
from the following Discourse.

I conceive then in the first Place, that the Wise and Beneficent Maker of the
World and of Man, intending that Men should, for the most part, live a
considerable number of Years, in a Condition to act their Parts on the Mundane
Stage; He was pleased to frame those Living Automata, Human Bodies, that, with
the ordinary succors of Reason, making use of their exquisite Structure fitted
for Durableness, and of the friendly, though undesign'd* Assistence of the
various Bodies among which they are placed, they may in many Cases recover a
State of Health, if they chance to be put out of it by lesser Accidents than
those, that God, in compliance with the great Ends of his General Providence,
did not think fit to secure them from, or enable them to surmount. Many things
therefore, that are commonly ascribed to Nature, I think, may be better
ascribed to the Mechanisms of the Macrocosm and Microcosm, I mean, of the
Universe and the Human Body. And, to illustrate a little my Meaning by a gross
Example or two, I desire you will consider with me a Sea-compass, wherein the
excited Magnetic Needle, and the Box that holds It, are duly poised by Means
of a competent number of opposite Pivats: For though, if you give this
Instrument a somewhat rude Shake, you will make the Box totter, and incline
this way and that way, and at the same time drive the Points of the Magnetic
Needle many Degrees to the East, or to the West; yet, the Construction of the
Instrument and the Magnetism of one main Part of It, are such, that, if the
Force, that first put it into a disorderly Motion, cease from acting on It, the
Box will, after some Reciprocations, return to its Horizontal Situation; and
the Needle, that was forced to deviate, will, after a few irregular* Motions to
this and to that side of the Magnetical Meridian, settle itself again in a
Position, wherein the Flower-de-Luce steadfastly regards the North. And yet this
recovery to its former State is effected in a factitious Body, by the bare
Mechanism of the Instrument itself, and of the Earth, and other Bodies, within
whose Sphere of Activity it is placed. But, because Many have not seen a
Mariner's Compass, I will add a less apposite but more obvious and familiar
Example: For, if when an empty Balance is duly counterpois'd, you shall, by
your Breath or Hand, depress one of the Scales, and thereby, for the time,
destroy the Aequilibrium; yet, when the Force is once removed, the depressed
Balance will presently ascend, and the Opposite will descend; and, after a few
Motions up and down, they will both of them, of their own accord, settle again
in an exact Aequilibrium, without the help of any such Provident Internal
Principle, (...) Nature: The absence of whose Agency may be confirmed by This,
that the depressed Scale does not at first stop at the Horizontal Line, beneath
which it was first depressed, (as it ought to do, if it were raised by an
Intelligent Being,) but rises far above It. If it be here objected, that these
Examples are drawn from Factitious, not from merely Physical, Bodies; I shall
return this brief Answer, and desire that it be applied not only to the Two
freshly mentioned Examples, but to All of the like Kind, that may be met with
in this whole Treatise. I say then, in short, that diverse of the Instances, we
are speaking of, are intended but for Illustrations; and that Others may be
useful Instances, if they should be no more than Analogous Ones: Since
Examples, drawn from Artificial Bodies and Things, may have both the Advantage
of being more clearly conceived by ordinary Understandings, and That of being
less obnox^^s to be questioned in that Pa^^^^ar in which the Comparison or
Correspondence consists. And I the less scruple to employ such Examples,
because Aristotle himself and some of his more learned Followers make use of
diverse Comparisons drawn from the Figures and other Accidents of Artificial
Things, to give an account of Physical Subjects, and even of the Generation,
Corruption and Forms of Natural Bodies. This Advertisement premised, I pursue
this Discourse, it interrupted, by adding, Thus in a human Body, the Causes
that disorder it are oftentimes but Transient, whereas the Structure of the
Body itself and the Causes that conduce to the Preservation of that Structure,
are more stable and durable, and on that account may enable the Engine to
out-last many Things, that are Hostile to It. This may be somewhat illustrated,
by considering, that Sleep, though it be not properly a Disease, easily becomes
One, when it frequently transgresses its due Bounds; and even whilst it keeps
within them, it does, for the time it lasts, hinder the exercise of many
Functions of the Body, more than several Diseases do; and yet, according to the
common course of Things, the Matter that locked up the Senses being spent, the
Man of himself recovers that sensible and active State, on whose score he is
said to be awake. But to come somewhat closer to the Point; We see, that many
Persons, who get a Praeter natural Thirst with overmuch Drinking, get rid of
it again in a few days by forbearing such Excesses; and many, that by too
plentiful Meals are brought to a want of Appetite, Recover, as it were, of
course, by a spare Diet, in a few days; the renewed Ferment, or Menstruum of
the Stomach, being able in that time to concoct by little and little, or expel
the indigested Aliments or peccant Humors that offended the Stomach, and
caused the want of Appetite.

And here I desire to have it taken Notice of, as a thing that may be
considerable to our present Purpose, that I look not on a Human Body, as on a
Watch or a Hand-mill, i. e. as a Machine made up only of Solid, or at least
Consistent, Parts; but as an Hydraulical, or rather Hydraulopneumatical Engine,
that consists not only of Solid and Stable Parts, but of Fuids, and those in
Organical Motion. And not only so, but I consider, that these Fluids, the
Liquors and Spirits, are in a living Man so constituted, that in eertain
Circumstances the Liquors are disposed to be put into a Fermentation or
Commotion, whereby either some Depuration of Themselves, or some Discharge of
hurtful Matter by Excretion, or both, are produced, so as, for the most part,
to conduce to the Recovery or Welfare of the Body.

And, that even Consistent Parts may be so framed, and so connected with other
Parts, as to act, as it were, pro re nata, varying their Motions, as differing
Circumstances make it convenient they should be varied, I purposely show in
another Paper. To this I might altogether refer you; but, in regard the Thing
is a Paradox, and lays a Foundation for Another not Inferior to itself, I shall
here borrow thence one Instance, not mentioned that I know of by Others to this
purpose, that may both declare my Meaning, and confirm the Thing itself: I
consider then, that what is called the Pupil or Apple of the Eye, is not (as
it is known,) a substantial Part of the Organ, but only a round Hole or Window
made in the Wea, at which the Modified Beams of Light enter, to fall upon the
Chrystalline Humor, and thence be refracted to the bottom of the Eye, or seat
of Vision, to make there an Impression, that is usually a kind of Picture (for
it is not always a neat One,) of the Object. Now the Wise and All-foreseeing
Author of Things has so admirably contrived this Instrument of Sight, that, as
it happens to be employed in differing Lights, so the Bigness or Area of the
Pupil varies. For when the Light is vivid, and would be too gteat if all the
Beams were let in, that might enter at an Aperture as large as the usual, the
Curtain is every way drawn toward the Middle, and thereby the round Window
made Narrower. And, on the other side, when the Light is but faint, and the
Object but dimly illustrated, there being more Light requisite to make a
sufficient Impression at the bottom of the Eye, the Curtain is every way drawn
open, to let in more Light: And when the Eye is well constituted, this is
regularly done, according as the Organ has need of more or less Light. Of this,
some late Masters of Optics have well Treated, and I have spoken about it more
fully in another place. And the truth of the Observation you may easily find,
if you look upon the Eyes of a Boy or a Girl, (for in young Persons the change
is the most notable) when the Eyes are turned from looking on dark Objects
toward bright or more illuminated Ones. And I have found the Variation yet
more conspicuous in the Eyes of a young Cat, as I elsewhere particularly
relate. So that, referring you to the Writings already pointed at, I shall only
add in this place, that these various Motions in the Eye are produced by mere
Mechanism, without the Direction, or so much as Knowledge or Perception, of the
Rational Soul. And, upon the like Account it is, that other Motions, in several
Parts belonging to the Eye, are produced, as 'twere spontaneously, as occasion
requires. And so, as to the Fluid Parts of the Body, we find, that, according
to the Institution of the Author of Things, when healthy Women are of a fit
Age, there is a Monthly Fermentation or Commotion made in the Blood, which
usually produces a kind of Separation, and then an Excretion, advantageous to
the Body.

And, that you may the better make out what I meant by the Disposition, or
Tendency, of the Parts, to return to their former Constitution, I shall desire
you to consider, with me, a thin and narrow Plate of good Steel, or refined
Silver; for, if one End of it be forcibly drawn aside, the changed Texture of
the Parts becomes such, or the Congruity and Incongruity of the Pores, in
reference to the ambient Ether, that endeavors to permeate them, is made
such, that, as soon as the Force that bent it is removed, the Plate does, as it
were, spontaneously return to its former Position. And yet here is no internal
watchful Principle, that is solicitous to make this Restitution, for otherwise
it is indifferent to the Plate what Figure it settle in; for, if the Springy
Body stand long Bent, then, as if Nature forgot her Office, or were unable to
execute it, though the Force that held the Spring bent be removed, it will not
endeavor to regain its former streightness: And, I have tried, in a Silver
Plate, that, if you only heat it red-hot, and let it cool, if you put it into a
crooked Posture, it will retain it; but barely with two or three strokes of a
Hammer, which can only make an invisible change of Texture, the Plate will
acquire a manifest and considerable Springyness, which you may again deprive it
of, by sufficiently heating it in the Fire, without so much as melting it.

But, to return to the Discourse, formerly begun, about Distempers wont to be
harmless by being Transient, we may observe, that the third or fourth day after
Women are brought to Bed, there is commonly a kind of Fever produced, upon the
plentiful resort of the Milk to the Breasts; for which cause, this Distemper
is, by many, called the Fever of Milk. And this is wont, in a short time, to
pass away of itself, as depending upon Causes far less durable, than the
Economy of the Woman's Body. And, if it be objected, that these are not
Diseases, because they happen according to the Instituted Course of Nature; I
will not now dispute the validity of the Consequence, though I could represent,
that the Labor of Teeming Women, and the breeding of Teeth in Children,
happen as much according to the Institution of Nature, and yet are usually very
painful, and oftentimes dangerous: But I will rather answer, that, if the
troublesome Accidents, I have alleged, cannot serve to prove, they may at
least to illustrate, what I aim at. And I shall proceed to take notice of a
Distemper, that Physicians generally reckon among Diseases, I mean, the flowing
of Blood at the Haemorrhoidal Veins: For, though oftentimes this Flux of Blood
is excessive, and so becomes very dangerous, and therefore must be checked by
the Physician, (which is no great Argument, that a Being, wise and watchful,
manages this Evacuation,) yet frequently, if not for the most part, the
Constitution of the Body is such, that the superfluous or vitiated Blood goes
off, before it has been able to do any considerable mischief, or perhaps any at
all, to the Body. And so we see, that many Coughs, and Hoarsenesses, and
Coryzas are said to be cured, that is, do cease to trouble Men, though no
Medicine be used against them, the Structure of the Body being durable enough
to out-last the Peccant Matters, or the Operation of those other Causes, that
pro-duce these Distempers.

It is a known thing, that most Persons, the first time they go to Sea,
especially if the Weather be any thing Stormy, are, by the unwonted Agitations,
which those of the Ship produce in them, (assisted perhaps by the Sea-Air, and
Smells of the Ship) cast into that Disease, that, from the Cause of it, is
called the Sea-sickness, which is sometimes dangerous, and always very
troublesome, usually causing a loss of Appetite, and almost continual
Faintness, a pain in the Head, and almost constant Nauseousness, accompanied
with frequent, and oftentimes violent, Vomitings; which Symptoms make many
complain, that, for the time, they never felt so troublesome a Sickness; and
yet usually, after not many days, this Distemper, by degrees, is mastered by
the Powers of the Body, tending still to persevere in their orderly and
friendly Course, and suppressing the adventitious Motions that oppose it, and
the sick Person recovers without other help. And so, though Persons
unaccustomed to the Sea, whether they be sick or no, are, by the inconvenient
Motions of the Ship, usually brought to a kind of habitual Giddiness, which
disposes them to reel and falter, when they walk upon firm ground: Yet, when
they come a Shore, they are wont in no long time to be freed from this uneasy
Giddiness, without the help of any Medicine: The usual and regular Motions of
the Parts of the Body obliterating by degrees in a few days (I used to be free
from it within some hours,) that adventitious Impression, that caused the
Discomposure. To the same purpose, we may take notice of that which happens to
many Persons, who riding backwards in a Coach are not only much distempered in
their Heads, but are made very sick in their Stomachs, and forced to Vomit, as
violently and frequently, as if they had taken an Emetick: And yet all this
Disorder is wont quickly to cease, when the Patient leaves the Coach, without
the continuance of whose Motion, (that continues a preposterous One in some
Parts of the Patient) the Distemper will quickly yield to the more ordinary and
regular Motions of the Blood, and other Fluids of the Body. So, when in a
Coach, or elsewhere, a Man happens to be brought to Faintness, or cast into a
Swoon, by the closeness of the Place, or the over-charging of the Air with the
fuliginous Reeks of Men's Bodies; though the Disease be formidable, yet, if the
Patient be seasonably brought into the free Air, the friendly Operation of That
External Body, assisting the usual Endeavors or Tendency of the Parts of the
Patients Body to maintain his Life and Heath, is wont quickly to restore him to
the State he was in, before this sudden Sickness invaded him. Diverse things,
that happen in some Diseases, may be grossly illustrated, by supposing, that
into a Vial of fair Water some Mud be put, and then the Vial be well shaken,
for the Water will be troubled and dirty, and will lose its Transparency, upon
a double Account; that of the Mud, whose opacous Particles are confounded with
It; and that of the newly generated Bubbles, that swim at the top of it; and
yet to clarify this Water, and and make it recover its former Limpidness,
there needs no particular Care or Design of Nature, but according to the common
Course of Things, after some time the Bubbles will break and vanish at the top,
and the earthy Particles, that compose the Mud, will, by their Gravity, subside
to the bottom, and settle there, and so the Water will become clear again. Thus
also Must, which is the lately expressed Juice of Grapes, will for a good while
continue a troubled Liquor; but though there be no Substantial Form to guide
the Motions of this factitious Body, yet, according to the Course of Things, a
Fermentation is excited, and some Corpuscles are driven away, in the Form of
Exhalations or Vapors, others are thrown against the sides of the Cask, and
hardened there into Tartar, and others again subside to the bottom, and settle
there in the Form of Lees; and by this means leave the Liquor clear, and, as to
Sense, uniform. And why may not some Depurations and Proscriptions of
Heterogeneous Parts be made in the Blood, as well as they are usually in Must,
without any peculiar and solicitous Direction of Nature.

There is indeed one Thing, to which the Sentence of Nature's being the Curer
of Diseases may be very speciously applied, and that is the healing of Cuts and
Wounds, which, if they be but in the Flesh, may oftentimes be cured without
Plasters, Salves, or other Medicines; but, not to mention Haemorrhagies and
some other Symptoms, wherein the Chriurgeon is fain to curb or remedy the
Exorbitancies of Nature; this Healing of the Solutio continui seems to be but
an Effect or Consequent of that Fabric of the Body, on which Nutrition
depends. For the Alimental Juice, being, by the Circulation of the Blood and
Chile, carried to all Parts of the Body to be nourished, if it meets any where,
either with preternatural Concretions, or with a Gap made by a Cut or Wound,
its Particles do there concrete into a kind of Bastard-flesh, or some such
other Body, which that Juice, in the Place and other Circumstances it is in, is
fitted to constitute. Thus we see, that not only Wens and Scrophulous Tumors
are nourished in the Body, but misshapen Mola's do by Nutriment grow in the
Womb, as well as Embryo's feed there. And, to come closer to the present
Argument, we see, that, in Wounds, Proud-Flesh, and perhaps Fungus's, are as
well produced and entertained by the Aliment brought to the wounded Part, as
the true and genuine Flesh; so that either Nature seems much mistaken, if She
designs the Production and Maintenance of such superfluous and inconvenient
Bodies; or the Surgeon is much to blame, who is industrious to destroy them,
though oftentimes he cannot do it, without using painful Corrosives. But, for
ought appears, Nature is not so shy and reserved in Her Bounty, but that She
sends Nourishment, to repair as well Things that do not belong to the Body, as
genuine Parts of It, as to restore Flesh to wounded Parts, as may appear by
Warts and Corns, that grow again after they are skilfully cut. And, I remember,
I have seen a Woman, in whose Forehead Nature was careful to nourish a Horn,
about an Inch and more in length, which I fully examined, whilst it was yet
growing upon Her Head, to avoid being imposed upon.

But, besides the Diseases hither to discoursed, there are many Others, as well
Acute as Chronical, wherein, it is confessed, that Nature alone does not work
the Cure, so that as to these, (which are more numerous, than the former) I may
well pretend, that the Aphorism, that makes Nature the Curer of Diseases, is
not true, otherwise than in a limited Sense. But, because I know it is
pretended, that even in these Diseases Nature is the principal Agent, by whose
Direction the Physician acts in subserviency to her Designs; and Physicians
themselves (whether out of Modesty or Inadvertence, I now enquire not,) are
wont to acknowledge, that they are but Nature's Ministers, I think it necessary
to consider briefly, what Sense is fit, according to our Doctrine, to be given
to these Assertions, to make them receivable by us.

But, to make way for what we are to say on this Occasion, it may be fit to
observe, that one great Cause of the common Mistakes about this Matter, is, as
has been partly intimated already, That the Body of a Man is looked upon,
rather as a System of Parts, whereof Most are gross and consistent, and not a
Few hard and solid too, than as, what indeed it is, a very compounded Engine;
that, besides these Consistent Parts, does consist of the Blood, Chyle, Gall,
and other Liquors; also of more subtle Fluids, as Spirits and Air; all which
Liquors and Fluids are almost incessantly and variously moving, and thereby put
diverse of the Solid Parts, as the Heart and Lungs, the Diaphragma, the Hands,
Feet, etc. into frequent and differing Motions. So that, as, when the
Constitution or the Motions, that in a sound Body do regularly belong to the
Fluid Parts, happens the former to be Depraved, or the later to grow Anomalous,
the Engine is immediately out of Order, though the gross solid Parts were not
primarily affected: So, when by proper Remedies (whether Visible or not,) the
vitiated Texture or Crasis of the Blood or other Juices is corrected, and the
inordinate Motions, that They and the Spirits are put into, or, that they also
put the consistent Parts into, are calmed and rectified, the grosser and more
solid Parts of the Body, and so the whole Animal Economy, if I may so call It,
will be restored to a more convenient State. Thus we see, that in many
Hysterical Women, by the fragrant Effluvia of a Spanish Glove, or some Other
strong Perfume, the Spirits and Genus Nervosum being affected, several
disorderly Symptoms are produced, and oftentimes the Motion of the Blood is so
stopped or abated, that any Pulse at all is scarcely to be felt, nor Respiration
discerned, and the whole Engine, unable to sustain itself, falls to the Ground,
and lies moveless on It; and yet we have often, by barely holding to the
Patient's Nostrils a Vial full of very strong Spirit, or Volatile Salt, or
Sal-armoniack, or of Hartshorn, in less than a quarter of an Hour, sometimes
in a few Minutes, restored Women in that Condition to their Senses, Speech and
Motion.

We are also here to consider, what I have formerly inculcated, that the
Economy of the human Body is so constituted by the Divine Author of It, that
it is usually fitted to last many Years, if the more General Laws, settled by
the same Author of the Universe, will permit it. And therefore it is not to be
wondered at, that in many Cases, the Automaton should be in a Condition to
concur, though not with Knowledge and Design, to its own Preservation, when,
though it had been put somewhat out of Order, it is assisted by the Physicians
Hands or Medicines to recover a convenient State.

And if it be objected, that the Examples, that have been in this past
Discourse frequently drawn from Automata, are not adequate, and do not fully
reach the Difficulties we have been speaking of, I shall readily grant it,
provided it be considered, that I avowedly and deservedly suppose the Bodies of
living Animals to be, Originally, Engines of God's own framing, and consequently
Effects of an Omniscient and Almighty Artificer. So that, it is not Rational to
expect, that in the incomparably inferior Productions of human Skill, there
should be found Engines fit to be compared with These, which, in their
Protoplasts, had God for their Author. Not to mention, (what yet may be
considerable in reference to the Lastingness of human Life,) that a Man is not
a mere Mechanical Thing, where nothing is performed for the Preservation of the
Engine, or its Recovery to a good State, but by its own Parts, or by other
Agents, acting according to Mechanical Laws without Counsel or Design; since,
though the Body of a Man be indeed an Engine, yet there is united to It an
Intelligent Being, (the Rational Soul or Mind,) which is capable, especially if
instructed by the Physicians Art, to discern, in many Cases, what may hurt It,
and what may conduce to the Welfare of It, and is also able (by the Power it
has to govern the Muscles and other Instruments of voluntary Motion,) to do
many of those Things it judges most conducive to the Safety and the Welfare of
the Body, it is joined with. So that, a Man is not like a Watch, or an Empty
Boat, where there is nothing but what is purely Mechanical; but like a Manned
Boat, where, besides the Machinal Part, (if I may so speak) there is an
Intelligent Being that takes Care of It, and both steers It, or otherwise
guides It, and, when need requires, trimms It; and, in a word, as Occasion
serves, does what he can to preserve It, and keep It fit for the Purposes, it is
designed for.

These Things being premised, I think the Physician (here supposed to be free
from Prejudices and Mistakes,) is to look upon his Patients Body, as an Engine
that is out of Order, but yet is so constituted, that, by his Concurrence with
the Endeavors, or rather Tendencies, of the Parts of the Automaton itself, it
may be brought to a better State. If therefore he find, that, in the present
Disposition of the Body, there is a Propensity or Tendency to throw off the
Matter that offends It, and (which ought to be some way or other expelled,) in
a convenient Way, and at commodious Places; he will then act so, as to comply
with, and further, that Way of Discharge, rather than Another. As, if there be
a great Appearance, that a Disease will quickly have a Crisis by Sweat; he will
rather further It by covering the Patient with warm Clothes and giving
Sudorifick Medicines, than, by endeavoring to carry off the peccant Matter by
Purging or Vomiting, unseasonably hinder a Discharge, that probably will be
beneficial: And in this Sense Men may say, if they please, that the Physicians
are Ministers or Servants of Nature; as Seamen, when the Ship goes before a
good Wind, will not shift their Sails, nor alter the Ships Motion, because they
need not. But to show, that it is as 'twere by Accident, that the Physician
does, in the forementioned Case, obey Nature, (to speak in the Language of the
Naturists, I reason with,) I need but represent, that there are many other
Cases, wherein the Physician, if he be skilful, will be so far from taking
Nature for his Mistress, to direct him by Her Example, what should be done;
that a great Part of his Care and Skill is employed, to hinder Her from doing
what She seems to Design, and to bring to pass Other Things very differing
from, if not contrary to, what She Endeavors.

Thus, though Nature in Dropsies inportunately crave store of Drink, the
Physician thinks himself obliged to deny It; as he does what they greedily
desire, to his Patients of the Green Sickness, or that Distemper they call
Pica: Though the absurd and hurtful Things, as very unripe Fruit, Lime, Coals,
and other incongruous Things, be earnestly longed for. Thus also the Surgeon
does often hinder Nature from closing up the Lips of a Wound, as She would
unskilfully do, before it be well and securely healed at the bottom. So the
Physician does often, by Purging or Phlebotomy, carry off that Matter, that
Nature would more dangerously throw into the Lungs, and expel by frequent and
violent Coughs.

And so, if a Nerve or Tendon be pricked, the Surgeon is fain, with
Anodynes, and other convenient Medicines, to prevent or appease the
unreasonable Transports of Nature, when, being in a Fury, by violent and
threatening Convulsions, She not only much disorders, but endangers, the
Patient. And so likewise, when in those Evacuations that are peculiar to Women,
Nature affects, in some Individuals, to make them by undue and inconvenient
Places, as the Nipples, the Mouth, or the Eyes, whereof we have diverse
Instances, among the Observations collected by Schenckius, Schenk. Obser. l.
IV. page m. 633. and seq.
or related by other good Authors. The Physician is careful by Bleeding the
Patient in the Foot and by using other Means, to oblige Nature to alter Her
Purpose, and make the intended Evacuations by the proper Uterine Vessels. And,
though according to the Institution of Nature, as they speak, there ought to be a
Monthly discharge of these Superfluities, and therefore, whilst this is
moderately made, the Physician does rather further than suppress It: Yet if, as
it often happens in other Patients, Nature overlashes in making those
Evacuations, to the great weakening or endangering the Sick Person, the
Physician is careful by contemperating Medicines and other Ways to correct
Nature's exorbitancy and check Her profuseness of so necessary a Liquor, as the
Blood. Other Instances, more considerable, than some of these hitherto
mentioned, might be given to the same purpose; but I forbear to do it, because,
there being some, though perhaps very needless, Controversies about Them, I
could not make out their fitness to be here alleged without more Words, than I
am now willing to employ about unnecessary Proofs, fearing it might be thought,
I have dwelt too long already upon the Explication of One Aphorism. I shall
therefore only observe in short, that I look upon a good Physician, not so
properly as a Servant to Nature, as One that is a Counselor and a Friendly
Assistant, who, in his Patient's Body, furthers these Motions and other Things,
that he judges conducive to the Welfare and Recovery of It; but as to Those,
that he perceives likely to be hurtful, either by increasing the Disease, or
otherwise endangering the Patient, he think it is his Part to oppose or hinder,
though Nature do manifestly enough seem to endeavor the exercising or carrying
on those hurtful Motions.

On this occasion, I shall take notice of the Practice of the more Prudent
among Physicians themselves, who, being called to a Patient, subject to the
Flux of the Haemorrhoids, if they find the Evacuation to be moderate, and
likely either to benefit the Patient on another account, (as in some Cases
it is,) or at least to end well, they do, as some of them speak, commit the
whole business to Nature; that is, to speak intelligibly, they suffer It to
take its Course, being encouraged to do so, in some Cases, by the Doctrine of
Hippocrates, Hippocrat. Lib. vi. Aphorism. xi.
and in others by Experience. But, if the Evacuation prove to be too lasting,
or too copious, they then are careful to hinder Nature from proceeding in it,
and think themselves obliged to employ both inward and outward Means, to put a
stop to an Evacuation, which may bring on a Dropsy, or some other formidable
Disease And if it be said, that Nature makes this Profusion of so necessary a
Liquor as Blood, only because She is irritated by the Acrimony of some Humor
mixed with it; I say, that this Answer, which, for Substance, is the same that
Naturists may be compelled to fly to, on many Occasions, is in effect a
Confession, that Nature is no such wise Being as they pretend; since She is so
often provoked to act, as it were, in a Fury, and do those things in the Body,
that would be very mischievous to It, if the Physician, more calm and wise than
She, did not hinder Her. So that, notwithstanding the reverence I pay the great
Hippocrates, it is not without due Caution and some Limitations, that I admit
that notable Sentence of his, where he thus speaks; Hippocrat. Epidem. l. 6. 5.
text. 2. 4.
Invenit Natura ipsa sibi-ipsi aggressiones. And after three or four lines, Non
edocta Natura and nullo Magistro usa, ea quibus opus est facit. Which, I fear,
makes many Physicians less courageous and careful than they should, or perhaps
would be, to employ their own Skill on diverse Occasions, that much require It.

I shall now add, that, as in some Cases, the Physician relieves his Patient in
a Negative Way, by opposing Nature in her unseasonable or disorderly Attempts:
So in other Cases, he may do it in a Positive Way, by employing Medicines that
either strengthen the Parts, as well Fluid as Stable, or make sensible
Evacuations of Matters necessary to be proscribed by Them; or (he may do it,)
by using Remedies, that by their manifest Qualities oppugn those of the
Morbifick Matter or Causes; as when by Alcaly's or absorbing Medicaments he
mortify's Praeter-natural Acids, or disables Them to do Mischief. And, perhaps,
One may venture to say, that, in some Cases, the Physician may* in a Positive
Way, contribute more to the Cure even of an inward Disease, than Nature Herself
seems able to do: For, if there be any such Medicine preparable by Art, as
Helmont affirms may be made of Paracelsus's Ludus, by the Liquor Alkahest; or,
as Cardan relates, that an Empirick had in his Time, who, traveled up and down
Italy, curing Those wherever he came, that were tormented with the Stone of
the Bladder; If, I say, there be any such Medicines, the Physician may, by such
Instruments, perform that, which, for ought appears, is not to be done by
Nature Herself, since we never find, that She dissolves a confirmed Stone in
the Bladder. Nay, sometimes the Physician does, even without the help of a
Medicine, control and overruled Nature, to the great and sudden Advantage of
the Patient. For, when a Person, otherwise not very weak, happens by a Fright,
or some surprising ill News, to be so discomposed, that the Spirits hastily and
disorderly thronging to some inward Part, especially the Heart, hinder the
regular and wonted Motion of It, by which disorder the Circulation of the Blood
is hindered, or made very imperfect: In this Case, I say, the Patient is by
Nature's great Care of the Heart, (as is commonly supposed even by Physicians,)
cast into a Swoon; whence the Physician sometimes quickly frees him, by rubbing
and pinching the Limbs, the Ears and the Nose, that the Spirits may be speedily
brought to the External Parts of the Body; which must be done by a Motion to
the Circumference, (as they call It,) quite opposite to That toward the Center
or Heart, which Nature had given Them before. But as to the Theory of
Swoonings, I shall not now examine its Truth, it being sufficient to warrant my
drawing from thence an Argument ad Hominem, that the Theory is made Use of by
Those I reason with.

By what has been discoursed One may perceive, that, as there are some
Phenomenon, that seem to favor the Doctrine of the Naturists about the Cure of
Diseases, so there are Others, that appear more manifestly favorable to the
Hypothesis we propose. And both these sorts of Phenomenon, being considered
together, may well suggest a Suspicion, that the most Wise and yet most Free
Author of Things, having framed the first Individuals of Mankin'd, so as to be
fit to last many Years, and endowed those Protoplasts with the Power of
propagating their Species; it thereupon comes to pass, that in the subsequent
Hydraulico-pneumatical Engines we call Human Bodies, when neither particular
Providence, nor the Rational Soul, nor overruling Impediments interpose,
Things are generally performed according to Mechanical Laws and Courses;
whether the Effects and Events of these prove to be conducive to the welfare of
the Engine itself, or else cherish and foment Extraneous Bodies or Causes,
whose Preservation and Prospering are hurtful to It. On which Supposition it
may be said, That the happy things, referred to Nature's prudent Care of the
Recovery and Welfare of sick Persons, are usually genuine Consequences of the
Mechanism of the World, and the Patients Body; which Effects luckily happen to
be co-incident with his Recovery, rather than to have been purposely and wisely
produced in order to It; since, I observe, that Nature seems to be careful to
produce, preserve, and cherish Things hurtful to the Body, as well as Things
beneficial to It. For we see in the Stone of the Kidneys and Bladder, that out
of Vegetable or Animal Substances of a slighter Texture, such as are the
Alimental Juices, which, in Sucking Children (who are observed to be frequently
subject to the Stone in the Bladder) are afforded by so mild a Liquor as Milk;
Nature skilfully frames a hard Body of so firm a Texture, that it puzzles
Physicians and Chemists to tell, how such a Coagulation can be made of such
Substances: And I have found more than one Calculus to resist both Spirit of
Salt, that readily dissolves Iron and Steel, and that highly Corrosive
Menstruum, Oil of Vitriol itself. We see also, that, diverse times, the Seeds or
Seminal Principles of Worms, that lie concealed in unwholesome Fruits, and
other ill-qualifi'd Aliments, are preserved and cherished in the Body, so, as
in spite of the Menstruum's ferments, etc. they meet with there, they grow to
be perfect Worms, (of their respective kinds) that are often very troublesome,
and sometimes very dangerous, to the Body that harbors them: Producing, though
perhaps not immediately, both more and more various Distempers (especially here
in England) than every Physician is aware of. This Reflection may very well be
applied to those Instances we meet with in good Schenck. Observe. Lib. 3. Page
mihi 337. and seq.
Authors, of Frogs, and even Toads, whose Spawn, being taken in with corrupted
Water, has been cherished in the Stomach 'till the Eggs being grown to be
complete Animals, they produced horrid Symptoms in the Body, that had lodged
and fed them. And if, according to the received Opinion of Physicians, stubborn
Quartans are produced by a Melancholy Humor seated in the Spleen; it may be
said, that Nature seems to busy Herself to convert some Parts of the Fluid
Chile into so tenacious and hardly dissipable a Juice, that in many Patients,
notwithstanding the Neighborhood of the Spleen and Stomach, neither strong
Emeticks, nor Purges, nor other usual Remedies, are able, in a long time, to
dislodg it, or resolve it, or correct it. But that is yet more conducive to my
present purpose, that is afforded me by the Consideration of the Poison of a
Mad-dog, which Nature sometimes seems industriously and solicitously to
preserve: Since we have Instances, in approved Authors, that a little Foam
conveyed into the Blood by a slight hurt, (perhaps quickly healed up,) is,
notwithstanding the constant Heat and perspirable Frame of the Human Body, and
the dissipable Texture of the Foam, so preserved, and that sometimes for many
Years, that, at the end of that long time, it breaks out, and displays its
fatal Efficacy with as much vigor and fury, as if it had but newly been
received into the Body.

To this agrees That which is well known in Italy, about the biting of the
Tarantula. For, though the Quantity of Poison can scarce be visible, since it is
communicated by the Tooth of so small an Animal as a Spider, yet, in many
Patients, it is preserved during a great part of of their Lives, and manifests
its Continuance in the Body by Annual Paroxysms. And, I know a Person of great
Quality, who complained to me, that, being in the East, the biting or stinging
of a Creature, whose offensive Arms were so small, that the Eye could very
hardly discern the Hurt, had so lasting an Effect upon him, that, for about
twelve Years after, he was reminded of his Mischance, by a Pain he felt in the
hurt Place, about the same time of the Year that the Mischief was first done
him. And, in some Hereditary Diseases, as the Gout, Falling Sickness, and some
kinds of Madness, Nature seems to act as if She did, with Care as well as
Skill, transmit to the unhappy Child such Morbifick Seeds or Impressions of the
Parents Disease, that, in spite of all the various Alterations the younger
Body passes through, during the Course of many Years, this constantly protected
Enemy is able to exert its Power and Malice, after forty, or perhaps fifty,
Years concealment. Such Reflections as these, to which may be added, that the
Naturists make no scruple to style That Death, which Men are brought to by
Diseases, a Natural Death, make me backward to admit the famed Sentence of
Hippocrates hitherto considered, Morborum Naturae Medici, without limitations,
especially those two that are delivered in the Fifth Section: See Page 164. to
Page 173.
To which I refer you the rather, because they may help you to discern, that
diverse Phenomenon, that favor not the received Notion of a kind and prudent
Being, as Nature is thought to be, are yet very consistent with Divine
Providence.

SECT. VIII.
I have now gone through so many of the celebrated Axioms, concerning Nature,
that, I hope, I may reasonably presume, that the other Sentences of this kind,
that my Haste makes me leave unmention'd, will be thought capable of being
fairly explicated, and with Congruity to our Hypothesis, by the help of the
Grounds already laid, since, with light Variations, they may be easily enough
improved, and applied to those other Particulars, to which they are the most
Analogous.

But this Intimation ought not to hinder me to make a Reflection, that not only
is pertinent to this place, but which I desire may have Retrospect upon a great
part of the whole precedent Discourse. And it is This, that, though we could
not Intelligibly explicate all the particular Axioms about Nature, and the
Phenomenon of Inanimate Bodies, that are thought, but not by me granted, to
favor them by Mechanical Principles; it would not follow, that we must
therefore yield up the whole Cause to the Naturists. For we have already shown,
and may do so yet further ere long, that the Supposition of such a Being, as
they call Nature, is far from enabling Her Partisans to give intelligible
Accounts of these and other Phenomenon of the Universe. And though our Doctrine
sh^^ld be granted to be, as well as that generally received about Nature,
insufficient to give good Accounts of Things Corporeal: Yet I shall have this
Advantage in this Case, that a less degree of Probability may serve, in
Arguments employed but to justify a Doubt, than is required in Those that are
to demonstrate an Assertion.

It Is true, that the Naturists tell us, that the Nature they assert is the
Principle of all Motions and Operations in Bodies; which infers, that in
explicating Them, we must have recourse to Her. But before we acquiesce in, or
confidently employ, this Principle, it were very fit we knew what it is. This
Question I have discoursed of in the Section: But having there intimated a
Reference to another Place, the Importance, as well as Difficulty of the
Subject, invites me to resume in this Place the Consideration of It; and both
vary and add to what I formerly noted, that I may as well inculcate as clear my
T^oughts about It. I demand then o^ Those, that assert such a Nature as is
vulgarly described, whether it be a Substance or an Accident? If it be the
later, it should be declared, what kind of Accident it is; how a Solitary
Accident can have Right to all those Attributes, and can produce those
numerous, manifold, and wonderful Effects, that they ascribe to Nature; and why
a complex of such Accidents, as are the Mechanical affections of Matter, (as
Figure, Bulk, Motion, etc.) may not altogether, as probably as that Accident
they call Nature, be conceived to have been Instituted by the perfectly Wise
Author of the Universe, to produce those Changes among Bodies, which are (at
least for the most part,) intelligibly referable to Them? And if Things be not
brought to pass by their Intervention, 'twere very fit, as well as desirable,
that we should be Informed, by what other Particular and Intelligible Means
Nature can effect them better, than they may be by that Complex.

But if it be said, as by Most it is, that the Principle, called Nature, is a
Substance, I shall next demand, Whether it be a Corporeal, or an Immaterial
One? If it be said to be an Immaterial Substance, I shall further ask, Whether
it be a Created One, or not? If it be not, then we have God under another Name,
and our Dispute is at an End, by the removal of its Object or Subject, which is
said by the Schools to be God's Vicegerent, not God Himself. But if Nature be
affirmed (as She is, at least by all Christian Philosophers,) to be a Created
Being, I then demand, Whether or no She be endowed with understanding, so as to
know what she does, and for what Ends, and by what Laws She ought to Act? If
the Answer be Negative, the Supposition of Nature will be of very little Use to
afford an intelligible Account of Things; an unintelligent Nature being liable
to the Objections, that will a little below be met with against the usefulness
of Nature, in case She be supposed a Corporeal Being. And though it should be
said, that Nature is endowed with Understanding, and performs such Functions as
diverse of the Ancients ascribe to the Soul of the World; besides, that this
Hypothesis is near of kin to Heathenism, I do not think, that they who shall
with many Grecian, and other Philosophers, who preceded Christianism, suppose a
kind of Soul of the Universe, will find this Principle sufficient to explicate
the Phenomenon of It. For if we may compare the Macrocosm and Microcosm in
This, as well as many are wont to do in other Things; we may conceive, that,
though Nature be admitted to be endowed with Reason, yet a multitude of
Phenomenon may be Mechanically produced, winhout Her immediate Intervention; as
we see that in Man, though the Rational Soul has so narrow a Province to take
care of, as the Human Body, and is supposed to be intimately united to all the
Parts of It; yet, abundance of things are done in the Body by the Mechanism of
it, without being produced by that Soul. Of this we may allege, as an
Instance, that, in Sleep, the Circulation of the Blood, the regular Beating of
the Heart, Digestion, Nutrition, Respiration, etc. are performed without the
immediate. Agency, or so much as the actual Knowledge, of the Mind. And, when a
Man is awake, many things are done in his Body, not only without the Direction,
but against the Bent of his Mind; as often happens in Cramps and other
Convulsions, Coughing, Yawnings, etc. Nay, though some Brutes, as particularly
Apes, have the Structure of many Parts of their Bodies very like that of the
Analogous Ones of Human Bodies: Yet, that admirable Work of the Formation and
Organization of the Foetus, or little Animal, in the Womb, is granted by
Philosophers to be made by the Soul of the Brute (that is therefore said to be
the Architect of his own Mansion,) which yet is neither an Incorporeal, nor a
Rational Substance. And, even in a Human Foetus, if we will admit the general
Opinion of Philosophers, Physicians, Divines and Lawyers, I may be allowed to
observe, that the Human Body, as exquisite an Engine as it is justly esteemed,
is formed without the Intervention of the rational Soul, which is not infused
into the Body, 'till This has obtained an Organization, that fits it to
receive such a Guest; which is commonly reputed to happen about the end of the
Sixth Week, or before that of the Seventh. And this Consideration leads me a
little further, and prompts me to ask, How much, by the Supposition or
Knowledge of the Mind, (at the newly mentioned time,) we are enabled to
explicate the Manner, How the forementioned Functions of an Embryo are
performed, when at the end of six or seven Week the Rational Soul supervenes
and comes to be united to this living Engine?

And, if it be urged, that Nature being the Principle of Motion in Bodies,
their various Motions, at least, which amount to a considerable Part of their
Phenomenon, must be explainid by having recourse to Her: I answer, that it is
very difficult to conceive, how a Created Substance, that is Immaterial, can by
a Physical Power or Action move a Body: The Agent having no impenetrable Part,
wherewith to impell the Corporeal Mobile. I know, that God, who is an mmaterial
Spirit, ought to be acknowledged the Primary Cause of Motion in Matter, because
(as we may justly with Monsieur Des Carts infer,) Motion not belonging to
Corporeal Substance, as such; This must owe That to an Incorporeal One. But
then, I consider, that there is that infinite Distance between the
Incomprehensible Creator, and the least imperfect Order of his Creatures, that
we ought to be very Cautious, how we make Parallels between Him and Them, and
draw Inferences from His Power and manner of Acting to Theirs. Since He, for
Instance, can immediately act upon Human Souls, as having Created Them, but
they are not able so to act upon one another. And I think it the more difficult
to conceive and admit, that, if Nature be an Incorporeal Substance, She should
be the greater Mover of the Mundane Matter, because we see, that, in a Human
Body, the Rational Soul, (which the School-Philosophers assert to be an
Immaterial Spirit,) though vitally united to it, can only determine the Motion of
some of the Parts, but not give Motion to any, or so much as Regulate it in
most. And, if Nature be said to move Bodies in another than a Physical Way, I
doubt, whether the Supposition of such a Principle will be of much Use to
Physiologers in explicating Phenomenon; since I shall scarce think him an
Inquisitive or a Judicious Doctor, who should imagine, that he explains, that
it gives an intelligible and particular Account of the astonishing Symptoms of
those strange Diseases, that diverse very Learned and Sober Physicians impute to
Witchcraft, when he says, that those strange Distortions and convulsive
Motions, for Instance, and other Prodigious Effects, were produced by a wicked
immaterial Spirit, called a Devil. But having to this purpose said more in
another Paper, which you may command the Sight of, I shall not trouble you with
it here.

The past Discourse opposes their Opinion, who assert Nature to be an
Immaterial Creature. But because it is thought, that a greater Number of
Philosophers, at least among the Moderns, take Her to be Corporeal, I shall now
address my Discourse to their Hypothesis. And though I might object, that, if
Nature be a Body, it may be demanded, How She can produce, in Men, Rational
Souls, that are Immaterial Beings, and not capable to be produced by any
Subtiliation or other Change of Matter whatsoever? Yet, waving this Objection,
I shall first demand, Whether Those, I reason with, believe Nature, though
Corporeal, to act Knowingly, i. e. with Consciousness of what She does, and for
pre-designed Ends; or else to be blindly and necessarily moved and directed by
a Superior Agent, endowed with (what She wants,) an excellent Understanding;
and then I shall represent a few things, appliable some to one or the other of
the two Answers, that may be made, and some to both.

And first, the Cartesians would ask, How, if Nature be a Corporeal Substance,
we can conceive Her capable of Thinking; and, which is more, of being a most
Wise and Provident Director of all the Motions that are made in the Corporeal
World?

Secondly, A Philosophizer may justly ask, How a Corporeal Being can so
pervade, and, as it were, com-penetrate the Universe, as to be intimately
present with all its Minute Parts, whereof yet it is said to be the Principle of
Motion?

Thirdly, He may also demand, Whence Nature, being a Material Substance, comes
itself to have Motion, whereof it is said to be the Principle? Since Motion does
not belong to Matter in itself, and a Body is as truly a Body when it rests, as
when it moves. And, if it be answered, that the First Cause, that is, God, did
at first put it into Motion; I reply, that the same Cause may, at least as
probably, be supposed to have put the unquestioned Mundane Matter into Motion,
without the Intervention of another Corporeal Being, in whose Conception, ( i.
e. as it is Matter,) Motion is not involved.

Fourthly, It may likewise be asked, How the Laws of Motion come to be observed
or maintained by a Corporeal Being? which, as merely such, is either incapable
of understanding them, or of acting with respect to them, or at least is not
necessarily endowed with any knowledge of them, or power to conform to them,
and to make all the Parts of the unquestioned Mundane Matter do so too.

Fifthly, And I do not see, how the taking in such an unintelligent and
undesigning Principle will free our Understandings from great Difficulties,
when we come to explicate the Phenomenon of Bodies. For, as is elsewhere noted,
if Nature be a Bodily Creature, and acts necessarily, and (if I may so speak,)
fatally, I see no Cause to look upon It but as a kind of Engine; and the
Difficulty may be as great, to conceive how all the several Parts of this
supposed Engine, called Nature, are themselves framed and moved by the Great
Author of Things, and how they act upon one another, as well as upon the
undoubted Mundane Bodies; as it is to conceive how, in the World itself, which
is manifestly an admirably contrived Automaton, the Phenomenon may, by the same
Author, (who was able to endow Bodies themselves with Active Powers, as well as
he could, on other scores, make them Causes,) be produced by Virtue, and in
consequence of the Primitive Construction and Motions that He gave it (and
still maintains in it,) without the Intervention of such a thing, as they call
Nature. For This, as well as the World, being a Corporeal Creature, we cannot
conceive, that either of them act otherwise than Mechanically. And it seems
very suitable to the Divine Wisdom, that is so excellently displayed in the
Fabric and Conduct of the Universe, to employ in the World, already framed and
completed, the fewest and most simple Means, by which the Phenomenon, designed
to be exhibited in the World, could be produced. Nor need we be much moved by
hearing some Naturists say, that Nature, though not an Incorporeal Being, is of
an Order Superior to mere Matter; as diverse of the Schoolmen teach the Things,
they call Material Forms to be. For, who can clearly conceive an Order or Kind
of Beings, that shall be Real Substances, and yet neither Corporeal nor
Immaterial? Nor do I see, how the Supposition of this Unintelligible, or at
least Unintelligent Being, though we should grant it to have a kind of Life or
Soul, will much assist us to explicate the Phenomenon; as if a Man be
acquainted with the Construction of Mills, he he may as well conceive, how Corn
is ground by a Mill, driven by the Wind or by a Stream of Water, which are
Brute and Senseless Beings, as he can by knowing, that it is kept at Work by a
Horse, who, though an Animated Being, acts in our Case but as a Part of an
Engine that is determined to go round, and who does neither intend to grind the
Corn, nor know that he grinds It.

And in this Place (though perhaps not the very fittest,) I may Question, With
what Congruity to their Master's Doctrine, the SchoolPhilosophers teach, that
Nature is the Principle of Motion in all the Bodies, they call Natural. For,
not to urge, that those great Masses of Sublunary Matter, to which they give
the Name of Elements, and the Mixed Bodies, that consist of them, are, by diverse
learned Men, said to be moved to or from the Center of the Earth, by distinct
Internal Principles, which they call Gravity in the Earth and Water, and Levity
in the Fire and Air; and that there is ascribed also to every compounded Body,
that Quality of the Two, which belongs to the Element that predominates in It.
Not to urge this, I say, consider, that the Celestial Part of the World does
so far exceed the Sub-Coelestial in Vastness, that there is scarce any
Comparison between them; and yet the Generality of the Peripateticks, after
Aristotle, tell us, that the Celestial Globes of Light, and the vast Orbs they
suppose them to be fixed in, are moved from West to East by Intelligences, that
is, Rational and Separate Beings, without whose Conduct they presume, that the
Motions of the Heavens could not be so Regular and Durable, as we see they are.
So that, in that Part of the Universe, which is incompararably vaster than the
Sublunary is, Intelligences being the Causes of Motion, there is no Recourse to
be had to Nature, as the true and internal Principle of It.

And here it may not, perhaps, be improper to declare somewhat more fully a
Point already touched upon, namely, that, if to know what is the general
Efficient Cause of Motion, can much contribute to the Explication of particular
Phenomenon; the Hypothesis of those Naturists I now reason with, will have no
considerable Advantage, if any at all of Ours; which derives them from the
Primitive Impulse given by God to Matter, and from the Mechanical Affections of
the greater and lesser Portions of It. For it is all one to Him, that would
declare by what particular Motion, as Swift, Slow, Uniform, Accelerated,
Direct, Circular, Parabolical, etc. this or that Phenomenon is produced; to
know, whether the Motions of the Parts of Matter were Originally impressed on
them by Nature, or immediately by God; unless it be, that He, being of
infinitely Perfect Knowledge, may be, more probably than a Creature, supposed
to have at first produced in Matter Motions best accommodated to the
Phenomenon, that were to be exhibited in the World. Nor do I see sufficient
Cause to grant, that Nature Herself (whatever She be,) produces any Motion de
Novo, but only, that She transfers and regulates That, which was communicated
to Matter at the beginning of Things: (As we formerly noted, that in the Human
Body, the Rational Soul or Mind has no Power to make new Motions, but only to
direct those of the Spirits and of the grosser Organs and Instruments of
voluntary Motion.) For, besides that many of the Modern Naturalists approve of
the Cartesian Opinion, That the same Quantity of Motion is always preserved in
the whole Mass of of the Mundane Matter, that was communicated to it at first,
though it be perpetually transferring it from one Part to another: Besides
this, I say, I consider, that, if Nature produces in these and those Bodies
Motion, that were never before in Beings; (unless much Motion be annihilated,
which is a thing as yet unprov'd,) the Quantity of Motion in the Universe must
have for some Thousands of Years perpetually increased, and must continue to do
so; which is a Concession, that would much disorder the whole Theory of Local
Motion, and much perplex Philosophers, instead of assisting Them, in
explicating the Phenomenon of Bodies.

And as for the Effects of Local Motion in the Parts of the Universal Matter,
which Effects make a great Part of the Phenomenon of the World: After what I
have formerly declared, you will not wonder to hear me confess, that, to me,
the Supposition of Nature, whether Men will have Her an Immaterial or Corporeal
Substance, and either without Knowledge or else endowed with Understanding,
does not seem absolutely Necessary, nor perhaps very Useful, to make us
comprehend, how they are produced. The Bodies of Animals, are diverse of them
little less curiously framed than Men's, and most of them more exquisitely,
than, for ought we know, the great Inanimate Mass of the Corporeal World is:
And yet, in the Judgment of no mean Naturalists, some of the Mechanical
Philosophers, that deny Cogitation, and even Sense properly so called, to
Beasts, do, at least as Intelligibly and Plausibly, as those that ascribe to
them Souls endowed with such Faculties as make them scarce more than gradually
different from Human Ones, explicate the Phenomenon that are observed in them.
And I know not, whether I may not on this Occasion add, that the Peripateticks
themselves, especially the Moderns, teach some things, whence One may argue,
that the Necessity of recurring to Nature does not reach to so many things by
far, as is by them supposed. For the Efformation (or Framing) of the Bodies of
Plants and Animals, which are by great odds the finest pieces of Workmanship to
be met with among Bodies, is ascribed not immediately to Nature, but to the
Soul itself, which they will have to be the Author of the Organization of the
Body, and therefore call it the Architect of its own Mansion; which, they say,
that it frames by an Innate Power and Skill, that some call Plastic, and to
which others give other Names. And unto the same Soul, operating by Her several
Functions, they attribute the Concoction of Aliments, the Expulsion of
Excrements, the Production of Milk, Semen, etc. the Appetitive, Loco-motive,
and I know not how many other Faculties, ascribed to Living Bodies. And, even
in many Inanimate Ones, the noblest Properties and Operations are, by the same
School-Philosophers, attributed to what they call their Substantial Forms;
since from These they derive the wonderful Properties of the Lodestone, the
attractive Faculty of Amber and other Electricks, and the Medical Virtues of
Gems and other Mineral Bodies, whether Consistent or Fluid.

But not to insist on this Argument, because it is but ad Hominem, (as they
speak,) if we consider the Thing itself, by a free Examen of the pretended
Explanations, that the Vulgar Philosophers are wont, by recurring to Nature, to
give of the Phenomenon of the Universe; we shall not easily look on those
Accounts, as meriting the Name of Explications. For to explicate a Phenomenon,
it is not enough to ascribe it to one general Efficient, but we must
intelligibly show the particular manner, how that general Cause produces the
proposed Effect. He must be a very dull Enquirer, who, demanding an Account of
the Phenomenon of a Watch, shall rest satisfied with being told, that it is an
Engine made by a Watch-Maker; though nothing be thereby declared of the
Structure and Co-aptation of the Spring, Wheels, Balance, and other Parts of
the Engine; and the manner, how they act on one another, so as to cooperate to
make the Needle point out the true Hour of the Day. And (to improve to my
present purpose an Example formerly touched upon,) as he that knows the
Structure and other Mechanical Affections of a Watch, will be able by Them to
explicate the Phenomenon of It, without supposing, that it has a Soul or Life
to be the internal Principle of its Motions or Operations; so he, that does not
understand the Mechanism of a Watch, will never be enabled to give a rational
Account of the Operations of It, by supposing, as those of Chiness did, when
the Jesuits first brought Watches thither, that a Watch is an European Animal,
or Living Body, and endowed with a Soul. This Comparison seems not ill to befit
the Occasion of propounding It; but to second It by another, that is more
purely Physical; when a Person, unacquainted with the Mathematics, admires to
see, That the Sun rises and sets in Winter in some Parts of the Horizon, and in
Summer in Others, distant enough from them; that the Day, in the former Season,
is by great odds shorter than in the Later, and sometimes (as some days before
the Middle of March and of Sept.) the Days are equal to the Night; that the
Moon is sometimes seen in Conjunction with the Sun, and sometimes in Opposition
to Him; and, between those two States, is every Day variously illuminated; and,
that sometimes one of those Planets, and sometimes another, suffers an Eclipse;
this Person, I say, will be much assisted to understand, how these things are
brought to pass, if he be taught the clear Mathematical Elements of Astronomy.
But, if he be of a Temper to reject these Explications, as too defective, it is
not like, that it will satisfy him, to tell him after Aristotle and the
Schoolmen, That the Orbs of the Sun and Moon, and other Celestial Spheres,
are moved by Angels or Intelligences; since to refer him to such general and
undetermined Causes, will little, or not at all, assist him to understand, how
the recited Phenomenon are produced.

If it be here objected, That these Examples are drawn from Factitious, not
from merely Physical, Bodies; I shall return this brief Answer, and desire that
it be applied not only to the Two freshly mentioned Examples, but to All of the
like Kind, that may be met with in this whole Treatise, (near the Beginning of
which, had I remembered it, something to the same purpose should have had
Place.) I say then in short, that diverse of the Instances we are speaking of
are intended but for Illustrations; and that others may be useful Instances, if
they should be no more than Analogous Ones: Since Examples, drawn from
Artificial Bodies and Things, may have both the Advantage of being more clearly
conceived by ordinary Understandings, and That of being less obnoxious to be
Questioned in that Particular, in which the Comparison or Correspondence
consists. And I the less scruple to employ such Examples, because Aristotle
himself, and some of his more learned Followers, make Use of diverse
Comparisons, drawn from the Figures and other Accidents of Artificial Things,
to give an Account of Physical Subjects, and even of the Generation, Corruption
and Forms of Natural Bodies.

This Advertisement premised, I pursue the Discourse it interrupted, by adding,
That thus we see That confirmed, which was formerly observed, namely, that
though Mechanical Principles could not be satisfactorily employed for
explaining the Phenomenon of our World; we must not therefore necessarily recur
to, and acquiesce in, that Principle, that Men call Nature, since neither will
That intelligibly explain Them: But in that Case, we should ingeniously
confess, That we are yet at a loss, how they are performed; and that this
Ignorance proceeds, rather from the Natural Imperfection of our Understandings,
than from our not preferring Nature (in the Vulgar Notion of It,) to the
Mechanical Principles, in the Explication of the Phenomenon of the Universe.
For whereas Monsieur Des Carts, and other acute Men, confidently teach, that
there are scarce any of these Phenomenon, that have been truly and intelligibly
deduced from the Principles peculiar to the Aristotelians and
School-Philosophers; it will scarce be denied by any that is acquainted with
Physico-Mathematical Disciplines, such as Optics, Astronomy, Hydrostaticks,
and Mechanics, more strictly so called, but that very many Effects (whereof
Some have been handled in this present Tract,) are clearly explicable by
Mechanical Principles; which, for that Reason, Aristotle himself often imploys
in his Quaestiones Mechanicae and elsewhere. So that, if because the
Corpuscularian Principles, cannot be satisfactorily made Use of to account for
all that happens among Things Corporeal, we must refuse to acquiesce in them:
It is but just, that, since a Recourse to what is called Nature is yet more
dark and insufficient, at least, we must reject as well the Later as the Former
Hypothesis, and endeavor to find some Other preferrable to Both.

And now, if it be demanded, what Benefit may redound to a Reader from the
Explications given in the foregoing Seventh Section? and in general, from the
Troublesome, as well as Free, Enquiry, whereof they make a considerable Part? I
shall Answer, That I am not quite out of Hope, that the Things hitherto
discoursed may do some Services both to Natural Philophy and to Religion.

And as to the first of these; this Tract may be of Use to the cultivaters of
that Science, by dissuading them from employing often, and without great need,
in their Philosophical Discourses and Writings, a Term, (I mean Nature,) which,
by reason of its great Ambiguity, and the little or no Care, which Those that
use It are wont to take, to distinguish its different Acceptions, occasions
both a great deal of Darkness and Confusedness in what Men say and write about
Things Corporeal; and a multitude of Controversies, wherein really Men do but
wrangle about Words, whilst they think they dispute of Things; and perhaps
would not differ at all, if they had the Skill or Luck to express themselves
clearly. Besides which Service, the past Discourse may do this Other, to wean
Many from the fond Conceit they cherish, that they understand or explicate a
Corporeal Subject or a Phenomenon, when they ascribe it to Nature. For to do
That, One needs not be a Philosopher, since a Country Swain may easily do the
same Thing.

On this Occasion, I must not forbear to take notice, that the unskilful Use of
Terms of far less Extent and Importance, and also less Ambiguous, than the word
Nature is, has been, and still is, no small Impediment to the Progress of Sound
Philosophy. For not only the greatest Part both of Physicians (though otherwise
learned Men,) and of Chemists; but the Generality of Physiologers too, have
thought, that they have done their Part, though not on all Occasions yet on
very Many, when they have referred an Effect or a Phenomenon to some such
Things as those, that are presumed to be Real Qualities; or are by some styled
Natural Powers; or are by others, by a more comprehensive and more usual Name,
(which therefore here chiefly employ,) called Faculties; for each of which they
are wont to form a Name, fit for Their purpose: Though they do not intelligibly
declare, what this Faculty is, and in what manner the Operations they ascribe
to It, are performed by It. Thus the attractive Faculty ascribed to a Man, that
is enabled by Nature's (presumed) abhorrence of a Vacuum, to suck up Drink
through a Straw or Pipe, has been for many Ages acquiesced in, as the true
Cause of the Ascension of that Liquor in Suction; of which nevertheless the
Modern Philosophers, that have slighted Explications derived merely from
Faculties, have assigned (as has been already declared,) Intelligible, and even
Mechanical Causes. The Power that a Lodestone has with one Pole to attract (as
they speak,) the Northern Point of the Mariner's Needle, and with the Other to
drive it away, is looked upon as one of the Noblest and most proper Faculties
of that admirable Stone. And yet I elsewhere show, how in a very small, indeed,
but true and natural Magnet, I have, by a bare, and sometimes invisible, Change
of Texture, given that Extreme of the Magnet, that before drew the Southern
Point of the Needle, the Power to draw the Northern, and to the opposite
Extreme, the Power to drive it away: So much does even this wonderful
attractive Faculty, as it is called, depend upon the Mechanical Structure of the
Mineral, and its Relation to other Bodies, among which it is placed, especially
the Globe of the Earth, and its Magnetical Effluvia.

But because in another Paper, I purposely discourse of what Naturists call
Faculties, I shall here content my self to note in general, that the Term
Faculty may, indeed, be allowed of, if. It be applied as a compendious Form of
Speech, but not as denoting a real and distinct Agent; since in reality the
Power or Faculty of a Thing is (at least) oftentimes but the Matter of It, made
Operative by some of its Mechanical Modifications; [I say, some, because the
Complex of all makes up its Particular Nature.] And with how little Scruple
soever, Men commonly speak of Faculties, as supposing Them to be distinct and
active Principles; yet this Condition does not necessarily belong to them. For
sometimes, if not frequently, the Effect, of what is reputed a Natural Power of
Faculty, is produced by the Texture, Figure, and, in a word, Mechanical
Disposition of the Agent; whereby it determines the Action of a remoter Agent
to the produced Effect. Thus in a Clock, to make the Balance vibrate, to point
at the Hour, to make, at set times, the Hammer strike upon the Bell, are but
different Effects of the Weight or Spring, that sets and keeps the Engine in
Motion. And so a Key may either acquire or lose its Power of opening a Door
(which, perhaps, some Schoolmen would call its aperitive Faculty,) by a
Change, not made in itself, but in the Locks it is applied to, or in the Motion
of the Hand that manages It. And least it should be objected, that these
Instances are taken wholly from Artificial Bodies, I shall add, that, when a
clear Piece of Native Crystal has obtained, as it often does, a good
Prismatical Shape, and is, in a due Position, exposed to the Sunbeams; its
Figuration, by inabling it to refract and reflect those Beams after a certain
Manner, gives it a Colorifick Faculty, whereby it is enabled to exhibit that
wonderful and pleasing variety of Colors, that emulate, if not surpass, those
of the Rainbow. And so in a Concave Metalline Looking-glass, though there seem
to be many distinct Faculties, such as that of Reflecting, Inverting,
Magnifying diverse Objects, and Melting, Burning, etc. several Bodies; yet all
these Powers are but the genuine Consequences of the Figure, Capacity and
Smoothness, which are Mechanical Affections of the Matter of the Speculum. And,
indeed, if I judge aright, (though what I am going to say will seem a Paradox,)
yet many Qualities of very many Bodies are but lasting Dispositions to be thus
or thus wrought upon by the Action of External Agents, and also (perchance) to
modifie that Action; as we see, that the Power of making an Echo, that is
observed in diverse hollow Places, is nothing but the Mechanical Disposition,
their Figure and Resistance gives them to reflect a Sound. And, to resume the
lately mentioned Instance of a Key, we may add, that, by bare Position, either
End of it, especially if the Key be long, may be made to acquire or lose a
Transient Magnetic Faculty from the Effluvia of that great Magnet, the Earth;
and that also the same Key may, in a few Moments, acquire a durable Magnetism,
by a Mechanical Change received from the Lodestone, as is known to Those, that
are any thing versed in the Philosophy of that wonderful Mineral.

And to me it seems likely, that one main Reason, why learned Men have ascribed
such inherent and active Powers, as they call Faculties, to so many Bodies, is,
because that, not being conversant enough with Natural and Artificial Things,
they did not duly perpend, how great a Difference there may be between a Body
considered absolutely, or by itself, and the same Body considered in such
Circumstances, as it may be found in. For in some Cases a Physical Body many
have strange Things justly ascribed to It, though not as it is such a Body
considered simply, or unassociated with other Bodies; but as it is placed among
congruous Ones, and makes the Principal or most Operative Part of a compounded
Body, or of the Complex of Bodies it is joined with, and which are of such
determinate Structures, as are convenient for the Phenomenon, to be exhibited.
This may be Analogically seen in what happens to a Spring. For if, being bent,
it is held in Ones Hand, or crowded into a Box, it is but a Simple thing, that
does only, by its Expansive Endeavor, strive to remove the Bodies that keep it
compressed. But in a curious Watch, it may, by virtue of the Structure of that
Engine, become the Principle of I know not how many differing, and perhaps
contrary, Motions, among the Parts of It; and of many notable Phenomenon and
Effects exhibited or produced thereby. This Reflection may, perhaps, be
improved, if I here add, that, in many Bodies, a Fluid Substance, determined to
convenient Motions, may be equivalent to an Internal Spring; especially if it
be assisted by friendly External Agents. This may be illustrated by
considering, that if One that plays skilfully on a Flute, blow out of his Mouth
into the open Air, he will but turn it into a vapid Aereal Stream: But if this
Wind duly pass into the Instrument, and be modified there by the Musician's
Fingers and Skill, the simple Stream of Air may be formed into very various and
melodious Tunes. Thus Gunpowder artificially tempered, though, if it be fired in
the open Air, it will give only a rude and sudden Flash, that presently
vanishes; yet, if it be skilfully disposed of in Rockets and other
well-contriv'd Instruments, and then kindled, it will exhibit a great and
pleasing variety of Shining Bodies and Phenomenon, that are justly admired in
the best sort of Artificial Fireworks. A Physical Instance also, in favor of
our Analogical or Vicarious Springs (if I may so call them,) is afforded me by
the Bulbs of Onions, and the Roots of Aloes, commonly called Semper-vive, and
some other Vegetables, which in the Spring being exposed to the Air, the Juices
and Spirits, contained in them, will be so agitated by the Warmth of that
Season, and so modified by the particular Structure of the more firm Parts,
that, though neither Earth nor Rain cooperate, they will shoot forth green
Stalks or Leaves for many Weeks together, as if they were planted in a good
Soil; (though the Matter of these green Productions be furnished by the radical
Parts themselves, as may be argued both from the manifest Diminution of the
Bulb in Bigness, and the great and gradual Decrement in Weight, that I observed
in making Experiments of this King. And so also the Air, which is an External
Fluid, concurring with the Juices and Spirits of diverse Insects and other cold
Animals, may both be put into Motion, and have that Motion so determined by
their Organization, as to recover in the Spring or Summer, as it were, a new
Life, after they have lain moveless and like dead Things, all the Winter; as we
see in Flies, that, in a hot Air, quickly recover Motion and Sense, after
having lost Both, for perhaps many Months. And the like Change may be far more
suddenly observed in Them, in the warmer Seasons of the Year, when the Air is
drawn from Them by the Pneumatick Pump, and afterward permitted to enliven
Them again. And to give another Instance, that may possibly please better,
(because, as it is purely Physical, so it is Simple and very Conspicuous,) though
that which the Sunbeams are wont primarily to produce be but Light and,
perhaps, Heat; yet falling in a due Manner upon a rorid Cloud, they form there
the Figure of a vast Bow, and, being variously reflected and, refracted, adorn
it with the several Colors, Men admire in the Rainbow.

But I must not farther prosecute an Observation, that I mentioned but
occasionally, as an Instance whereby to show, that the advancement of solid
Philosophy may be much hindered by Men's Custom of assigning, as true causes of
Physical Effects, Imaginary Things or perhaps Arbitrary Names; among which none
seems to have had a more malevolent Influence upon Physiology than the Term
Nature, none having been so frequently and confidently used, or employed to so
many differing Purposes. And therefore, though I would not totally forbid the
Use of the word Nature, nor of Expressions of Kin to It, in Popular Discourses
or even in some Philosophical Ones, where Accurateness is not required or
Ambiguity is prevented by the Context; nor (to dispatch) whereit may be
employed as a compendious form of speech, without danger to Truth, or Prejudice
to Sound Philosophy, (in which Cases I myself forbear not the Use of It;) yet,
I hope, our Free Enquiry may (somewhat at least,) conduce to the more skilful
Indagation, and happy Discovery, of Physical Truths, if it can persuade Men to
make Use less frequently, and with more Circumspection, of so ambiguous, and so
often abused, a Term as Nature; and cease to presume, that a Man has well
performed the part of a true Physiologer, till he have circumstantially or
particularly deduced the Phenomenon he considers, by Intelligible Ways, from
Intelligible Principles. Which he will be constantly put in Mind of doing, or
discover that he has not done it; if, by forbearing general and ambiguous
Terms and Words, he endeavors to explain Things by Expressions, that are clear
to all attentive Readers, furnished with an ordinary measure of Understanding
and Reason. And this perspicuous Way of Philosophizing should be not a little
recommended to ingenious Men, by the valuable Discoveries, which Those that
have employed it, in their Researches and Explications of difficult Things,
have in this Inquisitive Age happily made, not only about the various
Phenomenon, commonly referred to the Fuga Vacui; but in the Hydrostaticks,
Optics, Anatomy, Botanicks, and diverse other Parts of real Learning, that I
cannot now stay to enumerate. And thus much it may possibly be sufficient to
have said, about the Service our Doctrine may do Natural Philosophy.

As for Religion, if what I have formerly said in favor of it be duly
considered and applied, the past Discourse will not appear unfriendly, nor
perhaps useless, to It. And therefore, if I do here abridge what I have there
said, and add to it some Considerations, that were fit to be reserved for this
Place; I hope the Doctrine, we have proposed, may appear fit to do it a
threefold Service.

I. And in the First Place, Our Doctrine may keep Many, that were wont, or are
inclined, to have an excessive Veneration for what they call Nature, from
running, or being seduced, into those Extravagant and Sacrilegious Errors, that
have been upon plausible Pretenses embraced not only by many of the old Heathen
Philosophers but, by diverse Modern Professors of Christianity, who have of late
revived, under new Names and Dresses, the impious Errors of the Gentiles. This
I venture to say, because many of the Heathen Writers, as has been shown in
the Fourth Section, ackonwledg'd indeed a God (as these also own they do,) but
meant such a God, as they often too little discriminated from Matter, and even
from the Thus the Stoics, in Laertius, describe the World thus, Mundus est qui
constat ex Coelo and Terra atque ex illorum Naturis; sive, Qui constat ex Diis
and Hominibus, iisque Rebus quae Horum gratia conditae sunt. And of Chrysippus,
one of the Patriarchs of that Sect, the same. Diog. Laertius l. 7. in Vita
Zenon.
Historian in the same Book says, Purissimum dixit ac liquidissimum Aethera,
quem etiam primum asserunt Stoici esse Deum, sensibiliter veluti infusum esse,
per ea quae sunt in Aere, per cunctas Animantes and Arbores, per Terram autem
ipsam secundum Halitum. To which agrees not only that noted Passage of Virgil,
Principio Coelum, etc. -- But another, which I somewhat wonder Learned Men
should read with no more Reflection: Since he there gives the Sky the very Title
of the High God: Tum Pater Omnipotens foecundis imbribus Ether, etc.
World; and as is very differing from the true One, adored by Christians and
Jews: For Ours is a God, first, infinitely Perfect; and then secondly, by
consequence, both Incorporeal and too Excellent to be so united to Matter, as
to animate it like the Heathens Mundane Soul; or to become to any Body a Soul
properly so called; and thirdly, Incapable of being divided, and having either
Human Souls or other Beings, as it were, torn or carved out, or otherwise
separated from him, so as to be truly Parts or Portions of his own Substance.

The Error here rejected, was the Opinion of many of the Heathen Philosophers,
and particularly of the Stoical Sect; of whose Author, In Vita Zenonis.
Laertius says, De Divina Substantia Zeno ait Mundum totum atque Coelum. And
several Ethnic Philosophers, even after the Light of the Gospel began to shine
in the World, adopted the Argument of the Elder Stoics, who inferred the World
to be Animated and Rational from the Nature of the Human Soul, which they
thought a Portion of the Intelligent Part of the World, that some of them
confounded with the Deity. For the Soicks (in Laertius) affirm, De Vitis Phil.
l. 7.
Mundum esse Animale and Rationale and Animatum ((...)) and Intelligibile. And
it is added, Mundum animatum esse, inde manifestum est, quod Anima nostra inde
veluti avulsa sit. Thus Seneca, Epist. 92.
Quid est autem cur non existimes, in eo divini aliquid existere, quae Dei pars
est? Plutarch in Quaest. Plut.
So Plutarch, speaking of the Soul, Non opus Solum Dei, sed and pars est; neque
ab ipso, sed ex ipso nata est. And Epictetus, Dissert. 1. caip. 14.
Animae ita alligatae and conjunctae Deo sunt, ut particulae ejus sint.
Whereas, the Idolaters and Infidels I speak of, conceived, under the Name of
God, a Being, about which they dogmatically entertained Conceptions, which,
though different from one another, are much more so from the Truth.

For first, Most of Them thought Their God to be purely Corporeal, as, besides
what Diogenes Laertius and Others relate, I remember Origin does in several
Places affirm. If you will believe Praepar. lib. 3. cap. 4.
Eusebius, the Ancient Egyptian Theologers not only affirmed the Sun, Moon and
Stars to be Gods, but denied Incorporeal Substances, or Invisible Nature's, to
have framed the World, but only the Sun, that is discoverable to our Eyes. And
this Corporiety of God seems manifestly to be the Opinion of Mr. Hobbs and his
genuine Disciples, to diverse of whose Principles and Dogmas it is as congruous,
as it is repugnant to Religion. But secondly, There are Others, that allowed a
Soul of the world, which was a Rational and Provident Being, together with the
Corporeal Part of the Universe, especially Heaven, (which, I remember,
Aristotle himself styles a De Coelo l. 2. c. 3.
Divine Body, (or, as some render his Expressions, the Body of God:) But
withal, They held, that this Being did properly Inform this great Mass of the
Universe, and so was, indeed, a Mundane Soul. And though some of our late
Infidels (formerly pointed at in this Treatise,) pretend to be great
Discoverers of new Light in this Affair, yet, as (...) ^s I am informed of
their Doctrine, it has much Affinity with, and is little or not at all better
than That which I formerly noted out of Lactantius to have been asserted by the
Stoics, and the Doctrine which is expressed by Maximus (a Pagan) to St.
Austin. Equidem Vnicum esse Deum summum atque magnificum, quis tam demens, tam
mente captus, ut neg^t esse certissimum? Hujus nos virtutes per Mundanum opus
diffusas, multis vocabulis invocamus, quoniam Nomen ejus Cuncti proprium
ignoremus. Or by that Famous and Learned Roman, Varro, who is cited by St.
Austin, De Civit Dei lib. 7. cap. 6.
to have said, Deum se arbitrari Animam Mundi, and hunc ipsum Mundum esse Deum:
Sed sicut Hominem Sapientem, cum sit ex Animo and Corpore, tamen ab animo
dicimus Sapientem; ita Mundum Deum dici ab Animo, cum sit ex Animo and Corpore.

The Doctrine, by us proposed, may ('it is hoped,) much conduce to justify some
Remarkable Proceedings of Divine Providence, against those Cavillers, that
boldly censure It, upon the account of some Things, that they judge to be
Physical Irregularities, (for Moral Ones concern not this Discourse,) such as
Monsters, Earthquakes, Floods, Eruptions of Volcanos, Famines, etc. For,
according to our Doctrine, --

1. God is a most Free Agent, and Created the World, not out of necessity, but
voluntarily, having framed It, as he pleased and thought fit, at the beginning
of Things, when there was no Substance but Himself, and consequently no
Creature, to which He could be obliged, or by which he could be limited.

2. God having an Understanding infinitely Superior to that of Man, in Extent,
Clearness, and other Excellencies, He may rationally be supposed to have framed
so Great and Admirable an Automaton as the World, and the subordinate Engines
comprised in it for several Ends and Purposes, some of them relating chiefly to
His Corporeal, and others to His Rational Creatures; of which Ends, he has
vouchsafed to make Some discoverable by our dim Reason, but Others are probably
not to be penetrated by it, but lie concealed in the deep Abyss of His
Unfathomable Wisdom.

3. It seems not Incongruous to conceive, that this most Excellent and Glorious
Being thought fit to order Things so, that both His Works and Actions might
bear some Signatures, and as it were Badges of His Attributes, and especially
to stamp upon His Corporeal Works some Tokens or Impresses, discernable by
Human Intellects, of His Divine Wisdom; an Attribute that may advantagiously
disclose Itself to us Men, by producing a vast Multitude of Things, from as
few, and as simple, Principles, and in as Uniform a Way, as, with Congruity to
His other Attributes, is possible.

4. According to this Supposition, it seems, that it became the Divine Author
of the Universe to give It such a Structure, and such Powers, and to establish
among its Parts such general and constant Laws, as best suited with His
purposes in Creating the World; and, to give these Catholic Laws, and
particular Parts or Bodies, such Subordinations to one another, and such
References to the Original Fabric of the Grand System of the World, that, on
all particular occasions, the Welfare of inferior or private Portions of It,
should be only so far provided for, as their Welfare is consistent with the
general Laws settled by God in the Universe, and with Such of those Ends, that
he proposed to himself in framing It, as are more Considerable, than the
Welfare of those particular Creatures.

Upon these Grounds, if we set aside the Consideration of Miracles, as Things
supernatural, and of those Instances, wherein the Providence of the great
Rector of the Universe, and Human Affairs, is pleased peculiarly to interpose;
it may be rationally said, That God having an Infinite Understanding, to which
all Things are at once in a manner Present, did, by virtue of it, clearly
discern, what would happen, in consequence of the Laws by Him established, in
all the possible Combinations of Them, and in all the Junctures of
Circumstances, wherein the Creatures concerned in Them may be found. And, that
having, when all these things were in His Prospect, settled among His Corporeal
Works, general and standing Laws of Motion suited to His most Wise Ends, it
seems very congruous to His Wisdom, to prefer (unless in the newly excepted
Cases) Catholic Laws, and higher Ends, before subordinate Ones, and Uniformity
in His Conduct before making changes in It according to every sort of
particular Emergencies: And consequently, not to recede from the general Laws
He at first most Wisely established, to comply with the Appetites or the Needs
of particular Creatures, or to prevent some seeming Irregularities (such as
Earthquakes, Floods, Famins, etc.) incommodious to Them, which are no other
than such as He fore saw would happen (as the Eclipses of the Sun and Moon from
time to time, the falling of Showers upon the Sea and Sandy Deserts, and the
like must do, by virtue of the Original Disposition of Things,) and thought fit
to ordain, or to permit, as not unsuitable to some or other of those Wise Ends,
which He may have in His All-pervading View, who either as the Maker and
Upholder of the Universe, or as the Sovereign Rector of His Rational Creatures,
may have Ends, whether Physical, Moral, or Political; (if I may be allowed so
to distinguish and name Them,) diverse of which, for ought we can tell, or
should presume, are known only to Himself, whence we may argue, that several
Phenomenon, which seem to us Anomalous, may be very Congruous or Conducive to
those secret Ends, and therefore are unfit to be censured by us, dim-sighted
Mortals.

And indeed, the admirable Wisdom and Skill, that, in some conspicuous
Instances, the Divine Opificer has displayed in the fitting of Things for such
Ends and Uses, for which (among other purposes) He may rationally be supposed
to have designed Them, may justly persuade us, that His Skill would not appear
Infeferiour in reference to the rest also of His Corporeal Works, if we could
as well in These, as in Those, discern their particular final Causes. As if we
suppose an excellent Letter about several Subjects, and to different Purposes,
whereof some Parts were written in plain Characters, others in Ciphers, besides
a third sort of Clauses, wherein both Kinds of Writing were variously mixed, to
be heedfully perused by a very intelligent Person, if he finds that those
Passages, that he can understand, are excellently suited to the scopes that
appear to be intended in them, it is Rational as well as Equitable in Him to
conclude, that the Passages or Clauses of the third sort, if any of them seem
to be insignificant, or even to make an Incongruous Sense, do it but because of
the illegible Words; and that both these Passages, and Those written altogether
in Ciphers, would be found no less worthy of the excellent See the Discourse of
Final Causes.
Writer, than the plainest Parts of the Epistle, if the particular purposes,
they were designed for, were as clearly discernable by the Reader. And perhaps
you will allow me to add, that by this way of ordering Things so, that, in some
of God's Works, the Ends or Uses may be manifest, and the exquisite fitness of
the Means may be conspicuous; [as the Eye is manifestly made for seeing, and
the Parts it consists of admirably fitted to make it an excellent Organ of
Vision] and in others, the ends designed seem to be beyond our reach: By this
way, (I say) of managing Things, the most Wise Author of them does both
gratify our Understandings, and make us sensible of the Imperfection of Them.

If the Representation now made of Providence serve (as I hope it may,) to
resolve some scruples about it; I know you will not think it useless to
Religion. And though I should miss of my aim in it, yet since I do not
dogmatize in what I propose about it, but freely submit my thoughts to better
Judgments; I hope my well meant Endeavors will be, as well as the unsuccessful
ones of abler Pens have been, excused by the scarce superable difficulty of the
Subject. However, what I have proposed about Providence, being written, rather
to do a service to Theology, than as necessary to justify a dissatisfaction
with the Received Notion of Nature, that was grounded mainly upon Philosophical
Objections; I hope our Free Enquiry may, though this Second Use of it should be
quite laid aside, be thought not unserviceable to Religion, since the First Use
of it, (above delivered) does not depend on my Notions about Providence, no
more than the Third, which my Prolixity about the former makes it fit I should
in few words dispatch.

III. The last then, but not the least, service, I hope our Doctrine may do
Religion, is, that it may induce Men to pay their Admiration, their Praises,
and their Thanks, directly to God Himself; who is the True and Only Creator of
the Sun, Moon, Earth, and those other Creatures that Men are wont to call the
Works of Nature. And in this way of expressing their Veneration of the True
God, (who, in the Holy Scripture styles Himself a Jealous God, Exodus xx. 5.)
and their gratitude to Him, they are warranted by the Examples of the ancient
People of God, the Israelites, and not only by the Inspired Persons of the Old
Testament, but by the Promulgators of the New Testament, and even by the
Celestial Spirits; who, in the last Book of It, are introduced, Rev. iv. 2.
Praising and Thanking God himself for His Mundane Works, without taking any
notice of His pretended Vicegerent, Nature.

THE CONCLUSION.
AND now, dear Eleutherius, you have the whole Bundle of those Papers that I
found and tacked together, (for they are not all that I have written) touching
my Free Enquiry into the Received Notion of Nature: At the Close of which
Essay, I must crave leave to represent two or three things about It.

1. Since this Treatise pretends to be but an Enquiry, I hope that any
Discourses or Expressions that you may have found Dogmatically delivered, about
Questions of great moment or difficulty, will be interpretated with congruity
to the Title and avowed Scope of this Treatise; and that so favorable a
Reader, as Eleutherius, will consider, that 'twas very difficult in the heat of
Discourse, never to forget the Reserves, that the Title might suggest,
especially since, on diverse occasions, I could not have spoken, with those
Reserves, without much enervating my Discourse, and being, by Restrictions and
other cautious Expressions, tedious or troublesome to you. But this, as I
lately intimated, is to be understood of Things of great moment or difficulty.
For otherwise, there are diverse Notions, Suppositions, and Explanations, in the
Vulgarly Received Doctrine of Nature, and Her Phenomenon; which I take to be
either so precarious, or so unintelligible, or so incongruous, or so
insufficient, that I scruple not to own, that I am dissatisfied with them, and
reject them.

2. Though, upon a transient view of these Papers, I find that several Parcels,
that came first into my hands, having been laid and fastened together, (to keep
them from being lost, as others had already been) before the others were
lighted on, some of them will not be met with in Places that are not the most
proper for them; yet Haste and Sickness made me rather venture on your good
Nature, for the Pardon of a venial Fault, than put myself to the trouble of
altering the Order of these Papers, and substituting new Transitions and
Connections, in the room of those, with which I formerly made up the Chasms and
Incoherency of the Tract, you now receive. And if the Notions and Reasonings be
themselves solid, they will not need the Assistence of an exact Method to
obtain the Assent of so discerning a Reader, as they are presented to: Upon the
score of whose Benignity, it is hoped, that the former Advertisement may
likewise pass for an Excuse, if the same things, for substance, be found more
than once in a Tract written at very distant Times, and in differing
Circumstances. For, besides that such seeming Repetitions will not (if I be not
mistaken) frequently occur, and will, for the most part, be found, by being
variously expressed, to elucidate or strengthen the Thought or Argument, they
belong to: And besides, that the Novelty and Difficulty of some Points may have
made it needful, not only to display, but to inculcate them; besides these
things, (I say) it is very possible that the same Notion may serve to explicate
or prove several Truths; and therefore may, without Impertinency, be made use
of in more than one Part of our Treatise. And if our Enquiry shall be thought
worthy to be Transcribed, and presented to you a second time, after I shall
have reviewed it, and heard Objections against it, and considered the Things,
that either you, or I myself, may find fault with in it; it is very possible,
that (if God grant me Life and Leisure,) this Tract, which, in its present
Dress, I desire you would look on but as an Apparatus (toward a more full and
orderly Treatise,) may appear before you in a less unaccurate Method: And that
my Second Thoughts may prove more Correct, more Mature, or better Backed and
fortified, than my First.

3. The Subject of my Enquiry being of great Extent, as well as Consequence, it
obliged me to consider, and treat of many Things, (as Philosophical, Medical,
Theological, etc.) and, among them, of diverse that are not at all of easy
Speculation. And I found it the more difficult to handle them well, because the
Attempt I have ventured upon being new, and to be prosecuted by Discourse, many
of them opposite to the general Sentiments of Mankind, I was not to expect much
Assistence from any thing, but Truth and Reason. And therefore, as I cannot
presume not to need your Indulgence, so I cannot despair of obtaining it, if in
this my first Essay, upon a variety of difficult Points, I have not always hit
the Mark, and as happily found the Truth as sincerely sought it. But if you
shall (which it is very probable you will) find that I have fallen into some
Errors, 'twill be but one Trouble for you, to make me discern them, and forsake
them, (especially any, wherein Religion may be concerned) which I have, by way
of Praevision, made it the more easy for myself to do; because (if my Style
have not wronged my Intentions,) I have written this Discourse, rather like a
doubting Seeker of Truth, than a Man confident that he has found It.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of some Books lately Printed for, and are to be sold by, John
Tailor at the Globe in St. Paul's Churchyard.
THE Declamations of Quintilian, being an Exercitation or Praxis upon his
Twelve Books, concerning the Institution of an Orator; Translated (from the
Oxford Theater Edition) into English, by a Learned and Ingenious Hand, with the
Approbations of several Eminent Schoolmasters in the City of Landon. Octavo.
Price 4 s. 6 d.

England's Happiness in a Lineal Succession; and the Deplorable Miseries which
ever attended Doubtful Titles to the Crown, Historically demonstrated by the
Bloody Wars between the two Houses of York and Lancaster. Twelves. Price 1 s. 6
d.

The Happy Ascetick, or the Best Exercise; with a Letter to a Person of
Quality, concerning the Lives of the Primitive Christians. By Anthony Horneck,
D. D. Preacher at the Savoy. Octavo. Price 4 s. 6 d.

THis Book is now Printing in Latin, by the Author's own Direction, and will
be Published by Trinity Term next. Printed for, and Sold by John Tailor at the
Globe in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1686.

ERRATA.
Page 27. l. 17. r. Angel, p. 47. dele To which I now proceed, p. 131. l. 10.
r. Causality, p. 134. l. 15. and 16. r. God and a Providence is afforded by the
Consideration of the Visible, etc. p. 273. l. 16. r. World.

Mal-punctations, or small Literal Faults (if any be,) the Courteous Reader is
desired to correct with his Pen.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE Reader is here to be advertised of a great Oversight that happened to be
made by several Transpositions of the loose Sheets, wherein (and not in a
Book,) the Copy was sent to the Press. For the Discourse beginning at the sole
Break that is to be met with in the Hundred and Fiftieth Page, and ending with
another Break at the second Line of the Hundred Fifty and Sixth Page, ought to
have been placed at the sole Break that is to be met with in the Hundred Sixty
and Second Page. And the Discourse that reaches from the beginning of the
Hundred Seventy and Eighth Page, to the Close of the V. Section, which ends in
the Hundred Eighty and Second Page, ought to have been Printed among the
Arguments that may be alleged by the Naturists, among which it should, if I
misremember not, have been brought in at the Close of the Two Hundred Forty and
Eighth Page, and thence have reached to the end of the Sixth Section. These
Transpositions are thought necessary to have notice given of Them, to avoid
Confusion, since the Printed Sheets did not come to Hand, 'till too much of the
Book was wrought off before the Transpositions could be discerned; which makes
it fit to give Notice of what it is too late to remedy. And though also some
Connections and Transitions, relating to the Transposed Papers, be not such as
they should be, yet it is not judged fit, that the Reader be troubled with long
Advertisements about them; because his Discretion may easily correct them, and
the Incongruities are not of Moment enough to spoil the Discourses they relate
to.


