ANIMADVERSIONS UPON MR. HOBBES's PROBLEMATA DE VACUO.

By the Honorable ROBERT BOIL, Fellow of the Royal Society.

LONDON, Printed by William Godbid, and are to be Sold by Moses Pit, at the
Angel over against the little North Door of St. Paul's Church. 1674.

PREFACE.
UPON the coming abroad of Mr. Hobbes's Problemata Physica, finding them in the
hands of an Ingenious Person, that intended to write a Censure of them, which
several Employments private and public have, it seems, hindered him to do; I
began, as is usual on such occasions, to turn over the leaves of the Book, to
see what particular things it treated of. This I had not long done before I
found, by obvious passages in the third Chapter, or Dialogue, as well as by the
Title, which was Problemata de Vacuo, that I was particularly concerned in it;
upon which I desired the Possessor of the Book, who readily consented, to leave
me to examine that Dialogue, on which condition I would leave him to deal with
all the rest of the Book. Nor did I look upon the Reflections I meant to make
as repugnant to the Resolutions I had taken against writing Books of
Controversy, since the Explications, Mr. Hobbes gave of his Problems, seemed
to contain but some Variations of, or an Appendix to, his Tract De Natura
Aeris, which, being one of the two first pieces that were published against
what I had written, was one of those that I had expressly reserved my self the
liberty to answer. But the Animadversions I first made upon Mr. Hobbes's
Problems De Vacuo, having been casually mislaid e're they were finished; before
I had occasion to resume my task, there past time enough to let me perceive,
that his Doctrine, which 'twill easily be thought that the Vacuists
disapproved, was not much relished by most of the Plenists themselves, the
modernest Peripateticks and the Cartesians; each of them maintaining the
Fullness of the World, upon their own grounds, which are differing enough from
those of our Author, the natural Indisposition I have to Polemical Discourses,
easily persuaded me to let alone a Controversy, that did not appear needful:
And I had still persisted in my silence, if Mr. Hobbes had not as 'twere
summoned me to break it by publishing again his Explications, which in my
Examen of his Dialogue De Natura Aeris I had shown to be erroneous.

And I did not grow at all more satisfied, to find him so constant as well as
stiff an Adversary to interspersed Vacuities, by comparing what he maintains in
his Dialogue De Vacuo, with some things that he teaches, especially concerning
God, the Cause of Motion, and the Imperviousness of Glass, in some other of his
writings that are published in the same Volume with it. For since he asserts
that there is a God, and owns Him to be the Creator of the World; and since on
the other side the Penetration of Dimensions is confessed to be impossible, and
he denies that there is any Vacuum in the Universe; it seems difficult to
conceive, how in a World that is already perfectly full of Body, a Corporeal
Deity, such as he maintains in his Append. ad Leviath. cap. 3, can have that
access even to the minute parts of the Mundane Matter, that seems requi^ site
to the Attributes and Operations that belong to the Deity, in reference to the
World. But I leave Divines to consider what Influence the conjunction of Mr.
Hobbes's two Opinions, the Corporeity of the Deity, and the perfect Plenitude
of the World, may have on Theology. And perhaps I should not in a Physical
Discourse have taken any notice of the proposed Difficulty, but that, to
prevent an Imputation on the Study of Natures Works, (as if it taught us rather
to degrade than admire their Author,) it seemed not amiss to hint (in transitu)
that Mr. Hobbes's gross Conteption of a Corporeal God, is not only unwarranted
by found Philosophy, but ill befriended even by his own.

My Adversary having proposed his Problems by way of Dialogue between A. and B;
'twill not, I presume, be wondered at, that I have given the same form to my
Animadversions; which come forth no earlier, because I had diverse other
Treatises, that I was more concerned for, to publish before them.

But because it will probably be demanded, why on a Tract that is but short, my
Animadversions should take up so much room? It will be requisite, that I here
give an account of the bulk of this Treatise.

And first, having found that there was not any one Problem, in whose
Explication, as proposed by Mr. Hobbes, I saw cause to acquiesce, I was induced
for the Readers ease, and that I might be sure to do my Adversary no wrong, to
transcribe his whole Dialogue, bating some few Transitions, and other Clauses
not needful to be transferred hither.

Credo, (says Mr. Hobbes in his Dialogus Physicus:) De Not. Aeris, p. 13.
Nam motus hic Restitutionis, Hobbii est, and ab illo primo and solo explicatus
in Lib. de Corpore, cap. 21. Art. 1. Sine qua Hypothesi, quantuscunque labor,
ars, sumptus, ad rerum Naturaliu^ invisibiles causas inveniendas adbibeatur,
frustra erit. And speaking of the Gentleman (to whom it were not here proper
for me so give E^ithe^es) that used to meet at Gresham-College, and are known
by the Name of the Royal Secrety, he thus treats them and their way of
Inquiring into Nature: Conveniant, studia conferant, Experimenta faciant
quantum volunt, nisi and Principiis utantur mess, nihil proficient.

A. Pateris ergo nihil bactenus a Collegis tuis promotam esse scientium
Causarum Naturalium, nisi quod Unus eorum Machinam invenerit, qua motus
excitari Aeris possit talis, ut parts Sphaerae simul undiquaque tendant ad
Centrum, and ut Hypotheses Hobbianae, ante quidem satis probabiles, hinc
reddantur probabiliores.


B. Nec fateri pudet; nam est aliqu^d prodire tenus, si non datur ultra.


A. Quid tinus? quorsum autem tantus apparatus and sumptus Machinarum factu
difficilium, ut eatenus tantum productis quantum ante prodi^rat Hobbius? Cut
non inde potius incepistis ubi ille desiit? Cur Principiis ab illo positis non
estis usi? Cumque Aristoteles recte dixit, ignorato motu ignorari Naturam, etc.

-- Ad Causas autem, propter quas proficere ne pau^usum quidem potuistis, nec
poter^tis, accedunt etiam ^liae, ut odium Hobbii, etc.



Next, I was not willing to imitate Mr. Hobbes, who recites in the Dialogue we
are considering the same Experiments that he had already mentioned in his Tract
De Natura Aeris, without adding as his own (that I remember) any new one to
them. But my unwillingness to tire the Reader with bare Repetitions of the
Arguments I employed in my Examen of that Tract, invited me to endeavor to
make him some amends for the exercise of his patience by inserting, as occasion
was offered, five or six new Experiments, that will not perhaps be so easily
made by every Reader that will be able (now that I have perspicuously proposed
them) to understand them.

And lastly, since Mr. Hobbes has not been content to magnify himself and his
way of treating of Physical matters, but has been pleased to speak very
slightingly of Experimentarian Philosophers (as he styles them) in general,
and, which is worse, to disparage the making of elaborate Experiments; I judged
the thing, he seemed to aim at, so prejudicial to true and useful Philosophy,
that I thought, it might do some service to the less knowing, and less wary,
sort of Readers, if I tried to make his own Explications enervate his
Authority, and by a somewhat particular Examen of the Solutions he has given of
the Problems I am concerned in, show, that it is much more easy to undervalue a
frequent recourse to Experiments, than truly to explicate the Phenomenon of
Nature without them. And since our Author, speaking of his Problemata Physica,
(which is but a small Book) scruples not to tell His Majesty, to whom he
dedicates them, that he has therein comprised (to speak in his own terms) the
greatest and most probable part of his Physical Meditations; and since by the
alterations, he has made in what he formerly writ about the Phenomenon of my
Engine, he seems to have designed to give it a more advantageous form: I
conceive, that by these selected Solutions of his, one may, without doing him
the least injustice, make an estimate of his way of discoursing about Natural
things. And though I would not interess the credit of Experimentarian
Philosophers in no considerabler a Paper than this; yet if Mr. Hobbes's
Explications and mine be attentively compared, it will not, I hope, by them be
found, that the way of Philosophising he employs, is much to be preferred
before that which he undervalues.

ANIMADVERSIONS UPON MR. HOBBES's Problemata de VACUO.
A. MAy one, without too bold an inquisitiveness, ask, what Book you are
reading so attentively?


B. You will easily believe you may, when I shall have answered you, that 'twas
Mr. Hobbes's lately published Tract of Physical Problems, which I was perusing.


A. What progress have you made in it?


B. I was finishing the third Dialogue or Chapter when you came in, and finding
my self, though not named, yet particularly concerned, I was perusing it with
that attention which it seems you took notice of.


A. Diverse of your Experiments are so expressly mentioned there, that one need
not be skilled in decyphering to perceive that you are interessed in that
Chapter, and therefore seeing you have heedfully read it over, pray give me
leave to ask your Judgment, both of Mr. Hobbes's Opinion, and his Reasonings
about Vacuum.


B. Concerning his Opinion, I am sorry I cannot now satisfy your Curiosity,
having long since taken, and ever since kept, a Resolution to decline, at least
until a time that is not yet come, the declaring my self either for or against
the Plenists. But as to the other part of your Question, which is about Mr.
Hobbes's Arguments for the absolute Plenitude of the World, I shall not scruple
readily to answer, that his Ratiocinations seem to me far short of that
cogency, which the noise he would make in the world, and the way wherein he
treats both ancient and modern Philosophers that dissent from him, may warrant
us to expect.


A. You will allow me the freedom to tell you, That, to convince me, that your
resentment of his explicating diverse of the Phenomenon of your Pneumatic Engine
otherwise than you have been wont to do, (and perhaps in terms that might well
have been more civil,) has had no share in dictating this Judgment of yours;
the best way will be, that entering for a while into the party of the Vacuists
you answer the Arguments he alleges in this Chapter to confute them.


B. Having always, as you know, forborne to declare my self either way in this
Controversy, I shall not tie my self strictly to the Principles and Notions of
the Vacuists, nor, though but for a while, oppose my self to those of the
Plenists: But so far I shall comply with your Commands, as either upon the
Doctrine of the Vacuists, or upon other grounds, to consider, whether this
Dialogue of Mr. Hobbes have cogently proved his, and the Schools, Assertion,
Non dari Vacuum; and whether he has rightly explained some Phenomenon of Nature
which he undertakes to give an account of, and especially some produced in our
Engine, whereof he takes upon him to render the genuine Causes. And this last
inquiry is that which I chiefly design.


A. By this I perceive, that if you can make out your own Explications of your
Adversaries Problems de Vacuo, and show them to be preferable to his, you will
think you have done your work, and that it is but your secondary scope to show,
that in Mr. Hobbes his way of solving them, he gives the Vacuists an advantage
against Him, though not against the plenists in general.


B. You do not mistake my meaning, and therefore without any further Preamble,
let us now proceed to the particular Phenomenon considered by Mr. Hobbes; the
first of which is an Experiment proposed by me in the one and thirtieth of the
Physico-Mechanical Experiments concerning the Adhesion of two flat and polished
Marbles, which I endeavored to solve by the pressure of the Air. And this
Experiment Mr. Hobbes thinks so convincing an one to prove the Plenitude of the
World, that, though he tells us he has many cogent Arguments to make it out,
yet he mentions but this one, because that, he says, suffices.


A. The Confidence he thereby expresses of the great force of this Argument
does the less move me, because, I remember, that formerly in his Elements of
Philosophy he thought it sufficient to employ one Argument to evince the
Plenitude of the World, and for that one he pitched upon the Vulgar Experiment
of a Gardeners Watering-Pot: But, whether he were wrought upon by the
Objections made to his Inference from that Phenomenon in your Examen of his
Dialogue De Natura Aeris, or by some other Considerations, I will not pretend
to divine. But I plainly perceive, he now prefers the Experiment of the
cohering Marbles.


B. Of which it will not be amiss, though the passage be somewhat long, to read
you his whole Discourse out of the Book I have in my hand.


A. It Is fit that you, who for my sake are content to take the pains of
answering what he says, should be eased of the trouble of reading it, which I
will therefore, with your leave, take upon me. His Discourse then about the
Marbles is this:


A. Ad probandam Universi Plenitudinem, nullum nostin' Argumentum cogens?


B. Imo multa: Unum autem sufficit ex eo sumptum, Quod duo corpor a plana, si
se mutuo secundum amborum planitiem communem tangant, non facile in instante
divelli possunt; successive vero facillime. Non dico, impossible esse duo
durissima Marmora it a coharentia divellere, sed difficile; and vim postulare
tantam, quanta sufficit ad duritiem lapidis superandam. Siquidem vero majore vi
ad separationem opus sit quam illa, qua moventur separata, id signum est non
dari Vacuum.


A. Assertiones illae demonstratione indigent. Primo autem ostende, quomodo ex
duorum durissimorum corporum, conjunctorum ad superficies exquisite laeves,
diremptione difficili, sequatur Plenitudo Mundi?


B. Si duo plana, dura, polita Corpora (ut Marmora) collocentur unum supra
alterum, ita ut eorum superficies se mutuo per amnia puncta exact, quantum
fieri potest, contingant, illa sine magna difficultate ita divelli non possunt,
ut eodem instante per omnia puncta dirimantur. Veruntamen Marmora eadem, si
communis eorum superficies ad Horizontem erigatur, aut non valde inclinetur,
alterum ab altero facillime (ut scis) etiam solo pondere dilabentur. Nonne
causa hujus rei haec est, Quod labenti Marmori succedit Aer, and relictum locum
semper implet?


A. Certissime. Quid ergo?


B. Quando vero eadem uno instante divellere conaris, nonne multo major vis
adhibenda est; Quam ob causam?


A. Ego, and mecum (puto) omnes cansam statuunt, Quod spatium totum inter duo
illa Marmora divulsa, simul uno instante implere Aer non potest, quantacunque
celeritate fiat divulsio.


B. An qui spatia in Aere dari vacua contendunt, in illo Aere solo dari negant
qui Marmora illa conjuncta circumdat?


A. Minime, sed ubique interspersa.


B. Dum ergo illi, qui Marmor unum ab altero revellentes Aerem comprimunt, and
per consequens Vacuum exprimunt, Vacuum faciunt locum per revulsionem relictum;
nulla ergo separationis erit difficultas, saltem non major quam est difficultas
corpora eadem movendi in Aere postquam separata fuerint. Itaque quoniam,
concesso Vacuo, difficult as Marmora illa dirimendi nulla est, sequitur per
difficultatis experientiam, nullum esse Vacuum.


A. Recte quidem illud infers. Mundi autem Plenitudine supposita, quomodo
demonstrabis possibile omnino esse ut divellantur?


B. Cogita primo Corpus aliquod ductile, nec nimis durum, ut ceram, in duas
parts distrahi, quae tamen parts non minus exact in communi plano se mutuo
tangunt quam laevissima Marmora. Jam quo pacto distrahatur ^era, consideremus.
Nonne perpetuo attenuatur donec in filum evadat tenuissimum, and omni dato
crasso tenuius, and sie tandem divellitur? Eodem modo etiam durissima columna
in duas parts distrahetur, si vim tantam adhibeas, quanta sufficit ad
resistentiam duritiei superandam. Sicut enim in card parts primo extimae
distrahuntur, in quarum locum succedit Aer; ita etiam in Corpore quantumlibet
duro Aer locum subit partium extimarum, quae primae Vulsionis viribus
dirumpuntur. Vis autem quae superat resistentiam partium extimarum Duri, facile
superabit resistentiam reliquarum. Nam resistentia prima est a Toto Duro,
reliquarum vero semper a Residuo.


A. It a quidem videtur consideranti, quam Corpora quaedam, praesertim vero
durissima, fragilia sint.

Does this Ratiocination seem to you as cogent, as it did to the Proposer of it?


B. You will quickly think it does not, and perhaps you will think it should
not, if you please to consider with me some of the Reflections that the Reading
of it suggested to me.

And first, without declaring for the Vacuists Opinion, I must profess my self
unsatisfied with Mr. Hobbes's way of arguing against them: For, where he says,
Dum ergo illi qui Marmor unum ab altero revellentes Aerem comprimunt and per
consequens Vacuum exprimunt, Vacuum faciunt locum per revulsionem relictum;
nulla ergo separationis erit difficultas, saltem non major quam est difficultas
corpora eadem movendi in Aere postquam separata fuerint. Itaque quoniam,
concesso Vacuo, difficultas Marmora illa dirimendi nulla est, sequitur per
difficultatis experientiam, nullum esse Vacuum. Methinks he expresses himself
but obscurely, and leaves his Readers to ghess, what the word Dum refers to.
But that which seems to be his drift in this passage, is, that, since the
Vacuists allow interspersed Vacuities, not only in the Air that surrounds the
conjoined Marbles, but in the rest of the ambient Air, there is no reason, why
there should be any difficulty in separating the Marbles, or at least any
greater difficulty than in moving the Marbles in that Air after their
separation. But, not to consider, whether his Adversaries will not accuse his
phrase of squeezing out a Vacuum as if it were a Body, they will easily answer,
that notwithstanding the Vacuities they admit in the ambient Air, a manifest
reason may be given in their Hypothesis of our finding a difficulty in the
Divulsion of the Marbles. For, the Vacuities they admit being but interspersed,
and very small, and the Corpuscles of the Atmosphere being according to them
endowed with Gravity, there leans so many upon the upper surface of the
uppermost Marble, that that stone cannot be at once perpendicularly drawn up
from the lower Marble contiguous to it, without a force capable to surmount the
weight of the Aerial Corpuscles that lean upon it. And this weight has already
so constipated the neighboring parts of the ambient Air, that he, that would
perpendicularly raise the upper Marble from the lower, shall need a
considerable force to make the Revulsion, and compel the already contiguous
parts of the incumbent Air to a subingression into the pores or intervals
intercepted between them. For the Conatus of him, that endeavors to remove the
upper Marble, whilst the lower surface of it is fenced from the pressure of the
Atmosphere by the Contact of the lower Marble which suffers no Air to come in
between them, is not assisted by the weight or pressure of the Atmosphere,
which, when the Marbles are once separated, pressing as strongly against the
undermost surface of the upper Marble, as the incumbent Atmospherical Pillar
does against the upper surface of the same Marble, the hand that endeavors to
raise it in the free Air has no other resistance, than that small one of the
Marbles own weight to surmount.


A. But what say you to the Reason that Mr. Hobbes, and, as he thinks, all
others give of the difficulty of the often mentioned Divulsion, namely, Quod
spatium totum inter duo illa Marmora divulsa simul uno instante implere Aer non
potest, quant acunque celeritate fiat divulsio.


B. I say, that, for ought I know, the Plenists may give a more plausible
account of this Experiment, than Mr. Hobbes has here done; and therefore
abstracting from the two opposite Hypotheses, I shall further say, That the
genuine Cause of the Phenomenon seems to be that which I have already
assigned; and that difficulty of raising the upper stone that accompanies the
Airs not being able to come in all at once, to possess the space left between
the surfaces of the two Marbles upon their separation, proceeds from hence,
that, 'till that space be filled with the Atmospherical Air, the hand of him
that would lift up the superior Marble cannot be fully assisted by the
pressure of the Air against the lower surface of that Marble.


A. This is a Paradox, and therefore I shall desire to know on what you ground
it?


B. Though I mention it but as a Conjecture proposed ex abundanti* yet I shall
on this occasion countenance it with two things; the first* that, since I
declare not for the Hypothesis of the Plenists as it is maintained by Mr.
Hobbes, I am not bound to allow, what the common Explication, adopted by my
Adversary, supposes; namely, that either Nature abhors a Vacuum (as the Schools
would have it,) or that there could be no Divulsion of the Marbles, unless at
the same time the Air were admitted into the room that Divulsion makes for it.
And a Vacuist may tell you, that, provided the strength employed to draw up the
superior Marble be great enough to surmount the weight of the Aerial
Corpuscles accumulated upon it, the divulsion would ensue, though by Divine
Omnipotence no Air or other Body should be permitted to fill the room made for
it by the divulsion; and that the Air's rushing into that space does not
necessarily accompany, but in order of Nature and time follow upon, a
separation of the Marbles, the Air that surrounded their contiguous surfaces
being by the weight of the collaterally superior Air impelled into the room
newly made by the divulsion. But I shall rather countenance what you call my
Paradox by an Experiment I purposely made in our Pneumatical Receiver, where
having accommodated two flat and polished Marbles, so that the lower being
fixed, the upper might be laid upon it and drawn up again as there should be
occasion, I found, that if, when the Receiver was well exhausted, the upper
Marble was by a certain contrivance laid flat upon the lower, they would not
then cohere as formerly, but be with great ease separated, though it did not by
any Phenomenon appear, that any Air could come to rush in, to possess the
place given it by the recess of the upper Marble, whose very easy avulsion is
as easily explicable by our Hypothesis; since the pressure of that little Air,
that remained in the Receiver, being too faint to make any at all considerable
resistance to the avulsion of the upper Marble, the hand that drew it up had
very little more than the single weight of the stone to surmount.


A. An Anti-plenist had expected, that you would have observed, that the
difficult separation of the Marbles in the open Air does rather prove, that
there may be a Vacuum, than that there can be none. For in case the Air can
succeed as fast at the sides as the divulsion is made, a Vacuist may demand,
whence comes the difficulty of the separation? And if the Air cannot fill the
whole room made for it by the separated Marbles at the same instant they are
forced asunder, how is a Vacuum avoided for that time, how small soever, that
is necessary for the Air to pass from the edges to the middle of the room newly
made?


B. What the Plenists will say to your Argument I leave them to consider; but I
presume, they will be able to give a more plausible account of the Phenomenon
we are treating of, than is given by Mr. Hobbes.


A. What induces you to dislike his Explication of it?


B. Two things; the one, that I think the Cause he assigns improbable; and the
other, that I think another, that is better, has been assigned already.

And first, whereas Mr. Hobbes requires to the Divulsion of the Marbles a force
great enough to surmount the hardness of the stone, this is asserted gratis,
which it should not be; since it seems very unlikely, that the weight of so few
pounds as will suffice to separate two coherent Marbles of about an Inch, for
instance, in Diameter, should be able to surmount the hardness of such solid
stones as we usually employ in this Experiment. And though it be generally
judged more easy to bend, if it may be, or break a broader piece of Marble
caeteris paribus, than a much narrower; yet, whereas neither I, nor any else
that I know, nor I believe Mr. Hobbes, ever observed any difference in the
resistance of Marbles to separation from the greater or lesser thickness of the
stones; I find by constant experience, that, caeteris paribus, the broadness of
the coherent Marbles does exceedingly increase the difficulty of disjoyning
them: Insomuch that, whereas not many pounds, as I was saying, would separate
Marbles of an Inch, or a lesser, Diameter; when I increased their Diameter to
about four Inches, if I misremember not, there were several Men that
successively tried to pull them asunder without being able by their utmost
force to effect it.


A. But what say you to the Illustration, that Mr. Hobbes, upon the supposition
of the Worlds Plenitude, gives of our Phenomenon by drawing asunder the
opposite parts of a piece of Wax?


B. To me it seems an Instance improper enough. For first, the parts that are
to be divided in the Wax are of a soft and yielding consistence, and according
to him of a ductile, or, if you please, of a tractile nature, and not, as the
parts of the coherent Marbles, very solid and hard. Next, the parts of the Wax
do not stick together barely by a superficial contact of two smooth Planes, as
do the Marbles we are speaking of; but have their parts implicated, and as it
were entangled with one another. And therefore they are far from a disposition
to slide off, like the Marbles, from one another, in how commodious a posture
soever you place them. Besides it is manifest, that the Air has opportunity to
succeed in the places successively deserted by the receding parts of the
attenuated Wax; but it is neither manifest, nor as yet well proved by Mr.
Hobbes, that the Air does after the same manner succeed between the two
Marbles, which, as I lately noted, are not forced asunder after such a way, but
are, as himself speaks, severed in all their points at the same instant.


A. I know, you forget not what he says of the dividing of a hard Column into
two parts by a force sufficient to overcome the resistance of its hardness.


B. He does not here either affirm, that he, or any he can trust, has seen the
thing done; nor does he give us any such account of the way wherein the Pillar
is to be broken, whether in an erected, inclined, or horizontal posture; nor
describe the particular circumstances that were fit to be mentioned in order to
the solution of the Phenomenon. Wherefore, 'till I be better informed of the
matter of fact, I can scarce look upon what Mr. Hobbes says of the Pillar, as
other than his Conjecture, which now I shall the rather pass by, not only
because the case is differing from that of our polished Marbles, which are
actually distinct Bodies, and only contiguous in one Commissure; but also,
because I would hasten to the second reason of my dislike of Mr. Hobbes's
Explication of our Phenomenon, which is, that a better has been given already,
from the pressure of the Atmosphere upon all the superficial parts of the upper
Marble save those that touch the Plane of the lower.


A. You would have put fair for convincing Mr. Hobbes himself, at least would
have put him to unusual shifts, if you had succeeded in the attempt you made,
among other of your Physico-Mechanical Experiments, to disjoyn two coherent
Marbles, by suspending them horizontally in your Pneumatical Receiver, and
pumping out the Air that environed them; for, from your failing in that
attempt, though you rendered a not improbable Reason of it, Mr. Hobbes took
occasion, in his Dialogue De Natura Aeris, to speak in so high a strain as
this: Nihil isthic erat quod ageret pondus; Experimento hoc excogitari contra
opinionem eorum qui Vacuum asserunt aliud argumentum fortius aut evidentius non
potuit. Nam si duorum cohaerentium alterutrum secundum eam viam, in qua jacent
ipsae contiguae superficies, propulsum esset, facile separarentur, Aere praximo
in locum relictum successive semper influente; sed illa ita divellere, ut simul
totum amitterent contactum, impossible est, mundo pleno. Oporteret enim aut
motum fieri ab uno termino ad alium in instante, aut duo corpora eodem tempore
in eodem esse loco: Quorum utrumvis dicere, est absurdum.


B. You may remember, that where I relate that Experiment, I expressed a hope,
that, when I should be better accommodated than I then was, I might attempt the
Trial with prosperous success, and accordingly afterward, having got a lesser
Engine than that I used before, wherewith the Air might be better pumpt out and
longer kept out, I cheerfully repeated the Trial. To show then, that when two
coherent Marbles are sustained horizontally in the Air, the Cause, why they are
not to be forced asunder, if they have two or three Inches in Diameter, without
the help of a considerable weight, is the pressure I was lately mentioning of
the ambient Air; I caused two such coherent Marbles to be suspended in a large
Receiver, with a weight at the lowermost, that might help to keep them steady,
but was very inconsiderable to that which their Cohesion might have surmounted;
then causing the Air to be pumpt by degrees out of the Receiver, for a good
while the Marbles stuck close together, because during that time the Air could
not be so far pumpt out, but that there remained enough to sustain the small
weight that endeavored their divulsion: But when the Air was further pumpt
out, at length the Spring of the little, but not a little expanded, Air, that
remained, being grown too weak to sustain the lower Marble and its small clog,
they did, as I expected, drop off*


A. This will not agree over-well with the confident and triumphant expressions
just now necited.


B. I never envied Mr. Hobbes's forwardness to triumph, and am content, his
Conjectures be recommended by the confidence that accompanies them, if mine be
by the success that follows them. But to confirm the Explication given by me of
our Phenomenon, I shall add, that as the last mentioned Trial, which I had
several times occasion to repeat, shows, that the cohesion of our two
contiguous Marbles would cease upon the withdrawing of the pressure of the
Atmosphere; so by another Experiment I made, it appears, that the supervening
of that pressure sufficed to cause that Cohesion. For, in prosecution of one of
the lately mentioned Trials, having found, that when the Receiver was well
exhausted, two Marbles, though considerably broad, being laid upon one another
after the requisite manner, their adhesion was, if any at all, so weak, that
the uppermost would be easily drawn up from off the other; we laid them again
one upon the other, and then letting the external Air flow into the Receiver,
we found, according to expectation, that the Marbles now cohered well, and we
could not raise the uppermost but accompanied with the lowermost. But I am
sensible, I have detained you too long upon the single Experiment of the
Marbles: And though I hope the stress Mr. Hobbes lays on it will plead my
excuse, yet to make your Patience some amends, I shall be the more brief in the
other particulars that remain to be considered in his Dialogue De Vacuo. And
'twill not be difficult for me to keep my promise without injuring my Cause,
since almost all these particulars being but the same which he has already
alleged in his Dialogue De Natura Aeris, and I soon after answered in my
Examen of that Dialogue, I shall need but to refer you to the passages where
you may find these Allegations examined, only subjoyning here some Reflections
upon those few and slight things, that he has added in his Problems De Vacuo.


A. I may then, I suppose, read to you the next passage to that long one, you
have hitherto been considering, and it is this: Ad Vacuum nunc revertor: Quas
causas sine suppositione Vacui redditurus es illorum effectuum, qui ostenduntur
per Machinam illam quae est in Collegio Greshamensi?


B. Machina illa --


B. Stop here, I beseech you, a little, that, before we go any further, I may
take notice to you of a couple of things that will concern our subsequent
Discourse.

Whereof the first is, that it appears by Mr. Hobbes's Dialogue about the Air,
that the Explications he there gave of some of the Phenomenon of the Machina
Boyliana, were directed partly against the Virtuosi, that have since been
honored with the Title of the Royal Society, and partly against the Author of
that Engine, as if the main thing therein designed were to prove a Vacuum. And
since he now repeats the same explications, I think it necessary to say again,
that if he either takes the Society or me for professed Vacuists, he mistakes,
and shoots beside the mark; for, neither they nor I have ever yet declared
either for or against a Vacuum.

And the other thing I would observe to you, is, that Mr. Hobbes seems not to
have rightly understood, or at least not to have sufficiently heeded in what
chiefly consists the advantage, which the Vacuists may make of our Engine
against him: For, whereas in diverse places he is very solicitous to prove, that
the cavity of our Pneumatical Receiver is not altogether empty, the Vacuists
may tell him, that since he asserts the absolute plenitude of the World, he
must, as indeed he does, reject not only great Vacuities, but also those very
small and interspersed ones, that they suppose to be intercepted between the
solid corpuscles of other bodies, particularly of the Air: So that it would not
confute them to prove, that in our Receiver, when most diligently exhausted,
there is not one great and absolute Vacuity, or, as they speak, a Vacuum
coacervatum, since smaller and disseminated Vacuities would serve their turn.
And therefore they may think their Pretensions highly favored, as by several
particular effects, so by this general Phenomenon of our Engine, that it
appears by several Circumstances, that the Common or Atmospherical Air, which,
before the pump is set a work, possessed the whole cavity of our Receiver, far
the greatest part is by the intervention of the pump made to pass out of the
cavity into the open Air, without being able, at least for a little while, to
get in again; and yet it does not appear by any thing alleged by Mr. Hobbes,
that any other body succeeds to fill adequately the places deserted by such a
multitude of Aerial corpuscles.


A. If I ghess aright, by those words, (viz. it appears not by any thing
alleged by Mr. Hobbes,) you design to intimate, that you would not in general
prejudice the Plenists.


B. Your conjecture was well founded: For I think diverse of them, and
particularly the Cartesians, who suppose a subtle Matter or Ether fine enough
to permeate glass, though our common Air cannot do it, have not near so
difficult a task to avoid the Arguments the Vacuists may draw from our Engine,
as Mr. Hobbes, who, without having recourse to the porosity of glass, which
indeed is impervious to common Air, strives to solve the Phenomenon, and prove
our Receiver to be always perfectly full, and therefore as full at any one time
as at any other of common or Atmospherical Air, as far as we can judge of his
opinion by the tendency or import of his Explications.


A. Yet, if I were rightly informed of an Experiment of yours, Mr. Hobbes may
be thereby reduced either to pass over to the Vacuists, or to acknowledge some
Aetherial or other matter more subtle than Air, and capable of passing through
the pores of glass; and therefore, to show your self impartial between the
Vacuists and their Adversaries in this Controversy, I hope you will not refuse
to gratify the Plenists by giving your friends a more particular account of
the Experiment.


B. I know which you mean, and remember it very well. For, though I long since
devised it, yet having but the other day had occasion to peruse the Relation I
writ down of one of the best Trials, I think I can repeat it, almost in the
very words, which, if I mistake not, were these:

There was taken a Bubble of thin white glass, about the bigness of a Nutmeg,
with a very slender stem, of about four or five Inches long, and of the bigness
of a Crows-quill. The end of the Quill being held in the flame of a Lamp blown
with a pair of Bellows, was readily and well sealed up, and presently the
globous part of the glass, being held by the stem, was kept turning in the
flame, 'till it was red hot and ready to melt; then being a little removed from
the flame, as the included Air began to lose of its agitation and spring, the
external Air manifestly and considerably pressed in one of the sides of the
Bubble. But the glass being again, before the cold could crack it, held as
before in the flame, the rarefied Air distended and plump'd up the Bubble;
which being the second time removed from the flame, was the second time
compressed; and, being the third time brought back to the flame, swelled as
before, and removed, was again compressed, (either this time or the last by two
distinct cavities;) 'till at length, having satisfied our selves, that the
included Air was capable of being condensed or dilated without the ingress or
egress of Air (properly so called) we held the Bubble so long in the flame,
strengthened by nimble blasts, that not only it had its sides plump'd up, but a
hole violently broken in it by the over-rarified Air, which, together with the
former watchfulness, we employed from time to time to discern if it were any
where cracked or perforated, satisfied us that it was till then entire.


A. I confess, I did not readily conceive before, how you could, (as I was told
you had,) make a solid Vessel, wherein there was no danger of the Aires getting
in or out, whose cavity should be still possessed with the same Air, and yet the
Vessel be made by turns bigger and lesser. And, though I presently thought upon
a well stopped bladder, yet I well foresaw, that a distrustful Adversary might
make some Objections, which are by your way of proceeding obviated, and the
Experiment agrees with your Doctrine in showing, how impervious we may well
think your thick Pneumatick Receivers are to common Air, since a thin glass
Bubble, when its pores were opened or relaxed by flame, would not give passage
to the Springy particles of the Air, though violently agitated; for if those
particles could have got out of the pores, they never would have broke the
Bubble, as at length a more violent degree of Heat made them do; nor probably
would the Compression, that afterward insued of the Bubble by the ambient Air,
be checked near so soon, if those Springy Corpuscles had not remained within to
make the resistance. Methinks, one may hence draw a new proof of what I
remember you elsewhere teach, that the Spring of the Air may be much
strengthened by Heat. For, in our case, the Spring of the Air was thereby
enabled to expand the comprest glass, it was imprisoned in, in spite of the
resisting pressure of the external Air; and yet, that this pressure was
considerable, appears by this, that the weight of so small a Column of
Atmospherical Air, as could bear upon the Bubble, was able to press in the
heated glass, in spite of the resistance of its tenacity and arched figure.


B. Yet that which I mainly designed in this Experiment was, (if I were able)
to show and prove at once, by an Instance not liable to the ordinary
exceptions, the true Nature of Rarefaction and Condensation, at least of the
Air. For, to say nothing of the Peripatetick Rarefaction and Condensation,
strictly so called, which I scruple not to declare, I think to be physically
inconceptible or impossible; it is plain by our Experiment, that, when the
Bubble, after the Glass had been first thrust in toward the Center, was
expanded again by heat, the included Air possessed more room than before, and
yet it could perfectly fill no more room than formerly, each Aerial Particle
taking up, both before and after the heating of the Bubble, a portion of space
adequate to its own bulk; so that in the Cavity of the expanded Bubble we must
admit either Vacuities interspersed between the Corpuscles of the Air, or that
some fine Particles of the Flame, or other subtle matter, came in to fill up
those Intervals, which matter must have entered the Cavity of the Glass at its
pores: And afterward, when the red-hot Bubble was removed from the flame, it
is evident, that, since the grosser particles of the Air could not get through
the Glass, which they were not able to do, even when vehemently agitated by an
ambient Flame, the Compression of the Bubble, and the Condensation of the Air,
which was necessarily consequent upon it, could not, supposing the Plenitude of
the World, be performed without squeezing out some of the subtle matter
contained in the cavity of the Bubble, whence it could not issue but at the
pores of the Glass. But I will no longer detain you from Mr. Hobbes his
Explications of the Machina Boyliana; to the first of which you may now, if you
please, advance.


A. The passage I was going to read, when you interrupted me, was this:


B. Machina illa eosdem effectus producit, quos produceret in loco non magno
magnus inclusus ventus.


A. Quomodo ingreditur istuo ventus? Machinam nosti Cylindrum esse cavum,
sneum, in quem protruditur Cylindrus alius solidus ligneus, coriotectus, (quem
suctorem dicunt) it a exquisite congruens, ut ne minimus quidem Aer inter
corium and aes intrare (ut putant) possit.


B. Scio, and quo Suctor facilius intrudi possit, foramen quoddam est in
superiori part Cylindri, per quod Aer (qui suctoris ingressum alioqui impedire
possit) emittatur. Quod foramen aperire possunt and clandere quoties usus
postulat. Est etiam in Cylindri cavi recessu summo datus aditus Aeri in globum
concavum Vitreum, quem etiam aditum clavicula obturare and aperire possunt
quoties volunt. Denique in globo vitreo summo relinquitur foramen satis amplum,
(clavicula item claudendum and recludendum) ut in illum quae volunt immittere
possint, experiendi causa


B. The imaginary wind to which Mr. Hobbes here ascribes the effects of our
Engine, he formerly had recourse to in the 13th page of his Dialogue, and I
have sufficiently answered that passage of it in the 45th and 46th pages of my
Examen, to which I therefore refer you.


A. I presume, you did not overlook the comparison Mr. Hobbes annexes to what I
last read out of his Problems, since he liked the conceit so well, that we meet
with it in this place again, though he had formerly printed it in his Dialogue
De Natura Aeris. The words (as you see) are these: Tota denique Machina non
multum differt, si naturam ejus spectes, a Sclopeto ex Sambuco, quo pueri se
delectant, imitantes Sclopetos militum, nisi quod major sit, and majori art
fabricatus, and pluris constet.


B. I could scarce, for the reason you give, avoid taking notice of it. And if
Mr. Hobbes intended it for a piece of Ralliery, I willingly let it pass, and
could easily forgive him a more considerable attempt than this, to be revenged
on an Engine that has destroyed several of his opinions: But, if he seriously
meant to make a Physical Comparison, I think he made a very improper one. For,
not to urge, that one may well doubt how he knows, that in the enclosed cavity
of his Pot-gun, there is a very vehement wind, (since that does not necessarily
follow from the compreffion of the included Air:) In Mr. Hobbes's Instrument,
the Air, being forcibly comprest, has an endeavor to expand it self, and when
it is able to surmount the resistance of its prison, that part that is first
disjoined is forcibly thrown outward; whereas in our Engine it appears by the
passage lately cited of our Examen, that the Air is not comprest but expanded
in our Receiver, and if an intercourse be opened, or the Vessel be not strong
enough, the outward Air violently rushes in: And if the Receiver chance to
break, the fragments of the glass are not thrown outward, but forced inwards.


A. So that, whether or no Mr. Hobbes could have pitched upon a Comparison more
suitable to his Intentions, he might easily have employed one more suitable to
the Phenomenon.


B. I presume, you will judge it the less agreeable to the Phenomenon, if I
here subjoyn an Experiment, that possibly you will not dislike; which I devised
to show, not only that in our exhausted Receivers there is no such strong
endeavor outward, as most of Mr. Hobbes's Explications of the things that
happen in them are built upon, but that the weight of the Atmospherical Air,
when it is not resisted by the counterpressure of any internal Air, is able to
perform what a weight of many pounds would not suffice to do.


A. I shall the more willingly learn an Experiment to this purpose, because in
your Receivers, the rigidity of the glass keeps us from seeing, by any manifest
change of its figure, whether, if it could yield without breaking, it would be
pressed in, as your Hypothesis requires.


B. The desires to obviate that very difficulty, for their satisfaction, that
had not yet penetrated the grounds of our Hypothesis, made me think of
employing, instead of a Receiver of Glass, one of a stiff and tough, but yet
somewhat flexible, Metal. And accordingly having provided a new Pewter
Porrenger, and whelmed it upside down upon an Iron plate fastened to (the upper
end of) our Pneumatical Pump, we carefully fastened by Cement the orifice to
the plate, and though the inverted Vessel, by reason of its stiffness and
thickness and the convexity of its superficies, were strong enough to have
supported a great weight without changing its figure; yet, as soon as by an
exsuction or two the remaining part of the included Air was brought to such a
degree of expansion, that its weakened Spring was able to afford but little
assistance to the tenacity and firmness of the Metal, the weight of the pillar
of the incumbent Atmosphere (which by reason of the breadth of the Vessel was
considerably wide also) did presently and notably depress the upper part of the
Porringer, both lessening its capacity and changing its figure; so that instead
of the Unequal surface, the Receiver had before, it came to a Concave one, which
new figure was somewhat, though not much, increased by the further withdrawing
of the included and already rarefied Air. The Experiment succeeded also with an
other common Porringer of the same Metal. But in such kind of Vessels, made
purposely of Iron plates, it will sometimes succeed and sometimes not,
according to the Diameter of the vessel and the thickness of the plate, which
was sometimes strong enough and sometimes too weak to resist the pressure of
the incumbent Air. And sometimes I found also, that the vessel would be thrust
in, not at the top but side-ways, in case that side were the only part that
were made too thin to resist the pressure of the Ambient; which Phenomenon I
therefore take notice of, that you may see, (...) that powerful pressure may be
exercised laterally as well as perpendicularly.

Perhaps this Experiment, and that I lately recited of an Hermetically sealed
Bubble, by their fitness to disprove Mr. Hobbes 's Doctrine, may do somewhat
toward the letting him see, that he might have spared that not over-modest and
wary expression, where speaking of the Gentlemen that meet at Gresham-College,
(of whom I pretend not to be one of the chief) he is pleased to say,
Experimenta faciant quantum volunt, nisi Principiis utantur meis nihil
proficient. But let us, if you please, pass on to what he further alleges to
prove, that the space in the exhausted Receiver, which the Vacuists suppose to
be partly empty, is full of Air. (Video (says A.) si suctor trudatur usque ad
fundum Cylindri Aenei, obturenturque for amina, Secuturum esse, dum suctor
retrahitur, locum in Cylindro cavo relictum fore vacuum. Nam ut in locum ejus
succedat Aer, est impossible. To which B. answers, Credo equidem, suctorem cum
Cylindri cavi superficie satis arcte cohaerere ad excludendum stramen and
plumam, non autem Aerem neque Aquam. Cogita enim, quod non ita accurate
congruerent, quin undiquaque interstitium relinqueretur, quantum tenuissimi
capilli capax esset. Retracto ergo suctore, tantum impelleretur Aeris, quantum
viribus illis conveniret quibus Aer propter suctoris Retractionem reprimitur,
idque sine omni difficult ate sensibili. Quanto autem interstitium illud minus
esset, tantum ingrederetur Aer velocius: Vel si contactus sit, sed non per
omnia puncta, etiam tunc intrabit Aer, modo suctor majore vi retrahatur.
Postremo, etsi contactus ubique exactissimus sit, vi tamen satis aucta per
cochleam ferream, tum corium cedet, tum ipsum es; atque ita quoque ingredietur
Aer. Credin' tu, possibile esse duas superficies ita exact componere, ut has
compositas esse supponunt illi; aut corium ita durum esse, ut Aeri, qui
Cochleae open incutitur, nihil omnino cedat? Corium quanquam optimum admittit
aquam, ut ipse scis, si forte fecisti unquam iter vento and pluvia (...). It
aque dubitare non potes, quin retractus Suctor tantum Aeris in Cylindrum
adeoque in ipsum Recipiens incutiat, quantum sufficit ad locum semper relictum
perfect implendum. Effectus ergo, qui oritur a Retractione suctoris, alius non
est quam ventus, ventus (inquam) vchementissimus, qui ingreditur undiquaque
inter Suctoris superficiem convexam, and Cylindri aenei concavam, proceditque
(versa clavicula) in cavitatem globi Vitrei, sive (ut vocatur) Recipientis.

The Substance of this Ratiocination having been already proposed by Mr. Hobbes
in his Dialogue of the Air, the 11th page, I long since answered it in the 30th
and some of the following pages of my Examen; and therefore I shall only now
take notice in transitu of some slight whether additions or variations, that
occur in what you have been reading. And, first, I see no probability in what
he gratis asserts, that so thick a Cylinder of Brass, as made the chief part of
the pump of our Engine, should yield to the Sucker, that was moved up and down
in it, though by the help of an Iron rack; and whereas he adds, that the
leather, that surrounds the more solid part of the Sucker, would yield to such
a force; it seems, that that compression of the leather should by thrusting the
solid parts into the pores make the leather rather less than more fit to give
passage to the Air; nor would it however follow, notwithstanding Mr. Hobbes's
Example, that, because a Body admits Water, it must be pervious to Air: For I
have several times, by ways elsewhere taught, made Water penetrate the pores of
Bladders, and yet Bladders resist the passage of the Air so well, that even
when Air included in them was sufficiently rarefied by Heat, or by our Engine,
it was necessary for the Air to break them before it could get out; which would
not have been, if it could have escaped through their pores. What Mr. Hobbes
inculcates here again concerning his ventus vehementissimus, you will find
answered in the place of my Examen I lately directed you to.


A. We may then proceed to Mr. Hobbes's next Explication, which he proposes in
these terms:


A. Causam video nunc unius ex Machinae mirabilibus, nimirum cur Suctor,
postquam est aliquatenus retractus and deinde amissus, subito recurrit ad
Cylindri summitatem. Nam Aer, qui vi magna fuit impulsus, rursus per
repercussionem ad externa vi eadem revertitur.


B. Atque hoc quidem Argumenti satis est etiam solum, quod locus a suctore
relictus non est Vacuus. Quid enim aut attrahere aut impellere suctorem potuit
ad locum illum unde retractus erat, si Cylindrus fuisset vacuus? Namut Aeris
pondus aliquod id efficere potuisset, falsum esse satis supra demonstravi ab eo
quod Aer in Aere gravitare non potest. Nosti etiam, quod cum e recipiente Aerem
omnem (ut illi loquuntur) exegerint, possunt tamen trans vitrum id quod intus
fit videre, and sonum, si quis fiat, inde audire. Id quod solum, etsi nullum
aliud Argumentum esset (sunt autem multa,) ad probandum, nullum esse in
Recipiente Vacuum, abunde sufficit.


B. Here are several things joined together, which the Author had before
separately alleged in his oftenmention'd Dialogue. The first is, the Cause he
assigns of the ascension of the Sucker forcibly deprest to the bottom of the
exhausted Cylinder, and then let alone by him that pumpt; to which might be
added, that this ascension succeeded, when the Sucker was clogged with an
hundred pound weight. This Explication of Mr. Hobbes you will find examined in
the 33th and 39th, and some ensuing pages of my Discourse. And as to his
denying, that the weight or pressure of the Air could drive up the Sucker in
that Phenomenon, because the Air does not weigh in Air, we may see the
contrary largely proved in diverse places of my Examen, and more particularly
and expressly in the four first pages of the third Chapter. And whereas he says
in the last place, that the visibility of Bodies included in our Receivers, and
the propagation of Sound, (which, by the way, is not to be understood of all
Sound that may be heard, though made in the exhausted Receiver,) are alone
sufficient Arguments to prove no Vacuum: I have considered that passage in the
answer I made to the like allegation in the 45th page of the Examen; and shall
only observe here, that, since the Vacuists can prove, that much of the Air is
pumpt out of the exhausted Receiver, and will pretend, that, notwithstanding
many interspersed Vacuities, there may be in the Receiver corporeal substance
enough to transmit Light and stronger Sounds, Mr. Hobbes has not performed what
he pretended, if he have but barely proved, that there may be Substances
capable of conveying Light and Sound in the cavity of our Receiver, since he
triumphantly asserts, Nullum esse in Recipienti Vacuum. But we may leave Mr.
Hobbes and his Adversaries to dispute out this point, and go on to the next
passage.


A. Which follows in these words:

Ad illud autem, quod si Vesica aliquatenus inflata in Recipiente includatur,
paulo post per exuctionem aeris inflatur vehementius and dirumpitur, quid
respondes?


B. Motus partium Aeris undiquaque concurrentium velocissimus and per concursum
in spatiis brevissimis numeroque infinitis gyrationis velocissimae vesicam in
locis innumerabilibus simul and vi magna, instar totidem terebrarum, penetrat,
praesertim si vesica, antequam immittatur, quo magis resistat aliquatenus
inflat a sit. Postquam autem Aer penetrans semel ingressus est, facile cogitare
potes, quo pacto deinceps vesicam tendet, and tandem rumpet. Verum si antequam
rumpatur, versa clavicula, Aer externus admittatur, videbis vesicam propter
vehementiam motus temperatam diminuta tensione rugosiorem. Nam id quoque
observatum est. Jam si haec, quam dixi, causa minus tihi videatur verisimilis,
vide an tu aut alius quicunque imaginari potest, quo pacto vesica distendi and
rumpi possit a viribus Vacui, id est, Nihili.


B. This Explication Mr. Hobbes gave us in the 19th page of his Dialogue De
Natura Aeris, and you may find it at large confuted in the latter part of the
third Chapter of my Examen. Nor does, what he here says in the close about the
Vires Vacui or Nihili, deserve to detain us, since there is no reason at all,
that the Vacuists should ascribe to nothing a power of breaking a Bladder, of
whose rupture the Spring of the included Air supplies them so easily with a
sufficient Cause.

After what Mr. Hobbes has said of the breaking of a Bladder, he proceeds to an
Experiment which he judges of affinity with it, and his Academian having
proposed this Question:

Unde fit ut animalia tam cito, nimirum spatio quatuor minutorum horae, in
recipiente interficiantur?

For answer to it our Author says:


B. Nonne animalia sic inclusa insugunt in Pulmones Aerem vehementissime motum?
Quo motu necesse est ut transitus sanguinis ab uno ad alterum cordis
ventriculum interceptus, non multo post sistatur. Cessatio autem sanguinis,
Mors est. Possunt tamen animalia cessante sanguine reviviscere, si Aer externus
satis mature intromittatur, vel ipsa in Aerem temperatum, antequam refrixerit
sanguis, extrahantur.

This Explication is not probable enough, to oblige me to add any thing about
it to what I have said in the 49th and the two following pages of my Examen;
especially the most vehement motion, ascribed to the Air in the Receiver,
having been before proved to be an Imaginary thing. You may therefore, if you
please, take notice of the next Explication.

[Idem Aer (says he) in Recipiente Carbones ardentes extinguit, sed and illi,
si, dum satis calidi sunt, eximantur, relucebunt. Notissimum est, quod in
fodinis Carbonum terreorum (cujus rei experimentum ipse vidi) saepissime e
lateribus foveae ventus quidam undiquaque exit, qui fossores interficit
ignemque extinguit, qui tamen reviviscunt si satis cito ad Aerem liberum
extrahantur.]

This Comparison which Mr. Hobbes here summarily makes, he more fully displayed
in his Dialogue De Natura Aeris, and I considered, what he there alleged, in
the 52th page and the two next of my Examen. And, though I will not contradict
Mr. Hobbes in what he historically asserts in this passage; yet I cannot but
somewhat doubt, whether he mingles not his conjecture with the bare matter of
fact. For, though I have with some curiosity visited Mines in more places than
one, and proposed Questions to Men that have been conversant in other Mines,
both elsewhere and in England (and particularly in Derbyshire where Mr. Hobbes
lived long;) yet I could never find, that any such odd and vehement wind, as
Mr. Hobbes ascribes the Phenomenon to, had been by them observed to kill the
Diggers, and extinguish well-lighted Coals themselves: And indeed, it seems
more likely, that the damp, by its tenacity or some peculiarly malign quality,
did the mischief, than a wind, of which I found not any notice taken;
especially since we see, what vehement winds Men will be able to endure for a
long time, without being near-kill'd by them; and that it seems very odd, that
a wind, that Mr. Hobbes does not observe to have blown away the Coals, that
were let down, should be able (instead of kindling them more fiercely) to blow
them out.


A. The last Experiment of your Engine, that your Adversary mentions in these
Problems, is delivered in this passage:


A. Si phialam aquae in Recipiens dimiseris, exucto Aere bullire videbis aquam.
Quid ad hoc Respondebis?


B. Credo sane in tanta Aeris motitatione saltaturam esse aquam, sed ut
calefiat nondum audivi. Sed imaginabile non est, Saltationem illam a Vacuo
nasci posse.


B. This Phenomenon he likewise took notice of, and attempted to explicate in
his abovementioned Dialogue, which gave me occasion in the 46th and 47th pages
of my Examen, to show how unlikely it is, that the vehement motion of the Air
should be the cause of it; but he here tells us, that it is not imaginable, that
this dancing of the water (as he is pleased to call it) proceeds from a vacuum,
nor do I know any Man that ever pretended, that a vacuum was the efficient
cause of it. But the Vacuists perhaps will tell him, that, though the bubbling
of the water be not an effect of a vacuum, it may be a proof of it against him;
for they will tell him, that it has been formerly proved, that a great part of
the Atmospherical Air is by pumping removed out of our exhausted Receiver, and
consequently can no more, as formerly, press upon the surface of the water. Nor
does Mr. Hobbes show what succeeds in the room of it; and therefore it will be
allowable, for them to conclude against him (though not perhaps against the
Cartesians) that there are a great many interspersed Vacuities left in the
Receiver, which are the occasion, though not the proper efficient cause, of the
Phenomenon. For they will say, that the Springy Particles of the yet included
Air, having room to unbend themselves in the spaces deserted by the Air that
was pumpt out, the Aerial and Springy Corpuscles, that lay concealed in the
pores of the water, being now freed from the wonted pressure that kept them
coil'd up in the liquor, expanded themselves into numerous bubbles, which,
because of their comparative lightness, are extruded by the water, and many of
them appear to have risen from the bottom of it. And Mr. Hobbes's vehement
wind, to produce the several Circumstances of this Experiment, must be a
lasting one. For, after the agitation of the Pump has been quite left off,
provided the external Air be kept from getting in, the bubbles will sometimes
continue to rise for an hour after. And that which agrees very well with our
Explication and very ill with that of Mr Hobbes's, is, that, when by having
continued to pump a competent time, the water has been freed from the Aerial
particles that lurked in it before, though one continue to pump as lustily as
he did, yet the water will not at all be covered with bubbles as it was, the
Air that produced them being spent; though, according to Mr. Hobbes's
Explication, the wind in the Receiver continuing, the dance of the water should
continue too.


A. I easily ghess, by what you have said already, what you may say of that
Epiphonema wherewith Mr. Hobbes (in his 18th page) concludes the Explications
of the Phenomenon of your Engine. [Spero jam te certum esse, says he, nullum
esse Machinae illius Phenomenon, quo demonstrari potest ullum in Universo
locum dari corpore omni vacuum.]


B. If you ghess'd aright, you ghess'd that I would say, that as to the
Phenomenon of my Engine, my business was to prove, that he had not substituted
good Explications of them in the place of mine, which he was pleased to reject.
And as for the proving a Vacuum by the Phenomenon of my Engine, though I
declared that was not the thing intended, yet I shall not wonder, that the
Vacuists should think those Phenomenon give them an advantage against Mr.
Hobbes. For, though in the passage recited by you he speak more cautiously than
he is won to do, yet, by what you may have already observed in his
Argumentations, the way he takes to solve the Phenomenon of our Engine, is by
contending, that our Receiver, when we say it is almost exhausted, is as full
as ever (for he will have it perfectly full,) of common Air; which is a conceit
so contrary to I know not how many Phenomenon, that I do not remember I have
met with or heard of any Naturalist, whether Vacuist or Plenist, that having
read my Physico-Mechanical Experiments and his Dialogue, has embraced his
opinion.


A. After what you have said, I will not trouble you with what he subjoyns
about Vacuum in general, where having made his Academian say, [Mundum scis
finitum esse, and per Consequens vacuum esse oportere totum illud Spatium quod
est extra mundum infinitum. Quid impedit quo minus vacuum illud cum Aere
mundano permisceatur?] He answers: De rebus transmundanis nihil scio. For I
know, that it concerns not you to take notice of it. But possibly the Vacuists
will think, he fathers upon them an Impropriety they would not be guilty of,
making them speak, as if they thought, the ultra-mundan Vacuum were a real
Substance that might be brought into this World and mingled with our Air. And
since, for ought I know, Mr. Hobbes might have spared this passage, if he had
not designed it should introduce the slighting answer he makes to it; I shall
add, that by the account Mr. Hobbes has given of several Phenomenon within the
World, it is possible, that the Vacuists may believe his Profession of knowing
nothing of things beyond it.

After the Experimenta Boyliana (as your other Adversary calls them;) Mr:
Hobbes proceeds to the Torricellian Experiment, of which he thus discourses:


A. Quid de experimento censes Torricelliano, probante Vacuum per Argentum
vivum hoc modo: est in seq. figurae ad A, pelvis sive aliud vas, and in eo
Argentum vivum usque ad B; est autem C D tubus vitreus concavus repletus quoque
Argento vivo. Hunc tubum si digito obturaveris erexerisque in vase A, manumque
abstuleris, descendet Argentum vivum a C; verum non effundetur totum in pelvim,
sed sistetur in distantia quadam, puta in D. Nonne ergo necessarium est, ut
pars tubi inter C and D sit vacua? Non enim puto negabis quin superficies tubi
concava and Argenti vivi convexa se mutuo exquisitissime contingant.


B. Ego neque nego contactum, neque vim Consequentiae intelligo.

By which passage it seems that he still persists in the solution of this
Experiment, which he gave in his Dialogue De Natura Aeris, and formerly did,
for the main, either propose, or adopt, in his Elements of Philosophy.


B. This opinion or explication of Mr. Hobbes I have, as far as concerns me,
considered in the 36th, and some ensuing pages, of my Examen, to which it may
well suffice me to refer you. But yet let me take notice of what he now
alleges:


B. Si quis (says he) in Argentum vivum, quod in vase est, vesicam immerserit
inflatam, nonne illa amota manu emerget?


A. It a certe, etsi esset vesica ferrea vel ex materia quacunque praeter Aurum.


B. Vides igitur ab Aere penetrari posse Argentum vivum.


A. Etiam, and quidem illa ipsa vi quam a pondere accipit Argenti vivi.

I confess this Allegation did a little surprise me: It concerned Mr. Hobbes to
prove, that as much Air, as was displaced by the descending Mercury, did at the
orifice of the Tube, immersed in stagnant Mercury, invisibly ascend to the
upper part of the pipe. To prove this he tells us, that a bladder full of Air
being depressed in Quicksilver, will, when the hand that depressed it is
removed, be squeezed up by the very weight of the Mercury, whence it follows,
that Air may penetrate Quicksilver. But I know not, who ever denied, that Air
environed with Quicksilver may thereby be squeezed upwards; but, since even
very small bubbles of Air may be seen to move in their passage through Mercury,
I see not, how this Example will at all help the Proposer of it. For it is by
mere accident, that the Air included in the bladder comes to be buoyed up,
because the bladder it self is so; and if it were filled with Water instead of
Air, or with Stone instead of Water, it would nevertheless emerge, as himself
confesses it would do, if it were made of Iron, or of any Matter besides Gold,
because all other Bodies are lighter in specie than Quicksilver. But since the
emersion of the bladder is manifest enough to the sight, I see not how it will
serve Mr. Hobbes's turn, who is to prove that the Air gets into the
Torricellian Tube invisibly; since it is plain, that even heedful observation
can make our Eyes discover no such trajection of the Air; which (to add that
inforcement of our Argument) must not only pass unseen through the sustained
Quicksilver, but must likewise unperceivedly dive, in spite of its comparative
lightness, beneath the surface of the ponderous stagnant Mercury, to get in at
the orifice of the erected Tube. But let us, if you please, hear the rest of
his Discourse about this Experiment.


A. Though it be somewhat prolix, yet, according to my custom hitherto, I will
give it you verbatim.


B. Simul atque Argentum vivum descenderit ad D, altius erit in vase A quam
ante, nimirum plus erit Argenti vivi in vase quam erat ante descensum, tanto
quantum capit pars tubi C, D. Tanto quoque minus erit Aeris extra tubum quam
ante erat. Ille autem Aer qui ab Argento vivo loco suo extrusus est, (supposita
universi plenitudine) quo abire potest nisi ad eum locum, qui in tubo inter C
and D a descensu Argenti vivi relinquebatur? sed qua, inquies, via in illum
locum successurus est? Qua, nisi per ipsum corpus Argenti vivi Aerem urgentis?
Sicut enim omne grave liquidum, sui ipsius pondere, Aerem, quem descendendo
prennt, ascendere cogit (si via alia non detur) per suum ipsius corpus; ita
quoque Aerem quem premit ascendendo, (si via alia non detur) per suum ipsius
corpus transire cogit. Manifestum igitur est, supposita mundi plenitudine posse
Aerem externum ab ipsa gravitate Argenti vivi cogi in locum illum inter C and
D. Itaque phenomenon illud necessitatem vacus nondemonstrat. Quoniam autem
corpus Argenti vivi penetrationi, quae fit ab Aere, non nihil resistit, and
ascensioni Argenti vivi in vase A resistit Aer; quando illae duae resistentiae
aequales erunt, tunc in tubo sistetur alicubi Argentum vivum; atque ibi est D.


B. In answer to this Explication I have in my Examen proposed diverse things,
which you may there meet with: And indeed his Explication has appeared so
improbable to those that have written of this Experiment, that I have not found
it embraced by any of them, though, when diverse of them opposed it, the
Phenomenon of our Engine were not yet divulged. Not then needlessly to repeat
what has been said already, I shall on this occasion only add one Experiment,
that I afterward made, and it was this: Having made the Torricellian
Experiment (in a straight Tube) after the ordinary way, we took a little piece
of a fine Bladder, and raising the Pipe a little in the stagnant Mercury, but
not so high as the surface of it, the piece of Bladder was dexterously conveyed
in the Quicksilver, so as to be applied by ones finger to the immersed orifice
of the Pipe, without letting the Air get into the Cavity of it; then the
Bladder was tied very straight and carefully to the lower end of the Pipe,
whose orifice (as we said) it covered before, and then the Pipe being slowly
lifted out of the stagnant Mercury, the impendent Quicksilver appeared to lean
but very lightly upon the Bladder, being so near an exact Aequilibrium with the
Atmosperical Air, that, if the Tube were but a very little inclined, whereby
the gravitation of the Quicksilver, being not so perpendicular, came to be
somewhat lessened, the Bladder would immediately be driven into the orifice of
the Tube, and to the Eye, placed without, appear to have acquired a concave
superficies instead of the unequal it had before. And when the Tube was
re-erected, the Bladder would no longer appear sucked in, but be again somewhat
protuberant. And if, when the Mercury in the Pipe was made to descend a little
below its station into the stagnant Mercury, if, I say, at that nick of time
the piece of Bladder were nimbly and dexterously applied, as before, to the
immersed orifice, and fastened to the sides of the Pipe, upon the lifting the
Instrument out of the stagnant Mercury, the Cylinder of that Liquor being now
somewhat short of its due height, was no longer able fully to counterpoise the
weight of the Atmospherical Air, which consequently, though the Glass were held
in an erected posture, would press up the Bladder into the orifice of the Pipe,
and both make and maintain there a Cavity sensible both to the Touch and the
Eye.


A. What did you mainly drive at in this Experiment?


B. To satisfy some Ingenious Men, that were more diffident of, than skilful
in, Hydrostaticks, that the pressure of the external Air is capable of
sustaining a Cylinder of 29 or 30 Inches of Mercury, and upon a small lessening
of the gravitation of that ponderous liquor, to press it up higher into the
Tube. But a farther use may be made of it against Mr. Hobbes's pretension. For,
when the Tube is again erected, the Mercury will subside as low as at first,
and leave as great a space as formerly was left deserted at the top; into which
how the Air should get to fill it, will not appear easy to them, that, like
you and me, know by many trials, that a Bladder will rather be burst by Air
than grant it passage. And if it should be pretended, either that some Air from
without had yet got through the Bladder, or that the Air, that they may presume
to have been just before included between the Bladder and the Mercury, made its
way from the lower part of the Instrument to the upper; it is obvious to answer,
That it is no way likely, that it should pass all along the Cylinder unseen by
us; since, when there are really any Aerial Bubbles, though smaller than Pins
heads, they are easily discernible. And in our case, there is no such
resistance of the Air to the ascension of the stagnant Mercury, as Mr. Hobbes
pretends in the Torricellian Experiment made the usual way.


A. But, whatever becomes of Mr. Hobbes's Explication of the Phenomenon; yet
may not one still say, that it affords no advantage to the Vacuists against him?


B. Whether or no it do against other Plenists, I shall not now consider; but I
doubt, the Vacuists will tell Mr. Hobbes, that he is fain in two places of the
Explication, we have read, to suppose the Plenitude of the World, that is, to
beg the thing in question, which it is not to be presumed they will allow.


A. But may not Mr. Hobbes say, that it is as lawful for him to suppose a
Plenum, as for them to suppose a Vacuum.


B. I think he may justly say so; but it is like they will reply, that, in their
way of explicating the Torricellian Experiment, they do not suppose a Vacuum at
to Air, but prove it. For they show a great space, that having been just before
filled with Quicksilver, is now deserted by it, though it appeared not, that
any Air succeeded in its room; but rather, that the upper end of the Tube is
either totally or near totally so devoid of Air, that the Quicksilver may
without resistance, by barely inclining the Tube, be made to fill it to the
very top: Whereas Mr. Hobbes is fain to have recourse to that which he knows
they deny, the Plenitude of the World, not proving by any sensible Phenomenon,
that there did get in through the Quicksilver Air enough to fill the deserted
part of the Tube, but only concluding, that so much Air must have got in there,
because, the World being full, it could find no room any where else; which the
Vacuists will take for no proof at all, and the Cartesians, though Plenists,
who admit an Etherial matter capable of passing through the pores of Glass,
will, I doubt, look upon but as an improper Explication.


A. I remember on this occasion another Experiment of yours, that seems
unfavourable enough to Mr. Hobbes's Explication, and you will perhaps call it
to mind when I tell you, that 'twas made in a bended Pipe almost filled with
Quicksilver.


B. To see whether we understand one another, I will briefly describe the
Instrument I think you mean. We took a Cylindrical Pipe of Glass, closed at the
upper end, and of that length, that being dexterously bent at some Inches from
the bottom, the shorter leg was made as parallel as we could to the longer: In
this Glass we found an expedient, (for it is not easy to do,) to make the
Torricellian Experiment, the Quicksilver in the shorter leg serving instead of
the stagnant Quicksilver in the usual Baroscope, and the Quicksilver in the
longer leg reaching above that in the shorter about eight or nine and twenty
Inches. Then, by another artifice, the shorter leg, into which the Mercury did
not rise within an Inch of the top, was so ordered, that it could in a trice be
Hermetically sealed, without disordering the Quicksilver. And this is the
Instrument that I ghess you mean.


A. It is so, and I remember, that it is the same with that, which in the
Paradox about Suction you call, whilst the shorter leg remains unsealed, a
Traveling Baroscope. But when I saw you make the Experiment, that leg was
Hermetically sealed, an Inch of Air in its natural or usual consistence being
left in the upper part of it, to which Air you outwardly applied a pair of
heated Tongs.


B. Yet that, which I chiefly aimed at in the Trial, was not the Phenomenon I
perceive you mean; for, my design was, by breaking the Ice for them, to
encourage some, that may have more skill and accommodation than I then had, to
make an attempt that I did not find to have been made by any; namely, to reduce
the Expensive force of Heat in every way included Air, if not in some other
Bodies also, to some kind of measure, and, if 'twere possible, to determine it
by weight. And I presumed, that at least the event of my Trial would much
confirm several Explications of mine, by showing, that Heat is able, as long as
it lasts, very considerably to increase the Spring or pressing power of the
Air. And in this conjecture I was not mistaken; for, having shut up, after the
manner newly recited, a determinate quantity of uncomprest Air, which, (in the
Experiment you saw,) was about one Inch; we warily held a pair of heated Tongs
near the outside of the Glass, (without making it touch the Instrument, for
fear of breaking it,) whereby the Air being agitated was enabled to expand it
self to double its former Dimensions, and consequently had its Spring so
strengthened by Heat, that it was able to raise all the Quicksilver in the
longer leg, and keep up or sustain a Mercurial Cylinder of about nine and
twenty Inches high, when by its expansion it would, if it had not been for the
Heat, have lost half the force of its elasticity. But whatever I design in this
Experiment, pray tell me, what use you would make of it against Mr. Hobbes.


A. I believe, he will find it very difficult to show, what keeps the Mercury
suspended in the longer leg of the Traveling Baroscope, when the shorter leg
is unstopt, at which it may run out; since this Instrument may, as I have
tried, be carried to distant places, where it cannot with probability be
pretended, that any Air has been displaced by the fall of the Quicksilver in
the longer leg, which perhaps fell long before above a mile off. And when the
shorter leg is feal'd, it will be very hard for Mr. Hobbes to show there the
odd motions of the Air, to which he ascribes the Torricellian Experiment. For,
if you warily incline the Instrument, the Quicksilver will rise to the top of
the longer leg, and immediately subside, when the Instrument is again erected,
and yet no Air appears to pass through the Quicksilver interposed between the
ends of the longer and the shorter leg. But that which I would chiefly take
notice of in the Experiment, is, that upon the external application of a hot
Body to the shorter leg of the Baroscope, when 'twas sealed up, the included
Air was expanded from one Inch to two, and so raised the whole Cylinder of
Mercury in the longer leg, and, whilst the heat continued undiminished, kept
it from subsiding again. For, if the Air were able to get unseen through the
body of the Quicksilver, why had it not been much more able, when rarefied by
Heat, to pass through the Quicksilver, than for want of doing so to raise and
sustain so weighty a Cylinder of Mercury? I shall not stay to inquire on this
occasion, how Mr. Hobbes will, according to his Hypothesis, explicate the
rarefaction of the Air to double its former dimensions, and the condensation of
it again; especially since, asserting that part of the upper leg, that is
unfill'd with the Quicksilver, to be perfectly full of Air, he affirms that,
which I doubt he cannot prove, and which may very probably be disproved by the
Experiment you mention in the Discourse about Suction, where you show, to
another purpose, that in a Traveling Baroscope, whose shorter leg is sealed,
if the end of the longer leg be opened, whereby it comes indeed to be filled
with Air, the pressure of that Air will enable the subjacent Mercury notably to
compress the Air included in the shorter leg.


B. I leave Mr. Hobbes to consider what you have objected against his
Explication of the Torricellian Experiment; to which I shall add nothing,
though perhaps I could add much, because I think it may be well spared, and our
Conference has lasted long already.


A. I will then proceed to the last Experiment recited by Mr. Hobbes in his
Problemata de Vacuo.


A. Si Phialam, collum habentem longiusculum, candemque omni Corpore praeter
Aerem vacuam ore sugas, continuoque Phialae os aquae immergas, videbis aquam
aliquousque ascendere in Phialam. Qui fieri hoc potest nisi factum sit Vacuum
ab exuctione Aeris, in cujus locum possit Aqua illa ascendere?


B. Concesso Vacuo, oportet quaedam loca vacua fuisse in illo Aere, etiam qui
erat intra Phialam ante suctionem. Cur ergo non ascendebat Aqua ad ea implenda
absque suctione? Is qui sugit Phialam, neque in ventrem quicquam, neque in
pulmones, neque in os e Phiala exugit. Quid ergo agit? Aerem commovet, and in
partibus ejus conatum sugendo efficit per os exeundi, and non admittendo,
conatum redeundi. Ab his conatibus contrariis componitur circumitio intra
Phialam, and conatus exeundi quaquaversum. Itaque Phialae ore aquae immerso,
Aer in subject am aquam penetrat e Phiala egrediens, and tantundem aquae in
Phialam cogit.

Praeterea vis illa magna suctionis facit, ut sugentis labra cum collo Phialae
aliquando arctissime cohaereant propter contactum exqusitissimum.


B. As to the first Clause of Mr. Hobbes's account of our Phenomenon, the
Vacuists will easily answer his Question by acknowledging, that there were
indeed interspersed Vacuities in the Air contained in the Vial before the
suction; but they will add, there was no reason, why the Water should ascend to
fill them, because, being a heavy body, it cannot rise of it self, but must be
raised by some prevalent weight or pressure, which then was wanting. Besides,
that there being interspersed Vacuities as well in the rest of the Air that was
very near the Water, as in that contained in the Vial, there was no reason, why
the Water should ascend to fill the Vacuities of one portion of Air rather than
those of another. But when once by suction a great many of the Aerial
Corpuscles were made to pass out of the Vial, the Spring of the remaining Air
being weakened, whilst the pressure of the ambient Air, which depends upon its
constant Gravity, is undiminished, the Spring of the internal becomes unable to
resist the weight of the external Air, which is therefore able to impel the
interposed Water with some violence into the Cavity of the Glass, 'till the
Air, remaining in that Cavity, being reduced almost to its usual Density, is
able by its Spring, and the weight of the Water got up into the Vial, to hinder
any more Water from being impelled up. For, as to what Mr. Hobbes affirms,
that, Is qui su git Phialam neque in ventrem quicquam, neque in pulmones, neque
in os quicquam exugit: How it will agree with what he elsewhere delivers about
Suction. I leave him to consider. But I confess, I cannot but wonder at his
confidence, that can positively assert a thing so repugnant to the common
sentiments of Men of all opinions, without offering any proof for it. But I
suppose, they that are by trial acquainted with Sucking, and have felt the Air
come in at their mouths, will prefer their own experience to his authority. And
as to what he adds, that the Person that sucks agitates the Air, and turns it
within the Vial into a kind of circulating wind, that endeavors every where to
get out; I wish, he had shown us by what means a Man that sucks makes this odd
Commotion of the Air; especially in such Vials as I use to employ about the
Experiment, the orifice of whose neck is sometimes less than a Pins head.


A. That there may be really Air extracted by Suction out of a Glass, me thinks
you might argue from an Experiment I saw you make with a Receiver which was
exhausted by your Pump, and consequently by Suction. For I remember, when you
had counterpois'd it with very good Scales, and afterward by turning a
stop-cock, let in the outward Air, there rushed in as much Air to fill the
space that had been deserted by the Air pumpt out, as weighed some scruples
(consisting of twenty grains a piece) though the Receiver were not of the
largest size.


B. You did well to add that Clause; for, the Magdobargic Experiment, mentioned
by the industrious Schottus, having been made with a vast Receiver, the
readmitted Air amounted to a whole ounce and some drachms. But to return to Mr.
Hobbes, I fear not that he will persuade you, that have seen the Experiment he
recites, that as soon as the neck of the Vial is unstopt under water, the Air,
that whitl'd about before, makes a sally out, and forces in as much water. For,
if the orifice be any thing large, you will, instead of feeling an endeavor to
thrust away your finger that stopped it, find the pulp of your finger so thrust
inward, that a Peripatetick would affirm that he felt it sucked in. And that
Intrusion may be the Reason, why the lip of him that sucks is oftentimes
strongly fastened to the orifice of the Vials neck, which Mr. Hobbes ascribes
to a most exquisit contact, but without clearly telling us, how that
extraordinary contact is effected. And when your finger is removed, instead of
perceiving any Air go out of the Vial through the water, (which, if any such
thing happen, you will easily discover by the bubbles,) you shall see the water
briskly spring up in a slender stream to the top of the Vial, which it could
not do, if the Cavity were already full of Air. And to let you see, that, when
the Air does really pass in or out of the Vial immersed under water, it is very
easy to perceive its motions, if you dip the neck of the Vial in water, and
then apply to the globulous part of it either your warm hands or any other
competent Heat, the internal Air being rarefied; you shall see a portion of it,
answerable to the degree of Heat you applied, manifestly pass through the water
in successive bubbles, whilst yet you shall not see any water get into the Vial
to supply the place deserted by that Air. And if, when you have (as you may do
by the help of sucking) filled the neck and part of the belly of the Vial with
water, you immerse the orifice into stagnant water, and apply warm hands to the
globulous part as before, you will find the water in the Vial to be driven out,
before any bubbles pass out of the Vial into the surrounding water; which
shows, that the Air is not so forward to dive under the water, (and much less
under so ponderous a liquor as Quicksilver,) as Mr. Hobbes has supposed.


A. That it is the Pressure of the external Air, that (surmounting the Spring of
the internal) drives up the water into the Vial we have been speaking of, does,
I confess, follow upon your Hypothesis: But an Experimentarian Philosopher, as
Mr. Hobbes calls you among others, may possibly be furnished with an Experiment
to confirm this to the Eye.


B. You bring into my mind what I once devised to confirm my Hypothesis about
Suction, but found a while since that I had omitted it in my Discourse about
that Subject. And therefore I shall now repeat to you the substance at least of
the Memorial that was written of that Experiment, by which the great interest
of the weight of the Atmospherical Air in Suction will appear, and in which
also some things will occur, that will not well agree with Mr. Hobbes's
Explication, and prevent some of his Allegations against mine.


A. Having not yet met with an Experiment of this nature, such an one as you
speak of will be welcome to me.


B. We took a Glass Bubble, whose long stem was both very slender and very
Cylindrical; then by applying to the outside of the Ball or globulous part a
convenient heat, we expelled so much of the Air, as that, when the end of the
pipe was dipped in water, and the inward Air had time to recover its former
coolness, the water ascended either to the top of the pipe or very near it.
This done, we gently and warily rarefied the Air in the Cavity of the Bubble,
'till by its expansion it had driven out almost all the water that had got up
into the stem, that so it might attain as near as could be to that degree of
heat and measure of expansion, that it had when the water began to rise in it.
And we were careful to leave two or three drops of water unexpell'd at the
bottom of the pipe, that we might be sure, that none of the included Air was by
this second rarefaction driven out at the orifice of it; as the depression of
the water so low assured us, on the other side, that the included Air wanted
nothing considerable of the expansion it had when the water began to ascend
into the pipe. Whilst the Air was in this rarefied state, we presently removed
the little Instrument out of the stagnant water into stagnant Quicksilver,
which in a short time began to rise in the pipe. Now, if the ascension of the
liquor were the effect of Natures Abhorrence of a Vacuum; or of some internal
principle of Motion; or of the Compression and propagated Pulsion of the
outward Air by that which had been expelled; why should not the Mercury have
ascended to the top of the pipe, as the water did before? But de facto it did
not ascend half, or perhaps a quarter so far; and if the pipe had been long
enough, as well as 'twas slender enough, I question, whether the Mercury would
have ascended (in proportion to the length of the stem) half so high as it did.

Now of this Experiment, which we tried more than once, I see not, for the
reason lately expressed, how any good account will be given without our
Hypothesis, but according to That it is clear.


A. I think I perceive why you say so; for the Ascension of Liquors being an
effect of the prevalency of the external Airs pressure against the resistance
it meets with in the Cavity of the Instrument, and the Quicksilver being bulk
for bulk many times heavier than water, the same surplusage of pressure that
was able to impel up water to the top of the pipe, ought not to be able to
impel up the Quicksilver to any thing near that height. And if it be here
objected, as it very plausibly may be, that the raised Cylinder of Mercury was
much longer than it ought to have been in reference to a Cylinder of Water, the
proportion in gravity between those two Liquors (which is almost that of
fourteen to one) being considered; I answer, that when the Cylinder of Water
reached to the pipe, the Air possessed no more than the Cavity of the globulous
part of the Instrument, being very little assisted to dilate it self by so
light a Cylinder as that of Water: But when the Quicksilver came to be impelled
into the Instrument by the weight of the external Air, that ponderous Body did
not stop its ascent as soon as it came to be equiponderant to the formerly
expelled Cylinder of Water; because, to attain that height, it reached but a
little way into the pipe, and left all the rest of the Cavity of the pipe to be
filled with part of that Air, which formerly was all shut up in the Cavity of
the Bubble; by which means the Air, included in the whole Instrument, must
needs be in a state of expansion, and thereby have its Spring weakened, and
consequently disabled to resist the pressure of the external Air, as much as
the same included Air did before, when it was less rarefied; on which account,
the undiminished weight or pressure of the external Air was able to raise the
Quicksilver higher and higher, 'till it had obtained that height, at which the
pressure, compounded of the weight of the Mercurial Cylinder and the Spring of
the internal Air (now less rarefied than before,) was equivalent to the
pressure of the Atmosphere or external Air.


B. You have given the very Explication I was about to propose* wherefore I
shall only add, that, to confirm this Experiment by a kind of Inversion of it,
we drove by heat a little Air out of the Bubble, and dipped the open end of the
pipe into Quicksilver, which by this means we made to ascend 'till it had
filled about a fourth part or less of the pipe, when that was held erected.
Then carefully removing it without letting fall any Quicksilver, or letting in
any Air, we held the orifice of the pipe a little under the surface of a Glass
full of Water, and applying a moderate heat to the outside of the Ball, we
warily expelled the Quicksilver, yet leaving a little of it to make it sure
that no Air was driven out with it; then suffering the included Air to cool,
the external Air was found able to make the Water not only ascend to the very
top of the pipe, and thence spread it self a little into the Cavity of the
Ball, but to carry up before it the Quicksilver that had remained unexpell'd at
the bottom of the stem. And if in making the Experiment we had first raised, as
we sometimes did, a greater quantity of Quicksilver, and afterward drove it
out, the quantity of Water, that would be impelled into the Cavity of the pipe
and ball, would be accordingly increased.


A. In this Experiment it is manifest, that something is driven out of the
Cavity of the Glass before the Water or Quicksilver begins to ascend in it: And
here also we see not, that the Air can pass through the pores of Quicksilver or
Water, but that it drives them on before it, without sensibly mixing with them.
In this Experiment there appears not at all any Circular Wind, as Mr. Hobbes
fancies in the sucked Vial we are disputing of, nor any tendency outward of the
included Air upon the account of such a Wind; but, instead of these things,
that the ascension of the Liquors into the Cavity of the pipe depends upon the
external Air, pressing up the Liquors into that Cavity, may be argued by this,
that the same weight of the Atmosphere impelled up into the pipe so much more
of the lighter Liquor, Water, than of the heavier Liquor, Mercury.


B. You have said enough on this Experiment; but it is not the only I have to
oppose to Mr. Hobbes his Explication: For, that there is no need of the
sallying of Air out of a Vial, to make the Atmospherical Air press against a
Body that closes the orifice of it, when the pressure of the internal Air is
much weakened; I have had occasion to show some Virtuosi, by sucking out, with
the help of an Instrument, a considerable portion of the Air contained in a
Glass; for having then, instead of unstopping the orifice under water, nimbly
applied a flat Body to it, the external Air pressed that Body so forcibly
against it, as to keep it fastened and suspended, though 'twere clogged with a
weight of many ounces.


A. Another Experiment of yours Mr. Hobbes's Explication brings into my mind,
by which it appears, that, if there be such a Circular Wind, as he pretends,
produced by Suction in the Cavity of the Vial, it must needs be strangely
lasting. For I have seen more than once, that, when you have by an Instrument
sucked much of the Air out of a Vial, and afterward carefully closed it, though
you kept the slender neck of it stopped a long time, perhaps for some weeks or
months, yet when 'twas opened under water, a considerable quantity of the
Liquor would be briskly impelled up into the neck and belly of the Vial. So
that, though I will not be so pleasant with Mr. Hobbes, as to mind you on this
occasion of those Writers of Natural Magic, that teach us to shut up
Articulate, Sounds in a Vessel, which being transported to a distant place and
opened there, will render the Words that are committed to it; yet I must needs
say, that so lasting a Circular Wind, as, according to Mr. Hobbes, your
Experiments exhibited, may well deserve our wonder.


B. Your admiration would perchance increase, if I should assure you, that
having with the Sunbeams produced smoke in one of those wellstopt Vials, this
Circular Wind did not at all appear to blow it about, but suffered it to rise,
as it would have done if the included Air had been very calm. And now I shall
add but one Experiment more, which will not be liable to some of the things as
invalid as they are, which Mr. Hobbes has alleged in his account of the Vial,
and which will let you see, that the weight of the Atmospherical Air is a very
considerable thing; and which may also incline you to think, that, whilst Mr.
Hobbes does not admit a subtiler Matter than common Air to pass through the
Pores of close and solid Bodies, the Air he has recourse to will sometimes come
too late to prevent a Vacuum. The Experiment, which was partly accidental, I
lately found registered to this sense, if not in these words: [Having, to make
some Discovery of the weight of the Air, and for other purposes, caused an
Aeolipile, very light considering its bulk, to be made by a famous Artist, I
had occasion to put it so often into the fire for several Trials, that at
length the Copper scaled off by degrees, and left the Vessel much thinner than
when it first came out of the Artificers hands; and a good while after, this
change in the Instrument being not in my thoughts, I had occasion to employ it,
as formerly, to weigh how many grains it would contain of the Air at such a
determinate constitution of the Atmosphere, as was to be met with, where I then
chanced to be. For the making this Experiment the more exactly, the Air was by
a strong, but warily applied, fire so carefully driven away, that, when
clapping a piece of Sealing-wax to the Pin-hole, at which it had been forced
out, we hindered any communication betwixt the Cavity of the Instrument and the
external Air, we supposed the Aeolipile to be very well exhausted, and
therefore laid it by, that, when it should be grown cold, we might, by opening
the orifice with a Pin, again let in the outward Air, and observe the increase
of weight that would thereupon ensue: But the Instrument, that, as I was
saying, was grown thin, had been so diligently freed from Air, that the very
little that remained, and was kept by the Wax from receiving any assistance
from without, being unable by its Spring to assist the Aeolipile to support the
weight of the ambient Air; this external fluid did by its weight press against
it so strongly, that it compressed it, and thrust it so considerably inwards,
and in more than one place so changed its figure, that, when I showed it to the
Virtuosi that were assembled at Gresham-Colledge, they were pleased to command
it of me to be kept in their Repository, where I presume it is still to be seen.


FINIS.
NEW EXPERIMENTS About the PRESERVATION OF BODIES IN VACUO BOYLIANO.
By the Honorable ROBERT BOIL, Fellow of the Royal Society.

LONDON, Printed by William Godbid, and are to be Sold by Moses Pit, at the
Angel over against the little North Door of St. Paul's Church. 1674.


