A DISCOURSE OF Things ABOVE REASON.

INQUIRING Whether a Philosopher should admit there are any such.

By a Fellow of the Royal Society*

To which are annexed by the Publisher (for the Affinity of the Subjects) Some
ADVICES About judging of Things said to Transcend REASON.

WRITTEN By a Fellow of the same Society.

LONDON, Printed by E. T. and R. H. for Jonathan Robinson at the Golden Lion in
S. Paul's Churchyard. 1681.

An Advertisement.
THe Later of the two following Dialogues is but a part of a Discourse,
consisting of some Conferences, whereof, that was neither the First, nor the
Last. This 'twas thought fit the Reader should have notice of, that he may the
more easily guess upon what account it is, that some Clauses in the first Page,
(and perhaps a few other Passages elsewhere) contain somewhat that appears not
altogether the same it would have done, if there had been no need to make any
alteration at all in that Page. But because, tho there was a connection between
that Dialogue and the rest of the Papers from which it is dismembered, yet it is
dependency upon the others, is not so very great, but that the Publisher
thought the divulging of it might be useful and seasonable: and therefore
finding that want of Leisure, and much Diffidence, made the Author unwilling to
revise, and part with the other Papers that accompanied this which now comes
forth; he prevailed with him to suffer that Dialogue to take its Fortune, which
the Publisher hopes may be such, as may encourage the Author to communicate
what he has further meditated upon such Subjects.

ERRATA.
Page 3. lin. 3. read Arnobius. p. 9. l. 5. r. how. p. 25. l. 20. r. continui.
p. ib. l. 21. r. hucusque superata. p. 38. l 20. for near read above. p. 56. l.
18. r. deny. p. 60. l. 5. r. sight. p 84 l. 7. r. men of. p. 86. l. ult. r. us;
for. p. 92. l. 22. r. Time will. p 93. l. 12. r. do. P. 4 l. 12. r. bare
repetition. p. 34. l. 6. r. Body. p. 41. l. 3. r. instance* p. 43. l. 10. r.
^gy. p. 48. l. 26. r. ^soners. p. 50. l. 3. r. thing. p. 62. l. 1. r. evidence
of.

A DISCOURSE OF Things ABOVE REASON.
ENQUIRING, Whether a Philosopher should admit there are any such.
The Speakers are, Sophronius, Eugenius, Pyrocles, and Timotheus. Euge. THE
Seriousness you yet retain in your looks, and the posture we found you in at
our entrance, makes me fear these two Gentlemen and I are unseasonable
intruders, that are so unhappy as to disturb your Meditations.


Sophron. Instead of doing that, you will much promote them, if you please to
accompany me in them: For the subject that busied my thoughts is both so
abstruse and so important, that it needs more than one to consider it, and
deserves that He should be a far better considerer than I, who therefore must
think my self far less fit for that task than you.


Eug. I will punish the flattery of these last words, by declining to make any
Return to it.


Pyrocl. And I, Gentlemen, to prevent the loss of time and words between you,
shall without farther Ceremony ask Sophronius, what his thoughts were employed
about when we came in.


Sophr. I was then musing upon a Subject, that was newly proposed to me by our
common Friend Arnobiut, who would needs have my opinion, Whether, and if at
all, how far, we may employ our reasonings about things that are above our
Reason, as Christians grant some mysteries of their Religion to be.


Euge. If, by things above Reason, be meant only those, that are undiscoverable
by Reason without Revelation; I should not hesitate to say, that there may be
diverse things of that kind: For the free Decrees of God, and his determinations
concerning the Government of the World, and the future state of mankind (to
name now no others) are things which no humane Reason can pry into, but must
owe the fundamental discovery it makes of them, to the Revelation of him, whose
purposes they are.

But if, by things above Reason, be meant such, as though delivered in words,
free from darkness and Ambiguity, are not to be conceived, and comprehended by
our Rational Faculty, I shall freely confess, that I scarce know what to say
upon so unusual and sublime a subject.


Pyrocl. For my part, Gentlemen, I think it were very requisite to be sure in
the first place, that the subject of our Discourses is not Chimerical, but that
we can really know, that there are things we cannot comprehend, though they be
proposed to us in expressions no less clear than such, as would suffice to make
other things intelligible to us.


Sophr. Your cautiousness, Pyrocles, must not be rejected by me, who when,
before you came in, I was putting my thoughts into some order, judged it unfit
to consider, either how one might know what things were to be looked on as
above Reason, how far we may discourse of them, or whether or no any
supernaturally revealed Propositions, such as Divines call Articles of Faith,
ought to be reckoned among them, till I should have first seriously inquired,
whether in general we ought to admit any such Objects of our Contemplation, as
these, and the like Questions suppose.


Euge. I hope then that this being the first thing you purposed to enquire
into, we may, without too much boldness, desire to know what came into your
mind about it.


Sophr. If I had brought my considerations to an issue upon that subject, I
should with less reluctance acquaint you with them; but I since I have yet made
but an imperfect progress in my enquiry, instead of delivering any positive
opinion upon so abstruse a subject, I shall only tell you, that as far as I
could yet discern, it seemed to me that among the Objects, our reason may
contemplate there are some whose Nature we cannot comprehend, others whose
Attributes or Actions are such, as that we cannot understand how they should
belong to the Subject, or else that we cannot conceive how they should consist
with some acknowledged Truth.


Euge. So that if I apprehend you right, you do not only admit some things to
be above Reason, but make no less than three sorts of them.


Sophr. If you will needs have two of them to be coincident, I shall not much
contend, but I think the number you have named may, without any great
inconvenience, be admitted: For by things above Reason, I here understand (not
false or absurd ones, but) such, as though the Intellect sees sufficient cause
(whether on the score of Experience, Authentic Testimony, or Mathematical
Demonstration) to assent to; yet it finds it self reduced when it is conversant
about them, to be so with a notable and peculiar disadvantage: And this
disadvantage does usually proceed either from the nature of the thing proposed,
which is such, that we cannot sufficiently comprehend it, or from our not being
able to conceive the manner of its existing and operating; or from this, that
it involves some notion or proposition, that we see not how to reconcile with
some other thing, that we are persuaded to be a truth. The first of these three
sorts of things, may, for brevity and distinction sake be called
Incomprehensible, the second Inexplicable, and the third Unsociable. But for
fear lest the shortness I have used in my expressions, may have kept them from
being so clear, I shall somewhat more explicitly reckon up the three sorts of
things that seem to me above Reason.

The first consists of those whose Nature is not distinctly and adequately
comprehensible by us: To which sort perhaps we may refer all those intellectual
Beings (if it be granted that there are such) as are by nature of a higher
order than humane Souls. To which sort some (...) the Angels (at least of the
good ones) may probably belong; but more than probably we may refer to this
Head, the Divine Author of Nature, and of our Souls, Almighty God, whose
perfections are so boundless, and his Nature so very singular, that it is no
less weakness than presumption to imagine, that such finite Beings as our
Souls, can frame full and adequate Idea's of them: We may indeed know by the
consideration of his works, and particularly those parts of them that we our
selves are, both That he is, and in a great measure What he is not; but to
understand thoroughly What he is, is a task too great for any but his own
infinite Intellect: And therefore I think we may truly call this immense
Object, in the newly declared sense, supra-Intellectual.


Euge. I suppose I may now ask what is the second sort of Things above Reason?


Sophr. It consists of such, as though we cannot deny that they are, yet we
cannot clearly and satisfactorily conceive, how they can be such as we
acknowledge they are. As how Matter can be infinitely, (or which is all one, in
our present discourse, indefinitely) divisible: And how there should be such an
incommensurableness betwixt the Side and Diagonal of a Square, that no measure,
how small soever, can adequatly measure both the one and the other.

That Matter is endlesly divisible, is not only the assertion of Aristotle and
the Schools, but generally embraced by those rigid Reasoners, Geometricians
themselves; and may be farther confirmed by the other instance of the Side and
Diagonal of a Square, whose incommensurableness is believed upon no less firm a
proof, than a demonstration of Euclid, and was so known a truth among the
Ancients, that Plato is said to have pronounced him rather a Beast than a Man,
that was a stranger to it. And yet if continued quantity be not divisible
without stop, how can we conceive but that there may be found some determinate
part of the side of a Square, which being often enough repeated, would exactly
measure the Diagonal too. But though Mathematical Demonstrations assure us,
that these things are so, yet those that have strained their Brains, have not
been able clearly to conceive how it should be possible, that a Line (for
instance) of not a quarter of an inch long, should be still divisible into
lesser and lesser portions, without ever coming to an end of those
subdivisions; or how among the innumerable differing partitions into aliquot
parts, that may be made of the side of a Square, not one of those parts can be
found exactly to measure so short a Line as the Diagonal may be.


Euge. There is yet behind, Sophronius, the third sort of those things, which,
according to you, surpass our Reason.


Sophr. I shall name that too, Eugenius, as soon as I have premised that some
of the Reasons that moved me to refer some instances to this head, do not so
peculiarly belong to those instances, but that they may be applicable to
others, which 'twas thought convenient to refer to the second or first of the
foregoing Heads: And this being once intimated, I shall proceed to tell you,
that the third sort of things that seem to surpass our Reason, consists of
those, to which the Rules and Axioms and Notions, whereby we judge of the truth
and falsehood of ordinary, or other things, seem not to agree.

This third sort being such as are encumbered with Difficulties or Objections,
that cannot directly and satisfactorily be removed by them that acquiesce in
the received Rules of subordinate Sciences, and do reason but at the common
rate, such Objects of Contemplation as this third sort consists of, having
something belonging to them, that seems not reconcilable with some very
manifest, or at least acknowledged Truths.

This it may here suffice to make out by a couple of Instances, the one of a
Moral, the other of a Mathematical Nature: And first, that Man has a free will,
in reference at least to civil matters, is the general confession of Mankind:
All the Laws that forbid and punish Murder, Adultery, Theft, and other Crimes,
being founded on a Supposition, that men have a power to forbear committing
them, and the sense men have of their being possessed of this power over their
own actions, is great enough to make Malefactors acknowledge their punishments
to be just, being no less condemned by their own Consciences, than by their
Judges.

And yet (some Socinians, and some few others excepted) the generality of
Mankind, whether Christians, Jews, Mahometans, or Heathens, ascribe to God an
infallible Prescience of humane Actions, which is supposed by the belief of
Prophecies, and the recourse to Oracles, by one or other of which two ways the
Embracers of the several Religions newly mentioned, have endeavored and
expected to receive the informations of future things, and such as depend upon
the Actings of men. But how a certain fore-knowledg can be had of contingent
things, and such as depend upon the free will of man, is that which many great
wits that have solicitously tried, have found themselves unable clearly to
comprehend, nor is it much to be admired that they should be puzzled to conceive
how an infinitely perfect Being should want Prescience, or that their will
should want that liberty, whereof they feel in themselves the almost perpetual
exercise.

The other instance I promised you, Euge. is afforded me by Geometricians: For
these (you know) teach the divisibility of Quantity in infinitum or without
stop, to be Mathematically demonstrable. Give me leave then to propose to you a
strait line of three foot long divided into two parts, the one double to the
other. I suppose then, that according to their doctrine a line of two foot is
divisible into infinite parts, or it is not: If you say it is not, you
contradict the demonstrations of the Geometricians; if you say that it is, then
you must confess either that the line of one foot is divisible into as many
parts as the line of two foot, though the one be but half the other, or else
that the infinite parts, into which the line of one foot is granted to be
divisible, is exceeded in number by the parts, into which the line of two foot
is divisible, and consequently that the line of two foot has a multitude of
parts greater than infinite. Which Reasonings may let us see that we may be
reduced either to reject Inferences legitimately drawn from manifest or granted
Truths, or to admit conclusions that appear absurd; if we will have all the
common Rules whereby we judge of other things to be applicable to Infinites.

And now, Gentlemen, having acquainted you with what sorts of things seem to be
above Reason, I must, to prevent mistakes, desire you to take along with you
this Advertisement: That though the nobleness and difficulty of so uncultivated
a Subject, inclined me to offer something toward the elucidating of it, by
sorting those things into three kinds; yet I shall not, and need not in this
Conference, insist on them severally, or lay any stress on this partition. For
though I have above intimated, that a Proposition may speak of somewhat that is
supra-intellectual, or else contain somewhat which we cannot conceive how it
may be true, or lastly teach us somewhat for a truth, that we cannot reconcile
with some other thing, that we are convinced is true; yet if but any one of
these have true Instances belonging to it, That may suffice for my main purpose
in this place, where I need only show in general, that there may be things that
surpassour Reason, at least so far, that they are not to be judged of by the
same measures and rules, by which men are wont to judge of ordinary things, for
which reason I shall often give them one common name, calling them Priviledg'd
Things.


Euge. Methinks that to manifest the Imperfections of our Reason, in reference
to what you call Priviledg'd Things, you need not have recourse to the
unfathomable Abysses of the Divine Nature, since for ought I know, Pyrocles, as
well as I, may be non-plus'd by an instance that came into my mind de
Compositione continui.


Timoth. Since Sophronius has not thought fit to give us any of the Arguments
of the contending party's, I shall be glad to know what difficulty occurred to
you.


Euge. Suppose a great Circle divided into its three hundred and sixty degrees,
and suppose that as great a number as you please or can conceive, of strait
lines, be drawn from the several designable parts of some one of these degrees,
to the Center, it is manifest that the degrees being equal, as many lines may be
drawn from any, and so from every one of the others, as from that degree which
was pitched upon.

Then suppose a Circular Arch, equal to the assumed degree, to be further bent
into the circumference of a little circle, having the same Center with a great
one, it follows from the nature of a Circle, and has been geometrically
demonstrated, that the semi-diameters of a Circle how many soever they be, can
no where touch one another but in the Center. Whence it is evident, that all the
lines that are drawn from the circumference to the Center of the greater
Circle* must pass by differing points of the circumference of the smaller, (for
else they would touch one another before they arrive at the Center) and
consequently that as many lines soever as can even mentally be drawn from the
several points of the circumference of the great Circle to the common Center of
both Circles, must all pass through different points of the little Circle, and
thereby divide it into as many parts (proportionably smaller) as the greater
Circle is divided into: So that here the circumference of the lesser Circle
presents us with a curve line, which was not possibly divisible into more parts
than an Arch of one degree, or the three hundred and sixtieth part of the
Circumference of the greater Circle, and yet without being lengthned, becomes
divisible into as many parts as the whole circumference of the same greater
Circle. And though we should suppose the circumference of the internal Circle
not to exceed one inch, and that of the exterior Circle to exceed the
circumference of the Terrestrial Globe, or even of the Firmament it self, yet
still the demonstration would hold, and all the lines drawn from this vast
Circle, would find distinct points in the lesser, to pass through to their
common Center.


Timoth. Though I will not pretend to confirm what Sophronius has been proving,
by adding Arguments a priori; yet I shall venture to say, that I think it very
agreeable both to the nature of God and to that of man, that what he has
endeavored to prove true should be so; for we men mistake and flatter Humane
Nature too much, when we think our faculties of Understanding so unlimited,
both in point of capacity and of extent, and so free and unprepossest, as many
Philosophers seem to suppose: For, whatever our self-love may incline us to
imagine, we are really but created and finite Beings (and that probably of none
of the highest or^ders of intellectual Creatures) and we come into the world,
but such, as it pleased the Almighty and most free Author of our Nature to make
us. And from this dependency and limitedness of our Natures, it follows not
only that we may be (for I now dispute not whether we are) born with certain
congenit Notions and Impressions and Appetites or Tendencies of Mind; but also
that the means or measures which are furnished us to employ in the searching or
judging of Truth, are but such as are proportionable to Gods designs in
creating us, and therefore may probably be supposed not to be capable of
reaching to all kinds, or if you please of Truths, many of which may be
unnecessary for us to know here, and some may be reserved, partly to make us
sensible of the imperfections of our Natures, and partly to make us aspire to
that condition, wherein our faculties shall be much enlarged and heightened. It
seems not therefore unreasonable to think, both that God has made our faculties
so limited, that in our present mortal condition there should be some Objects
beyond the comprehension of our Intellects (that is) that some of his creatures
should not be able perfectly to understand some others, and yet that he has
given us light enough to perceive that we cannot attain to a clear and full
knowledge of them.


Pyrocl. I think, Sophronius, that I now understand what you mean by Things
above reason, or as you (not unfitly) styled them, privileged things: But I
presume you need not be told, that to explain the sense of a Proposition, and
to make out the truth of it, (unless in common Notions, or things evident by
their own light) are always two things, and oftentimes two very distant ones.


Sophr. I need not scruple, Pyrocles, to grant the truth of what you say, but I
must not so easily admit your application of it; for among the examples, I have
been proposing, there are some at least, that do not only declare what I mean
by things above reason, but are instances, and consequently may be proofs that
such things there are. And to those I could have added others, if I had thought
it unlikely, that in the progress of our Conference, there may be occasions
offered of mentioning them more opportunely.


Pyrocl. I have long thought that the wit of man, was able to lay a fine
varnish upon any thing that it would recommend; but I have not till now found
Reason set a work to degrade it self, as if it were a noble exercise of its
power to establish its own impotency: And indeed it is strange to me, how you
would have our Reason comprehend and reach things, that you your sel^ confess
to be above Reason, which is methinks, as if we were told that we may see
things with our eye^ that are invisible.


Sophr. I do not think, that 'ti^ to degrade the understanding, to refuse to
idolize it, and it is not a^^ injury to Reason, to think it a li^mited faculty,
but an injury to the Author of it, to think man's understanding infinite, like
his. And if what I proposed be well grounded, I assign Reason its most noble
and genuine Exercise, which is to close with discovered Truths, in whose
embraces the perfection of the Intellect too much consists, to suffer that
perfective action to be justly disparaging to it: And a sincere understanding
is to give, or refuse its assent to propositions according as they are or are
not true, not according as we could or could not wish they were so; and
methinks it were somewhat strange, that Impartiality should be made a
disparagement in a Judge. But, Pyrocles, leaving the reflection with which you
ushered in your Objection, I shall now consider the Argument it self, which
being the weightiest that can be framed against the opinion you oppose, I shall
beg leave to offer some considerations, wherein I shall endeavor to answer it
both by proving my Opinion by experience, and by showing that experience not to
be disagreeable to Reason.


Pyrocl. I shall very willingly listen to what you have to say on such a
subject.


Sophr. I shall then in the first place allege the experience of many persons,
and diverse of them great Wits, who have perplexed themselves to reconcile, I
say, not the Grace of God, but even his Prescience to the liberty of man's will,
even in bare moral actions: And I have found partly by their Writings, and by
discourse with some of them, that the most towering and subtle sort of
Speculators, Metaphysicians, and Mathematicians, perchance after much racking
of their brains, confess themselves quite baffled by the unconquerable
difficulties they met with, not only in such abstruse subjects, as the nature
of God, or of the humane Soul, but in the nature of what belongs in common to
the most obvious Bodies in the world, and even to the least portions of them:
You will easily guess that I have my eye on that famous controversy, Whether
or no a continued quantity (which every body, as having length, breadth, depth,
must be allowed to have) be made up of Indivisibles. Of the perplexing
difficulties of this Controversy, I might give you diverse confessions, or
complaints made by a sort of men too much accustomed to bold assertions and
subtle Arguments, to be much disposed to make acknowledgments of that kind: But
I shall content my self with the testimony which one of the more famous modern
Schoolmen gives both of himself and other learned men, and which if I well
remember, he thus expresses. Aggredimur comtinus compositionem, Ovied contr.
17. Phys.
cujus hujusque non separata difficultas omnium Doctorum male ingenia vexavit,
neque ullus fuit qui illam non pene insuperabilem agnoscat. Hanc plerique
terminorum obscuritate, illorumque replicatis and implicatis distinctionibus,
and subdistinctionibus obtenebrant, ne aperte capiantur desperantes rem posse
alio modo tractari neque rationis lucem sustinere, sed necessario confusionis
tenebris obtegendum, ne argumentorum evidentia detegatur.

And though he had not been thus candid in his confession, yet what he says
might be easily concluded by him, that shall duly weigh with how great, though
not equal force of Arguments, each of the contending parties imputes to the
opinion it opposes, great and intolerable absurdities as contained in it, or
legitimately deducible from it.


Eug. I have not the vanity to think that the weakness of my Reason ought to
make another diffident of the strength of his: But as to my self, what
Sophronius has been saying cannot but be confirmed by several trials, wherein
having exerted the small abilities I had to clear up to my self some of the
difficulties about Infinites: I perceived to my trouble, that my speculations
satisfied me of nothing so much, as the disproportionateness of those abstruse
subjects to my reason. But, Sophronius, may it not be well objected, that
though the Instances you have given, have not been hitherto cleared by the
light of Reason; yet it is probable they may be so hereafter, considering how
great progress is, from time to time, made in the discoveries of Nature, in
this learned Age of ours.


Sophr. In answer to this question, Eugenius, give me leave to tell you first,
that you allow my past discourse to hold good for ought yet appears to the
contrary: Whence it will follow, that your Objection is grounded upon a hope,
or at most a Conjecture about which I need not therefore trouble my self, till
some new discoveries about the things in question, engage me to a new
consideration of them. But in the mean while, give me leave to represent to you
in the second place, that though I am very willing to believe, as well as I
both desire and hope it, that this inquisitive Age we live in, will produce
discoveries that will explicate diverse of the more hidden mysteries of Nature,
yet I expect that these discoveries will chiefly concern those things, which
either we are ignorant of for want of a competent History of Nature, or we
mistake by reason of erroneous Prepossessions, or for want of freedom and
attention in our speculations. But I have not the like expectations as to all
Metaphysical difficulties, (if I may so call them) wherein neither matters of
Fact, nor the Hypothesis of subordinate parts of Learning, are wont much to
avail. But however it be, as to other abstruse Objects, I am very apt to think,
that there are some things relating to that infinite and most Monadical Being
(if I may so speak) that we call God, which will still remain incomprehensible
even to Philosophical understandings. And I can scarce allow my self to hope to
see those Obstacles surmounted, that proceed not from any Personal infirmity,
or evitable faults, but from the limited nature of the Intellect: And to these
two considerations, Eugenius, I shall in answer to your question, add this
also: That as men's inquisitiveness may hereafter extricate some of those grand
difficulties, that have hitherto perplexed Philosophers; so it may possibly
lead them to discover new difficulties more capable than the first, of baffling
humane understandings. For even among the things wherewith we are already
conversant, there are diverse which we think we know, only because we never with
due attention, tried whether we can frame such Ideas of them, as are clear and
worthy for a rational seeker and lover of truth to acquiesce in. This the great
intricacy that considering men find, in the notions commonly received of space,
time, motion, etc. and the difficulties of framing perspicuous and satisfactory
apprehensions even of such obvious things, may render highly probable. We see
also that the Angle of Contact, the Doctrine of Asymptotes, and that of surd
numbers and incommensurable Lines, all which trouble not common Accomptants and
Surveyors, (who though they deal so much in numbers and lines, seldom take
notice of any of them) perplex the greatest Mathematicians, and some of them so
much, that they can rather demonstrate, that such affections belong to them,
than they can conceive how they can do so: All which may render it probable,
that men's growing curiosity is not more likely to find the solutions of some
difficulties, than to take notice of other things, that may prove more
insuperable than they.


Tim. This conjecture of yours, Sophronius, is not a little favored by the
Rota Aristotelica; for though the motion of a Cart-wheel is so obvious and
seems so plain a thing, that the Carman himself never looks upon it with
wonder; yet after Aristotle had taken notice of the difficulty that occurred
about it, this trivial Phenomenon has perplexed diverse great Wits, not only
Schoolmen, but Mathematicians, and continues yet to do so, there being some
circumstances in the progressive motion and rotation of the circumference of a
Wheel, and its Nave, or of two points assigned, the one in the former, and the
other in the latter, that have appeared too subtle (and even to modern)
Writers, so hard to be conceived and reconciled to some plain and granted
Truths, that some of them have given over the solution of the attending
difficulties as desperate, which perchance, Pyrocles, would not think strange,
if I had time to insist on the intricacies that are to be met with in a
speculation, that seems so easy as to be despicable.


Sophr. Your Instance, Timotheus, must be acknowledged a very pregnant one, if
you are certain that a better account cannot be given of the Rota Aristotelica,
than is wont to be in the Schools, by those Peripateticks that either frankly
confess the difficulties to be insoluble, or less ingenuously pretend to give
solutions of them, that suppose things not to be proved, or perhaps so much as
understood (as Rarefaction and Condensation strictly so called) or lose the
question and perhaps themselves, by running up the dispute into that most
obscure and perplexing Controversy de compositione continui.


Eugen. I am content to forbear pressing any further at present an Objection;
much of whose force depends on future contingents, and I shall the rather
dismiss the proof drawn from experience, that I may the sooner put you in mind
of your having promised us another Argument to the same purpose, by manifesting
the opinion to be agreeable to Reason.


Sophr. I understand your pleasure, Eugenius, and shall endeavor to comply
with it, but the difficulty and intricateness of the Subject of our discourse,
obliges me to do it by steps; and for fear we should want time for more
necessary things, I will not now stay to examine whether all the things that
hitherto have appeared above Reason, be impenetrable to us, because of an
essential disability of our understandings, proceeding from the imperfection
and limitedness of their nature, or only because of some other impediment, such
as may be especially the condition of the soul in this life, or the infirmities
resulting from its state of union with a gross and mortal body.

Forbearing then to discourse how this came into my mind, and what thoughts I
had upon it, I shall proceed in my considerations; and to clear the way for
those that are to follow, I shall in the first place observe to you, that
whatever be thought of the faculty in abstracto, yet Reason operates according
to certain Notions or Ideas, and certain Axioms and Propositions, by which as
by Prototypes or Models, and Rules and Measures, it conceives things, and makes
estimates and judgments of them. And indeed when we say that such a thing is
consonant to Reason, or repugnant to it, we usually mean that it is either
immediately or mediately deducible from, or at least consistent with, or
contradictory to one or other of those standard Notions or Rules.

And this being premised, I consider in the next place, that if these Rules and
Notions be such, as are abstracted only from finite things, or are congruous
but to them; they may prove useless or deceitful to us, when we go about to
stretch them beyond their measure, and apply them to the infinite God, or to
things that involve an Infiniteness either in multitude, magnitude, or
littleness.

To illustrate and confirm this notion, give me leave to represent in the third
place, that in my opinion all the things that we naturally do know or can know,
may be divided into these two sorts: The one such as we may know without a
Medium* and the other such as we cannot attain to, but by the intervention of a
Medium, or by a discursive act. To the first belong such Notions as are
supposed to be connate, or if you please innate, such as that Two
contradictories cannot be both together true. The whole is greater than any
part of it; Every (entire) number is either even or odd, etc. And also those
other Truths, that are assented to upon their own account without needing any
medium to prove them; because that as soon as, by perspicuous terms, or fit
examples, they are clearly proposed to the understanding, they discover
themselves to be true so manifestly by their own light, that they need not be
assisted by any intervening Proposition, to make the Intellect acquiesce in
them; of which kind are some of Euclids Axioms, as that, If to equal things
equal things be added, the totals will be equal; and that two right lines
cannot include a space. To the second sort of things knowable by us, belong all
that we acquire the knowledge of by Ratiocinations, wherein by the help of
intervening Propositions or Mediums, we deduce one thing from another, or
conclude affirmatively or negatively one thing of another. This being supposed,
and we being conscious to our selves, if it were but upon the score of our own
infirmities and imperfections, that we are not Authors of our own nature; for
ought we know it may be true, and all the experience we have hitherto had,
leads us to think it is true, that the measures suggested to us either by
sensations, the results of sensible observation, or the other instruments of
knowledge, are such as fully reach but to finite things or Beings, and
therefore are not safely applicable to others. And diverse of those very
Principles that we think very general, may be (if I may so speak) but gradual
notions of truth, and but limited and respective, not absolute and universal.

And here give me leave, as a farther consideration, to take notice to you,
that though perfect Syllogism be counted the best and most regular forms that
our Ratiocinations can assume, yet even the laws of these are grounded on the
doctrine of Proportions: For even between things equal there may be a
proportion (namely that of equality) upon which ground I suppose it is, that
Mathematical Demonstrations have been publicly proposed of the grand
Syllogistical Rules. And in consequence of this, I shall add that Geometricians
will tell you, that there is no proportion betwixt a finite line and an
infinite, Rationem habere inter se quantitates dicuntur quae possunt
multiplicatae, sese mutuo superare.
because the former can never be so often taken, as to exceed the latter, which
ac^cording to Euclid's definition of Proportion, it should be capable to do.
Definit. 5.
Of which Premises the use I would make is to persuade you, Elem. V.
that since the understanding operates but by the Notions and Truths it is
furnished with, Euclidis.
and these are its instruments by proportion to which it takes measures, and
makes judgments of other things; these Instruments may be too disproportionate
to some Objects to be securely employed to determine diverse particulars about
them: So the eye being an instrument which the understanding employs to
estimate distances, we cannot by that safely take the breadth of the Ocean,
because our sight cannot reach far enough to discover how far so vast an object
extends it self. And not only the common instruments of Surveyors that would
serve to measure the height of an house or a steeple, or even a Mountain,
cannot enable them to take the distance of the Moon; but, when Astronomers do,
by supposition, take a chain that reaches to the Center of the Earth, (and
therefore is by the Moderns judged to be near four thousand miles long) even
then I say, though by the help of this and the Parallaxes, they may tolerably
well measure the distance of some of the nearer Planets, especially the Moon^
yet with all their great industry^ they cannot by the same way (o^ perhaps any
other yet known) wit^ any thing tolerable acurateness, measure the distance of
the fixed Stars; the Semidiameter of the Earth, bearing no sensible proportion
to that of so vast a Sphere as the Firmament, whose distance makes the
Parallaxes vanish, it being as to sense all one, whether at so great a remove,
a Star be observed from the Center, or from the surface of the Earth.


Eug. In a matter so abstruse, a little Illustration by examples, may be very
proper and welcome.


Sophr. It Is scarce possible to find very apposite examples, to illustrate
things of a kind so abstruse and heteroclite as those may well be supposed,
that do surpass our Reason.

But yet some assistance may be borrowed from what we may observe in that other
faculty of the mind, which is most of kin to the Intellect, I mean the
Imagination: For when, for instance, I think of a Triangle or a Square, I find
in my fancy an intuitive Idea (if I may so call it) of those figures that is a
Picture clear and distinct, as if a figure of three sides or four equal sides,
and Angles were placed before my eyes.

But if I would fancy a myriagon, or a figure consisting of ten thousand equal
sides, my Imagination is overpowered with so great a multitude of them, and
frames but a confused Idea of a Polygon with a very great many sides: For if
(to speak suitably to what the excellent Des Carts has well observed in the
like case) a man should endeavor to frame Ideas of a Myriagon or a Chiliagon,
they would be both so confused, that his Imagination would not be able clearly
to discriminate them, though the one has ten times as many sides as the other.
So if you would imagine an Atome, of which perhaps ten thousand would scarce
make up the bulk of one of the light particles of dust, that seem to play in
the Sunbeams when they are shot into a darkened place, so extraordinary a
littleness not having fallen under any of our Senses, cannot truly be
represented in our imagination. So when we speak of Gods Primity (if I may so
call it) Omnipotence, and some other of his infinite Attributes and
Perfections, we have some conceptions of the things we speak of, but may very
well discern them to be but inadequate ones: And though diverse Propositions
relating to things above Reason, seem clear enough to ordinary Wits, yet he
that shall with a competent measure of attention, curiosity, and skill,
consider and examine them; shall find that either their parts are inconsistent
with one another, or they involve contradictions to some acknowledged or
manifest Truths, or they are veiled over with darkness and incumbered with
difficulties, from whence we are not able to rescue them. Thus when the side
and Diagonal of a Square are proposed, we have clear and distinct Ideas of each
of them apart, and when they are compared, we may have a conception of their
incommensurableness. But yet this negative notion, if it be thoroughly
considered, and far enough pursued, clearly contains that of a strait lines
being divisible in infinitum; and that divisibility is encumbered with so many
difficulties, and is so hard to be reconciled to some confessed dictates of
Reason, that (as we have seen already) Philosophers and Geometricians that are
convinced of the truth, are to this day laboring to extricate themselves out
of those perplexing intricacies.

I will not trouble you with the puzling, if not insuperable difficulties, that
incumber the doctrine of Eternity, as it is wont to be proposed in the Schools
of Divines and Philosophers, lest you should allege that these difficulties
spring rather from the bold assumptions and groundless subtleties of the
Schoolmen, than from the nature of the thing it self: But I will propose
somewhat that cannot be denied, which is, that some substance or other,
whether, as I believe, God, or as the Peripateticks say, the World, or as the
Epicureans contend, Matter, never had a beginning, that is, has been for ever.
But when we speak of an eternity a part ante (as they call it) we do not speak
of a thing whereof we have no conception at all, as will appear to a
considering person, and yet this general notion we have is such, that when we
come attentively to examine it, by the same ways by which we judge of almost
all other things, the Intellect is non-plus'd: For we must conceive, that the
time efflux'd since Adam (or any other man as remote from us as he is said to
have been) began to live, bears no more proportion to the duration of God, or
of Matter, than to those few minutes I have employed about mentioning this
instance. Nay if we would be Aristotelians, the same thing may be said as to
those men, that lived many thousand millions of years before the time we reckon
that Adam began to live in: For each of these times being finite and measurable
by a determinate number of years, can bear no proportion to that infinite
number of years (or somewhat that is equivalent) which must be allowed to a
duration that never had a beginning. And as there are some things whose nature
and consequences pose our Faculties, so there are others, whereof though we
have a notion, yet the modus operandi is beyond our comprehension; I do not
mean only the true and certain modus operandi, but even an intelligible one.
As, though diverse learned men, especially Cartesians, and that upon a
Philosophical account, assert, that God created the world; yet how a substance
could be made out of nothing (as they, and the generality of Christians
confessedly hold) I fear we cannot conceive. And though all Philosophers, very
few excepted, believe God to be the Maker of the World (out of preexistent
matter) yet how he could make it but by locally moving the parts of the Matter
it was to consist of, and how an incorporeal substance can move a body, which
it may pass through without resistance, is that which I fear will be found
hardly explicable: For if it be said, that the Soul, being an immaterial
substance, can never the less move the Limbs of the humane Body rightly
disposed, I shall answer that it does not appear that the rational Soul does
give any motion to the parts of the Body, but only guide or regulate that which
she finds in them already.


Timoth. May it not then be rationally said, that by making observations of
such things that are the proper Objects of our faculties, and by making
legitimate deductions from such observations, and from our other knowledges
whether innate or acquired, we may come to be certain, that some things are,
and so have general and dark Ideas of them, when at the same time we are at a
loss to conceive how they can be such, or how they can operate and perform what
they do, supposing the Truth and sufficiency of some other things we are
convinced of. To be short, negative apprehensions we may have of some
privileged things, and positive, but indistinct apprehensions we may have of
others, and that is enough to make us in some sort understand our selves, and
one another, when we speak of them, though yet when we sufficiently consider
what we say, we may find that our words are not accompanied with clear,
distinct, and symmetrical conceptions, of those abstruse and perplexing things
we speak of. And since, as has been already shown, we find by experience, that
we are unable sufficiently to comprehend things, that by clear and legitimate
consequences may be evinced to be, why should not this cogently argue, that
some of our conceptions may be of things, to which somewhat belongs that
transcends our Reason, and surpasses our comprehension? And if I would play the
Logician with Pyrocles, I would tell him that his Objection destroys his
Opinion: For since he talks to us of what is incomprehensible, that term must
or must not be attended with some suitable Idea: If it be not, let him
consider, whether in his own Phrase he speaks sense and not like a Parrot; but
if it be, let him then confess, that one may have some kind of Idea of a thing
incomprehensible. But, Pyrocles, whether or no you think I prevaricate in this,
you will not, I hope, suspect me of doing it, in adding that when natural
Theology had taught men, (as well Philosophers as others) to believe God to be
an infinitely perfect Being, we ought not to say that they had no Idea of such
a Being, because they had not a clear and adequate one. And since Aristotle
discourses ex professo and prolixly enough, de infinito, and cites the
ancienter Philosophers for having done so before him, and since (besides his
Commentators and Followers) Democritus, Epicurus, followed by Gassendus and
other late Philosophers, maintain either that the world is boundless, or that
space (real or imaginary) is not finite in extent, or that the world consists
of Atoms infinite in number; I hope you will not put such an affront upon all
these great persons, as to think they said they knew not what, when they
discoursed de infinito, as they must have done, if they spoke without Ideas of
the things they spoke of, though it may be justly supposed, that the Subject
being infinite, the Ideas they framed of it, could not be comprehensive and
accurate.


Eug. So that according to you, Sophronius, it may be said, that by reason we
do not properly perceive Things above Reason, but only perceive that they are
above Reason, there being a dark and peculiar kind of Impression made upon the
understanding, while it sets it self to contemplate such confounding Objects,
by which peculiarity of impression, as by a distinct and unwonted kind of
internal sensation, the understanding is brought to distinguish this sort of
things (namely) transcendent or priviledg'd ones from others, and discern them
to be disproportionate to the powers with which it uses thoroughly to penetrate
Subjects, that are not impervious to it. As when the Eye looks into a deep Sea,
though it may pierce a little way into it, yet when it would look deeper, it
discovers nothing but somewhat which is dark and indistinct, which affects the
sensory so differingly from what other more genuine objects are wont to do,
that by it we easily discern, that our sight fails us in the way before it
arrives at the bottom, and consequently that there may be many things concealed
there, that our sight is unable to reach.


Timoth. I guess, Gentlemen, by the silence you seem to conspire in, after so
long a debate, that you have now said as much as at present you think fit to
say for and against this Proposition, that there are Things above our Reason.


Sophr. I shall not, for my part, cross your Observation, Timotheus, but
instead of adding any new proofs, shall only desire you to look back upon those
I have presented you already, and to let me remind you, that of the two
Arguments by which I attempted to show that there are some things above Reason,
the first and chiefest was suggested by Experience, and the other which was
drawn from the nature of things and of man, was brought as 'twere, ex
abundanti, to illustrate and confirm the former, and give occasion to some
hints about priviledg'd Subjects. And therefore though I hope what has been
discoursed by these Gentlemen and me, may be able to persuade Pyrocles, that
the acknowledgment that some things are above Reason may fairly comply with the
dictates of it, yet whatever he thinks of the cogency of our discourse, the
truth of the main conclusion may be sufficiently evinced by our first Argument
drawn from experience: For if we really find, that there are things which our
Reason cannot comprehend, then whether the account these Gentlemen and I have
given, why our faculties are insufficient, for these things be good or not; yet
still some true account or other there must be of that insufficiency. And as we
should very thankfully receive from Pyrocles, any better account than what we
have propounded, so if he cannot assign any better, I hope he will join with us
in looking upon this, as very agreeable to our Hypothesis; since hereby some
things must appear to us so sublime and abstruse, that not only we find we are
not able to comprehend them, but that we are unable to discern so much as upon
what account it is that they cannot be comprehended by us.


Eug. I am not averse, Sophronius, from your Paradox about gradual notions, and
I am the more in clin'd to think, that some of the Axioms and Rules that are
reputed to be very general, are not to be in differently extended to all
Subject and cases whatsoever; when I consider the differing apprehension that
the mind may frame of the same object, as well according to the vigor or (if I
may so call it rank of the understanding, as according to the differing
information it is furnished with: For if on^ should propose to a child, for
in^stance, of four or five years old the demonstration of the one hu^^dred and
seventeenth Proposition of Euclid's tenth Book, wherein (...) proves the side
and Diagonal (...) a Square to be incommensur^^ble, thongh possibly he may be
^^ble to read the words that expre^^ the Theorem, and though he ha^ eyes to see
the Scheme imploy^^ for the demonstration, yet if (...) should spend a whole
year about (...) you would never be able to make him understand it, because
it is quite above the reach of a Child's capacity: And if one should stay till he
be grown a man, yet supposing him to have never learned Geometry, though he may
easily know what you mean by two incommensurable lines, yet all the reason he
has attained to in his virile age, would but indispose him to attain to that
demonstration; for all the experience he may have had of lines, will but have
suggested to him as a manifest and general truth, that of any two strait lines
we may by measuring find how many Feet, Inches, or other determinate measure,
the one exceeds the other. And though one that has been orderly instructed in
all that long train of Propositions, that in Euclid's Elements precede the one
hundred and seventeenth of the tenth Book, will be also able to arrive at an
evidence of this truth, that those two Lines are incommensurable; yet (as
Sophronius formerly noted) how it should be possible that two short Lines being
proposed, whereof each by it self is easily measurable among those innumerable
multitudes of parts into which each of them may be mentally divided, there
should not be any one capable of exactly measuring both, is that which even a
Geometrician that knows it is true is not well able to conceive. But Gentlemen,
that you may not accuse my digression, I shall urge these comparisons no
further, my scope in mentioning them being to observe to you, that for ought w^
know to the contrary, such a diffe^rence of intellectual Abilities as i^ but
gradual in Children and Men^ may be essential in differing rank^ of
Intellectual Beings. And so (...) may be, that some of those Axiom that we
think general, may, whe^^ we apply them to things whereo^ they are not the true
and prope^ measures, lead us into error, thoug^ perhaps Intellects of an higher
o^^der may unriddle those difficulti^ that confound us men, which conjecture I
should confirm by some things that would be readily granted me by Christians,
if I thought it proper to play the Divine in a discourse purely Philosophical.


Pyrocl. You, Gentlemen, have taken the liberty to make long discourses, and I
shall not much blame you for it, because it is a thing as more easily, so more
speedily done, to propose difficulties than to solve them; yet methinks amongst
you all, you have left one part of my Objection unanswered, not to say
untouched.


Sophr. I suppose, Pyrocles, you mean what you said about discerning invisible
things with the Eye, but I purposely forbore to take notice of that, because I
foresaw it might be more seasonably done, after some other points had been
cleared: Wherefore give me leave now to represent to you, as a Corollary from
the foregoing discourses, that nothing hinders but that we may reasonably
suppose, that the great and free Author of humane nature, God, so framed the
nature of Man, as to have furnished his Intellective Faculty with a light,
whereby it cannot only make estimates of the power of a multitude of other
things, but also judge of its own nature and power, and discern some at least
of the limits beyond which it cannot safely exercise its act of particularly
and peremptorily judging and defining. And now that God, who (as I said) is a
most free Agent, may have given the mind of Man such a limited nature,
accompanied with such a measure of light, you will not I presume deny but the
question is, you will tell me, whether he has done so? But I hope what has
been formerly discoursed by these Gentlemen and me, has put that almost quite
out of question. However, I shall now invite you to observe with me, that the
Rational Soul does not only pass judgments about things without her, but about
her self, and what passes within her: She searches out and contemplates her own
spirituality and union with the Body. The Intellect judges wherein its own
nature consists, and whether or no it self be a distinct faculty from the Will;
and to come yet closer to the point, be pleased to consider, that Logic and
Metaphysics are the works of the Humane Intellect, which by framing those
disciplines, manifests, that it does not only judge of Ratiocinations, but of
the very Principles and Laws of Reasoning, and teaches what things are
necessary to the obtaining of an Evidence and Certainty, and what kind of
Mediums they are from whence you must not expect any demonstrative Arguments,
concerning such or such a subject. To these things it is agreeable, that if we
will compare the bodily Eye with the Understanding, which is the Eye of the
Mind, we must allow this difference, that the Intellect is as well a
Looking-glass as a Sensory, since it does not only see other things but it self
too, and can discern its own blemishes or bad conformation, or whatever other
infirmitiesit labors under. Upon which consideration, we may justify the
boldness of our excellent Verulam, who when he sets forth the four sorts of
Idols (as he calls them) that mislead the studiers of Philosophy, makes one of
them to be Idola Tribus, by which he means those Notions, that though radicated
in the very nature of mankind, are yet apt to mislead us, which may confirm
what I was saying before, that the Soul, when duly excited, is furnished with a
light, that may enable her to judge even of diverse of those original Notions,
by which she is wont to judge of other things. To be short, the Soul upon trial
may find by an inward sense, that some things surpass her forces, as a blind
man that were set to lift up a rock would quickly find it too unweildy to be
managed by him, and the utmost exercise of his strength would but convince him
of the insufficiency of it, to surmount so great a weight or resistance; so
that we do not pretend that the Eye of the Mind should see Invisibles, but only
that it shall discern the limits of that Sphere of Activity, within which
Nature has bounded it, and consequently that some Objects are disproportionate
to it. And I remember that Aristotle himself says, that the eye sees both light
and darkness, which expression, though somewhat odd, may be defended by saying,
that though since darkness is a Privation, not a Being, it cannot properly be
the object of sight, yet it may be perceived by means of the Eye, by the very
differing affection which that Organ resents, when it is impressed on by luminous
or enlightened Objects, and when it is made useless to us by darkness.


Timoth. What you have said, Sophronius, has in great part prevented one thing
that might be said to strengthen Pyrocles his objection, namely, that whereas
when we see with our bodily eyes, there is besides the outward Organ an
internal and rational faculty, that perceives by the help of the eye, that
which is not directly the object of sight in the Eye of the Mind, the
Intellect, there is but one faculty to perceive and judge: For according to
your notion, it may be well answered, that the Intellect being capable by its
proper light, to judge of it self and its own acts as well as of other things,
there is no need of two Principles, the one to perceive and the other to judge,
since one is sufficient for both those purposes.


Pyrocl. When I have time to reflect on all that I have heard alleged amongst
you, Gentlemen, I shall consider how far your Arguments ought to obtain my
assent: But in the mean while I must tell you, that they will scarce have all
the success I presume you desire, unless you add somewhat to free me from what
yet sticks with me of a scruple, that is much of the nature of that which I
formerly proposed, being this; How we can justify our presuming to discourse
at all of things transcending Reason? For I cannot understand how a man that
admits your opinions, can intelligibly speak (and to speak otherwise
mis-becomes a rational creature) of what is infinite or any thing that
surpasses our reason; since when we discourse of such things, either our words
are, or are not accompanied with clear and distinct Ideas or conceptions of the
things we speak of: If they be not, what do we other than speak nonsense, or
(as has been already said) like Parrots entertain our Hearers with words, that
we our selves do not understand; and if they be, then we do in effect
comprehend those things, which yet you would have me think to be on some
account or other, Incomprehensible.


Sophr. I acknowledge this difficulty, Pyrocles, to be a great one; but yet I
think it not so great as that it ought to interdict us all discoursing of
things above Reason: And this would perhaps appear probable enough, if, as your
objection borrows much of what you have formerly alleged, so I may be allowed,
as well to repeat some things as propose others, in making answer to it.


Timoth. I for my part shall not only give you my consent to do so, but make it
my request that you would do it, for when I look back upon our conference,
methinks I plainly perceive that partly the objections of Pyrocles, and partly
some (I fear impertinent) interpositions of mine, have kept your discourse from
being so methodical as otherwise you would have made it, and therefore to be
reminded of some of the chief points of your doctrine, as well as to connect
them with those you shall judge fit to strengthen or illustrate them, may much
conduce to make us both understand it more clearly, and remember it better.


Eug. I am much of your mind, Timotheus, but though my interpositions have been
far more frequent and much less pertinent than yours, yet I am not troubled
that the method of our conference has been so much disturbed; because I think
such a free way of discoursing, wherein emergent thoughts if they be
considerable, are permitted to appear as they arise in the mind, is more useful
than a nice method in a debate about an uncultivated and highly important
subject, in which I think we should aim at first rather to inquire than to
resolve, and to procure as many hints and considerations as we can, in order to
our fuller information against our next meeting, without suppressing any that
is true or useful, only because it agrees not so well with a regular method, as
it does with the design of our conference.


Sophr. Without reflecting upon either of those Gentlemen that have been
pleased to accuse themselves, I shall readily comply with the motion made by
Timotheus, and after having proposed some distinctions make application of them.

And the better to clear this matter in reference to Pyrocles's objection, I
shall first take the liberty to make some distinctions of the Notions or
conceptions of the Mind, and for brevity sake give names to those I have now
occasion to employ. I consider then, that whether the conceptions or Ideas we
have of things be simple or compounded, they may be distinguished into such as
are particular or distinct, and such as are only general, dark, and confused,
or indistinct: So when a Navigator to unknown Countries first gets a sight of
Land, though he may be satisfied that it is Land, yet he has but a very dark
and confused picture of it made in his eye, and cannot descry whether or no the
shore be rocky, or what Creeks or Harbors (if any) it have in it* much less
whether the Coast be well inhabited, and if it be, what kind of buildings it
has; all which he may plainly and distinctly see upon his going ashore. And
this mention of the Sea puts me in mind to point at another distinction, which
is that of some things we have an adequate, of others, but an inadequate
conception; as if we suppose the Navigator I was speaking of, should look
toward the main Sea, though he might see a good way distinctly, yet at length
it would appear so darkly and confusedly to him, that at the verge of the
sensible Horizon, his sight would make him judge that the Sea and Sky come
together, and yet he would conclude that the utmost part of the Sea he could
descry, was but a part of the Ocean, which may, for ought he knows, reach to a
vast extent beyond the visible Horizon.

To our confused, and often also to our inadequate conceptions, belong many of
those that may be called Negative, which we are wont to employ when we speak of
Privations or Negations, as Blindness, Ignorance, Death, etc. We have a
positive Idea of things that are square and round, and black and white, and in
short of other things, whose shapes and colors make them the objects of our
sight: Bu^ when we say, for instance, that (...) Spirit or an Atome is
invisible (...) those words are attended with a ne^gative conception, which is
com^monly but dark and confused be^cause it is indefinite, and remove^ or lays
aside those marks, by which we are wont clearly to perceive an^ distinguish
visible substances: An^ when we say that such a thing (...) impossible, we have
some kind o^ conception of what we speak of, b^^ it is a very obscure and
indistinc^ one at best, exhibiting only a gene^ral and very confused
representat^^on of some ways, whereby on^ might think the thing likely to b^
effected if it were at all perform^^ble, accompanied with a percept^^on of the
insufficiency of tho^^ ways. There is yet another diff^^rence in the notions we
have (...) things, which though not wont^^ be observed, is too important to
(...) here pretermitted, and it is thi^ That of some things we have ^^knowledg,
that for want of a fit^^ term may be called primary or direct, and of some
other things the knowledge we have is acquired but by inferring it from some
more known or clearer truth; and so may be called inferred or illative
knowledge. As when a Geometrician defines to me an Hyperbole, I quickly gain a
clear and distinct Idea of it, but when he proves to me that this Hyperbole may
have such a relation to a strait line which he calls Asymptote, that this line
being continued still comes nearer and nearer to the prolonged side of the
Hyperbole, and yet how far soever both be drawn, 'twill never come to touch it,
his subtle demonstrations present me with an inferred or illative truth, at
which we arrived not but by the help of a train of ratiocinations, and on which
if we exercise our imagination, we shall find this factitious truth, if we may
so call it, accompanied but with a very dim and confused Idea. To the foregoing
distinctions, give me leave to add but this one more, which belongs chiefly to
the not^^ons we have of true or false propos^^tions, namely, that of our
concept^^ons of things, some are Symmetrici^^ (if I may so call them) or every
wa^ consistent, by which I mean th^^ that have these two qualification^ the one
that all the parts are consi^^^ent among themselves, and the ^^^ther that the
entire Idea is consi^^^ent with all other truths; and so^^ are Chymerical or
Asymmetrical, (...) which I understand those that a^ either self-destroying by
the contr^^riety of the parts themselves th^^ are made up of, as if one sho^^
talk of a triangular square, or a (...) shiny night; or being extravaga^^ lead
to some manifest absurdit^^ that may be legitimately inferr^^ from them, or
into inextrica^^ difficulties, or involve a real rep^^^nancy to some
acknowledged tru^ or rule of Reason.

To what I have hitherto said (...) must add these two observation* The First,
that the mind of Ma^^ so framed, that when she is (...) instructed and is not
wanting to her self, she can perceive a want of light in her self for some
purposes, or of clearness and completeness in the best Idaeas she is able to
frame of some things, and on this account can so far take notice of the extent
and imperfection of her own faculties, as to discern that some objects are
disproportionate to her; As when we attentively consider the dimensions of
space, or (if the Cartesians judge aright, that body is nothing but extended
substance) those of the Universe, we may by trial perceive that we cannot
conceive them so great, but that they may be yet greater, or if you please may
exceed the bounds, how remote soever, which our former conception presumed to
assign them; which may be illustrated by what happens to the eye, when it looks
upon the main Sea; since we easily grow sensible that how far soever we can
discover it, yet our sight falls far short of the extent of that vast object.
And it is by the sense which the mind has of her own l^^mitedness and
imperfection on cer^tain occasions, that I think we ma^^ estimate what things
ought no^ and what ought to be looked upon as Things above Reason; for by th^^
Term, I would not have you thin^^ I mean such things as our ration^^ faculty
cannot at all reach to, (...) has not any kind of perception (...) for of such
things we cannot in pa^^ticular either speak or think li^^ men: But my meaning
is this, th^^ whereas the rational Soul is consc^^ous to her own acts, and
feels, th^^ she knows diverse sorts of thin^^ truly and clearly; and thereby
ju^^^ly concludes them to be within (...) compass of her faculties; when (...)
contemplates some few things th^^ seem to be of another order, she^ convinced
that however she stra^^ her power, she has no such Ide^ or perception of them,
as she (...) or may have of those objects th^^ are not disproportionate to her
^^^culties: And this is my first Obse^^vation.

The other thing that I was to observe about the nature of the Mind is, that
it is so constituted, that its faculty of drawing consequences from known
truths, is of greater extent than its power of framing clear and distinct
Idaeas of things; so that by subtle or successive inferences, it may attain to
a clear conviction that some things are, of whose nature and properties (or at
least of some of them) it can frame no clear and satisfactory conceptions. And
that men should be better able to infer propositions about diverse things, than
to penetrate their nature, needs the less be wondered at, both because it is
oftentimes sufficient for our uses to know that such things are, though that
knowledge be not accompanied with a clear and distinct Idaea; and because
oftentimes the Rules (such as, whatever is produced must have a cause; and,
from Truth, nothing rightly follows but Truth) are clear and easy that enable
the Mind to infer conclusions about things, whose nature is very dark, and
abstruse.


Eug. I know, Sophronius, that you have not laid down these preliminary
distinctions and remarks without designing to make use of them, which the
little time that now remains to manage our conference in, calls upon you to
proceed to do.


Sophr. I was just going to say, Eugenius, that after what I have premised, I
hope it may now be seasonable to apply the newly delivered Notions to the three
sorts of things that I formerly represented as being in some sense above
reason. For I consider, that there are some objects of so immense and peculiar
a nature, that (if I may so speak) by an easy view of the mind, that is
without any subtle and laborious disquisition, the Soul discerns, and as it
were feels the Object to be disproportionate to her powers: And accordingly if
she thinks sit to try, she quickly finds her self unable to frame conceptions
of them fit to be acquiesc'd in, and this sort of Objects I do upon that
account call inconceivable, or (on some occasions) supra-intellectual.

But when by attentively considering the attributes and operations of things,
we sometimes find that a thing has some property belonging to it, or does
perform somewhat, which by reflecting on the beings and ways of working that we
know already, we cannot discern to be reducible to them or derivable from them,
we then conclude this property or this operation to be inexplicable; that is,
such as that it cannot so much as in a general way be intelligibly accounted
for, and this makes the second sort of our things above Reason. But this is not
all, for the Rational Soul that is already furnished with innate, or at least
primitive Idaeas and Rules of true and false, when she comes to examine certain
things and make successive inferences about them, she finds (sometimes to her
wonder as well as trouble) that she cannot avoid admitting some consequences as
true and good which she is not able to reconcile to some other manifest Truth
or acknowledged Proposition: And whereas other Truths are so harmonious, that
there is no disagreement between any two of them, the Heteroclite Truths I
speak of appear not symmetrical with the rest of the body of Truths, and we see
not how we can at once embrace these and the rest, without admitting that grand
absurdity which subverts the very foundation of our reasonings, That
Contradictories may both be true. As in the controversy about the endless
divisibility of a strait line, since it is manifest that a line of three foot
for instance is thrice as long as a line of one foot, so that the shorter line
is but the third part of the longer, it would follow that a part of a line may
contain as many parts as a whole, since each of them is divisible into infinite
parts, which seems repugnant to common sense, and to contradict one of those
common Notions in Euclid, whereon Geometry it self is built. Upon which account
I have ventured to call this third sort of things above Reason Asymmetrical or
Unsociable, of which eminent instances are afforded us by those controversies
(such as that of the compositio continui) wherein which side soever of the
question you take, you will be unable directly and truly to answer the
objections that may be urged to show that you contradict some primitive or some
other acknowledged truth.

These, Eugenius, are some of the considerations by which I have been induced
to distinguish the things that to me seem to overmatch our Reason, into three
kinds. For of those things I have styled Unconceivable, our Idaeas are but such
as a moderate attention suffices to make the mind sensible that she wants
either light or extent enough to have a clear and full comprehension of them:
And those things that I have called Inexplicable, are those which we cannot
perceive to de- upon the Idaeas we are furnished with, and to resemble in their
manner of working any of the Agents whose nature we are acquainted with: And
lastly, those things which I have named Unsociable, are such as have Notions
belonging to them, or have conclusions deducible from them, that are (for ought
we can discern) either incongruous to our primitive Idaeas, or when they are
driven home, inconsistent with the manifest Rules we are furnished with, to
judge of True and False.


Eug. I presume, Sophronius, that by sorting things above Reason into three
kinds, you do not intend to deny but that it is possible one object may in
differing regards be referred to more than one of these sorts.


Sophr. You apprehend me very right, Eugenius, and the truth of what you say
may sufficiently appear in that noblest of Objects, God.


Timoth. We owe so much to God, the most perfect of Beings, not only for other
blessings, but for those very Intellects that enable us to contemplate him,
that I shall be very glad to learn any thing that may increase my wonder and
veneration for an Object, to whom I can never pay enough of either.


Sophr. You speak like your self, Timotheus, and I wish I were as able as I
ought to be willing, to satisfy your desire: But since we are now discoursing
like Philosophers, not Divines, I shall proceed to speak of that gloriousest of
Objects, But as his Nature or some of his Attributes afford me instances to the
purpose, for which I presumed to mention him. When God therefore made the World
out of nothing, or (if Pyrocles will not admit the Creation) when he discerns
the secretest thoughts and intentions of the Mind, when he unites an immaterial
Spirit to a humane Body, and maintains, perhaps for very many years, that
unparalled union with all the wonderful conditions he has annexed to it;
when, I say, he does these and many other things, that I must not now stay to
mention, he supplies us with instances of things that are Inexplicable: For
such operations are not reducible to any of the ways of working known to us;
since our own Minds can but modify themselves by diverse manners of thinking;
and as for things without us, all that one body can do to another by acting on
it, is to communicate local motion to it, and thereby produce in it the natural
consequences of such motion; in all which there is no action like any of those
I just now ascribed to God. And if we consider that the praescience of those
future events that we call contingent, being a perfection, is not to be denied
to God; who is by all acknowledged the perfectest of Beings and that yet the
greatest Wits that have labored to reconcile this infallible praecognition
with the liberty of man's will, have been reduced to maintain some thing or
other, that thwarts some acknowledged truth or dictate of Reason: If we duly
consider this (I say) it will afford us an instance of truths, whose
consistency and whose symmetry with the body of other truths, our Reason cannot
discern, and which therefore ought to be referred to that sort of things above
Reason, that I call Unsociable. And now I come to the third sort of these
things which is that I formerly mentioned, first under the name of
Incomprehensible or supra-intellectual: which Title, whether or no it belongs
to any other Object, (which I will not now enquire) does certainly belong to
God, whose Nature comprehending all perfections in their utmost possible
degrees, is not like to be comprehensible by our minds, who altogether want
diverse of those perfections, and have but moderate measures, (not to call them
shadows) of the rest. We are indeed born with, or at least have a power and
diverse occasions to frame an Idaea of a Being infinitely perfect, and by this
Idaea we may sufficiently discriminate the Original of it, God, from all other
Objects whatsoever. But then, when we come to consider attentively and minutely
what is contained in the notion of Omnipotence, Omniscience, Eternity, and
those other divine Attributes that are all united in that great confluence and
abys^ of perfections, God; we may be^ sure to find, that our faculties are
exceedingly surmounted by the vastness and gloriousness of that unlimited and
unparalled object (...) about which, as we can discove^ that it exists, and
that it possesse^ all the perfection we can conceive^ so we may at the same
time discern^ that it must have degrees of perfection, which because of the
inferiority of our Nature, we are not able to conceive.

And yet this discovery of God^ Incomprehensibleness may be mad^ without subtle
disquisitions, an^ without trains of consequences^ though not without due
attention^ by a direct view of the Mind (if (...) may so term it;) who finds
her self upon trial as unable fully to measure the divine perfections as the
dimensions of space, which we can conceive to be greater and greater, without
ever being able to determine any extent beyond whose limits they cannot reach.


Pyrocles. I suspected Sophron. by the tenor of your Discourse that the last
Questions these Gentlemen asked you, diverted you from saying somewhat more
than you did by way of application of your preceding Discourse.


Sophron. I was then indeed about to make, as I now shall, this use of what I
had been saying; that I readily acknowledge that it is an arrogance to talk of
infinite or of priviledg'd things, with the same confidence, or to pretend to
do it with the same clearness, wherewith knowing men may speak of things
unquestionably within the compass of our Intellect: But that this need not
hinder us from speaking, nor does disable us from speaking rationally of
priviledg'd things themselves. For all the notions that are allowable are not
of the same sort or order; and if none were to be admitted but those that
enable us to comprehend the Object, that is, which give us a clear and distinct
knowledge of all that it contains or that belongs to it, I must confess that we
have no good Notions of priviledg'd things in particular* but then I must add,
that I fear we have few or none even of many things that we think our selves
very knowing in. And when we speak of things as being above Reason, though we
have no clear, distinct and adequate Notion o^ them, yet we may have a general
confused and inadequate Notion of them, which may suffice to make us
discriminate their respective Objects from all else, and from one another; as
may be observed in several, Idaeas that are negatively framed, such as those we
have o^ invisible, incomprehensible, and in others which I formerly called
Inferred; because they accompany the remote Inferences whereby one truth is
concluded from another: as when Geometricians infer from some propositions in
Euclid that any strait line may be divided farther and farther without stop.
For of this and some other propositions about priviledg'd things, we are not
quite destitute of allowable Notions; as may appear by some of the admirably
ingenious Speculations of Mathematicians about the Affections of surd Numbers,
and about incommensurable Magnitudes; about some of which we have no such clear
and symmetrical Conceptions as we have of many other things, that are of a
nearer and more intelligible order. And on this occasion I shall not scruple to
acknowledge, that partly by my own Experience, and partly by the Confessions of
others, and by their unsuccesful Attempts, I am induced to think that God, who
is a most free Agent, having been pleased to make Intelligent Beings, may
perhaps have made them of differing Ranks, or Orders, whereof Men may not be of
the Principal; and that whether there be such Orders or no, he has at least
made us Men, of a limited nature (in general) and of a bounded Capacity.
Congruously to this I think also, that he has furnished man either with
certain innate Ideas or Models and Principles, or with a Faculty or Power and
Disposition easily to frame them, as it meets with occasions (which readily
occur) to excite them: But because that (as I lately noted) God intended the
mind of Man but of a limited Capacity, his Understanding is so constituted that
the inbred or easily acquired Idaeas and primitive Axioms wherewith it is
furnished, and by Relation or Analogy whereunto it judges of all other Notions,
and Propositions, do not extend to all knowable Objects whatsoever; but reach
only to such as have a sufficient Affinity, or bear some proportion to those
Primary Idaeas and Rules of Truth, which are sufficient if duly improved, to
help us to the attainment, though not of the perfect knowledge of truth's of
the highest Orders, yet to the Competent Knowledge of as much truth as God
thought fit to allow our minds in their present (and perchance lapsed)
Condition, or state of Union with their mortal Bodies.


Eugen. Your Opinion, Sophron. if I apprehend it aright, contains two very
differing Assertions; one that it is allowable to contemplate and even to
discourse of things above Reason, since we may have some Conceptions of them,
though they be but very dim and imperfect: and the other, that we ought not to
look upon, or speak of such Objects as things that we comprehend, or have even
such a measure of knowledge of, as we have of things that are not priviledg'd.
For of these we are not to speak but with a peculiar Wariness, and modest
Diffidence.


Sophron. You have expressed my thoughts Eugen. since I Intend not to enjoin
silence, or dissuade Curiosity, but yet forbid presumption, in reference to
priviledg'd things.


Timoth. And truly Sophron. I see no Reason to repine at the limits which your
late Discourse has in imitation of the Author of nature himself, assigned to
human Knowledge. For the number of priviledg'd things is altogether
inconsiderable in comparison of the multitude of other things, to which our
knowledge may be improved to reach; and which it far more concerns us to know
well, than it does to resolve puzling Questions about things incomprehensible;
there being within the compass of those truths, enough to employ, and reward
our Curiosity without straining and tiring our Reason about Objects that
transcend it. And yet even about these, some disquisitions may be allowed us,
for an object that on the account of some of its properties may be a
priviledg'd one; may have diverse other things belonging to it, that do not
surpass our Reason, and whose knowledge may therefore be attained, by the due
employment of it.

Thus we usefully study the nature of Bodies, which make up the Object of the
Excellent Science of Natural Philosophy; though the true Notion of Body in
general be a thing so difficult to frame, that the best of our Modern
Philosophers can by no means agree about it. Which I do not wonder at; because
if we pursue the notion of a Body to the uttermost; 'twill lead us to the
perplexing controversy, De compositione continui, and there you will not deny,
but that the understanding will be left in the dark. Thus Surveyors,
Carpenters, Architects, and many others know diverse Affections of the square
Figure that are of great use to them in their respective Employments, though
that property of the square, that its side and diagonal are incommensurable, be
unknown to most of them; and if they were told of it, and would prosecute the
Speculation, would involve them in exceeding great and probably insuperable
difficulties.


Sophron. To confirm what you have been telling us, Timoth. I shall venture to
add, that even about priviledg'd things, our inquiries, if modestly and
discreetly managed, may not only be allowable but sometimes profitable. For
even of such Subjects a studious search may bring us to know more than we did,
though not so much as we would, nor enough to be acquiesc'd in. So that such
enquiries may probably teach us, to know the Objects better, and our selves
better too; by giving us such a sensible discovery of the insufficiency of our
Understandings to comprehend all sorts of things, as may be very useful, though
not pleasing, and may richly recompense us, for the pains that ended in so
instructive a disappointment. And let me add to the pertinent instances that
have been mentioned, the noblest that can be given; I mean the Contemplation of
God himself. For he has so ordered all things, that it is scarce possible for
us, to be destitute of an Idaea of him, which will at least represent him as an
existent Being, and more perfect than any other Being; and yet when we come
with sufficient Application of mind to pry into the wonderful Attributes of
this most singular and adorable Being, we are, as was lately observed, sure to
find our selves unable to comprehend so unbounded an Object. Which yet ought
not to discourage us from so noble a Study, since we are allowed the great
contentment and honor to make further and further discoveries of the
excellentest of Objects, by that very immensity of his perfections, that makes
it impossible for us to reach to the bounds of his Excellency, or rather to
discover that it has any bounds at all.

But, Gentlemen, I perceive I have been so transported by the mention of this
vast and divine Subject, in whose Contemplation it is so easy, and so pleasant
to lose ones self, that I have forgot the notice Eugen. gave me, a pretty while
since, that the time allotted for our present conference was then near
expiring. And therefore I shall leave you to pick out of the Excursions to
which your interpositions tempted (not to say obliged) me, the Applications,
that I intended to make more methodically of the distinctions I laid down. And
I am the less troubled to be hindered from proposing to you my thoughts about
the way of distinguishing priviledg'd things from others, because we have a
domestic Monitor, or a kind of an internal Criterium always at hand to help
us. For I think it may well be said, that the wise Author of Nature has endued
the Understanding with such a quick, though internal, Sensation (if I may so
call it) that when due attention is not wanting, it can feelingly discern
between other Objects, and those that are disproportionate to its ability. As
even in Beasts, the eye is so framed (according to the institution of Nature)
that if it be obverted to the bright noon-day-Sun, there needs no Monitor, but
the operation of the same Sun, to make it wink; (and perhaps water) and thereby
discover it self to be dazzled and overpowr'd by the disproportionate Object.


Pyroc. I confess your Discourses, Gentlemen, have made an unexpected
Impression upon me; but whether that will amount to a Conviction will scarce
appear till our next Conference. Only thus much I shall tell you now, that it
would much facilitate our agreement in Opinion, if you did not contend for
altogether so much; but would be pleased to leave it undertermin'd, whether
Man's intellectual Faculty it self is incapable by the help of any degree of
light, to discover and know those things, which you call above Reason? and
would content your selves to say, That there are some things belonging to these
Subjects, which we must confess we have less clear and distinct Notions of,
than we have even of the difficultest of those things, that are acknowledged
not to surpass our Reason: And that if we will take upon us, to determine
positively and particularly about these transcendent things, we must employ
ways of Reasoning, congruous to their peculiar natures.


Sophron. I shall readily consent not to expect your final Resolution, before
our next meeting, having no cause to fear that time, will be unfriendly to her
Daughter Truth.


Timoth. And in the mean while, Pyrocles, I am glad to find by the last part of
what you just now said, that you seem to be no longer indisposed to admit some
things, that (at least in our present state) do some way or other surpass our
Reason. For I think that instead of exalting that faculty, we injure and
defraud it, if we do not freely allow it, as much enjoyment of Truth as we are
able to procure it: And consequently if Geometry, or Revelation, or Experience,
assure us of diverse things of which we can know but That they are, and what
they do, not, what they are, and how they act, we must neither refuse, nor
neglect the study of such Truths, any more than we would refuse to look into
any other Objects, than those that we can look through; And therefore to enrich
the Intellect as much as we are able, we must entertain, not only those Truths,
that we can comprehend, but those also, how sublime soever, that we can have
any certain, though but a very imperfect Knowledge of, Especially since those
remote and abstruse Subjects may be as much more noble as more dark than
others, and thereby render an imperfect Discovery of them, more desirable, than
a far clearer one of Inferior things.


FINIS.
ADVICES IN JUDGING OF Things SAID TO TRANSCEND REASON.
The Speakers Arnobius, Eugenius, Pyrocles and Timotheus. Arnob. I Was very
glad, Gentlemen, to learn this morning of Sophronius some things, whence 'twas
easy to conclude, that by the Discourse you had with him last night, he has
made it allowable for me to demand, and rational for you to grant, nay to
proffer me, a Dispensation of the Task you imposed on me at our last meeting.
For though he spoke with the modesty that became him of your Conference, and gave
me, but a hasty and imperfect Account of what passed between you; yet I think I
may presume, that by his Discourse Pyrocles himself was at least inclined, and
you two, Gentlemen, fully persuaded to admit, that there are Things above
Reason; which was the main point about which you expected at our last Congress
that I should entertain you, at our then next, or now present meeting.


Eugen. I deny not, that Sophronius's Considerations were prevalent on
Timotheus and me; and have, I hope, made a good impression on Pyrocles himself;
but that ought not to hinder us from coming, as we now do, to claim your
promise of entertaining us about things above Reason. And if you will needs be
dispensed with from repeating those Considerations that Sophronius has employed
already, (though I doubt not but by repeating them, you would both strengthen and
advance them;) we will not be rigid Exactors of our Right: but yet we must not
remit your Task, though we are content to change it. For I question not but these
Gentlemen will consent with me, to discharge you of your promise of discoursing
of the Arguments that may infer some things to be above Reason, if you will
please to afford us your Thoughts, about the ways of avoiding to be imposed on
by our selves or others, when such sublime Subjects are treated or discoursed
of.


Arnob. Though in the recital of your Conference, Sophronius did but touch on
several Subjects whereon it would be proper for me to insist, in the Discourse
you seem to expect from me; yet I am apt to fear, that he has so prevented me
in what I should say, that he has left little or nothing for me to do, but to
make Repetitions of what you have heard already much better expressed: which
will be an Employment far enough from being grateful, either to you or me.


Eugen. Your Modesty, Sir, is not like to defeat our Curiosity; and that you
may not think your self hardly used, or condemned to bear Repetitions; be
pleased to take notice, both that, what we desire as a Favor, we might claim as
a Compensation, and that the things we expect from you now, are not Arguments
to make out that there are things above Reason, but that you would afford us
some Rules and Directions how to regulate the Ratiocinations we make; and
estimate those we meet with, about such Transcendent Subjects.


Arnob. I hope Eugenius, you do not in earnest think me so vain as to pretend
to frame a Logic about things above Logic; or magisterially to deliver Rules
about things that are as Anomalous, as they are either Remote or Abstruse.
Besides that all you have said, does not exempt me from a fear, that by reason
of Sophronius's omitting diverse points of his Discourse, and my imperfect
Remembrance of those he transiently and summarily mentioned, he has anticipated
much of what were otherwise proper for me to say. But yet because it is possible
that his thoughts and mine, may have lead us, to have made some Reflections
that are not at all the same; and that even when others happen to be
coincident, it may be not altogether useless, that I should endeavor to
enlarge some things that he has but hinted, and illustrate or vindicate some
others that will not be prejudiced by being cleared, or confirmed; and above
all this, because I would show you, that I am willing to comply with you
somewhat to the hazard of my Discretion, I shall not refuse to offer you some,
not Rules, but Advices; provided you freely interrupt me, when I begin to
trouble you with the Repetition of any thing that you have, though I have not
heard before; and provided too, that you look not on these Advices so much as
directions to find the truth in such abstruse matters, as Cautions that may
chance to assist you to avoid some Errors and Mistakes.


Eugen. We are not so scrupulous but that we shall upon your own terms gladly
receive your thoughts, whatever names you please to give them.


Arnob. I shall then without further preamble comply with your Commands, and
propose as my


First Advice.
That about Priviledg'd Subjects themselves, we do not admit any (affirmative)
assertion without such proofs, to evince it, as are sufficient in their kind.
I hope Gentlemen that Sophronius has so far declared to you, what is to be
meant by Priviledg'd things, that though it be a new term, yet I need not
solicitously explain it; and may think it sufficient to intimate in few words
that they are things of a very Heteroclyte and Abstruse Nature, and have
belonging to them such peculiar Affections and Attributes, as require that in
judging and reasoning of them we should employ Notions and Rules congruous to
their particular Condition; some of them superadded to, and others perhaps
differing from, those that men generally and safely enough make use of about
common and familiar things, that are of a nature less impervious to our
Understandings. And if the shortness of this Summary Description, should leave
it less clear than I hope you find it; I foresee there will diverse occasions of
illustrating it, by instances and other ways, occur in the Sequel of our
Discourse: In order to which I shall, after this short and necessary
Digression, return to the lately given First Advice; and tell you that it is
grounded upon this Consideration, that it is not reasonable to give assent to
any thing as a Truth, but upon a sufficient Reason of that Assent. And though we
may well grant in the general, that a thing which ^urpasses our Reason may have
belonging to it some affection that is also above Reason; yet we are not in
particular to believe that this or that Affection does belong to it, without
particular and competent proof. For since about a Priviledg'd thing, as well as
about any other, Propositions may be framed, and often are so, that are
contrary to one another; to assent to both, were to be sure to believe one
falsity, if not two. And if we will assent but to one, we must either judge at
Adventures, or allow our selves to examine the Mediums of Probation, employed
on both sides, and thereupon judge, why one of the Propositions is to be
assented to, and the other rejected.

Pyrocles. I am glad Arnobius, that you allow your self and us this manly
freedom without which our Understandings were liable to be imposed on in
matters of the highest Concernment: For there scarce ever did, or I fear ever
will, want some men who either out of Ignorance and passive Delusion, or out of
self-Confidence, or out of Design, take upon them, with great boldness, to
affirm what they please about priviledg'd Subjects, and when they are opposed
in their Extravagancies by Ratiocinations they cannot answer, they urge, that
these things being above Reason, are not to be judged of by it: But of such men
as these I usually demand whether their own Assent to the things they would
have us believe, be grounded upon some Rational Argument, or not: If they say,
it is not, they are fools to believe it themselves; and I should add to the
number of fools, if after this acknowledgment, I should believe them: But if
they say they do, I desire them to produce their Argument; for since it is
framed by a Human Understanding, the force of it may be also comprehended and
judged of by a Human Understanding: And it is to no purpose to say, that the
Subject surpasses Human Reason; for if it do so indeed, it will surpass theirs
as well as mine, and so leave us upon even terms. And let the thing assented
to, be what it will, the assent it self ought to be founded upon a sufficient
Reason, and consequently upon one that is intelligible, to the Human Intellect
that is wrought on by it.


Eugen. I willingly allow, that there is a great difference between the being
able and obliged to know the nature or cause of a thing, and the being able to
give an intelligible account of the motives that induce our assent to it; and
without such motives the assent may by chance be given to what is a truth, but
that will not hinder it from being an irrational Assent.


Timoth. I was not ill pleased Arnobius, with the Caution you employed in the
close of your Advice, where, by saying that the positive Proofs you require to
evince an Assertion about a priviledg'd thing, must be sufficient in their
Kind, you plainly intimate that you do not exact rigid Demonstrations of such
Assertions: And indeed it were not reasonable you should; for since it is
manifest, that there are many Truths, such as Historical and Political ones,
that by the nature of the things are not capable of Mathematical or
Metaphysical Demonstrations, and yet being really Truths, have a just Title to
our Assent, it must be acknowledged, that a rational Assent may be founded upon
Proofs that reach not to rigid Demonstrations, it being sufficient that they
are strong enough to deserve a wise man's Acquiescence in them. And therefore if
any things can be made out to be revealed by God concerning his own Nature, or
Actions, or Decrees, we ought firmly to believe them, because that, of some of
those things, as his Praescience, Mercy, etc. We can have no better Proofs;
and of others, as what he did before our World was made; and what he will do
with us after we are dead, we can have no other considerable Proofs at all.
And the Objection made by Pyrocles against the assenting to audacious
Propositions framed by imposing Men, will not reach our Case: for there is no
reason to think, that because an Object surpasses an humane Understanding, it
must therefore surpass the Divine Intellect it self. And even in things that
are transacted in the Mind of Man himself; I may learn from another that is not
my Superior, what I can by no means attain to know, unless he be pleased to
discover it to me. As that he was at such a time, thinking of the Creation of
the World, or resolving how to dispose of his Son, and what Recompense he
designs to give a Servant that he has not yet entertained.


Pyrocles. About things of such a kind as you now mention, Timotheus, I shall
not dissent from you; because these are things, that though not discoverable by
our Reason till we be informed of them, are yet clearly knowable by our Reason,
when we are informed of them. But that there should be things, which though
perspicuously proposed, should not be comprehensible by our understanding, is
such an affront to that noble Faculty, that I confess it has much indisposed me
to grant (what I am yet unwilling peremptorily to deny,) that there are, as
Sophronius would have us think, not only some privileged things, but more than
one kind of them; which if we do admit, it will place such narrow Limits to our
Understandings, that we must despair of the desireablest knowledge of all,
namely that which is conversant about the noblest and sublimest Objects.


Eugenius. Leaving to Sophronius the management of a Point he has studied, and
which I have not now time solemnly to Argue; I shall only tell you in general
that I see no necessity, That Intelligibility to a humane Understanding, should
be necessary to the Truth or Existence of a thing; any more then that
Visibility to a Humane Eye, should be necessary to the Existence of an Atome,
or of a Corpuscle of Air, or of the Effluvium's of a Loadstone, or the Fragrant
Exhalations of Ambergris, and Musk from a perfumed Glove; I might here observe,
that even by the same Sense some Creatures may discern things that may not be
perceptible to others: as no attention or application of the Organ (or the
Nose) will enable a man to perceive the Effluvia expiring from the stale
Footsteps of a hunted and unseen Hare or Dear, though Hounds, and especially
Bloodhounds, will have a vivid Preception of such Odours, and by their help,
trace and pursue the flying and unseen Beast. This, I say, may be observed in
Favor of my present Argument; but 'twill perhaps be a more proper illustration
to represent, that the natural Incapacity of a Child's Intellect, to understand
the abstruse Affections of Parabola's, Hyperbola's and the incommensurable
Lines of a Square, hinders not those Figures, from being contained in rerum
natura, or their Affections from being true and demonstrable. And though we do
admit some privileged things in the Sense above declared, yet, (to say
somewhat to obviate Pyrocles's Fear) there is no necessity that we should be
interdicted all Knowledge of those sublime Objects, in which there are many
things, whereof, or of their Consequences, we must confess our selves ignorant.
Thus elder Geometricians knew very well what a Rectangular Triangle was, when
they conceived it to be a Figure consisting of three strait Lines, two of which
comprize a right Angle; though probably for a great while they did not know so
much as all its chief Properties or Affections: since for ought appears, before
Pythagoras, (who offered a Heccatombe to the Muses in gratitude for the
Discovery) it was not known that the Square of the Hypothenusa is equal to the
Squares of both the other Sides; and much more likely it is, that they were not
able to solve those Difficulties (that continue to perplex even our Age) which
attend that endless divisibility of Lines, that is inferrible from that
Equality of the two Squares to the single Square.

And besides the inscrutable Perfections of God, some of his Works are such,
that, notwithstanding the complete Knowledge of them surpasses our Forces; yet
there remains so many things, as well worthy to be known, as possible to be
attained by us, that they will allow Exercise enough to the Wits of all the
Philosophers in the World. And besides that, as I have been saying, even about
these privileged Subjects themselves, diverse considerable things may be
discovered, if they were altogether impenetrable by our Understandings, yet
their Number is so small, that they would leave a large Scope for human
Knowledge to diffuse and improve it self. For it is not every thing that is hard
to be understood or contrary to the common Rules of Probability, that has a
right to pass for a privileged thing, for so the Paradoxes about Srud
Quantities, of Isoperimetal Figures; duplicate and triplicate Proportion, and
diverse other surprising Doctrines that are capable of Mathematical
Demonstrations, would be privileged things. Nor are all those worthy of this
Title that are by many proposed and embraced as Philosophical Mysteries, for,
such are the Peripateticks Substantial Forms, which really are not privileged
things, but Scholastic Chimeras. But though I shall not presume positively to set
down the discriminating Bounds and Signs of privileged things, yet most if
not all of them being such, as are either primary in their kind, as God
himself, and the things whose Nature flows immediately from him, or else things
that if thoroughly inspected, do necessarily involve the consideration of some
kind of Infinitum, or else are such that though in some main Questions about them
one side must be taken, both sides are encombred with absurdities, or scarce
superable Difficulties: Those I say being all (or some of them) the usual marks
that belong to privileged things, you will easily grant, that their Number is
not near so great as their abstruseness; and that therefore Pyrocles and his
Philosophical Friends need not fear to want employment for their Curiosity. And
for farther Answer to his Objection I shall add that we must regulate our
Belief by our Perceptions, not our Wishes, and must not conclude, that because
'twere desirable for us, that all things were penetrable to our humane
Understandings, there is really nothing that is not so: and we can no more
conclude that we are as knowing as Angels, because we wish we were so, than
that we are as immortal as they, because we would never die. But as for those
few things that have belonging to them, Properties so extraordinary, as to make
it probable, even at the first sight, that their Nature must be very abstruse
and difficult be fully discovered by us, I hope Pyrocles will allow, that
things of so Heteroclite a Nature may challenge an exemption from some of the
rules employed about common things; And that really such Rules as I mean, and
some also of the vulgar Notions cannot always be safely extended to such
Subjects, I forbear to show in this place; only because I would not too long at
once interrupt Arnobius; and I expect to have a good opportunity to speak again
of this Subject, before our Conference be ended.


Tim. You may then, I presume, Arnobius, as soon as you please, favor us with
your second Advice.


Arnob. I shall readily obey you, Timotheus, by proposing it thus:


The Second Advice, or Rule.
That we be not hasty to frame Negatives about Privileged Things, or to reject
Propositions or Explications concerning them; at least, as if they were absurd
or impossible.
It Is easy to observe in the Speculation of natural things themselves, how
unsafe it is not only to affirm, but in diverse Cases also reject opinions,
before men have any thing near a competent Historical Information of what
belongs to the Subject they take upon them peremptorily to judge of. And
therefore it must in reason be thought much more unwary to be forward to
resolve upon Negative Propositions about things which we our selves acknowledge
to be above the reach of Human Reason, which since they are, 'twill become us
at least to forbear a rude and insulting way of rejecting the opinions of
Learned Men that dissent from us about such things; since the sublimity of the
Subject should make mistakes about them the more easy to be pardoned, because
they are difficult to be avoided; and our own sharing in the disability of
penetrating such abstruse things, should keep us from being over-confident,
that we also may not be mistaken, and incline us to tolerate other men's
opinions about matters wherein we our selves have but opinion, not science.

Pyr. But have not you formerly advised us not to suffer our selves to be
imposed upon by proofless Assertions, even about privileged things?


Arnob. I did so, and do so still: but there is a great deal of difference
between believing a proofless affirmation about things which the affirmer does
not know to be true, and framing Negative Conclusions against Opinions, which,
for ought we yet clearly know, may be true: and therefore my present advice is
very consistent with my former: for here I counsel only, either a suspension of
Judgment, when there appears no proof on either side sufficient to sway the
Intellect; or such a wary and unprejudiced assent to opinions that are but
faintly probable, that the mind may be ready to receive, without either
obstinacy, or surprise, any better argument that shall conclude the contrary of
the opinion we favored before.


Eugen. But methinks it is hard to avoid the framing of Conjectures, even about
those sublime Subjects, concerning which we can frame but conjectures, and
those often very slight ones.


Arnob. I confess an absolute suspension of judgment is a very uneasy thing,
nor do I strictly require you should entertain no conjectures; but only that we
should consider that we may be easily mistaken in them, and by further
information see cause to lay them down, and perhaps exchange them for contrary
ones: my thoughts of this matter may be perchance somewhat illustrated by
supposing that we four were walking in a Highway, and discovered as far off as
our eyes could reach, some erected and moving body of human stature; tho we
should by its shape and walking safely enough conclude that 'twere no other
animal than a man, yet what manner of man he were, as old, or young, handsome,
or ugly; we should not be able to discern, and consequently, could have no
sufficient ground to determine. And as if I should affirm him to be a young man
or handsome, you may justly censure me of rashness; so if because I cannot
prove my conjecture, you should resolutely deny that he is a young man or
handsome, I should think you guilty, tho not of an equal, yet of a censurable
unwariness, because, for ought you know to the contrary, he may be what I
guessed him to be. And tho we are naturally so uneasy under fluctuation of
mind, that for my part I confess (and it may be you may be subject to the same
Infirmity) I should scarce forbear resembling in my thoughts the man we speak
of to some body or other that I knew, yet I should justly think that Conjecture
to be very fallible, and both expect that when I should come to have a nearer
and clearer view of him, I might see cause to dismiss my first Idea for that
which this new and better prospect would afford me, tho it were quite differing
from that I ^ad formerly entertained, and should represent him, that my forward
thought perhaps resemble, to a young man of my acquaintance with black curled
hair, and a ruddy complexion, to be pale and wrinckled, with gray hair curled
like a pound of Candles. The Application, I suppose, I may spare.

But Gentlemen, I would not be understood in the preceding Discourse, as if I
were against all framing of Negative Propositions about privileged Things; my
design being but to dissuade from hasty ones: For sometimes it is much more
easy and safe to deny things, than to affirm them to belong to a Subject that
surpasses our Reason. And the observation may be of use, especially in two
cases; one, when the Negative we assert is grounded not upon Axioms taken from
the usual course of Nature, or upon Propositions dubious, or remote from the
first Principles of knowledge, but upon either Catholic and Metaphysical
Axioms, or else upon Truths manifestly flowing from some clear, tho inadequate
notion we have of the nature of the things we treat of. The other Case is, when
we have a clear and sufficient proof by Revelation, or otherwise, of the
positive Attributes of the things we contemplate; for then we may safely deny
of that Subject any other thing that is really inconsistent with that positive
Attribute. Upon which account it is, that tho we do not fully comprehend what
God is, yet knowing by the clear Light of Nature (and if we be Christians)
believing it upon the account of Revelation, that he is a Being Intelligent and
infinitely perfect, we may safely deny against Epicurus, Vorstius, and Mr.
Hobbs, that he is a Corporeal Substance, as also that he is Mortal, or
Corruptible.


Pyrocl. I shall not trouble you, Arnobius, to enlarge upon your last Advice,
but willingly receive the ^avour of your next.


Arnob. Which shall be this:


The Third Advice, or Rule.
That a matter of Fact or other Truth about Privileged Things being proved by
Arguments competent in their kind, we ought not to deny it merely because we
cannot explain, or perhaps so much as conceive the Modus of it.
It Is no very difficult Task to justify this Advice; but I may do it the
better, if you give me leave to frame and premise a Distinction, for want of
which I have observed a want of Clearness in several Discourses, where the term
Modus has been employed: for sometimes we would deny so much as a possibillity,
that one thing can belong to, or be truly said of another; as when we say we
understand not how one Creature can create another; or how there can be a Line
that is neither straight, nor crooked; or a finite (whole) number that is
neither even nor odd. But most commonly we mean by our not understanding the
Modus of a thing, that we do not clearly and distinctly conceive after what
manner the Property or other Attribute of a Subject belongs to it, or performs
its operations. The first kind of Modus may, for distinctions sake, be called a
possible Modus; and the other, an actual modus. Now in both the foregoing
Acceptions of the term Modus, we may find Instances fit for our present
purpose. For we cannot imagine, How a short Line or other finite Quantity can
be endlesly divisible, or (on the contrary) how Infinite Parts should make but
a Finite Total: and yet Geometry constrains us to admit, That it is so. But tho
there be but few Instances of this kind, yet of the other sort of our Nescience
of the Modus of things, there may be found more Instances than we could wish
there were; for even in natural and corporeal things the eager disputes of the
acutest Philophers, and the ingenuous Confessions of the most judicious and
moderate, sufficiently manifest, that as yet we know not the manner of
operating whereby several Bodies perform what we well know they bring to pass.
And not to enter into those nice and tedious Disputes of the cause of the
Cohesion of the parts of matter in the smallest, most principal, and most
primary Bodies, perhaps without going out of our selves, the way whereby the
Rational Soul can exercise any power over the humane body, and the way whereby
the Understanding and the Will act upon one another, have not yet been
intelligibly explained by any. And the like I may say of the Phenomenon of the
Memory, especially in those in whom that faculty is eminent. For it is a thing
much more fit to be admired, than easy to be conceived, how in so narrow a
compass as part of a Human Brain, there should be so many thousand distinct
Cells or Impressions as are requisite to harbor the Characters or Signatures
of many Languages, each of them consisting of many thousand differing Words,
besides the Images or Models of so many thousand Faces, Schemes, Buildings, and
other sensible Objects, and the Ideas of so many thousand Notions and Thoughts,
and the distinct Footsteps of almost innumerable multitudes of other things:
and how all these shall in so narrow a compass have such deep and lasting
Impressions made for them, and be oftentimes lodged so exactly in the order
wherein they were at first committed to the memory (and that perhaps many years
before) that upon a sudden command of the Will, or a slight casual Hint, a
whole set of Words, Things and Circumstances will in a trice, as it were, start
up and present themselves even in the very Series, order and manner that so
long before belonged to them. And I doubt not, but that besides those abstruse
things, about the Modus, of which the more candid Philosophers have confessed
their Ignorance, there would many others have been taken notice of, if we did
but as seriously and impartially inquire into the Nature of all the things we
are pleased to think we know. And when I reflect on the yet depending Disputes
between Philosophers and Mathematicians about the nature of Place and Local
Motion, which are things so obvious and familiar to us, I should, tho I had no
other Inducements, be inclined to think, that we should find difficulties
enough in many other Subjects wherein we do not now take notice of any, if we
particularly studied their nature; and that our acquiescence in what we have
learned about many things proceeds not from our greater knowledge of their
nature, but from our having exercised less curiosity and attention in
considering it.

And if in things Corporeal, that are the familiar objects of our Senses, we
are often reduced to confess our Ignorance of the Modes of their inexisting or
operating, I hope it will not be denied, that to a Being wholly unapproachable
by our Senses, natural Theology may be allowed to ascribe some things whose
Modus is not attainable by our understanding: As the Divine Prescience of
future Contingents; which as 'twere impious, to deny as to the truth of the
thing; so I fear it is impossible to explicate as to the Modus of it.

Eugen. If it were at this time proper for me to meddle with things of that
kind, I should not much scruple to say in favor of the Christian Religion,
that diverse Tenants granted both by Christians, Jews, and Heathens, as parts of
natural Theology, to me seem as difficult to be con^ived, as diverse of those
Mysteries that for their unintelligibless are fiercely opposed in Revealed
Theology. I will not take upon me to judge of others; but for my part I
confess, I do not much better understand, how an Intellect and a Will and
Affections are distinctly inexistent in God, in such sort as they are wont to
be attributed to him, than how in him there can be a Trinity; stated, not as
some Schoolmen explicate, or rather darken it, but as the Gospel delivers it: I
can as little explain by any thing in Nature, how God, who is an immaterial
Substance, can move Matter, as how he can create it: nor would it at all
satisfy me to tell me, that a Rational Soul moves a Human Body; for I do not
allow, that it gives any motion to the Body, but only guides that which other
Agents have put the parts of it into. And tho it did produce motion in the
Body, my scruple would yet remain; for the Cartesians themselves confess, that
the power the Soul has of so much as determining the motion of the Body belongs
to it, not upon any Physical Account, but by the particular Appointment and
immediate Power of God, who would have that Power one of the Conditions or
Properties of the Union of the Soul and Body. So that to me, who desire to have
it explained how an immaterial Substance can move Matter, and consequently, how
God can do it, it will be no satisfaction to say, that the Rational Soul can
move the Body it is joined to, since that Power is referred merely to God's
Appointment: And the question is, how God himself can be conceived to move
matter.


Arnob. I know not whether upon the same Grounds which I do not disallow, I may
not add, that whereas by many it is looked upon as an inconceivable thing that
God should see men's Thoughts, to me it appears as little intelligible how he
can know their outward Actions: For since we have no way of discerning the
particular motions of Men's Bodies, but by some of our Senses, especially our
sight; and since those Sensations themselves necessarily require Organs duly
constituted, that is, made up of diverse parts, framed and joined after such a
determinate manner, I see not how we can explain the Perception of visible
Objects without an Eye, or so much as any Corporeal Organ, or Substance;
especially since it is, and that very justly, asserted, that the Deity is not
united to any portion of matter, as the Human Soul is to the Human Body. And to
these Instances, others to the same purpose might be added, but that I think it
fitter to mind you, that of those it already mentioned amongst us, there are
some that I presume you will judge referable to that which I lately called a
possible Modus; since it seems, toto genere, as they speak, inexplicable, how
the Attribute inexists in the Subject, and after what manner the Cause can
produce the Effect ascribed to it.


Tim. I know you too well, Gentlemen, to suspect, you mean, by this, to deny to
God either the power of moving matter, or that of perceiving all its motions.


Arnob. You may well take that for granted, and you may remember, that to
prevent mistakes, I was careful in proposing my Advice to except those things
for which there is some positive proof competent in its kind.


Pyrocl. One may then, without surprising you, ask what kind of proofs those
may be?


Arnob. A full Answer to that Question would take up too much of that little
time that is allowed us before it grow dark, to go through the Advices that yet
remain unspoken of. But yet to comply with you as far as my haste will permit,
I shall name two or three kinds of positive proofs, that may be employed on
such occasions as we speak of. And first, if there be an effect that we discern
must proceed from such a Cause, or Agent, we may conclude that such a Cause
there is, tho we do not particularly conceive how, or by what operation it is
able to produce the acknowledged effect: Thus, tho a man otherwise of a good
Judgment, being wholly a stranger to the Mathematics, cannot conceive how a
skillful Astronomer can many years before hand foretell Eclipses to a day and
hour, and perhaps to a few minutes; yet when the success does, as it often
happens, verify such Predictions, he will be satisfied, that the maker of them
had the skill to foreknow the things foretold in them. And so the generality of
Learned Men among us, who are not so much acquainted with that part of
Navigation, which some Moderns have by a Greek Name called Limen-Euretica, or
the Art of steering to Harbors, cannot well conceive how a Ship, that is, for
instance, in the vast Atlantic Ocean above a thousand miles from any shore,
should be so directed as to arrive just at a little Harbor not Cannon-shot
over, which perhaps neither the Pilot, nor any other in the Ship ever saw. And
yet as little as we can distinctly conceive how such an Art of finding Ports
can be framed, we scruple not to allow there is such an one, because Navigators
to the East and West Indies, could not without the Guidance of such an Art find
the remotest Ports they are bound for.

A second sort there is of positive proofs consisting of those Consequences
that are clearly and legitimately inferred from any manifest acknowledged, or
already demonstrated Truth. To this sort belong diverse Mathematical
Propositions and Corollaries, which tho being nakedly proposed they seem
incredible to the generality of Learned Men, and sometimes to Mathematicians
themselves, are yet fully assented to, because they clearly follow from either
manifested or demonstrated Truths. Thus many cannot conceive how it is possible
there may be a million, for instance, of Circles, (or as many more as you
please) whose Circumferences shall each of them come nearer and nearer to one
another, and to a straight Line assigned, and yet none of them either touch,
much less cut, either any other Circle, or that Line but in one and the same
point. And yet this is one of the odd Propositions that Geometers have rightly
deduced as Corollaries from the sixteenth of Euclid's third Element. And tho we
cannot clearly conceive how two Lines, that at their remotest ends are but
little distant from each other, should perpetually incline toward each other
without ever concurring; yet Geometricians, that is, the rigidest Reasoners
that we know of, have been compelled admit this in the Linea Conchoides of
Nicomedes, to name no more. But tho, (not to touch the same strings too often)
I thought fit to mention these Instances; yet whether you judge them sufficient
or no, you will allow that which may be taken from the endless divisibility of
a Line: For tho, if I misremember not, Sophronius told me, he took notice to
you how unable we are to have a satisfactory apprehension, how a short line as
well as a long, can be divided into more and more parts without any stop; yet
Geometricians generally admit this, because it may be clearly deduced from some
Geometrical Truths, and particularly from the incommensurableness of the Side
and Diagonal of a Square: And if you will allow me to have once more recourse
to Divine Prescience, I may add another acknowledged instance by representing,
that Philosophers have admitted that, because they judged it clearly to follow
from the infinite Perfections of God; tho, how he can foresee Contingency the
most judicious and modest of them did not pretend their Reason was able to
conceive.


Timoth. To these two kinds of positive proofs mentioned by Arnobius, I doubt
not but he will give me leave to add Divine Revelations, if competently
attested ones can be produced; and therefore I will not by going about to
evince this, spend any of the time he reserves for the remaining Rules, to
which he may, for me, advance as soon as he thinks fit.


Arnob. I accept the Liberty you offer me, Timotheus, to proceed to my next
Advice; which is this.


The Fourth Advice, or Rule.
That when we treat of Privileged Subjects, we are not bound always to think
every thing false, that seems to thwart some received Dictate of Reason.
As great a Paradox as this may at first blush appear, yet it will need little
more to make it out than the application of some things already delivered on
occasion of the two foregoing Advices, of which this is indeed little more than
a Corollary. For it being evident, that as a great part of the Dictates of
Reason are Negative, so Negative Propositions do usually spring from the
repugnancy we judge that some things have to some positive Dictate of Reason;
if those positive Dictates contain but gradual and limited Truths (to borrow
Sophronius his Terms;) and come to be unduly extended to privileged Subjectss
it may very possibly happen, that a thing may be really true, that yet must
appear false, if it be judged of by its congruity to one of those limited, and
but respective Dictates of Reason. It Is also clear, that not only in
Philosophy, but natural (as well as revealed) Theology the usual ground on
which we reject many things is, that we judge them unintelligible. And I
censure not the practice in general, but I think it may easily mislead us, when
it is extended to things that we may discern to transcend our Reason, as for
ought yet appears, some of the Modus's even of things Corporeal are found to
do. And we think we have made complete Enumerations of the several ways of
inexistence of an Attribute in a Subject, or of the operation of one thing upon
another, when indeed we have overlooked one or other, and perhaps that which we
have thus pretermitted may be the true one; tho it may be also that no
attention and diligence of ours could in some Cases have served our turn, the
Modus inquired after being not conceivable to us, tho it may be too a higher
than a human Intellect.

Pyrocles. The School-Philosophers for many Ages in the Catalogues they made of
the ways of a Bodies working upon another at a distance; did not think of the
true ways by which Odors and Sounds are communicated to us, and therefore had
recourse to certain unintelligible things, which they were pleased to call
Species Intentionales. Whereas those modern Naturalists that philosophize
freely, acknowledge, that Odors are communicated by Effl^viums, exhaling from
the odorous Body, and fitted to affect our Nostrils, and Sounds are transmitted
to the Ear by the undulating motion which the Air is put into by the impulse of
the vibrating, or otherwise agitated parts of the sonorous Body.


Timoth. Methinks we need not go out of our selves to find Instances of both
the parts of what Arnobius was last saying, if we admit, as I question not but
we rationally may, this Tenet of the generality of Philosophers, both ancient
and modern, That the Reasonable Soul is an immaterial Substance: For then;
whereas men think they have sufficiently enumerated the ways of determining the
motion of a Body, by saying, that the determination must be made either in the
Line wherein the Impellent that put it into motion made it move, or in the Line
wherein it was determined to move by the situation of the resisting Body that
it met with in its way; the motions of the animal Spirits, if not also some
other internal parts of the Body, may, the Body being duly disposed, be
determined by the human Will; which is a way quite differing from the other.
And how this Attribute, I mean the power of determining the motion of a Body,
without any power to impart motion to that Body, should belong to an immaterial
Creature, which has no Corporeal Parts to resist the free passage of a Body,
and thereby change the Line of its Motion, is not yet, nor perhaps ever will be
in this life, clearly conceived by us men, tho there is no doubt, but that he,
who endowed the Soul with this Attribute or Power, perfectly understands, both
how it exists in the Soul, and how the Soul by exerting it, operates on the
Body.


Pyrocles. But can any thing seem more unreasonable than to embrace opinions
that contradict the Rules of Reason; which practice, if it be once allowed, why
should we trouble our selves to investigate what is congruous or incongruous to
Reason, since the making a discovery, that an opinion is repugnant to it, will
not assure us of that opinions being false.


Arnob. A person less knowing and equitable than Pyrocles would have spared
this double Objection, if he had remembered, what has been formerly said,
applicable to our present purpose, and what kind of things they are that we are
discoursing of: But to remind him a little of them, I shall desire him to
consider with me, that I no way disallow the rejecting of Opinions that are
found contrary to those Rules of Reason, at the framing of which the things
opin'd about were duly taken into consideration: But in Cases not thought on
when such Rules were devised, we are not always bound to submit to be judged by
them; and to maintain an opinion unconformable to such a Rule, may be not to
oppose a genuine and absolute dictate of Reason, but to rectify one that is
erroneously thought so, by showing, that the Rule is expressed in more
Catholic and Indefinite Terms than it ought to have been. And of two opinions
you will not deny that that is the most rational that is most agreeable to
those Rules of Reason, that are framed upon the fullest Information.


Eugen. It Is not difficult to gather from what you have said, Arnobius, that in
the Rule you proposed to us; very few of the Cases that occur in ordinary
discourse, or even in that of Philosophers, will be at all concerned. And in
these few Cases wherein you intend the Rule should take place, you are careful
to obviate inconveniences by a double caution. The first that you suppose, that
the opinion that claims an exemption from the common Rules, is not an arbitrary
or precarious Tenet, but sufficisufficiently made out by proper Arguments. And
the second, by declaring, that it is not to contradict right Reason, but bad
Reasoners to give limitation to Rules that have been too hastily framed and
conceived in too general Terms, by men, who either were not competently
informed of the variety of Particulars, when they took upon them to make
Analyzes and Enumerations; or else presumed to infer, that a thing was not,
because they did not understand the Modus of its existence or operation.


Arnobius. You take my sense right, Eugenius, and I have often thought, that
the causes of the great clamor that is made against some men for not
obsequiously submitting to, what some others call the Rules of Reason, are,
that men do not sufficiently understand the nature of things and themselves,
but entertain too narrow conceptions of the former, and too high an opinion of
the later.


Pyrocles. The Dictates of Reason being the surest, if not the only safe Rules,
that Nature has given us to frame our Discourses and Ratiocinations by; I
confess I am, tho not fully resolved, yet very unwilling, to allow any
Conclusion that is not conformable to them: or to admit that any thing should
be so highly privileged, as to be exempted from the Jurisdiction of Reason,
whose genuine Declarations they are.


Eugenius. This Objection, Pyrocles, seems to me to be grounded rather upon an
ambiguity of Terms, than the true nature of Things. For Reason is oftentimes
taken for a Set of Notions and Propositions employed and acquiesc'd in by this
or that sort of Reasoners, that are wont to have names given them from this or
that particular Discipline, as Astronomy, Chemistry, Optics, etc. of whose
received Doctrines they are supposed to be entirely maintainers. But it is also
with at least as much propriety, used to signify the rational faculty it self;
furnished with the light that accompanies it when it is rightly disposed and
informed. In the first of these two Senses it seems but reasonable to allow,
that some things ought to have the privilege to be exempted from being judged
by some of the same Rules that are employed to judge of other things by; for
some of these Rules were framed upon a slight consideration of common and
familiar things, either by the vulgar, or by men that for want of skill or
application of mind did not critically consider the distinct natures of things,
and yet presumed to settle Rules that other men's inadvertence or laziness has
made them receive for certain Dictates of Reason: whereas other natures should
have been then considered as well as those: and by reason of their not having
been so, the Rules I speak of are not always proper and safe, when they are
applied to these over-looked natures. Thus Successive Beings, as Time and Local
Motion, do in some Cases require to be estimated by other measures than
Substances, whether material, or incorporeal* And so also the more nice
Metaphysicians, especially among the Moderns, have thought themselves obliged
to discourse of Moduses, Relations, Privations, Extrinsecal Denominations, etc.
in a very differing way from that which belongs to Bodies and Spirits; tho the
unskilful (even among otherwise learned men) have been wont, and still are apt,
to confound all these Subjects; by applying to them indiscriminately the same
Rules, or, as they think them, Dictates of Reason.

But besides what may be said of these long unregarded or undistinguished
natures, there are other entities that are more generally and familiarly taken
notice of, wherein I may think one may find instances more applyable to my
present purpose. For I observe, that tho all other actual Beings are compounded
(to speak in the language of the Schools) of Essence and Existence; yet
according to the notion of Metaphysicians as well as Divines, it must be
acknowledged, that the simplicity of the Divine Nature is such as to exclude
from God even this kind of composition. And indeed the notion we have of a
Being infinitely perfect, imports, that, tho in no other Being, yet in this,
those two are inseparable; for actual existence being a perfection, must needs
belong to the Nature of a Being infinitely perfect. The generality of
Philosophers, after Aristotle, conceive Place to be the immovable and
immediately contiguous concave Surface of the ambient Body, so that it is a kind
of Vessel that every way contains the Body lodged in it; but with this
difference that a Vessel is a kind of moveable place, as when a Bottle of Wine
is carried from the Cellar to the Table; but place is an immovable Vessel, or
a Vessel considered as immovable: now supposing with: Aristotle, and the
generality of Philosophers, the plenitude of the world, it may be truly said,
that all Plants, Animals, Minerals, Stars and other Bodies are each of them in
such an Aristotelian place as has been described; whence it has been usually
said by Philosophers, that what is in no place (I hope they meant it only of
Bodies) is not at all; yet it appears not how the outermost Heaven, whether
that be the Firmament, or no, I need not here inquire, can be properly said to
be in a place, since these Philosophers asserting the World to be finite, must
grant there is no ambient body without it to contain it. And I shall add on
this occasion, that if the outermost Heaven should be impelled by the
irresistible power of God in a straight line this way, or that way, there
should ensue a motion without change of place, for the outermost Heaven was in
none before, and does not by its progression come to be contained by a new
ambient Body. And in this case even according to those modern Favorers of
Aristotle that approve Des' Carts his definition of local motion (which indeed
is far more intelligible than Aristotle's) the world may be said to move
without changing of place; for it does not pass from the Neighborhood of some
Bodies to that of others; since comprising all Bodies, and yet being bounded,
there is no body for it to leave behind, nor any beyond it for it to approach
to; and tho the Cartesians in their Hypothesis of the indefinitess of the World
do partly avoid the force of what I have been saying; yet besides what may be
rationally urged to show, that if the world be not more than indefinite, it
must be really finite; I consider that the Cartesians, tho upon grounds of
their own, must allow what I was observing, namely, that tho every particular
body in the Universe is naturally capable of Local Motion. Yet the Universe it
self is not; and tho every particular body in the world have some determinate
Figure; yet the world it self, being indefinite, has not so.

Whereas Aristotle and the Philosophers that have lived since his time, have
generally admitted the division established by him, of all Entities, into
Substance, and Accident, and accommodated their Rules to one of them, or both:
The Learned Gassendus and his Followers, have introduced a third sort of
things, as not being either Substances, or Accidents: and these if you will
admit, you will I presume, admit too, that they may be privileged from their
Rules calculated for other Natures. Of this kind of things, the Gassendists
make Place or Space to be. For they will not allow it to be a Substance,
because it is neither body, nor spirit, but only somewhat that has a capacity
to receive or contain bodies, and would subsist, tho God should annihilate all
the Substances he has created. And for the same reason it is not to be called
an Accident, since that necessarily requires a Substance to reside in
(according to that received Axiom) Accidentis esse, est inesse, whereas in case
of the annihilation of the world it self, and consequently all Substances that
compose it, their place or space would still remain, and be capable of
admitting a new world of the same extent, if God should be pleased to create
it; whence Gassendus wittily infers, that Bodies are rather accidental in
respect of place, than space in respect of Bodies. But without staying to
examine this Paradox, I shall venture to say in general, that he who shall with
an heedful, and unprejudiced eye, survey the several Hypotheses, or Systems,
maintained by the differing Sects of Philosophers, may find, that tho the
Instances will not be all of them the same; yet there is none of these Systems
in which one may not observe some thing or other, to which every one of the
Rules that reach to the other Snbjects treated of in that Philosophy, cannot
safely be applied. And indeed the mind of man being naturally far more desirous
to know much, than to take the pains requisite to examine, whether he does so
or not, is very prone to think that any small number of things that it has not
distinctly considered, must be of the same nature and condition with the rest
that he judges to be of the same kind. For by thus attaining to the knowledge
of things, by way of Inference, the mind gratifies at once both its vanity, and
its laziness; looking upon these Conclusions, as marks of the excellency of its
rational faculty, whilst they rather proceed from a want of the due exercise of
it.


Pyrocles. But if the received Dictates of Reason be not always safe grounds to
proceed upon in our Discourse, I would gladly know by what Rules we shall judge
of those Rules, and discover them to be erroneous, in case they be so, and by
what measures we shall estimate truth and falsehood, in those things wherein
the use of those Rules must be laid aside.


Arnobius. Your double objection, Pyrocles, I confess to be weighty enough to
deserve a considerate answer, and to give you the sum of mine in few words, I
shall tell you, that in my opinion, since there is no progress in infinitum in
the Criteria of truth, and that our faculties are the best instruments that God
has given us to discover, and to examine it by, I think a clear light or
evidence of perception shining in the understanding, affords us the greatest
assurance we can have, (I mean in a natural way) of the truth of the judgments
we pass upon things, whether they be other things, or the vulgar rules of
reasoning, or subjects that claim a privilege from those rules.

And here give me leave to consider, that it is not by induction, but by
evidence, that we know, that ex vero nil nisi verum sequitur. By which it
appears, that the innate light of the rational faculty is more primary, than
the very Rules of Reasoning, since by that light we judge even of the lately
mentioned Axiom which is it self the grand principle of Ratiocinations made by
Inference.


Eugenius. This matter may be perchance somewhat illustrated by observing that,
as the understanding is wont to be looked upon as the eye of the mind; so there
is this Analogy between them, that there are some things that the eye may
discern (and does judge of) organically, if I may so speak, that is, by the
help of instruments: as when it judges of a Line to be straight by the
applicasion of a Ruler to it, or to be perpendicular by the help of a
Plumb-line, or a Circle to be perfect by the help of a pair of Compasses: But
there are other things which the eye does perceive (and judge of) immediately
and by intuition, and without the help of Organs or Instruments; as when by the
bare evidence of the perception it knows that this color is red, and that
other blue, and that Snow is white, not black, and a Char-coal black, not
white; and such a Picture is very like, or another unlike to the face it was
drawn to represent. For thus there are some things that the Intellect usually
judges of in a kind of Organical way, that is, by the help of certain Rules, or
Hypotheses, such as are a great part of the Theorems and Conclusions in
Philosophy and Divinity. But there are others which it knows without the help
of these Rules more immediately, and as it were intuitively by evidence or
perception; by which way we know many prime notions and Effata, or Axioms
Metaphysical, etc. as that Contradictory Propositions cannot both be true; that
from truth nothing but truth can legitimately be deduced; that two things that
are each of them equal to a third thing, are equal to one another; that a whole
number is either even or odd. And it is also upon this evidence of perception;
that we receive with an undoubted assent many primitive Ideas and notions, such
as those of extended Substance or Body, Divisibility, or Local Motion, a
straight Line, a Circle, a right Angle, and many other things that it would be
here superfluous to mention.


Arnobius. I think the internal Light that the Author of Nature has set up in
man's Intellect qualifies him, if he makes a right use of it, not only to apply
the Instruments of Knowledge, but also to frame, and to examine them. For by
the help of this Light, the Understanding is enabled to look about, and both to
consider apart, and compare together, the natures of all kinds of things;
without being necessitated to employ in its Speculations, the Rules or Dictates
of any particular Science or Discipline; being sufficiently assisted by its own
Light, and those general Axioms and Notions that are of a Catholic Nature, and
perpetual truth; and so of a higher order, than the Dictates, or Rules of any
particular or subordinate Science or Art. And by these means the Understanding
may perceive the imperfection and falsity of such Rules or Theorems, as those
men that look no higher, nor no further than their own particular Science or
Art, embrace for certain and unquestionable. Thus when Philosophers observed
that they could frame a clear notion of a thing without considering whether it
were actually in being or not; or even when they suppose that it is not actually
in being; as we can frame a clear conception of a Rose in Winter, when there
are none to be found growing; and have a clear notion of a Myriagon, tho it is
very like there is no such Figure really existent in the world. They have
generally concluded, that the essence of things is differing and separable from
their existence. And yet when we consider that God is a Being infinitely
perfect, and that actual existence being a perfection, must belong to Him; we
may by the same light of Reason that dictated Essence and Existence to be two
separable things in all other Beings, discern that they must be inseparable in
God; and consequently that the forementioned Rule, tho more general than almost
any other, is not absolutely universal: but must be limited by the light of
Reason. And thus also Philosophers, considering that not only all sorts of
Bodies, but the immaterial Souls of Men, (and Angels themselves, supposing such
Beings) are all endowed with Qualities which are Accidents, have included it in
the very notion of a substance, to be the subject of Accidents, or as the
Schoolmen speak, substare Accidentibus; and accordingly substantia is wont to
be derived a substando: But the infranchised Intellect, finding in it self a
notion of an absolutely perfect, and therefore existent Being; and considering
that to be the subject of Accidents, is not a thing agreeable to the highest
perfection possible; it concludes, that in God there are no Accidents. And this
Conclusion has been embraced as a part, not only of Christian, but of Natural
Theology; and maintained by diverse Philosophers themselves, upon Metaphysical
and other merely rational grounds. In short, the native light of the mind may
enable a man, that will make a free and industrious use of it, both to pass a
right judgment of the extent of those very Dictates that are commonly taken for
Rules of Reason, and to frame others on purpose for priviledg'd things, so far
forth as they are so. But I fear, Gentlemen, the fourth Advice I have ventured
to offer you, has by its tediousness, made you justly impatient of being
detained by it so long: and therefore I shall advanced to the Fifth; which
imports,


The Fifth Advice, or Rule.
That where Privileged Things are concerned, we are not always bound to reject
every thing, as false, that we know not how to reconcile with some thing that
is true.
Pyrocl. You may call this an Advice, but I doubt others will style it a
Paradox, and possibly, think it one of the greatest that ever was broached.


Arnob. Yet perhaps you will find by and by, that it may be in great part made
good by what has been already discoursed, and by you admitted. I think it will
not be doubted, but that there are, or may be conceived straight Lines, whereof
one is a hundred or a thousand times longer than another: It Is also generally
granted, that a longer Line consists of, or may afford more parts than a
shorter; for a Line equal to the shorter, being taken out of the longer, and
consequently just as divisible as it, there will remain of the longer Line
another Line, perhaps many times exceeding the shorter Line: And lastly, it is
generally acknowledged, that no Number can be greater than infinite; since if
the lesser number were capable of accession (as it must be, if it fall short of
another number) it would need that accession (or a greater) to make it
infinite, which yet it is supposed to be already.


Pyrocl. I see not yet to what all this may tend.


Arnob. You will quickly perceive it, when I shall have desired you to
reconcile these Propositions with the demonstrations of Geometers of the
endless Divisibility of all straight Lines; whence they deduce, that tho they
be very unequal among themselves, yet the shortest of them contains, or may
afford infinite parts.


Pyrocl. But is there any thing more clear to humane understanding, or more
supposed in almost all our Ratiocinations, than that two Truths cannot be
contradictory to each other.


Arnob. Tho I am far from affirming, that one Truth can really contradict
another truth; yet I think that which is but a gradual or limited truth, may in
some few cases not be reconcilable by Us, to an absolute and universal Truth.
For, I think we may (with Sophronius) distinguish those Propositions we call
true, into Axioms Metaphysical, or Universal, that hold in all Cases without
reservation; and Axioms collected or emergent; by which I mean such as result
from comparing together many particulars that agree in something that is common
to them all. And some of these, tho they be so general, that in the usual
Subjects of our Ratiocinations they admit of no exceptions; yet may not be
absolutely and unlimitedly true; of which I know not whether I formerly gave
you an instance, even in that Axiom which (almost) all merely Natural
Philosophers have supposed and built on, that, ex nihilo nihil fit, which, tho
at least one of the highest of gradual or collected Truths, may yet be not
universally true, since, for ought we know, God that is acknowledged to be a
Being that is infinitely perfect, may have, and may have exercised, the power
of Creating. And in such Cases as this, not to be able to reconcile a truth
concerning a privileged thing with a Proposition that generally passes for true
(and in other Cases is so indeed) will not presently oblige us to reject either
Proposition as false, but sometimes, without destroying either, only to give
one of them a due limitation, and restrain it to those sorts of things, on
which 'twas at first grounded, and to which 'twas, because of man's ignorance,
or inconsiderateness, that 'twas not at first confined. And if the Miracles
vouched either for the Christian, or for any other Religion, be any of them
granted to be true; (as almost all mankind agrees in believing in general, that
there have been true Miracles;) it cannot well be denied but that Physical
Propositions are but limited, and such as I called Collected Truths, being
gathered from the settled Phenomenon of Nature, and are liable to this
limitation or exception, that They are true, where the irresistible power of
God, or some other supernatural Agent is not interposed to alter the course of
Nature.


Pyrocl. But do you think, there are no inconsistent Propositions that you
would call Truths, wherein you cannot show that one of them is but a gradual or
emergent Truth?


Arnob. It Is one thing to inquire whether men have yet discerned, or I am able
to make out, that one of the Propositions you speak of is but a limited truth;
and another, to inquire, whether speaking absolutely and universally, it may to
any Intellect appear to be no more than such. For first I consider, that the
Reason why we judge things to be repugnant, Being, that the Notions or Ideas we
have of them seem to us inconsistent, if either of these notions be wrong
framed, or be judged of by an unfit Rule, we may think those Propositions, to
be contradictory that really are not so; as, if you heedfully mark it, you
shall find, that those that are wont to employ their imaginations about things
that are the proper Objects of the Intellect, are apt to pronounce things to be
unconceivable, only because they find them unimaginable; as if the Fancy and
the Intellect were Faculties of the same extent: Upon which account some have
so grossly erred, as to deny all immaterial Substances, and chose rather so far
to degrade the Deity it self, as to impute to it a Corporeal Nature, than to
allow any thing to have a Being that is not comprehensible by their
Imagination, which themselves acknowledge to be but a Corporeal Faculty. But
besides this mistake of things repugnant, which arises from the mis application
or mis-management of our discerning Faculties, I consider in the next place,
that there may be another that proceeds from the Imperfection and Limitedness
of our Understanding, which being unable to judge of privileged things at the
same rate that it does of other Objects, may sometimes be unable to discover
that reconcileableness that a more illuminated and penetrating Faculty may
discern. This may be illustrated by what usually happens at Sea, (for there
men's Prospect is the most free) when looking toward the Main, the Sky and the
Waters seem to meet at the edge of the (sensible) Horizon, tho indeed they are
as far distant as Heaven is from Earth; and on the other side if you skillfully
mix together the dry and fine powder of Orpiment, and that of Indico, you will
produce a green color, as is known to Painters, and the eye takes notice but
of an uniform mixture, in which it sees neither blew nor yellow: But if, (as
experience shows) you look on this mixture with a very good Microscope, the
emergent color will disappear; and you will plainly see instead of it, blew
and yellow grains of the powders distinct from one another. Which Instances may
serve to show the imbecility of our visive Faculty; and the later of them may
teach us, that a thing may appear one and differing, as it is looked upon by a
more or less discerning sight. But an instance more home to our present purpose
may be afforded by yellow Diamonds, which because of their Color, not only
other Men, but the generality of Goldsmiths (in whose error I have sometimes
shared) take to be counterfeit Gems, or at best but right Topazes, whereas very
skillful Lapidaries, will by sure signs discover and acknowledge them to be
true Diamonds, notwithstanding their seeming difference from unquestioned ones,
and account them to be of the same nature with that noblest kind of Jewels.
Whence we may learn that a more skillful Judge may discern an agreement in
things that almost all other men think they see manifestly to be of distant
natures.


Eugenius. Give me leave, Gentlemen, to say on this occasion, that I have
several times observed, that men judge some things to be irreconcilable, not
only when they are both of them represented to the understanding in the form of
Propositions; but when one of them is but a notion, or a current difinition.
For diverse of these notions do contain in them a Proposition, or are equivalent
to it; As when a Circle is defined to be a Figure contained in a Line, all
whose parts are equally distant from the middle-most Point or Center, this
definition contains an affirmation of the essential property of a Circle; and
by the generality of Geometricians is therefore discriminated from that Conick
Section which they call an Ellipsis, tho that be also a Figure terminated by
one curve Line.

And because you are versed in Mathematics, I shall on this occasion show you
by a Geometrical Instance, that if a man have not genuine and adequate notions
of the things he judges of, he may confidently, and even upon very probable
grounds, judge things to be inconsistent, that in reality, are not so. For if
an ordinary Cultivater of Mathematical Disciplines should hear one man say,
that such a Figure is an Ellipsis, and another affirm it to be a Circle, he
would think their assertions to be inconsistent, having his mind prepossessed
with an Ellipsis's, being a Conical Section, whose properties must therefore
(he supposes) be very differing from those of a Circle; whereas such wary
Geometricians as the Learned Doctor Wallis See his Treatise de Sectionibus
Conicis.
will tell him, that the vulgar notions of Conick Sections are not adequate to
the Figures producible by them: For when a right Cone is cut quite through by
an inclining Plane, the figure produced by the Section agrees well with the
received notion of an Ellipsis, in which the Diameters are of unequal length;
yet if the Plane cut the Cone parallel to the Basis, that Conick Section will
be a true Circle, having all its Diameters equal.

It Is indeed an uncommon and unheeded account, but such an one upon which I
have observed not only Logicians, but Philosophers themselves to err about
judging things reconcilable or inconsistent; that if a man be not sufficiently
acquainted with the nature of any of the two things under consideration (and
much more if he be ignorant of, or mistaken about both) he may think there is a
contradiction between things, wherein a Superior or more piercing Intellect may
discern a consistency; for taking it for granted, that he knows one thing to be
a truth, if some other thing be affirmed to be so, which he has not
understanding or skill enough to see how to reconcile to it, it is no wonder,
that how well soever this may be evinced, he should as little know how to
admit, as how to reject it. This may be partly illustrated, and partly proved
by instances drawn from the Mathematics themselves: For a Novice in
Arithmetic, for example, finding That, according to his Rules, there is not
one mean proportional number between 4 and 32, will scarce be able to reconcile
that Proposition to this other, That there are two mean proportionals between
the mentioned numbers; For he may with great appearance of Reason ask, how, if
there be not so much as one mean proportional, there can be two? Whereas those
that are acquainted with the nature of Ranks or Series of numbers proceeding in
Geometrical Proportion, will easily discern that between those two recited,
both the number 8, and the number 16; are mean proportionals.


Timotheus. Tho I disallow not your Instance, Eugenius, yet I shall be willing
to hear one or two others of a less abstracted Nature.


Eug. To obey you, Timotheus, I shall add, that if an old School-Philosopher,
or a Mathematician not acquainted with the later Discoveries made by
Telescopes, should hear one man say, that the Moon is the most enlightened, when
she appears full to us, and another affirm that she is more enlightened at the
New Moon than at the Full, he would readily conclude, upon the supposition
(which he makes no doubt of) that the Moon receives all her light immediately
from the Sun, that the affirmation of the later (Astronomer) cannot be true;
which yet he would not conclude, if he knew (what is discovered by Telescopes)
that the Moon is as well enlightened by the Earth, as the Earth by the Moon;
upon which score, whereas at the Full she receives but those Beams that come to
her directly, from the Sun, at the Change she receives both them in that part
of her Body that is obverted to him, and those other Beams of his that are
reflected from the Terrestrial Globe to that part of the Moon that is nearest
to us.

And to the foregoing Instance, I shall add one more, that seems apposite
enough to Arnobius's Purpose, and it is, that before Pythagoras, not only the
vulgar of the Greeks, but their Philosophers and Mathematicians too, observing
oftentimes that a bright Star preceded the Rising Sun, and that frequently also
(on other days) after Sunset, another Star appeared, that was none of the
fixed ones; they confidently concluded from the so distant times of Apparition,
that the Sun was attended by two differing Stars, to which accordingly they
gave two differing names: But Pythagoras, who was a far better Astronomer (as
may be guessed, among other things, by his maintaining in those early times the
motion of the earth about the Sun) undertook to disabuse them, and effected it.
Now if one that had observed Venus only in the mornings, should have affirmed,
that besides the six known Planets, there was but a seventh (namely the
Phosphorus) which preceded the Rising Sun; and another, (that had taken notice
notice of her only in the Evenings) should assert, that besides the same six
known ones, the only seventh was that called Hesperus, which sometimes appeared
after his Setting; a By-stander would presently have concluded, that their
Assertions were not reconcilable, either to one another, or to the truth;
which (in his judgment) was, that there must be no less than eight visible
Planets; and yet Pythagoras, who had more skill, and more piercing wit, did,
(as was lately noted) discern and teach, that these two Phenomenon were
produced by one and the same Planet Venus, determined by its peculiar motion
(about the Sun) to show it self near our Horizon, sometimes before he ascends
it, and sometimes after he had left it. Such instances as these, tho offered
but as illustrations, may persuade us from being too forward to reject every
proposition, that we see not how to reconcile to what we take for a truth;
provided the distrusted proposition be such as we would acquiesce in, if we
could reconcile it to that supposed Truth.


Timotheus. From this Discourse, Eugenius, and that of Arnobius, which preceded
it, I think one may gather, that according to you two, when two Propositions
are laid down, whereof one is made evident to us by Experience, or by Reason,
acting within its own Jurisdiction or Compass; and the other is sufficiently
proved by being mathematically demonstrated, or duly attested by Divine
Revelation, we ought not to reject either of these propositions, as no truth,
merely because we do not yet know how to reconcile them: but we should rather
think, that the collected Proposition, is but a gradual, or limited truth; or
else we should consider, that we knowing but so imperfectly as we do the
particular natures of privileged Subjects, for ought we know a superior
Intellect may be able to discern a friendly agreement between what is delivered
about that Subject, and the affirmation that seems repugnant to it, tho we are
not quick-sighted enough to perceive this Agreement. And this, how strange
soever you may think it, Pyrocles, may not only be countenanced by such things
as Eug. lately said, but both you your self, and almost all mankind do de facto
seem to practice it, in the case of the Divine Prescience of man's free Actions.


Eugenius. What you contend for, Gentlemen, may perhaps be thought the more
receivable, if one should argue thus: First either the Propositions said to be
repugnant, are both really true, or they are not; If it be answered, that they
are not, the difficulty is at an end: for there is none at all to conceive a
true Proposition, should contradict a false one. But, secondly, if both the
Propositions be supposed to be true, it must be affirmed, either that they are
reconcilable, or that they are not; if it be said, they are not, then Pyrocles
his objection is out of doors; for it cannot then be reasonable to say, that
the two Propositions, tho inconsistent with one another, must necessarily be
one or other of them inconsistent with the truth. But this I presume he will by
no means assert, and consequently, must say, that the Propositions are
reconcilable. Upon which answer I shall demand, how that can be, unless a
superior Intellect, such as unquestionably the Divine is, can discover an
agreement between Propositions wherein we cannot discern it. For our not being
able to discern it, is you know professedly supposed in the case we discourse
of.


Pyrocles. But, Arnobius, will not this Doctrine make us very liable to have
falsities imposed on us at the pleasure of bold and dictating men?


Arnob. Not, if it be limited to the subjects wherein alone I would have it
admitted; for if neither of the things treated of be a privileged one, but both
in the jurisdiction of ordinary reason, I do not only consent, but (in my first
Advice) require, that the Propositions framed about them be estimated according
to the common Dictates of Reason. And even in cases where one of the
Propositions is about a privileged thing, I do not at all think fit, that it
should be received in spite of its being repugnant to the gradual truth
delivered in the other, unless it can by some other Argument sufficient in its
kind be proved to be true; and in that case, that, what I plead for, ought to
be admitted, is employed by the suffrage of almost all mankind, in that case,
which was just now pertinently mentioned by Timotheus: for tho men know not how
to reconcile the Liberty of man's will, with the infallible knowledge that God
has of those Actions that flow from it, yet they have unanimously judged it
reasonable to believe both Free Will and Prescience; the former, because they
felt it in themselves; and the later, partly because the foreknowledge of
things being manifestly a perfection, ought not to be denied to God, whom they
looked upon as a Being supremely perfect; and partly because some actions and
events that they all judged to flow from men's free will, were, as the
generality of men believed, foretold by Prophetic Oracles. But except in such
cases as I have been naming, I am altogether of Pyrocles's mind, that since we
have scarce any way of discovering a Falsity, but by its being repugnant to
somewhat that is true; to deny, that in cases within the juridiction of
ordinary Reason, the repugnancy of a Proposition to any manifest truth, ought
to sway our Judgments, were to deprive us of the usefullest Criterion to
discriminate between Falsehood and Truth.


Timoth. For my part, who believe with many Philosophers, as well Heathen as
Christian, that humane Souls owe their origin to God, and with almost all
Philosophers, (for I know what the Stoics held) that as he is the supreme
Being, so he is a most free Agent, I see not why, as he has given to Corporeal
Beings diverse Qualities, very differing in their degrees of Nobleness; so he
might not give to the Intelligent Productions of his Power and Will, various
degrees of Intellectual Capacities as well as a limitedness of Nature. And as
it will not follow, that because we can see with our eyes very small Objects,
and imagine such as are yet much smaller, either the eye, or the imagination
can ever reach to so small an Object as an Atome; so it will not follow that
because we are able to frame Conceptions of immaterial Beings, we must
therefore be able to understand the nature of God, and the Harmony of all his
Monadical Attributes. A little Boy may have a clear notion of three, four,
five, or other smaller numbers, and yet may be unable to frame good conceptions
of Triangular and other Polygon Numbers (as some call them) and much more of
the abstruse affections of surd Numbers, and the Roots of the higher
Algebraical Powers. To discern particular Truths is one thing, and to be able
to discover the Intercourse and Harmony between all Truths, is another thing,
and a far more difficult one; as a Traveller may upon the English Shore know
that he sees the Ocean, and upon the Coast of Afric be made to do the like,
and at the East Indies also he may know that he sees the Ocean; and yet not
know how those so distant Seas communicate with each other, tho that may be
manifest enough to a Cosmographer.


Arnob. What you say brings into my mind, that I have sometimes thought God and
men enjoy Truth, as differingly as they do Time. For we men, as we enjoy time
but by parcels, and always leave far the greatest part of it unreach'd to by
us; so we know but some particular Truths, and are always ignorant of far more
than we attain to. Whereas God, as his eternity reaches to all the portions of
time (or measured Durations) so his Omniscience gives him at one view a
prospect of the whole extent of Truth: (As if a man could see the whole River
of Nilus with all its turnings and windings from its hidden Springs to its
entrance into the Sea.) Upon which account he sees all particular Truths, not
only distinct, but in their Systeme, and so sees a Connection between those that
to us seemed the most distant ones.


Arnob. There remains now, Gentlemen, but one part more of your penance to be
undergone; for it is high time, I should hasten to the relief of a Patience I
have so long distressed, and therefore I shall give it but one exercise more,
and conclude your Trouble with some reflections on this last Advice.


The Sixth Advice, or Rule.
That in Privileged Things we ought not always to condemn that opinion which is
liable to ill Consequences, and encumbered with great inconveniences, provided
the positive proofs of it be sufficient in their kind.
That this Advice may be the more easily admitted, I shall separately suggest
three things, which I desire may be afterward considered all together.

First, that clear positive proofs, proportionate to the nature of things, are
genuine and proper motives to induce the understanding to assent to a
proposition as true; so that it is not always necessary to the evidence and
firmness of an Assent, that the Intellect takes notice of the Consequences that
may be drawn from it, or the difficulties wherewith it may be incumbered. This
is plain in those Assents which of all others, at least that are merely
natural, are by knowing men thougt to be the most undoubted and the best
grounded; I mean the Assents that are given to the Truth of Geometrical
Demonstrations: And yet, Euclid, for instance, in all his Elements of Geometry,
in some of which surprising Paradoxes are delivered, (as in the sixteenth
proposition of the third Book, and the 117th of the tenth Book, to name no
more) contents himself to demonstrate his Assertions in a Mathematical Way, and
does not, that I remember, answer or take notice of any one Objection: and the
Geometricians of our days think they may safely receive his Propositions upon
the Demonstrations annexed to them, without knowing or troubling themselves
about the subtleties employed by the Sceptick Sextus Empiricus, or others of
that Sect in their writings against the Mathematicians, and all Assertors of
assured knowledge.

The second thing I would offer to your consideration, is, that the former part
of our Discourse has manifested, that there are some things which our humane
and imperfect understandings either cannot, or at least do not, perfectly
comprehend: and that nevertheless men have not refrained from presuming to
dogmatize and frame Notions and Rules about such things, as if they understood
them very well. Whence it must needs come to pass, that if they were mistaken
(as in things so abstruse, it is very like they often were) those that judge by
the Rules they laid down, must conceive the Propositions opposite to their
mistakes, to be liable to very great, if not insuperable Difficulties and
Objections.

And this second Consideration, in conjunction with the first, will make way
for the third, as a natural production of them, which is, That, as we need not
wonder that privileged things, which are wont to be so sublime as to have been
out of the view of those that framed the Rules whereby we judge of other
things, should be thought liable to great Objections by them who judge of all
things only by those Rules; so we should not require or expect more evidence of
a Truth relating to such things, than that there are for it such sufficient
positive Reasons, as notwithstanding Objections and Inconveniences, make it,
upon the whole matter, worthy to be embraced.

Pyrocles. But can that be worthy to be assented to, which is liable to
Objections and Inconveniences, which the maintainers confess they know not how
to avoid? Does not your Euclid himself in some of his Demonstrations employ
that way of reasoning which some of his Latin Interpreters call Deductio ad
Absurdum?


Arnob. Euclid indeed (as well as other Mathematicians) besides that more
satisfactory way of direct probation, which perhaps he might have oftener
employed than he did, has sometimes where he thought it needful, made use of
the (...) you speak of. But in these cases he never goes out of the Discipline
he treats of, and confining himself to Arguments drawn from quantity, he urges
nothing as absurd, but what is undeniably repugnant to some Truth he had
already demonstrated, or to those clear and undisputed Definitions, Axioms, or
Postalata, which he supposes to have been already granted by those he would
convince. But tho he thus argues to prove that his Readers cannot contradict
him without contradicting themselves; yet we find not that he was at all
solicitous to clear those Difficulties that so quick-sighted a man could not
but know some of his Theorems to be attended with: but contents himself to
demonstrate the incommensurableness of the Side and Diagonal of a Square,
without troubling himself to take notice of the Difficulties that attend the
endless Divisibility of a Line, which would follow from what he demonstrated.
But, Pyrocles, to look back to the first part of your Objection, tho what you
say will hold in ordinary Cases, yet such peculiar ones, as we are speaking of,
deserve a particular Consideration. About some privileged things there are, and
about some others there may be contradictory Opinions (taking that term in a
strict sense) maintained. Now as both of these cannot be true, so one of them
must be so: as, tho it be hotly disputed whether Quantity be endlesly
divisible, yet certainly it either must, or must not be divisible without end:
And as was formerly observed which side soever you take, the Inconveniences
will be exceeding great, and perhaps there will lie Objections scarce to be
directly answered. And since one of the two opposite Opinions must be true, it
will not always be necessary, that an opinion must be false, which is encumbered
with great difficulties, or liable to puzzling Objections. And therefore if the
positive proofs on one side be clear and cogent, tho there be perplexing
Difficulties objected by the other; the truth ought not for their sake to be
rejected; because such difficulties proceeding usually either from notions that
men presume to frame about things above their reaches, or from Rules that were
not made for such points as are in dispute, the Objections are not to be judged
so well founded, as is that acknowledged Principle in Reasoning, that from
Truth, nothing but truth can be legitimately inferred.


Eugen. I confess I have always thought it reasonable in such Cases to compare,
as well the positive proofs of one opinion with those of the other, as those
Objections that are urged on either side; and there make my estimate upon the
whole matter; tho with a peculiar regard to that opinion that has a great
advantage in point of positive Arguments; Because, as Arnobius observed, those
are the proper Inducements to the Assent of the Intellect: And then the
Objections may well enough be suspected to proceed from the abstruse nature of
privileged things, and the overgreat narrowness of the Rules that men are wont
to judge of all things by. For we may have a sufficiently clear proof that a
thing is, whilst we have no satisfactory conception of its manner of existing
or operating; our illative knowledge, if you will allow me so to speak, being
clearer, and extending further than our intuitive or apprehensive knowledge.


Arnob. But even about things that we cannot sufficiently understand, we may in
some cases exercise our Reason, in answering objections that are thought not to
be at all answerable, because they are not directly so. For we may sometimes
show, by framing in another case a like Argument, which, the Adversary must
confess, does not conclude well, that neither does the Argument that contains
his Objection conclude aright.

This I could exemplify (tho that may seem no easy Task) but that I fear I
should want time to propose Examples, whose being very paradoxical would make
them need much proof; which you who I fear are quite tired already, would want
patience to hear. Wherefore I shall rather recommend to you one Observation,
which I take to be of no small moment and use, when we contemplate things of
the nature of those we have been discoursing of: and it is this, that we must
not expect to be able, as to privileged things, and the Propositions that may
be framed about them, to resolve all Difficulties, and answer all Objections;
since we can never directly answer those, which require for their solution a
perfect comprehension of what is infinite: as a man cannot well answer the
Objections that may be made against the Antipodes, the Doctrine of Eclipses,
that of the different Phases of the Moon, and of the long days and nights of
some months apiece, near the Poles, (not now to name that more abstruse part of
Astronomy, the Theory of the Planets) unless he understand the nature of the
Sphere, and some other Principles of Cosmography.


FINIS.

