THE Christian Virtuoso: IN TWO PARTS.

TOME I.

THE Christian Virtuoso: SHOWING, That by being addicted to Experimental
Philosophy, a Man is rather Assisted, than Indisposed, to be a Good Christian.

The First Part.

By T. H. R. B. Fellow of the ROYAL SOCIETY.

To which are Subjoined,

I. A Discourse about the Distinction, that represents some Things as Above
Reason, but not Contrary to Reason.

II. The first Chapters of a Discourse, Entitled, Greatness of Mind promoted
by Christianity.

By the same AVTHOR.

In the SAVOY: Printed by Edw. Jones, for John Tailor at the Ship, and John
Wyat at the Golden-Lion, in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1690.

THE PREFACE.
WHEN, many Years ago, I was induced to write something about the Subject of
the following Treatise; I did it, partly to give some Satisfaction to a Friend,
and partly to impose upon myself an Obligation, to consider the more
attentively upon what Grounds it may be asserted, That there is no
Inconsistence between a Man's being an Industrious Virtuoso, and a Good
Christian. How little fond I was of troubling the Public with a Discourse of
this Nature, may be guessed by my having thrown it aside, among other neglected
Papers, for several Years. And it had still continued in that Obscurity, if
the, formerly unprevalent, Desires of those that would have it appear in
Public, had not been enforced by an Observation or two, that I could not but
make. For I could scarce avoid taking notice of the great and deplorable Growth
of Irreligion, especially among those that aspired to pass for Wits, and
several of them too for Philosophers. And on the other side, it was Obvious,
that diverse Learned Men, as well as Others, partly upon the Score of their
Abhorrence of these Infidels and Libertines, and partly upon that of a
well-meaning, but ill-informed, Zeal, had brought many Good Men to think, that
Religion and Philosophy were incompatible; both Parties contributing to the
Vulgar Error, but with this difference, That the Libertines thought a Virtuoso
ought not to be a Christian; and the Others, That he could not be a true One.

It Is like, it may seem to some Readers, that I have too much enlarged the
Notion of Experience, and too much insisted on the Proofs deducible from that
Topic: But it is not improbable, that others may approve the Reasons, with
which that ample Notion of Experience is, where it is proposed, accompanied.
And the Ingenious Person, I was chiefly to please, being a great Lover and
Valuer of Experience, and of Arguments grounded on it, the Desire of gratifying
Him enticed me to say so much, that when I took up the Thoughts of making this
Treatise public, I found the Effects of my Complaisance so interwoven with the
other Parts of the Discourse, that I could not make any Great Alteration, (for
some I did make) without almost spoiling the Contexture of it.

I hope the Equitable Reader will not expect to find every Subject, of which I
have occasion to discourse, fully Treated of: For I neither designed nor
pretended to write a Body of Natural Theology, nor a Demonstration of the
Christian Religion; but thought it sufficient for me, to consider the Points I
wrote of, as far forth as was Necessary, or very Conducive, to my Purpose. And
therefore I thought myself, not only Warranted, but Obliged, (in point of
Discretion) to decline the mention of several Arguments and Reflections, that
would indeed have been very Proper, if my Design had been, to show, why One
should be a Christian; but Impertinent, to show, that a Virtuoso, while such,
may be a true Christian. But, as for this Reason, I omitted many Things, that
would have Enriched or Adorned my Discourse; so I have endeavored to make some
Amends, both by suggesting some new Subjects, and by adding on those that have
been already Treated of by others, diverse Thoughts, into which I was led by the
Attentive Consideration of the Subject itself; on which score, they may
probably not have yet occurred to the Reader, and may appear to him, either to
be new, as to the Substance; or, if any of them be coincident with the more
known Ones, to have something of peculiar, as to the way of Propounding, or of
Applying, them. And, I confess, I was somewhat Encouraged to communicate my
Thoughts on these Subjects, by considering, that (tho is ought not to be so,
yet) it is Notorious, that in the Age we live in, there are too many Persons
that are like to be found more indisposed to be Impressed on by Arguments, in
favor of Religion, from professed Divines, how worthy soever, than from such
as I, who am a Layman, and have been looked upon as no undiligent Cultivator of
Experimental Philosophy. And that the Style might not be unsuitable to the
Writer, and the Design; I thought fit, in my Arguments and Illustrations, both
to employ Comparisons drawn from Telescopes, Microscopes, etc. and to make
frequent use of Notions, Hypotheses, and Observations, in request among those,
that are called The New philosophers. Which I the rather did; because some
Experience has taught me, that such a Way of proposing and elucidating Things,
is, either as most clear, or, upon the account of its Novelty, wont to be more
acceptable, than any Other, to our Modern Virtuosi; whom thus to Gratify, is a
good Step toward the Persuading of them. For it is easy to observe, that some
Men are more accessible to Truth, and will be more prevailed upon by it, when
it is presented to them in One Dress, than when it appears in Another: As we
daily see, that some Persons will be more easily prevailed with to take a
Medicine, and that it will have a more kindly Operation upon them, if it be
exhibited in that Form and Consistence, that is best liked by the Patients;
whereof some love to have the Ingredients, the Medicine is to consist of,
offered them in a Liquid, others in a Soft, and others in a Dry, Form.

Though I am wont, as well as inclinable to spare the present Age; and though
my Censures of some reputed Virtuosi that live in it, are written with as
harmless and friendly Designs, as was the seeming Rudeness of the Angel to St.
Peter, when he struck him on the Side, and hastily rouzed him, but to awake
him, to take off his Chains, and to free him from the Dangers that threatened
him; yet I shall be more troubled than surprised, if I shall find the following
Treatise disliked by diverse Persons, that would pass for Virtuosi, and by some
that really are so. For some Men, that have but superficial, tho conspicuous,
Wits, are not fitted to penetrate such Truths, as require a lasting and
attentive Speculation; and diverse, that want not Abilities, are so taken up by
their Secular Affairs, and their Sensual Pleasures, that they neither have
Disposition, nor will have Leisure, to discover those Truths, that require both
an Attentive and Penetrating Mind. And more than of either of these sorts of
Men there are, whom their Prejudices do so forestal, or their Interest byas, or
their Appetites blind, or their Passions discompose, too much, to allow them a
clear Discernment, and right Judgment, of Divine Things. Upon which, and other
accounts, I shall not think it strange, if what I write shall make no great
Impression on Readers thus Qualified, whom to Convert, it is not enough to
Convince them: Nor shall I be greatly discouraged, or think much the worse of
my Arguments, if they do not make Proselytes of those, whom Sinister
Considerations make such Resolved Adversaries to the Truth, that He alone, that
can Preach from Heaven, is able to prevail upon them; and they must be
Converted, almost as Saul the Persecutor was, by an extraordinary Light from
Heaven, and a Power able to strike them to the Ground. But though I am not so
little acquainted with the present Age, as to expect to plead for Religion with
the Approbation of Atheists, or of Libertines, yet I shall not think my Pains
altogether misspent, if what I have written, either Startle any Irreligious
Reader so far, as to Engage him to consult abler Assertors of Christianity and
Virtue, than I pretend to be; or else prove so happy, as to Confirm and
Strengthen, by new Arguments and Motives, those that have heartily embraced the
Christian Faith and Morals, though perhaps not upon the firmest Grounds. For it
will be no small Satisfaction to me, if, though I cannot Convert the resclvedly
Irreligious, I shall at least furnish those that are not so, with Preservatives
against them, and hinder their Impiety from being Contagious.

But I fear, that those that are Enemies, both to the Doctrines I propose, and
to the Aims I pursue, will not be the only Persons that will find fault with
the following Tract; since, perhaps, there will not be wanting some Ingenious
Men, that expected, as well as desired, that I should never write but as a
Naturalist, because they themselves esteem nothing, save the Laws and
Phoenomena of Nature, to be Subjects worthy of a Philosophical Pen: As if,
because Rational Spirits are Invisible and Immaterial. Beings, all
Disquisitions about them must be airy and uncertain Speculations, and, like
their Objects, devoid of Solidity and Usefulness. But though among these
Ingenious Men there are several, whose Expectations from me I am much more
disposed to Gratify, than Disappoint; yet, on such an occasion as this, I must
take the liberty to own, That I do not think the Corporeal World, nor the
Present State of Things, the Only or the Principal Subjects, that an
Inquisitive Man's Pen may be worthily employed about; and, That there are some
Things that are grounded, neither upon Mechanical, nor upon Chemical, Notices
or Experiments, that are yet far from deserving to be Neglected, and much less
to be Despised, or so much as to be left Uncultivated, especially by such
Writers, as being more concerned to act as Christians, than as Virtuosi, must
also think, that sometimes they may usefully busy themselves about the Study of
Divine Things, as well as at other times employ their Thoughts about the
Inspection of Natural Ones. There are some Objects, whose Nobleness is such,
that, though we derive no Advantage from them, but the Contentment of knowing
them, and that but very imperfectly too; yet our Virtuosi themselves justly
think much Pains and Time, and, perhaps, Cost too, well spent in endeavoring
to acquire some Conjectural Knowledge of them: As may be instanced in the
Assiduous and Industrious Researches they have made about the remote Celestial
part of the World, especially the Stars and Comets that our Age has exposed to
their Curiosity. For most of these, though they require chargeable Telescopes,
and tedious, as well as unhealthy, Nocturnal Observations, are Objects, of
which we can know very little with any Certainty; and which, for ought appears,
we can make no useful Experiments with. Since therefore we so much prize a
little Knowledge, of Things that are not only Corporeal, but Inanimate;
methinks we should not undervalue the Studies of those Men, that aspire to the
Knowledge of Incorporeal and Rational Beings, which are incomparably more
Noble, than all the Stars in the World, which are, as far as we know, but
Masses of Senseless and Stupid Matter. Since also the Virtuosi deservedly
Applaud and Cherish the laborious Industry of Anatomists, in their Enquiries
into the Structure of dead, ghastly, and oftentimes unhealthfully as well as
offensively Foetid, Bodies: Can it be an Employment improper for a Christian
Virtuoso, or unworthy of him, to endeavor the Discovery of the Nature and
Faculties of the Rational Mind; which is That, that Enobles its Mansion, and
gives Man the Advantage he has of the Beasts that Perish?

I am content, that merely Natural Philosophy should often Employ my Thoughts,
and my Pen; but I cannot consent it should Engross them, and hinder me from
being Conversant with Theological Subjects. And since, among my Friends, I have
some, (and those not Inconsiderable for their Number, and much less for their
Merit,) that press me to Treat of Religious Matters, as well as Others, that
would have me addict myself to Cultivate Physical Ones; I, who think myself a
Debtor to Both these sorts, am willing to endeavor to Gratify Both; and having
already, on many Occasions, presented the later sort with large, as well as
public, Effects of my Complaisance for them, I hope, they will not think it
strange, that I should now and then have Regard to the former sort, too;
especially, since I had higher Motives, than Complaisance ought to be, to
induce me to Treat sometimes of Things that might be grateful to those Friends,
that are much so to Religious Composures.

I presume, it will be taken notice of, that, in the following Treatise, as
well as in diverse of my other Writings, especially about Subjects that are
purely, or partly, Philosophical; I make frequent use of Similitudes, or
Comparisons: And therefore I think myself here obliged to acknowledge, once for
all, that I did it purposely. And my Reasons for this Practice, were, not only
because fit Comparisons are wont to delight most Readers, and to make the
Notions, they convey, better kept in Memory; whence the best Orators and
Preachers have made great and successful use of Metaphors, Allegories, and
other Resemblances; but I was induced to employ them chiefly for two other
Reasons: 1. That though I freely confess, that Arbitrary Similitudes, and
likewise Those that are Foreign to the Subject treated of, such as are most of
the Vulgar Ones, that are usually borrowed from the Fictions of the Poets, and
from the uncertain, and often ill-applied, Relations of Pliny, Aelian, and
other too frequently Fabulous Writers, are scarce fit to be made use of but to
Vulgar Readers, or Popular Auditories; yet Comparisons fitly chosen, and well
applied, may, on many occasions, usefully serve to illustrate the Notions for
whose sake they are brought, and, by placing them in a true Light, help Men to
conceive them far better, than otherwise they would do. And, 2. Apposite
Comparisons do not only give Light, but Strength, to the Passages they belong
to, since they are not always bare Pictures and Resemblances, but a kind of
Arguments; being oftentimes, if I may so call them, Analogous Instances, which
do declare the Nature, or Way of Operating, of the Thing they relate to, and by
that means do in a sort prove, that, as it is possible, so it is not improbable,
that the Thing may be such as it is represented: And therefore, not only the
Illustrious Verulam, though not more a Florid, than a Judicious, Writer, has,
much to the satisfaction of his Readers, frequently made use of Comparisons, in
whose Choice, and Application, he was very happy; but that severe Philosopher
Monsieur Des Carts himself somewhere says, that he scarce thought, that he
understood any thing in Physiques, but what he could declare by some apt
Similitude; of which, in effect, he has many in his Writings; [As, where he
compares the Particles of fresh Water, to little Eels; and the Corpuscles of
Salt in the Seawater, to little rigid Staves; and where, after the Stoics, he
compares the Sense of Objects by the intervention of Light, to the Sense that a
blind Man has of Stones, Mud, etc. by the intervention of his Staff.] To which
I shall add, That proper Comparisons do the Imagination almost as much Service,
as Microscopes do the Eye; for, as this Instrument gives us a distinct view of
diverse minute Things, which our naked Eyes cannot well discern; because these
Glasses represent them far more large, than by the bare Eye we judge them; so a
skilfully chosen, and well-applied, Comparison much helps the Imagination, by
illustrating Things scarce discernible, so as to represent them by Things much
more familiar and easy to be apprehended.

I confess, I might, on some Occasions, have spoken, not only more Positively,
and Boldly; but, as to many Learned Readers, more Acceptably, if I would have
discoursed altogether like a Cartesian, or as a Partizan of some other Modern
Sect of Philosophizers. But, besides that, I am not minded to give myself up to
any Sect, I thought it convenient, that a Discourse, designed to work on
Persons of differing Persuasions about Philosophical Matters, should not
declare itself dogmatically, or unreservedly, of a Party, but employ rather the
Dictates of Reason, or Principles either granted, or little contested, than
proceed upon the peculiar Principles of a distinct Party of Philosophizers.

If now and then I have insisted upon some particular Subjects, more than
appears absolutely necessary, I did it, because that, though I wrote this
Treatise chiefly for my Friends, yet I did not write it for them only; but was
willing to lay hold on some of the Occasions that the Series of my Discourse
offered me, to excite in myself those Dispositions that I endeavored to
produce in others: And, by insisting upon some Reflections, impress them more
deeply upon my own Mind; especially when I was Treating of some Points, either
so Important, or so Opposed, or Both, that they can scarce be too much
inculcated.

The Name of the Person, to whom the following Papers were addressed, not being
necessary to be made Public; some Reasons made it thought convenient, that it
should remain unmentioned.

Postscript.
TO give an Account of the Prolixity, that some might otherwise censure, of the
foregoing PREFACE, I must Advertise the Reader, That it is of an ancient Date,
and that the First Part of the Treatise, that it belongs to, was already
written, and 'twas then designed, that the Second Part should accompany it to
the Press: On which score 'twas presumed, that, as the Particulars that make up
the Preamble would not appear Superfluous, in regard of the Variety of Subjects
to be Treated of; So, its Length would scarce be found Disproportionate to the
Bulk of the Whole designed Book.

THE Christian Virtuoso: SHOWING, That by being addicted to Experimental
Philosophy, a Man is rather assisted, than in disposed, to be a Good Christian.
The First Part.
SIR,
I Perceive by what you intimate, that your Friends, Dr. W. and Mr. N. think it
very strange, that I, whom they are pleased to look upon as a diligent
Cultivater of Experimental Philosophy, should be a concerned Embracer of the
Christian Religion; though diverse of its Articles are so far from being Objects
of Sense, that they are thought to be above the Sphere of Reason. But, though I
presume they may find many Objects of the like wonder, among those with whom I
am comprised by them, under the name of the New Virtuosi; and among These, they
may meet with diverse persons more able than I, to ease them of their wonder;
yet, since they are pleased by singling me out, as it were to challenge me to
do it, I shall endeavor to make them think it at least less strange, That a
great Esteem of Experience, and a high Veneration for Religion, should be
compatible in the same person. Wherefore I shall not deny, that I am now and
then busied in devising, and putting in practice, Trials of several sorts, and
making Reflections upon them: And I own too, that (about natural things) I have
a great Reverence for Experience, in comparison of Authority. But withal, I
declare, that to embrace Christianity, I do not think I need to recede from the
value and kindness I have for Experimental Philosophy, any thing near so far as
your Friends seem to imagine. And I hope it will appear, that, If the
Experimental way of Philosophising I am addicted to, have any things in it that
indispose a man to assent to the Truth, and live according to the Laws, of the
Christian Religion; those few things are more than countervail'd by the
peculiar Advantages, that it affords a Man of a well-dispos'd mind, toward the
being a good Christian.

I said, a man of a well-dispos'd mind; that is, one, that is both docile, and
inclined to make pious applications of the Truths he discovers; because such a
Qualification of Mind, I hope, God, through his Goodness, has vouchsafed me;
and the occasion given by your friends to the following Discourse, relating
peculiarly to me, a personal account of my Opinions, and reasons of them, ought
to suffice. And 'twill be ex abundanti, (as they speak,) if my Discourse be
found, as it often will be, to extend much farther. Which Reflection, I desire
you would frequently have in your thoughts, to prevent mistaking the Design of
the following Epistle.

I doubt not, but the Popular Prejudices, that I perceive your two Friends,
among many other more devout than well-inform'd Persons, have entertained, will
make them think, that what I have now delivered needs good proof, and perhaps
better than it is capable of. And therefore I hope you will easily allow me the
liberty, I am going to take, of briefly premising some things, to clear the way
for the principal Points, designed to be discoursed of in this Letter.

I know you need not be told, that the Philosophy* which is most in request
among the modern Virtuosi, and which by some is called the New, by others the
Corpuscularian, by others the Real, by others (though not so properly) the
Atomical, and by others again the Cartesian, or the Mechanical, Philosophy; is
built upon two foundations, Reason and Experience. But it may not be
impertinent to observe to you, that although the Peripatetick, and some other
Philosophies, do also pretend to be grounded upon Reason and Experience; yet
there is a great difference betwixt the use that is made of these two
Principles, by the School-Philosophers, and by the Virtuosi. For those, in the
framing of their System, make but little use of Experience; contenting
themselves for the most part to employ but few and obvious Experiments, and
vulgar Traditions, usually Uncertain, and oftentimes False; and superstructing
almost their whole Physics upon Abstracted Reason; by which, I mean, The
rational Faculty endowed but with its own Congenit or Common Notions and
Idea's, and with Popular Notices; that is, such as are common among men,
especially those that are any thing Learned. But now, the Virtuosi I speak of,
and by whom, in this whole Discourse, I mean those, that Understand and
Cultivate Experimental Philosophy, make a much greater and better use of
Experience in their Philosophical Researches. For they consult Experience both
frequently and heedfully; and, not content with the Phenomenon that Nature
spontaneously affords them, they are solicitous, when they find it needful, to
enlarge their Experience by Trials purposely devised; and ever and anon
Reflecting upon it, they are careful to Conform their Opinions to it; or, if
there be just cause, Reform their Opinions by it. So that our Virtuosi have a
peculiar Right to the distinguishing Title that is often given them, of
Experimental Philosophers.

I can scarce doubt, but your Friends have more than once obliged you to take
notice, of the Profane Discourses and Licentious Lives of some Virt^osi, that
boast much of the Principles of the New Philosophy. And I deny not, but that,
if the knowledge of Nature falls into the hands of a Resolved Atheist, or a
Sensual Libertine, he may misemploy it to Oppugn the Grounds, or Discredit the
Practice, of Religion. But it will fare much otherwise, if a deep insight into
Nature be acquired by a man of Probity and Ingenuity, or at least free from
Prejudices and Vices, that may indispose him to entertain and improve those
Truths of Philosophy, that would naturally lead him to Sentiments of Religion.
For, if a Person thus qualified in his Morals, and thereby disposed to make use
of the knowledge of the Creatures to confirm his Belief, and increase his
Veneration, of the Creator, (and such a Person I here again advertise you, and
desire you would not forget it, I suppose the Virtuoso this Paper is concerned
in, to be) shall make a great progress in Real Philosophy; I am persuaded, that
Nature will be found very Loyal to her Author, and in stead of Alienating his
Mind from making religious Acknowledgments, will furnish him with weighty and
uncommon Motives, to conclude such Sentiments to be highly rational and just.
On which occasion, I must not pretermit that judicious Observation of one of
the first and greatest Experimental Philosophers of our Age, (Sir Francis
Bacon) That God never wrought a Miracle to convince Atheists; because in his
Visible Works he had placed enough to do it, if they were not wanting to
themselves. The Reason he gives for which Remark, I shall confirm, by
observing, that it is intimated in a passage of St. Paul, asserting both Romans 1.
20.
that the invisible things of God are clearly seen from the Creation of the
World, as Tokens and Effects, (as I remember the Particle (...) in the Greek
does elsewhere signify,) and that his Divinity and Eternal Power may be so well
understood by the things that are made, that the Gentiles, who had but the
Light of Nature to lead them to the acknowledgment of the true God, were
Excuseless, for not being brought by that Guide to that Acknowledgment.

And indeed, the Experimental Philosophy giving us a more clear discovery, than
Strangers to it have, of the divine Excellencies displayed in the Fabric and
Conduct of the Universe, and of the Creatures it consists of, very much
indisposeth the mind, to ascribe such admirable Effects to so incompetent and
pitiful a Cause as Blind Chance, or the tumultuous Justlings of Atomical
Portions of senseless Matter; and leads it directly to the acknowledgment and
adoration of a most Intelligent, Powerful and Benign Author of things, to whom
alone such excellent Productions may, with the greatest Congruity, be ascribed.
And therefore, if any of the Cultivaters of Real Philosophy pervert it to
countenance Atheism, it is certainly the fault of the Persons, not the Doctrine;
which is to be judged of by it is own natural Tendency, not by the ill Use that
some bad Men may make of it; especially if the prevaricating Persons are but
pretenders to the Philosophy they misemploy; which Character will perhaps be
found to belong to most, if not all, the Atheistical and Profane Men, the
Objection means. For most of these do as little understand the Mysteries of
Nature, as believe those of Christianity; and of diverse of them it may be truly
said, that their Sensuality, and Lusts, and Passions, darkened and seduced
their Intellects: Their Immorality was the Original Cause of their Infidelity;
nor were they led by Philosophy to Irreligion, but got and perverted some
smattering of Philosophy, to countenance the Irreligious Principles, they
brought with them to the Study of it.

But all this notwithstanding, I fear, if not foresee, that you will surmise,
that the study of Natural Philosophy, how innocent soever it may be in it self,
will, in this Libertine City, engage me to converse with many, who, though they
pass for Virtuosi, are indeed Atheists; whose contagious Company must Endanger,
if not Infect, me.

This obliges me to tell you, that though I have no reason to take it at all
unkindly, that you are jealous of me on the score of being Solicitous for my
Safety; yet I hope my Danger is not so great as you may apprehend it. For
First, I must own to you, that I do not think there are so many Speculative
Atheists, as Men are wont to imagine. And though my Conversation has been pretty
free and general among Naturalists, yet I have met with so few true Atheists,
that I am very apt to think, that Men's want of due Information, or their
uncharitable Zeal, has made them mistake or misrepresent many for Denyers of
God, that are thought such, chiefly because they take uncommon Methods in
studying his Works, and have other Sentiments of them, than those of vulgar
Philosophers. And in the next place I must tell you, that having, through the
goodness of God, chosen my Religion, not Inconsiderately, but upon mature
Deliberation; I do not find those Virtuosi, you call Atheists, such formidable
Adversaries, as those that are afraid to hear them, do, by that Apprehension,
appear to think them. And indeed, I have observed the Physical Arguments of the
Atheists to be but very few, and those far enough from being Unanswerable. And
as for the very chief of them, though they are wont to puzzle such as are not
versed in nice Speculations, because they represent the assertion of a Deity,
as a Doctrine encumbered with inextricable Difficulties; yet I do not think the
Objections solidly grounded, since the same Difficulties, or others not
inferior, may be urged against those Hypotheses and Principles, that the
Deniers of God do or must admit. And indeed, most of the perplexing
Difficulties the Atheists lay so much stress on, do not proceed from any
Absurdity contained in the Tenent of the Theists, but from the Nature of
things; that is, partly from the Dimness and other Imperfections of our Human
Understandings, and partly from the Abstruse Nature, that, to such Bounded
Intellects, all Objects must appear to have, in whose Conception Infinity is
involved; whether that Object be God, or Atoms, or Duration, or some other
thing that is uncausable. For, however we may flatter our selves, I fear we
shall find, upon strict and impartial Trial, that finite Understandings are not
able clearly to resolve such Difficulties, as exact a clear comprehension of
what is really Infinite.

But to pursue this Discourse, would lead us too far. And it is more fit, after
so much has been said concerning not only the Design of this Tract, but the New
Philosophy, the Virtuosi, and my self; to proceed to those more Particular
things, that directly tend to the main Scope of our Epistle.

The first advantage, that our Experimental Philosopher, as such, has toward
being a Christian, is* that his course of Studies conduces much, to settle in
his Mind a firm Belief of the Existence, and diverse of the chief* Attributes,
of God: Which Belief, is, in the order of things, the first Principle of that
Natural Religion, which it self is pre-required to Revealed Religion in
general, and consequently to That in particular, which is embraced by
Christians.

That the consideration of the Vastness, Beauty, and Regular Motions, of the
heavenly Bodies; the excellent Structure of Animals and Plants; besides a
multitude of other Phenomenon of Nature, and the Subserviency of most of these
to Man; may justly induce him, as a Rational Creature, to Conclude, That this
vast, beautiful, orderly, and (in a word) many ways admirable System of things,
that we call the World, was framed by an Author supremely Powerful, Wise, and
Good, can scarce be denied by an intelligent and unprejudiced Considerer. And
this is strongly confirmed by Experience, which witnesses, that in almost all
Ages and Countries, the generality of Philosophers, and contemplative Men, were
persuaded of the Existence of a Deity, by the consideration of the Phenomenon
of the Universe; whose Fabric and Conduct they rationally concluded could not
be deservedly ascribed, either to blind Chance, or to any other Cause than a
Divine Being.

But, though it be true, that God has not left himself without witness, even to
perfunctory Considerers; by stamping upon diverse of the more Obvious Parts of
his Workmanship, such conspicuous Impressions of his Attributes, that a
moderate degree of Understanding, and Attention, may suffice to make Men
acknowledge his Being; Yet, I scruple not to think, That Assent very much
inferior to the Belief, that the same Objects are fitted to produce in an
Heedful and Intelligent Contemplator of them: For the Works of God are so
worthy of their Author, that, besides the Impresses of his Wisdom, and
Goodness, that are left as it were upon their Surfaces; there are a great many
more curious and excellent Tokens, and Effects, of Divine Artifice, in the
hidden and innermost Recesses of them; and these are not to be discovered by
the perfunctory looks of Oscitant or Unskilful Beholders; but Require, as well,
as Deserve, the most attentive and prying Inspection of inquisitive and
well-instructed Considerers. And sometimes in one Creature, there may be I know
not how many admirable things, that escape a vulgar Eye, and yet may be clearly
discerned by That of a true Naturalist; who brings with him, besides a more
than common Curiosity and Attention, a competent knowledge of Anatomy, Optics,
Cosmography, Mechanics, and Chemistry. But treating elsewhere purposely of
this Subject, it may here suffice to say, that God has couched so many things
in his Visible Works, that the clearer Light a Man has, the more he may
discover of their Unobvious Exquisiteness, and the more clearly and distinctly
he may discern those Qualities that lie more Obvious. And the more wonderful
things he discovers in the Works of Nature, the more auxiliary Proofs he meets
with to establish and enforce the Argument, drawn from the Universe and its
Parts, to evince That there is a God: Which is a Proposition of that vast
weight and importance, that it ought to endear every thing to us, that is able
to Confirm it, and Afford us new Motives to acknowledge and adore the Divine
Author of things.

In reference to this matter, we may confidently say, that the Experimental
Philosophy has a great advantage of the Scholastic. For in the Peripatetick
Schools, where things are wont to be ascribed to certain Substantial Forms, and
Real Qualities; (the former of which are acknowledged to be very abstruse and
mysterious things, and the later are many of them confessedly occult;) the
accounts of Natures Works may be easily given in a few words, that are general
enough to be applicable to almost all Occasions. But these uninstructive Terms
do neither oblige, nor conduct, a man to deeper searches into the Structure of
Things, nor the manner of being Produced, and of Operating upon one another.
And consequently, are very insufficient to disclose the exquisite Wisdom, which
the Omniscient Maker has expressed in the peculiar Fabrics of Bodies, and the
skilfully regulated Motions of them, or of their constituent Parts: From the
discernment of which things, nevertheless, it is, that there is, by way of
result, produced in the mind of an Intelligent Contemplator, a strong
Conviction of the Being of a Divine Opificer, and a just acknowledgment of his
admirable Wisdom. To be told, that an Eye is the Organ of Sight, and that this
is performed by that Faculty of the Mind, which from its Function is called
Visive; will give a Man but a sorry account of the Instruments and Manner of
Vision it self, or of the Knowledge of that Opificer, who, as the Scripture
speaks, Psalm. 94. 9.
formed the Eye. And he that can take up with this easy Theory of Vision, will
not think it necessary to take the pains to dissect the Eyes of Animals, nor
study the Books of Mathematicians, to understand Vision; and accordingly, will
have but mean thoughts of the Contrivance of the Organ, and the Skill of the
Artificer, in comparison of the Idea's that will be suggested of both of them,
to him that, being profoundly skilled in Anatomy and Optics, by Their help
takes asunder the several Coats, Humors, and Muscles, of which, that exquisite
Dioptrical Instrument consists: And having separately considered the Figure,
Size, Consistence, Texture, Diaphaneity, or Opacity, Situation, and Connexions,
of each of them, and their Coaptation in the whole Eye, shall discover, by the
help of the Laws of Optics, how admirably this little Organ is fitted, to
Receive the incident Beams of Light, and Dispose them in the best manner
possible, for completing the lively Representation of the almost infinitely
various Objects of Sight.

It Is easy for Men to say in general Terms, that the World is wisely framed;
but I doubt it often happens, that Men confess, that the Creatures are wisely
made, rather because upon other grounds they believe God to be a wise Agent,
than because so slight an account as the School Philosophy gives of particular
Creatures, convinces them of any Divine Wisdom in the Creator. And though I am
willing to grant, that some Impressions of God's Wisdom are so conspicuous,
that (as I lately intimated) even a Superficial Philosopher may thence infer,
that the Author of such Works must be a wise Agent; yet, how wise an Agent he
has in those Works expressed himself to be, none but an Experimental
Philosopher can well discern. And it is not by a slight Survey, but by a
diligent and skilful Scrutiny, of the Works of God, that a Man must be, by a
Rational and Affective Conviction, engaged to acknowledge with the Prophet,
that the Author of Nature is Wonderful in Counsel, and Excellent in Working,
Isa. xxviii. 29.

II. After the Existence of the Deity, the next grand Principle of Natural
Religion, is, the Immortality of the Rational Soul; whose genuine consequence
is, the Belief and Expectation of a Future and Everlasting State. For this
important Truth, diverse Arguments may be alleged, that may persuade a sober
and well-disposed Man to embrace it: But to convince a learned Adversary, the
strongest Argument, that the Light of Nature supplies us with, seems to be that
which is afforded by the Real Philosophy. For this teaches us to form true and
distinct Notions of the Body, and the Mind; and thereby manifests so great a
difference in their Essential Attributes, that the same thing cannot be both.
This it makes out more distinctly, by enumerating several Faculties and
Functions of the Rational Soul; such as, To Understand, and that so, as to form
Conceptions of Abstracted things, of Universals, of Immaterial Spirits, and
even of that infinitely Perfect One, God himself: And also, to Conceive, and
Demonstrate, that there are Incommensurable Lines, and Surd Numbers; to make
Ratiocinations, and both cogent and concatenated Inferences, about these
things; to express their intellectual Notions, pro re nata, by words or
Instituted Signs, to other Men; to exercise Free Will about many things; and to
make Reflections on its own Acts, both of Intellect and Will. For these and the
like Prerogatives, that are peculiar to the Human Mind, and superior to any
thing that belongs to the Outward Senses, or to the Imagination it self,
manifest, that the Rational Soul is a Being of an higher Order, than Corporeal;
and consequently, that the Seat of these Spiritual Faculties, and the Source of
these Operations, is a Substance, that being in its own nature distinct from
the Body, is not naturally subject to Dye or Perish with it.

And in reference to this Truth, our Virtuoso has an advantage of a mere
School-Philosopher. For being acquainted with the true and real Causes of
Putrefaction, and other Physical kinds of Corruption; and thereby discerning,
that the things that destroy Bodies, are the Avolation, or other Recess, of
some necessary Parts, and such a depraving Transposition of the component
Portions of Matter, as is altogether incongruous to the Structure and
Mechanical Modification, that is essential to a Body of that Species, or kind,
it belongs to: Our Naturalist, I say, knowing this, plainly perceives, that
these causes of destruction can have no place in the Rational Soul; which being
an Immaterial Spirit, and consequently a Substance not really divisible, can
have no Parts expelled or transposed, and so being exempted from the Physical
Causes of Corruption that destroy Bodies, she ought to last always. And being a
Rational Creature, endowed with internal Principles of Acting, as appears in
Free Will, she ought to live for ever, unless it please God to annihilate her;
which we have no reason to suppose he will do. But on the other side, the
Modern Peripateticks (for I question whether Aristotle himself were of the same
opinion) maintain Substantial Forms, by some of them, styled Semi-substantiae,
to which in Apes, Elephants, and others, that pass for ingenious Animals, they
ascribe some such Faculties and Functions, as seem to differ but gradually from
those of the Rational Soul; and (how innocent soever I grant their Intentions
to be) their Doctrine tends much to Enervate, if not quite to Disable, the
chief Physical way of Probation, whence the Immortality of Man's Mind is justly
inferred. For since according to the Peripateticks, substantial Forms, are, as
they speak, educ'd out of the Power or Potentiality of the Matter; and do so
depend upon it, not only as to Action, but as to Being, that they cannot at all
subsist without it: But when the particular Body (as an Herb, a Stone, or a
Bird,) is destroyed, they perish with it; or, (as some of them scarce
intelligibly express the same thing) fall back into the basom of the matter: I
think they give great advantage to Atheists, and Cavillers, to impugn the Minds
Immortality.

For if to an Ape, or other Brute Animal, there belongs a Being more noble than
Matter, that can actuate and inform it, and make it self the Architect of its
own Mansion, though so admirable as that of an Ape, or an Elephant; if this Being
can in the Body it has framed, perform all the Functions of a vegetable Soul;
and besides those, See, Hear, Taste, Smell, Imagine, Infer, Remember, Love, Hate,
Fear, Hope, Expect, etc. and yet be a mortal thing, and perish with the Body:
'Twill not be difficult for those Enemies of Religion, who are willing to think
the Soul Mortal, because their brutish Lives make them wish she were, to fancy,
that human Minds are but a somewhat more Noble, but not for that less Mortal,
kind of Substantial Forms; as amongst Sensitive Souls themselves, which they
acknowledge to be equally Mortal, there is a great disparity in Degrees, that
of a Monky, for instance, being very far superior to that of an Oyster.

III. The third main Principle of Unreveal'd Religion, and consequently of
Revealed, (which presupposes Natural Religion, as it is foundation) is a Belief
of the Divine Providence. And in this grand Article, as well as in the two
foregoing, a Man may be much Confirmed by Experimental Philosophy; both as it
affords him positive Inducements to acknowledge the Article, and as it shows
the great Improbability of the two main Grounds, on one or other of which, (for
they are not well consistent) is founded the denial of God's Providence.

A Virtuoso, that by manifold and curious Experiments searches deep into the
Nature of things, has great and peculiar Advantages, to discover and observe
the excellent Fabric of the World, as it is an immense Aggregate of the several
Creatures that compose it; and to take notice in its particular Parts,
especially those that are Animated, of such exquisite Contrivances, and such
admirable Coordinations, and Subordinations, in reference to each other, as lie
hid from those Beholders that are not both Attentive and Skilful. When our
Virtuoso contemplates the Vastness, scarce conceivable Swiftness, and yet
constant Regularity, of the various Motions, of the Sun, Moon, and other
Celestial Lights: When he considers how the Magnetism of the Earth makes its
Poles constantly look the same way, notwithstanding the Motions of its fluid
Vortex; how by daily turning about its own Center in four and twenty hours, it
receives as much Light, and benefit from the Sun, and all the glorious
Constellations of the Firmament, as if they, with all the vast heavenly Region
they belong to, moved about it in the same time; how by its Situation among
them, it enjoys the regular Vicissitudes of Day and Night, Summer and Winter,
etc. how the several Parts of the Sublunary World are mutually subservient to
one another, and most of them (one way or other) Serviceable to Man; how
excellently the Bodies of Animals are Contrived; what various and congruous
provision is made for differing Animals, that they may subsist as long as they
should, according to the Institution of Nature, by furnishing them, according
to their respective Natures, some with Strength to take their Food by force,
others with Industry to procure it by Subtilty; some with Arms, as Horns,
Hoofs, Scales, Tusks, Poisons, Stings, etc. to Defend themselves, and Offend
their Enemies; some with Wings or swiftness to fly from Dangers; some with
Foresight to prevent them; some with Craft, and perhaps strange Fetches of it,
to Elude them; how being distinguished into two Sexes, each of these is
furnished with apposite Organs, for the propagation of the Species, and with
skill and kindness to nourish and train up their young ones, till they can
shift for themselves; how admirable, and indeed astonishing, a process is gone
through in the formation of the Foetus*, especially of a Human one; how diverse
Animals are endowed with strange Instincts, whose Effects sometimes seem much
to surpass those of Reason it self; though they are superadded to the Mechanical
Structure of the Animal, and argue a respect to things very remote from it,
either in time, place, or both, and perhaps also to the Grand Fabric or System
of the World, and the general Economy of Nature. When, as I was saying, a
Philosopher duly reflects on these things, and many others of the like import,
he will think it highly rational to infer from them these three Conclusions.

First, That a Machine so Immense, so Beautiful, so well contrived, and, in a
word, so Admirable, as the World, cannot have been the effect of mere Chance,
or the Tumultuous Justlings and Fortuitous Concourse of Atoms, but must have
been produced by a Cause, exceedingly Powerful, Wise, and Beneficent.

Secondly, That this most Potent Author, and (if I may so speak) Opificer of
the World, has not Abandoned a Masterpiece so worthy of him, but does still
Maintain and Preserve it; so regulating the stupendiously swift Motions of the
great Globes, and other vast Masses of the Mundane Matter, that they do not, by
any notable Irregularity, disorder the grand System of the Universe, and reduce
it to a kind of Chaos, or confused State of shuffl'd and depraved things.

Thirdly, That as it is not above the Ability of the Divine Author of things,
though a single Being, to Preserve and Govern all his Visible Works, how great
and numerous soever; so he thinks it not Below his Dignity and Majesty, to
extend his Care and Beneficence to particular Bodies, and even to the meanest
Creatures; providing not only for the Nourishment, but for the Propagation, of
Spiders and Ants themselves. And indeed, since the Truth of this Assertion,
That God governs the World he has made, would appear (if it did not by other
Proofs) by the Constancy, and Regularity, and astonishingly rapid Motions of
the vast Celestial Bodies, and by the long Trains of as Admirable, as
Necessary, Artifices, that are employed to the Propagation of various sorts of
Animals, (whether Viviparous, or Oviparous;) I see not why it should be denied,
that God's Providence may reach to his particular Works here below, especially
to the noblest of them, Man; since most of those Learned Men that deny this, as
derogatory to God's Majesty and Happiness, acknowledge, that at the first
Creation, or (if they dislike that term) Formation of things; the great Author
of them must not only have extended his Care, to the grand System of the
Universe in general, but allowed it to descend so low, as to contrive all the
Minute, and various Parts, (and even the most homely ones) not only of Greater
and (reputedly) more perfect Animals, as Elephants, Whales, and Men; but such
Small and Abject Ones, as Flies, Ants, Fleas, etc. Which being manifestly
propagated by Eggs laid by the Female, cannot reasonably be thought the
offspring of Putrefaction. Whence I gather, as from matter of fact, that to be
concerned for the welfare, even of particular Animals; as it is agreeable to
God's All-pervading Wisdom, and exuberant Beneficence; so (whatever Men's
Vanity may make them surmise) it is not truly derogatory to his adorable
Greatness and Majesty.

And on this occasion, I shall add, that since Man is the noblest of God's
visible Works; since very many of them seem made for his Use; since, even as an
Animal, he is (as the Psalmist truly speaks) Psalm 138. 14, 15.
wonderfully made, and curiously, or artificially wrought; and since God has
both given him a Rational Mind, and endowed it with an Intellect, whereby he
can Contemplate the Works of Nature, and by them acquire a Conviction of the
Existence, and diverse Attributes, of their supremely perfect Author; since God
has planted Notions and Principles in the Mind of Man, fit to make him
sensible, that he ought to Adore God, as the most Perfect of Beings, the
Supreme Lord and Governor of the World, the Author of his own Nature, and all
his Enjoyments: Since all this, I say, is so, Natural Reason dictates to him,
that he ought to express the Sentiments he has for this Divine Being, by
Veneration of his Excellencies; by Gratitude for his Benefits; by Humiliation,
in view of his Greatness, and Majesty; by an Awe of his Justice; by Reliance on
his Power, and Goodness, when he duly endeavors to serve and please him; and,
in short, by those several Acts of Natural Religion, that Reason shows to be
Suitable, and therefore Due to those several Divine Attributes of his, which it
has led us to the knowledge of.

And here I shall take leave to add, that, from the Cartesian Principles,
(which you know are embraced, by a great part of the Modern Virtuosi) I think,
I may draw a double Argument for Divine Providence.

For first, according to the Cartesians, all Local Motion (which is, under God,
the grand Principle of all Actions among things Corporeal) is Adventitious to
Matter; and was at first produced in it, and is still every moment Continued
and Preserved immediately by God: Whence may be inferred, that he Concurs to
the Actions of each particular Agent, (as they are Physical;) and consequently,
that his Providence reaches to all and every one of them.

And secondly, the same Cartesians believe the Rational Soul to be an
Immaterial Substance, really distinct and separable from the Body. Whence I
infer, that the Divine Providence extends to every particular Man; since when
ever an Embryo, or little Human Body formed in the Womb, is, by being duly
Organized, fitted to receive a Rational Mind, God is pleased to Create one, and
Unite it with that Body. In which Transaction, there seems to me a necessity of
a direct and particular intervention of the Divine Power; since I understand
not, by what Physical Charm or Spell an Immaterial* Substance can be allured
into this or that Particular Embryo, of many that are at the same time fitted
to receive a Human Soul; nor by what merely Mechanical Ty, or Band, an
Immaterial Substance can be so durably (perhaps for 80 or 100 Years) joined and
united with a Corporeal, in which it finds no Parts, that it has Organs to take
hold of, and to which it can furnish no Parts to be fastened upon by them. Nor
do I better conceive, how a mere Body can produce Pain, Pleasure, etc. by its
own mere Action, or rather Endeavor to act, on an Immaterial Spirit. Nor will
the force of all that has been said for God's Special Providence, be eluded, by
saying, with some Deists, that after the first formation of the Universe, all
things are brought to pass by the Settled Laws of Nature. For though this be
confidently, and not without color, pretended; yet, I confess, it does not
satisfy me. For, beside the insuperable difficulty there is, to give an
Account of the first formation of things, which many (especially Aristotelian)
Deists will not ascribe to God; and besides that the Laws of Motion* without
which the present State and Course of things could not be maintained, did not
necessarily spring from the Nature of Matter, but depended upon the Will of the
Divine Author of things: Besides this, I say, I look upon a Law, as a Moral,
not a Physical, Cause, as being indeed but a Notional thing, according to
which* an intelligent and free Agent is bound to regulate its Actions. But
inanimate Bodies are utterly incapable of Understanding what a Law is, or what
it injoyns, or when they act conformably or unconformably to it; and therefore
the Actions of Inanimate Bodies, which cannot incite or moderate their own
Actions, are produced by real Power, not by Laws; though the Agents, if
Intelligent, may Regulate the Exertions of their Power by settled Rules.

IV. I have taken notice of two other Accounts, upon which the Experimental
Knowledge of God's Works, may, in a well-dispos'd Mind, conduce to establish
the Belief of his Providence; and therefore, though I shall not dwell long upon
them, I must not altogether pretermit them.

First then, when our Virtuoso sees how many, and how various, and oftentimes
how strange, and how admirable Structures, Instincts, and other Artifices, the
wise Opificer has furnished, even Brutes and Plants withal, to purchase and
assimilate their Food, to defend or otherwise secure themselves from hostile
things, and (to be short) to maintain their Lives, and propagate their Species;
it will very much conduce to persuade him, that so Wise an Agent, who has at
Command so many differing and excellent Methods and Tools, to accomplish what
he designs; and does oftentimes actually employ them, for the preservation and
welfare of Beasts, and even of Plants, can never want Means to compass his most
wise and just Ends, in relation to Mankind; being able, by ways that we should
never dream of, to execute his Menaces, and fulfill his Promises. But of these
rare Structures, Instincts, and other Methods, and, if I may so style some of
them with Reverence, Stratagems and Fetches of Divine Skill, that God is
pleased to employ in the conduct of the visible World, especially Animals, I
have already elsewhere purposely discoursed, and therefore shall now proceed,
and observe, in the second place, That, when we duly consider the very
differing ends, to which many of God's particular Works, especially those that
are Animated, seem designed, in reference both to their own Welfare, and the
Utility of Man; and with how much Wisdom, and, I had almost said, Care, the
glorious Creator has been pleased to supply them with means admirably fit for
the attainment of these respective ends; we cannot but think it highly
probable, That so Wise, and so Benign a Being, has not left his noblest visible
Creature, Man, unfurnished with means to procure his own Welfare, and obtain
his true End, if he be not culpably wanting to himself. And since Man is
endowed with Reason, which may convince him, (of what neither a Plant, nor
Brute Animal is capable of knowing, namely) that God is both his Maker, and his
continual Benefactor; since his Reason likewise teaches him, That upon both
those accounts, besides others, God may justly expect and require Worship and
Obedience from him; since also the same Rational Faculty may persuade him, That
it may well become the Majesty and Wisdom of God, as the Sovereign Rector of
the World, t^ give a Law to Man, who is a Rational Creature, capable of
Understanding and Obeying it, and thereby Glorifying the Author of it; since,
(farthermore) finding in his own Mind (if it be not depraved by Vice, or Lusts)
a Principle that dict^^^^ to him, That he owes a Veneration, and other suitable
Sentiments, to the Divinely Excellent Author of his Being, and his continual
and munificent Benefactor; since, on these scores, his Conscience will convince
him of his Obligation to all the Essential Duties of natural Religion; and
since, lastly, his Reason may convince him, That his Soul is Immortal, and is
therefore Capable, as well as Desirous, to be everlastingly Happy, after it has
left the Body; he must in reason be strongly inclined to wish for a
Supernatural Discovery of what God would have him Believe and Do. And therefore
if, being thus prepared, he shall be very credibly informed, That God has
actually been pleased to Discover, by Supernatural Revelation, (what, by
Reason, without it, he can either not at all, or but rovingly, guess at) what
kind of Worship and Obedience will be most acceptable to him; and to encourage*
Man to both these, by explicit Promises of that Felicity, that Man, without
them, can but faintly hope for, he would be ready then thankfully to
acknowledge, That this way of proceeding beseems the transcendent Goodness of
God, without derogating from his Majesty and Wisdom. And by these and the like
Reflections, whereof some were formerly intimated, a Philosopher, that takes
notice of the wonderful Providence, that God descends to exercise for the
welfare of Inferior and Irrational Creatures, will have an advantage above Men
not versed in the works and course of Nature, to believe, upon the Historical
and other Proofs that Christianity offers, That God has actually vouchsafed to
Man, his noblest, and only rational visible Creature, an explicit and positive
Law, enforced by Threatening severe Penalties to the Stubborn Transgressors; and
Promising, to the sincere Obeyers, Rewards suitable to his own Greatness and
Goodness. And thus the Consideration of God's Providence, in the conduct of
things corporeal, may prove, to a well disposed Contemplator, a Bridge, whereon
he may pass from Natural to Revealed Religion.

I have been the more particular and express, in what I have said about Divine
Providence, because I did not find other Writers had made it needless for me to
do so: And I dwelt the longer upon the Existence of the Deity, and the
Immortality of the Soul, that I might let you see, That I did not speak
Groundlesly or Rashly, but that I had considered what I said, when I asserted,
That the Experimental Philosophy might afford a well disposed Mind considerable
Helps to Natural Religion. I find my self therefore now at Liberty to proceed
to farther Considerations, and represent to you, That

V. Another thing, that disposes an Experimentarian Philosopher to embrace
Religion, is, That his Genius and Course of Studies accustoms him to value and
delight in abstracted Truths; by which Term, I here mean such Truths, as do not
at all, or do but very little, gratify Men's Ambition, Sensuality, or other
Inferior Passions and Appetites. For, whereas the Generality of those that are
averse from Religion are inclined to be so, upon This account, (among Others)
That they have a Contempt or Undervaluation of all Truths, that do not gratify
their Passions or Interests; He that is addicted to Knowledge Experimental, is
accustomed both to Pursue, Esteem, and Relish many Truths, that do not delight
his Senses, or gratify his Passions, or his Interests, but only entertain his
Understanding with that Manly and Spiritual Satisfaction, that is naturally
afforded it by the attainment of Clear and Noble Truths, which are its genuine
Objects and Delights. And though I grant, that the Discoveries made by the help
of Physical or Mechanical Experiments, are not, for the most part, of Kin to
Religion; yet, besides that some of them do manifestly conduce to Establish or
Illustrate Natural Theology, which is that, (as, though noted already, deserves
to be Inculcated) which Revealed Religion, and consequently that of Christians,
must be Founded on, or must Suppose: Besides this, I say, we may argue a
fortiori, That he, that is accustomed to prize Truths of an Inferior kind,
because they are Truths, will be much more disposed to value Divine Truths,
which are of a much higher and nobler Order, and of an Inestimable and Eternal
Advantage.

VI. There is another thing, that is too pertinent to the main Scope of this
Discourse to be here pretermitted: and it is, That both the Temper of Mind,
that makes a Man most proper to be a Virtuoso, and the Way of Philosophising,
he chiefly employ's, conduce much to give him a sufficient, and yet well
grounded and duly limited, Docility; which is a great Disposition to the
Entertainment of Revealed Religion. In the Vulgar and Superficial Philosophy,
wherein a Man is allowed to think, that he has done his part well enough, when
he has ascribed things to a Substantial Form, or to Nature, or to some Real
Quality, whether Manifest or Occult, without proving that there are such
Causes, or intelligibly declaring, How they produce the Phenomenon, or Effects
referred to them; in this Philosophy, I say, it is easy for a Man to have a
great Opinion of his own Knowledge, and be puffed up by it. But a Virtuoso, that
cannot satisfy Himself, nor dares pretend to satisfy Others, till he can, by
Hypotheses that may be understood and proved, declare intelligibly the manner
of the Operation of the Causes he assigns, will often find it so Difficult a
Task to do so, that he will easily discern, that he needs further Information,
and therefore ought to seek for it where it is the most likely to be had; and
not only to Admit, but Welcome it, if he finds it. Besides, the Litigious
Philosophy of the Schools seldom furnishes its Disciples with better than
Dialectical or Probable Arguments, which are not proper, either fully to
satisfy the Person that employs them, or leave his Adversary without any
Answer, Plausible at least, if not full as Probable as the Objection; upon
which account, men that have more Wit than sincere Love of Truth, will be able
to dispute speciously enough, as long as they have a mind to do so. And as such
slippery Arguments are not able to Convince even Him that employs them, if he
be a Man of Judgment; so, if he deals with a witty Adversary, they will leave
him able to Elude any Arguments of the like nature, with which he shall be
pressed. And in effect we see, That in the Aristotelian Philosophy there are
diverse Questions, such as, whether the Elements retain their distinct Nature in
a mixed Body? whether the Caelestial Orbs are moved by Intelligences? to omit
many others, which are as it were stated Questions; and as they have been
disputed from age to age, are like to continue Questions for many more, if that
Philosophy shall last so long. But a Virtuoso, that is wont in his Reasonings
to attend to the Principles of Mathematics, and sound Philosophy, and to the
clear Testimonies of Sense, or well verified Experiments, acquires a Habit of
discerning the Cogency of an Argument, or way of Probation; and easily
discerns, That Dialectical Subtilties, and School Tricks, cannot shift off its
force, but finds more Satisfaction in Embracing a Demonstrated Truth, than in
the vain Glory of Disputing subtly against it.

VII. Another thing that may dispose a studious Searcher of Truth, (not by
Speculations only, but) by Experiments, for Theology, is, that his
Inquisitiveness, and Course of Studies, makes him both Willing and Fit to
search out and discover Deep and Vnobvious Truths. I have with trouble
observed, That the greater part of the Libertines we have among us, being Men
of Pilate's humor, (who, when he had scornfully asked what is truth? would not
stay for an Answer) do, with great Fastidiousness, decline the Study of all
Truths that require a Serious and Settled application of Mind. These Men are,
for the most part, a sort of Superficial and Desultory Wits, that go no further
than the Out side of things, without penetrating into the Recesses of them; and
being easily tired with contemplating one, pass quickly to another; the
Consideration whereof they, with the same Lightness, forsake. And upon this
account, among others, it is, that this sort of Men, though often much applauded
by others, because the Most are but Superficial, as well as They, do almost as
seldom make good Philosophers, as good Christians. For though all the good
Arguments, that may be brought to evince the Truth of Natural (and Revealed)
Religion, be not Abstruse; yet some of the chief ones, especially those that
prove the Existence and Special Providence of God, and the Souls Immortality,
are, if not of a Metaphysical, yet at least of a Philosophical, nature; and
will scarce be clearly understood, and duly relished, but by a Person capable
of, and somewhat accustomed to, Attentive and Lasting Speculations, (as in
another Paper has been more fully declared.) About some Causes of Atheism.
But now, a Man addicted to prosecute Discoveries of Truths, not only by Serious
Meditation, but by intricate and laborious Experiments, will not easily be
deterred from effectually prosecuting his End, by the Troublesomness or
Difficulties that attend the clearing of those Notions, and Matters of Fact,
whereon Solid Arguments for Natural, or Revealed, Religion, are founded; how
remote soever those Truths may be from vulgar Apprehensions. In short, whereas
a Superficial Wit, such as is frequently found in Libertins, and often helps to
make them such, may be compared to an ordinary Swimmer, who can reach but such
things as float upon the Water; an Experimental Philosopher may be compared to
a skilful Diver, that cannot only fetch those things that lie upon the Surface
of the Sea, but make his way to the very Bottom of it; and thence fetch up
Pearls, Corals, and other precious things, that in those Depths lie concealed
from other men's Sight and Reach.

We have already seen, that Experimental Philosophy is, in its own nature,
friendly to Religion in general.

Wherefore I shall now add, That the Reverence I pay Experience, especially as
it gives both Grounds and Hints to rational Notions and Conclusions, does not a
little conduce to the Assent I give to the Truth of the Christian Religion in
particular.

This excellent Religion is recommended to well disposed Minds, by a greater
Number of Prerogatives, and other Arguments, than it were proper for me to
insist on in this Discourse: And yet my Design engages me to consider a few of
them somewhat particularly.

1. And first, I shall observe, That, whereas the three grand Arguments, that
conjointly evince the Truth of the Christian Religion in general, are (at least
in my opinion) the Excellency of the Doctrine, which makes it worthy to have
proceeded from God; the Testimony of the Divine Miracles, that were wrought to
recommend it; the great Effects, produced in the World by it. Two of these
three Arguments (for the first is of a more Speculative nature) are bottomed
upon matters of fact, and consequently are likely to be the most prevalent upon
those that have a great Veneration for Experience, and are duly disposed to
frame such pious Reflections, as it warrants and leads them* to make. This last
Clause I add, because, though I have formerly more than Intimated something of
the like Import, yet it is so necessary to my Design that you should take
special notice of it, that I must not here omit to advertise you, That, when,
in this Discourse, I speak of an Experimental Philosopher, or Virtuoso; I do
not mean, either, on this hand, a Libertine, though Ingenious; or a Sensualist,
though Curious; or, on that hand, a mere Empirick, or some vulgar Chemist, that
looks upon nothing as Experimental, wherein Chemistry, Mechanics, etc. are not
employed; and who too often makes Experiments, without making Reflection on
them, as having it more in his aim to Produce Effects, than to Discover Truths.
But the Person I here mean, is such a one, as by attentively looking about him,
gathers Experience, not from his own Trials alone, but from diverse other
matters of fact, which he heedfully observes, though he had no share in the
effecting them; and on which he is disposed to make such Reflections, as may
(unforcedly) be applied to confirm and increase in him the Sentiments of
Natural Religion, and facilitate his Submission and Adherence to the Christian
Religion.

An Experimental Philosopher, thus disposed, will, with the Divine Assistance,
(which he will be careful to Implore) find pregnant Motives to the Belief of
Christianity, in the two last of the three Arguments of its Truth, that I
lately proposed. That which is drawn from the Effects of this Religion in the
World, as it is last named, so I shall defer the Consideration of it, till I
have treated of the other; namely the Testimony of Divine Miracles, whose
Difficulty makes it requisite for us to consider it the more Attentively, and
distinctly declare the Grounds, upon which Experience may be esteemed a good
Topic on the present occasion. For the clearing of this matter, I shall
represent to you, That the word Experience may admit of diverse Senses, whereof
one is far more comprehensive than another; and likewise of several Divisions
and Distributions. For, besides its more restrained acceptance, it is sometimes
set in contra-distinction to Reason, so as to comprehend, not only those
Phenomenon that Nature or Art exhibits to our Outward Senses, but those things
that we perceive to pass Within our selves; and all those ways of Information,
whereby we attain any Knowledge that we do not owe to abstracted Reason. So
that, without stretching the Word to the utmost Extent of which it is capable,
and to which it has been enlarged; it may be looked upon as so comprehensive a
Term, that I think it may be of some importance to my present design, and
perhaps to Theology it self, to propose to you a Distribution of Experience,
that will not, I hope, be found useless to clear the Extent of that Term. I
shall then take the freedom to enlarge the Signification of the Word beyond its
commonest Limits, and divide it, for distinctions sake, into Immediate and
Vicarious Experience; or rather somewhat less Compendiously, but perhaps more
Commodiously, into Personal, Historical, and Supernatural, (which may be also
styled Theological:) referring the First of the three Members of this
distribution to Immediate Experience, and the two others, to Vicarious.

I call that Personal Experience, which a Man acquires immediately by himself,
and accrews to him by his own Sensations, or the exercise of his Faculties,
without the Intervention of any external Testimony. It Is by this Experience
that we know, that the Sun is bright; Fire, hot; Snow, cold, and white; that
upon the want of Aliments we feel Hunger; that we hope for future Goods; that
we love what we judge good, and hate what we think evil; and discern that there
is a great Difference between a Triangle and a Circle, and can distinguish them
by it.

By Historical Experience, I mean that, which though it were personal in some
Other man, is but by his Relation or Testimony, whether immediately or
mediately, conveyed to us. It Is by this that we know, that there were such Men
as Julius Caesar, and William the Conqueror, and that Joseph knew that Pharaoh
had a Dream, which the Egyptian wise Men could not expound.

By Theological Experience, I mean that, by which we know what, supposing there
is some Divine Revelation, God is pleased to relate or declare concerning
Himself, his Attributes, his Actions, his Will, or his Purposes; whether
immediately, (or without the Intervention of Man) as he sometimes did to Job and
Moses, and Constantly to Christ our Savior: Or by the Intervention of Angels,
Prophets, Apostles, or Inspired Persons; as he did to the Israelites, and the
Primitive Christian Church; and does still to us, by those written Testimonies
we call the Scriptures.

By Personal Experience, we know that there are Stars in Heaven; by Historical
Experience, we know that there was a new Star seen by Tycho and other
Astronomers, in Cassiopaea, in the Year 1572. and by Theological Experience we
know, that the Stars were made on the Fourth Day of the Creation.

By this you may see, That I do not in this Discourse take Experience in the
strictest sense of all, but in a greater latitude, for the knowledge we have of
any matter of Fact, which, without owing it to Ratiocination, either we acquire
by the Immediate Testimony of our Own Senses and other Faculties, or accrews to
us by the Communicated Testimony of Others. And I make the less scruple to take
this Liberty, because I observe, that, even in common Acceptance, the word
Experience is not always meant of that which is Immediate, but is often taken
in a latitude. As when we say, that Experience teaches us, who perhaps were
never out of England, that the Torrid Zone is Habitable, and Inhabited; and
persuades learned men, that never had opportunity to make nice Celestial
Observations, that Stars may be Generated and Perish, or at least begin to
Appear, and then Disappear, in the Celestial Region of the World. And on this
kind of Historical Experience, consisting of the Personal Observations of
Hippocrates, Galen, and other Physicians, transmitted to us, a great part of
the Practice of Physic is founded. And the most Rational Physicians reckon
upon, as matters of fact, not only what other Physicians have left upon Record,
but diverse Present things, which themselves can know but by the Relation of
their Patients; as, that a Man has a particular Antipathy to such a thing,
which the Doctor perhaps judges fit for him to use; or that a Woman with Child
longs for this or that determinate thing. And Physicians reduce these and the
like matters of fact to Experience, as to one of the two Columns of Physic,
distinguished from Reason.

Since then Learned Men, as well as common Use, confine not the application of
the word Experience to that which is Personal, but employ it in a far greater
latitude; I see not, why that, which I call Theological Experience, may not be
admitted; since the Revelations that God makes concerning what he has Done, or
purposes to Do, are but Testimonies of things, most of them matters of Fact,
and all of them such, as, so far forth as they are merely Revelations, cannot
be known by Reasoning, but by Testimony: Whose being Divine, and relating to
Theological Subjects, does not alter its Nature, tho it give it a peculiar and
supereminent Authority.

Having premised and cleared the proposed Distribution of Experience, it will
now be seasonable to consider, how it may be applied to the Matters of Fact,
that recommend the Credibility of the Christian Religion; and on this occasion,
I shall distinctly offer you my Thoughts, in the two following Propositions.

Prop. I. We ought to believe diverse things upon the information of Experience,
(whether Immediate, or Vicarious) which, without that information, we should
judge unfit to be believed; or antecedently to it, did actually judge contrary
to Reason.

This Proposition may be understood, either of Persons, or of Things, and will
hold true, as to both.

And first, as to Persons; if your own Observation of what occurs among Mankind
do not satisfy you, that we are obliged, after sufficient Trial, frequently to
alter the Opinions, which upon probable Reasons we had before entertained, of
the Fidelity, or Prudence, or Justice, or Chastity, etc. of this or that
Person; I shall refer you to the Records of History, or appeal to the Tribunals
of Judges. For both in the one, and at the other, you will find but too many
Instances and Proofs from matters of Fact, that Persons looked on, even by
Intelligent Men, as Honest, Virtuous, and perhaps Holy too, have proved guilty
of Falseness to their Friends, Perfidiousness to their Princes, Disloyalty to
their Husbands or Wives, Injustice to their Neighbors, Sacrilege, Perjury, or
other Impieties to their God: And in the Courts of Justice, you will find a
great part of the Time employed to Detect and Punish, not only Civil
Transgressions, as Thefts, Cheats, Forgery, Falsewitness, Adultery, and the
like heinous Crimes, perpetrated by those, that, before they were thoroughly
sifted, passed for Honest; but you will find Sins against Nature, such as
Sodomy, and other unnatural Lusts, the Murders of Parents by their Children,
and Innocent Children by their Parents, nay, Self-murder too; though this be a
Crime, which cannot be acted without a violation of what seems the most
Universal and Radicated Law of Nature, (and is acknowledged so by wicked Men)
Self-preservation. But it will not be necessary more solicitously to prove,
that we ought, upon the Testimony of Experience, to change the Opinions we
thought we had rationally taken up of Persons; and therefore I shall now
proceed to make good the Proposition, in the Sense I chiefly intended, which
is, as it relates to Things.

If Experience did not both Inform and Certify us, Who would believe, that a
light black Powder should be able, being duly managed, to throw down
Stone-Walls, and blow up whole Castles and Rocks themselves, and do those other
Stupendous things, that we see actually performed by Gun*powder, made use of in
Ordnance, and in Mines? Who would think, that two or three grains of Opium,
should so stupify a large Human Body, as to force a Sleep, and oftentimes even
without That, suspend the sharpest Torments, in the Cholick, Gout, and other
the most painful Diseases, and that in Patients of quite different Ages, Sexes,
and Constitutions; in whom also the Diseases are produced by Differing, or even
by Contrary, Causes? Who would believe, that the Poison adhering to the Tooth
of a Mad Dog, though perhaps so little as to be scarce discernable by Sense,
should be able, after the slight Hurt is quite healed, to continue in the warm,
and still perspirable, Body of the bitten person, not only for some Days or
Months, but sometimes for very many Years? And after, having lurked all that
while, without giving any trouble to the Patient, should on a sudden pervert
the whole Economy of his Body, and put him into a Madness like that of the Dog
that bit him, discovering it self by that* as Admirable as Fatal, Symptom of
Hydrophobia?

But, besides a multitude of Instances that may be given of Truths, that, were
it not for Experience, we should refuse to believe; because the small Strength
of such Agents, seems altogether disproportionate to the Effects ascribed to
them: Many other Instances might be alleged, wherein we assent to Experience,
even when its Informations seem contrary to Reason, and that which, perhaps, we
did actually and without scruple take to be True.

Since Gravity is the Principle, that determins Falling Bodies to move toward
the Center of the Earth; it seems very rational to believe, with the Generality
of Philosophers, that therein follow Aristotle; That, in proportion as one Body
is more heavy than another, so it shall fall to the ground faster than the
other. Whence it has been, especially by some of the Peripatetick School,
inferred, that of two Homogeneous Bodies, whereof one does, for Example, weigh
ten pounds, and the other but one pound; The former being let fall from the
same height, and at the same time, with the latter, will reach the ground ten
times sooner.

But notwithstanding this plausible Ratiocination, Experience shows us, (and I
have purposely tried it) that (at least in moderate heights, such as those of
our Towers, and other Elevated Buildings) Bodies of very unequal weight, let
fall together, will reach the Ground at the same time; or so near it, that it is
not easy to perceive any difference in the Velocity of their Descent.

It Is generally taken for granted by Naturalists, as well as others, that
Strong and Loud Noises, as they are heard much farther off than Fainter Sounds,
so, if the Sonorous Bodies be equally distant from the Ear, the very Strong
Sound will arrive much sooner at it, than the other; and yet by the Experiments
of the Moderns about the Velocity of Sounds, (in making diverse of which, I have
endeavored to be accurate) it appears, that Weaker Sounds are (at least as to
Sense) transmitted through the Air as swiftly as Stronger ones. And indeed,
it is often observed, that when Cannons and Muskets are discharged together, the
Noises of both arrive also together at the Ear; which would not be, if the
Sound of a Cannon were any thing near as much Swifter, as it is Louder, than
that of a Musket.

It seems irrational to conceive, that a Smaller and Weaker Loadstone, may draw
away a piece of Steel from a Larger and Stronger; and yet Experience (which
both others and I have made) evinces, that in some cases, this Paradox is a
Truth.

It has generally, by Philosophers as well as other Men, been looked upon as
manifest, and consonant to Reason, that Cold condenses Water more or less,
according as the degree of the Cold is; and (consequently) that Ice is Water
reduced into a lesser Volume. But it is plain, by Experiments carefully made,
(some of which I have elsewhere published) that by Glaciation, Water is rather
Expanded; or at least, that Ice takes up more room, than the Water did before
it was Congealed. And of this sort of Instances, where we believe, upon the
Authority of Experience, things that are contrary to what we should otherwise
judge to be a Dictate or Conclusion of Reason; An Essay of Improbable Truths.
I could add many, if I thought it as needful in this place, as in some other
Papers, where I have given them already.

And now it will be seasonable to put you in mind, that in one part of the
Proposition, hitherto discoursed of, it appears, That I designed to extend the
force of the Arguments, grounded upon Experience, to that which is not
Immediate, but Vicarious; that is, not personally our own, but communicated by
others; provided it be competently Attested, and duly Conveyed to Us.

There will need but a little Reflection on what is judged reasonable, and
freely practiced, by Philosophers themselves, to Justify this Proposition. For
how many Conclusions have the Modern Naturalists admitted, though not only
Abstracted Reason never led Men to make them, but plausible Arguments, and the
Notions and Axioms of the most generally received Philosophy, were repugnant to
them. Thus, That in Heaven it self there should be Generations and Corruptions,
was not only Unobserved before the time of Aristotle, (who thence argues the
Incorruptibility of Celestial Bodies) but is Contradicted by his Arguments;
and yet both many others, and I, have seen great Spots (perhaps bigger than
England, or than Europe it self) Generated and Dissipated on or near the
Surface of the Sun; and several of the Modern Philosophers and Astronomers,
having never had the good fortune to see any of these, (which indeed of late
years have but rarely appeared) must take these Phenomenon upon the Credit of
those that have observed them. And much more must they do so, who, in spite of
the Vulgar Philosophy, which made all Comets Sublunary, believe, there were
Celestial, and perhaps Firmamentary, Comets. For, that they were above the
Concave of the Moon's Orb, we must believe upon the affirmation of those that
observed them, which very few have done themselves. And the height of the
famous Comet, or Disappearing Star, in Cassiopaea, in the Year 1572. whereon so
much stress is laid by our Philosophers and Mathematicians, is admitted and
urged, chiefly upon the belief they have, not only of Tycho's Veracity, but his
Skill in observing the Motions and Phenomenon of that Celestial Light, and
particularly its having no Parallax.

In short, the great Architect of Experimental History, Sir Francis Bacon, when
he divides it but into three parts, assigns the second of them to what he calls
Praeter-Generations; such as Monsters, Prodigies, and other things; which being
(as to Us) but Casualties, all those that happened in other Times and Places
than we have lived in, (and those will be confessed to be incomparably more
than any of us has personally observed) we must take upon the Credit of others.
And yet These, (vicarious Experiments) by Suggesting new Instances of Nature's
Power, and uncommon ways of Working; and by Overthrowing, or Limiting, received
Rules and Traditions, afford us a considerable and instructive part of Natural
History, without which, it would not be either so Sound, or so Complete.

Prop. II. After what has been hitherto discoursed, it may be, I hope, both
seasonable and warrantable to advance to, and assert, our Second Proposition;
viz. That we ought to have a great and particular regard to those things that
are recommended to our Belief, by what we have reduced to Real, though
Supernatural, Experience.

For, 1. It Is manifest, that the most rational Men scruple not to believe, upon
competent Testimony, many things, whose Truth did no way appear to them by the
consideration of the nature of the Things themselves; nay, though what is thus
believed upon Testimony be so Strange, and, setting aside that Testimony, would
seem so Irrational, that antecedently to that Testimony, the things at last
admitted as Truths, were actually rejected as Errors, or judged altogether
unfit to be Believed. And I must here desire you to consider, that the Points
wherein Experience overrules that, which, before it superven'd, was judged to
be most agreeable to Reason, concern things merely Natural or Civil, whereof
Human Reason is held to be a proper Judge: Whereas many of the Points
recommended by Supernatural Experience, concern things of a Superior Order;
many of which are not to be Adaequately estimated by the same Rules with things
merely Corporeal or Civil; and some of which, as the Essence and manner of
Existence, and some peculiar Attributes, of the Infinite God, involve or
require such a knowledge of what is Infinite, as much passes the reach of our
limited Intellects.

But this is not all. For, 2. You may consider in the next place, that, whereas
it is as Justly as Generally granted, that the better qualified a Witness is, in
the capacity of a Witness, the Stronger Assent his Testimony deserves; we ought
of all the things that can be recommended to us by Testimony, to receive those
with the highest degree of Assent, that are taught us by God, by the
intervention of those Persons, that appear to have been Commissioned by Him to
declare his Mind to Men. For the two grand Requisites of a Witness, being the
knowledge he has of the things he delivers, and his faithfulness in truly
delivering what he knows; all Human Testimony must on these accounts be
inferior to Divine Testimony: Since this (later) is warranted both by the
Veracity of God, (which is generally acknowledged by those that believe his
Existence) and by his boundless Knowledge; which makes it as impossible he
should be Deceived himself, as the other does, that he should Deceive us. And,
because that, for the delivery of the Divine Testimony we are speaking of, it
has oftentimes pleased God, who is a most Free, as well as a most Wise, Agent,
to make use of Unpromising Persons as his Instruments; I shall not on this
occasion altogether overlook this Circumstance, That an Experimental
Philosopher so often increases his Knowledge of Natural things, by what He
learns from the Observations and Practices, even of Mean, and perhaps of
Illiterate, Persons, (such as Shepherds, Plowmen, Smiths, Fowlers, etc.)
because they are conversant with the Works of Nature; that He is not only
Willing to admit, but often Curious to seek for Informations from them, and
therefore is not like to find much repugnancy in receiving the Doctrines of
Revealed Religion, such as Christianity, if the Teachers of it were honest Men,
and had opportunity to know the Truth of the Things they deliver, though they
were Fishermen, Tentmakers, or some other Mean Profession.

And indeed, (to enlarge a little upon a Subject that, I fear, has scarce been
considered) such a person as our Virtuoso, will, with both great Willingness,
and no less Advantage, Exercise himself in perusing, with great Attention, and
much Regard, the Writings of the Apostles, Evangelists, and Ancient Prophets;
notwithstanding any Meanness of their First Condition, or of their Secular
Employments. And in these Sacred Writings, He will not only readily suffer
himself to be instructed in these Grand and Catholic Articles of Religion,
which, because of their Necessity or very great Usefulness, are to be met with
in many places, and in variety of Expressions, by honest and duly disposed
Readers: But He will, in stead of Disdaining such Tutors, both Expect, and
carefully Strive, to Improve his Knowledge of Divine Things in general, even by
those Hints, and Incidental Passages, that a careless or ordinary Reader would
Overlook, or not expect any thing from. For, as the Faecundity of the
Scriptures is not wont to be enough discerned, when the Sacred Writers
transiently touch upon, or glance at, a great many Subjects, that they do not
expressly handle, and that therefore are not vulgarly taken notice of; so the
Docility we have ascribed to our Virtuoso, will make him repose a great deal of
Trust in the Testimony of Inspired Persons, such as Christ and his Apostles,
about Things of all sorts, either usually taken notice of or not, that relate
to Objects of a Supernatural Order; especially if among these, God himself, and
his Purposes, be comprised, since diverse of those things are not knowable
without Revelation, and others are best known by it. And to be allowed to
ground a Belief about such things, on the Relations and other Testimonies of
those that were in the Scripture Phrase, Luke 1. 2.
Eye Witnesses and Ministers of the things they speak of, will by our Virtuoso
be justly reputed such an advantage, in order to the Knowledge of things
Divine, as the consulting with Navigators and Travelers to America, is, to him
that is curious to learn the State of that New-world. For an ordinary Seaman
or Traveller, that had the opportunity with Columbus to sail along the several
Coasts of it, and pass up and down through the Country, was able at his return
to Inform Men of an hundred things, that they should never have learned by
Aristotle's Philosophy, or Ptolomy's Geography; and might not only Acquaint
them with diverse particulars, consonant to the Opinions which their formerly
received Physics and Cosmography did suggest, but also Rectify diverse
Erroneous Presumptions and Mistakes, which till then they thought very
agreeable to the Dictates of those Sciences, and so to Reason. And, as one,
that had a candid and knowing Friend intimate with Columbus, might better rely
on His Informations about many particulars of the Natural History of those
Parts, than on those of an hundred School-Philosophers, that knew but what they
learned from Aristotle, Pliny, Aelian, and the like ancient Naturalists; so,
and much more, may we rely on the Accounts given us of Theological Things, by
the Apostles, and constant Attendants of him that lay in the John I. 18.
Bosom of God his Father, and Commissioned them to declare to the World Act.
XX. 27.
the Whole Counsel of God, as far as 'twas necessary for Man to know.

We know, that Fuller Try als are allowed, among Ingenious Men, to rectify the
Informations of the more Imperfect Ones; and therefore I shall add, that, though
the Innate Notions and Sentiments, that Nature gives us of the Attributes and
Mind of God, be highly to be prized; yet the Informations that Theological
Experience affords of those Abstruse things, is far more Excellent and
Complete. For methinks, those great 1 Cor. II. 10.
Depths of God may be compared to the Depths of the Ocean. And we know, that in
the Sea, there are some Abysses so deep, that the Seaman's Sounding-Lines have
never been able to reach to the bottom of them; and where they are not
Unfathomable, all we are wont to do by our Soundings, is, to fetch from the
bottom some little Gravel, or Mud, or Shells, or some such thing, that sticks
to the tallow'd end of the Plummet, and gives us but a very imperfect account
of the Bottom, even of the Shallower Parts of the Sea: But if a Skilful Diver
be employed, he will not only tell us, whether the Bottom be Muddy, Gravelly,
or Sandy; but will be able to give us a kind of Topography of that Submarine
Land, and acquaint us with many Surprising Particulars, that we should never
otherwise have Discovered, or perchance so much as Dreamed of. And peradventure
it may be no Hyperbole to say, that the Informations of a Plummet, which
reaches not to Some Depths, and brings but a very slender account of Soils that
lie in Any, are not more short of those of a Diver, than the Informations
Philosophy gives us of some Divine things, are of those compleater Ones that
may be had from the Holy Scriptures. And when I remember, how many Opinions
about the Submarine Parts, that I, among many other Men, thought Probable, I
found cause to Change, upon the Conversation I had with a famous Diver, that
sometimes, by the help of an Engine, stayed several hours at the bottom of the
Sea; I find the less Reluctance, to suffer Opinions about Divine Matters, that
before seemed probable to me, to be Rectified by the fuller Discoveries made of
those things by the Preachers of the Gospel.

You may find some things applyable to the Confirmation of what has been newly
delivered, in an Essay, (which you may see when you please) that considers the
Bounds and Use of Experience in Natural Philosophy. Wherefore remembering, that,
before this late Excursion, I was speaking of Miracles, I shall now resume the
Subject, and proceed to tell you, that I have the more insisted upon the
Miracles that may be pleaded to recommend the Christian Religion, because I
thought, that an Argument grounded on Them is little less than Absolutely
Necessary, to Evince, that any Religion that Men believe to be Supernaturally
Revealed, and consequently that the Christian, does really proceed from God.

For, though the Excellency of the Christian Doctrine, and other concurrent
Motives, may justly persuade me, that it is worthy and likely to be given by
God; yet that de facto this Doctrine comes from Him by way of Supernatural
Revelation, I can scarce be sufficiently Ascertained, but by the Miracles
wrought by Christ and his Disciples, to Evince, that the Doctrine they
Preached, as Commissioned by God to do so, was indeed His, being, as such,
owned by Him. But these Miracles having been wrought (when 'twas most fit and
needful they should be wrought) in the first Ages of the Church; We, that live
at so great a distance from them, can have no knowledge of them by our Own
Senses, or Immediate Observation; but must Believe them upon the account of the
formerly mentioned Historical or Vicarious Experience, which is afforded us by
the duly transmitted Testimony of those, that were themselves (to speak once
more in an Evangelist's phrase) Luke I. 2.
Eyewitnesses and Ministers of the things they relate. And since we scruple
not to believe such strange Prodigies, as Celestial Comets, Vanishing and
Reappearing Stars, Islands founded by Subterraneal Fires in the Sea, Darkenings
of the Sun for many months together, Earthquakes reaching above a thousand
miles in length, and the like amazing Anomalies of Nature, upon the credit of
Human Histories; I see not, why that Vicarious Experience should not more be
trusted, which has diverse peculiar and concurrent Circumstances to confirm it,
and particularly the Death that most of the first Promulgators cheerfully
Suffered to Attest the Truth of it, and the Success and Spreading of the
Doctrine authorized by those Miracles, and received chiefly upon their account.
To which things, some perhaps would add, that it is less incredible, that the
Author of Nature should, for most weighty purposes, make stupendous Alterations
of the course of Nature; than that Nature her self, for no such end, should by
such Prodigies, as are newly mentioned, as it were, throw her self out of her
own Course.

Miracles being so necessary to the establishment of Revealed Religion in
general, it may be looked upon as a farther Disposition in our Virtuoso to
receive the Christian Religion, that the Philosophy, he cultivates, does much
conduce to enable him to judge aright of those strange things, that are by many
Proposed as Miracles, and Believed to be so.

For first, the knowledge he has of the Various, and sometimes very Wonderful,
Operations of some Natural things, especially when they are skilfully improved,
and dexterously applied by Art, particularly Mathematics, Mechanics, and
Chemistry, will qualify him to distinguish, between things that are only
strange and surprising, and those that are truly miraculous: So that he will
not mistake the Effects of Natural Magic, for those of a Divine Power. And by
this well-instructed Wariness, he will be able to discover the Subtle Cheats
and Collusions of Impostors; by which, not only Multitudes of all Religions,
especially Heathen, but even Learned Men of most Religions, for want of an
insight into real Philosophy, have formerly been, or are at this day, deluded,
and drawn into Idolatrous, Superstitious, or otherwise Erroneous, Tenants or
Practices.

And on the other side, the knowledge our Virtuoso may have of what cannot be
justly expected or pretended from the Mechanical Powers of Matter, will enable
him to discern, that diverse things are not produceable by Them, without the
intervention of an Intelligent Superior Power; on which score he will frankly
acknowledge, and heartily believe, diverse Effects to be truly Miraculous, that
may be plausibly enough ascribed to other Causes in the Vulgar Philosophy;
where Men are taught and wont to attribute Stupendous unaccountable Effects to
Sympathy, Antipathy, Fuga vacui, Substantial Forms, and especially to a certain
Being presumed to be almost Infinitely Potent and Wise, which they call Nature:
For This is represented as a king of Goddess, whose Power may be little less
than boundless; as I remember Galen himself compares it to that of God, and
says, that He could not do such a thing, because Nature cannot; and Censures
Moses for speaking as if he were of another Mind. The whole Passage is so
weighty, that I thought fit to direct you to it in the Margent Gal. de Vsu
part. Lib. XI. Cap. XIV.
, though, to comply with my have, I forbear to transcribe and descant upon so
prolix a One, and add to it diverse other Passages that I have met with in
famous Authors; who, for want of knowing the true Extent of the Powers of
Matter and Motion, left to themselves in the Ordinary Course of things, Ascribe
to Natural Causes, as they call them, such Effects as are beyond their reach,
unless they be Elevated by Agents of a Superior Order.

I know it may be objected, that the hitherto-mention'd Dispositions, that
Experimental Knowledge may give a Man, to Admit the Histories of the Miracles
recorded in the Gospel; and likewise to Expect, that God will be able to
perform the Promises and Menaces that are in his name delivered there, may be
countervail'd by this, That those, who are so much acquainted with the
Mysteries of Nature, and her various and strange ways of Working, as a Virtuoso
may well be, may by that Knowledge be strongly tempted to think, that those
surprising things that other Men call Miracles, are but Effects of Her Power;
the Extent of which, is not easily discerned by ordinary Men, nor safely
defined by Philosophers themselves. But this Objection being plausible enough,
to make me think it deserved to be seriously considered, I took an occasion
that was once offered me, to examine the validity of it in a Paper by it self:
And this being at your command, I shall refer you to it. And I hope, that in
the mean time it may suffice to say, That to make it reasonable to judge this
or that particular Performance, a Supernatural One, it is not at all necessary,
that it surpass the whole Power of Nature, that is, of Physical Agents;
provided, it surpass the power of that Cause, or that complex of Causes, from
which, the Effect must in reason, if it be purely Natural or Physical, be
supposed to have proceeded. As for instance, That a Fisherman or two should
speak other Languages than their own, does not at all exceed the power of
Nature, if they employed a competent time in learning them. But that a great
number of Fishermen, and other Illiterate Persons, should all on a sudden
become Linguists, and in an hour's time be able to speak intelligibly to a
great number and variety of Nations in their respective Languages, as the New
Testament relates, that the Apostles and their Companions did on the day of
Pentecost See Acts II.
: That gift of Tongues, I say, was an Ability, which in those circumstances of
Place, Time, and Persons, wherein 'twas exercised, may justly be concluded to
have been Supernatural or Miraculous.

I fear you will think, I have dwelt too long upon the Argument for
Christianity, drawn from that sort of matters of Fact we call Miracles; though
the uncommon way that my Design led me to represent them in, would not permit
me to make it out in few words. Wherefore I shall now pass on to another
Argument, in favor of the same Religion, that is afforded by Experience, being
drawn from the strangely successful Propagation, and the happy Effects of
Christianity, in the World. But having formerly had occasion to display this
Argument in a separate Paper, which you may command a Sight of, if I shall not
have time to annex a Transcript of it to the later Sheets of this First Part of
the present Essay, I will refer you for more ample Proof to That Writing, and
content my self in this place briefly to touch some of the Heads, and subjoyn a
Reflection or two that you will not meet with in that Paper.

It Is a notorious Matter of Fact, that in less than half an Age, the Christian
Religion was spread over a great part of the then known World; insomuch, that
in a few Years after it began to be preached, the Apostle of the Gentiles could
tell the Romans with Joy, that their Faith ( i. e. profession of the Gospel)
Romans 1. 8.
was spoken of throughout the whole World. And in the Second Century,
Tertullian, and other famous Writers, show, that the Gospel had already
numerous Proselytes, in a great number of different Kingdoms and Provinces. But
I forbear to mention, what he and others have magnificently said of the Success
of the Gospel, because I had rather refer you to the plain Narratives made of
it by Eusebius, Socrates Scholasticus, and other grave Authors; being of
opinion, that mere Historians may give to a Philosophical Reader, a more
Advantageous Idea of the Efficacy of that excellent Doctrine, than eloquent
Orators, as such, can do. This wonderful quick progress of this Religion being
ascertained to our Virtuoso, by a Thing he is so much swayed by, as Experience;
it does not a little dispose him to Believe the Truth of so prevalent a
Religion. For, If he considers the Persons that first promulgated it, They were
but half a score of Illiterate Fishermen, and a few Tent-makers, and other
Tradesmen. If he considers the Means that were employed to Propagate this
Doctrine, he finds, that they had neither Arms, nor External Power, to Compel
Men to receive it; nor Riches, Honors, or Preferments, to Bribe or Allure them
to it; nor were they Men of Philosophical Subtilty, to entrap or entangle the
Minds of their Auditors. Nor did they make use of the pompous Ornaments of
Rhetoric, and fetches of Oratory, to inveagle or entice Men; but treated of
the most Sublime and abstruse Matters, in a most Plain and unaffected Style, as
became Lovers and Teachers of Truth. If he considers the nature of the
Doctrine, that in little time obtained so many Proselytes, he will find, that,
instead of being suited to the Natural Apprehensions, or the Received Opinions,
of Men; and instead of gratifying their corrupt Affections, or complying with
so much as their Innocentest Interests; it prescribed such Mortifications, and
such great strictness of Life, and high degrees of Virtue, as no Legislator had
ever dared to impose upon his Subjects, nay, nor any Philosopher on his
Disciples. And this Doctrine was proposed in such a way, and was accompanied
with Predictions of such Hardships and Persecutions, that should in those times
be the portion of its sincere Professors, as if the Lawgiver had designed
rather to Fright Men from his Doctrine, than Allure them to it; since they
could not believe what he said, and foretold, to be true, without believing,
that they should be made great Sufferers by that Belief. If our Virtuoso
considers the Opposition made to the Progress of the Gospel, he will find cause
to wonder, that it could ever be surmounted. For the Heathens, which made by
far the greatest part of the World, were deeply engaged in Polytheism,
Idolatry, Magical Rites and Superstitions, and almost all kind of Crimes, and
some of these were shameless Debaucheries, which oftentimes made a part of
their Worship. And the Jews were by the corrupt Leaven of the Pharisees, and
the impious Errors of the Sadduces, and the General Mistakes of the Nation
about the Person, Office, and Kingdom, of the Messiah; and by their dotage upon
their vain Traditions, and numerous Superstitions, grounded upon them: The
Gentiles, I say, and the Jews, who were those that were to be Converted, were,
on these and other accounts, highly Indisposed to be made Proselytes.
Especially when they could not own themselves to be such, without exposing
their Persons to be hated and despised, their Possessions to be confiscated,
their Bodies to be imprisoned and tormented, and oftentimes their Lives to be,
in as Ignominious as Cruel ways, destroyed. And whilst the Secular Magistrates
made them suffer all these Mischiefs, the Venerated Priests, the Subtle
Philosophers, and the Eloquent Orators, persuaded the World; that they Deserved
yet more than they Endured; and employed all their Learning and Wit to make the
Religion Odious and Ridiculous, as well as the Embracers of it Miserable:
Accusing the Martyrs, and other Christians, of no less than Atheism, Incest,
and the inhuman shedding and drinking the innocent Blood of Infants. These and
the like Matters of Fact when our Virtuoso reflects on, and considers by what
unpromising Means, (as far as they were but Secular) such seemingly
insurmountable Difficulties were conquered; He cannot but by this Historical
Experience be inclined to think, that Effects, so disproportionate to the
Visible Means, could not be brought to pass without the peculiar Assistance and
extraordinary Blessing of God: By whom those successful Preachers averred
themselves to be Commissionated. For, that the Supernatural help, the Christian
Doctrine appears to have had, was Divine, not Diabolical, will seem evident to
our Virtuoso, from the Nature, Tendency, and Effects, of the Doctrine it self;
which expressly teaches, that there is but one God; that He alone is to be
Worshipped, and not Idols, nor any of the Heathen Demons or Deities; that the
Devils are Wicked, Apostate, Malicious, and Miserable Creatures, that are Hated
of God, and do extremely Hate Mankind; and that those Vices, as well as Rites
of Worship that they have established in the World, were Abominable to God, and
would be by degrees Destroyed by him: As in effect they soon began to be in
many places of the World, where the Worshippers of Christ cast the Devil out of
His Temples, out of Men's Veneration, and oftentimes out of their Bodies too.

One Circumstance there is of the Propagation of the Gospel, which, though it may
seem more Extrinsecal than those hitherto mentioned, is yet too considerable to
be here pretermitted; since it is this, That the Quick Spreading and Success of
the Christian Doctrine in the World, was Foretold both by the Prophets of the
Old Testament, and the Author and promulgators of the New. For it being
notorious, that there have been diverse Errors and Superstitions, that have with
too much Celerity been spread far and wide in the World; either by mere
Accidents, (as they were reputed) that were very friendly to them, or by the
Industry and Artifices of Men: This, I say, being so, it ought to be no small
Satisfaction to Equitable Judges, that the Quick Progress, and Notable Effects,
of the Christian Religion, were Foretold, partly by the Ancient Prophets, and
partly by the Messiah and his Apostles. For by these accomplished Predictions
it may appear, that the wonderful Success of the Gospel was not an Effect of
Chance, but was long before determined by Divine Providence, as a Work sit to
be Dear to God, and to be accomplished in a wonderful way by his Peculiar
Assistance, (as will by and by be somewhat more fully declared.) That the
Triumphs of the Gospel were Foretold by several of the Old Prophets, may appear
by their yet Extant Writings; some of which are alleged to that purpose, by
those Writers of the New Testament, that were endowed with the same Prophetic
Spirit. And if you please to consider the Passages cited in the Margent, you
will easily grant, that those Ancient Inspired Writers Genesis 49. 11. Isa. 2. 2.
Psalm 2. 8. Mal. 1. 11.
foresaw, that in the days of the Messiah, there should be a great and notable
Conversion of of the Gentiles of several Nations, to the Worship of the only
true God of Israel: And though God did not think fit, that those Predictions,
extant in the Gospel, should be so conspicuous and pompously set forth, that
speak of the Conversion that should be made, not only of the Heathen World, but
(of a more* Refractory portion of Mankind) a great part of the Jewish Nation,
to the Christian Doctrine; yet there are diverse Passages in the New Testament,
that are Real, though some of them Unheeded, Prophecies of the wonderful Progress
of the Gospel, and the large Extent of the Kingdom of the Messiah. Thus Christ
foretold, that his twelve Apostles should be his Witnesses, not only in Judaea
and Samaria, but to the uttermost parts of the Earth. And, according to the
most probable Explication of that Text, in the 24th of St. Matthew's Gospel,
which is usually referred to the end of the World, but seems rather to respect
the Destruction of Jerusalem; there is a Prediction, that before the End, (of
the Jewish Polity, as well as the Mosaical Economy) Mat. XXIV. 14.
the Gospel of the Kingdom (of the Messiah) should be preached or proclaimed
(...) Luke II. 1.
in the whole World, (in that Sense of the term World that was then much in
use, and was employed by the Evangelist Luke to signify the Roman World or
Empire.) To which may be added, that ten or twelve Fishermen (called the
Apostles) were sent to Convert all Nations to the Worship of a Crucified
Person; which would have been a strange Commission to be given such Men at that
time, if their Master, who sent them, had not Foreseen the Success, as well as
Known the Truth, of the Doctrine he sent them to Preach. The quick Diffusion of
the Christian Faith, and the swift Growth of the Christian Church from
despicable Beginnings, to a Greatness very Disproportionate to them, are more
than intimated, by what Christ says of the Leaven hid in a great quantity of
Meal; and of the Mustard Seed that quickly grows (in the hot and fertile
Country of Judaea) to a wonderful Bigness and Height; since these Passages,
that perfunctory Readers look on but as mere Parables, were really Prophecies,
that quickly began to be manifestly Fulfilled. And it may bring no small
Authority to the Predictions of the New Testament, that when diverse of them
were made, there appeared no Likelihood that they should ever be made good.
When a Poor Virgin, that was betrothed to a Carpenter, confidently pronounces,
that all Ages should call her Blessed; what probability was there, that what
she said, should ever come to pass? Mat. 26. 13.
And when another Private Woman, then living in a Village, had it foretold her,
that a censured Action of hers should be reported through the whole World, to
her great Praise; what sober Man, that were not a Prophet, would venture to
lose his Credit, by making such a Promise? And therefore, since we see such
unlikely Predictions actually Accomplished, it may well convince an unbiased
Man, that the Authors of them, as well as the ancient Seers, were really
endowed with a truly Prophetic Spirit; and that the Events by That Foretold,
were not Effects of Chance or Policy, but of Divine Providence.

I thought it not improper, to make the mention of these Predictions follow so
close the Discourse of the Miracles, because true Prophecies of Unlikely
Events, fulfilled by Unlikely Means, are supernatural Things; and, as such,
(especially their Author and Design considered) may properly enough be reckoned
among Miracles. And I may add, that these have a peculiar advantage above most
other Miracles, on the score of their Duration: Since the manifest Proofs of
the Predictions continue still, and are as visible as the Extent of the
Christian Religion; and some of them are still more and more accomplished, by
the Conversions made of multitudes of Infidels, in several vast Regions of
America, (to name no other Countries.) So that if we may call some Miracles
transient ones, such as the Turning Water into Wine at a Wedding-feast in
Galilee; and the Darkening of the Sun, when the Moon was Full, at the
Crucifixion of Christ: Accomplished Predictions may be styled permanent ones;
and their difference may be set forth by the differing States of the Mosaic
Manna: Exodus XVI. 14, 21, 26, 33.
For, though both that which fell daily (except on the Sabbath) in the Wilderness,
and that which was laid up in a pot before the Testimony, were Supernatural
Productions; yet, whereas a portion of the Former outlasted not two or three
days, That kept in the pot was preserved many Ages, and continued to be (as it
was foretold it should) a Visible Miracle.

There is another Reason, why the wonderful Propagation of the Gospel should be
annexed to the Argument drawn from Miracles, in favor of the Christian
Religion. For the Preachers of it, both Pretended and Appealed to Miracles, as
Proofs of the Truth of their Doctrine: And if we consider the great
Disadvantages they lay under, and the powerful Opposition of all sorts that
they met with and surmounted; it cannot reasonably be thought, that such
Unlikely Men should so Succesfully preach so Uninviting a Doctrine, unless it
were confirmed by Conspicuous Miracles. Or at least, if so uneasy and
persecuted a Religion was propagated without Miracles, that Propagation it self
(as one of the Fathers well observes) may justly pass for a Miracle; and be no
less fit than another, to Confirm the Religion so admirably Propagated.

The past Discourse has, I hope, manifested, that a Virtuoso has some Helps,
that other Men, generally speaking, have not, to make him judiciously approve
the Arguments for the Truth of the Christian Religion, that are grounded on the
Miracles wrought in its favor, and the wonderful Success of it in the World.
But, because a Revealed Religion, how true soever it be, can scarce be proved
but by Moral Demonstrations; and because for this reason, it is not always
sufficient, that the Arguments be good in their kind, but there are some
Qualifications required in the Minds of them that are to be Convinced by them;
I shall now add, that Experimental Philosophy does also Dispose the Minds of
its Cultivaters to receive due Impressions from such Proofs, as Miracles do, as
well as other Topics, afford the Christian Religion.

Another thing then that qualifies an Experimentarian for the reception of a
Revealed Religion, and so of Christianity, is, that an Accustomance of
endeavoring to give Clear Explications of the Phenomenon of Nature, and
discover the weakness of those Solutions that Superficial Wits are wont to make
and acquiesce in, does insensibly work in him a great and ingenuous Modesty of
Mind. And on the score of this Intellectual, as well as Moral, Virtue, not only
he will be very inclinable, both to Desire and Admit further Information, about
things which he perceives to be Dark or Abstruse; but he will be very unapt to
take, for the adaequate Standard of Truth, a thing so Imperfectly informed, and
Narrowly limited, as his mere or abstracted Reason; (as I think I have
elsewhere intimated, that One may call That, which is furnished only with its
own, either Congenite, or very easily and very early Acquired, Notions and
Idaea's, and with Popular Notices.) And though a vulgar Philosopher, that allows
himself to refer the Obscurest things in Nature to Substantial Forms, Real
Qualities, Sympathy, Antipathy, and some few other Terms, which, to be employed
by him, Need not, and perhaps for their darkness Cannot, be clearly Understood;
and by which he pretends to explain all things in Nature; and may indeed
explicate one thing as well as another: Though (I say) such a Titular Philosopher
may presume, that he understands every thing; and may be easily tempted to
think, that he must not hope, nor desire to learn from less able Men than his
first Teachers; and that, That cannot be true, or be done, which agrees not
with his Philosophy; yet a Sober and Experienced Naturalist, that knows what
Difficulties remain, yet unsurmounted, in the presumedly clear Conception and
Explications even of things Corporeal, will not, by a lazy or arrogant
presumption, that his knowledge about things Supernatural is already
sufficient, be induced to Reject, or to Neglect, any Information that may
increase it.

And this frame of Mind is a very happy one, for a Student in Revealed
Theology, where Cautiousness is not more Necessary for the avoiding of Errors,
than Docility is Advantageous for the Learning of Truth: Since the knowledge
and goodness of the Divine Teacher is such, that a Scholar, to improve his
Intellect, needs but bring a Mind fitted to receive the genuine Informations,
that are most liberally offered, (in the Scripture) and will never deceive Him,
that employs, together with servent Prayers, a due Care not to mistake the
Meaning of them.

An assiduous Conversation with the exquisitely Framed, and admirably Managed,
Works of God, brings a Skilful Considerer of them to discover from time to
time, so many things to be Feazable, or to be True, which, whilst he argued but
upon grounds of incompetently Informed Reason, he judged False or
Unpracticable; that little by little he acquires a Habit of receiving some
sorts of Opinions, and especially those that seem unfriendly to Religion, but
as Probationers, with a disposition to Reform or Discard them upon further
Information. And This, as he is resolved to Submit to, in case he meets with
it, so he is disposed to Receive, if not to Expect it, by having often found
himself obliged, upon subsequent Information, to mend or lay aside his former
Opinions, though very agreeable to the best Light he had to judge by, when he
entertained them. As, though it seems a visible Truth, that the Discus of Venus
is, in all respects to the Sun, totally Luminous; yet when the Telescope
discovers her to have her Full and her Wane, like the Moon, he will believe
this further Observation, against the first made with his Naked Eyes.

And indeed, I have sometimes doubted, whether to be versed in Mathematics,
and other Demonstrative parts of Philosophy, bring a greater advantage to the
Mind, by Accustoming and Assisting it to Examine Strictly Things proposed for
Truths, and to Evince Strongly the Truths a Man knows, to Others; than by
Fitting him to Discern the force of a good Argument, and Submit willingly to
Truths clearly evinced, how little soever he may have expected to find such
Conclusions true. 'Twill not be difficult to apply these Reflections to our
present purpose; since there are several passages in the Scripture that
sufficiently declare, both that Multitudes persist in a Criminal Infidelity,
out of an overweaning Conceit of their own Knowledge, and a readiness to be
swayed rather by strong Prejudices, than by the strongest Arguments that would
remove them; and, that Docility is a very happy disposition to the
Entertainment of Revealed Religion: In reference to which, this Qualification
will be the more easily found in our Virtuoso; because, whereas the things,
about which he has been accustomed to be sensible of his Ignorance, or desire
further Instruction, are within the Sphere of Nature, and the Jurisdiction of
Philosophy; many of the things that Revealed Religion declares, (such as are
the Decrees, the Purposes, the Promises, etc. of God, and his most peculiar
manner of Existing and Operating) are things so Sublime and Abstruse, that they
may well be looked upon as of an higher Order than merely Physical Ones, and
cannot be Satisfactorily reached by the mere Light of Nature. It Is true, that
our Philosopher, because he is so, will examine more strictly, than Ordinary
Men are Wont or Able to do, the Proofs brought for this or that proposed
Revelation. But that is no disadvantage to a Supernatural Religion, such as the
Christian; if it be, as we now suppose it to be, True; and the real Truth about
Religion it self, does not require Credulity, but only Docility. And perhaps
this matter may be illustrated, by comparing what happens to a Philosopher in
the Examen of Opinions, and to a Chemist in that of Metals. For if a Piece of
Coin, that Men would have pass for true Gold, be offered to an Ordinary Man,
and to a Skilful Refiner; though the later will examine it more strictly, and not
acquiesce in the Stamp, the Color, the Sound, and other Obvious Marks, that
may satisfy a Shopkeeper, or a Merchant; yet when he has tried it by the
Severer ways of Examining, such as the Touchstone, the Cupel, Aquafortis, etc.
and finds it to hold good in those Proofs, he will readily and frankly
acknowledge, that it is true Gold, and will be more thoroughly Convinced of it,
than the other Person; whose want of Skill will make him still apt to retain a
Distrust, and render him indeed more easy to be Persuaded, but more difficult
to be fully Satisfied. On the like account; though our Virtuoso will examine with
more Strictness and Skill, than Ordinary Men are able, Miracles, Prophecies, or
other Proofs, said to be Supernatural, that are alleged to Evince a Revealed
Religion; yet if the certain and genuine Characters of Truth appear in it, He
will be more thoroughly Convinced of it than a less Skilful Man, whose want of
good Criteria, (or Touchstones) and Sound Judgment, will incline him to be
Diffident, and to be still afraid of having been Imposed on.

I expect, in the mean time, that you should here Object against what has been
said in the later Leaves of the past Discourse, that it has degraded the Human
Intellect, by ascribing so much to Experience, Natural or Supernatural, that it
has left nothing for Reason to do, unless servilely to Obey.

But, though this Objection be plausible, yet the Answer to it will not be very
difficult, if the Matter it self be duly considered, and Reason be brought to
act, even on this occasion, not as an Interessed Party, but an Unbiased Judge.

For we have already shown, that Rational Philosophers scruple not to Alter or
Renounce the Opinions, that Specious Reasons had Suggested to them, when once
they either find those Opinions Contradicted by Experience, or meet with other
Opinions more Conformable to Experience. And Aristotle himself, though he be
accused to have, perhaps the first of all the Ancient Naturalists, perverted
Physics, by wresting them to a compliance with Logical and Metaphysical
Fancies; yet even He confesses, not only that in the Science of Nature, Reason
ought to comport with the Phenomenon, and the Phenomenon with Reason; but that
to adhere to plausible Ratiocinations, with the neglect of Sensible
Observations, is a Weakness, or Disease, ((...)) of Mind. I will not here
mention what I say in another Paper, by way of attempt to settle the Bounds of
Reason and Experience, in reference to Natural Philosophy; but it may concern
our present Argument, to employ a few Lines in this place, toward the further
clearing the lately proposed Objection. We may observe then, that, whether or
no it be True, which is taught by Aristotle, and commonly received in the
Schools, that the Understanding is like Blank Paper; and that it receives no
Knowledge, but what has been conveyed to it through the Senses: Whether, I say,
this be or be not admitted, it is plain, that the Notions which are either
Congenite with the Understanding, or so easily and early Acquired by it, that
diverse Philosophers think them Innate, are but very few, in comparison of those
that are requisite to Judge aright, about any one of a multitude of things,
that occur, either in Natural Philosophy, or Theology. For in the Divine
Nature, Power, Wisdom, and other Attributes, there is a Faecundity that has
produced a World of Contrivances, Laws, and other things, that exceedingly
surpass both the Number and Variety, that the dim and limited Intellect of Man
could reach to, by framing and compounding Idaea's, without the assistance of
the Patterns, afforded by the Works and Declarations of God.

On the account of the same Prerogative of the Divine Knowledge, it must
frequently happen, that the Notions and Opinions, Men take up, of the Works and
Mind of God, upon the mere Suggestions of the Abstracted Reason, (if I may so
call it) newly spoken of, must not only be almost always very deficient, but
will be oftentimes very erroneous. Of which, we see evident proofs in many of
the Opinions of the Old Philosophers, who, though Men of strong Natural parts,
were misled by what they mistook for Reason, to maintain such things about the
Works and the Author of Nature, as We, who, by the favor of Experience and
Revelation, stand in a much clearer Light, know to be False, and often justly
think utterly Extravagant.

The Importance of the Subject lately spoken of, and its being too little
Considered, may make it deserve to be Inculcated; and therefore I shall subjoyn
on this occasion, that That which I have lately called Abstracted Reason, is
but a narrow Thing, and reaches but to a very small share of the Multitude of
Things knowable, whether Human or Divine, that may be obtained by the help of
further Experience, and Supernatural Revelation. This Reason, furnished with no
other Notices than it can supply it self with, is so narrow and deceitful a
Thing, that He that seeks for Knowledge only within Himself, shall be sure to
be quite Ignorant of far the greatest part of Things, and will scarce escape
being Mistaken about a good part of Those he thinks he knows.

But, notwithstanding what has been hitherto said, I am far from intending to
deny Reason any of its just Prerogatives. For I show in another Paper, that
Experience is but an Assistant to Reason, since it does indeed supply
Informations to the Understanding; but the Understanding remains still the
Judge, and has the Power or Right, to Examine and make use of the Testimonies
that are presented to it. The Outward Senses are but the Instruments of the
Soul, which Hears by the intervention of the Ear, and in respect of which, the
Eye it self is but a more Immediate Optical Tube; and the Sense does but
Perceive Objects, not Judge of them. Nor do the more wary among the
Philosophers, trust their Eye, to Teach them the Nature of the visible Object;
but only employ it to Perceive the Phenomenon it exhibits, and the Changes that
happen to its self by the action of it. And whereas it is confessed, that the
Sensories may deceive us, if the Requisites of Sensation be wanting; as when a
Square Tower appears Round at a great distance, and a Straight Stick half in
the Water, appears Crooked, because of the double Medium; it is the part of
Reason, not Sense, to Judge, whether none of the Requisites of Sensation be
wanting; which (give me leave to add) oftentimes requires, not only Reason, but
Philosophy; and then also it is the part of Reason to Judge, what Conclusions
may, and what cannot, be safely grounded on the Informations of the Senses, and
the Testimony of Experience. So that when it is said, that Experience Corrects
Reason, it is somewhat an improper way of Speaking; since it is Reason it self,
that, upon the Information of Experience, Corrects the Judgments she had made
before.

And this (borrowed from the forementioned Paper, because 'twas never
Published) prompts me to illustrate the Use of Reason, by comparing her to an
able Judge, who comes to Hear and Decide Causes in a strange Country. For the
General Notions he brings with him, and the Dictates of Justice and Equity, can
give him but a very short and imperfect Knowledge of many things, that are
requisite to frame a right Judgment, about the Cases that are first brought
before him; and before he has heard the Witnesses, he may be very apt to fall
into Prejudicate Opinions of things, (whether Persons or Causes.) But when an
Authentic and sufficient Testimony has cleared Things to him, he then
pronounces, according to the Light of Reason, he is Master of; to which, the
Witnesses did but give Information, though That subsequent Information may have
obliged him, to lay aside some Prejudicate Opinions he had entertained before
he received it. And what is said of Natural Experience, in reference to the
Understanding, may, with due alteration, be applied to Supernatural Revelation:
For here also the Understanding is to Examine, whether the Testimony be indeed
Divine; and, whether a Divine Testimony ought to be (as It will easily perceive
it should) Believed, in what it clearly Teaches; to omit other Uses of Reason,
(about Theological Matters) which belong not to this place; where it may
suffice to have shown, that Reason is not Degraded from the Dignity that
belongs to her, of Perceiving and Judging; though she be Obliged by her own
Dictates, to take in all the Assistance she can, from Experience, whether
Natural, or Supernatural; and by the fuller Accounts of things she receives
from those Informations, to Rectify, if need be, her former and less mature
Judgments.

In short, Those that cry up Abstracted Reason, as if it were Selfsufficient,
exalt it in Words; but we that Address Reason to Physical and Theological
Experience, and direct it how to Consult them, and take its Informations from
them, exalt it in Effect; and Reason is much less usefully served, by the
former sort of Men, than by the later; since whilst those do but flatter it,
these take the right way to improve it.

I hope you will not imagine, that I have, in the foregoing part of this
Letter, said all that I could say pertinently. For, being mindful of the
Brevity becoming an Epistolary Discourse, I omitted several Arguments, that
would have challenged their places in a just Treatise; and have but Touched
upon most of those I have mentioned; though Reasonings of this kind are usually
like Tapestry, which loses much by being looked on whilst the Hangings are
Folded up, which should be displayed to their full Dimensions.

But having offered you some things, which perhaps you have not met with
elsewhere; and having, though but transiently, touched upon the Grounds of diverse
other considerable Arguments; I hope that your Learning and Sagacity, will both
Supply what you will discern to have been Omitted, and Enforce what has been
but Intimated; and then I shall not despair, that what I have said may suffice
to persuade you, that Experimental Philosophy may greatly Assist a
well-dispos'd Mind, to yield an Hearty and Operative Assent to the Principles
of Religion. I am,

SIR, Your most etc.

The End of the First Part.
REFLECTIONS UPON A Theological Distinction.

According to which, it is said, That some ARTICLES of FAITH are Above Reason,
but not Against Reason.

In a Letter to a Friend.

In the SAVOY: Printed by Edw. Jones, for John Tailor at the Ship in St. Paul's
Churchyard. MDCXC.

Advertisement.
AFter the Author had begun the Second Part of his Christian Virtuoso, and made
some Progress in it, which he designed to continue till he had Completed it;
he was obliged to leave the Country, where he enjoyed some Leisure, and to
remove to London; where Sickness, and Business, and a Multitude of Visits he
could not avoid receiving, did so distract him, that these Remora's, added to
the Fertility of the Subjects that remained to be Treated of, which he found
much greater than he was at first aware of, made him lay aside the Materials he
had prepared for the Second Part, to a fitter Opportunity, and comply with the
Occasions he had, to publish some Tracts that required more haste. And it is for
the like Reasons, that having at present some other Essays of a quite differing
Nature in the Press, he is obliged to postpone his resuming and finishing the
Second Part of the Christian Virtuoso (which will require more Sheets than the
former) for some longer time; tho yet to Comply with the Solicitations of the
Printer, he consents both to let the First Part come abroad, and (to make the
Book of a more decent size) add to it, by way of Substitution, a Discourse that
is of Affinity enough to the other, upon the account of some of the Points it
handles, and more upon that of its Scope; and that will not be Ill received, if
it have the good fortune to find the Public as kind to it, as Private Perusers
have been.

For my Learned Friend Mr. H. O.
SIR,
1. I Can neither admire nor blame the Curiosity you express, to receive some
Satisfaction about the important Distinction that is made use of, in defense of
some Mysteries of the Christian Religion; namely, that they are indeed above
Reason, but not against Reason. For though diverse Learned Men have, especially
of late, employed it; yet I perceive you and your Friends N. N. think, that
they have not done it so clearly, as both to prevent the Exceptions of
Infidels, or render them more groundless; and at least, to obviate the Surmises
of those others, who have been persuaded to look upon this Distinction, but as
a fine Evasion, whereby to elude some Objections that cannot otherwise be
answered. And indeed, as far as I can discern by the Authors wherein I have met
with it, (for I pretend not to judge of any others,) there are diverse that
employ this Distinction, few that have attempted to explain it, (and that I
fear, not sufficiently) and none that has taken care to justify it.

II. In order to the removal of the Difficulties that you take notice of, I
shall endeavor to do these Two things: 1. To declare in what sense I think our
Distinction is to be understood. And, 2. To prove that it is not an Arbitrary
or Illusory Distinction, but grounded upon the Nature of Things.

Though I do not desire to impose my Sentiments on any Man, much less on You;
yet because I, as well as others, have had some occasions to make use of the
Distinction we are considering; I think myself obliged, before I go any
further, to acquaint you in what sense I understand it.

III. By such things then in Theology, as may be said to be above Reason, I
conceive such Notions and Propositions, as mere Reason, that is, Reason
unassisted by supernatural Revelation, would never have discovered to us:
Whether those things be to our finite Capacities, clearly comprehensible or
not. And by things contrary to Reason, I understand such Conceptions and
Propositions, as are not only undiscoverable by mere Reason, but also, when we
understand them, do evidently and truly appear to be repugnant to some
Principle, or to some Conclusion, of Right Reason.

IV. To illustrate this Matter a little, I shall propound to you a Comparison
drawn from that Sense, which is allowed to have the greatest Cognation with the
Understanding, which I presume you will readily guess to be the Sight. Suppose
then, that on a deep Sea, a Diver should bid you tell him, What you can see
there; That which you would answer, would be, that you can see into a Seagreen
Liquor, to the depth of some Yards, and no further: So that if he should
farther ask you, Whether you see what lies at the Bottom of the Sea, you would
return him a Negative Answer. If afterward the Diver letting himself down to
the Bottom, should thence bring up and show you Oysters or Muscles with Pearls
in them; you would easily acknowledge, both that they lay beyond the reach of
your Sight, and consequently argued an Imperfection in it; tho but such an
Imperfection, as is not Personal but Common to you with other Men, and that the
Pearls have the genuin Color and Luster, that naturally belongs to such Gems.
But if this Diver should pretend, that each of these Pearls he shows you, is as
large as a Tennis-Ball, or some of them bigger than the Shells they were
enclosed in, and that they are not round but cubical, and their color not
White or Orient, but Black or Scarlet; you would doubtless judge what he
asserts, to be not only (or not so properly,) undiscernable by your Eyes, but
contrary to the Informations of them, and therefore would deny what he affirms.
Because, that to admit it, would not only argue your Sight to be Imperfect, but
False and Delusory; tho the Organ be rightly qualified, and duly applied to its
proper Objects.

V. This Illustration may give you some superficial Notion of the Difference
betwixt a thing's being above Reason, and its being contrary to it. But this
may better appear, if we consider the Matter more distinctly. And to offer
something in order to this, I shall beg leave to say, that, in my Opinion, the
things that may be said to be above Reason, are not all of One sort, but may be
distinguished into Two kinds, differing enough from each other.

VI. For it seems to me, that there are some Things, that Reason by its own
Light cannot Discover; and others, that, when proposed, it cannot Comprehend.

VII. And First, there are diverse Truths in the Christian Religion, that Reason
left to itself, would never have been able to find out, nor perhaps to have so
much as dreamed of: Such as are most of Those that depend upon the Free Will
and Ordination of God, as, That the World was made in six Days, That Christ
should be Born of a Virgin, and That in his Person there should be united Two
such infinitely distant Natures as the Divine and Human; and That the Bodies of
Good Men shall be raised from Death, and so advantageously changed, that the
Glorified Persons shall be like, or equal to, the Angels.

VIII. Of this kind of Theological Truths, you will easily believe, that 'twere
not difficult for me to offer diverse other Instances; and indeed there are many
Truths, and more I think than we are wont to imagine, that we want Mediums, or
Instruments to discover, tho, if they were duly proposed, they would be
intelligible to us: As, for my part, when by looking on the Starry Heaven,
first with my naked Eyes, and then with Telescopes of differing Lengths, I did
not only discry more and more Stars, according to the Goodness of the
Instruments I employed, but discovered great Inducements to think, that there
are in those inestimably remote Regions, many Celestial Lights, that only the
Want of more reaching Telescopes conceal from our Sight.

IX. And thus much I presume you will close with the more easily, because it
disagrees not with the Sentiments of some few (for I dare say not, many)
Orthodox Divines. But I must take leave to add, that besides these mysterious
Truths, that are too remote, and hidden, to be Detected by Human Reason; there
is another sort of Things, that may be said to be above Reason.

X. For there are diverse Truths delivered by Revelation, (contained in the Holy
Scriptures,) that not only would never have been found out by mere natural
Reason; but are so abstruse, that when they are proposed as clearly, as proper
and unambiguous Expressions can propose them in; they do nevertheless surpass
our dim and bounded Reason, on one or other of those Three accounts that are
mentioned in a Dialogue about things transcending Reason; namely either, as not
clearly conceivable by our Understanding, such as the Infiniteness and
Perfections of the Divine Nature; or inexplicable by us, such as the Manner,
how God can create a rational Soul; or how, this being an immaterial Substance,
it can act upon a Human Body, and be acted on by it; (which Instance I rather
chose, than the Creation of Matter, because it may be more easily proved) or
else asymmetrical, or unsociable; that is, such, as we see not how to reconcile
with other Things, which also manifestly are, or are by us acknowledged to be,
true; such as are the Divine Prescience of future Contingents, and the Liberty
that belongs to Man's Will, at least in diverse Cases.

XI. It will not perhaps be improper to observe, on this occasion, that, as of
Things that are said to be above Reason, there are more kinds than one; so
there may be a Difference in the Degrees, or, at least, the Discernableness, of
their Abstruseness.

XII. For some things appear to surpass, or distress, our Understandings,
almost as soon as they are proposed, at least, before they are attentively
looked into. As, what is said to be Infinite, either in Extent or Number. But
there are other things, the Notions whereof, as they first arise from the
things considered in gross, and as it were indefinitely, are such, as do not
choque or perplex our Understandings; and are so far intelligible, that they
may be usefully employed in ordinary Discourse. But when we come to make a deep
Inspection into these, and prosecute to the uttermost the successive Inferences
that may be drawn from them; we reason our selves into Inextricable
Difficulties, if not flat Repugnancies too. And to show you, that I do not say
this gratis; be pleased to consider with me, that, we usually discourse of
Place, of Time, and of Motion; and have certain general indeterminate
Conceptions, of each of these; by the help of which, we understand one another,
when we speak of them; Tho, if we will look thoroughly into them, and attentively
consider all the Difficulties, that may be discovered by such an Inspection; we
shall find our Reason oppressed by the Number and Greatness of the
Difficulties, into which we shall argue ourselves; or, at least, may be argued
by others; tho these Men, who do make such shrewd Objections against the
Hypothesis, we embrace, will hardly be able themselves to pitch on any, that
will not allow us to repay them in the same coin.

XIII. What has been newly said, may, I hope, assist us to clear a Difficulty,
or Scruple, (about the Distinction we treat of,) which since it sprung up in my
own Mind, may very probably occur also to your Thoughts; namely, That if any
Theological Proposition be granted to surpass our Reason; we cannot pretend to
believe it, without discovering, that we do not sufficiently consider what we
say: Since we pretend to exercise an act of the Understanding, in embracing
somewhat that we do not understand, nor have a Notion of.

XIV. But on this occasion we may justly have recourse to a Distinction, like
That I have lately intimated. For, in diverse cases, the Notions, Men have of
some Things, may be different enough, since the one is more obvious and
superficial, and the other more Philosophical or accurat. And of these Two
differing kinds of Conceptions, I have already offered some Instances in the
very differing Notions, Men have of Place and Time: Which, tho familiar
Objects, I elsewhere show to be each of them of so abstruse a Nature, that I do
not wonder to find Aristotle himself complaining of the Difficulty that there
is to give a clear, and unexceptionable, Notion of Place; nor to find so acute
a Wit as St. Austin, ingenuously confessing his Disability to explicate the
Nature of Time.

XV. And what is said of the great Intricacies, that incumber a deep Scrutiny
into these familiar Objects of Discourse, will hold, as to the Divisibility of
Quantity; as to Local Motion; and as to some other Primary things; whose
Abstruseness is not inferior in Degree, tho differing as to the Kinds of
things, wherein it consists.

XVI. By such Instances as these, it may appear, that without talking as
Parrots, (as your Friends would intimate, that those that use our Distinctions
must do;) or as irrational Men; we may speak of some Things that we acknowledge
to be on some account or other above our Reason; since the Notions we may have
of those Things, however dim and imperfect, may yet be of use, and may be in
some measure intelligible, tho the Things they relate to, may, in another
respect, be said to transcend our Understanding; because an attentive
Considerer may perceive, that something belongs to them, that is not clearly
comprehensible, or does otherwise surpass our Reason (at least in our present
State.)

XVII. Having dispatched the Objection, that required this Digression: I shall
now step again into the Way, and proceed in it by telling you, that any one
apposite Instance may suffice to clear the former part of the Expression that
is employed, when it is said that a Mystery, or other Article of Faith, is above
Reason, but not contrary to it: For if there be so much as one Truth, which is
acknowledged to be such, and yet not to be clearly and distinctly
comprehensible, it cannot justly be pretended, that to make use of the
Distinction we are treating of, is to say something, that is not intelligible,
or is absurd. And it will further justify the Expression quarrelled at, if we
can make it appear, that it is neither Impertinent or Arbitrary, but grounded
on the Nature of Things. And this I shall endeavor to do, by showing, that
though I admit Two sorts of Things, which may be said to be above Reason, yet
there is no necessity, that either of them must (always) be contrary to Reason.

XVIII. As for the first sort of Things said to surpass Reason, I see not, but
that Men may be unable, without the Assistance of a more knowing Instructor, to
discover some Truths; and yet be able, when These are revealed or discovered to
them by that Instructor, both to understand the disclosed Propositions by their
own Rational Faculty, and approve them for True, and fit to be embraced. The
Intellect of Man being such a bounded Faculty as it is, and naturally furnished
with no greater a stock or share of Knowledge, than it is able by its own
Endeavors to give itself, or acquire; 'twould be a great Unhappiness to
Mankind, if we were obliged to reject, as repugnant to Reason, whatever we
cannot discover by our own natural Light; and consequently, to deny our selves
the great Benefits we may receive from the Communications of any higher and
more discerning Intellect. An Instance to my present purpose may be found among
Rational Souls themselves, though universally granted to be all of the same
Nature. For, tho a Person but superficially acquainted (for Example) with
Geometry, would never have discovered by his own Light, that the Diameter of a
Square is incommensurable to the Side; yet when a skilful Mathematician
dexterously declares, and by a Series of Demonstrations proves, that noble
Theorem; the Disciple by his now instructed Reason will be able, both to
understand it, and to assent to it: Insomuch, that Plato said, that he was
rather a Beast than a Man that would deny it.

XIX. Other Instances may be alleged to exemplify the Truth newly mentioned.
And indeed, there is not so much as a strong Presumption, that a Proposition or
Notion is therefore repugnant to Reason, because it is not discoverable by It;
since it is altogether extrinsecal and accidental to the Truth or Falsity of a
Proposition, that we never heard of It before; or that we could never have
found It out by our own Endeavors; but must have had the Knowledge of It
imparted to us by another. But then this Disability to find out a thing by our
own Search, does not hinder us from being able by our own Reason, both to
understand it when duly proposed, and to discern it to be agreeable to the
Dictates of right Reason. To induce you to assent to the later part of this
Observation, I shall add, that these Intellectual Assistances may oftentimes
not only enlighten, but gratify, the Mind, by giving it such Informations, as
both agree with its former maimed or imperfect Notices, and complete them.
When, for example, an antique Medal, half consumed with Rust, is showed to an
unskilful Person, though a Scholar; he will not by his own Endeavors be able
to read the whole Inscription, whereof we suppose some parts to be obliterated
by Time or Rust; or to discover the Meaning of it. But when a knowing Medalist
becomes his Instructor, he may then know some (much defaced) Letters, that were
illegible to him before, and both understand the Sense of the Inscription, and
approve it as genuine and suitable to the Things, whereto it ought to be
congruous. And because diverse Philosophical Wits are apt, as well as you, to be
startled at the name of Mystery, and suspect, that because it implies something
abstruse, there lies hid some Illusion under that obscure Term: I shall venture
to add, that agreeably to our Doctrine we may observe, that diverse things that
relate to the Old Testament, are in the New called Mysteries, because they were
so under the Mosaic Dispensation; tho they cease to be so, now that the
Apostles have explained them to the World. As the calling of the Gentiles into
the Church of God, is by their Apostle called a Mystery; because, to use his
Phrase, it Coloss. I. 26. Ephesians. III. 3, 5, 6.
had been hid from Ages and Generations: Though he adds, But now it is made
manifest to his Saints. And the same Writer tells the Corinthians, that he 1 Corinthians. XV. v. 51, 52.
shows them a Mystery, which he immediately explains, by foretelling, that all
pious Believers shall not dye, because that those that shall be found alive at
the coming of Christ, shall not sleep, but be changed; as the other Dead shall
be raised incorruptible. Which surprising Doctrine, though because it could not
be discovered by the Light of Nature, nor of the Writings of the Old Testament,
he calls a Mystery; yet it is no more so to us, now that he has so expressly
foretold it, and therefore declared it.

XX. Other Instances I content myself to point at in the Margin, that I may
pass on to confirm the Observation I formerly intimated; See Mat. XIII. 11.
Ephesians. V. 31.
that diverse things which the Scripture teaches beyond what was known, or (in
probability) are discoverable by natural Light, are so far from being against
Reason, by being (in the sense declared) above it; that these Discoveries ought
much to recommend the Scripture to a rational Mind; because they do not only
Agree with the doubtful or imperfect Notions we already had of things, but
Improve them, if not Complete them. Nay, I shall venture to add, that these
Intellectual Aids may not seldom help us to discern, That some Things, which
not only are above Reason, but at first sight seem to be against it; are really
reconcilable to Reason, improved by the new Helps, afforded it by Revelation.
To illustrate this by a Philosophical Instance, when Gallileo first made his
Discoveries with the Telescope, and said, That there were Planets that moved
about Jupiter; He said something, that other Astronomers could not discern to
be True, but nothing that they could prove to be False. And even when some
Revelations are thought not only to transcend Reason, but to clash with it; it
is to be considered, Whether such Doctrins are really repugnant to any absolute
Catholic Rule of Reason, or only to something, which so far depends upon the
Measure of acquired Information we then enjoy, that, though we judge it to be
Irrational, yet we are not sure, that the Thing, this Judgment is grounded on,
is clearly and fully enough known to us. As, to resume the former Example, when
Gallileo, or some of his Disciples, affirmed Venus to be sometimes Horned like
the Moon; tho this Assertion were repugnant to the unanimous Doctrine of
Astronomers, who thought their Opinion very well grounded, on no less a
Testimony than That of their own Eyes; yet in effect the Proof was incompetent,
because their unassisted Eyes could not afford them sufficient Information
about this case. And so, when Gallileo spoke of Hills and Valleys, and Shadows,
in the Moon, they were not straight to reject what he taught, but to have, if
not a kind of implicit Faith, yet a great Disposition to believe what he
delivered, as upon his own Knowledge, about the Figure and Number of the
Planets. For they knew, that he had, and had already successfully made use of,
a Way of discovering Celestial Objects, that they were not Masters of; nor
therefore competent Judges of all the Things, though they might well be of
many, that he affirmed to be discoverable by it. And though they could not see
in the Moon what he observed, (Valleys, Mountains, and the Shadows of these)
yet they might justly suspect, that the Difference of the Idea that they framed
of that Planet, and that which he proposed, might well proceed from the
Imperfection of their unaided Sight; especially considering, that what he said,
of the differing Constitution of what is there analogous to Sea and Land, did
rather Correct and Improve, than absolutely Overthrow, their former Notices.
For he allowed the Spots they saw, to be darker Parts of the Moon, and gave
Causes of that Darkness; which their bare Eyes could not have led them to any
such Knowledge of. And the Nonappearance of the Mountainous Parts of the Moon
in that form to the naked Eye, might well be imputed to the great Distance
betwixt them and us, since at a far less Distance square Towers appear round,
etc.

XXI. It now remains, that I say something, that may both make some Application
of the Form of Speech hitherto discoursed of, and afford a Confirmation of the
Grounds whereon, I think, it may be justified. This I am the rather induced to
do, because I expect it will be objected, that he that acknowledges, that the
Thing he would have us believe, transcends our Reason, has a Mind to deceive
us, and procures for himself a fair opportunity to delude us, by employing an
Arbitrary Distinction, which he may apply as he pleases.

XXII. But to speak first a word or two to this last Clause; I acknowledge,
that such a Distinction is capable enough of being misapplied: And I am apt to
think, that, by some School-Divines, and others, it has been so. But, since
there are other Distinctions that are generally and justly received by Learned
Men, and even by Philosophers themselves, without having any Immunity from
being capable to be perverted; I know not, why the Distinction, we are
considering, should not be treated as favorably as they. And however, the
Question at present is not, whether our Distinction may possibly be misapplied
by rash or imposing Men; but whether it be grounded on the Nature of Things. To
come then to the Thing it self, I consider, that for an Opinion to be above
Reason, in the sense formerly assigned, is somewhat, that (as was noted in
reference to the first sort of Things, that surpass it) is Extrinsecal and
Accidental to its being True or False. For to be above our Reason, is not an
Absolute thing, but a Respective one, importing a Relation to the Measure of
Knowledge, that belongs to the Human Understanding, such as it is said to
transcend: And therefore it may not be above Reason, in reference to a more
enlightened Intellect; such as in probability may be found in Rational Beings of
an higher Order, such as are the Angels; and, without peradventure, is to be
found in God* Whom, when we conceive to be a Being Infinitely perfect, we must
ascribe to him a perfect Understanding, and boundless Knowledge. This being
supposed, it ought not to be denied, that a Superior Intellect may both
comprehend several Things that we cannot; and discern such of them to be
congruous to the fixed and eternal Idea's of Truth, and consequently agreeable
to one another, as dimsighted Mortals are apt to suspect, or to think, to be
separately False; or, when collated, Inconsistent with one another. But to
lanch into this Speculation, would lead me farther than I have time to go. And
therefore I shall content my self to offer you one Argument, to prove, That of
Things that may be said to be above Reason, in the Sense formerly explained, it
is no way impossible, that even such an one should be true, as is obnoxious to
Objections not directly answerable. For I consider, that of Things above
Reason, there may be some which are really contradictory to one another, and
yet each of them is maintainable by such Arguments, as very Learned and Subtle
Men do both Acquiesce in, and Enforce, by loading the Embracers of the opposite
Opinion, with Objections they cannot directly answer.

XXIII. This I take to be manifest, in the case of the Controversy about the
endless Divisibility of Quantity; as, suppose, of a straight Line. For many
eminent Mathematicians, and a greater number of Naturalists, and in particular
almost all the Epicureans, and other Atomists, stiffly maintain the Negative.
The Affirmative is nevertheless asserted, and thought to be Mathematically
demonstrated, by Aristotle in a peculiar Tract; and both by His School, and by
several excellent Geometricians besides. And yet in reality, the Assertions of
these Two contending Parties are truly Contradictory; since, of necessity a
straight Line proposed must be, at least mentally, divisible, into Parts that
are themselves still further divisible; or, it must not be so, and the
Subdivisions must at length come to a stop. And therefore one of the opposite
Opinions must be true. And it is plain to those, that have, with competent Skill
and Attention, impartially examined this Controversy, that the side that is
pitched upon, whichsoever it be, is liable to be exposed to such Difficulties,
and other Objections, as are not clearly answerable; but confound and oppress
the Reason of those that strive to defend it.

XXIV. I have, Sir, the more largely discoursed of the foregoing Distinction;
not only, because I did not find my self to have been prevented by others; but,
because I look upon the explaining and justifying of it to be of Importance,
not alone to the Defense of some Mysteries of the Christian Religion, but (what
perhaps may have escaped your Observation) of some important Articles of
Natural Theology it self. For though Natural Religion taught diverse Heathen
Philosophers, such Truths as these, viz. The Production of the Rational Soul or
Mind, which is an Immaterial Substance; the Formation of the World out of the
Universal Matter, though this Action required, that an Incorporeal Substance
gave Motion to a Body; that God knows Men's Thoughts and Intentions, how
carefully soever they strive to hide them; and that God foreknows the Events of
the free Actions of such Men, as are not to be born these many Ages; though, I
say, these, and some other Sublime, Truths, were by diverse Men embraced before
the Gospel began to be Preached; yet when I attentively consider, how hard it
is to conceive the Modus of these Things, and explain how some of them can be
performed; and also, how some of the Divine Attributes, as Eternity, Immensity,
Omnipresence, and some others, belong to God; and how some Actions, as the
Moving of Bodies, and the Creation of Human Minds, with all their Noble
Faculties, are Exercised by Him: When I consider such Things, I say, I
acknowledge, that, to my apprehension, there are some Doctrine allowed to have
been discovered by the mere Light of Nature, that are liable to such Objections
from Physical Principles, and the settled order of Things corporeal; as, if they
be urged home, will bring those that are Ingenuous to acknowledge, that their
Intellects are but dim and imperfect, and indeed disproportionate to the
sublimest and most mysterious Truths; and that they cannot perfectly comprehend
them* and answer all the Difficulties that incumber them; though they find
themselves obliged to admit them, because of the weighty Positive Reasons, that
recommend those Heteroclite Truths to their Assent.

XXV. If you should now tell me, that, after all I have said, it is plain, that
the questioned Distinction* if it were granted, might be of very bad
consequence; as affording shelter to any Unintelligible Stuff, that some bold
Enthusiast, or conceited Philosophizer, may obtrude under the Venerable Title
of a Mystery, above the Jurisdiction of Reason; and, that though the
Distinction were admitted, it would not be a good Proof of any disputed Article
of the Christian Religion: If, I say, this shall be objected, I shall answer,
(what in part is intimated already) That I do not deny, but that our
Distinction is liable to be ill employed, but that this is no other Blemish
than what is common with it to diverse other Distinctions, that are without
scruple Admitted, because they are useful; and not Rejected, because they have
not the Privilege, that they can never be misapplied: And therefore, both in
reference to those Distinctions, and to That we have been Treating of, it
becomes Men to stand upon their Guard, and strictly examine, how far the
Notion, or Doctrine, proposed as a Mystery, does require, and is entitled to,
the benefit of this Distinction. I shall also readily grant the greatest part
of the second Member of your Objection. For I think it were great Weakness in a
Christian, to urge our Distinction as a positive Proof: Since, tho it be
Extrinsecal to an abstruse Notion, to be, or not to be, above Reason; (as was
just now noted to another purpose,) yet, generally speaking, that Abstruseness
is less fit to bring credit to a Conception, or a Doctrine, than it is to make
it to be distrusted. Nor are Christians such fond Discoursers, as to pretend,
That such an Article of Religion ought to be believed, Because it is above
Reason, as if that were a proof of its Truth; but only, that if it be otherwise
well proved, it ought to be believed, Notwithstanding its being above Reason.

XXVI. And this I shall represent in favor of those that believe these
abstruse Articles, that are clearly revealed in the Scripture, upon the
Authority of the Divine Revealer; (who never deceives Others, nor can be
Himself deceived,) that since, as we have lately shown by the contradictory
Opinions about the Divisibility of Quantity, some Doctrines must be true, whose
Difficulties do not appear to be surmountable by our dim Reason; and since the
Perfectness of God's Knowledge permits us not to doubt, but that He certainly
knows which of the two Contending Opinions is the True; and can declare so much
to Men: It would not be a sure ground of rejecting a Revealed Article, to
allege, that it is encumbered with confounding Difficulties, and liable to many
and weighty Objections.

XXVII. And, (to add somewhat that may help to defend some Truths of Natural,
and others of Revealed, Religion) That a thing may be rationally assented to,
upon clear positive Evidence, though we cannot directly answer the Objections,
that a Speculative and Subtle Wit may devise against it; is a Truth, which, as
important as it is to Religion in general, and the Christian Religion in
particular, I think one may sufficiently manifest by this one Instance, That,
because we can walk up and down, and so remove our Bodies from Place to Place,
by this one Argument, I say, we are justly satisfied, that there is Local
Motion in the World, notwithstanding all the Specious and Subtle Arguments,
that Zeno and his Followers have employed to impugn that Truth: Against which,
they have alleged such Difficulties, as have not only puzzled and perplexed,
but (for ought yet appears) nonplus'd the Ancient Philosophers, and, I doubt,
those Moderns too, that have attempted to give clear Solutions of them.

XXVIII. If now, Sir, we look back upon what has hitherto been discoursed, I
hope you will allow me to gather thence the Conclusion I aim at, which is, that
There is no necessity, that every Notion or Proposition that may be found
delivered in the Holy Scriptures, that surpasses our Reason, must therefore be
contradictory to it: And that, in case the Christian Religion be True, and it is
Mysteries or other Articles divinely Revealed; it is not enough, for the
Confutation of any of them, to reject the Expression, that it is above Reason,
but not contrary to it; as if it involved an unintelligible or groundless
Distinction: For tho This will not evince the Truth of a Mystery, since That
must be Established upon its proper Grounds and Arguments; yet it will keep it
from being Therefore Absurd or False, because it transcends our Reason: Since
to do so, may belong almost indifferently to a Chymerical Notion, and a
Mysterious Truth. And if the Expression be employed to justify any thing, that,
tho styled a Mystery, is but a pretended One; the Error will lie, not in the
Groundlesness of the Distinction, but the Erroneousness of the Application. I
am,

SIR, Your most etc.

FINIS.
Greatness of Mind, PROMOTED BY CHRISTIANITY.

In a LETTER to a Friend.

The First Part.

LONDON, Printed by Edward Jones, for John Tailor at the Ship in St. Paul's
Churchyard. MDCXCI.

To my honored Friend Sir R. M.
SIR,
I Do not wonder, that a great Soul, like yours, should enquire, What aspect
Religion, and particularly that of Christians, has upon Greatness of Mind: But,
I confess, I somewhat marvel, that you should be put upon the Enquiry, by the
Suggestions of such a Libertine as Mr. N. N.'s confidently pretending, that his
Atheistical and Sensual Principles are much more friendly, than the Doctrines
of Christianity, to a noble Frame of Mind. Wherefore I dare not permit the
Sense I have of my own Weakness, how great and just soever, to keep me from
presenting you with my Thoughts; and the rather, because I presume you are not
indisposed to receive a Satisfaction in this Point, since you seem to expect it
from a Pen that is no better than mine; which, you well know, must not be, on
this occasion, assisted by the Arguments and Ornaments, that the fine Sentences
of the Fathers, and other Divines and Humanists, might afford to a Person that
were at leisure, and furnished with a Library. Yet I shall not much, either
excuse, or deplore, my being so ill accommodated for the Task you impose upon
me; because as you seem to desire but my own Thoughts, so I know not, whether
common Place-books would afford me any great Assistance on so uncommon a Theme;
and, I confess, that, when the Matter will bear it, I, as well as you, do less
care for Authorities, especially taken from Discourses, designed rather to
Persuade than Prove, in comparison of those Arguments, that are suggested by a
due Consideration of the Nature of the Thing. But yet, I presume, you will
readily give me leave to do that frequently enough, which your Friend, perhaps,
will call Preaching. For besides that, your Desires, and my Haste, confine me
to the Bible and my own Thoughts; the frequent Citation of Texts of Holy
Scripture is exacted by the Nature of the Question I am to handle: it being
necessary, for the evincing of the Doctrines of Christianity, not to be
inconsistent with Greatness of Mind, that we as well consider, What those
Doctrines are, which sure will be best declared by the Scriptural Texts that
contain them, as What are the Attributes of Greatness of Mind.

CHAP. I.
TO proceed then with some Method, as well as much Brevity, I conceive, it will
be no unfit Way to come to a Resolution in our Inquiry, if I First set down and
enumerate the chiefest Things, that, in the estimation of Intelligent Men, do,
as if they were so many Ingredients, make up what we call Magnanimity or
Greatness of Mind, That not being a single Starr, but a Constellation of
elevated and radiant Qualities; and then show, that Religion, especially That
of the Christians, is, at least, consistent with each of these, if it do not
also promote it. But in this Enumeration, tho I shall, ex abundanti, take in
some Qualities, that are not Essential to Greatness of Mind, but rather
Accessions to it; yet I shall not scrupulously distinguish those Things that
are necessary to complete it, and Those that are partly some of them Signs, and
some of them Effects of it; hoping from your Equity, that these additional
Things will be thought to make full amends, if, through Haste or Mistake, I
should chance to have omitted any Property, that you may judge to belong to the
true Notion of Generosity.

I shall, in the following Discourse, take it for granted, (and I hope I need
not tell you, that I do so) that as we think not Masons, but Jewellers, fit to
judge of the Genuineness and Value of precious Stones; so you will allow me to
take the Notion and Measures of Greatness of Mind, not from the Opinions of the
Injudicious Vulgar, but the Judicious Estimates of Reason, improved by
Philosophy, and enlightn'd by Natural Theology.

I know, the undiscerning Multitude, whose Judgment seems rather lodged in the
Eye than in the Brain, when they hear Men name Greatness of Mind, are apt to
fancy Something, that, like the Coronation of a King, is attended with Pomp and
Splendour, and a numerous Train of Gazers, and the loud Acclamations of the
People. And, at least, when mention is made of an Heroic Soul, they imagine,
that it cannot be but in a great Commander, like a Roman Emperor, or a
Tartarian General, that leads and defeats Armies, and desolates whole
Countries, and leaves them Peopled only with Carcasses. But Reason and
Religion, that look on Human things with Eyes untroubled by those pompous
Outsides that dazzle the Vulgar, can easily see a vast Difference betwixt
Greatness of Fortune and Greatness of Mind. And not only Christianity teaches,
that God, who is no (...) Respecter of Persons, Acts 10. and 34. 2 Samuel 14. and
14. Sees not Persons as Man sees them; and that a thing that is sublime amongst
Men, may be an Abomination to Him: But Philosophers themselves can easily
distinguish betwixt that real Greatness, that truly belongs to the Man, and
that Theatrical one, that Fortune may have annexed to his Condition. And, tho
they pay a peculiar Honor and Respect to great Virtue in Sovereigns, rather
than in Subjects, because in the former, it is more diffusively beneficial, and
cannot last without resisting stronger Temptations; yet, they do not think,
that a great Empire always either finds, or makes, a great Soul. And if
Dignities, how high soever, be attained by mean Submissions, or weak Actions,
they think this extrinsecal Greatness can no more make a mean Soul Great, than
high Stilts can make a Dwarf a proper Man. Perhaps, they look upon Many, who,
for making a great Bustle and Noise in the World, are, by themselves, and the
shallow Vulgar, thought great Spirits, but as Gnats, that are in themselves
small and worthless Creatures, and are really considerable for Nothing, save
the Noise and the Stings wherewith they are able to disturb Men's Rest. That
lucky Monarch, that overcame so great a Part of the then known World, and
conquered Countries, faster than one would have thought he could have traveled
over them, has this Character given of his stupendous Exploits, by the Roman
Historian, that all he had done, was, That he durst well despise despicable
things. And in a Poet of the same Nation, this is his Elogy,

Faelix Terrarum Praedo non utile mundo,
Editus Exemplum.
And if such Persons as They, had so little Respect for so great a Monarch,
that was a lawful Sovereign; what Liberty, think you, do Philosophers allow
themselves, who so little value the Favorites of Fortune, for their being so
that even such as those prosperous Usurpers, Phocas, etc. that her Fondness,
and the Applause of a Multitude, (as blind, perhaps, as She is painted) have
seated in the Throne; Philosophers, in their Thoughts, do as well doom to a
Scaffold, as Religion does to Hell. And certainly, True Greatness of Mind must
be something that both Resides in the Soul, and is Perfective of it; neither of
which Properties belong to any thing that Fortune can bestow: and all that
outward Greatness can do, is not to make a Soul Great, but to afford one that
is, the opportunity of showing itself to be so. And all these Submissions and
Respects that Custom, or Fear, or Interest make Men pay to those, whom, only
their Titles, or their Places, or their Power makes Great ones, do as little
argue or increase the real worth of those envied Persons, as the standing for
more than formerly in an account, turns a Brass Counter into Silver or Gold.
And as no less skill in Arithmetic is required, to Multiply, etc. a thousand
Farthings than a thousand Guinea's, tho one of the latter, be worth almost a
thousand of the former; so the ordering or disposing of all things according to
the best Rules, and after the best manner they are capable of, may argue no
less Greatness of Mind in a private Man, than is exercised by a Great Monarch,
in those Actions that attract the Eyes, and busy the Tongues, of Nations. And
as it usually speaks a Man a better Artist to make a Pocket-Watch, than a great
Town-Clock, all the Advantage the later has of the former, consisting in the
Greatness of the Matter that is wrought, and not that of the Skill, that is
displayed: So it sometimes happens, that those Productions of Virtue argue a
greater Soul, that make, by far, a lesser Show and Noise. And you may remember,
not only, that Socrates, notwithstanding his private, and even necessitous,
Condition, was by the Oracle preferred to all the Grecians, when Greece was the
Theater of generous Minds: But, that a far truer Oracle than That of Delphos,
pronounced the poor Widows Mind, and Circumstances, to have made her Mite a
greater Liberality, than all that the Rich Man had bestowed upon the Corban.
Mark XII. 43.
And it is the Sentence of no worse a Judge than Prove. XVI. 32.
Solomon.

Let us not then from the mean Notions of the Vulgar, and the fond Opinions of
common Souls, take our Estimates of so sublime and extraordinary a Quality, as
Greatness of Mind. For many Things, to which they give not only their
Approbation, but their Applause, are, and ought to be, as little esteemed, if
they be condemned by the Wise, as a piece of Brass Money, that has long past
current among the People, ought to be thought good Gold, when Refiners and
Say-masters have declared it counterfeit. And if you ask me, What Notion then
of Greatness of Mind, I am willing to allow, I shall freely tell you, that, in
my apprehension, the Man that has a Great Mind, is he that uses his utmost
moral Diligence to find out what are the best Things he can do, and then,
without being deterred by Dangers, or discouraged by Difficulties, does
resolutely and steadily pursue them as far as his Ability and Opportunities
will serve; and This out of an Internal Principle of Love to God and Man, and
with a sincere Aim, to Glorify the one, and Benefit the other.

CHAP. II.
BUT, before I descend to Particulars, it will not be amiss to take notice of
one Consideration, that may, in general, make it probable, That the Christian
Religion is rather favorable, than opposite, to true Magnanimity. That this
Argument may make somewhat the more Impression, I shall, tho very briefly,
observe that the Aspects, both of the Author, the Rules, the Aims, or Scopes,
and the Rewards of Virtue, as it is recommended by Christianity, have a great
and direct tendency to Elevate it, and make it Heroic.

And first, the prime Author of the Doctrine of the Gospel being GOD himself,
who both knows Man perfectly, and is mentioned in Scripture as a Tit. III. 4.
(...), or Lover of Mankind; it is but reasonable to suppose, that the Doctrines
and Laws he caused to be solemnly delivered to Mankind, and confirmed by
Miracles, and whose System is, in the Apocalypse, honored with the Title of
Revel. XIV. 6.
The Everlasting Gospel, (i. e.) not to be succeeded by a more perfect
Institution, as the Mosaic Law was by That; should be fitted to beget and
advance solid and sublime Virtue, and be more, than any other Institution,
Perfective of Human Nature.

Next, the Rules, and (if there be any such) the Counsels of the Christian
Religion require, and tend to, extraordinary degrees of Virtue: The Divine
Legislator, being able to look into the Hearts of Men, makes his Laws reach
Those, and Those principally, too. The loving GOD with all our Hearts, with all
our Minds, etc. and our Neighbor as our selves, as comprehensive as those two
grand Principles of Virtue are, is by our Savior made the Summary of the Moral
Law, and adopted into the Gospel; the 2 Cor. VII. 1. 1 Thessalonians. V. 22.
cleansing ourselves from all Filthiness, both of Flesh and Spirit; and the
abstaining from all kind, or appearance, of Evil, are the Negative Parts of the
Christians Duty; and for the Positive Parts, we are plainly told, That unless
our Righteousness exceed that boasted one Matthew. V. 20.
of the Scribes and Pharisees, we shall not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.
We are urged to 2 Pet. III. 18. I. 5.
grow in Grace, to add to our Faith, Virtue, and to That, a whole Train of
excellent Qualities. And, for fear any such thing should be thought to be
purposely omitted, because left unmentioned, this general Exhortation is given
us; Phil. IV. 8.
Finally, my Brethren, whatsoever things are true, etc. But there is yet a more
aspiring Path of Virtue traced us out in the Gospel, where it proposes to us
the Example of Christ, as One, whose Steps we are to tread in: For not only
that Divine Person never committed any Sin, 1 Pet. II. 22.
neither was Guile found in his Mouth; but the Supreme and Omniscient Judge, God
Himself, Declared, by a Voice from Heaven, his full Approbation both of his
Person and his Doctrine, when he said, Mat. XVII. 5.
This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased, hear he him. And his
Sinless Life, which was a Living Law, did not only surpass the Examples, but
even the Precepts and the Idea's too, of the Heathen Moralists and
Philosophers, as may be elsewhere shown. And the becoming a serious Disciple of
so Perfect and Divine a Teacher, does itself so engage a Man to renounce his
former Vices, that when Romans XIII. 14.
St. Paul had dissuaded his Romans from diverse other Vices, instead of
exhorting them to the contrary Virtues in particular, he only desires them, in
general, to put on the Lord Jesus Christ, as a comprehensive Durty, which
contained in it all the Virtues, he declined to enumerate.

Thirdly, but tho he calls us to high Degrees of Virtue, yet he does not to
Unattainable ones; For, tho Philosophy wisely forbore, tho not always to
commend, yet to enjoin, things disproportionate to Human Infirmities; yet, he
may well be allowed to engage us to more than Human Virtues, that by his Divine
Assistances, if they be duly sought, is always ready to enable us to acquire
and practice Them. Of his John I. 16.
Fullness, says St. John, We have all received, and Grace for Grace; ( i. e.)
either Graces answerable to His, as the Faculties of a Child's Mind, are to
Those of a Perfect Man; or, Grace upon Grace, ( i. e.) an Accumulation of
Graces heaped upon one another; which may keep you from wondering, that St. Paul
should dare to say, Phil. IV. 13.
That he could do all things through Christ that strengthened him. And where his
Invitations meet with an honest and a willing Mind, his Commands do not only
Chaulk out the Way, but Give Strength to walk in it; and he usually, does by
his Spirit, such a kind of Work, as he sometimes did miraculously by his Power,
Matt. 9. 6.
when he at once bid, and enabled, a Paralytick Person that wanted Strength to
stir from his Bed, to rise and walk. And when, having commanded St. Peter to
Mat. XIV. 29.
walk to him upon the Sea, he enabled him securely to tread upon the Waves;
thereby Approving and Rewarding the excellent Notion that Disciple had, That
the Command of Christ was a sufficient Cause to put him upon Action, tho a
Miracle were requisite to carry him through with it.

Fourthly, The Rewards proposed to Virtue and Piety, by the Christian Religion,
do exceedingly tend to animate and heighten Them; whether we consider the
Recompenses the Gospel propounds in this Life, or those that it promises in the
Next. The great present Rewards of Virtue, are, you know, the Approbation of
Good Men, and the Applause of a Man's own Conscience. The First of these is as
well attainable by Christian Hero's, as by any other; for Virtue loses neither
its Worth, nor Amiableness, by being Baptized; and tho in some Times and Places
lesser Degrees of it may be disregarded, or traduced, yet, generally speaking,
the greater Degrees of it will either invite, or extort, Men's Esteem. Among the
Roman Persecutors, the exemplary Lives and Constancy of the Primitive
Christians, brought it to be Proverbially said, That such a Man was a good Man,
saving that he was a Christian; and, Soli Christiani mortis contemptores, was
usually in Heathen's Mouths. There are diverse Qualities, and those more pressed
by the Christian, than any other, Institution, that have in them so much of
Native Loveliness, that St. Paul might justly say of them, That he that
exercises himself in them, is, generally speaking, Romans XIV. 18.
both ceptable to God, and approved by Men. Nor did those Virtues that
recommended the Great Constantine, whilst he was a Gentile, lose their Luster,
or the Veneration they procured him, when he turned Christian, and practiced
them with higher Aims, than that of satisfying Himself, and pleasing his People.

And as for the Reward of a good Conscience, which was able to make Hercules
undergo all his Labors; and made all the other Hero's of the Gentile World; I
think, it will not be doubted, but that this inward Recompense is received, not
only without any Defalcations, but with great Improvements, by him, whose
Virtues flow from Religion. For, to him the Applauses of Conscience may well be
more acceptable than all the various sorts of Music, Dan. III. 7.
that Solemnized the Dedication of Nebuchadnezar's Golden Image, since in him
Conscience does not, as in mere Natural Men, act only the Part of a Domestic
Judge, but That of a Delegate from God himself; and its Absolutions are less
welcome, as they are Approbations of Reason, than as they are the Pledges of
Gods Acceptance, and of that higher Reward that will be consequent to it in the
Life to come.

For these Joys, that are placed on the other side of the Grave, are much the
Noblest part of the Recompense of Virtue, and proportionable Incitements to the
Practice of it; and yet, on the account of future Rewards, the Christian has
much greater Motives to Heroic Virtue, than the Heathen Moralist, or
Philosopher. For, the posthume State of Man is so dim and uncertain, that we
find even the greatest Men, among the Heathens, speak very doubtfully, and not
without Ifs and Ands, of a future State, and much more of a future Happiness,
as may be instanced in Socrates, Cyrus, Seneca, and many others; so that they
rather seemed to have Wished, or Hoped, than Believed, their future Felicity:
And, I fear, that many of them, finding that happy State described chiefly by
the Poets, reckoned it among Poetic Fictions. And those that did, though but
waveringly, expect Recompenses in the Life to Come, had but poor and mean
Idea's suggested to them of it; the Hopes they were entertained with, being of
Fortunate Islands and the Elysian Fields, which are not so Transcendent as to
make a diffident Man very forward to quit the Gardens of Epicurus, that he has
here in Possession, upon the doubtful hopes of other Gardens in Elysium.
Whereas, to excite the Christian to an Heroic Degree of Virtue, he is not
allowed to Hope, but Commanded to be entirely Confident of passing out of this
World into a Place, to which the Poets Elysium is much more Inferior, than the
Possession of a Garden is to That of an Empire. To attempt the Description of
that Celestial Happiness, would be, contrary to my Inclination, to launch out
into a Common Place; and were a Work, that if my Haste did not, my Disability
would, dissuade me from: And therefore, though it be a State made up of the
Confluence of all sort of Things rationally Desirable; yet, having only said
in general of all the other Goods that it comprizes, that the Scripture tells
us, 1 Cor. II. 9.
That Eye has not Seen, nor Ear Heard, nor the Heart of Man Conceived, what God
has laid up for them that Fear him: I shall particularly take notice only of
those Parts of this Inestimable Reward, that may peculiarly concern my present
purpose, by being the chief Things that Heroic Souls are wont to Aspire too; a
Good Name, Honor, and Dignity.

To have a Good Name for Good Actions, cannot but be a very desirable Thing,
the Applause of Wise and Good Men, being a loud Echo from without, that, by
repeating it, confirms the Approbation given by the Conscience within. But
though to do Virtuous and Worthy Actions be the best and likeliest way of
acquiring a Good Name, yet it is not a certain one: For, such is the Ignorance,
the Malice, or the Enmity of a great many, that no Man is sure to escape being
Misrepresented, or Traduced; as, we see, that the Sublimity, the Brightness,
and the regular Courses of the Stars themselves, could not hinder wanton Poets,
or fanciful Astronomers, from giving those Luminous Constellations the Names
not only of the Nobler Beasts, as the Lion, the Eagle, and the Whale; but even
of Animals that lie under an ill Name, as the Dog, the Goat, and the Scorpion.
And though it be true, that oftentimes Innocence long Clouded, does, like
Lightning, break out at last; yet oftentimes too, that happens not till Malice
and Envy are Dead, because the maligned Person is so; by which means he does
not Live to know he is justified; and many, if not all, of those mis-inform'd
Men are Dead and gone for whose good Opinion he was chiefly concerned. But
though the Christian may, as well as any other, be Traduced by Calumny, which
often serves good Men, (as the Heathen Persecuters did the Martyrs, when they
exposed them to the Peoples view, clothed in the Skins of Beasts, to make them
hideous and hateful;) yet he is justly cheared by the Assurance he has, that
there will come a Time when oppressed and disfigured Innocence shall shine forth
and triumph, and his good Name, as well as his Body, shall have a Glorious
Resurrection, even in the Sight of his Accusers and Enemies, and of all those
whom their Slanders did either prevail with, or startle. For at that great and
general Assize, to which there shall be a far greater Confluence, Dan. III.
than the Assyrian Monarch drew to the Plains of Babylon, the Heroic Disciples
of the Apostles will be able to say, upon happier terms than the Apostles
themselves did here below, that they are made a 1 Cor. IV. 9.
Spectacle to God, to Angels and to Men. And in that Illustrious Assembly, of
the Heb. XII. 2, 3.
First Born, whose Names are written in Heaven, being present, the Men, not
only of all Nations, but of all Ages too, the Vizards shall be as well taken
off, as the Masks; and the formerly traduced Saints, being welcomed with the
Title of Matt. XXV. 21.
Good and Faithful Servants, shall solemnly be acquitted by the Sentence, not
of a Fallible, or partial, Judge, but of an Infinite and Supreme One, Jer.
XVII. 10.
That searches the Hearts and Reins, and cannot be Deceived or Bribed; and, to
be sure, that the injured Saint shall come off with Honor enough, he shall
then be Absolved by being Crowned.

This Celestial Crown comprehending, in the Scripture Dialect, both the
remaining Parts of the Christians Reward, Honor and Dignity, or Glory, and
Preferment; it will be pertinent to mention some Advantages that giveit an high
Preference about the Crowns of Monarchs here below.

And First, Earthly Crowns may sometimes be the Fruits and Recompenses of Worth
and Virtue, but are not at all the proofs of them. They are usually the Gifts
of Nature, and, not unfrequently, of Fortune; and History gives us cause to
wish, they were more seldom the Acquists of Crimes. But the Celestial Crowns
proclaim, tho not the Merit, the Worth of them that receive them, being never
adjudg'd but to Such, whom previous Graces and Virtues have fitted and
qualified for Col. I. 12.
the Inheritance of the Saints in Light.

Besides, as an Earthly Crown may be acquired without Merit, so it may be
possessed without Happiness. And if Crimes be made Steps to a Throne, they
prove so many Thorns to him that sits on it, who is there a more Illustrious,
not a less tormented, Malefactor. The Sublimity of a Throne, as little as the
Height of a Scaffold, keeping a Criminal Person from feeling the punishments
inflicted on him there. As may appear by the instance Acts XII. 21.
of Herod Agrippa, whose Throne, and glistering Habit, which Josephus takes
notice of, tho they procured him not only the Acclamations, but Adorations, of
the dazzled Multitude, could not protect him from the incensed Justice of an
higher King than he; so that whilst others treated him as a God, he found
himself one of the most miserable of Men, and was fain to hasten from a Seat,
which occasioned, but could not protect, his Impiety. But a Celestial Crown,
as it is graciously bestowed for the Supreme Recompense of Virtue, and on that
account may be called a Crown of Righteousness; so it always proves a Blessing
as inseparable from Happiness, as a Thing is from it self. The Crowns of this
World, by the very advantage of being Hereditary, show, that they cannot
preserve the Possessors from Death. But the Crown, I speak of, is by the Divine
Bestower of it, called, Rev. II. 10.
A Crown of Life; and of it, in respect of other Crowns, may be truly said,
what Solomon said of Wisdom, in reference to other Goods, That Eccl. VII. 12.
the Excellency of it is, that it gives Life to the owner thereof. And though
Earthly Crowns be such Transitory Things, that we may observe, Dan. II.
that even the Four great Monarchies of the World were by God represented to
Nebuchadnezar, but as parts of a Dream, whereas the Kingdom promised to
Christians, is called in the Scripture, Heb. XII. 28.
A Kingdom that cannot be moved, as the Believers Crown is, in opposition to
those fading Crowns of Laurel, that adorned the Heads of the Roman Conquerors,
called an 1 Pet. V. 4.
unwithering Crown of Glory: As if the Laurel placed on the Christians Head,
could grow and flourish in the Wreath, better than it did on the Tree.

But all that I have yet said is Inferior to this last Prerogative of the
Celestial Crown, that it does not only confer a relative Dignity or
Preeminence, but an essential Worth and Excellency; as if the Diamonds, which
adorned that Crown, should impart their own Sparklingness, Transparency, and
Incorruptibility, to the Person that wears it. The highest Preferments here
below do raise a Man above others, without raising him above himself. By being
at the top of a Ladder, a Man comes to an higher Station, but is not really
taller than he was; and a Vane, by being placed on the top of the highest
Steeple, is not from Iron turned into Gold or Silver, but remains still of the
same base Metal it was, and is but a Weathercock, and so the Sport of the
Winds. But a Celestial Crown is always attended with a Personal Improvement,
befitting so high a Dignity. The Heavenly Coronation has a Virtue like That of
the Unction of Saul, who, upon his being made King, was enabled to 1 Samuel X. 6.
Prophecy, and was turned into an other Man. And the Resemblance holds in this
too, that Christ is said, to have made his Redeemed ones, not only Rev. 1. 6.
Kings, but Priests to God and his Father, as if the Kingly Dignity were not
enough, unless the Sacred Character of a Priestly Office were added.
Congruously to which, St. Peter calls Christians, in general, a 1 Pet. II. 9.
Royal Priesthood; the Understanding, the Will, the Affections, are all refined
and elevated; and the very Body itself is transformed into a Spiritual Body. As
if the Glorified Soul did shine, with an undiminish'd Splendour, through its
happily changed Mansion. And we may well suppose, that this will be a Bright
and Noble Structure, if we remember, that the Angels, who, in their Apparitions
to good Men, were wont to be very careful not to frighten them, did yet appear
with a Majestic Splendour; Mark XVI. 5.
and that Angel that the Apostles saw in our Saviors Sepulcher is represented
as a young Man clothed Luke XXIV. 4.
in a long white and shining Garment. And we are told by St. Paul, that, in the
future State, Phil. III. 21.
our vile Bodies shall be transformed into the likeness of his Glorious Body;
and how Glorious it is in Heaven, we may guess, by what it was at his
Transfiguration here on Earth, during which, the Scripture relates, Matt. XVII.
2.
That his Face did shine as the Sun, and his Raiment was white as the Light.
And of Moses and Elias, tho they came to speak to him of his Death, it is added
by Luke IX. 31.
St. Luke, That they also appeared in Glory. And since our Savior has assured
us, That Matt. XXII. 30.
those shall be accounted worthy of that State, shall be like, or equal to the
Angels; And that then the Mat. 13. 43.
Righteous shall shine like the Sun in the Kingdom of their Father, who knows,
but that the Transfigur'd Soul and Body of some happy Saint may be as Glorious
a Sight, as that which appeared to St. John in the Apocalypse, when he saw an
Angel Rev. XIX. 17.
standing in the Sun? If it be said, that these are very bold Hyperbolies, I
hope the Texts, I have mentioned, will keep them from seeming altogether
groundless Conceits. And, when among other excellent Prerogatives, that our
Savior promises the persevering Beleivers, One is, Rev. II. 26, 27
That he will give them Power over the Nations, and to Rule them with a Rod of
Iron; and the Other, which may well be the last, is expressed in these words.
Rev. 3. 21.
To him that overcomes, will I grant to sit with me in my Throne, even as I
evercame, and am set down with my Father in his Throne. And tho I readily
yield, that these Expressions are not to be and literally, taken; yet, when I
consider the infinite Power, and Goodness, of God; and that, for ought we know,
he may have numberless Dominions, and Setts of Governable Creatures, that we
are yet strangers too; I think, God's Attributes, and Christ's Expressions, may
warrant us to expect amazing things from him that is Able, and has Declared
himself Willing, to do for us Ephesians. 3. 20.
above what we can ask, or, in our present State, so much as think. And, at
least, that will be allowed me, which I drive at in this Celebration of our
future Happiness, that the Christian Religion, by proposing such inestimable
Rewards, presents Beleivers with far higher Motives to Heroic Virtue, than
Morality, or Philosophy, can afford other Men.

Advertisement.
THe Author being desired to add yet something to the foregoing Discourses, to
give the Book they make Parts of, a Thickness more proportionate to its
Largeness; he did among other Papers of his, that he turned over in Compliance
with that request, light upon an Epistolary Discourse, which by its very being
unfinished, seemed (by reason of its shortness) the more fit to serve the
present turn. For this Tract having been drawn up in a Country, whence the
Author was obliged to remove, before he had made any considerable Progress in
his Work; he was easily induced to put it up in a Bundle of other Writings,
which, like this, were laid aside till he should be at much leisure to complete
them. But upon the newly mentioned occasion, finding that among diverse loose
and lesser Memoirs, that had been thrown together in order to the designed
Treatise, there were 15 or 20 Pages at the beginning that were Coherent enough;
he was content they should attend the Christian Virtuoso, because of the
affinity of the things designed in both the Papers; which being to recommend
the Christian Religion to worthy Souls, 'twas congruous enough that a Discourse
which shows, That the Christian Religion may very well consist with a
Philosophic Genius; should be accompanied by another that tends to manifest,
That Greatness of Mind, which comprizes uncommon degrees of Virtue, is not only
Consistent with Christianity, but may be highly Promoted by it. Those that
reflect on this Aim, will not ('it is hoped) think it strange, that the Style is
a little Raised; since though the Subject be Theological, yet the Writer, (who
was then many Years Younger than he now is) being a Person of Honor, and
writing for a Noble Gentleman, who, like himself, was a Layman; 'twas thought
not only Allowable but Fit, that the Style should not be altogether unsuitable
to the Subject and to the Aim: which was to make Impressions on an Illustrious
Person, not by dry Precepts, or Languid Discourses, but by exciting him to
Heroic Virtue, by the Noblest Patterns and Ideas, and the most moving
Incentives, he could propose.

And though the Discouragements lately mentioned, and since increased by the
Authors not being able to find some of the principle Materials he had, in loose
Sheets, provided for the following Discourse; oblige him to lay aside the
thoughts of Completing it; yet because it is very possible that some Elevated
Soul may have a Mind to prosecute the design, or Cultivate so noble a Subject;
he thought it not amiss (as little Samples of his Method or Way of Treating it)
to Subjoyn to the greater Fragment, besides the Index of the Heads of
Discourse, intended for the First Part, 5 or 6 Lesser Fragments that he lighted
on, whilst he was seeking for some Papers belonging to the same Tract, that
should have been, but were not, found in their Company.

CHAP. III.
First Fragment.
TO have high Aims and Noble Designs, is so Genuin a Mark, and Effect of
Greatness of Mind, that there is not any more generally acknowledged; insomuch
that Ambition, though it be but a Depravation or a Counterfeit of this Heroic
frame of Mind, does yet so dazzle the Eyes of the greater part of Men, as to
pass for Magnanimity; and Noble Attempts do oftentimes, even when they fail of
Success, not miss of Esteem.

-- Magnis tamen excidit ausis, was meant for an Encomium by him that said it.
And I remember that one of the Ancients reckons it among the Glories of that
Great Captain, Hannibal, who long successfully disputed, with the Romans, the
Empire of the World, that he resolved to Besiege Rome, though he never proved
able to lead his Army within the Sight of her Walls.

Now, as to have Elevated Aims is one of the chief Signs, and indeed Parts, of
an Heroic temper of Mind; so, there are no men that seem to me to have Nobler
and Sublimer Aims, than Those to which a true Christian is Encouraged; since he
aspires to no less things than to please and glorify God; to promote the Good
of Mankind; to improve, as far as is possible, his Personal Excellencies in
this Life; and to secure to himself for ever a glorious and happy Condition in
the next.

CHAP. IV.
Second Fragment.
ONE of the grand Difficulties, that he, who would be highly Virtuous, must
expect to surmount and Conquer, especially in such a Degenerous age, as ours,
is the Temptation that is afforded by the Universality of vicious Customs and
Examples. I wish 'twere needless, solicitously to prove, either how great an
Influence Examples, especially bad ones, have on the generality of Men; or how
general bad Examples have been in most Ages, and in particular in That we live
in. The Scandal given by bad Examples, though it be one of the most obvious
Temptations, is none of the least dangerous. For Interest, Bashfulness, and
that very Complaisance and Civility, that is so usually found in well-bred, or
Good-natured, Persons, makes them very unwilling to offend or disoblige the
Company they live with; and whom they have several Inducements rather to please
and gratify by imitation and compliance, than tacitly to reproach by
Nonconformity to their Sentiments, and Practices. And, in effect, we find, that
many that could not be perverted by the Frowns and Threats of the Vicious, have
been Debauched by their Company and Example. Against this powerful Temptation,
Religion strongly arms it is Hero, both by Precepts and Precedents. Thou shall
not follow a Multitude to do Evil, was the Express Command of the Mosaic Law.
Say not thou a Confederacy to all, to whom this People shall say a Confederacy,
was the Command of God to his Prophet. Our Savior makes it an Argument to
dissuade his Disciples from an anxious Solicitude about Meat and Drink and
Clothing, that after all these things the Gentiles (which are by far the most
numerous part of Mankind) do seek. And, upon the same ground, he endeavors in
the same Divine Sermon upon the Mount to keep them from Vain Repetitions in
Prayer. And, whereas it may seem an Immodesty to dare to dissent from others,
that vastly surpass us in number; the Heroic Conqueror of Canaan speaks thus
to the whole Body of the Victorious Jewish Nation, that they may choose to
serve whom they thought fit, and worship either the Gods whom their Fathers
served, or those Worshipped by the Neighboring Nations, but as for me and my
House, we Will serve the Lord, Be you not conformed to this World, says St.
Paul. And another Apostle, speaking of himself and the true Christians of his
time, scruples not to affirm it passionately and roundly, 1 John, 5. 9.
We know that we are of God, and the whole World lies in Wickedness.

Nor does Religion furnish us with Precepts only, to disobey Custom, and
Example, but with Precedents too, of which there are Three so illustrious, that
I know not how to pass them by. The First is afforded by Lot, who lived in a
place, that was grown so Proverbial for the Height of Wickedness, that to
aggravate their Sins by the most Hyperbolical Comparison, we must liken them to
themselves; and they were grown so wicked, that in a place where an admirable
Plenty, and an unbounded Libertinisme could not but make them very populous,
there could not be found half a Score of good Men, the generality of that
cursed People being fallen so much not only from Virtue, but from common
Honesty, that they did not restrain themselves so much, as to Human Vices. And
yet, even the Sins of Sodom, which cried so loud as to reach Heaven, and bring
down Fire and Brimstone from thence, disturbed Lot's Quiet, without destroying
his Innocence, and an Apostle assures us, that, that just Man was but vexed
with the filthy Conversation of the wicked, not prevailed with in the least to
imitate it.

The Next Instance of a Religious Courage, inflexible to bad Examples, is
afforded us by the three Friends of Daniel, who, at the great Solemnity of the
Dedication of Nebuchadnezars Golden Image; when they had, besides that great
and stern Monarchs Command, the Example not only of many Men but many Nations,
and a more numerous Assembly of Persons, considerable for Quality and Dignity,
than the World ever saw before or since, singly opposed their Naked Constancy
to the haughty Tyrants Menaces, and the prostrate World's Example. And yet
these Men were Courtiers, bred among that supple sort of fine Creatures; that
were as accustomed to bow their Consciences, as their Knees, to their proud
Master. They had not only Lives to lose, but the chief Dignities of the
Province of Babylon, then the Queen of Nations. And they could not upon their
refusal quit the stateliest Palace in the World, without immediately changing
it for a burning Fiery Furnace.

The Last Instance I shall name, and the most illustrious that can be named,
is, that I am supplied with by Noah, he lived in an Age, in which there were as
many Heinous Sinners almost as there were Men, tho Vice has generally had a
Benjamins Portion, in the Distribution of Mankind betwixt It and Virtue, yet,
Methusala excepted, the Inequallity was grown such, as gave Vice rather a
Monopoly than a Share of Men; or if a Distribution were to be admitted, 'twas
such a one, as That made of Saul and his Army, when all the people were on one
side, and only he and Jonathan on the other: It Is strange, that when the World
was so recent, that many, that were then alive might remember and converse with
one, that for two hundred Years lived contemporary with Adam, (for so we may
gather Methusala to have done) Men should so soon forget all Sentiments of
Piety. But yet in Noah's time, the World could not be compared to its present
State, where tho it be Night in one place, it is Day in another; but to the
state of Tohu va Bohu, or the first Chaos, where Darkness was over the face of
the Universal Deep. For the Scripture tells us, Genesis 6. 12.
That all Flesh had corrupted his way upon the Earth, that every Imagination of
the thoughts of Man's Heart was only evil continually. And though Noah's Family
were saved with him in the Ark, yet it may be doubted, whether that were a
certain token of their being untoucht by the general Contagion. For that
wonderful Vessel contained Beasts clean and unclean, harmless and rapacious,
and in it were saved Wolves as well as Lambs, and Vultures as well as Doves.
And where God gives the Reason, why he vouchsafed to receive Noah and his House
into the Ark, he Expresses it thus; For thee have I seen Righteous before me in
this Generation, without making mention of any of his Family. Nor, was the
Wickedness of the Antediluvian World more Universal than it was Great; that
Mungrel breed were guilty of Sins as Gigantic as Themselves. The Text says,
that the Earth was filled with Violence through them; and those Impious Rebels
against their Maker broke the Laws of Nature with an Insolence, that provoked
him to break off the course of Nature to punish them, since nothing less than
an Universal Deluge of Water could place Limits to such an impetuous and
overflowing Impiety. But all these sinful Examples, how general soever, could
not prevail on Noah so much as to keep him from giving One of a quite contrary
Nature; the Scripture calls him an Herald or 2. Peter, 2. 5*
Preacher of Righteousness; and though it appears not, that he made any Converts,
he persever'd in his rejected Admonitions for Sixscore years, a time long
enough to have tired his Patience, especially since he did not any of his
Hearers Obstinacy. And his Constancy raised him as much above the reach of
their Temptations, as the Waters that punished their Sin raised his Ark above
their drowned Mansions. And now go and compare with any Constancy of the
following times, where Virtue has always had some Party, though not a numerous
one, this unequalled Singularity of Noah, which God himself seems to have taken
special notice of, not only by that Patriarchs wonderful Preservation, but by
saying Emphatically, Genesis 7. 1.
Thee have I seen Righteous before me in this Generation, which was so brutish
and depraved, that I know not whether he were not obliged to live among worse
Brutes before he finished the Ark than afterward, when in it he was shut up
with Lions, Foxes, and Tygres.

Third Fragment.
Another Virtue, that belongs to a great Mind, is Constancy, or persevering
Patience in Afflictions. This Quality has so Noble an appearance, that when
it is exercised even by Malefactors, it obtains our Esteem; and whilst we
cannot so much as excuse their Actions, we cannot but commend the Manner of
their suffering for them: Calmness of Mind, in the midst of outward Storms,
being something that looks so handsomely, that Crimes and Gibbets cannot keep
it from doing so; nor hinder those in whom it is found, from being both pitied
and applauded.

That this part of Greatness of Mind is befriended by the Christian Religion,
more than by any other Institution, will appear; if we consider, what it
contributes to Constancy and Patience, under outward Pressures and Calamities,
by Precept, by Examples, and by Arguments.

CHAP. V.
Fourth Fragment.
HUmility is a Virtue, that, at the first blush, seems so distant from Greatness
of Mind, that some would think it improper to refer the Former to the Later,
under any other Notion, than that of an Opposite. But, whatever may be thought
of Humility, solitarily considered, yet, when we find it in Conjunction with
those other Qualities, that contribute to make up Greatness of Mind, it adds to
their Number; and* tho* it does not perhaps shine as bright as some of them, is
as amiable as any; and imparts somewhat of its own Loveliness to all the rest.
And you will not much wonder, that I place this Virtue among those that
Constellate, if I may so speak, an Heroic Mind, if you consider, whence
Humility may in such a Soul proceed, and what difficulties it may surmount. For
if Wealth, Honor, and other outward Blessings exalt our Hero's Condition; to
be Humble, in the midst of such Advantages, argues a Mind elevated above the
Presents of Fortune, and speaks a Soul Great enough to undervalue those things
that ordinary Souls admire; and which even men that pass for Great, make the
Objects of their Ambition, and, when attained, of their Pride. And if our Hero
be ennobled with great Virtues, or famous for great Actions; his Humility
argues, that he has so raised an Idea of Virtue, and dares aspire to such a
pitch of it, that he cannot rest satisfied with greater seize, than
Persons, but ordinarily Virtuous, aim at; and looks upon himselfas obliged and
born to an unwearied pursuit of Heroic and still increasing Degrees of
Excellency. And if a laudable Practice, by being extremely difficult, is a mark
of a Great Soul, Humility must not be denied that Character; for This is a
Virtue more difficult to Excellent, than to Ordinary, Souls. In other Cases, a
Hero is to contend but with his Vices, or his Passions, or his open Enemies;
but to be Humble, he must overcome his Virtues too; and that, when they act
unitedly as one Body: Since, though other Virtues naturally assist one another,
they all conspire to ruin Humility; which, having Pride to contend with, is to
deal with so subtle an Adversary, that sometimes even by being foiled he
overcomes. And as the Torpedo poisons his Arm that wounds it; so sometimes in
the best Arguments we employ against Pride, the very strength and seeming
success of them, tempts the Maker of them to be Proud; and I will not swear,
that, at this very time, I exalt our Hero's Humility, without any Diminution of
my Own.

To the attainment of an Eminent degree of this lovely both Virtue, and Grace,
the Gospel conduces, by furnishing its Embracers with Express Injunctions;
clear Directions; high Rewards, and other weighty Motives; and the Noblest
Paterns and Perfectest Examples, that ever were, or can be, given*

The Heads of the Discourse, Entitled Greatness of Mind, befriended by
Christianity.
The Introduction. 1. OF the true Notion of Greatness Fifth Fragment.
of Mind. 2. Of the Tendency, that the Christian Religion has to promote
Greatness of Mind in general. 3. That Christianity gives Men noble Aims, such
as the glory of God, the pleasing of Him, the general Good of Men, Personal
Excellencies in this World, and Eternal Happiness in the next. The Virtues or
Qualifications, which, as so many constituent Parts, make up Greatness of Mind,
and are peculiarly befriended by Christianity; are chiefly These, 4. Courage or
Valor. 5. Constancy and Patience in Afflictions. 6. Bounty or Liberality. 7.
Forwardness to oblige. 8. Readiness to forgive. 9. A just and impartial
Estimate of Riches, and other Things that Ordinary Men covet and admire. 10.
Humility. 11. A Contempt of all that is base.
The End of the First Part.
Greatness of Mind, PROMOTED BY CHRISTIANITY.
The Second Part.
Sixth Fragment.
THE former Discourse has, I hope, sufficiently manifested, That, of the several
Virtues and Noble Qualities that make up true Greatness of Mind, there is not
any that is not at least consistent with Christianity, and that most of them
are eminently promoted by it. But I expect your (...) will pretend, that there
are some Qualities required by our Religion, that directly and powerfully tend
to debase the Mind they possess; and hinder it from attaining, or even
aspiring, to such great Things as it would reach to, if it were not detained or
depressed by Religion. Let us now therefore examine, Whether, notwithstanding,
the Wings which we have shown that Religion adds to the Mind, the Cloggs that
it fastens to her, be heavy enough to disable her to raise her self above the
pitch of Vulgar Souls; and force her, instead of soaring aloft, to flutter
about the Earth.

The chief Things, that, as far as I can learn, are alleged, either by
Philedonus, or more considering Adversaries than he; to show Religion to be
either quite Inconsistent with, or very Unfriendly to, Greatness of Mind, are
these. --

But, in regard that I find not the Answers that were drawn up to the
Objections; and it is not so convenient to let the Later appear unaccompany'd by
the Former, it is thought the safest Way to leave them both at present
unmentioned; and only take notice, that to the Last of the Six Objections,
which, to deal heartily, were named and considered, these words were found
subjoyned.

And now, if it appear, that neither any nor all of these, have such an
unfriendly Aspect on Greatness of Mind, as is pretended; and that at least the
Impediments, they can bring, are much more than countervail'd by the
Assistances that Religion affords Heroic Virtue; I hope it will appear, that
Greatness of Mind is not incompatible with Christianity, but rather promoted by
it.

FINIS.

