Vindiciae Calvinisticae: OR, SOME IMPARTIAL REFLECTIONS ON THE DEAN of
LONDONDEREYS CONSIDERATIONS That Obliged him to come over to the Communion OF
THE Church of Rome.

AND Mr. Chancellor KING's Answer thereto.

IN WHICH He no less Unjustly than Impertinently Reflects, on the Protestant
Dissenters.

In a Letter to a Friend.

By W.B. D.D.

3 Ep. Joh. 9, 10. But Diotrephes who loves to have the Preeminence among
them, receives us not -- Neither does he himself receive the Brethren, and
forbids them that would, and casts them out of the Church. DVBLIN: Printed
by A. Crook, and S. Helsham, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty on
Ormond-Key, and sold by the Booksellers of London and Westminster 1688.

TO THE READER.
THOU wilt find the worthy Author of this ensuing Tract, opposing two persons
of a very different Character. M: M. whose scru^les are so mean, and so often
answered; that as they could have little influence in his Change, so they
deserved no new Consideration. The most material of his Questions may be
reduced to this, Being that the Church of Rome by her usurping shifts
propagated her Apostasy to her neighbor Churches, how can any of those belong
to the Catholic Church if they ceas that Apostasy, and regain their former
state? The answer is easy unl s^ infection do for ever subject a Church to
that Church which infected it. Can any man doubt whether the British Churches
had equal authority to reform themselves for Christ's sake, as they had to
admit these corruptions for the Popes sake.

The other Person is M: K: who has needlessly yea to the apparent damage of
his cause, bitterly censured the whole body af Nonconformists. Whether his
novel notions, or the unseasonable publication of matters of debates among us,
be most culpable, it is hard determining: The sad consequences were so obvious,
that great importunity failed to incline my undertaking our vindication, though
the charge against us is great, and the proof attempted from mistaken
principles.

But seeing the Author with others judged a reply needful, and represented our
silence as turned to our reproach; I am persuaded to preface the ensuing Book,
wherein thou will find both evidence and candor.

I shall only hint at what the Book is concerned in, and insist on some
Criminations the Author overlooks.

Mr: K's. excluding us from the Catholic Church can harm us little when he
gives us a description of this Church so entirely Popish, and opposite to the
joint testimony of Protestants, S. 68: of the Church.
in a controversy betwixt the Romanists and us. The Articles of the Church of
Ireland define the Catholic Church in the Creed, 4. Bell: de Eccl: milit: lib:
3: Cap: 2.
to be the invisible body of Elected Saints in heaven and earth. But all of M:
K 's. description, is Bellarmines own who strangely confounds a particular
Church with the Catholic Church visible, out of which particular Churches are
formed; unless you admit Infidels for Members: and into which they are
resolved; unl^ss they cease to be Catholic Members when their Pastors die or
remove. Whereas M: K. might have known that the Catholic visible Church as
entitive is made up of professing Christians, and particular Churches are but
secondary members of this body as Organical by Aggregation.

But the Dissenters will deny his charge by further proving that they are
subjects to their lawful Pastors, that such are not their Pastors whom he
charge them with separation from; And they can justify their Separation to be
a duty, and so no bar to their Catholic privilege if they had some times been
subject to such. Yea it is manifest, the Church of England account us within the
Pale of the Church; by her calling us Brethren departed in the Faith when dead,
and too often Excommunicating us when alive. His charge of Ecclesiastical
Rebellion cannot yet affect us, when we think that we justly deny the
Convocation to be a fit Representative of all the Pastors in England; and not a
supreme power over all our Churches, yea and suspect a definition of the
Catholic Church by such regent Officers, as what favors the Universal
Headship, and may well end in the Pope as principium unitatis.

His positiveness in our duty to be silent when suspended, without regard to
justice of the ground of it, imports he has forgotten that Casuists generally
determine, that an unjust sentence binds not before God or the Church; and that
Pastors power in the church is not of the same extent as a Kings in the State,
but under the limits of many more instituted laws. But these matters being
debated in the book I proceed.

M: K 's Sarcasm against our cant from M: M 's. allusion to a plain scripture
p. 13 may call him to suspect what spirit himself is of ( Luke 9, 55.) and
others of his sort who redicule scripture passages though used in the sense of
the spirit that inspired the writers of the scriptures and condemn in us those
principles, which were the common sense of Protestant Bishops, but yet these
must be the only Protestant Successors, because they keep up the ceremonies tho
they despise many important doctrines which they more vallued themselves by.

Reader, thou may wonder how M: K. that affirms no ministers may reform no
nor preach against the Established Church; can publish these thoughts of his so
repugnant to the sense of the Church, and undertake to reform the very
Catholic Church by a definition of it so opposite to that his Church has
published.

He Reproacheth us with the favors we new recieve from men of M: M 's
persuasion. M: K. P: 39. Reply.
We thankfully own the Kings Favors without ungrateful enquiries into the
grounds of it, nor yet doubting but we shall take care not to forfeit what he
thinks meet to grant: But why should you that dislike an Inquisition grudg us a
little ease? I believe you are not for blaming the Magistrate when the Rods and
Axes are disused. Are not the miseries great enough which we have endured at
your hands for refusing to sin in doing things, which you had nothing but the
bare authority of the imposer to plead for? But I heartily wish all our
hardships so forgoten by us as that they neither abate charity nor prevent
union on Christian Catholic terms.

I confess it is no small amazement to hear the Prelatists reflect on the
present liberty of Dissenters. Are we blameable for meeting now we do it with
safty, when we suffered so much rather than forbear it? Can they that have
refused Preferments, endured prisons, reproach and loss of estates for their
principles be suspected apt to renounce or betray them for a smile?

How can these men that to other day resolved all law into the Kings mere will,
now brand our meetings as unlawful? But this will convince the world, that that
party will allways Skrew up the point of Loyalty, whose Interest the Government
p^omotes; and yet may challenge their own sentiments when the Throne is less
auspicious.

Finally why will these persons thus clamor, as if they bewailed they had lost
an opportunity to inflict the same evils, by the interposal of a power we might
well have expected less kindness from? Have we any thing but immunity from
punishment? Do we enjoy your preferments or places? Is it no favor you reap
whilst you enjoy your Revenues, and public opportunities of service? you will
esteem it so, and more pity others, if ever you come to endure the penury,
hazard and contempt of other faithful Ministers; which tho I suggest in order
to a more sober: judgment; yet I desire never to behold.

M: K: p: 72. Reply:
M: K. Brands us as friends to the Popish Party.

Through the weakness of the Clergy this silly reproach is propagated among the
people the fa^shood whereof time may discover more than a present flash of heat
for low interests can do.

But wh^rin ^yeth this friendship, unless that you will not suffer us to be
friends with you, and therefore you conclude we must needs be one with them; ^
heartily wish all could acquit themselves of culpab^e friendship with them as
we can. I am sure we agree not in principles with them in any thing w^erin we
differ from you, and we blame you for nothing, but wherein you agree with them.
Let us reform your Church, and We promise we wi l remove nothing but what is
Popish; Let them reform your Church, and i will engage they will take away nothing
but what is Presbyterian. Do you condemn us for any thing but that which Popery
would relieve us in? is it we that bow to the East, and to the Altar? do we use
vain pageantry in Consecrating of Churches, and utensi^s, baptiseing them with
saints names? Do we frisk from place to place in reading our Service, use the
sign of the Cross, kneel at the Sacrament, which never obtained in the Church
before Transubstantiation. Have we Absolution of sins to the uncensured? Is
private Communion our manner? Have we Organs, Singing-boys, unscriptural
Confirmation, preaching Deacons, Reading over the Dead, Holy days, Surpluses,
Responsa's and twenty more appendants to worship. The Romish Church has all
these; whereas we worship God without all this stuff added to Gospel
institutions, and are content with that that for decency, the contrary whereto
is indecent by natural light or common usage.

Further whether most countenanceth the universal Headship your Diocessans or
our plain Presbyter? Have we Deans and Chapters, Chancellors of Bishops-Courts
(the prime managers of Discipline) Pluralities etc.

What common interest can we have with them, unless as subjects to the same
King? and how little some of the N. Conformists befriended their interest these
very men lately reproacht us with, and its Christian and Generous in his
Majesty to overlook.

Few considering men will think, that we who have endured so much under you for
dislike to the remains of Popery; will espouse that Church Form, where we must
meet with all your fau^t, and much greater. Nor is it probable we should do any
thing unbecoming sinceer and discerning Protestants, though we profess due
Loyalty, both from Conscience, and from Grateful Resentments.

What then can be the matter? that whiles the Hind commends you as next of kin;
your worship, practices, Costitutions, yea Doctrines of late do so exceed in
Harmony with the Popish party abov^ Us; while Mr: M. tells you their Flowers
are your ornament, yea the world knows they love most of you and your ways
better than us; and many of your own proclaim, they would be Papists rather
than Presbyterians; that yet we must sti l in ta^k, Sermons and Print, have
this character of great friendship fastened on us. It seems to have its rise
from this, you had cast us out of all places, and possessed them your selves,
whereby you apprehend us now less envied, and so less exposed to the first
attack of Covetousness or ambition in your rivals. But is it fair in you, first
to set us below envy, and then fret that we are not made a sacrifice to
preserve your grandeur?

I shall conclude these remarks I have made on M. K's unseasonable
provocations; with my hearty prayers to God that he would discover to the
Church of England, and to us whatever our mistakes have been, that by his
present dealings, he would dispose us to true repentance for our foolish as
well as sinful heats, and our valuing any interest above Christ's: and that he
would give all a more truly Catholic spirit, which will be found the
serviceable as well as Christian temper; and is so needful to revive the
bleeding interest of Religion among us. That I may contribute my mite to this,
and the peace, which would result therefrom, permit me to hint.

1. The terms imposed on the Nonconformists were amazingly severe, and certain
to make the number of the scrupulous considerable.

No Church under heaven, except the popish, ever imposed assent and Consent to
so many disputable things. We must solemnly assent to many Doctrines we cannot
own; and to many practices which we always scrupled, and much more their
revival after they were once removed. We must be reordained, we must solemnly
declare the covenant bound no man, when as a vow it must bind to all that was
lawful in it; and we know some who were sui juris when they took it, we must
swear never to endeavor alteration in the Church as established, whereas it
owns in its preface to the curses in the liturgy, that its Discipline is
defective: and we believe the same of many other things, to say nothing of the
many disorders apparent in it.

The Presbyterians on the Kings return proposed to use the Liturgy with some
amendments, and to submit to the Model of Episcopacy, drawn up by the
peaceable Bishop Usher; but availed not.

2. The Consequences of the divisions produced by these severe terms, have been
dismal. How much of men's Ministry has been wasted on these matters, which
might have been employed to more edifying purposes? the profane have had an
engine to exert their inbred emnity against the serious. Was it not come to
that pass, that one was jeered as a Phanatick, if he dared not to be profane?
Yea under the shadow of zeal against Nonconformists, men became light in their
gravest employs, Heterodox in their notions, and too many did ridicule all
Religion in the most probable evidences of it, as Cant and Hypocrisy. What need
I enlarge any more. Were the things contended, for by the imposer valuable, so
as to countervail the least of these mischiefs?

3. It is necessary for Church and State, that the union of Ministers and
communion of Sts. be provided for, on more comprehensive terms.

All our study and prayers backed with sore hardships, have not, nor ever can
bring us to comply with these, the Churches strongest arguments for them be,
that they are indifferent and surely the Churches necessity will at last
convince her that's a poor Plea: Religion must decay, and the strength of the
Church will abate, whilst the number of Dissenters is so great. Gross errors
will prevail much while Dissenter is the common odious name of all; and bad men
will influence, when the terms of union are so hard, as to exclude the good.
Let the terms of peace be once such, that wise and good men need not scruple;
and separation will grow so odious a name as will expose the guilty, were the
tolerable entertained, how would love flourish, and a^l be useful to the
Churches real interest? shall we then provoke God to desert us by our quarrels,
and loose the very name of Protestant, by contending for things that are of no
use to us either as protestants or Christians.

The Kingdoms interest concurr's as an argument to it. Where could be the
policy of cutting off so considerable a part of the nation from servicableness
to the state, because they could not agree to some forms. Which had no
influence to make them good Christians, or good Subjects. Strange was the
impression of the Clergy, (or some others) that the fittest man must not serve
the State, if he scrupled the Cross in Baptism. Tho I am no Errastian, yet I
cannot but persuade the Magigistrate, not to interrupt trade, harrase his
Subjects, keep his Treasures empty, give his enemies the advantage of a
discontented party, tempt them to irregularities and dislikes of his
Government; and all this for some Oaths and Ceremonies valluable only as the
outworks of excessive grandeur, or a distinguishing mark between them that fear
an Oath, and them that fear it too little.

May not we expect the Government to say in due time, it can be no sin against
God, to take away those things which the lovers of them call indifferent; and
therefore cannot quarrel against the removal of, nor separate if they be
removed. It is not our interest to keep out so great a body of Dissenters,
whose compliance it is vain to expect, when they suffered so many years
testifying against them as sinful: Let therefore the peace of the Church, and
prosperity of the State be provided for, by things of more moment, and less
disputable.

4. The terms that would be comprehensive of the most considerable part of
Dissenters, are neither difficult nor dangerous.

It was not peaceable or prudent Suggestion, that every little change is fatal;
tho men's interest do not tempt them to make it so. Must the body die, if the
hair or nails be pared? I will not dare to make proposals so unseasonably; But
I think it easy to demonstrate, that no greater a change is needful than will
consist with decency in worship, restraint of fundamental errors, the Churches
peace and truest glory, the Magistrates tranquil security, and the just credit
and power of the Clergy.

Its our temper or selfish respects, not our differences, which have kept us so
long asunder. Could we but stoop less than our Lord's example calls us to, when
he washed his Disciples feet, the debates would soon be at an end. Were we
weaned from the love of Dominion, which he expressly forbids, and inspired with
that love he declares so essential to his followers: it were impossible for us
to unchurch each other, who can subscribe all the Articles of the Church of
Ireland, and all the Doctrinal Articles of the Church of England; as we can and
will do.

I might hope a little prudence (which God seems about to furnish us all with)
could not fail to make us one; in the mean while, and as fit means conducive to
it, let us attend to our more needful work, valuing each others as Christian
societies, tho under some pardonable mistakes.

That God would show all of us the pattern of his house, and establish us in
his truth, is the prayer of him, who longs to see peace within the gates of
Zion, owneth all for Catholic members who are baptized visible Christians, tho
fixed in no particular Church, and so not subject to any stated Pastors:
blesses God for our reformation, tho instruments might be culpable;
acknowledges all Christian societies to be Churches, where the Word is truly
preached, and Sacraments administered, by duly qualified Pastors, tho a
Canonical right be disputable; so that no contradictory thing be added which
dissolves their Church State, and dare not exclude from the Catholic Church
foreign Protestants, who reformed by God's word, tho without the consent of
the major part of a corrupt Clergy: yea, will not stake the Reformation in our
Lands on a casting Vote in the Convocation, but its correspondency to Christ's
rules; who alone is supreme Ruler in his house; and by whose laws the fidelity
of his Stewards, and their actings is determined.

SIR,
I Have according to your desire perused D. Manby's Considerations, and Mr.
King's Answer, and shall here give you my thoughts of them.

For the D's Considerations, I never imagined the Protestant Cause in any
danger by so weak an Assault. If these be the strongest reasons he has to
produce, he seems to be as yet but a Novice in the Roman School, and arrived no
higher than the young fry of Missionarys whom the Fathers furnish with such
Questions as these to accost ignorant people with. There is nothing in that
Paper but what more learned Champions for the Church of Rome have more
plausibly urged, and our Protestant Divines both at home and abroad as solidly
refuted. So that it seemed to me a needless expense of time to repeat the
Answers so often given to those Questions, because Mr. M. was pleased to ask
them over again. And I should have been still of that mind, if Mr. K's Answer
had not altered my thoughts. It Is indeed judicious and clear enough wherever he
defends the Church of England upon those principles which are common to her
with other Reformed Churches; but where his narrow affection to a Party has
byast his judgment, he has unhappily founded the justice of the Reformation on
such principles as are only calculated for the vindication of the Church of
England, and (what is much worse) such as cast disingenuous Reflections upon
the rest of the Reformed Churches. I shall therefore in these Remarks suggest
such truly Catholic Principles as justify all the Reformed Churches both as to
their Reformation, and their claim to be a true part of the Catholic Church;
which, if I mistake not, Mr. K's as well as Mr. M's Paper wou^d exclude some of
them from; for the Notions of the one as well as the other turn the Catholic
Church into a Sect, and are injurious to Christian Charity in its due extent,
tho not both in an equal degree. And I undertake this the more willingly,
because it is truly Catholic principles must cement the affections of
Protestants, and dispose them to as near an union in practice as can be
expected under the unavoidable d^fferences of our Judgment about matters of
less importance. And in pursuance of this desi^n, I shall follow the order of
Mr. K's Answer, who puts D. M's Paper into all the method it is capable of, and
only take notice of those Answers wherein Mr. K's either Judgment or Charity
seems to fail him.

The 1st. Quest: proposed by D. M. in his Preface is,

What is meant by the Catholic Church?

Mr. K's Answer is, It Is the whole body of men professing the Religion of
Christ, and living under their lawful spiritual Governors, p. 4.

There is no doubt he intends this for the description of the Catholic Church
here on earth, as measured by a judgment of charity, and comprising all
credible professors of the Christian Religion. Here are two characters to
distinguish the Members of it, Professing the Religion of Christ, and Living
under lawful spiritual Governors.

Now that which I chiefly dislike in this description is, that this latter mark
of the Catholic Church [Living under lawful spiritual Governors] gives us a
Notion of it not only very obscure, but too narrow. Nor does he find any such
mark assigned either in that Text he quotes, 4 Ephesians. 3, 4, 5. or in that passage
he cites out of St. Augustine. And it is the more necessary to insist on this,
because every Notion of the Catholic Church, which is too narrow, is so far
schismatical; for it cuts off those from their relation to the Catholic Church
who are members of it, and Mr. K. himself does afterward apply it to that ill
purpose.

That this Notion of the Catholic Church is too narrow (on supposition Mr. K.
mean no better than he speaks) is hence evident, because there are many who are
true members of the Catholic Church who live under no Pastors or spiritual
Governors at all, nor indeed have the opportunity to do so. What does he think
of many Christians that live in some foreign Plantations where they are not
furnished with them. Nay, to propose an Instance much more considerable. What
does Mr. K. think of all the Protestants who are yet in France, and because
they will not change their Religion, are confined to Galleys, Prisons, or
Convents? Are all these, by the banishment of their Ministers, exc^uded from
the Catholic Church? Has the French King's Edict so malignant an influence as
to cut them off from the body of Christ, by depriving them of their lawf^l
Pastors? If so, Popish Princes have a very formidable power, and Protestants
may well dread their Edicts upon a Spiritual as well as Temporal account more
than all the Thunders of the Vatican

But I fear Mr. K. would scarce allow the Reformed Churches in France to be any
part of the Catholic Church if they had their Pastors again: if we compare
this description of it with other passages in his Answer. For this description
is very obscure; and, if I conjecture right, Mr. K's Notion of lawful spiritual
Governors much more narrow.

What does he mean by Lawful Spiritual Governors? Are they to be estimated such
by the Law of the Land, or by the Laws of the Church, or by the Law of Christ?

Does he mean such spiritual Governors as are established in every Nation by the
Authority of the Civil Magistrate? If so, then the Arrian Bishops when
established by the Emperors of their opinion were the only lawful Pastors, and
all that part of the people that adhered to their Orthodox Pastors ceast to be
members of the Catholic Church. Then the Popish Clergy in France are the only
lawful Spiritual Governors, and the Protestants there are no part of the
Catholic Church; because they separate from them. And should the Popish Clergy
be established in these Kingdoms by Law, all that should adhere to their
Protestant Pastors (even those whom Mr. K. now thinks their only lawful ones)
would cease to be members of the body of Christ. So that the supreme Magistrate
might make Pastors lawful or unlawful at his pleasure, and make those that are
this month members of the Catholic Church cease to be so the next. But this is
a Principle I would hope fitter for Mr. Hobbs than for Mr. K. to defend.

Is it then the Laws of the Church that must determine who are the lawful
Pastors? If this be his Notion of them (as his following discourse would
incline one to think); What Church does he mean, whose Laws must determine this
great debate? If the Universal Church? I know none can make Laws to oblige all
the members of it but Christ himself, whom Mr. K. grants to be the only Head of
it, p. 55. And how should we know the sense of the universal Church in this
matter, when there has been no General Council these many hundred years, nay
when there never was any such thing at all. The largest Councils that
Church History records, being summoned by the Roman Em^erors, whose Mandates
could not reach the extra-Imperial Churches. What is this Church then whose
Laws or Judgment must determine who are lawful Pastors? Is it every National
Church? If so, it is a difficult matter to know what that is. For unless Mr. K:
would give such a schismatical Notion of it, as the Papists give of the
Catholic Church, it must include all the particular Christians and particular
Societies of such within the bounds of that Nation, who profess the true
Christian Religion in all its essentials, (for all true Churches do not profess
it in equal purity). Such a National Church is not of divine Institution, and
is indeed only a combination of Churches as united under one Civil Sovereign.
Its true Notion lies not in any combination purely Ecclesiastical and
Intrinsecal, but Civil and Extrinsecal. As the true National Church of England
(unless we will confine the name to a Sect or Party) denotes all the Churches
in England as united under one King that has a civil Supremacy over them. But
what if in the same Nation there be a division about some disputable Doctrine
as betwixt Lutherans and Calvinists in the dominions of several German Princes,
or about Church Government and modes of Worship, etc. as in these Nations? What
if the several particular Churches according to these differences in their
judgment fix under different Pastors? Who are the Church whose Laws must decide
this debate about lawful Pastors? Is it such an Assembly of the Clergy as our
Convocation? But what if both Parties have such Assemblys? Is it that Party of
the Clergy which the Civil Magistrate does establish and not the other, then
the Civil Magistrate may in Germany make both the Lutherans and Calvinists
lawful Pastors, and here both the Conformists and the Nonconformists, nay and
unmake them at his pleasure, and so make their Churches a part or no part of
the Catholic Church. Nay, if this be true, then in France the general Assembly
of the Popish Clergy must determine who are lawful Pastors, and were the
Protestant Ministers there now, for the people to adhere to them would not only
be unlawful, but (what is worse) such a Sin as would cut them off from the
Catholic Church. And does Mr. K. really think so? What, would they cease to be
the subjects of Christ because they prefer those Pastors who teach his
Doctrine, and administer his Sacraments, and discipline according to the Rules
of the Gospel, before those who grossly corrupt them, and impose those
corruptions? He must have a very odd understanding that can assent to so
senseless, not to say so wicked, an assertion: For this were no better than to
set up a point of mere human Order in opposition to the interest of Truth and
Holiness. I might here instance again in the Arrian Bishops, who had not only
the countenance of the Emperors, but got Imperial Councils (called General, as
that of Armini and Syrmium) on their side; and according to this Principle,
they were the only lawful Pastors, and those that separated from them were no
part of the Catholic Church.

I know not how Mr. K. will like these consequences; But he cannot avoid them,
unless he will say, That where there are in a Nation two divided parties of
Christians fixed under different Pastors, those are the only lawful Pastors who
are on the side of Truth in the Points controverted betwixt them, whether they
have the Civil Magistrates countenance or no. And if he say this, 'twill follow
on the other hand, that in those Popish Kingdoms where there are any Protestant
Ministers, they are the only lawful Pastors, and the Popish Churches that live
not under them no part of the Catholic Church. Nay, in those parts of Germany
where there are Lutherans and Calvinists, if the Calvinists be in the right,
the Lutherans for separating from the Calvinist Ministers, forfeit all relation
to the Catholic Church. And to add no more, if the Non-Conformists be in the
right in the matters debated betwix them and the Conformists about
Church Government, etc. they are the only lawful Pastors, and the Prelatical
Churches no part of the Catholic Church.

Or lastly, Must the Laws of Christ determine who are lawful Pastors? then
those are the only lawful spiritual Governors in his Church whose Office he has
instituted, who have all the Qualifications required, 1 Timothy 3. chapter 1 Tit. Who
are ordained to their Office by such as he has entrusted the power of
Ordination to, (where such Ordination can be had) and who have the consent of
that Flock they take the oversight of. If these be the laws of Christ (as it
were easy to prove if that were denied) then all Diocesan Prelates must be
cashiered from the number of lawful Pastors, unless they can prove their Office
instituted by Christ, and so must all the Parish-Ministers who want the
Qualifications mentioned, 1 Timothy 3. or who are imposed on the people without
their consent, nay, too often against it. And if Mr. K's Notion of the
Catholic Church be true, then all the Churches that live under Diocesan
Prelates as their spiritual Governors, or such unqualifi'd obtruded
Parish-Ministers, are no part of the Catholic Church. So that if he retract
not this new description of the Catholic Church, it is like to fall heavy on
his own Party; and because I would not be so uncharitable to the Church of
England, as he is to the Churches of Dissenters, I advise him the next time he
undertakes to define the Catholic Church, to leave out this dangerous mark of
it. At least he ought to apply this mark to the Papists as well as Dissenters;
whereas among the Latin Questions; The 14th is, Whether that be a true Church
which has not lawful Pastors? And Mr. K. thus answers, It may be a true Church,
witness the Church of Rome, which has had so many haeretical, schismatical,
simoniacal ones, who were not all lawful Pastors; But did there therefore cease
to be a Chureh at Rome? But I perceive this is a true mark when he would vent
his spleen against the Presbyterian Churches at home and abroad, but a false or
uncertain one when it would unchurch the Papists. The best of it is, if it be a
true mark, the Papal and Diocesan Churches are most concerned in the dangerous
consequences of it.

All therefore I shall add on this Head, is a brief Answer to Mr. M's Question,
What that Holy Catholic and Apostolic Church is which we profess to believe
in the Creed?

Answ. We need go no farther for the resolution of this Question, than the Text
quoted by Mr. K. 4 Ephesians. 3, 4, 5. Only I must premise, that the Catholic Church
in its true extent includes the Church Triumphant as well as the Church
Militant; nay, all the Saints that have been, are, or shall be on earth to the
end of the world; see Mr. Claud's Reponse au livre de Monsr: l'Evesque de
Meaux, etc. p. 7, 8, 9, etc. But if we speak of the Catholic Church as
militant on earth, it must be considered either as measured by the judgment of
God, which discerns the truth of things from all hypocritical disguises, or as
measured by the judgment of humane Charity. As measured by the judgment of God,
it is according to the fore-quoted Text, One body or society animated by one
holy Spirit, having one heavenly hope, subjected to one Lord Jesus, believing
the same revealed Doctrine as to all necessary Articles, and devoted by one
Baptismal Covenant to one heavenly Father. This Body is called Invisible, or
Mystical, from that internal Faith and Holiness which are invisible; and it is
also Visible by the external profession of that true Faith and Holiness. And
this is that Church which we profess to believe in the Creed, in which alone we
can expect to find the true Communion of Saints; And to this Church alone all
promises of saving Blessings are made in the holy Scriptures. The judgment of
several Fathers to this purpose, and particularly St: Aug: see quoted in that
forecited discourse of Mr: Claud from p: 45 to 68:
But the Catholic Church, as measured by the judgment of human Charity,
comprizes all that make a credible profession of Christian Faith and Holiness.
For we are incapable to distinguish the true and living members of the Church
from those that only appear to be so. And therefore the Catholic Church, as
estimated by our charity, is more large and comprehensive than the real Body of
Christ. For Hypocrites are no true members of his Body, tho mixed with them in
the same external Society by their external Profession; or as St. John
distinguishes, they are among them, but not of them, 1 John 2. v. 19. They are
but blasted Ears, not the true Wheat; they are members of the Church Catholic
in appearance, not in reality. The Church Catholic, as measured by our
charitable judgment, is I know commonly called the Church-Catholick^ Visible,
i. e. the Church Catholic, as estimated by an external or visible profession.
But I would choose rather for avoiding confusion, to call it the Visible Church
Catholic mixed: For the Church Catholic in the proper sense, (as constituted
of its living, or as the Schools speak, its univocal members, real Saints) is
also Visible, because its members not only believe with the heart, but confess
with the mouth to salvation, as the Apostle Paul speaks, Romans 10. v. 10. But
these real Saints do not make up one distinct external society by themselves,
but as mixed with a crowd of Hypocrites, who join with them in the same external
profession of Christianity; Nor are they exactly distinguishable from
Hypocrites in our Judgment, which cannot pierce into the hearts of men, and
only looks at the credibility of their external profession. If therefore it be
inquired, what is the true Catholic Church? We must answer, All sincere
Christians, who are one body or society by their belief of, and subjection to
Jesus Christ their common Head and center of Unity. If it be inquired, whom
should we in charity judge to be members of the Catholic Church, the Answer is
obvious; All that make a credible profession of that Faith and that subjection.
If it be asked further, what is a credible profession? it is answered, A
profession not contradicted by notorious ignorance of the essentials of
Christianity, by fundamental Errors, or by notorious wickedness. And he that
would prove any particular Church or Churches, that call themselves Christian,
to be no parts of the Catholic Church, must prove that they deny, or at least
do not profess some essential Article of the Christian Faith, or are
notoriously ungodly. (I add notoriously ungodly, because subjection to the laws
of Christ is as necessary to our being the true members of his Church, as
belief of his Doctrine; and consequently a credible profession of that
subjection, as requisite to our being esteemed such). And therefore D. M. has
very little reason to value himself upon this Question: And the Church of Rome
has so little reason to arrogate to her self the Title of the Church Catholic,
that a man must be very charitable to allow her to be a part of it; but no wise
man will allow her to be any other than the most corrupt and unsound part of
it. For that Church has gone so near toward the subverting the essential
truths and laws of Christianity by their dangerous corruptions in Doctrine,
Worship and Practice, that it would be the best service D. M. can do her, to
demonstrate clearly that there is a credible profession of Christianity left
amongst those that practically hold all the Decisions of the Council of Trent,
exagr. To reconcile that Doctrine of their Council, that imperfect Contrition
or Attrition is sufficient to dispose a man for Absolution in the Sacrament of
Penance, Council of Trent, Sess. 4. cap. 4. with that necessary Doctrine of the
Gospel, Wihout Repentance there is no Remission of Sins. To reconcile the
worship of the Church of Rome with the second Commandment, is a task well
worthy of D. M's pains. But I hope in many that live in the communion of the
Church of Rome, the common principles of Christianity which they retain,
prevail against the poisonous additions of Popery; and all the Doctrines of
that and other Councils are not practically held by them. But their claim to be
a part of the Church Catholic is not near so clear and indisputable as that of
the Reformed Churches, whose Doctrine and Worship compared with the holy
Scriptures, evidence them to be an incomparably sounder part of it; tho even
all the Reformed Churches are not equal in their soundness and purity.

This Catholic Church has only one universal Head Jesus Christ, and is one
Body only on the account of its union with, and subjection to him. Nor is there
any Vicarious universal Head under Christ to which the Government of the Church
Catholic is committed, whether Pope, General, Council, or College of
Prelates; Nor can any such humane Head make Laws obligatory to the universal
Church. For any to pretend to it is an usurpation of Christ's Legislative
power; and it is chiefly on the account of that Usurpation, and employing that
usurped power to deprave the Church, and destroy its soundest members, that the
Protestants have called the Pope Antichrist. Particular Churches are the chief
integrating parts of the Church Catholic; (I speak of it here as measured by
the judgment of charity). As to any of these particular Churches, if the Quest.
be, Are they a part of the Catholic Church? It must be resol^'d by the
credibility of their Christian Profession. If the Question be, Are they
Churches regularly constituted or organized? It Is in the reso^ution of this
Quest. We must consider, whether they be a society of Christians united under
one or more such Pastors as Christ has appointed, for personal communion in
Faith, Worship and holy living; and whether their Pastors were in a regular
manner set over them. And here the dispute about lawful spiritual Governors
must come in. F^r that a particular Church have a lawful Pastor, is not
absolutely necessary to its being a true Church, and consequently a true part
of the Catholic Church (as Mr. K. himself acknowledges in the fore-quoted
place, p. 90. tho how he will reconcile that Concession with his description of
the Catholic Church, I do not understand): It Is only necessary to its being a
Church regularly constituted. And who are such lawful Pastors, there will be
occasion to discuss in answer to the 4th Quest.

The second Quest. is, Whether by the Church Catholic be meant the Church of
England alone, or the Church of England in communion with other Churches?

Mr. K. well replys, The Church of England is no more the Catholic Church,
than the British Seas are the whole Ocean. But he does ill to found its being a
part of the Catholic Church on its subjection to Catholic Bishops. I suppose
he means Diocesan Bishops. For it would not cease to be a part of the catholic
Church, if it should disown Diocesan Prelacy. And if Mr. K. think otherwise, he
has these two difficult Propositions to prove; First, that Jesus Christ has
instituted the Office of Diocesan Prelates in his church; and secondly, that he
has made such Prelates the center of catholic Unity, and subjection to them
necessary to our being members of the catholic church. Now if Mr. K. will
undertake the defense of these two Propositions, he not only unchurches all the
Reformed Churches that want Diocesan Prelacy, but even the Catholic Church it
self for a Century or two at least, as I offer to evince, if Mr. K. please to
demand it. For communion with other Churches, it must be understood in the
essentials of Christian Religion; for it can scarce be expected in all its
integrals in this imperfect state, but much less in unnecessary humane
additions to Christianity: And we must not confound communion with subjection;
the former may be due where the latter is not.

The third Quest. is, With what other Church does the Church of England
communicate in Sacraments and Liturgy?

Mr. K. well answers, That Unity in Liturgy is no part of communion of
Churches; and that the Church of England (and had his charity been wide enough,
he might safely have added also, the Churches cal^'d Presbyterian and
Independen^) is united with all other Christians in the participation of the
same Sacraments: And I doubt not the Presbyt. and Indep. Churches administer
them as agreeably to our Saviors Institution as any other. I come therefore to
the

4th. Quest. Whether by the Catholic Church be meant the variety of all
Protestants, since they want her essential mark, Unity?

Before I consider Mr. K's answer to the Quest. I shall offer one that is very
obvious, and (I doubt not) more agreeable to the temper of every true Catholic
and charitable Christian, viz.

That all the Reformed Churches whose public Confessions of Faith are extant,
are true parts of the Catholic Church; tho some of them may be more, others
less pure and uncorrupted. (Of Quakers we can make no judgment, because we know
not what their ^pinions are, and it is well if they do so themselves. For
Fifth-Monarchy men, I know no distinct Churches constituted of them; and if
they hold no other Notion of a Fifth-Monarchy than the learned Mr. Mede on the
Rev. seems inclined to believe, I hope Mr. K. will not think it inconsistent
with salvation.)

If D. M. ask where is the essential mark of the Church Catholic, viz. Unity
among the Episcopal, Presbyt. Indep. and Anabapt. Churches?

Answ. What Unity does he mean? If an Unity in the essentials of Ch^istian
Faith and Holiness, let him name me one of these Churches that denis any
essential Article of the Christian Religion, or one Precept of the moral Law;
nay, or one essential part of Divine Worship, as Praise, Prayer, Preaching; or
one Sacrament instituted by Jesus Christ. For tho the Anabaptists deny the
Baptizing of Infants, yet they do not deny Baptism it self; and however I may
judge them mistaken in that point, I should think him more dangerously mistaken
that should on the account of their Error in so intricate a controversy condemn
them as no part of the Catholic Church. I will not patronize all the
irregularities that may be objected in some of these Churches, but my charity
does oblige me to add, that they are not such as invalidate the credibility of
their Christian Profession, nor the thousandth part so gross as the corruptions
of the Greek and Roman Churches.

Or does Mr. M. mean by Catholic Unity, an Unity in an humane universal Head
of the Church, as Pope or Council? This is no better than an Unity in owning a
gross Usurper that invades the Prerogatives of our blessed Lord, the only Head
of his Church, that claims an universal power over his Church, without any
commission from him. Or does he mean, an Unity in all the Errors, Idolatry,
Superstition, and corrupt practices that have by degrees crept into the Church,
and overrun any considerable part of it? I hope he will not make this the mark
of the Catholic Church's Unity, no more than he would make men's diseases a
mark of their unity in the humane nature. This is an Unity to be avoided, not
courted or desired. Or does he mean an Unity in humane unnecessary Canons that
shall reduce all Christians to an exact uniformity in the external modes of
Religion? This is an Unity never to be effected, but either by reducing men's
judgments to an uniformity about those matters, or by forcing them to comply
with what their judgments condemn. The former is morally impossible,
considering the different degrees of our knowledge in this imperfect state on
earth; and one might as wisely attempt to bring all Nations to affect the same
civi^ customs, ceremonies, or garb. The latter is a lo^ding it over God's
heritage, and exercising a dominion over the Faith of Christians in the higest
degree, which the Apostles themselves disclaim and forbid, 2 Cor. 1.24. 2 Pet.
5.3. An uniformity in humane rites is no unity prescribed in the word of God;
and consequently not necessary to the constitution of the Catholic Church. The
laws of Christ, which alone are obligatory to the Catholic Church, have made
sufficient provision for its Unity as far as it is attainable on earth; (for
perfect Unity is the effect of the perfect light and love of Heaven). And for
any single person, or collective body of Pastors to prescribe other terms of
Unity to the Catholic Church than Christ has done, is not only an usurpation
of his legislative power, but one of the most effectual methods that Hell has
found out to raise Schisms and Divisions in it, and thereby to destroy
Christian love. And he that knows not how fatal an Engine the needless and
corrupt impositions of ambitious Prelates and their Councils have been above
these 1300 years to deprave and tear the Christian Church, under pretense of
reducing it to an impossible Uniformity, is either a stranger to Church
History, or has too deep a tincture of that wretched pride and ignorance that
has animated imperious Patriarchs and Popes.

I proceed now to consider Mr. K's Answer to D. M's Quest. which I shall
transcribe at large.

Neither are all Protestants Catholic Members of the Church, nor they only.
Those among Protestants that embrace the Catholic Faith, and make no
separation from their lawful Governors, and that live in Unity of Faith and
Charity with their neighbor Churches, are catholic members; and have that
unity which is essential to the catholic church. But these are not to be
confounded with Presbyterians, Independents, Anabaptists, Fifth-monarchy men,
Quakers, etc. since these have separated themselves from their lawful
Governors, as much as Mr: M. himself; though their crime be less than his; as
he is less guilty that makes a rebellion, than he who joins with a Forreigner
to enslave his country.

I did not expect a man of Mr. K's abilities could have betrayed so much
ignorance or uncharitableness, or both, in answering so easy a Question. If the
Dissenters be guilty of Schism, I am sure it is not half so gross and palpable
as what this one Paragr^ph contains, nor so opposite to true christian love.

Mr. K. who charges D. M: for talking of things without clearing them, would do
well to take his own advice. It Is hard to imagine what he means by Catholic
members of the Church. Does he mean the same by it, as members of the catholic
church, or no?

If he do not, what signifies his Answer to D. M's Question, which was, Whether
the church catholic contain all the variety of Protestants who want her
essential mark, viz. Unity? Nay, why does he assert those Protestants only,
whom he here describes to have that Unity which is essential to the Catholic
Church? For none can be members of the Catholic Church, but such as are united
with their fellow members in those things which essentially constitute them one
Church or Body. Catholic members of the Church is no very proper expression,
it is like total parts, and can have no tolerable sense distinct from that
plainer expression, Members of the catholic church. If Mr. K. make any
distinction betwixt these two phrases, it must be founded on the supposition of
some vicarious Head of Unity to the Catholic Church, which we condemn the
Church of Rome for setting up, and Mr. K. himself seems to disown, p. 55. Nor
would that Hypothesis it self justify the distinction; because if Christ have
made any Vicarious Head or center of Unity to the Catholic Church, we could
not be united to him as his members without union with that Vicarious Head. So
that to be Catholic members of the Church, and members of the Catholic
Church, are the same thing.

And if Mr: K. use that expression in this sense, let us consider a little the
description he gives of those who are Catholic members of the Church. Here are
three characters to know them by; Their embracing the catholic Faith, their
making no separation from their lawful Governors, their living in charity with
their neighbor churches.

The first is, Embracing the Catholic Faith (and he should have added,
Professing catholic holiness of life). For this character it is undeniable, and
I hope Mr. K. will not exclude any of the forementioned Protestant Churches
from being Catholic members of the Church on this score.

The two latter Mr. K. himself will find too dangerous and too schismatical to
own upon second thoughts.

For from the third, viz. living in charity with their neighbor churches, I
infer;

1st. That this character does exclude all the Papists from being catholic
members of the Church; for they are so far from living in charity with their
neighbor Churches, that their Trent-creed does assert its Articles to be that
catholic Faith without which no man can be saved, and consequently damns all
the Churches in the world besides their own.

2. On supposition the Reformed Churches abroad which have not Diocesan
Bishops, be true Churches, this character excludes all those of the Church of
England from being catholic mem^ers of the Church, who do, with Mr. Dodwell
unchurch all those Reformed Churches that want Prelatical Ordination. For to
unchurch them, is not to live in charity with them.

3. If the Churches of the Presbyt. and Indep. here be true Churches, (as I
shall in this Paper evince they are), then Mr. K. and all that are of his mind,
are no catholic members of the Church, because they live not in charity with
their neighbor Churches. (And I hope there is not the less charity due to them
for being of the same country or Nation): for Mr. K. makes subjection to
lawful Pastors a mark of the members of the catholic Church, p. 4. and
declares the Presbyt. etc. destitute of that mark, p. 6. And consequently denis
them to be members of the catholic church, which is the highest breach of
charity imaginable. And what if the Presbyt. shou d treat Mr. K. according to
his own principle, and declare him no catholic member, because he lives not in
charity with them? They would but use his own weapons against himself. But
(however they have been misrepresented) they are not of that schismatical
humor as some are, who have long made a loud outcry against Schism.

4. Nay, if this character be true, then in all those contentions that have
happened in the Church where the contending Parties have been so uncharitable
as to excommunicate one another' tho sometimes about mere trifles; the one
Party or both have ceast to be catholic members of the church. And so when
Pope Victor excommunicated the Eastern churches for not keeping Easter on the
same day with him, He and all that joined with him ceast to be catholic
members of the church. And if to be catholic members of the Church, and
members of the catholic Church be the same, what a vast part of the christian
world has been unchurch'd in every age by the uncharitable censures of proud
contentious Prelates!

I suppose Mr. K. never considered these consequences, or else he would never
have made living in charity with neighbor Churches a necessary mark of the
catholic members of the Church. As if the legitimate children of the same
Father might not in an angry mood call one another Bastards, or the subjects of
the same King in a pievish humor nickname their fellow subjects Rebels
without any just cause. I am sure, the Presbyterian Churches both at home and
abroad are the least concerned in this character; for they have never unchurcht
the Prelatical Churches, even when they have met with the most harsh and
unreasonable treatment from them.

But Mr. K. has given us another character to distinguish the Catholic members
of the Church by, which he imagines will exclude all the Presbyterians,
Independents, etc, from that number, viz.

That they are such as make no separation from their lawful Governors.

All this is founded on his schismatical mark of the catholic Church, viz.
That its members live under their lawful spiritual Governors. Here therefore
all those difficulties occur about the meaning of lawful spiritual Governors
which were proposed, p: 3, 4, 5* 6, 7. And which sense soever Mr. K. chooses,
he will find it does oblige him to unchurch a great part of the Catholic
Church, i. e. to be a schismatic of the worst sort. And if the laws of Christ
must determine the debate, he will give the Dissenters such an Argument against
Prelatical Churches being members of the Catholic, as he will never be able to
answer: And Mr. Baxter's Treatise, which proves the unlawfulness of Diocesan
Prelacy, has, according to Mr. K. done what that charitable man never intended,
unchurcht all our Diocesan Churches, and cashierd them from being any part of
the Church-Catholick.

There is no doubt but unjust separation from any lawful spiritual Governors is
a sinful practice: And particular Churches gathered by such a sinful
separation, are not gathered in a regular way. And therefore an unjust
violation of due Order, is all that Mr. K. can justly pretend to charge the
Presbyterians and Independents with, and perhaps will find it a more difficult
task than he imagines, to make good that charge.

And therefore to clear this matter, let me premise; Particular Churches are
the chief integrating parts of the Church- Catholic. These Churches consist of
one or more Pastors, and a Christian Flock associated under his or their
oversight for personal communion in Faith, Worship, and holy living. These
Churches are obliged by the very dictates of the light of nature, and general
rules of the holy Scripture, to endeavor the preservation of all necessary
Unity, by the amicable consultations of their associated Pastors. The judgment
of such associated Pastors should be submitted to by the people under their
care, when it is not repugnant to the Word of God, and contrary to the interest
of Religion. But the people do not owe them a blind obedience, nor have such
Pastors any power but for edification. Much less can such Bishops pretend to an
higher power, whose very Office Christ never instituted, whose pretended
relation to their Diocese is not founded on the peoples consent to it; and if
such Bishops should claim the sole power of Church Government in a Nation, and
exercise it against the will of Christ to the n^torious detriment of souls, (as
by unjust silencing of faithful Pastors when their labors are highly conducive
to the Churches good, by imposing on the people sinful conditions of
Church Communion, by obtruding unqualifi'd Pastors on the people against their
consent, etc.) To separate from such Bishops so far as to disobey these unjust
commands, is no separation from our lawful Governors; and is no more a
Rebell^on in the Church, than it is a Rebellion in the State to disobey one that
usurps a Power he never received from the King, and which he exercises against
the laws and interest of the Kingdom.

And therefore I would propose these two Questions to Mr. K. in reference to
this Head.

Q. 1. On supposition the Presbyt's and Indep's have made an unjust separation
from their lawful Governors whom they should have subm^tted to, Whether ^his be
such a crime as will exclude them from being Catholi^k members of the Church?

To resolve that, We must consider the nature of their separation. Their
Ministers separate from the Bishops, i. e. they are not willing to obey them in
what they account a sinful and dangerous usurpation, viz. the assuming the sole
power of Church Government, and depriving the Pastors of particular Churches of
an essential part of their Office, and suspending them unjustly. Their people
separate from the Parish-Ministers, but it is not by disowning them, as no true
Ministers, but by refusing to receive them as theirs, because they judge they
have a right to choose a Physician for their Souls as well as for their Bodies;
and therefore think not themselves bound to acquiesce in the Patrons or Bishops
choice, when contrary to their own edification; especially when there are terms
of Parish-communion imposed, to some unlawful, to others greatly suspected; and
all true Church Discipline is cast out or neglected. They separate not from the
conforming Churches as no true Churches, but as preferring the ordinary
communion of purer; because they judge the laws about Parish-order do not
oblige, when injurious to the interest of Religion and Souls. Now suppose them
mistaken in these matters through the weakness of their judgment; will this
sort of separation make them cease to be Catholic membe^s of the Church? It Is
not a separation from any thing Christ has made necessary to the unity of his
Church, it is only a separation from some humane order, which they dare not
comply with, because they apprehend it contrary to the laws of Christ. And is
this to be compared to a Rebellion in the State? (as he is pleased to do, p.
6.) Is the convocation, Christ? or their Canons equally obligatory as his laws?
or do those that disobey the Canons of the Convocation, because they judge them
opposite to the laws of Christ, renounce their Allegiance to him as the Head of
his Church? Are their Canons even about things they call indifferent, as
necessary to be obeyed, as the undoubted Rules of the Gospel, by all that would
be Catholic members of the Church, when those that are required to obey them,
fear the things commanded are unlawful? When I read such expressions as this
about Church-Rebellion, I cannot but lament the effects of humane ignorance and
pride, and observe in such as Mr. K. some degrees of that spirit that has acted
Papal Councils, who made no scruple of treating all that would not pay them a
blind obedience with such characters as these. And I know no better way to
convince Mr. K. of the folly of this Principle I am opposing, than by showing
him how pernicious the consequences of it are to his own Party.

For if this sort of Schism which he supposes the Dissenters guilty of, prove
them to be no Catholic members of the Church, then sure more heinous Schism
will prove those to be in the same condition who are gui^ty of it. Greater
Schism is more opposite to Catholic Unity than lesser. But the Prelates are
guilty of more heinous Schism than this of the Dissenters supposing it to be
Schism); and consequently if Mr. K's principle be true, are no Catholic
members of the Church. That the Prelates are gui^ty of more heinous Schism, I
offer this Argument to evince. Those who impose unnecessary and and doubtful
terms of Church-Commun^on, nay, who declare many thousands of true Christians
ipso facto excommunicated, are greater Schismatics than those, who only
scruple those terms, tho through mistake, and who unch^rch not those Churches
which they are thus forced to separate from. For the Schism of the Imposers is
more voluntary and curable by forbearing to prescribe such terms of Communion
as are more likely to prove engines of Division; The Schism of the Refusers is
more involuntary, and in doubtful cases often incurable. And it is more opposite
to Christian Love to excommunicate thousands of sincere Christians, than it is
to prefer those Churches which we upon the best enquiry judge more pure before
those that seem more corrupt without unchurching them; even tho in so doing we
should be guilty of some breach of the Churches peace, by v^olating a tolerable
humane order: So that all Mr. K. will gain by excluding Dissenters from the
Catholic Church on the account of their Schism, will be, That by the same
reason, our Convocation were no Catholic members of it; and if so, I am sure
they are no lawful Governors in it.

For what I have here asserted, that the Convocation have excommunicated
thousands of sincere Christians, and that ipso facto, I appeal to their Canons,
and to the consciences of any that peruse them, and know the Nonconformists in
these Kingdoms, few whereof are not by some of these Canons ipso facto
excommunicated. See Mr. Baxter's English Schismatic detected, who from p. 42.
to the 50th. recites the particular Canons.

Nay, if all that are guilty of equal Schism with that of the Dissenters
(supposing them guilty) be no Catholic members of the Church, I fear there are
few such in the World. Sure the Schism of the Papists is of a more monstrous
nature, who unchurch a^l the Churches on earth besides themselves. And the
Greeks pay them in the same coin. And if other of the Eastern Churches do not
unchurch one another, they have lost their old wont. What dreadful work
Councils have made in hereticating and unchurching one another upon very
unjustifiable grounds, fills up both pages in Church History. And as such were
more heinous Schismatics than those that are guilty only of passive
separation, (i. e. separation occasioned by men's scrupling the lawfulness of
some humane Canons); so according to this notion, they were no Catholic
members of the Church: And at this senseless rate we may soon reduce the
Catholic Church to a small compass. And what would become even of the
Christian World, if the compassions of our blessed Lord were as narrow as the
charity of such censorious Christians.

The 2d. Quest. I would propose to Mr. K. is,

Upon what grounds does he assert that the Presbyterians, Independents, etc.
have made a separation from their lawful spiritual Governors?

This Quest. relates to the regular constitution of their Churches; Who then
are the lawful Pastors of these Presbyterians, etc. from whom they have
separated? Does he mean the Bishops, or the Parish Ministers?

If the Bishops, they must be considered either as the King's Officers, to
execute that civil power which he has circa sacra; And so the Presbyterians
submit to them, and separate not from them; Or they must be considered as
Christ's Officers, to exercise that spiritual power which his Charter gives; and
as such, the Presbyterians are very ready to submit to them, when they have
proved the divine Right of their Office: Or they must be considered as the
Churches Officers; and if so, it is requisie, that Church should obey them, who
assign them their Office, or consent to be their subjects; not those who
account their Office a sinful usurpation, and are the more unwil^ing to become
their Subjects, because they cannot be so without complying with sinful
Impositions, and even approving their usurpation. And that any Church may
lawfully constitute new Officers whom Christ never appointed, and su^ject his
undoubted Officers to their Authority, especially such as Diocesan Prelates,
who by engrossing the power of the Keys, render Church Discipline
impracticable, is a proposition Mr. K. will hardly prove.

If the Parish-Ministers be the lawful Governors they separate from, I would
willingly know how they come to be the lawful Governors or Pastors to those
that consent not to their Pastoral relation, and have sufficient reasons why
they do not? Will Mr. K. say, that all persons ought to commit the conduct of
their Souls to that Minister whom the Bishops or Patron chooses? and that it is
sinful separation not to do so? I would then enquire; What does he think of
those Parishes that are so large, that scarce the tenth part of the people can
enjoy the labors of the Parish-Ministers, as Stepney, Giles, Martins, and
Cripplegate Parishes in London, which have one with another 30000 or 40000
souls in each of them? Does he think it an unlawful separation for that part of
the people that cannot have room in the Parish Churches, to attend the
Ministrations of other pious and judicious Pastors? Is this such a separation
too as will exclude them from the Catho^ick Church? To assert t^is, is to
prefer a point of humane order (or rather disorder) about Parish-bounds b^^ore
the salvation of souls; and in effect to say, that 'twere better all those peop
e should want the ordinary means of salvation, and live like Pagans or Atheists
without any public worship of God, than such a point of Church-orde^ be
violated. And if any can believe all this, it is very much to be doubted whether
they know what souls and their salvation are.

Again, What does Mr. K. think of such Parish-Ministers as want the necessary
qua^ifications, such as are notoriously ignorant, or scandalously wicked? Do
those in their Parishes, who after having sought redress in vain, choose other
Ministers of eminent lea^ning and ho^iness, make a sinful separation, even such
as will argue them no Catholic members of the Church? If he say this, he still
prefers a mere point of humane order before the end of it, the edification of
souls; and had rather haz^rd their damnation, than have a scandalous Parish
Minister disowned, whose Life is more likely to debauch, than his Doctrine to
reform his Hearers.

I might ins^st on many such Questions as these; but because Mr. K. has not
thought fit to give us any reason why he takes the Parish-Ministers for the
only lawful Governors, even to those Nonconformists that consent not to their
pastoral relation, I shall f^r their vindication offer this argument, to prove
that the Nonconformists live under their lawful spiritual Governors or Past rs,
and consequently make no separation from them.

I instance in the Presbyterians;

Those are the lawful spiritual Governors of particular Christian Flocks or
Churches, who have all the qualifications requisite, a valid Ordination, the
consent of those Churches, and who in taking the oversight of them violate no
law of God, nor any just law of man.

But such are the Pastors of the Presbyterian Churches in these Kingdoms; E.
they are the lawful Pastors of those Churches.

The minor Prop. alone needs proof, viz. That the Pastors of the Presbyt.
Churches are such as are here described.

For their Qualifications, and the consent of the people; that is matter of
fact, concerning which, they may safely appeal to those that know them: ^nly I
would here suggest, that a considerable number of Ministers who prescribe
various difficult exercises to a Candidate for the trial of his abilities, are
as likely to judge of them as one single Bishop, who usually commits the
examination of them to his Chaplain. For the validity of their Ordination, I
undertake to make that good in answer to the Questions about Mission. The only
doubt then remaining is, Whether these Pastors in taking the oversight of their
Flocks, do violate any law of God, or any just law of Man?

1. For the laws of God, I cannot understand any that they should be supposed
to violate, but either that law that enjoins us to obey Superiors, or such as
enjoin the preservation of the Churches peace.

For the former, it falls in with what doubt may arise concerning the laws of
men.

For the latter, the precepts of God which concern the Churches peace, I need
only say these two things to clear them from the suspicion of violating them.

1. That the great duties recommended in the holy Scriptures in order to the
preservation of the Churches peace, are a mutual forbearance in things
indifferent, and a charitable judgment of each other in lesser differences.

This is evident from the 14th Chapt. of the Ep. to the Romans to the 17th ver.
of the 15th. where these duties are at large pressed from great variety of
Topics, and urged on those that had Pastors among them. And to say, this great
Rule on y obliged Christians to these duties till the Clergy had determined
those indifferent things, and by their imposing them, cast out all Dissenters,
is too like the confidence of those Gentlemen who own Christ instituted the
Communion in both kinds. But te^l us his Institution obliges not, now the
Church has pleased to command it shall be otherwise. And I do appeal to any
impartial judge, whether the Convocation or the Presbyterians have better
observed this great Rule that concerns the Churches peace; But,

2. No Law of God enjoins us to do any thing sinful for the Churches peace.

But for the Pastors of the presbyterian churches to desert their ministerial
Office when never just^y forbidden, and when their labors were highly
conducive to the Interest of Religion and the Salvation of souls, were sinful.
Methinks those Men that are so zealous to exclaim against all alienation of
churchlands and utensils as Sacriledg and a very horrid sin, should see
something equally heinous if not more so, in men's alienating those excellent
gifts God has endued them with for the Churches Edification, when never justly
forbidden the exercise of that Ministry to which they are devoted. They who
are justly called to that office by men, are called by Christ, and are bound to
be true and faithful to him. And where there is a true necessity of their
labors, they may answer their unjust silencers, as Peter and John did; Acts
4.19 Whether it be right in the sight of God to hearken unto you more than unto
God, judge ye. Timothy, who was ordained by men, yet has that solemn charge
given him, 2 Timothy 4.1, 2. that is sufficient to deter Ministers from denying
their Lord the service they have vowed him, to please the unjust will of men. I
know but one case that will excuse a Minister unjustly silenced in forbearing
the exercise of his Ministry, viz. when there is no necessity of his labors,
and the exercise of his Ministry would by violating pub^ick order do more hurt
than good in his present circumstances. But it is too evident, this was not the
case of those 2000 Ministers si^enc'd by the Act of Uniformity. To that
purpose, let the consequences of their continuing or forbearing their Ministry
be compared. What was the inconvenience of their Preaching more than this, that
a point of humane order was violated; some needless impositions (to speak the
mildest) not complied with, (which were designed to promote an impracticable
uniformity, but were more likely to prove engines of corrupting and dividing
the Church); and the unjust will of the Silencers disobeyed. What was the
advantage of their continuing their Ministry? It may be justly said to the
honor of God, that many thousands of ignorant souls have been instructed in
the truths of the Gospel, and by true conversion or repentance added to the
number of Christ's mystical body; the honor of Christianity has been promoted
by the purity of their societies through the faithful exercise of
Church Discipline; the serious practice of Religion has been more effectually
maintained in a profane and debauched age; And (what I would chiefly recommend
to your consideration) a vast number of souls have enjoyed the suitable and
succesful means of their Edification and Salvation, who either through the
irregularity of Parish-bounds, or through their own scruples about the terms of
Parish-communion, must else have wanted them; or through the ill provision of
Parish-Ministers must have sat under such Pastors as no man concerned for his
own ^ternal happiness should be satisfied with where he may have better. For
the truth of these things, the silenced Ministers may freely appeal to those
that know them, and have any serious sense of these matters. But they will not
much regard the judgment of those who think there is no need of any other
conversion than from the external profession of a false Religion to the
profession of a true; And no Regeneration but external Baptism, who account all
sufficiently qualified to take a pastoral charge of souls who have got into
holy Orders; and think the people bound in complaisance to the Patron, or the
Bishop to acquiesce in their choice, tho it deprive them of the most probable
means of their salvation, and oblige them to sit under those as their Pastors,
from whose labors little succe^s can be rationally expected. But for such as
understand the real necessities and value of souls; and know how much the
success of Ministers does ordinarily depend on their moral aptitude and
abilities for that sacred Office; and have learnt to prefer the Edification and
Salvation of Souls before external order, when inconsistent with it: Let them
judge, whether the foresaid Ministers had not sinned, had they in those
circumstances deserted their Ministry, and denied their help to those that
needed, and ear^estly craved it? i. e. Whether it were better that in our large
Parish-Churches thousands should live without any public worship of God, or
means of salvation; Or that all who scruple the imposed conditions of
lay-communion should live without Pastors till they can change their judgment;
Or that the people in a vast number of Parishes should live under such as their
Pastors as no serious Christian would commit the conduct of his soul to, where
he may have better; Or that irreligion should prevail through the total neglect
of Church Discipline: In a word, whether it were better all the souls whom the
Nonconformist's Ministry has been the Instrument within these 25 years to
enlighten, sanctify, and prepare for Heaven, had never enjoyed their labors,
than the external order of Parish-bounds should be violated, and the suspected
impositions (of things owned by the Imposers for indifferent) disobeyed?

Now if it were sinful for the silenced Ministers to desert their office in
such circumstances, because of an unjust prohibition; then no law of God that
concerns the Churches peace, does oblige them to it. And that they were
unjustly prohibited the exercise of their office, belongs to the next Head.

2. The foresaid Ministers do in the exercise of their Ministry violate no just
law of man.

The humane Law which they violate, enjoins such conditions of their office as
these among others.

1. A Declaration of unfeigned Assent and Consent to all things contained in
and prescribed by the Book entitled the Book of Common Prayer and
Administration of the Sacraments, and other Rites and Ceremonies, etc. and in
the form and manner of making, Ordaining, and Consecrating of Bishops, Priests
and Deacons.

2. The Oxford Oath, or swearing never to endeavor any alteration of the
present Church Government.

3. Reordination as to those that had not Prelatical Ordination.

4. The Oath of Canonical Obedience, etc.

Now if these conditions of the Ministry be sinful, I would gladly know whether
any humane law be just, that forbids the Minist^rs of our Lord Jesus to preach
his Gospel, unless they will comply with sinful terms, or that makes sinning
the condition of the exercise of their Ministry? I hope none will presume to
say that which sets up the authority of Man against God's. I would therefore
enquire further, Ought all to forbear the exercise of their Ministry who are
forbidden by an unjust humane Law? If so, why did not Christian Pastors forbear
it under Pagan Emperors. or the Orthodox under the Arrian, or Reformed Pastors
under Popish Princes, where the law ^or^ids them? Or will Mr. K. say, all these
ought to have forborne and deserted their office. What! has God left it at the
will of men whether he shall be publicly worshipped, whether his Gospel shall be
preached, whether the Office he has called men to shall be discharged, whether
souls shall enjoy the suitable means of their Salvation, or the number of
Ministers shall be proportionable to the real necessity of souls? Has he given
men any power against his own interest, or to promote the damnation of souls by
imposing such terms of the Ministry as Christ's own Laws forbid his Ministers
to obey? If all ought not to forbear their Ministry who are forbidden by an
unjust Law, What is there in the case of the silenced Ministers that should
oblige them to it? I know nothing can be imagined but this, That obedience to
that Law, tho unjust, would in their circumstances tend more to the good of the
Church and sou s, than all their ministerial labors. And if any can make this
good, I doubt not but they will forbear. For proof of the contrary, see p. 27,
28. under the former Head.

All the Quest. therefore will be concerning the conditions of the Ministry,
that by the foresaid Law were imposed upon them.

For the first mentioned, the Declaration of Assent and Consent, etc.

Are there not many thousands of sincere and upright Chr^stians in these
Kingdoms, who do really judge kneeling at the Sacrament unlawful, because they
account it a symbo izing with the Church of Rome in a ceremony abused to
Idolatry? who judge the Cross in Baptism unlawful, because it is a new Tessera
or symbol of our Christian Profession of hum^ne Institution, to which those
very duties and blessings of ^he Gospel are annexed, which our Lord has annexed
to Baptism, ^special^y when the words of the Canon are, [To dedicate them ^y
that badge (the sign of the Cross) to the service of Christ, whose benefits
^^stow'd on th m in Baptism the name of the Cross does represent]? Or, wh^
scruple the use of Sponsors in Baptism, to undertake that work which ^s the
Parents duty, and not theirs, unless the Parent be incapable; and the more,
because the 29^h Canon of the Church says [No Parent shall be urged to be
present, nor be admitted to answer as Godfather for his ^wn child]? He that
knows not, there are many thousands who judge ^hese things unlawful, and yet
are persons as eminent for their piety as those that are otherwi^e minded, is
either a stranger to these Nations, or has very little charity left. Whether
these persons be mistaken in these scrup^es or no, I do not now dispute, nor is
it necessary to my Argument to suppose them in the right; But I would hope it
will be granted me, that their credible profession of Religion gives them a
right to all the seals of the Covenant; and that it is not lawful to debar them
from the Lord's Supper, or their children from Baptism on the account of these
scruples. To say otherwise, were to make it lawful for the Ministers of Christ
to reject those whom they have all imaginable reason to be^ieve that their Lord
receives, nay, whom he has commanded them to receive, Romans 14.1. Whereas to
reject such, is a heinous degree of Schism, and opposite to the great law of
Charity and Christian forbearance, which Pastors as well as people are
concerned in. It Is the very sin Diotrephes is charged with, 3 Ep. Joh. v. 10.

Now if it be un^awful to deprive such of external Church Priviledges as in the
judgment of rational Charity have a right to them, then it is unlawful to
profess our Assent and Consent to a Book which obliges us to th^s Uncharitable
and Schismatical practice; For the Book obliges us to administer the Sacraments
only in the manner there prescribed, and by the Canons of the Church those
Ministers incur the danger of Suspension that do otherwise. So that we cannot
be Ministers without approving th^se Schismatical Conditions of
Church Communion, and perhaps excluding the most sober part of a Parish on the
account of them. Whereas Christian Love forbids us to Exclude such, and much
more forbids us to Assent and Consent to their Exclusion.

For the 2d. Cond^tion of the Ministry, That Clause in the Oxford Oath wherein
we must swear never to endeavor any Alteration of Government in the Church.

Does Mr. K think there are no Corruptions in the Government of the Church,
which if altered and reformed would greatly conduce to the advancement of real
Religion? Is the exercise of Church Government by a Lay-Chancellor and the
manner of their process in the Spiritual Courts, no corruption that needs
amendment? What when so solemn a thing as the Censures of the Church is managed
more like a d^sign to correct men's purses then either the Errors of their
Judgment or disorders of their Pract^ce, and as Dr. Burnet in the life of
Bishop Bedel complains, That Excommunication had lost all its force as a
Spiritual Censu^e and was dreaded only on the account of the effects it
produced in Law. And these matters are not since changed for the better. Is
that Discipline by which every particular Church should be as much as possible
preserved from the infecti n and scandal of notoriously wicked members,
possible to be exercised by a Bishop or his Lay-Chancellor for a whole Diocese
containing 3 or 4 hundred or perhaps as many more particular Churches? For
Instance, Is the Bishop of Lincoln whose Diocese contains in it 1000 or 1100
Parish-Churches capable to cal^ all the scandalous sinners within that vast
Precinct to Repentance, to examine the crimes alleged against them, use all
the admonitions and reproofs that tend to reclaim them and after due evidence
of their impenitency cast them out of Church Communion? How many thousands must
he have at once in his Court if he exercised Church Discipline as strictly as
the H. Scriptures enjoin or as the Common Prayer Book owns it was practiced in
the primitive Church. See Pref: to the Commination used in Lent. And does there
need any plainer Argument of the impossibility of it, then that this Discipline
was never actual^y exe c^sed by the Bishops to any purpose, nor one scandalous
si^ner of a thousand in a Diocese ever called to Repentance for his notorious
crimes or censured for his continuing in them (unless it were some scrupulous
Nonconformist.) And does Mr. K. think these things need no alteration? If he
does so, I would gladly know, What Church Government or Discipline signifies?
To what purpose then is all this stir about an Empty Name, when there is no use
to be made of the Thing to the great purposes it is intended for? when it is not
exercised to preserve the honor of Religion by a credible profession of it in
particular Churches, and to secure those Churches from the pernicious influence
of such whom their Haeresies or their scandalous crimes render unfit for
Christian Society?

If these things be gross abuses, If the present Church Government render
Discipline impracticable, and deprive Parish-Ministers of an essential part of
their Office, Is it lawful to swear We will never endeavor an alteration of
this, and that without any limitation signified, as [in an irregular manner or
beyond our particular Sphoere?] Is it lawful for those who know these to be
corruptions which have greatly depraved the Church and dishonored Christianity
to swear they will never e^deavour to amend them? They might as well bind
themselves by oath never to Repent nor Promote the Repentance of others.

If any say the meaning of the Oath is only, that they will never endeavor
this [by any sinful means, or beyond their private sphere]; Why could not these
necessary words be put in? And that this dangerous sense was never intended by
the Convocation, is evident from the 7th Canon, where they thus speak; [
Whosoever shall hereafter affirm that the Government of the Church of England
under his Majesty, by Archbishops, Bishops, Deans, Archdeacons, and the rest
that bear Office in the same is Antichristian, or repugnant to the word of God,
let him be ^xcommunicate ipso facto, and so continue till he repent, and revoke
such his wicked error] They that thus supposed nothing in their Government
repugnant to the word of God, did without doubt intend to bind the inferior
Clergy from all attempts to alter it; and so contrived this Oath, that an
Allegiance might be in these Nations sworn to the Bishops as well as the King.

For the 3d. viz. Reordination. The Divines of the Church of England generally
own it unlawful; and consequently, the imposition of it supposes Ordination by
Presbyters a Nullity. For such therefore as were so ordained to consent to
Reordination, is to own the Nullity of their former Administrations, and cast
the basest slurr on a great part of the Reformed Ministry: And this reminds me
of a passage in the Preface to the Book of Ordination, which acquaints us with
the judgment of those that composed it, Viz. [And to this intent, that these
Orders be reverently esteemed, No man shall be accounted or taken for a lawful
Priest in the Chapter of Engl. or be suffered to execute the Function, except he be
called according to this form, or has had formerly Episcopal Ordination.] And
this we must profess our Assent and Consent to; which he that can do, (and
makes conscience of declaring nothing but what he really believes has either a
large stock of ignorance, or very little charity; (as will appear by what is
said on the Head about Mission). The Authors of that Preface could not but
foresee, that such Declarations would eff^ctually choke a great part of the
Ministers in England and Ireland, and it is hard to imagine what other design
they could have in requiring their Assent and Consent to such passages as these.

For the Oath of Canonical obedience viz. That the Priests or Deacons will
reverently obey their Ordinary and other chief Ministers to whom is committed
the Charge and Government over them.

I suppose It Is meant of obedience to their Ordinary in what he prescribes
agreably to the Canons which are the known Rule he governs by. And so we should
be obliged to read the sentence of excommunication against all that the Bishop
or his Chancellor may according to those Canons excommunicate, now he may
excommunicate all Nonconformists.

And we that know them to be men of holy and blameless lives, must swear to
obey the Bishop, by publishing his schismatical sentence.

I might have added several things more on this Head, were it necessary.

I know some have told the world ^reely, that in their Declaration of Assent,
etc. they intend no more than to receive those Books as an Instrument of peace;
so that they will not preach against any thing contained in them, as some
subscribe even the Articles themselves: To which I need only answer;

1. It used to be acknowledged by Prot. Casuists, (as it is largely asserted by
Bishop Sanderson de Juram.) That to stretch the words of Laws, Oaths, and
Promis^s to meanings different from their common use, is sinful, and a practice
fitter for those that own the Doctrine of Equivocations, etc. than sincere
Christians, or good subjects. Now if to Assent and Consent to all things
contained in, and prescribed by a Book, be not an Assent to them as true, and
Consent to them as good or lawful; it is impossible to understand the sense of
those two words. And what might not a man in this lax sense declare his Assent
and Consent to, tho never so much against his judgment, provided he did not
think himself obliged to speak publicly against it. That the Parliament never
intended that lax sense, appears hence; That when the House of Lords added a
Proviso, that the Declaration in the Act of Uniformity should be understood but
as obliging men to the use of the Book, the House of Commons refused it at a
Conference about it, and gave such reasons against that sense and Proviso to
the Lords; upon which they acquiesc'd, and cast it out.

2. Whatever meaning be put on the forementioned declarations and oaths, None
can exercise his Ministry in the Church of England without denying the
privileges of Christianity to those that have a right to them and without
quiting an essential part of his office as Pastor of a particular Church, or
incurring the danger of suspension for doing otherwise. And the Ministers of
Christ must not put themselves under such a nec^ssity of acting uncharitably
and schismatically toward his true Members, nor thus wi^fully maim and deprave
their Pastoral office.

I appeal then to the Judgment of all, Whether if these conditions of the
Ministry be sinful, That Law be just that shall enjoin them, and make men's
forswearing themselves necessary to the preaching of the Gospel?

I am very sorry Mr. K. and some of his Coat should so often necessitate their
Brethren to harp on this ungrateful string. They pay too great a deference to
the Laws of the Land to cast any need^ess Reflections on them. But men ought
not to bear silently the charge of Schism and Church Rebellion, who are no way
guilty of it. Especially when their silence and neglect to vindicate themselves
may tempt others who are not acquainted with their case, to censure and hate
them wrongfully, as clothed with these odious characters. I hope the precedent
discourse has evidenced the charge to be undeserved and false. And therefore
whatever expressions seem to grate on the Laws, must be imputed to the unhappy
necessity put upon them to give a true representation of their case, by the
virulent accusations of their brethren, from whom one would think they might
rather expect some pity. I doubt not but the moderate and charitable part of
the Conforming Clergy have other apprehensions of their brethren, and are
ashamed of these passages in M. K's Answer. But for those that approve the
silencing Laws, arraign their Brethren as Church-Rebels for not obeying them,
and condemn those societies that need and embrace their help merely on that
score, as no parts of the Catholic Church, even when they exclude not the
Popish Churches, It will appear, I think, from this Paper, that their Arguments
are not so strong as their Passion, and a little more charity would advance the
reputation of their Intellectuals as well as Morals. Such men may long exclaim
against our divisions, but their own principles and temper are the most
insuperable obstacle to the healing of them.

Having considered the Questions in the Preface, I come to examine the first
set of those in the Pamphlet it self, which concern the Mission of the first
Reformers, and they are by Mr: K. reduced to these five.

1. What Priesthood or Holy Orders had the first Reformers but what they
received from the hands of Roman Catholic Bishops?

2 Who authorized the first Reformers to preach their Protestant Doctrine, and
administer their Protestant Sacraments?

3. Whether Cranmer and his Associates could condemn the Church of Rome by
pretense of the Mission they received from her Bishops?

4. Whether a Presbyterian Minister having received Orders from a Protestant
Bishop, can by virtue of such Orders pronounce the Church of England a corrupt
Church?

5. Whether an Act of Parliament in France, Spain, or Germany, be not as good
an Authority for Popery there, as in England for Protestancy?

These are Questions one would think too ridiculous to be seriously proposed.
But I am heartily sorry Mr. K. can find no better Answer to them than what he
has given, which in several passages runs too much on the same wretched
mistak^s that led D. Manby to offer them with so much confidence.

And therefore I need say little more to expose them; than first state the
Controversy about Mission, and then apply the true Notion of it to these
Questions.

There is a twofold Mission, Immediate or Mediate:

1. Immediate, Which those had whom God sent to deliver some extraordinary
message, or some new revelation of his will to men. Such a Mission had the
extraordinary Prophets under the old Testament, the Apostles and Evangelists
under the new. And these brought some Credentials of their Mission to convince
men of the truth of it. That immediate Mission is now ceased; the revelation of
the Divine Will being completed in the holy Scriptures, and directions given
for the continuance of a Ministry in the Church. There is therefore,

2. A Mediate Mission, or Call to the Pastoral Office. (For we are not here
concerned with the office of Deacons), I mean that office of Bishops, or
Elders, or Ministers (for they are but several names to import the same thing)
so often described in the holy Scriptures. The office contains in it many great
and laborious works, To teach the Flock committed to their charge, be their
Guides in public Worship, and rule them by Evangelical Discipline. A Call to
this Office gives the person called authority to do those works, and lays on
him a personal obligation to do them. It Is from Christ alone that power is
derived by which men are authorized and obliged. It Is his will expressed in the
Gospel-Charter constitutes men his Ministers. And all that is further requisite,
is, to know how he signifies his will concerning this or that particular
person, being one of his Ministers.

To that purpose we must consider what Christ has done already in the
Gospel-Charter, and what he has left for men to do.

Christ has already determined in the Gospel that there shall be a Ministry in
his Church to the end of the World: He has described their Office, and all the
particular works of it; as what Doctrine they shall preach, what Worship they
shall celebrate, how they shall rule the Church they oversee, and what
Discipline they shall administer in it: He has left them sufficient rules in
all matters of universal constant necessity for performing these works: He has
described the duties which Christian Flocks owe to such Pastors: He has
assigned the qualifications of such Pastors; He has made it the duty of people
that need the labors of such qualified persons to seek their help, and of
Ministers to call them out, approve, and invest them in that Office, and of the
Civil Magistrate to protect the Worthy.

It belongs not therefore to any men to appoint any new office in the Church of
Christ, or maim that Office he has instituted, or impose sinful conditions in
order to its exercise, or impose any other duties on the people than he has
done; much less does it belong to them to determine whether the Gospel shall be
preached, or the necessities of souls who want such Pastors supplied.

All therefore that the Gospel has left to the Ordainers, is the Designation of
the person to whom Christ's Charter shall convey the power, the approbation of
his qualifications, and the Investiture of him, or solemnizing his admittance.
The Ordainers therefore do not give the power to others as from themselves, nor
does it pass hrough their hands, nor can they diminish it, as ex gr. should the
Ordainers say, [Receive thou power to preach and adm^nister the Sacraments, but
not to rule the Flock:] Th^s restraint or diminution is null, as being contrary
to the Charter of Christ. They are but Instruments of Inauguration, as a
Recorder that invests a Mayor in that office which the King's Charter gives
him. And the great design of the Interposition of Pastors in this matter is, to
secure to the Church a succession of ab^e and blameless Pastors, of which they
are supposed most fit to judge. Ordination by Pastors is God's ordinary regular
way of admittance to prevent the Churches being depraved and injured by the
intrusion of unqualified persons And therefore it should not be neglected
wherever it may be had. Only it must be added, that the law of Christ which
determines, that the Gospel shall be preached by persons so qualified, is
founded on the necessity of souls, and the great law of Charity; and therefore
is of constant and indispensible necessity in the Church. But the command of
their being Ordained by Pastors, is but subservient to the former, and relates
only to the ordinary regular execution of it; and does not oblige where there
is a physical or moral impossibility of observing it, and yet a necessity of
the Ministry. For Ordination by Pastors is not of absolute necessity to the
being of the Ministry; There have been and may be extraordinary cases wherein a
man may be obliged to be a Minister without it: To instance in two cases;

What if many Christians should be cast on the shore of some Pagan Nation,
where they are forced to stay a considerable time, and one among them be more
eminently qualified than the rest, to be their Minister; the rest entreat his
help; and will any say, that the Providence of God, which has given him such
abilities, does not sufficiently authorize him to exercise them in this case of
necessity? When the work of the Ministry is of so much greater importance and
necessity than that positive precept about the ordering of it. Nay, to propose
a Case far more considerable:

What if all the pre^ent Pastors in a Nation should corrupt the Christian
Doctrine and Worship, and impose those corruptions on the people as terms of
Church Communion? What if they refuse to ordain any that will not join with
them herein? The people dare not comply with those terms, and because they
would not live without the advantages of the public Ministry and Worship, they
invite such to take the Pastoral care of their Souls as are duly qualified;
that such qualified persons should not accept Ordination on such wicked terms,
is past doubt; But what if they live so remote from any other Christian Kingdom
that they cannot have Ministerial Ordination elsewhere. Will any say, that in
this case, those qualified persons for want of this Ordination ought not to
^^ke on them the Pastoral charge of those people, which God h^s given them such
abilities for, and such a Call by his providence (...)? To say this, were to
set up the Rule about the regular orde^ing the Ministry above the ends of the
Ministry it self, and o^ (...) circumstances of the Duty to the substance of
it. Where (...) ^sitive precepts must always yield to moral, and matters or
(...) order to the end of the Duty ordered; and the former must n^ be pleaded
against the latter. Ordination by Pastors is no^ therefore there necessary
where it cannot be had without sin; and yet without a Ministry; the interest of
the Gospel, and the salvation of Souls, are like to suffer the most visible
prejudice and detriment. For these are matters infinitely more precious and
valuable than any Rules of external order, and the very end those Rules aim at,
and are subservient to. And if this be not granted, it must be left to the
pleasure of such corrupt Pastors, whether the people who cannot join in
communion with them, shall enjoy the means of their salvation, or be obliged to
live like Atheists without any public worship of God. And he that asserts
this, may next assert, that God has left it to their pleasure, whether the
people shall be saved or damned; and that it is better they should be
canonically damned than uncanonically saved. I propose these Cases to show the
vanity and falsehood of that Notion some make such a noise about, viz: The
necessity of an uninterrupted succession of Ordination. And if that principle
be false: much more is theirs who assert the necessity of Successive prelatical
ordination.

But tho in such extraordinary Cases, The extraordinary call of God's
providence is sufficient to authorize a man to the sacred ^ffice, and sup^lies
the defect of Ministerial Ordination; Yet the command of God which enjoins such
Ordination does oblige where it may be had; and the neglect of it would bring
great confusion and disorder into the Church, and expose it to the danger of
being corrupted and divided by unqual^fied Intruders.

The only thing that remains to be considered under this Head is, Who are
entrusted with the power of ordination, Or whom has Christ appointed to approve
and invest others in the Ministerial office?

Answ. Those are entrusted with this power and appointed to this wo^k, Who are
themselves such Bishops or Elders or Pastors as the holy Scriptures describe,
He that denies this, is obliged to acquaint us what other Officers the Apostles
left in the Church, to whom this sole power of ordination was entrusted then,
or what other officers claimed and exercised it in the primitive Church, Which
none that I know of ever pretended to do.

But now those whom the holy Scriptures call Bishops or Elders, were the stated
pastors of particular Congregations.

That the same persons are in Scripture called Bishops and Elders is too
palpable to be denied (However the Authors of the Preface to the Book of
Ordination are pleased to say the contrary, viz. That it is evident to all men
diligently reading the holy Scriptures and ancient Authors, that from the
Apostles time there have been these orders in Christ's Church, Bishops, Priests
and Deacons, (as several offices) and even this palpable mistake among the rest
we are required to declare our assent to.) Those who are 20 Acts. 17. called
the Elders of the Church of Ephesus, are commanded, v. 28. to take heed to all
the Flock, over whom the holy Ghost had made them overseers or Bishops. The
description of a Bishop 1 Timothy: 3 chapter and of an Elder 1 Tit. are the same; And
Titus when directed to ordain Elders must see that they be blameless, for a
Bishop must be blameless as the Steward of God, v. 6, 7.

That these Bishops or Elders were Pastors of single congregations is evident
from the Duties enjoined them toward those under their care, and from the
Duties which the Flocks are required to pay them.

They are to labor among the people and admonish them, And the people were to
know and esteem them highly in love for their works sake 1 Thessalonians. 5, 12, 13.
They were to rule their Flock, speak the word of God to them, and to watch over
their Souls as those that must give an account; 13 Hebr. 7, 17, 24. They were
to take heed to all the Flock over whom the Holy Ghost had made them overseers.
20 Acts, 28. Wherein the Apostle proposes his own practice, (while he stayed
among them as their temporary pastor) for their imitation viz That he taught
them publicly, and from house to house, and ceased not to warn every one with
tears day and night 20 Acts, 20, 31. v. They were to be ensamples to the Flock
who were to follow their Faith considering the end of their Conversation, 1
Pet. 5. v. 3, compared with Heb: 13.7, They were to visit the sick and pray for
them James, 5, 14. see Dr. Hammond's Annotations on these places applying them
to Bishops.

Now let us consider whether these mutual duties, betwixt Pastor and Flock were
to be performed betwixt the Pastor or Pastors of a single congregation, and the
congregation committed to their care or betwixt a Diocesan Bishop and so vast a
Flock as his Diocese.

That one or more Pastors of a single congregation associated for personal
communion are capable of performing these duties to their Flock, and their
Flock to them is past all doubt.

But can these mutual Duties be performed betwixt a Diocesan Bishop and his
Diocese? Is he capab^e of laboring amongst them in word, and being esteemed of
them highly for his Works sake, when very few, comparatively of his Diocese,
ever saw him, or heard him preach? Can he watch over the souls of all in his
Diocese as his Flock, and warn them of their evil courses, when he knows not
one of them in many score thousands? Can the Diocese follow the Faith of such
Bishops, and consider the end of their conversation, and propose them as their
patterns, when not one in many thousands know any more of the life of their
Bishop, than if he lived at the other end of the World? Are such Bishops
obliged to visit the sick of their Diocese? Can they rule them by the exercise
of Church Discipline against the notoriously scandalous, when perhaps there are
forty or fifty thousand such in their Diocese? Can they use all the due process
of serious reproofs and persuasions that are requisite to be u^ed for
reclaiming such sin^ers, when there is so vast a number of them, and those so
remote in their habitations, and the Bishops wholly strangers to the most of
them? These are so pa^pable impossibilities, as to an unbyast considerer, are
instead of a thousand Arguments; that the Bishops or Elders which these Texts
speak of were not Diocesan Bishops, i. e. they were not the Overseers or Rulers
of many score or hundreds of Churches, as their Flocks to whom they were to
perform all these Pastoral works, and the Flocks to pay them the forementioned
Duties; But the Pastors of such a number of people as they could thus
personally oversee, teach, rule, watch over, visit, etc. and such a number as
could pay them that love, submission, imitation, etc. prescribed in the
forequoted Texts. Especially when it is so expressly asserted. Acts 14. v. 23.
That such Elders were ordained in every Church, which Titus is also appointed
to do in every City, 1 Tit. 5. And it is well known every Town equal to our
usual Market Towns in England was then called (...), or City; and but a few
comparatively of the inhabitants at first converted to Christianity.

I grant, that soon after the Apostles time, the name of Bishop and Presbyter,
or Elder, begun to be distinguished, and that of Bishop applied to a stated
Praeses or Moderator of a Presbytery or certain number of Elders. But it is as
evident, That the Bishop and his Presbyters in the Primitive Church were but
the Rulers of one Single Congregation capable of personal communion, not of
many Score or hundred Churches. How plain to this purpose is that known passage
of Ignatius (whose Authority the Defenders of Prelates have so vainly boasted
of.) who in his Epistle to the Philadelphians gives this certain mark of every
Churches individuation, viz. There is to every Church one Altar and one Bishop
together with the Presbytery (or Eldership) and the Deacons my fellow servants.
(...), etc
The same Author in his Epistle to Polycarp advises that good Bishop to have
fr^quent Churhc-Assemblies, and to enquire after all by name, and not to
despise servants and maids: So in his Epistle to the Smyrnenses, Fellow all of
you the Bishop as Jesus Christ does the Father, (...), etc:
and the Presbyte^y as the Apostles, and reverence the Deacons as the
appointment of God. Let none without the Bishop transact the affairs of the
Church. Let that be accounted a valid communion which is in his presence, or by
his permission; for where the Bishop is, there let the multitude be. It Is not
lawful, without the Bishop, to Baptize, or make a Love-Feast.

Nothing can more fully evidence that the Church of Smyrna had their B shop,
Presbyters, and Deacons; and 'twere ridiculous to apply those pass^ges to a
modern Bishop and his Diocese.

Justin Martyr's known account of Church=Assemb^ies evinces the truth of this
which the learned Mr. Jos. Mede in his Discourse of Churches quotes, p. 48, 49,
50. and from thence acknowledges, They had then but one Altar, (or place of
Communion) to a Church, taken for the company or coporation of the faithful, as
united under one Bishop.

Tertullian's account of particular Church Assemblies assures us, Apol. cap.
that Church Discipline was exercised in them, and that by the probati
seniores, or approved Elders (among whom we own the Preses was called Bishop.
Even in Cyprian's time, his famous Church of Carthage was not so great, but
that he frequently professes he would do nothing in Church Affairs without the
consent of his Presbyters, and all the people, especially in the censuring of
Offenders. As in his Ep. 3.6, 10 11, 13, 14, 26, 27, 28, etc. Edit Goul And Ep
68. as he there declares the people have the chiefest power of choosing worthy
Priests, and refusing the unworthy; so when he relates the manner of the
Ordination of a Bishop, he tells us, All the next Bishops of the same Province
do come together to that people over whom the Bishop is set, and the Bishop is
appointed, the people being present who fulliest know the life of every one,
and have thoroughly seen the Act of every one's conversation. Which also we saw
done with you in the Ordination of Sabinus our Colleague, that the office of a
Bishop was given him, and hands imposed on him in the place of Basilides by the
suffrage of the whole Fraternity, and by the judgment of the Bishops that had
met together, etc.

We may easily gather what the Bishops Church was when all the people must be
present, and judge of his life, and are supposed to be thoroughly acquainted
with it. A Diocese of the mod^rn extent would be hard put to it to meet
together for this purpose, and pass their judgment concerning the life of their
Bishop.

The Constitutions and Canons called Apostolical, assign such duties to the
Bishop, as plainly imply his relation to a Congregation capable of personal
Communion, as his Charge or Flock.

And (to give a brief summary of those proofs which it would require a large
volume to insist fully on) if we consider impartially all the duties which the
most ancient Christian Writers describe, as belonging to the office of a
Bishop, viz. [To be the ordinary public Teacher of his Flock, (a) and Baptizer
of those that were received into his Church. (b) To confirm the Baptized, to
reconcile and absolve all penitents, to administer the Lords Supper. (c) To
receive all oblations, etc. and distribute them, To take care of the poor and
sick and strangers as their Overseer and Curator (d) To try all causes about
scandal in his Church with his Presbyters in the presence of his Flock (e) To
Ordain other Bishops and Elders, To keep Synods among his neighbor Bishops, To
grant communicatory Letters (f) etc.] And to how great a flock one man is
capable to perform them: If we consider further that the Bishop and his
Presbyters lived usually in the same House and in Common, at least near the
Church, and that in the distribution of their maintenance one half of it was
destined to repair the Fabric or Temple, and maintain the poor; the other half
to the Bishop and his Clergy, or Presbyters (g); That it was the common custom
for the Presbyters to sit in the same Seat with the Bishop (in a semicircle)
and the Deacons below them (h); That the Deacons are always mentioned as
Officers in the same Church with the Bishop (i). That the Love Feasts were not
to be kept without the Bishops permission, and he was to have his share sent
him, if absent (k). That the way of strangers communicating was by
communicatory Letters or Certificates which were to be showed to the Bishop of
the Church where they desired to communicate (l). That a Schism was described
by setting up Altar against Altar, every communicating Church having its Altar
(or Table for celebrating the Lord's Supper) and Bishop (m)

(a) Constit: Apost. c. 26. Just: Mart. Apol: 2: (b) Tertull. de Cor: Mil. c.
3. (c) Ignat. Ep. ad Smyrn: p: 4. Just: Mart: Apol: 2. (d) Just. Mart. ibid
Constit: Apost. c. 27. Apost. Can. 5: (e) See Cypr Ep. passim, Tertull. Apol.
c. 39. and many more in Blondel de Jure plebis, etc. (f) See Albasp. Observe. p.
254, 255. (g) See Tolet de sacerd. lib. 5. cap. 4. n. 15. and Pad. Paul Sarpi's
Tract of Church-benefices translated by Dr. Denton. (h) Constit. Apost. c. 57.
Counc. Carth. 4: Can: 35 (i) 1 Phil. v. 1. Clem. Rom: Ep: ad Cor: p: 54, 55:
Pius in Ep: Justo Episc: Biblioth: Patr: Tom: 3: p: 15: Constit: Apost: c: 30
and 44. (k) Ignat: Ep. ad Smyrn. forequoted. Constit. Apost. c. 28: (l) Albasp.
Observe. p. 254, 255. (m) Ignat. Ep: ad Philad. forecited. Cypr. Ep: 40, 72, 73.
The ancient description of a Church is well known, Plebs Episcopo coadunata:
See Dr. Still. Iren. p. 416.

That the Bishop was chosen by the Suffrages or Votes of the people he took the
charge of, (n) and (as was said before) administered Church Censures in the
presence of his Flock, whose judgment he consulted (o:) That Presbyters did but
sedom preach publicly in the two or three first Ages, except in Alexandria or
some few Churches that had Presbyters of more than ordinary Learning and
Abilities; Chrysostom's preaching at Antioch, and Austin's at Hippo, while
Presbyters are noted as unusual; That every City had its Bishop, is granted by
all; (and Dr. Hammond and Grotius own many had two, nay, some had more, as
might appear by many instances, were it needful.) And every Town of any bigness
was then called (...), or City, and the number of Christians did not of a long
time even in the larger Cities exceed that of our larger Parishes. Nor were
Bishops confined to Cities or Towns; for the Country Village^ (where three
were any tolerable number of Christians to m^ke a Church or Congregation) had
long their Bishops also, who were not put down till Ambition had begun to
deprave the Church, and for a reason agreeable to the humor of those that did
it, ne vilescat nomen Episcopi (p): If we consider the nearness of Episcopal
See's of which we read many that were much nearer one another than our
Market Towns, perhaps one, two, or a few more miles distant (q): If we observe
all the small inconsiderable p^aces that were the See's of many famous ancient
Bishops, not half so big as our lesser sort of Perishes (r): If we consider the
vast number of Bishops mentioned within a narrow compass of ground.

(n) See Cypr. Ep. 68 forecited, and many more testimonies in Baxter's
Church History, and Answer to Stillingfl. from p. 128 to 133. and in Blondel de
Jure plebis, etc. (a) See Blondel, ibid. (p) Council. Laod. Can. 57. (q) To give
a few instances; In Palestine, Diospolis or Lydda was but six miles from Joppa,
Joppa four miles from Janmia; Rhinccoruca four miles from Anthedon, and
Anthedon not three miles from Gaza, and Gaza, twenty furlongs from Constantia
(anciently called Majuma). So in Egypt, Nicopolis was twenty furlongs from
Alexandria, and Taposiris, Canopus, Heraclia and Naucratis not much farther
from one another; and yet all these Episcopal See's (r). Mr. Thorndike Right of
Churches reviewed, tells us, p. 53. that in Africa Bishops were so plentiful,
that every good Village must needs be the Seat of an Episcopal Church; and the
African Church, as Dr. Stillingfleet tells us, Iren. p. 373. longest retained
the primitive simplicity and humility.

Binnius tells us of Sylvester calling together 284 Bishops, of which 139 were
out of Rome, or not far from it. A Council of Donatists at Carthage had 270
Bishops (as Austin tells us, Ep. 68) about the year 308, and yet they were the
smaller number, and complained of Persecution. Victor. Vtic: in Persec: Vand.
acquaints us that in that part of Africa 660 Bishops fled besides the great
number murdered and imprisoned and many to^erated, The 6th Provincial Council
of Carthage had 217 Bishops. And to give an instance of later date which we are
more capab^e to judge of, even Patrick is said to have founded here in Ireland
365 ^hurches, ordained so many Bishops besides 3000 Presbyters. Usher de
Eccles: Brit. Primord. p. 950. If we add hereto the late date of Par^h^s as
distinguished from the Bishops Church, (The Government of the Cathedral by the
Bishop with the Dean, and chapters being a Relict of the ancient Episcopal
Government) From these evidencies (and many more might be added) duly weighed,
We may easily judge what the ancient Churches and Bishops were. A primitive
Bishop had no more then one Church, or assembly capable of personal Communion
under his Charge, which he rul d with the joint concurrence of his Presbyters
or Elders. The first that set up more Assemblies under one Bishop were Rome and
Alexandria, and no other Church can be proved to have done so for near 300
years nor many Churches for 4 or 5 hundred. And even those Assemblies did but
long make up one communicating Church, and were but to the Bishops Church as
Chapels of ease are to our larger Parish Churches. But for Diocesan Churches
and Bishops, it is evident from these few remarks, That they are entire
strangers to the primitive Church in its first and purest Ages. 'Twas only
Ambition (striving to model the Ecclesiastical Government by the Civil) that
first gave rise to them, and from the same ambition in the Empire, sprung up
Metropolitans, Patriarks and Popes, (The last of these long claiming only a
Primacy of order among the rest of the Bishops in the Empire, for which
Constantinople long vy'd with them, it is but of late they have improved their
pretensions into a claim of Supremacy over the Catholic Church as the Vicars
of Christ) And it is too observable in Church History that as the Seats of
Bishops swelled and their power encreast by engrossing to themselves that work
which a score or hundred Bishops could hardly discharge, so all true Discipline
was gradually disused and lost, and the Church miserably depraved by the
corruption of it, as well as divided by the Contentions of aspiring Bishops
about their primacy and usurped power.

If you desire further satisfaction on this head, I referr you to Mr. Baxters
Treatise of Episcopacy who in the 2d. part 5, 6, 7: chapter has given as
Satisfactory an account of the ancient Episcopacy as can be exp^cted of any
matter of fact at that distance The few slender exceptions produced by Dr.
Stillingfl. in his Vnreason. of Seper: (which yet do not reach the two first
Centuries) are so clearly invalidated and exposed by Mr. Baxters Answer to Dr:
St. p. 100, 101, etc. and by Mr. Clerkson in his, No evidence of Diocesan
Churches in Antiq: etc: that I shall take it for granted that, Diocesan Bishops
and Churches are Strangers to Antiquity, and shall look on that cause as
desperate and lost, unless some of its Patrons could disprove that full stream
of evidence he has brought against it from the most ancient Christian writers
in the forementioned Treatise. There are few considerable defenders of Prelacy,
whose writings he has not animadverted on.

And it is strange to observe, how far the most of them mistake the true state
of the controversy. Some go about to prove a sort of general superintendents
Archbishops, or Metropolitans who had some inspection over the Bishops of
particular Churches within their Province, and presided in their Synods, but
did not put down the Government and exercise of Church Discipline in those
particular Churches, as if this were a proof of those Diocesan Bishops that do
cast out all Government and exercise of Discipline by the Bishops or Pastors of
particular Churches, and pretend to be the sole Pastors of the Diocese. And yet
the jurisdiction of such Metropolitans, is of no very ancient date, and quite
contrary to the judgment of Cyprian, who disowns any Bishop of Bishops, and
owns only Bishops or Overseers of Flocks or Churches. Others take a great deal
of pains to prove the stated presidency of one (by the name of Bishop) in a
Consessus or Bench of Presbyters, who had but all one Communicating Church
under their charge, which is not denied to have begun early in the Church as a
Remedy of Schism. But that difference of Bishop and Presbyters, when both were
but joynt-rulers of a Congregation, is so far from being a proof of modern
prelacy, that such Diocesan Bishops have put down the primitive Parish-Bishops,
and monopoliz'd the power of many score, or hundreds of such Bishops to
themselves, and thereby rendered true Church Government impracticable. Nay that
very difference betwixt the Bishop and Presbyters of a particular Church, seems
to have had it is rise wholly in the notorious disparity of his gifts, learning,
age, etc. above the rest, but was never esteemed by them a difference in office
or power, nor is it ascribed to any higher Original ^hen Human Constitution by
Jerome, Au^^in, Amb^ose, Sedulius, Primasius, Chrysostom, Theodoret, etc. not
to mention ^^der writers.

If then Ordination belong to Scripturall Bishops, and such be the Pastors of
particular Churches, (...) none else di^ or^^^^ in the Primitive Church in its
purest Ages Then a l such Bishops have that power. Nor indeed have any power to
or^^^ but on the account of their being such Scriptural Bish^^s. ^h^ office of
Diocesan Prelates being a manifest Usurpation in the Church which had it is rise
in human Ambition, That U^u pation cannot rightfully deprive the true Bishops
or Pastors o^ that power of Church Government, which is as essential to their
office as the power of teaching or being guides in worship. And whatever may be
said for Parish-Bishops, submitting for peace sake, to the usurpation of a
Diocesan, (ex: gr. when he claims the sole power of Ordination) where the true
ends of it are attained, yet they have no reason to submit to it, when Diocesan
Bishops shall so abuse that usurped power as to corrupt and deprave the
Ministry by imposing sinful terms, and hazard the ruin of Souls by neglecting
to provide a number of faithful Pastors suitable to their real necessities. The
Ordination therefore of the Pastors or Bishops of particular Church^s is more
agreeable to the holy Scripture and primitive Antiquity, and consequently more
unexceptionably Valid then that of a single Diocesan.

From whence it follows, That the ordination of Pastors in the Presbyterian
Churches is Valid; because either they are ordained by Diocesan Bishops, who
had power to ordain on the account of that office they have in common with
scriptural Bishops, tho they have none as Diocesan; or they are ordained by a
concurrence of scriptural Bishops, to whose office the power of Ordination was
annexed by divine Institution, and and cannot be alienated by any humane
usurpation. For Christ has given none power to change his Institutions. Nor can
the will of the Ordainers debar his Officers from any part of that Authority
which his Charter conveys to them. And if the validity of Ordination by such
scriptural Bishops be denied, the Church had no ordained Ministers for a
Century or two at least.

Having laid down these Notions about Mission, I come to examine D: M's Quest's.

Quest: 1: What priesthood or holy Orders had the first Reformers, but what
they received from the hands of Roman Catholic Bishops?

Answ: If D: M: mean, that their priesthood or ministerial office was conveyed
to them by the Bishops, as the Givers of it, they received it from none at all;
nor has any that power to give; it is given by Christ in his Charter. But if he
mean, that the Roman Catholic, or Popish Bishops did invest them in that
office. It Is owned, that most of the Reformed Ministers were ordained by them;
and it is not material, whether they were R man Catholic Bishops of the same
rigid stamp as those of the present Age, or no; for the validity of their
Ordination depends on the Essentials of the Pastoral office retained, and not
on their horrid corruption of it. And as Mr. K. well observes, they ordained as
Christian, not as Roman Bishops. But what if some of the Reformers became
Pastors to the people upon their necessities and call, who durst not comply
with the sinful terms of Ordination in the Church of Rome, and yet could have
no other? They would not be in this case destitute of a true Mission: For the
evident necessities of the peoples souls (who earnestly desired to have the
Truths of the Gospel purely preached, and divine Worship purely celebrated; and
who could not with a safe conscience continue in the Communion of the Roman
Church), and their Qualifications for so necessary a work were a sufficient
signification of the will of Christ that they should undertake it. For the
precept about the ordinary regular way of Admission to the Ministry did not
oblige where it could not be lawfully observed and where there was a far
greater necessity of a pure untainted Ministry then of that positive point of
Order. For else on supposition, no Pas^o^s had embraced the Reformation, The
people who did, would have been obliged to have lived like A^heists without
public worship.

2 Q: Who authorized the first Reformers to preach their Protestant Doctrine,
and administer their Protestant Sac aments?

Answ. It does not belong to the Ordainers to determine what Doctrine the
person ordained shall preach, but to Christ who has determined that matter
already. And therefore if the Doctrine which our first Reformers preached, and
the Sacraments they administered be Christ's, as Mr. K. well argues, it is
ridiculous to ask who authorized them to preach the one, or administer the
other. Christ did; and no men can authorize any to preach any other Doctrine,
or administer any other Sacraments. The Bishops or Priests in the Roman Church
had no right or Mission from Christ to preach Popish Doctrine, or administer
Popish Sacraments, or celebrate Popish Wo^sh^p so far as these are contrary to
the Doctrine, Sacraments, and Worship contained in the Gospel. These were gross
corruptions of their office; and therefore when any of them embraced the
Reformation, when they begun to preach the Gospel more purely, and to celebrate
divine Worship more free from the ido^atrous and superstitious mixtures that
had prevailed in the Roman Church, they restored their Ministry to its true
use, and so far purged it from that wretched depravation. And in this debate
Mr. K need not be ashamed to defend either Luth^r, or Calvin, or Zuinglius. For
S cinus or h^s followers, they can produce no Mission to preach against the
Divinity and satisfaction of the Son of God, no more than D. M. to preach u^
the worship of Images, or Invocation of Angels and Saints, or Adoration of the
Host, etc.

For the 3d and 4th Qu. I shall join them.

Whether Cranmer and his Associates could condemn the Church of Rome by
pretense of the Mission they received from her Bishops. If so, whether a
Presbyterian Minister having ^eceived Orders from a Protestant Bishop, can by
virtue of such Orders pronounce the Church of England a corrupt Church?

It Is evident both these Questions are founded on this ridiculous fancy, that
the person Ordained is obliged to conform his Ministrations to the judgment or
humor of the Ordainers. It Is true indeed, if in any Church, the Ministers that
are Ordained be obliged to subscribe a Confession of Faith, or observe any
public Rules in their Worship, they ought not to be Ordained on these terms,
if they think any thing in the Doctrine of that Church, or the Ru^es of its
worship contrary to the Doctrine of Christ, or the Gospel Rule of Worship. Much
less should they enter into that obligation with a design to break it
afterward. This were odious dissimulation. But if any have been Ordained in a
Church that has obliged them to subscribe certain Articles of Faith, and Rules
of Worship, which at their Ordination they had no scruple against, and shall
upon deeper study find many of those Artic^es were gross and dangerous Errors,
and those Rules of Worship idolatrous or superstitious, they are not obliged to
preach those Errors, or practice those Rules against the dictates of their own
con^cience. Nay, if those errors and corruptions endanger the salvation of
their Flock, they ought to preach against them, and warn souls of their danger.
And not to do this, is to betray those souls, to desert the cause and testimony
of Christ, and fail of that fidelity he expects in the discharge of their
office. They ought to do all in their sphere toward a Reformation; and if they
should be suspended for the doing that which Christ has made their duty, the
suspension is unjust and null, as being opposite to the laws and interest of
Christ, and is indeed a Rebellion against him. If therefore the Doctrines and
Worship of the Roman Church were pernicious, and endangered the salvation of
souls, and our Reformers had just ground to account them such, they were bound
by the laws of Christ to preach against them, and warn the people of them, and
in their sphere attempt a Reformation. Nor would any suspension or
excommunication of those Popish Bishops that Ordained them, justify their
deserting their Ministry, and betraying the interest of Christ and souls. And
they might do this without assuming any Authority over the Church of Rome; they
only refused subjection to her unjust impositions. And so may Presbyterian
Ministers refuse subjection to the sinful impositions of those Prelates that
Ordained them, and are not obliged to lay down their Office when ever their
Ordainers shall unjustly silence them, as we proved before.

But Mr. K. I perceive likes not this Answer, and therefore chooses to justify
the Church of Engl. upon narrower grounds; And therefore in his Reply to these
Questions;

1. He grants that, A Presbyter or Bishop ought not to preach against the
Constitution of the Church whereof they are Members.

2. He asserts, This was not the Reformers Case, and therefore he founds the
lawfulness of the Reformation entirely upon its being made by the Convocation,
in whom he supposes the supreme Church Government lodged in this Nation.

Had Mr: K. only argued, that the Reformation in England was not only lawful,
but effected in the most regular way with the concurrence of the Civil
Magistrate upon the advice of so considerable a part of the Clergy; none could
have blamed him for taking in all the considerations that prove the Reformation
in England to have been the most unexceptionably regular and orderly. But that
in his eager zeal to defend the Prelates of the Church of England in silencing
their brethren, he should make such a Concession to the Papists as may be used
against the Reformation elsewhere with so great advantage, was not ingenuous.
But we must excuse him that he had rather wound the Reformed Churches abroad,
than not gratify his spleen against the Presbyterians at home, and cared not
whom he made Schismatics, provided he fastened that character on his Brethren.

Let us therefore examine this Concession of his, p. 27. A Presbyter or Bishop
ought not to preach against the Constitution of that Church of which they are
members. The reason he gives is, Because there is a regular way wherein they
may endeavor a Reformation* viz. If they find any thing amiss in her Doctrine
or Discipline, they may make their application for the redress of it to those
that have power to reform it, but must not presume, being subjects, to u^urp
their Governors power.

But what if their Governors refuse to reform, and silence those that desire,
or in their own sphere attempt it? All the answer is,

But if such a Bishop or Presbyter be censured and suspended, he is thereby
discharged from the execution of his Office, and he must no more make a Schism
to regain it, than one must make a Rebellion in the State to regain a Civil
Office. This we urge, and I think with reason against the Presbyterians and
other Sects among us, that either have no Ordination or appointment to their
Offices from the Church of England or Ireland, or else abuse the power against
her, which was once given them by her, and from which they are again legally
suspended. And as we urge this against them, so likewise against D. M. etc.

Let us briefly consider the Consequences of this Concession, and the grounds
of it.

1. Its Consequences.

The first Protestant Pastors in France, and most other parts of Europe were
before the Reformation members of those Churches where they lived, and subject
to their Governors; they had received Ordination by the hands of Popish
Prelates. God was pleased so to bless their studies, and search after truth,
that they begun to discover abundance of gross and pernicious errors in the
Doctrine, and a wretched mixture of Idolatry and Superstition in the worship of
the Church they lived in. What should they do? they were but particular
Presbyters, and therefore should not according to Mr. K's principle preach
against the Constitution of the Church which gave them their Office. Many of
them tried his remedy; they represented these things to their Ecclesiastical
Superiors, as Luther to the Archbishop of Mentz, and the Bishop of Brandenburg,
and the Pope himself. But they soon learnt by dear experience, how averse the
Court of Rome was to any Reformation, and how little it was to be expected from
the Prelates, who either had no will, or no courage to attempt a Reformation
against the will of the Pope. Luther and all his followers in stead of
prevailing with those that had the conduct of the Church were excommunicated as
Heretics. Now according to Mr. K's principle, these Reformers being censured
and suspended by the Prelates to whom they were subject, were discharged from
the execution of their Office, and should no more have made a Schism in the
Church to regain it, than one must make a Rebellion in the State to regain a
Civil Office.. And since they did not desert their Office, but went on to
preach against the Constitution of the Romish Church, and the will of their
Superiors the Popish Prelates, they were no better than Schismatics and
Church-Rebels; Nay, if his Notion of the Catholic Church be true, the people
that separated from the Popish Prelates, and adhered to their excommunicated
Pastors, ceast to be members of the body of Christ. And how great a part of the
Reformed Churches and their Pastors fall under this heavy charge? And will Mr.
K. own all these unavoidable consequences upon mature deliberation? What if we
should once more have a Popish Convocation in England, and these should restore
the Romish Religion, and suspend a^l the present Parish-Ministers (whom Mr. K.
thinks now lawful Pastors), According to his Principle they being but
Presbyters, and the Bishops Subjects, must not preach against the Constitution
of the Church of England, declaring her judgment by a Convocation in whom the
supreme Government of the Church is lodged; they must therefore cease their
Ministry, and no more make a Schism by the exercise of it, than they must make
a Rebellion in the State to regain a Civil Office. Nay, to separate from such
Governors of the Church of England, will prove those that do it no Catholic
members of the Church. The same principles may be applied to the Arrians, who
got Imperial Councils, and consequently the Government of the Imperial Church
into their hands, and for such Pastors as Athanasius to preach against
Arrianism which was then the Doctrine of the Church was Schism and
Church-Rebellion; In a word, According to these Principles, It Is in the power
of a Convocation to damn many thousand souls by suspending an Orthodox, and
substituting a corrupt Ministry; and for those Orthodox Pastors when suspended
to endeavor their salvation by the exercise of their Ministry, is to be
Schismatics and Church-Rebels. And what is this less than to set up the will
of such Church-Governors above the will and laws of Christ, above the Salvation
of Souls, and above the Interest of Truth and Holiness. Therefore,

3. Let us examine the Grounds of this strange Assertion, viz. Because there is
a regular way for reforming abuses, And for particular Presbyters to do it
against the will of the Bishops whose Subjects they are, is like reforming
abuses in the state, in spite of the King, a remedy generally worse then the
disease, etc.

Answ. 1. All that these reasons prove is, that Reformation should be first
sought by humble addressing to our Superiors. But Mr. K. plainly leaves it
impossible if they refuse.

2. They are founded on this wretched mistake, that the Authority of Bishops in
the Church does resemble that of a King in the State, and so to reform abuses
in the Church against their will, is like reforming abuses in the State, in
spite of the King. Whereas it is Christ's Authority in the Church that does
resemble the King's in the State. And therefore if he would rightly state the
comparison, it runs thus; Christ the King of his Church, requires all his
Officers to preach the pure Doctrine and administer the pure institutions
delivered in his Gospel (which is his universal law,) Let us suppose, there are
in this or that particular part of the Church dangerous corruptions crept in,
The law of Christ obliges these his officers to disown them and reform them,
but the Major part of these will not, but presume to silence those that do it
according to his command. Now the Quest: is whether those that obey the command
of Christ be the Rebels against him, or those that neither will obey his
commands themselves, nor allow others to do so. One would think, that such as
refuse to reform and silence all that in their own place attempt it, according
to the tenor of their Commission, are like to prove the Church Rebels. But no
doubt the Pastors of a Church may disown and excommunicate one that abuses his
office to the perverting the Church, and for him to continue to p rvert the
Church by such maladministration is to Rebel against Christ and his laws.
The charge of Rebellion therefore must arise from the vio^ation of Christ's
Authority, not men's, which the Major part of Pastors may be guilty of in a
Nation as well as the lesser.

3 He seems to confound a private and a public Reformation.

4. The Reason given, why a Bishop or Presbyter when censured, is discharged
from his Office, viz. Because to regain it is like making a Rebellion to regain
a Civil Office does suppose two great mistakes.

1. That the Ordainers give a Spiritual office in the Church as the King gives
a Civil office in the State; And this is no less a mistake then to set the
Ordainers in the place of Christ. It Is his Charter gives the sacred office as
the King's does the Civil, and the Ordainers do but for orders sake approve and
ceremonially invest the person as the Recorder does the Mayor of a Town whom
the Burghesses choose. And herein Mr. K. seems to own that very error which is
the ground of all Mr. M's impertinent Questions.

2. He supposes, that the Bishops who ordain Presbyters, have equal power to
depose them from their Ministerial office as the King has to take away a Civil
Commission. And thus, p: 27. he te^ls us, That the present Dissenters were the
Bishops subject, accountable to them as their Superiors, and liable to be
discharged from their office, and the benefits of the Communion of the Church
by their Censure.

Whereas It Is plain, that it is the Charter of Christ gives the sacred office as
the King's does the Civil; And as none can take a Civil Commission given by the
King to any Subject, but by the King's orders and Command: So none can take
away that spiritual Commission Christ has given any officer in his Church but
by his orders. But now he has given none leave or Authority to depose his
officers, but for evident Maladministration, as preaching Heresy, gross
scandal, etc. And if in any part of his Church, The Major number of Pastors
should depose the Minor for doing their duty, or without a just cause, their
doing so is, a bold and wicked usurpation, for which they may expect their Lord
will call them to an account, as he threatens the evil servant, who unmindfull
of his Lord's coming, begun to smite his fellow servants, 24. Matthew. 48, 49:
But for the innocent Pastors thus wrongfully deposed, to disobey their usurping
deposers is to obey Christ, who never warranted them to desert their office,
and b^tray Souls, because they are unjustly forbidden to do what his charter
has made their duty. It Is therefore the unjust deposers are the Rebels against
Christ, and their usurpation is, as if the Mayor of a County town should
without any orders from the King, presume to turn out all the Mayors of the
particular Corporations in that County at his own pleasure; and I imagine the
King would in all probability take him for the Rebel who would thus under
pretense of his Authority, usurp a power never given him, and exercise it to
the violation of his Charter, and the Laws of the Land. This is the true state
of the Case, and Mr. K's mistakes about it are so palpable, that it is a wonder
how a man of his judgment could fall into them. And I must needs add here, that
as the Dissenters were never the Bishops Subjects as they are any officers of
Christ, and Mr. K will never prove them to be so; So they will be more afraid
of submitting to their usurpation, if they arrogate to themselves such an
unlimited power of deposing his undoubted officers, particular, Church Bishops,
and claim a blind obedience to their deposing Sentence, be it right or wrong.
And it is but fidelity to our Lord, to disown such palpable and dangerous
usurpation.

The grounds then of Mr. K's principles being false, they will not serve him to
condemn the Presbyterian Ministers as either Schismatics or Church-Rebels, and
the charge is likelier to fa^l heavy on those that presumed to suspend them
against the known laws of Christ, from whom they received their Commission. Mr.
K. very gravely takes for granted, what he will never prove.

1. That the Convocation are by the laws of Christ, the Supreme Governors of
all the Christians in England.

2. That either the Convocation did justly, according to the laws of Christ,
suspend the Nonconf^rming Ministers, or that an absolute obedience, was due to
their Censure whether just or unjust.

1. He takes it for granted, That the Convocation, are by the Laws of Christ,
the supreme Governors of all the Christians in England.

Does not Mr. K. know, that the Divines of his own Church are not agr^ed about
this matter. The Reverend Dr. Stilling: when posed by Mr. Baxter about this
Quest. Who was the Ecclesiasti^al governing Head of the Church of England, as
one body politic, Uureas: of Seper: p: 127, 128.
does very fairly deny that the Church of England has any such Head or Regent
part, nay denies the necessity of such an Head. So that according to him, the
Church of England can be no Political Church made up of a Governing and a
governed part; And consequently all the noise of it is Government Constitutions
and Laws as such a political Church, is at an end. But now Mr. K. comes and
tells us without Scruple, That the supreme Government of our Church, has always
been in a National Council or convocation of our Clergy. If so, I would gladly
know, whether Mr. K: does think that the laws or Canons of a Convocation, would
ob^ige the Consciences of all the Christians in England, tho they were not
enacted and ratified by the civil Authority? If they would nor, it is evident,
that the Church of England has no Ecclesiastical Head of Government, because
none that can make laws obligatory to all the Christians in England; And so the
Convocation are but the King's Ecclesiastical Council (which is indeed the true
Notion of them) to advise him what Laws he shall establish by civil Authority,
relating to Church Government. If he say, the Canons of the Co^vocation would
oblige, whether the civil Authority ratified them or no; I ask Quo jure. All
obligation to obey any Church-governors as such, must arise from the command of
Christ. Now where has he commanded, that in every Nation such a small part of
the Clergy, as our Convocation consists of, shall be supreme Governors of all
the rest. When perhaps, they are as unfit to represent the judgment of all the
Pastors (not to mention the people) in England, as ^he Council of Trent all the
Churches in Euro^e. I am confident, besides the 2000 silenced Ministers, the
far greater part of the Conforming Clergy would never have consented to all the
late excommunicating Canons, had their Vote been required. And the chief
members of the Convocation are so far from being Christ's Officers, that I
desp^ir their ever defending the lawfulness, and much more the divine r gh^ of
their Office against Mr. Baxter's Arguments in his for^said Treatise of
Episcopacy. Neither the light of nature, nor general laws of Scripture wou d
suggest such an Ass^mbly as the governing Head of the Church of England. A duly
^l cted Synod of Pastors in a Nation to endeavor the nearest Unity and Concord
of the particular Churches (as far as it is to be expected on earth) by their
amicable consultations we grant to be most desirable and eligible wherever it
may be had; and the judgment of such a Synod should be complied with in all
things not r^pugnant to the word of God. But we cannot say so of an Assembly
composed chiefly of men, whose Office is not only an Usurpation, but such as
renders true Church Government impossible, and whose interest and grandeur
inclines them to keep up the divisions and corruptions which they have made.
And to such a Convocation's being entrusted by Christ with the National
Church Government, which Mr. K. is pleased to assert, I oppose the judgment of
the truly learned Archbishop Usher which he often professed to Mr. Baxter, viz.
That Church-Councils are not for Government, but for Unity; Not as being in
order of Government over the several Bishops, but that by consultation they may
know their duty more clearly, and by agreement maintain Unity, and to that end
they were anciently celebrated.

2. Mr. K. takes it for granted also, That either the Convocation did justly
according to the laws of Christ suspend the Nonconforming Ministers, or that
those Ministers were bound however to obey their sentence, whether right or
wrong.

For the first, If he will indeed prove their silencing to have been just, i.
e. that the Nonconforming Ministers were guilty of such maladministration as
forfeited their office, and warranted the Prelates by the laws of Christ to
depose them, I will assure him, they will quit their office rather than rebel
against Christ, or any just deposing sentence of men. But I have already proved
the sentence to be unjust: And the silencing such a number of Ministers on such
grounds, was a crime of that nature, that I would in charity to Mr. K. warn him
to draw the guilt of it no further on his own head, by undertaking to justify
or defend it.

For the Second, That these Ministers, tho unjustly suspended, were bound to
obey the sentence, is to give the suspende^s the same absolute Authority
c^aim'd by Popish Prelates and Councils; and on the same grounds, all the
Protestant Ministers in France and other Reformed Churches were bound to cease
their Ministry when first suspended by Popish Prelates, and so their
Reformation was only founded on Church-Rebellion. Nay, if this be true, it will
be in the power of a Convocation in England by imposing such sinful terms of
Church Communion as few of the people dare submit to, and silencing all the
Pastors that will not approve of them, to oblige the greatest part of the
Nation to live without the public worship of God (as the Popes did sometimes
thus interdict a whole Kingdom). And he that can believe this, may next be
persuaded, that Christ has put the power of damning men into the hands of a
Convocation, and the people must not endeavor their own salvation against the
will of such a Convocation, tho even the Apostles themselves had no power but
for Edification.

4 Quest. Whether an Act of Parliament be not as good in France, Spain, or
Germany for the Popish Religion, as in England for Protestancy?

Answ. Mr. K. justly says, that it is not sufficient the Power which
establishes a Religion be competent, and the methods of settling it regular;
but it is likewise necessary the Religion it self be true, p. 33. No humane laws
can justly establish a false Religion, because God has given no man power to
contradict his Revelation and Laws. And tho subject^on be due to the
Magistrate, yet his Authority cannot oblige us to formal obedience, when he
commands us to profess Error, or practice false Worship, or forbids us to
confess with the mouth what we believe with the heart to salvation.

The only Quest. here is, Whether the Popish or the Protestant Religion be the
more agreeable to the holy Scriptures the only infallible Test of all revealed
Religion? Which Quest. D: Manby should have attempted to resolve by coming to
the merits of the Cause, and entering into a particu^ar discussion of the
Controversies betwixt the Church of Rome and those that have embraced the
Reformation. Had he done this, he might have spared all these impertinent
Questions about M^ssion, which are but as Mr. K. calls them, mere Banter, and
contrived only to divert people from a necessary enquiry into the principles of
the Popish Religion.

Only there is one passage that occasionally drops from Mr. K's Pen in answer
to this last Quest. which I would take notice of, p. 33. It Is one principle of
the Christian Religion, that the Professors thereof ought to associate into a
body, and that Christ the Author thereof has appointed Governors who are to
descend by succession, and that to these regularly appointed, due obedience is
to be paid, as men value the rewards and punishments of another life.

It Is strange to me that Mr. K. should think any man able to know what he meant
by these words.

If he means, that all the Christians throughout the world must associate in a
General Council to set up some universal Officers that shall govern the
Church-Catholick as as one political society subject to them, or that the
Church-Catholick must become one body by a subjection to any humane Head, Pope,
Council, or College of Prelates, this is plainly to set up a Vice-Christ, and
to make a humane center of Unity to the Catholic Church, which he seems
honestly to disclaim, p. 55. If he mean not thus, why does he talk of Governors
appointed to this Catholic body. So for these Governors descending by
succession, if he mean that none are lawful Governors but such as can plead an
uninterrupted successi^n of Prelatical Ordination, as Mr. Dodwell seems to
dream), it will hence follow, that it is a mere uncertainty whether there be any
lawful Governors in the Church at all; and if such Prelates were not known in
the primitive Church, either they or the succeeding Ages had no lawful
Governors. So when he makes obedience due to these Governors, as men value the
rewards or punishments of another life; I hope he means obedience to them so
far as they deliver those laws of Christ which he enforces with that solemn
sanction; and not obedience to every unnecessary or sinful injunction of their
own. And I hope he will not think that Christ has appointed such our Governors,
whose very office he never instituted.

And if the meaning of this fine Principle be no more than this, that all
Christians must unite in Christ as their Head, and all endeavor to live under
such Pastors as he has instituted, and the Pastors endeavor all necessary
Concord by their mutual consultations, and be careful to provide such as shall
succeed them in the same office; and that to disobey such Pastors when they
urge the necessary Doctrines and Laws of Christ, is to forfeit the rewards, and
incurr the punishments of another life; then indeed I see no danger in this
Principle. But without all this allowance and explication, it has a very
dangerous sound, and Mr. K. was not aware what use D. Manby might make of it.

For the 2d and 3d Points of Mr. M's Paper about Auricular Confession, and the
Catholic Church, Mr. K's Answer is so judicious and clear, (bating a passage
or two that relate to his schism^tical Notion of the Catholic Church) that I
shall not needlessly undertake what he has so well performed. The same I may say
concerning his Answer to that wild discourse of the Dean's in vindication of
the Church of Rome, and accusation of the Reformed, except what Mr. K. has, p.
79, 80, 81, 82. which runs on the mistakes I have already animadverted or. And
it is strange Mr. K. should, p. 82. quote; Phil. 3.15. to that purpose he there
does, which may be applied to the quite contrary with far greater advantage, as
the Answerers of Dr. Stillingfleet's Sermon have at large evinced. The Rule the
Apostle there speaks of, is, what God has prescr^b'd to h^s Church, not the
unnecessary, and much less the sinful Canons of men. And for those that are
otherwise minded, he leaves them to God's instruction, and does not immediately
go about to open their eyes by an excommunication ipso facto, much less by a
Writ de Excom. capiendo. And if other Church-governors had used the same
forbearance, there had been fewer Schisms and Divisions in the Christian world.

For Mr. K's Answer to the Latin Questions, there occurrs nothing in them
disagreeable to the common Protestant Doctrine, which does not refer to the
forementioned mistakes.

Having (Honored Sir) offered you my sense of these passages in Mr. K's
Answer, wherein I thought his immoderate affection to a Party perverted his
judgment; I shall now put an end to this long Letter, by a few reflections on
these matters.

1. I could heartily wish Mr. K. and all that approve these passages in his
Book, to consider seriously, Whether they are acted by true Christian charity
and love, whilst they deny so many Christian Churches in these Kingdoms living
under the Pastoral care of Orthodox and pious Ministers never justly silenced,
to be any part of the Catholic Church; and that upon such Principles as pass
the same hard censure on all the Reformed Churches that were set up as separate
from Popish National Churches? To unchurch true Churches, is the most opposite
to that love which is the life of Christian Unity, and is the highest degree of
Schism. How much more to unchurch so many, and those so eminent for the purity
of Faith, Worship, and Practice; nay, for their charity too toward those parts
of the Catholic Church that are less pure than themselves. I should heartily
rejoice if any one could show me any Churches on this earth wherein there is a
more pure, peaceable and credible profession of Christianity made (as to its
integrals as well as essentials) than in those Reformed Churches abroad, and
those at home, which I have here been obliged to defend from the Assault of a
Protestant Divine. I am far from denying our Parish Churches to be true parts
of the Catholic Church, and I hope all that account themselves obliged on the
reasons suggested in this Paper to frequent other Christian Societies do esteem
them as such, and own all the credible profession of Religion made among them.
Tho there are many things wherein they could desire them reformed, especially
they could wish them that liberty of consenting to their own Pastors which was
the general practice of the Catholic Church in its purest Ages, and was
confirmed by the judgment of so many Councils; See Mr. Baxters Church History
passim, and his Answ. to Dr. Stillingfl. p. 128, 129, etc: and Blondel, de jure
plebis, etc. And they would be glad to see some tolerable exercise of that true
and godly discipline which the Common Prayer book acknowledges was practiced in
the primitive Church, and the restoration whereof, it says, is much to be
wished. But the mischief is, tho they have a professed assent and consent to
this, it is only to wish it, for they have sworn to endeavor no alteration how
desirable soever.

2 I would hope that long experience will convince us all of the necessity of
more large and comprehensive terms of Christian Concord, as far as that is to
be expected or attained on earth. I hope the Churches unity, will no more be
laid by Protestants on such humane Canons as are not only unnecessary but
contrary to the Churches interest and edification. Nor the breach of such a
sinful unity, be branded as Schism and Church-Rebellion, Mr. Hales of Eaton and
Dr. Stillingfleet (once) were of another mind, and laid the charge of Schism,
in all such cases at the right Door, viz. the Imposers.

3. Tho I can expect no perfect cure of our divisions (unless the Churches in
these Nations were cemented on a more wide and Catholic foundation, I mean not
the schismatical terms of the Roman Church) Yet I would humbly propose it to
the Consideration, both of the sober charitable Conformists and Nonconformists,
whether something may not be done to promote some considerable degrees of
Concord even while the differences of our judgment and practice do remain.

May they not publicly declare, they own each others Assemblies, for true
Christian Churches? May not their members to testify a true Catholic charity
maintain occasional Communion? should it not be owned scismatical on either
hand to confine that part of Christ's Catholic Church which is in these
Kingdoms to either party? May not the Pastors own each other for true Ministers
of the Gospel, and Pastors to such as consent to their Pastoral relation? (I
speak of such as want not the necess^^y qualifications) May they not rejoice in
the success of each others labors for promoting that common Interest of
Christianity wherein both ^re agreed? For sure that ought to be infinitely
dearer to us then the narrow Interest of a party, or the Interest of more
dubious Opinions and modes of Worship. May they not concur to promote each
others just esteem and reputation in order to the success of their labors? May
they not maintain a more amicable correspondence in order to a nearer union of
their affections and if possible of their judgment and practice too? May they
not forbear unjust Ca^umnies and reviling language to render each other odious?
May they not love and honor in each other whatever there appears of the Image
of their Lord and Master his gifts and graces? May they not both join in the
defense of the Reformed Religion upon the common principles wherein the
Protestant Churches agreed? And would not so much of mutual affection and
concord tend more to credit true Religion and strengthen its real Interest,
then the contrary uncharitable narrow and irreconcilable Temper? I doubt not
but the truly moderate on both sides are acted by this truly Catholic and
Christian Temper; And it would be a comfortable presage to these Churches to
see this temper more generally diffused and prevalent among us. But for those
that will still fancy Christ has every where committed the government of his
church to Diocesan Prelates and by catholic Unity mean a subjection to all
their cannons and censures, and make all disobedience to their commands when
contrary to the commands of Christ, Schism and Church Rebellion, They may long
talk of Catholic Unity and Peace, But they are next to the Papists the most
dangerous enemies of it; For they have too deep a tincture of their humor who
make a mighty noise about Unity but when we come to enquire where it lies, They
mean a subjection to a certain Gentleman that dwells at Rome, or at best to
that Clergy who adhere to him in all the corruptions of Christian Doctrine
worship and Practice.

Lastly, I would advise all of Mr. K's mind to consider well the Catholic
principles suggested in this paper (in opposition to his schismat^cal ones) to
the case of a popish convocation in Eng. or Irel. should such a convocation
suspend him from preaching his protestant doctrine and administering prot
sacraments (as D. M. calls them) and he go on to do it, By his own Notions he
would be a schismatic and Church-Rebel, by mine a faithful pastor to his Flock
and a Loyal subject of Jesus Christ. And therefore whether his principles or
mine be more honest, more agreeable to the holy Scriptures more serviceable to
advance the Authority and Interest of Christ, more conducive to the welfare of
Souls, I leave to his own conscience to determine on second thoughts; And doubt
not but most of his own Brethren will acknowledge mine to be so.

I cannot but reflect on these debates with deep regret that I am put on so
unhappy necessity, not only of opposing Mr. K. but saying so much against the
present Church-Goverment in order to the Vindication of the Reformed Churches
both at home and abroad, and the Truth it self. But as these principles I have
here reflected on have been the fatal Engines of Church Tyranny and divisions
these many Ages, and belong to the Roman Arsenall, so it is the necessary work of
a Peacemaker who proposes a Catholic Unity and Love as his great aim to batter
them down. I had not so long delayed the sending this paper, but that I still
hoped some abler pen would have undertaken what mine is so unfit for, However I
hope I have asserted nothing contrary either to Truth or Peace, or if I have, I
am willing to receive better Information.

I am Sir. Your most humble etc.

A POSTSCRIPT.
THe person to whom the Letter was addressed desiring me to publish it, I
thought it requisite upon a review of it, to add a few things relating to some
passages in it. The opposition of Mr. K's Notion of the Catholic Church to the
Articles of the Church of Ireland, and the agreeableness of mine to them is
observed in the Preface.

To what is said about Mr. K's mark of the Catholic Church, viz. [living under
lawful spiritual Governors;] I add, that this renders the relation of all true
Christians to our blessed Lord (as his members) as questionable as the title of
the Pastor under whom they live; and consequently exposes their right to all
the benefits of the Gospel, even to the Kingdom of Heaven it self to the same
uncertainties and doubts as the regularity of his Admission to his Office. And
if those ancient Canons repeated in so many Councils be of any force, which
declare all Elections of the Clergy by Magistrates, or without the consent of
the people, void; what a desperate case has almost all the Christian world been
in ever since the old way of Elections was altered! Nay, the Church of England
it self, where the Bishops are chosen by the King, and Parsons by Patrons, is
in a miserable plight. So severe is this mark of the Catholic Church on those
for whose secular interest Mr. K. seems to have calculated it, and so
over-favourable to those whom he designed to exclude from the Catholic Church
by it.

For what is said on behalf of all the Reformed Churches, p. 11, etc. It is not
intended to include the Socinians, who deny an essential Article of the
Christian Faith, the Deity of Christ, and all the Doctrines of his
Satisfaction, etc. that depend on it.

Against Mr. K's Notion of the Supreme Government over all the Christians in
England being lodged in the Convocation touched on, p. 57th. I add this
Argument ad hominem; The General-Assembly in Scotland have equal pretensions to
the Supreme Government of all Christians in that Nation, as the Convocation has
in England. Now if the laws of the Convocation would oblige the Consciences of
all the Christians in England (as the laws of the Church) whether ratified by
the Civil Authority or no, then the Acts of the General Assembly in Scotland
have the same force there; Now that General Assembly which sat there in the
year 1639. (whose Acts were also ratified afterward by King Chapter the First in
person, present in his Parliament there) abolisht Prelacy, and set up the
Presbyterian Government there. The Prelates were, according to Mr. K's
Principles, discharged from their Office, and since they regained it not only
without the allowance of any General Assembly, but against the Acts or Laws of
all that sat there since, they were therein guilty of Schism or Church
Rebellion. Mr. K's Notions are as unmerciful to the Bishops there as to
Presbyters here: So little does he regard where those envenomed darts may fall,
which he levels against his Dissenting Brethren.

The Contents of the Letter
MR. M's 1 Quest. in the Preface, What is meant by the Catholic Church. Mr.
K's Answer considered, and evidenced to be obscure, narrow, and consequently
schismatical and dangerous, from p. 2 to p. 7. The true Answer to that
Question. p. 7, 8, 9, 10. Mr. M's 2d and 3d Questions. Mr. K's Answer enlarged,
to make it more Catholic and comprehensive. p. 10, 11. Mr. M's 4th Quest.
Whether by the Catholic Church be meant the variety of all Protestants since
they deny her essential mark, Unity? The true Catholic Answer proposed, p. 11,
12, 13. Mr. K's Answer to that Question considered; His three marks of the
Catholic members of the Church examined. His first [Embracing the Catholic
Faith] allowed. His second [Living in Charity with their neighbor Churches]
excludes the Papists, Mr. Dodwel, and himself, and a great part of the
Christian world in the present and former Ages. His third mark [Making no
separation from their lawful Governors] founded on his schismatical Notion of
the Catholic Church. Two Questions proposed on that Head. 1. Whether the
separation of the Presbyterians, etc. (supposing it to be sinful) will exclude
them from being Catholic members of the Church? That it does not, proved from
the nature of their separation, being only a breach of humane Unity: The
contrary Assertion excludes the English Convocation, the Papists, and the
greatest part of the Christian Church in every Age from being Catholic
members, etc from p. 16. to p. 20: 2: Upon what grounds does Mr: K: assert that
the Presbyterians have made a sinful separation from their lawful Governors?
Some difficulties proposed on that Head; That the Presbyt: Ministers are lawful
Pastors to the Churches under their oversight, proved, from p: 21, to p. 30:
The Q's in the Pamphlet about Mission. The true Notion of Mission stated: The
Authority and Obligation of Pastors to the duties of their Office, derived from
Christ's Charter: The use of Pastoral Ordination: Its absolute necessity to the
being of the Ministry disproved: The power of Ordination belongs to scriptural
Bishops: Such Bishops proved to be the Pastors of single Congregations, not
Diocesses, from Scripture and Antiquity: The Ordination of Presbyt. Ministers
at home and abroad, hence vindicated, from p. 38. to p: 48: These promised. Mr.
M's 1 Qu. What Priesthood or holy Orders had the first Reformers but what they
received from Romans Cath. Bishops? Answered. p: 48, 49 His 2 Q. Who authorized
the first Reformers to Preach their Protestant Doctrine, and administer their
Protestant Sacraments? Answered, and retorted on the Church of Rome. p. 49: His
3d and 4th Q's; Whether Cranmer and his Associates could condemn the Church of
Rome by virtue of the Mission derived from her Bishops; If so, whether a
Presbyt: Minister having received Orders from a Protestant Bishop, can by
virtue of such Orders pronounce the Church of England a corrupt Church?
Answered. p: 50, 51: Mr. K's Answer examined: His Concession to D. M. [That a
Bishop or Presbyter ought not to preach against the Constitution of the Church
he is a member of; and if he be censured or suspended, he is discharged, etc.]
considered, The consequences of it pernicious to a great part of the Reformed
Churches, and to our own, had we a Popish Convocation. The grounds of it absurd
and false. The silenced NC. Ministers not chargeable with Schism or
Church-Rebellion; the charge more likely to fall heavy on the unjust silencers,
unless Mr: K. can prove both the divine right of the Convocation to be the
Ecclesiastical Head of the Church of England, and the equity of their silencing
sentence, from p: 51 to p. 59: 5 Q: Whether an Act of Parl: etc: Answered, p:
59, 60: Some general Remarks on the rest of Mr: K's Answer, p. 60, 61, 62:
Reflections on the whole; from p: 62 to the end: A Postscript:
FINIS:
ERRATA.
PAge 7: l: 21: r: Arimini: (To line 24 add ( And not the Catholic Church, as
visible, or as measured by a Judgment of Charity, as the Papists assert, and
Mr: K: with them, contrary to the stream of protestant writers on that
Controversy) p: 9: l: 15: after commandment, add an etc: p: 23: l: 30: r: 7th
v: p: 40: l: ult: r: prelacy. p: 59: l: 28: r: 5th Q: p: 63: l: 17: blot out a


