THE NARRATIVE OF Mr. William Boys, CITIZEN OF LONDON:

Faithfully Relating what came to his Knowledge concerning the Late Horrid
POPISH PLOT, and the Death of Sir Edmund-Bury Godfrey, by his Acquaintance
with, and Attendance upon Mr. Miles Prance, before, and after his being Taken
and Imprisoned,

WHEREIN Many things not yet Discovered to the World, Relating to the Truth of
the Kings Evidence, and the Guilt Charged upon Philiberd Vernatti (formerly
Servant to the Lord Bellasis) Gerrard, Kelle, and Lusan Priests; All Fled for
the said Fact is made Manifest.

PUBLISHED For the Conviction of all Gainsayers, and the Vindication of the
said Mr. Boys from the Aspersion the Popish Party would have cast upon him, for
his Faithfulness in finding out their Divellish Designs, made Evident by the
many Snares laid for him.

LONDON, Printed for Dorman Newman at the Sign of the Kings Arms in the
Poultry. 1680.

I Do appoint Mr. Dorman Newman and no other, to Print this my NARRATIVE.

WILLIAM BOYS.

THE NARRATIVE OF Mr. William Boys.
THe Malicious Slanders, and Scandalous Reproaches thrown upon me for my good
Intentions to Serve my King, and Country, being the Contrivances of that
Never-sleeping Party, who have left no stone unturned to abolish the Belief of
Sir Edmund-Bury Godfrey's Murder, at least as any way Reflecting upon Romish
Design, have occasioned me to Publish these few sheets, not only for the
Vindication of my own Innocence, but also for the General Satisfaction of the
Nation, and for its farther Confirmation by several particulars never yet made
Public to the world.

That I was a faithful Instrument to procure the Discovery of that Inhuman and
deeply Meditated Murder, is a thing well known to many, as having been
particularly employed by His Majesty and the Council, to persuade Mr. Prance to
Discharge the Conscience of a Christian, by making a true Confession, because
of my great Acquaintance and daily Familiarity with him. Which they, who felt
the fatal Consequences of my sincere Endeavors, so deeply laid to heart, that
they sought several ways to Ensnare my Life, and Undermine my Reputation,
accusing me of being a Party concerned, and one that spoke by the Dictates of
Fear or Imposture; and therefore not to be Credited, whereby they aimed to kill
two Birds with one Stone, that is to say, to stop the Progress of Protestant
belief, and Satisfy their Revenge upon me. Therefore for the Satisfaction of
the world, and my own Vindication, I thought it but necessary to give this Real
and Faithful Account of my Proceedings and Transactings in reference to my
Accusations.

In the first place, I was Bred up in a Protestant Family from my Infancy, as
being the Son of Mr. Rowland Boys, a Clothier in the City of Worcester; and I
have all along Professed the same Religion. True it is, that Neighborhood and a
Sociable Temper brought me into the Acquaintance of several Roman Catholics,
with whom I had frequent Converse, but with none so strictly obliged in
Friendship as with Mr. Miles Prance, between whom and my self there was a more
than ordinary Intimacy, which gave cause of Suspicion to many, that I was of
the same Persuasion; though indeed the true ground of such Familiarity was only
upon the frequent occasions of mutual Commerce. A reason for intimate Converse
so fair, that a more probable cannot be given, nor more frequently in practice,
there being nothing that Familiarises even Familiarity it self, so much as the
League of Friendship and Profit, and the dependency of Trades one upon another,
I being an Artist in Lampwork, for the making all manner of Curious
Representations in Glass.

Upon the 29 th. of September was Twelvemonth, at my Return out of the
Country, I was by my Neighbor Mr. Prance invited to Dinner, in Token of a
courteous Welcome-Home. While we were merry at Table one Thomas Haddon, a
Lodger at that time in Mr. Prance's House, came in very hastily full of private
Intelligence, which Mr. Prance having understood in a Corner of the Room,
returned to his Guests with a Sorrowful and Pensive Countenance. Which sudden
alteration occasioned me out of Friendship, to be more than ordinarily
inquisitive into the Causes of so Disconsolate a Change. At first he seemed
very shie and reserved, but when I pressed him more closely, he told me, That
several of his Friends had been taken out of their Beds the night before, and
carried to Prison. I asked him whether he knew the cause of their Apprehension?
He answered, No. Perhaps said I they may prove to be Highway-men, and then your
Grief will soon be over, though they should receive the Reward of their
Misdeeds. To which Mr. Prance returned, That they were persons falsely accused,
but that th^i^ Crime was not for Robbing upon the Highway. Whereupon I bid him
be of good Comfort and tear nothing, for that Innocence would justify it self.
While we were thus Discoursing, in came one Grove, a Schoolmaster, living in
Princes-street, in the Company of another Stranger, who both took Mr. Prance
aside to the end of the Room, where they Whispered for some time together, so
that I could not understand any thing of their Discourse; only Grove was
overheard to say, His Uncle Grove (who was since Hanged) was taken.

After we had staid till toward night, the Company that had Dined together,
that is to say, Mr. Prance, Haddon, my Self and others, went all to a
Coffee-House in Drewry-Lane, where Mr. Prance being known to be a Papist, was
Greeted with a very Sour Welcome by one of the Company, in these words. Now
all the Bloody Designs of you Papists are Discovered, and several of your
Priests and Jesuits are apprehended for High Treason, for attempting to Kill
the King and Destroy the Protestant Religion. These words did not a little
Nettle Mr. Prance, who therefore to vindicate the Innocence of his own Party,
smartly replied, That they who were taken were Honest men, and that he would
prove them so to be. Which Dispute (one word begetting another) grew to that
degree of Heat, that I was afraid of an absolute Quarrel, which would have
ended in nothing but Blows. Whereupon I took an opportunity to persuade Mr.
Prance to leave the place, and to retire to the Tavern; where being in private,
I endeavored to get out of him the truth and the occasion of these odd
Passages; but he would give me no satisfaction, only continued stiff and firm
in the Vindication of his Friends, the apprehended Papists.

On the first of October, Mr. Prance was sent for to the same Coffee-House, and
Threatened by some persons, that they would have him before the King and
Council for his vindication of Traitors, and the extravagant Expressions he had
uttered the last time he was there. To which Mr. P. more calmly answered, that
he would send for me, and hear what I would say to it, which he accordingly
did. When I came, I told him, he was much to be blamed for delivering himself
in such high Terms, but that I hoped there would be no farther notice taken of
his words, in regard he was known, or at least verily believed to be an Honest
man, and no way concerned in Designs of so wicked a Nature. To which he
replied, That he was as Innocent as the Child unborn. After he made this
Protestation, we went both of us to the Parties that had Threatened him, and I,
undertaking to be his Advocate, desired them that they would not call a man in
Question for a few rash words, especially since they knew nothing of ill in his
Behavior, but had rather experienced the contrary: who being by that means
pacified and obliged to a kind promise of Civility, I advised him to be more
careful for the future and go home about his Business.

About a 11. or 12. a Clock the same Night, Mr. P. being a Bed, was put into a
most terrible Affrightment; for hearing as he lay, the Noise of a Constable and
his Watch passing along the Street, he verily imagined that they had been come
to apprehend him. This sudden Terror caused him to call up his Lodger Haddon;
who having made himself ready, and observed the Coast to be clear about his
House, away went Mr. P. to seek a safer Harbor: which when I understood the
next day, I Checked him for his idle Fears and groundless Apprehensions, and
Counseled him to stay at home. To which he made this short answer, That he was
afraid, and could not help it. Thereupon, in point of Friendship I offered him
my own house, and there entertained him for two Nights, viz. the 2 d. and 3 d.
of October; but withal I advised him that if any Officer should come to enquire
for him at his own house, that he should immediately Surrender himself, for
that the bare Suggestions and Surmises of his Neighbors could be no Proof
against him, and that his own Innocence would overcome all.

Upon the coming forth of the Kings Proclamation, Mr. P. not being willing to
take the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, was resolved to have gone out of
Town. But when he Communicated his Intentions to me, and had Discovered the
Scruples of his Conscience, I persuaded him not to be so over nice, but to take
the Oaths, and not only used all the Arguments my own Capacity had furnished me
withal, but also for his clearer Information and Instruction profer'd to go
along with him to the Bishop of London, Dr. Stilling-fleet, or Dr. Burnet, who,
I did not Question, would give him those convincing Arguments that would oblige
him to embrace the Protestant Religion and forsake Popery. Which Discourse of
mine so far prevailed upon him, that he went and took the Oaths both of
Allegiance, and Supremacy, in obedience to the Kings Command: and after that,
went along with me to hear Dr. Sharp, whose Sound Divinity confirmed him in
what he had done.

This Success engaged me to improve my Industry with others, that were his
Friends and Visiters; particularly with one Mr. Edwards, a most Severe Roman
Catholic, living in Browns-Court in the Old-Bayley, whom I met at Mr. Prance's
House, and there endeavored to persuade him to a Conformity with the Church of
England. But his obstinacy was such, that he utterly refused to think of any
alteration in his Opinion; not but that he loved the King, as he said, but that
he would not Swear Allegiance to him. Upon which some Discourse arising between
the said Mr. Edwards and my self, wherein Mr. Edwards seemed to complain of the
hard measure which was Dealt to the Roman Catholics, that being Subjects and
Freeborn-men, they should be forced like Exiles, from their Homes and
Habitations, merely for not acting against their Consciences. But here, I met
with so angry aRebuke for declaring, in justification of the Proclamation, that
no good Subjects would Scruple to take those Oaths which were Commanded by Him,
to whom they owed their Protection, that I thought my self in some danger of my
Life. For one Mr. Owen a Zealot of the same Leaven, taking up the Cudgels
against me, flatly told me that I was no Honest man to speak in defense of his
Majesty's public Command, called me, in a vehement Passion, Great Heretic,
and with a Menacing fury bore up so close me, that I expected some immediate
Act of Violence, which perhaps he had executed, had not my Sister, in a
trembling sear stepped between and pulled me away from the Company. However I
accounted my self not a little happy in the good Office I had done my friend
Mr. P. And I make this short instance, not only to show how difficult a thing
it is, to cure the Cankered obstinacy of men Intoxicated and Stupefied with the
Destructive Principles of Popery, but in some measure to let it appear to the
world, that the good Service Mr. P. has done, was not an Act, so much
proceeding from the hopes of future advantage, but by the Inducements of a fair
and Candid Reformation.

Soon after these Passages had happened, there was a secret Murmuring among the
Neighbors, that doubtless Mr. P. was concerned in the Murder of Sir
Edmund-Bury Godfrey, for that he was so timorous as to lie from his House, and
because he was also the Queens Servant. But for my part, when I heard these
dangerous Rumors, I still reproved the Reporters for going about to bring a
person causlesly into trouble, not deeming him in the least to have been Guilty.

At another time, when Vernatti was with Mr. P. at the Horse-shooe Tavern, in
the Company also of the before-named Haddon, Dr. Parratt's man, whose Office it
was to Collect Money from the Friends of Deceased Papists to have Masses said
for their Souls in Purgatory, it happened that I came in, I knew not what their
Discourse was before I entered the room; but so soon as Haddon was gone,
Vernatti fell upon me with all his persuasive Arguments to Reconcile me to the
Church of Rome, and would have used perhaps many more words, but that Mr. P.
told him, it was in vain to trouble himself. And indeed it was but an ill time
for him to think of Converting me, who had the same Design upon his present
Friend.

Upon the 20 th. of December, when Mr. P. was Apprehended and carried away, his
Wife with Tears in her eyes came to me, and requested me to go and give my
Testimony for him, that he lay at my House such and such nights, and therefore
could not be Guilty of the Crime that was laid to his Charge; I went
accordingly to speak what I knew, but my Testimony would not then be admitted.
Yet in regard I had Discovered so much kindness for him, and such an Intimacy
with him, it was Ordered by some of the Members of the House of Commons, that
my House should be Searched; believing there might there be found some Letters
perhaps belonging to Mr. Prance, from whence they might Collect some farther
Discovery of a truth which they were so diligently laboring to find out. For
the Execution of this Order, the Officers appointed came to one Mr. Robert
Sexton's House in Princes-street, who understanding their business, and being
my very good friend, persuaded them to desist, or at least to stay for some
time, till I came thither my self, in regard it might bring a Scandal upon me,
and breed an ill Opinion of me among my new Neighbors (for I was but a little
before removed to my House near Ludgate) Luckily I came into Mr. Sextons, while
the Officers and he were in this Debate. They strictly examined me what I knew
of Mr. P. and his Actions, and told me they came to Search my House. I readily
desired them to do it, while I staid where I was; but entreated them to do it
with as little noise as might be, for the reasons beforementioned; assuring
them withal, that I had no Letters, Books, or Papers that any way in the world
concerned Mr. P, which gave them sufficient Satisfaction.

Much about this time Mr. P. was more strictly examined before the King and
Council, where he first made a Confession, and then denied all again; whereupon
he was sent back to Newgate. But the Honorable Board having been informed that
I had been intimate with the Prisoner, sent for me, to try whether any thing
to the purpose might be gathered from me in point of Circumstance or otherwise.
I answered directly to all Questions demanded, to the utmost of my knowledge.
But not being privy to any thing of the Murder, I could not give that
Satisfaction which was sought for, so that I was ordered to attend the next day
being the 4 th. of January, and to bring along with me my Wife and Servant. We
were severally called in, and narrowly examined about many things in relation
to Mr. P. What he was? When he lay at my house? We Answered, that we knew no
ill of him, but that we thought him to be a very Honest man. We also told them
the time that he lay at my House, and the occasion, as is before declared.
Which gave the Council such satisfaction, that we were all Discharged.

The Council being thus satisfied that I was a Protestant, and a person of
honest repute, sent for me again upon the 10 th. of January, and commanded me
to go to Newgate, and to endeavor to draw what I could out of him, concerning
the Murder of which he was Accused, and to see whether I could persuade him to
make a full Confession of the truth. Accordingly I went, put several Questions
to him, and begged of him over and over to Discharge his Conscience, and to
tell the Truth. Mr. P. seemed to be very joyful to see his old Friend, but
would Confess nothing, and to all my Questions made only this general Answer,
That he was Innocent of the Horrid Murder; however he entreated me to come
again, and not to forsake him in his Distress. I promised to return the next
day, and did so; but then I found him like a person almost Distracted, and
observed that in his Frantic Passions he would often repeat his Innocence, and
his ignorance of the Murder, but yet when he was asked any Question about it,
he never answered to the purpose. Seeing therefore that I could by no means
engage him to Confess the Fact, and that all my Labor had been hitherto in
vain, I returned back to the Council and gave them an account of what I had
done. Nevertheless they ordered me to persist, and to make use of all the means
and Persuasions that I thought might take effect to oblige him to Discover the
particulars of a Murder, in which they were fully persuaded he was none of the
least Active Conspirators. And indeed such was the Care and Diligence of those
great Personages in the Discovery of that Detestable Murder, that they gave me
great encouragement to return again, and seemed to intimate some hopes of
favor to the relenting Prisoner. The two sorrowful Brothers of the Murdered
Knight went along with me, and staid in another Room while I Discoursed,
entreated and persuaded the Prisoner, and spent many kind and friendly words in
vain, for nothing yet could prevail. In the Evening upon the 11 th. of January
D. Lloyd, the Dean of Bangor, came to him, and calling for me, showed me before
Mr. Prance's face a Warrant for his Pardon, entreating him withal upon his
Majesty's so Gracious and Condescending Mercy, to Discover his knowledge. He
would not at first believe the Warrant to be real, For, said he, to me, if it
were so, why had not you brought it as well as the Doctor? After many
persuasions reiterated in vain, the Doctor perceiving him in a bad Condition of
Health, would not urge him any farther that Night; only wished him a Physician
to give him such Prescriptions as he wanted; whereupon I besought him to take
care that some one of the Kings Physicians might be sent him; which he procured
accordingly. So that about one of the Clock the same Night I being left with
him all the while, Mr. Dickyson came to him, and gave him such proper Remedies
as perfectly recovered him. The next day, being Sunday the 12 th. of January I
returned to him again, and spent the whole Afternoon with him, entreating him
with many persuasions as well for his own and his Families sake, as for the
public good, that he would not conceal from merited Justice, those whom now I
was fully convinced, that he knew to be such notorious Offenders; but that he
would at length declare his knowledge. Urging him withal, not to loose the fair
opportunity that was offered to him to have both his Life and his Liberty,
which if now neglected, might cost him a dear and too late Repentance. At that
time I pressed him so effectually, that he began to speak something to the
purpose, telling me that he had seen a Relation of the Murder, but, that never
being personally concerned in the Fact, he knew nothing more than what he had
learnt from that Narrative. I asked him who showed him the Relation? He
answered, Vernatti, but this seemed not Satisfactory to me. For upon farther
Discourse with him, I perceived that he gave me an account, not as from a
second Hand, but as one that had been all along concerned in the Fact. After a
long Debate, and many Persuasions, at length I told him, that I was assured of
his Pardon, if he would ingeniously and in time Confess the whole matter, and
how far he himself had been concerned. That I knew there were others in Prison
for the same Crime, who if they should first Reveal the Business, his
Confession would only serve to Condemn himself; and therefore I advised him, as
he loved his life, speedily to prevent his own Misfortune, by giving a free and
exact account of the Murder; in regard it was plain, that Vernatti would never
have trusted him with the Relation of such a Secret, had he not been a
Confederate. That night I could get no more out of him, so that I left him to
ponder upon what I had said to him. Which had that good effect, that by break
of day the next Morning being the 13 th. of Jan. I was sent for to the Prison,
to speak with Mr. P. And that very morning it was, that he Discovered to me all
that he knew of the Murder of Sir Edmund-Bury Godfrey, and of something more
relating to the Plot it self, and gave me a full account of the manner of the
Action, if not in the same words yet altogether the same in Substance, which he
himself has already made public to the world, to which, for avoiding a
needless Repetition I refer the Reader.

When I brought the account to the King and Council, they gave me my Oath to
Confirm that the Recital of it came immediately from Mr. Prances mouth which I
readily took, as being a most certain Truth. I farther told his Majesty what
Mr. P. had revealed to me of the Design of Prossers Matteson, Adamson, and
Bradshaw; to have Murdered the Right Honorable the Earl of Shaftsbury. And
indeed such was the Indefatigable Care and Industry of that Noble Peer in
Prosecuting the Discovery of the Plot, such his unwearied endeavors to secure
his Majesty and the Kingdom, by his Wisdom and Councils from the Attempts of
our Enemies, that they have merited the thankful applause of the whole Nation.
No wonder therefore that the Papists should be so zealous to remove so great an
Obstacle of their wicked Conspiracies out of the way.

I also gave an account of what Mr. P. had revealed to me concerning the Plot,
or at least of so much as he know. All which things Mr. P. has since himself
more amply declared either in his own Narrative, or in the Testimonies which he
gave against the several persons, since Convicted and Executed for the Crimes
in some part by him proved against them.

When the Kings most Excellent Majesty had received a full Information of all
these things from me, part in Writing, part by word of Mouth; he caused
Warrants to be issued forth for the apprehension of Prosser, Bradshaw, etc. and
by me sent an Order to Captain Richardson to bring Mr. P. up to the Council the
same day. The King was then present, and took the pains to examine him himself,
to every particular of what I had delivered and declared; all which Mr. P.
confirmed as he had before Confessed to me in the Prison; and further declared
to his Majesty, That he would stand by his said Confession with the hazard or
loss of his Life.

In consideration of this Confession, his Majesty was pleased to command that
Mr. P. should have his Pardon, and that Captain Richardson should suffer him to
want for nothing. I was also ordered to keep him Company every day. For the
Kings Majesty and Council were pleased to be so sensible of the pains I had
taken, to bring that horrid Murder to light, that the Earl of Essex, a most
Noble and Prudent Counselor, with the rest of the Honorable Board, did me
the high favor to return me a particular thanks. And Sir Robert Southwell
afterward declared in the Lobby before several persons that I had Discharged a
good Conscience both toward God and man. And therefore in requital of my good
Service upon that occasion, upon the 29 th. of Jan. his Majesty in Council was
most graciously pleased to make the following Order in my behalf.

At the Court at White Hall the 29 th. of January 1678/9.
Present the Kings Most Excellent Majesty.
The Lords of the Committee of Examinations, having this day represented to his
Majesty in Council, the necessity of having a stock of three or four Hundred
Pounds, to answer the Occasions of the Committee, did among other particulars
make mention of the Service which had been done by Mr. William Boys, who had
for a long time left his own occasions, and the following of his Trade, to obey
the Orders of the said Committee, and frequently to resort to his Neighbor Mr.
Prance, in order to Discover the truth of the Evidence which he had given
touching the Murder of Sir Edmund-Bury Godfrey, and their Lordships praying
that his Majesty would please to bestow some mark of his Favor upon him to the
value of 30 l. His Majesty was pleased to Order, and it is hereby Ordered
accordingly, That the Right Honorable the Lord High Treasurer of England do
forthwith cause to be paid to the said William Boys the Sum of Thirty Pounds
Sterling, as of his Majesty's free Gift and Bounty to him, out of the Stock,
which by the said Committee is desired to answer the Service which is under
their Care.

Robert Southwell.


After the Trials of the Murderers were over, I waited upon the Right
Honorable, the Earl of Essex to entreat his favorable Assistance and his kind
word to his Majesty and Council in behalf of Mr. P. that he might be released
out of Prison; That as I had been an Aid and Succor to him in the time of his
Trouble, I might not be thought to leave the work imperfect, which I had in
Friendship begun; having no other end or aim in all my Actions Relating to this
Affair, than to approve my self a good and Loyal Subject, a true Protestant and
a Cordial Friend. Neither am I conscious to my self of having failed in any one
of these particulars; for which, my Innocence will at no time refuse with all
humility to make its appeal to those Noble Lords who were the discerning
Witnesses of my behavior, as having frequent occasion to attend upon them,
during Mr. Prance's Imprisonment.

Therefore for several reasons, I thought it but necessary to give this short
account and Narrative to the world as being, First,

1. An Eyewitness of his Majesty's most Princely and Tender Care, and
unwearied pains, which he took at that time for the public Security of the
Nation, and to bring the Offenders to Condign punishment. And that the Lords of
the Council were no less vigorously Active to second his Sovereign Resolutions
with their most prudent Advice, and continual and laborious Scrutinies.

2. To confirm the Relation of the Murder made by Mr. P. as being first
received by my self from his own Mouth, which I do Attest before God and the
whole world to agree in all particulars with what he himself has Published, and
so absolutely consent, that I should but have incurred the blame of tyring or
abusing the Reader with a Repetition of the same words again. Nor was it
extorted from him by any other Wrack or Torture, then that of a Dismayed and
Distracted Conscience, which could not Disburthen it self till it had thrown
off the Shackles of those fears and jealousies that usually perplex the Guilty,
especially considering the remediless Dilemma that was put upon him; that
Labyrinth of Life or Death, wherein he found himself intrigu'd without hopes of
ever getting forth, unless he made use in time of the Silken Clue that was
offered.

3. In the third place, I thought it was a duty owing to my own Reputation, to
disengage it from the Scandals throw upon me by the Papists, who would make the
world believe me to be a Phanatick. As also to rescue it from some ill thoughts
of the Protestants who suspected me to be a Papist, in regard of my frequent
Converse with those of the Roman Catholic Profession.

As for the Papists, it was no more than I exspected from them, who being
unwilling to believe so horrid a Murder, perpetrated by the contrivance of
their dignified Priests and Confessors, or ashamed that such an eternal Blur
should contaminate their Ecclesiastical History, care not what Blemishes and
Scandals they throw upon others, to wipe off the Reproach from themselves.
Which in regard it has been their continued practice from the beginning of the
first Discovery of that Villainous Murder, the Effects whereof have only
redounded to their farther shame and Confusion, I have great reason not to
question but that the Reports which they have raised upon me, will be as little
regarded, as those vilifying Imputations, which they vainly cast upon others.
Although, were it true, that I were a Phanatick, I should not account my self
so ignominious, as if I were in the number of the Papists, with that weight of
Blood and intended Massacre upon their Shoulders. I lightly pass over that
other Reproach of theirs, That I was a Presbyterian Rascal, and that if it had
not been for such a Presbyterian Rogue as I, Mr. P. had never made his
Discovery, as being of little or no value.

As for the Protestants, I must confess that their Suspicions do not a little
trouble me, and I cannot but look upon their unkindness as proceeding from
somewhat of Ingratitude; since that Familiarity with which they so upbraid me,
happened to be so Fortunate for their Advantage.

But for their satisfaction, I do declare that I never was a Papist, nor of any
other Profession then that of the Church of England, in which I also intend to
live and die. Nor was I ever concerned in any of the foul Actions of the
Papists relating to the Plot, or the Barbarous Murder of Sir Edmund-Bury
Godfrey, but as an Instrument to Discover the Truth: being looked upon by his
Majesty and his most Honorable Privy Council as the fittest, and most likely
person to Succeed, by reason of my Acquaintance and Familiarity with Mr. Prance.

And to show how Careful and Faithful I was in the Management of that Secret
wherewith I was entrusted by his Majesty, I must farther declare, That when Mr.
Redding, who had often sought for me at my house, and having at last found me
out, and by all Persuasions and Arguments imaginable, had endeavored to get
from me a Copy of Mr. Prance's Confession and Depositions (which was highly
pressed upon me at the Dog Tavern near Ludgate) I refused him with Indignation
of all his promised Encouragements and Rewards; telling him withal, that as I
had been entrusted by his Majesty in the Business, I would by no means or
persuasions in the world Falsify so great a Trust, nor Discover what Mr. P.
had revealed before the season of due allowance.

When Mr. Reading had given me over, there came two other Gentlemen to me with
the same Proposals; assuring me of a great Reward in hand, to let them have Mr.
Prances Confession, and what he had Discovered concerning the Murder, and the
Plot. But all their Promises could not move me in the least to betray a Trust,
so Graciously reposed in me by my Sovereign; and with the Honor and
Satisfaction of having so done, I hope to live with a more quiet Conscience
upon the small gains of my Lawful Industry, than upon the more abounding ways
of Treachery, and Infidelity.

Neither may I here omit to tell my Revilers, that while I was in the midst of
that Service which I performed, I was not without some disencouraging
Apprehensions of being in danger of my Life. For being one Evening at Mr.
Sexton's House in Princes-street, three persons living hard by, and well known
to be of the Popish Gang, were observed to stand waiting at the Corner of the
same Street, who when they perceived that I was coming forth, withdrew
themselves toward Lincolns-Inn-Fields, which was my directest way home; of
which, Notice being given to Mr. Sexton, both he and the rest of my Friends
advised me to take another way, in regard it was dark, and fearing those
persons were upon the Watch to do me a Mischief. The persons names were, one
Tarleton, a Guilder, since Fled for being concerned in Guilding Milled
Shillings, and one Aldrige a Turner, and Neighbor thereby, with one more who
was a Stranger; which, with what I have already said, I hope may serve to quash
the Mistrusts of my Religion, and satisfy all good Protestants of the reality
and sincerity of my Intentions.

Now so soon as I had obtained Mr. Prance's absolute Enlargement, I brought him
to Princes-street to see his Wife, whom he had not seen all the time of his
Confinement, and there alighted at Mr. Sextons House. At that time the same
Aldrige abovementioned, with his Wife and some others, began to renew their
former Malice, muttering one to another that the Rogue P. was come out of
Prison, and that the Presbyterian Rogue Boys was with him; which not sufficing,
they also began to vent their Spleen in irreverent Language against his Majesty
himself; for which I had them seized by virtue of a Warrant from several of the
Justices of the Peace, who Committed them to Custody, where they remained two
days, and were then carried before the Lords of the Council, who were pleased
to Discharge them upon their Submission. After this, I took Mr. P. together
with his Wife, home to my own house near Ludgate, where he continued for a
Month. Thither also came several of the Relations of both to Visit him, as I
thought, out of love, but indeed for nothing but to Teaze and perplex him, by
Pealing continually in his Ears, That they were afraid he had wronged his
Conscience, and wishing that the Blood of those that died might not lie at his
door. All which for a while Mr. P. took patiently enough, but told them withal,
that he had done nothing but what Justice obliged him to do, and that had it
not been for those wicked Priests and Papists who had deluded him before, he
had never come into that Trouble and Disgrace which he had undergone.
Perceiving then, that they came rather to vex him, than Congratulate his
Delivery, I made bold to tell 'em, that I believed they were sorry that his
Life was Saved, and that they had rather he should have Died than have
Discovered the Truth, and so with Mr. Prance's leave, forbade them all my
house, excepting only his Wife.

Being thus disgusted, and meditating new Projects, they endeavored all they
could, to get Mr. P. from a place so inconvenient for their purposes. Which
when they had effected, then they began to form New Designs, for the bringing
about whereof, they thought they could find no better way, than to create a
difference between Mr. P. and my self, which they intended to heighten
afterward to an absolute Quarrel and breach of Friendship.

The Design was very silly and like the rest of their vain Imaginations;
however they were resolved to put it in execution, hoping that when they had
set us once at Defiance, that some strange Incongruities and Incoherencies
would have dropped from us for them to lay hold on, and to make their advantages
of. So carefully is that great Maxim of the Pope, Divide and Reign, diffused
from the Hand to every particular Member of the Romish Doctrine.

To this purpose the women were the first that attempted to make Trial of their
Female Cunning. The first that began to lay her Trains to blow up the long
Friendship between Mr. P. and my self was one Mrs. Billing, as Mr. P. himself
acknowledged, a professed Roman Catholic, set on by those of her own Religion.

But her Plot failing, Mrs. Prance her self went to one Mrs. Dorothy Sherborn,
her own Sister, and a zealous Papist* and Cunningly informed her, that the time
was now come to be revenged upon me for being Instrumental in the Discovery of
the Murder of Sir Edmund-Bury Godfrey; for that her Husband and I were quite
fallen out. Though I have so much Charity for Mr. Prance's Wife, to believe,
that she had no unkindness for me, but upon the Score of her Religion.

This Wheedle encouraging Mrs. Sherbons Zeal, away goes she to the Lady Powis,
and informed her of the difference which themselves had forged between Mr. P.
and my self, and advised her not to let slip the Opportunity that offered it
self of making their Advantage of it. The Lady, believing the overture real,
and consequently a thing probable to take effect, employed Mr. Dangerfield, a
person at that time altogether unknown to me, to make his way into my Company,
and to use his Art to the best advantage of their Design, which was to entrap
me, if possible, by Prolixity of Discourse, and to gain what ever
Disconcurrencies of former Evidence he could, relating to the Transactions
between me and Mr. P. To which end he came to me by no name, but only as from
Mr. P. upon a pretense of desiring me to cut him some Amber. To which I made
him answer, that it was a thing quite out of my rode, and wondered that Mr. P.
who knew me better, should so far mistake my calling. The Gentleman perceiving
his Error, desired to be more private with me over a glass of Wine. As for
Wine I refused him, considering how he had failed in his Address, which had
rendered him very suspicious to me; but in regard he came from Mr. P. as he
said, I yielded to drink a Dish of Coffee or a Glass of Ale with him, yet with
this Caution to my self, that I resolved the Master of the House, as much as
possible he could, should be by, all the time of our stay. When we were
together, Mr. D. then as I said before) unknown to me, began with the Death of
Sir Edmund-Bury Godfrey. Upon which he applauded my Kindness to Mr. P. by
telling me how great a Friend I had been to him in Saving his Life. But then
coming to his point, he fell on the other side to bemoan my Misfortune that I
should be so ill requited for my Kindness, for that Mr. P, strangely ungrateful
and forgetful of my successful Friendship, did nothing but rail at me, and
speak ill things of me, behind my Back. To all which I made only this short
reply, That I was very sorry for it, but for the occasion, left it to God and
Mr. Prances own Conscience to be the Judges.

To this purpose he went on much further, and left no instigations and
incentives unessay'd to heighten my Provocation against my Friend. However I
still persisted in my good Opinion of him, believing Mr. P. to be the same
person in reference to his honest affections toward me; and therefore desired
M. D. to desist from any further Attempts, which would be but vain and
fruitless. Which, though it silenced his farther Prosecution at that time, yet
he again the next morning, still concealing his name, and pretending only came
to be an admirer of Art; and therefore, seeing certain Counterfeit Necklaces in
my Room, asked me, whether I made them or no? I told him, I did. Thereupon he
bought some three or four, with some slight Questions beforehand, what the true
value of them might be? To which I replied, That in regard he was Mr. Prances
Friend, I would have no more of him, than what I sold them for to the Exchange.
But he replied, he was so much an admirer of Art, that he could not but believe
himself obliged to give me a Price according to his own judgment, and the
value, that he himself had set upon them; which was more than I demanded. After
that we parted, and I saw him no more till about ten days, or a Fourthnight
afterward, at what time I met him accidentally in Fleet Street, when he would
have pressed upon me a Bottle of Wine at the Castle Tavern. But I refused it,
and excused my self, by telling him, I did not care to Drink with strange
Company, as being known to have been Instrumental in the Discovery of Sir
Edmund-Bury Godfrey's Murder, and therefore did not know what Designs some
people might have upon me. After which, I only met him Passant upon a Sunday in
Fleet Street with a Lady in his hand.

All this while Mrs. Dorothy Sherborn kept an Intimate Correspondence with me
and my Wife. But with no other Design than to blow the Coals of Discord between
Mr. P. and me, with often Repetitions of my Kindness to her Brother-in-law Mr.
P. and telling me how much he was beholding to me for his Life, for which
reason, he was a very unworthy person to speak so ill of me, as he did, in all
Companies. On the other side I still took his part, and justifying, that what
he had done was no more than what it behoov'd him to do, told her, her
Brother-in-Law could have no reason to speak ill of me, and that therefore I
should be very cautious of believing what she said to be true.

Notwithstanding all this, Mrs. Sherborn continued without ceasing her
undermining Projects, so that neither my Wife nor I could pass by her House,
but she called us in, and was still exclaiming against the good Service Mr.
Prance had done, which she called one of the greatest pieces of Villainy that
possibly could have been Committed. And so changing her Note, accused me, to
have wrought him to make a Confession of Tales and Stories to save his Life and
hazard his Soul. So that it was no wonder her Brother-in-law was so much
offended at me as he was. Applauding Providence therein, that would by means of
their differences unfold the Mysteries of both our iniquities.

Which Insinuation might perhaps have wrought some effect upon my belief, well
knowing how Indefatigable the Papists are to Bugbear and Terrify the
Consciences of persons not well resolved, and consequently that Mr. P. might
possibly be wrought upon to have some ill thought of me, but that I knew, that
I had only completed what Mr. P. himself had begun; by fortifying him in his
resolutions to stand to that Confession which he had made before the Lords of
the Committee, and to confirm him in the ratification of his own Act and Deed.

Seeing then, that Mrs. Sherborn pressed these things so hard upon me, I resolved
to put the Question as severely to her, and desired her punctually to tell me,
whether she thought there was any Plot or no? To which she answered, that she
believed there was a Plot against the King and Government, but not that it was
carried on by the Papists, but that I should find in a short time, that it was
a Presbyterian Plot: which made me very much admire, in regard that neither by
my Converse with my Acquaintance of that Profession, nor by my reading of their
Books, I could find them inclined or Principl'd to any such Acts of Irregular
Violence.

Mrs. Sherborn being thus at a loss, one James Pemberton, living near Ladgate,
Tracing her Steps, undertook to accomplish what she had begun, though he made
his Batteries with the same plausible Insinuations that she had used before;
as, that I had been a great Friend to Mr. P. etc. However that I had over
persuaded him to Confess things of which he was no way Guilty, merely to save
his Life; arguing from a supposition, that he was insufficient to be entrusted
with so great a secret, that he was altogether innocent. Finding my self thus
frequently and so severely encountered, I retreated to my former Question and
asked him likewise, whether he thought there was any Plot or no? whose answer
was to the same Tune that Mrs. Sherborn had Sung before, that he believed there
was a Plot, though not of the Papists Contrivance, but by the Contrivance of
the Presbyterians, and that in a short time it would be so proved: And his
Grand Argument was, that the Papists had died wrongfully, or else they would
have made a true Confession of themselves. I replied, that was no true proof,
and showed him a Book upon the Trial of Parry, wherein it was made out, that he
first Confessed the Treason against the Queen, and at his Execution denied it,
against the Letters which were produced under his own hand Writing; which Book
he desiring to see, I lent it him; but he found it so ill for his Turn, that
though I often re-demanded it of him, I could hardly get it again (by which I
shrewdly conjectured that he had a mind to have embezel'd it, and dispose of it
as a Heretical Story) but at last I did.

All these Contrivances ill Succeeding, I received the following Letter from an
unknown person at Westminster.

Sir,
I Am informed by a Friend of mine that you are a very great Artist for making
Artificial Eyes. I do want Two or Three, and if your Leisure would give you
leave; I am a Stranger to you, but I am in good hopes, you will do me the
favor to come to me to the Dog Tavern in the Palace-yard at Westminster to
Morrow by Eleven of the Clock, and enquire for the Number 2. and there you may
find me, for my Occasions will not give me leave to come into the City, or else
I would not give you the Trouble. So I remain hoping to be better acquainted.

Sir, I Am Yours, William Odriffe,
Angel-Yard October 31. 1679.

This Letter I showed to several Friends, but they all concurred that it was
only a Trapan, and a Design laid to ensnare me, and advised me not to go
without some other persons to bear me Company. With this Caution I went, and
enquired for the Number 2. but there was no such person as had subscribed his
name to the Letter. I understood indeed that there was an honest Gentleman of
the same Name that lived at Westminster, but being sent to by me, he utterly
disowned any knowledge of the Matter, or that he had appointed any Business at
the said Tavern. But it seems there was a Gang that Watched my coming, and
hearing my smart enquiry for the Number 2. and my Expostulation with the
Servant of the House, one of them came to me, and told me, that he and some
others staid for Mr. Odriffe, and that it could not be long ere he come; and
thereupon invited me to the rest of the Company. Then I concluded it was time for
me to march off; so I thanked him, for his Kindness and took my leave with a
resolution not to come near him nor his Mr. Odriffe neither.

When all these Designs proved fruitless, then they gave it out, that I held a
Correspondence with the Earl of Danby, and that he had given me Ten pounds to
pay my Rent; which, as they pretended was for some private Service, that I had
either done or was to do his Lordship. A thing which I utterly disown; for I
cannot remember, that ever I so much as saw the Earl of Danby in my life but
once, and that was, as I was coming down with Mr. P. from his Grace the Duke of
Monmouths Lodgings in the Cockpit at White Hall, and the said Earl was passing
by through the place where the Sentinel stands; and then neither did I know who
his Lordship was, till the Sentinel, of whom I asked the Question, had informed
me, nor did I so much as speak to him, as all that were present can Testify.
And indeed it would have been a strange confident. Presumption in me to have
gone to speak to a person of Honor to whom I was utterly unknown, having no
business with him, as I neither had at that, or at any other time. So that how
his Lordship should come to know my wants, and be so bountiful as to give me
Ten Pound, I can by no means understand. However, if his Lordship were so
Liberal, I had the Misfortune to be basely Cheated, for I never had it. And I
wish Mrs. Sherborn would do me the Kindness to inform me, who the person was,
to whom his Lordship gave order to pay the money, for I promise her, did I know
the person, I should go and demand it. For if it were true, both his Lordship,
and my self, are very much abused. On the other side I should have been
extremely to blame, that I should not ere this have returned his Lordship my
most humble Thanks for so great and special a favor: neither do I know of any
person from whom I ever received a kindness, that can Tax me of so much
Ingratitude. But this is like the rest of the Actions of the Papists, that care
not what they say, or Swear to, so it be to advance the Interest of their Holy
Mother the Church of Rome, though never so much to the Prejudice and Defamation
of the Innocent.

At length Mrs. Sherborn declares, that Mr. Dangerfield told her this Story,
and that he came to have imposed upon her. A Tale which seems very Incoherent
with Truth, that he should go about to Amuse or Trapan her, when they were both
at the same time in the fame Confederacy together. For Mr. Dangerfield has
since declared, that he never knew me, but by her means, and that they had a
real Design to have ruined me, if they found that they could not win me to
serve their purposes, though with this intimation, that my compliance with them
would prove a Thousand pound in my way.

But now that the Scene is changed, Mrs. Sherborn rails against Mr. Dangerfield
as much, or more than ever she did against me, and prosecutes his Failings with
as loud Invectives and Aggravations, as her Anger can express. So that it is
evident that the Papists do not bear so much Malice against the persons, or the
Vices of men, as against their Reformations, and Recantations of their Errors.
The wicked shall be Saints among them, so long as they will be Instrumental to
carry on their Designs; but if once, out of an apprehension of their Mistake,
or an abhorrency of the Facts which they put upon them to Execute, they seek to
retrieve themselves and their Reputation, by a seasonable Repentance and
Detection of the Romish Treacheries, then the most ponderous Crimes and
Scandals are too light to over-whelm their recovered Reputations.

As for Mr. Prance himself, his own Relations began to be his most bitter
Enemies, and raised a Report, that he was concerned in making of Fireballs;
and that he was seen in Perpole-Lane, the Night before the New-Prison was
Burnt, and that several Fireballs had been found near the place where he had
been Drinking, in that Lane, the night before. This Report so terrified Mr.
Prance's Wife, as fearing it might swell to the prejudice of her Husband, that
with a mind very much troubled and perplexed, she came and found me out, in a
place in the City, where I was with her Husband and some other Company, and
calling me aside, told me the whole Relation, and desired my assiistance to
search out the Truth, which I promised her. Accordingly I went the next day to
satifie her. But after I had made all the diligent enquiry I could, I found the
whole business to be grounded only upon the Idle Twattle of an Old-woman that
Lodged in Perpole-Lane, who the next day after the Fire went to a Female
Relation of Mr. Prances in Bride-Lane, and a Protestant, and told her of the
Fire that had happened the night before, and that Mr. Prance was suspected
about it: who made her answer, that she knew nothing of the Fire, neither did
she believe her Kinsman any way concerned in it. However she went in Friendship
to her Sister, that was a Papist, and giving her an account of what the
Old-woman had told her, desired her to give Mr. Prance notice of it, as being
more familiar with him. She on the other side meditating to make another sort
of use of the Information, improves the Surmise, intending to have Kindled a
more destructive flame to Mr. Prances disadvantage, and endeavored to have
brought not only Mr. Prance but her Sister into trouble about it. But it proved
such an idle and silly invention of Popish Contrivance as only served to show
the inveterate Malice of their Dying Revenge, ready to lay hold upon any
seeming opportunity to have blasted the Credit of Mr. Prance's Evidence, as I
made it clearly out.

About the beginning of January Mr. Prance came to me, and told me I was to be
Examined in reference to a very great and weighty Concern. I asked him whether
he knew what it was? To which he made Answer, that it was not convenient for
him to speak of it: but said withal, that there was a woman to be examined also
with me.

Upon which I endeavored to Recollect my Memory, but could not call to mind
any person with whom I had had any Discourse about any thing of State Affairs,
as not becoming me to meddle with them.

Thereupon I asked him who the person was that should cause me to be Examined?
which he refused to tell me; a thing that I took somewhat unkindly from him,
telling him that I could not have concealed any thing from him, which might
have fore-arm'd him against the Information of any person whatsoever; but all I
could say signified nothing at that time.

Upon the Twenty Second of the same Month, he invited me to a Glass of Wine at
the Feathers Tavern in Fleet Street, whither I went along with him. There we
met (as I thought accidentally) with Mr. Warcupp, one of his Majesty's Justices
of the Peace for the County of Middlesex, and Captain Cresset, in whose Company
I had not sat long, but Mr. Warcupp sent for Mr. Bedlow. After some
Salutations that passed betwixt us, in came another person, who Saluted me by
the Name of Mr. Boys. I returned him his Salute, but could not Divine who he
was, till one in the Company taking up the Glass, presented his Service to him
by the name of Mr. Dangerfield. So soon as I heard that, I asked Mr. Prance if
that were the same person who was employed to make the Plot as Acted by the
Presbyterians? He told me it was. Then said I, this is the person that came the
last Summer to have inveigl'd me. Whereupon I asked him if this were the person
who intended to have me Examined? To which he replied, it was: whereupon I
staid somewhat longer than I meant to have done; expecting what Mr. Dangerfield
or any other person in the room might have to say to me; but there was nothing
said that night.

Upon the 29 th. of January Mr. Dangerfield came to my House, and told me I
must appear before the Lord Mayor to be by him Examined, but told me nothing of
the occasion. Thereupon I went that day to my Lords House, but his Lordship
being that day busy, I had Orders to attend the next, which accordingly I did.
Before I went Mr. Prance came to me, and offered to go along with me; but I
refused his Courtesy, because he had Concealed the name of the Person from me,
when I desired him to let me know it: Telling him withal, that I did not
Question but to be able to answer any thing that should be alleged against me.

When I came before my Lord I found the occasion of my being Summoned to be
quite contrary to what Mr. Prance had intimated, as that, I had talked at a
strange Rate of things of high and great Concernment. For indeed the business
was only this (and I was conscious to my self it could not really be for any
other reason) that I should declare and justify the Truth of Mr. Dangerfields
coming to ensnare me, how I came to have a Distrust of him, and the ways and
Method which he used to engage me to a Discovery of the Secrets which the most
Honorable Privy Council had entrusted me withal, and what Mr. Prance had
Confessed touching the Murder, and farther to attest my constant refusal of
his Temptations, and Resistance of his plausible Batteries. Of all which I made
an Affidavit before his Lordship, since Printed in Mr. Dangerfields Second
Narrative, to which I refer the Reader; which gave his Lordship Satisfaction,
and serves as much as any thing, to confirm Mr. Dangerfields Evidence.

This is that which in Vindication of my self, I thought not only fit, but
necessary to declare to the world. A Relation altogether plain, and without any
Fallacy of Expression, which he that will go about to disprove, may do it if he
can.

FINIS.

