A DEFENSE OF THE Kings Authority AND SUPREMACY, In the Church and
Church Discipline. And that He is Supreme Head and Governor, over all persons,
in all Causes Ecclesiastical. Against these Disciplinarians, the Pope, and his
Clergy, the Bishops and Episcoparians, the Scottish and English PRESBYTERIANS,
with the INDEPENDENTS. Who have for a long time, usurped the power of Kings,
and authority of Magistrates, contrary to the will of GOD, and the Honor of
KINGS. The second Edition much enlarged. By THEOPHILUS BRABOVRNE.

Give unto Caesar, the things that are Caesar's. LONDON, Printed for the Author,
and are to be sold by William Nowell, Bookseller in Norwich, 1660.

A DEFENSE Of The KINGS SVPREMACIE In the Church and Church Discipline: Against
these Disciplinarians, the Pope, English Bishops, Scottish and English
Presbyterians, and Independents: who have for a long time, usurped the
authority of the King and his Magistrates.
MY ensuing Discourse shall be, to maintain the Kings Supremacy, in causes
Ecclesiastical, and the authority of all Magistrates under him: and to confute
the authority of Bishops, and other Ministers in Church Matters.

Now because I will not dispute on Generals, I will by and by come to a
particular, namely to the censure and punishment of Excommunication, the which
is all the authority that Bishops and Ministers do claim: and I shall try
whether it belongs to the office of our Christian Magistrates, or to the Bishop
and his Chancellor, or to the Minister and his Lay Elders. Now if it can be
made appear, as I believe it will, that the censure of Excommunication belongs
to the Magistrate and not to the Bishop, then Bishops have lost all their
authority, even the richest flower in their Garland,

By the way note, that as the inferior Ministers rule with their Lay Elders,
so does the Bishop with his Chancellor, who is no Minister, but a Lay man: and
thus you see, that all Disciplinarians have their Lay Elders.

Now my endeavor shall be to give unto Caesar our King, the things that are
Caesar's: and to his subordinate Magistrates, the things that are theirs: and to
give unto Bishops and Ministers, the things that belong to them; as to be
Preachers, not Rulers, like Magistrates I have 2 or 3 things more to premise
before I come to my task.

1. Near twenty years agone, I took the National Oath and Covenant, to be true
and faithful to the King and his Posterity; the which I have been ever since,
so far as in my power was, sorrowing to see so many illegal and treacherous
practices, beyond my power to amend. I then also did swear, to do my endeavor
for the extirpation of Prelacy, that is, of Archbishops, Bishops, and
Chancellors, etc. In pursuance whereof I writ this little Treatise: holding my
self bound in conscience to keep my Oath.

But it will be said, the Parliament when they required this Oath was then
illegal, the King being absent.

I answer. Hence it follows, that my Oath was illegal, and binds not in the
Common Law; but yet it binds in point of Divinity: For an Oath taken by force
and fear, binds, as in the case of the Oath taken to the King of Babel, Ezekiel.
17.12, etc. And an Oath taken by fraud binds, as in the case of the Gibeonites:
and no man on earth can absolve from such an Oath, Josh. 9.3, 4.18, 19. with 2 Samuel 21.1, 2.6. wherefore I dare not be a perjured person. Jeremiah said,
Because of Oaths, the Land mourns, Jer. 23.10. God plagued the Israelites in
David's time, for the perjury of Saul before him, 2 Samuel 21.1, etc. We have sins
enough in this Land to answer to God for: and shall we add wilful perjury to
them, to provoke the Lord to wrath? God forbid. Now I humbly beseech our
honorable Parliament, to order things so, as those who have taken this Oath,
which cannot be recalled, may not be enforced by Law, to be forsworn by any of
their endeavors to establish or countenance our new Bishops.

2. Many say, as King James did: no Bishop, no King; but King James was no
Prophet, he spoke as he thought and desired: But had he lived to our days, and
seen what we have seen, he might have changed his proverb. If I may be so bold
to speak my sense, it had been good for King Charles, his Son, if he had cast
off Bishops twenty years before his death: For, as I suppose, they were one
great cause of his untimely end.

For he had armed his Bishops with too much of his Authority; the which some of
them abused to pride, calling them Jack Gentlemen.

Most of them abusing his authority, for the ushering in of Popish Ceremonies,
spending their zeal, to maintain trifles, not beseeming learned and grave
Doctors: as an ayeriall Cross, and white Surplice, an Hood and Tippet, whereby
they became ridiculous to the people:

And then they abused his authority, to cruelty and persecution for those
trifles: How many hundreds of painful and godly Ministers, of a good life and
conversation, did they silence for non-observance of these, and unmercifully
deprived them of their livings and livelihood, so as they were enforced to live
upon Alms. So great was their persecution in those days, as they drove many
hundreds of the Kings Subjects out of the Kingdom, to plant themselves in a
Wilderness: And how great was their tyranny in the High Commission Court at
London, and their Chancellours Courts in the Country, persons of years know too
well: and all this for trifles, whereby they became odious to the people then,
and to those that sat at the beginning of this long Parliament after, who
rooted them quite up: For these were eyewitnesses, and sensible of the pride,
ambition, and cruel persecutions of the Bishops, whereof many in our days
being but young men, are totally ignorant, and therefore think to gather grapes
of these thorns, and Figs of these thistles: But a wolf will be a wolf still,
though you crop his ears, and cut his tail, the same is true of a Fox.

Now in process of time, when unhappily the King and Parliament fell at odds,
many thousands of the people took in with the Parliament, some help them with
money, others with their persons and swords: but would not take in with the
King, for fear of Popery, and for fear they should be still under the tyranny
of cruel Bishops; the which to conscientious men, was more intolerable than
monthly Taxes, or illegal Monopolies of old. Thus the King lost the hearts of
his Subjects, because they saw themselves in a desperate case: For it was grown
into a proverb, no Bishop, no King.

3. Many who have read my former book of this subject, say, that I am an
Erastine, but they are such as know not the opinion of Erastus. I have seen his
book, which was anciently a dispute between reverend Beza and him, about
Excommunication. Now Erastus held it to be no Ordinance of Christ, but a
figment of man's brain: but I differ from him, and hold it to be an Ordinance of
Christ, I only endeavor to set the saddle on the right horse, saying, It is
the office of the Magistrate, not of the Bishop or Minister.

These things premised, now I come to my task, and shall handle by sundry
questions and answers thereunto drawing nearer and nearer unto it by little and
little, until I come to the main. The consideration whereof, may prove useful
to the King and Parliament: For desire them I do, to be cautious of putting
their own sword into the hands of the Clergy, lest they turn the point of it
against Magistrates: Have not the Scots excommunicated their King? and may not
our Bishops (if true to their principles) do the same to any Member in
Parliament, or Magistrate in the Kingdom? Yea, to the King himself: as I
shall prove before I have done, and so I come to the questions.

1. Quest. Who are the Church?

I answ. Not the Clergy only, but the Laiety and Clergy both, not excluding,
but including the Magistrate: For the Magistrate is not only a member of the
Commonwealth, but also a member of the Church: He is an Ecclesiastical person
as well as the Minister: for he is of and belonging to the Church as well as
the Minister: and so much is signified by the word Ecclesiastical: Wherefore
you may not object against the Magistrate, saying, he may not meddle with
Excommunication, because he is a Layman: For we must know, that the Magistrate
is an Ecclesiastical person as well as the Minister.

But you will say, the Minister is a Spiritual man, so is not the Magistrate.
I answ. He is a spiritual man that minds spiritual things, and leads a
spiritual life, Romans 8.1, 5. Romans 7.6. Now God be praised for it, we have many
Magistrates, who are spiritual men, and lead a spiritual life; and many
thousands of common people, who are so too: but Bishops, and Clergymen, and the
Pope, will be the spiritual men, and Magistrates and others must be the carnal
men.

Whereas I said even now, the Laiety and Clergy: I shall be quarrelled with by
the Clergy, for giving the priority to the Laiety, and not to the Clergy, as
has been the custom for many hundred years. Now I grant, that it has been
the custom ever since there was a Pope, and ever since the Pope exalted
himself above all that is called God; that is, above the Magistrate, 2 These.
2.4. and see Psalm. 82.6. And this Popish custom, would Bishops and Clergymen
uphold still: But are not the King, Parliament, and Magistrates Lay persons, as
they call them? and are not these above the Clergy? If these then be above
Bishops and Clergymen, these must have the priority; as well as superiority:
and therefore I said, the Laiety and Clergy: to say otherwise is Popish, and
tending to a denial of the Kings supremacy.

Quest. 2. How are the members of the Church to be qualified?

I answ. Not speaking of the invisible, but of the visible Church on earth,
these must have faith and repentance, or at least a profession of these: now
that this latter makes a member of the Church, I thus prove it.

1. Baptism is the door into the Church, and such as were baptized were entered
into the Church, and admitted as members of the Church: Now John the Baptist,
baptized a great multitude, as Jerusalem, and all Judea, and all the Country
about Jordan, upon confession of their sins, Mat. 3.5, 6. Now John could not
know any more of these, then their verbal profession, and yet he admitted them
into the Church by baptism. 2. The 3000. converted and baptized by Peter, and
so admitted into the Church, he could know no more of them then their external
profession, by submission to his baptism, and by saying men and brethren what
shall we do? which were but words. True, the Text says, they were pricked in
heart, Acts 2.37. But how could Peter know this; save by their words; and
submission to his baptism? both which were external: The Text says, verse.
45. they sold their possessions to give to the poor, yet Ananias was a liar,
Acts 5.1, etc. See 1 John 2.19. and Mat. 13.20. Further, the people of Laodicea
were a Church, Rev. 3.14. yet many of them had but external profession. Simon
the Sorcerer was baptized, and so made a member of the Church, Acts 8.13. and
Judas was a member of Christ's family and Church.

By the way note, that there is a superstitious niceness in some, who will not
admit one a member of their Church, without a months trial, etc. but this is
after the doctrine and commandments of men, Col. 2.22, 23. not after the
practice of John the Baptist.

To return: If a Magistrate has but an outward profession, he is a member of
the Church, and an Ecclesiastical person, as well as a Minister: Let none
therefore say, he is a Layman, and therefore he may not meddle with
Excommunication, as a Minister may.

Quest. 3. Is a Magistrate an Elder and Ruler of the Church?

I answ. He is not only an Elder and Ruler of the Commonwealth, but also of
the Church: this later I thus prove.

These called the Elders and Rulers of the people of this Commonwealth, Numb.
11.16, 24. were Rulers of the Church also; For Moses commanded Aaron the chief
Priest, to offer Incense, which was a Church-matter, Numb. 16.46. King Hezekiah
did the like, 2 Chronicles. 31.2. King David did so too, 1 Chronicles. 16.7. And also
King Josiah, 2 Kings 23.4. and 2 Chronicles. 35 15.1, 2, 3, etc. Things written
afore-time, were written for our learning, Romans 15.4. Hence it follows,

1. If therefore a Magistrate be a Ruler of the Church, why may not he punish
the scandalous sinner in the Church? and that with any punishment suitable to
the offense? be it by their punishment of Excommunication, or any other
punishment: it is in vain for him to command, if he may not punish.

2 If a Lay-Elder, be he the Bishops Chancellor, or the Ministers Elders, may
punish with Excommunication; why may not the Magistrate do so too? though you
call him a Layman.

But you will say, the Lay-Elder does it not alone, but with the Minister.

Answ. If he does it with another, yet he does it, though not alone. The chief
Priests and Elders together, put Christ to death: Yet we may say, and speak
truly, the Elders put Christ to death.

Quest. 4. Do you make two Churches in one Common wealth, the one of the
Magistrates, the other of the Ministers?

I answ. Yea: for they hold the Congregation and Assembly of the Minister and
people, in the Parish-house, to be one Church: and I shall prove, that there is
another Church, as in the Senate House, or common Hall, where the Magistrate
and people, are congregated and assembled for matters of Justice.

For the word Ecclesia, translated a Church, signifies a Congregation, or an
Assembly of people, Acts 7.38. Acts 19.32, 39, 41. Now the Magistrate and
people in the Senat-house, are a Congregation and an Assembly of people: and
therefore they are a Church, and all of them are Ecclesiastical persons, of and
belonging to this Church.

As the Magistrate and people are a Church, so they are a Church of Christ; for
they are all Christians, professing Christ, and faith in Christ, and they are
also a Church of God: for their authority is of, and from God, Romans 13.1. and
they assemble in their Hall to serve God; The Magistrate by ruling for God, and
in his place; the people to be ruled by God, and his righteous Laws.

The Magistrates Court therefore, being a Church of God, why should any say or
think, that it is an unfit place, for the censure of Excommunication? may it
not soon be as fit a place, as the Chancellours or Bishops Consistory?

Another quest. of these two Churches, which is greater? Papists say, the
Clergy Church, so they say, Bishops too; for they say, Church and State: but we
ought to give priority and superiority to the State, and say, State and Church:
For Moses commanded Aaron, and so did Kings the Priests: to speak otherwise,
giving priority to the Church, is popish, and tending to a denial of the Kings
supremacy.

Quest. 5. Being the Magistrate is no Divine, how can he know who is fit or not
fit to be excommunicated?

I answ. How can two or three Lay Elders, know who is fit, and who not, being
they are no Divines? And how can the Bishops Chancellor know, who is fit, and
not fit? for he is no Divine.

2. As for scandalous sins, as adultery, drunkenness, swearing, and such like,
being all matters of Fact, the Magistrate knows them, as well as the Bishop or
Minister, for the Magistrate does daily punish these sins in his Court.

As for fundamental doctrines, being none are such, but only such as are
clearly laid down in Scripture: and being they are daily preached on by our
Ministers, the Magistrate is not ignorant of these: Or if he be, God has
ordained the help of the Minister, by way of counsel and advice: but still so,
as the power and authority as Judge to pass censure, is still in the
Magistrate, as you may read, Deuteronomy. 17.8, 9, 10, 11.

As for points disputable, not clearly revealed in Scripture, I hold, that no
man is to be excommunicated for these; for if he be, the innocent may be
punished, as soon as the wicked. And therefore the Magistrate needs not meddle
with such points, but only with sins clearly revealed to be sins, as incest, 1
Cor. 5.1, etc. and by like reason, swearing, drunkenness, and the like.

Whereas I said, the Magistrate may take the advice of the Minister, etc. I
mean his advice in a fundamental doctrine, which is very clearly a sin in
Scripture; for else he may give wicked advice: But as for a doubtful and
disputable controversy, wherein Scripture is alleged on both sides, it is not
safe for the Magistrate to condemn either side upon advice of the Minister: for
a Church may err, a Council may err, and 10. or 12. Ministers may err too.
Suppose therefore a point comes before the Magistrate, which commonly is holden
to be an error or heresy, where will the Magistrate find among the Clergy
competent and fit Judges to determine it? for the Clergy hold the common
opinion: Now if the Magistrate call in to his help and advice ten or 12. of the
Clergy, will they not all advise for their own opinion? and then they will be
incompetent and partial Judges: Do you think, they will justify the accused
party, and condemn themselves? I dare say it, that all the Bishops in England,
will condemn this book if not before they see it: But the Law permits no man to
be a judge or a witness in his own cause: when the Clergy gives judgment, of a
cause commonly holden by others and themselves, to be an error or heresy,
they are like the High Court of Justice, all or the major part came thither
with a resolution, to make an end of the KING before they rose.

Quest. 6. Is the King next under Christ, supreme head of the Church?

Answ. This question is out of question with me: but being I hear of some
Ministers beyond Sea offended at this Title, and have read of some in England
of like opinion, I shall here prove the point: and first by the Laws of our
Kingdom, and then by the Scripture.

1. The Laws of our Kingdom, do give unto our King this just and Royal title,
to be supreme Head under Christ, over all persons, and in all causes
Ecclesiastical or spiritual: wherefore the King is supreme haad of the
Church, and therefore all good Subjects must acknowledge him so to be, Romans
13.1.

2. I have before proved, out of the Scriptures, that King Hezekiah, David, and
Josiah, were Rulers and Governors over the Church, and in Church Matters, 2 Chronicles. 31.2. and 1 Chronicles. 16.7. and 2 Chronicles. 35.1, etc. 2 Chronicles. 35.15. and 2
King. 23.4. Now those godly Kings were supreme in authority, for there was none
above or before them. It was prophesied of, that in time of the Gospel, Kings
should be our nursing Fathers, Isa. 49.22, 23. Now in our days, though we have
many Magistrates of high authority, yet none of them can or will challenge the
supremacy, but the King only.

3. See a pregnant Text for it, 1 Pet. 2.13. Submit your selves, etc. unto the
King, as unto the supreme. So supremacy is the Kings just Title. Now being it
is so, why do Bishops say and write Church and State? as if the Church and
Bishops were above the King: where is then the Kings supremacy?

Quest. 7. Does the punishment of Excommunication belong to the office of a
Bishop and his Chancellor: or to the Minister and his Lay Elders?

I answer negatively: This office belongs not to any Lay-Elder, who is not a
Magistrate of the Commonwealth: nor to any Chancellor, who is a Layman, and
no Magistrate: the contrary, I expect to see Bishops or Ministers to prove if
they can. And I answer, concerning Bishops or Ministers alone, without their
Elders or Assistants; and I deny also, that this office does belong to a Bishop
or a Minister: The contrary lies upon both of them, to prove if they can. In
the mean time I thus prove against them.

1. Excommunication is a punishment, so confessed by all men, and so called in
Scripture, 2 Cor. 2.6. and a punishment is a revenge, or taking vengeance on
them that do evil, Romans 13.4. Now Bishops and Ministers may not punish, and
revenge: For this belongs to the Magistrate, Romans 13.4. not to a Bishop or
Minister.

St. Paul says, a Bishop must be no striker, 1 Timothy 3.3. Now I know not why a
Bishop may not as well strike with his hand or fist, as punish, and take
vengeance on any man by Excommunication. Their distinction of corporal and
spiritual punishment will not help them, as you shall see in the next quest.

2. The office of the Magistrate is, to summon into his Court, these scandalous
sinners, the adulterer, swearer, drunkard, and the like, and in his Court to
examine them, and to examine witnesses against them, and then if guilty, to
judge and censure them to punishment, all these are acts of Magistraticall
authority, and we daily see Magistrates exercising this authority. Now for
Bishops to use these several acts in their Consistory, it is an usurpation of
the Magistrates office and authority: and therefore this authority belongs not
to a Bishop or a Minister, nor to the Pope: and without these precedent acts of
authority, there can be no Excommunication.

3. Christ has forbidden the Pope, the Bishop of a Diocese, and the Minister
of a Parish, to exercise Lordly authority in the Church: for he said, The Lords
of the Gentiles exercise dominion, and they that are great, exercise authority:
But it shall not be so among you, Mat. 20.25. Christ forbad his Apostles to
Lord it; and St. Peter to like purpose said, That Ministers must not be so much
as, or like unto Lords, over Gods heritage, 1 Pet. 5.3. Now for a Bishop to
punish with the Rod of Excommunication, it is a Lordly authority, for
punishment is Lordly: and for a Bishop in his Consistory, to examine one, and
witnesses against him, and then to judge and condemn him to punishment, this is
Lordly authority: wherefore the censure of Excommunication belongs not to a
Bishop.

I shall prosecute this point further, by sundry absurdities which depend upon
it, as

1. If Excommunication be proper to a Bishop, or a Minister, why does the
Bishops Chancellor meddle in it? for he is a Layman: and why do the Ministers
Elders meddle in it? for these are Laymen.

2. If the Bishop will punish some sins by Excommunication, as Adultery, then
he must punish all sins with Excommunication; for if he does not, he is
partial and unjust. The Bishop has but one salve for every sore, but one last
for every foot, which is Excommunication for greater and lesser sins: wherefore
he must inflict this one punishment upon every sinner: and then he must
excommunicate every thief, every traitor, and every murderer before they are
hanged: and there are a multitude of trespasses by the Common Law, the which
are sins also: Now all these the Bishop must summon into his Consistory, for to
undergo his spiritual punishment.

3. The Magistrate punishes in his Court, the adulterer, drunkard, swearer,
etc. Now the Bishop and his Chancellor, may not punish these in his Consistory
again with Excommunication; for if they do, they commit injustice: For after
the Magistrate has inflicted a full punishment, then for a Bishop to bring the
matter about again for another punishment: this is to punish twice for one
fault, a double punishment for a single sin: It is a torment intolerable, and
apt to make men run mad, to be trounced from the Magistrates Court, unto the
Bishops Consistory, for one crime, to be twice examined in several Courts, to
have witnesses twice brought against them, to be twice censured and condemned,
and to suffer two sorts of punishments, and all for one fault, which has been
sufficiently punished before by the Magistrate: this is intolerable.

To avoid this mischief, either let the Magistrate do all acts of authority and
justice, without the Bishop: or let the Bishop and his Chancellor, do all acts
of authority and justice, in things Civil and Ecclesiastical, without the
Magistrate; For to have two such Magistrates, a corporal, and a spiritual, or
a Civil, and an Ecclesiastical, is as if we had two Suns in the Firmament, or
two Kings in England, the Pope was the author of it.

4. If Excommunication be exercised by a Bishop, then he makes himself an
Antichrist, or Pope: For in his Consistory, he sits as a Judge over a
Magistrate if he be scandalous, examines him, and witnesses against him,
censures and condemns him: Now the mark of Antichrist, is to exalt himself
above all that is called God, 2 These. 2.4. And the Magistrate is called God,
Psalm. 82.6. If therefore a Bishop does pass sentence upon a Magistrate, he
makes himself Antichrist.

Quest. 8. Is excommunication a spiritual punishment belonging to Bishops?

I take this to be a popish device, and invented by the Pope: For when he
encroached upon the authority of Kings, that he might with the more color
obtain leave from them, to reign over the souls of the people, leaving the
bodies and fleshly carcasses for Kings to Reign over, then he stifled them with
this Dose; that Excommunication is no corporal but a spiritual punishment, and
suitable to his spiritual Clergy: and this has been the dose and plea of our
Bishops ever since.

But why the Clergy should engross this spirituality as proper to them, I see
no reason: For a Magistrate is an Ecclesiastical person, and a spiritual man,
as well as a Bishop: for he is a spiritual man that worships God in spirit and
truth: and who minds spiritual things, and live after the guidance and motions
of the spirit, John 4.23. Romans 8.1, 5. Romans 7.6. Now we have as many
Magistrates, such spiritual men as Bishops: and therefore Magistrates are as
fit to exercise the spiritual discipline of Excommunication as a Bishop: this
I thus prove.

1. If a Bishops Chancelleour who is a Layman, or the Lay Elders of Ministers,
may meddle in spiritual Excommunication, then a Magistrate may do so too,
though you call him a Layman.

2. That Excommunication, if it be a spiritual punishment, yet it is in the
power of the Magistrate, it is clear, Ezra 10.3, 7, 8. where the Princes and
Elders, did by a Proclamation, threaten the people with Excommunication, or
separation from the congregation, if they came not to take the Covenant.

3. King Solomon put off Abiathar the Priest, from his spiritual office of
Priesthood: which degradation was a spiritual punishment, 1 King. 2.27. as his
office was a spiritual blessing.

4. If Excommunication be a spiritual punishment, yet it belongs not to a
Bishop, because it is a Lordly power, forbidden by Christ to Ministers, Mat.
20.25. and 1 Pet. 5.3.

5. If a Bishop uses this spiritual punishment of Excommunication, he makes
himself an Antichrist, and a Pope; as I lately proved.

Quest. 9. Can you prove, that the censure and punishment of Excommunication
belongs to the Magistrate?

I answer yes: But first give me leave to show what, and how the Magistrate is
to act in this his office: when he has summoned into his Court the Adulterer,
Swearer, Drunkard, etc. and has examined him, and witnesses against him, and
has convicted him as guilty of punishment, then he is to pass sentence on him
publicly in Court, to suffer such punishment as is suitable to his sin: and
if the Magistrate judges Excommunication to be more suitable then any other
punishment, then he is to denounce the sentence thereof upon the offender: And
this done, then he is to send his command to the Bishop or Minister of the
parish to deny him the Sacrament. I doubt not, but the Magistrate may command
the Bishop or Minister: For Moses commanded Aaron, Hezekiah and Josiah
commanded the Priests and Levites; and so I come to prove the point.

1. The censure and punishment of Excommunication must either belong to the
Bishop or Minister, or to the Magistrate: But it belongs not to the Bishop or
Minister, as I have abundantly proved before. Therefore it belongs to the
Magistrate.

2. The Princes and Elders in Ezra's time, commanded the people to come to
Jerusalem to take the Covenant, and threatened those that refused, with
excommunication or separation from the Congregation or Church, Ezra 10.3.7, 8.
whereby you see that excommunication was in the power of the Magistrate.

3. King Solomon degraded Abiather the Priest from his spiritual office, which
was a spiritual punishment, 1 King. 2.27. Now if Kings and Magistrates will
imitate Solomon, then they must excommunicate scandalous persons: Solomon put
off the Priest from meddling in holy things, so should Magistrates cut off
scandalous sinners from the communion of Saints at the Lords Table, and from
meddling with these holy things.

4. If the Magistrate may command spiritual duties, then he may inflict
spiritual punishment for neglect of them, as in Excommunication: He that may
command a duty, has power to punish the neglect of it, or else he has no
power to command: to command without a coercive power to compel, is but an
image or scarecrow: But the Magistrate may command spiritual duties, 1 Chronicles.
16.7. and 2 Chronicles. 35.15. and 2 Chr. 29.1, 4, 5. and 2 Kings 23.4. And
therefore the Magistrate may inflict the spiritual punishment of
Excommunication.

5. Excommunication is a punishment, and so called by all men, and so it is
called in Scripture, 2 Cor. 2.6. and a punishment is a revenge. Now to punish
and revenge is proper to the Magistrate, for he is the Minister of God, to
punish and to take vengeance on him that does evil, Romans 13.4. Wherefore the
censure of Excom. upon the scandalous sinner, belongs to the office of the
Magistrate.

6. The several acts of authority used in Excom. belongs to Magistraticall
power, as to summon into Court, and to examine witnesses against one, and to
examine the person complained on: And without these precedent acts, there can
be no Excom. Now to whom belongs these acts, to him belongs the censure of
Excom. that is, to the Magistrate.

By these particulars it appears, that by the Word of God, the Bishop in his
Consistory does usurp the Magistrates office.

Quest. 10. Do Bishops divest the King of his supremacy?

I answer yes: and thus I prove it.

1. It is clear by the Word of God, as has been proved, that Bishops do usurp
the Magistrates authority and office: Now he that usurps the Magistrates
authority, he usurps the Kings authority, for the Magistrates authority is the
Kings: and he that usurps the Kings authority in causes Ecclesiastical, he
denies and devests the King of his supremacy in causes Ecclesiastical: For if
you deny him authority, you divest him of, and deny his superiority and
supremacy in authority. If a Master gives his servant five pounds, to dispose
of by his order, and the servant be robbed of it by the way, not only the
servant is robbed, but his Master also: and then his money being lost, he can
exercise neither authority nor superiority over it: So it is, if a Bishop takes
from the Magistrate the Kings authority, with it he takes the Kings superiority
and supremacy in Ecclesiasticals.

But Bishops will say, they had the Kings Commission for it: and the King gave
them this authority. But say I, Christ forbad them to take it, Mat. 20.25. and
1 Pet. 5.3.

Secondly, they say the King gave it them; and so does a true man give his
purse to a Thief, but it is out of fear: So these Kings afore-time, gave their
authority to Bishops, but they got this gift by fraud: For the Pope persuaded
Kings, that the Key of Discipline and Jurisdiction was a Legacy left by Christ,
first to Saint Peter, and so to his successors, Mat. 16.19. which is false, and
more then can be proved. Besides, Christ forbad the Pope and Bishops to
exercise Lordly authority, Mat. 20.25. and 1 Pet. 5.3. Now as the Pope, so did
those Bishops falsely plead that Legacy, and so got it by fraud and subtlety:
wherefore as I conceive, the gift of those Kings, and their Commissions was a
nullity.

Cromwell of late, got off the Kings head by force: and thus Bishops got away
those Kings regal authority in the Church by fraud and subtilty: Would it not
grieve a man to see his friend cheated of his money at Dice? And how can it but
be grievous to a loyal Subject, to see his Kings just and Royal prerogative,
wrested out of his hands by the wit of Bishops?

In King Henry the 8. the Bishops of England took an Oath to the Pope;
whereupon the Lord Cromwell then informed the King of it, saying, that he was
but half King, and his subjects but half-subjects to him: As I conceive, that
the King was King but over the bodies, and Bishops were Kings over the souls of
the people: so they fell into a praemunire, which cost them 100000. pounds. The
Bishops in those days could not by flattery and subtlety persuade the King and
his Council, that St. Peter's keys did hang on the Popes girdle, or on the
girdle of English Bishops: he would not be so cheated of his supremacy, for
they got it by fraud.

2. The Pope holds his office Jure Divino, so did those Bishops, and so do our
Bishops: for all these plead for Peter's keys, and such like Scriptures: Now
though our Bishops take a commission from the King, and say he is supreme, yet
they hold a higher commission, namely from God and Christ, and the Scriptures:
How then can the King be supreme in causes Ecclesiastical? for Bishops have a
commission higher then the commission which they have from the King: And how
can he be next under Christ, when the Bishops have gotten the higher
Commission? The King may be supreme over the State, but Bishops are next to
Christ, and supreme over the Church, and in causes Ecclesiastical; for they
say, they have an immediate commission from Christ: If so, their commission
from the King must be an inferior commission.

3. If a Bishop has this Lordly authority to Excommunicate, then if he makes
conscience of his office, he must do justice to and upon all men, rich and
poor, noble and ignoble, even to the K. as well as to the pesant: God is no
respecter of persons, a Bishop must not be partial. Now if a King be subject
to a Bishops Court, and the Bishops there sits as Lord and Judge over him,
where is the Kings supremacy in Ecclesiasticals? Notwithstanding Bishops
consciences and doing of justice, I know they dare not summon the King into
their Consistory: Yet I know, and they know too, that by their principles, and
the power of Peter's keys, which hang at their girdle as they make the world
believe, they are bound to make no scruple of any man, noble or ignoble.

The Scottish Discipline is odious to Episcoparians, for excommunicating their
King: but in my opinion, the Scots are the more honest men, for they act
according to their principles: but Bishops halt of one leg, and are blind of
one eye, when they look upon a King; and yet the Scots and our Bishops do fetch
their authority both from the same Scriptures. If therefore they may
excommunicate the King by their principles, where is the Kings supremacy?

4. There is a secret design of Bishops for supremacy, for they write and say
Church and State: Now though common people regard not which end goes forward,
yet Bishops do: for they do not only write so, and speak so, but will have
others to speak so too: my self being with a Bishop long since, I said State
and Church: but the Bishop corrected me, saying, you must say, Church and
State. So Bishops will have priority and superiority over the State: and if so,
then they aim at the Kings supremacy, for he is a Statesman, and the chief of
the State, there can be no supremacy, where there is not priority and
superiority. However the Bishops do act openly for the Kings supremacy, yet
underhand, they aim at the old Popish supremacy: why else do they keep on
foot, that popish language of Church and State?

The Bishops also use to name the Clergy and Laiety, giving the priority and
superiority to the Clergy and Bishops: but where then is the Kings priority,
superiority, and supremacy? Also they use to say, Lords spiritual and Lords
temporal.

Quest. 11. Are Ministers capable of a Bishopric, or the office of a Bishop?

I answer negatively, and my reasons are these.

1. As is before proved, Christ has forbidden Ministers to use Lordly
authority in the Church, Mat. 20.25. and 1 Pet. 5.3. and therefore Ministers
are not capable of a Bishopric.

2. If a Minister takes upon him the office of a Bishop, he makes himself a
Pope or an Antichrist, who exalts himself above all that is called God, 2 These.
2.4. Who is the Magistrate, Psalm. 82.6. For in his Consistory, he sits as Judge
over both Magistrate and people.

3. The office of a Bishop by ruling, is contrary to the office of a preaching
Minister, as I thus prove.

Christ sent his Apostles to preach, Mat. 20.1, 2, 7. but not to rule. St. Paul
charged Timothy not to rule, but to preach, and be instant in season, and out
of season, 2 Timothy 4.2. And St. Paul said, Woe unto me, if I preach not the
Gospel, 1 Cor. 9.16. And Ministers had their Ordination, not to rule, but to
preach.

But Lordly Bishops are no Preachers: no sooner Bishops, but their heads are so
full of Proclamations with ruling, as they lay aside preaching. Queen Eliz.
when she went to make a Bishop said, I am now going to stop a Preachers mouth.
I can speak my knowledge of them for sixty years, that they preach not above
once a year, sometimes twice, sometimes not once. Bishops have ever been
Ministers, but never Preachers: they have been the Drink ^ in the ^ive, the
(...) in Gods Vineyard, and those that have hidden their Talent in the earth,
or in a dark (...); did not such Bishops well deserve 2000. or 3000. pounds a
year? surely the State in those times, knew not what to do with their money. As
for those that sat at the beginning of the long parliament, though I cannot
call them legal, the King being absent, yet I look upon them, as an Assembly
of the wise men of our Kingdom: and those judged it good for the Church to
root our Bishops, Archbishops, Deans, Chancellours, etc. and these wise men
were eyewitnesses and ear-witnesses, and had too long an experience of Bishops
miscarriages, the which our young days cannot afford us.

They saw with their eyes, how the heart of Religion was in a Consumption; and
how Religion was like a garden over grown with the nettle and weeds of humane
inventions, and Bishops, or rather the Popes inventions, until Ceremony had
well nigh eat up substance: all was for an outward form and fashion, as to bow
toward the East, and then to turn West: To go up to the high Altar, and then
come down again to the Deske, to be clad in white, and in the Pulpit to be clad
in black, as if God were pleased with such toys: but I shall tell you of many
more of these Ceremonies before I have done. One thing more I believe provoked
these wise men, which was the Bishops cruel persecution, silencing and
depriving of livelihood, very many godly and painful Ministers, men of a
blameless life and conversation, and all for non observance of popish
Ceremonies: and another thing was, that they drove hence many of the Kings
Subjects, to plant in New England.

Quest. 12. Are Bishops allied, or a kin to the Pope, or are they Popish?

I have often said, that Bishops Ceremonies are Popish, and now I shall prove
it, by showing their affinity to the Pope.

1. The Pope of Rome is a Clergyman, a Bishop, and a Lord-Bishop, and so were
our English Bishops.

2. The Pope has these many Orders of Archbishops, Bishops, Deans,
Commissaries, Chancellors, Archdeacons, Prebends, and the rest of them: so
have our Bishops, as like to the Pope as may be.

3. The Pope reigns over many Nations: and our Bishops, over hundreds of Towns
and Parishes; and the Archbishop, by reason of a larger circuit, is yet nearer
the Pope.

4. The Pope challenges the Lordly power of Excommunication, and so do our
Bishops.

5. The Pope exalts himself above all that is called God, that is, the
Magistrate: and so did our Bishops in their Consistory.

6. Pope is a Minister, but no preacher: so were our Bishops, Non-preachers: As
soon might you draw a Bear to the stake, as a Bishop into a pulpit: and if at
once in a year, then they came trapped with their popish vestments. Bishops had
high Altars in their Chapels, and wax Candles thereon unlighted, a fit Emblem
of a Bishop without light in a pulpit: They would be these Angels, Rev. 1.20.
but they were not the Angels of light: for they gave no more light than their
wax candles, unless on Christmas day in the forenoon.

7. The Pope was a cruel persecuter of godly protestants: so were these
Bishops of many godly painful Ministers, men of an honest life and
conversation, these they silenced from preaching: (The dog in the manger would
eat no hay, nor suffer the horse to eat) and they unmercifully deprived them
of their Livings and livelihood, so as the Minister, his wife and children were
enforced to live upon Almsdeeds.

8. Bishop Wren, whilst Bishop in Norwich, forbad the Ministers in his Diocese,
to make any prayer in the pulpit, and nothing but an exhortation to prayer,
according to the 55. Canon: as pray we for the King, or let us pray for the
sick, etc. but the Minister was not suffered to put up one petition to God, for
the King, or for the sick. If this be according to the 55 Canon, then all the
Bishops were of this mind. Also papists do sing their Mass: so in our Cathedral
Churches, Bishops do sing, cant, and chant their Service.

9. The Pope was horribly superstitious, so were these Bishops: for both of
them had their Cross in baptism, the Surplice, hood and tippet, Copes, high
Altars, Wax Candles, Rails before the high Altar, bowings toward the high
Altar, Saints days, standing up at the Creed, with others like. Bishops said,
these Ceremonies were innocent and decent things: but they have been defiled
with superstition, as I read in their Canons: and are things defiled now
innocent? and are popish ceremonies decent things in a Protestant Church?

Thus it appears that the Pope and those Bishops were much alike, and nearly
allied, and that I have done them no wrong, by saying they were popish: For I
read not in Scripture, of Archbishops, Lord-Bishops, Deans, Chancellours, etc.
nor of a Cross in the air on an Infants fore head, nor of Surplices, Hood,
and Tippet, nor Copes, Wax-candles, Rails, etc. These never were plants of Gods
setting, but of the Popes: I cannot therefore bow to this golden Image which
the Pope has set up.

The Popish Mass does crawl full of these Ceremonies, and so does our Bishops
Divine Service in Cathedral Churches, the which is one cause, why many people
do so loath the Service Book: for where the Service Book comes in, there comes
in these Romish ceremonies: and we have a superstitious Clergy, as ready and
nimble to bid them welcome as may be.

These Bishops therefore, being so like the Pope in cruel persecution of godly
Ministers, in superstitious ceremonies, and in superstitious Orders of
Archbishops, Deans and Chancellours, etc. and being such loyterers in Gods
Vineyard, and hiding their talent of light in a close Lanthorn; those at the
beginning of the long Parl. did us a good office to remove them quite: and I
wish the King had been in presence, to have confirmed it, and annexed their
Lands to the Crown Lands, where they would have done good: but now they do
none, but to maintain a College of lazy persons; but that which hindered our
happiness, was an over high carriage then with the King, for which we have ever
since smarted full sore.

Quest. 13. Is there no means to pacify and allay the animosity between
Bishops and Episcoparians, Independents, and the Scottish Disciplinarians, that
so we may have peace in the Church.

I answ. Yes, there is one means, and but one that I know of; which is, that
the King would take his own sword into his own hands, and manage in by his
Magistrates, who are capable of it, as I have abundantly proved, and discharge
Bishops, Presbyterians, Independents, and Scottish, Disciplinarians of their
Lordly power. This Kingly sword is the bone of contention among them all,
until it be removed. I never look to see peace in the church: but if once
removed, I hope to see these persons, for highly contesting, feed and play
together like Lambs, and love like Christians,

A word or two of false Translations.
I Do find, by reading of learned Expositors on the Bible, that many words and
Texts concerning the blessed Trinity, are falsely translated: I hold it my
duty, no longer to conceal it, but to make it known, that it may come to the
knowledge of the King and Parl. who I hope will take it into consideration, and
in due time see that it be amended: And for a taste, I will give you some of
the Texts, and shall be ready to show many more.

1. See Eccl. 12.1. Remember thy Creators: so it is plurally in the Hebr. Text,
as if there were more then one Creator of the World: And St. Paul said, God
created all things by Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 3.9. But it is falsely translated
Creator singularly, as if there were but one.

2. See Psalm. 149.2. Let Israel rejoice in his makers: so it is plurally in the
Hebr. Text, as if there were two or three makers of the world: And St. Paul
said, God made the world by his son, Heb. 1.1, 2. But it is falsely translated
Maker, or Him that made; as if there were but one.

3. See Gen 1.2. The spirit of the Gods moved on the waters: so it is plurally
in the Hebrew; as if there were two or 3 Gods: But it is falsely translated God
singularly, as if there were but one God.

4. See Ephesians. 2.12. And ye were without Gods in the world: so it is in the
Greek Text plurally, as if there were more then one God in the Trinity: But it
is falsely translated God singularly, as if there were but one God in the
Trinity.

5. See Genesis 20.13. When the Gods, they caused me to wander: so it is in the
Heb. Text plurally, both noun and verb are plural, as if there were two or
three Gods in the Trinity. Genes. 3.22. The man is become like one of us. but
it is falsely translated singularly, both in the noun and verb, as God caused
me: as if there were but one God in the Trinity.

6. See Genesis 35.7. The Gods, they appeared unto him. So it is plurally in the
Hebr. Text, both the noun and verb are plural: as if there were two or three
Gods, as God the Father, God the Son, and God the holy Ghost: But it is falsely
translated, both in in the noun and verb singularly, as God appeared: as if
there were but one God in the Trinity.

The Church says, there is but one God: Now Translators, unfaithfully to
maintain the Doctrine of the Church, translate falsely, to draw Scripture to the
Church: but like honest men, they should translate word for word, number for
number, to draw the Church to the Scriptures.

FINIS.
A Postscript, further proving, that Bishops usurp the Kings Authority, and
divest him of his Supremacy.
THe King is the Fountain of all Authority and Jurisdiction: and whosoever
exercises Jurisdiction in this Kingdom, wtthout authority from the King, they
usurp the Kings authority, and make void his supremacy; and this Bishops do: For

1. There are two essential parts of a Bishops office as they hold, Ordination
and Jurisdiction. Now they lay as much claim to the power of Jurisdiction, as
to Ordination, and receive them both from the same hand and Donor: As the one
therefore is from God, not from the King, so is the other, even both from one
and the same Donor, but neither of them from the King. 2. a Bishop is created,
by his Metropolitan and other Bishops, who by Imposition of their hands, do
confer upon him as from God, the office of jurisdiction as they say, now this
Office is not derived from the King, nor can be: for the King does not lay
hands on the Bishop created. 3. Bishops claim their authority and jurisdiction
in the Church, from Peter's Keys Mat. 16.19. but not from the King, for Peter's
Keys were not delivered to Kings or lay persons, but to the Clergy. 4. All this
Bishops confessed in their writings, concerning this similitude, the patron gives
the Benefice or Living to the Incumbent, but the Bishop gives him his orders;
so the King gives the Bishopric to the Bishop, that is his large maintenance
of 2 or 3000. a year, but God gives him his Office, and makes him a Bishop: so
then a Bishop does derive his Office of jurisdiction from the King. 5. Bishops
in disputation say their Office is Ius Divinum: so then they own not the Kings
Authority in Ecclesiasticals: for this is Ius Humanum.

From the premises it is clear, 1. That Bishops have and exercise as high
Authority in the Church, os the King has in the Common Wealth: how then can
the King be solely next under Christ? yea, the Bishops have the sole authority
in the Church, but the King has none at all: where is then the Kings
authority, superiority, and supremacy in Ecclesiasticals? the Bishops have all
authority from God, in themselves: they derive none from the King: wherefore
they own not the Kings authority, sovereignty, superiority, nor supremacy: no
more then Papists do.

True it is, that Bishops pray for the King as supreme, and use their authority
in his name: but for all this, as you have seen they do not own his authority,
but deny it: they do but dissemble: for when they speak really and cordially,
they reject his authority: but when they intend to flatter, then in words, they
pray for the King as supreme, Those Exorcists, Act 19.13. did name over those
that had evil spirits, the name of the Lord Jesus: but had no authority so to
do, and their end was evil: so Bishops, use the name of the King and his
authority: but have no authority from the King so to do as you have seen
proved: wherefore they usurp his authority: and their end therefore cannot be
good.

Two or three things added to my postscript, further proving that Bishops were
Popish.
SInce my former writings, a book came to my hands, entitled, Reasons for the
necessity of a reformation in Discipline etc. Wherein I note besides others, 2
things: and I shall add a third.

1. That Bishops have foisted into the Book of Common Prayer many Apochriphal
Scriptures, which by the Law ought to be read in Churches: and which worse is,
they have rejected 100 Chapters of the sacred Canonical Scriptures, and placed
100. Chapters instead of them, of Apochryphal Scriptures: Oh abominable fact!
do they deserve the name of protestant Bishops, who Pope-like, make Apochrypha
Scriptures, of equal authority with the Holy word of God? was it not high time
for the long Parliament to root them out?

2. In the Letany of old, there was this Protestant prayer from the Bishop of
Rome, and all his detestable enormities, Good Lord deliver us, but in our books
of Service, afterward printed, this prayer was rejected by Bishops, and not
one word of it, were not those Bishops think you, greater friends to Papists
than to Protestants? for they would not suffer us to pray against Popery.

3. About 50 years agone, Bishops persecuted many godly and painful Ministers
for the Cross and Surplisse, but within about 20. year after, what a troop of
popish ceremonies more did they pester our Church withal? then they brought in
1. High Altars 2. The second service at the high Altar. 3. Bowings and cringing
toward the East and the high Altar. 4, Wax Candles on the high Altar in
Bishops Chapels. 5. Railes before the high Altar. 6. the Sacrament was denied
to those that refused to come up to the high Altar for it: I cannot remember
all their trinkets 100. Apochriphal Chapters instead of 100 Canonical Chapters.
8. No prayers to be made for the King in pulpit. 9. That the prayer in the
Letany, against popery, must no more be used. All these have sprung up long
since my time: and had not the long Parliament prevented it, by rooting out
Bishops, we may fear that by this time or not long hence, England would have
been another Rome. Judge I pray by these particulars, whether that was true or
not, which I wrote at the beginning of this Book saying, not only Bishops
tyranny, but also the fear of popery, caused thousands of the people to desert
the King, at the beginning of the unhappy war. Those that had eyes in their
heads might easily see what a crew of Popish Bishops we had: for my part I
never look to see them better, unless for a month or two or so long as our
Gracitious King live: who I believe will awe them for his time: but what shall
become of us afterward?

FINIS.

