SOME CONSIDERATIONS touching the VSEFVLNESSE Of EXPERIMENTAL Natural
Philosophy,

Proposed in Familiar Discourses to a Friend, by way of Invitation to the Study
of it.

OXFORD Printed by HEN: HALL Printer to the University, for RIC: DAVIS. Anno
Domini 1663.

OF THE VSEFVLNESSE OF Experimental Philosophy.

The PVBLISHER to the Reader.
IT is, Courteous Reader, part of the Satyr of Petronius against the Vice of
his own Time. Priscis temporibus, cum adhuc nuda Virtus placeret, vigebant
Arts ingenuae, summumque certamen inter homines erat, ne quid profuturum
saeculis diu lateret. Democritus omnium Herbarum succos expressit, and ne
lapidum virgultorumque vis lateret, aetatem inter Experimenta consumpsit. Other
Examples of the like Industry he brings, and then concludes against the
Laziness and Luxury of his own Age. At Nos, says He, ne paratas quidem Arts
audemus cognoscere, sed accusatores Antiquitatis vitia tantum docemus and
discimus. It was for want of a Democritus or two that he casts this hard
Censure upon his own Time. For, notwithstanding all his Harangue in
Commend^tion of some Ages which were ancient to his Own, It is evident out of
History, that there was never at once any great Number, who seriously and in
earnest for the Benefit of Mankind applied themselves to these severe
Scrutinyes of Natural Bodies. It is true that now and then, in all Centuries
from the Beginning of the World, there have appeared some Persons of a Nature
more refined, as if indeed (according to that Fancy of the Old Poets) some
Prometheus had made them either of another Metal, or of another Temper, from
the Vulgar, utterly above all Mixture with, or Embasement by the common
Fashions of this World; who did make it the End of their Lives, by Severing and
Mixing, Making and Marring, and multiplying Variety of Experiments on all
Bodies, to discover their hidden Virtues, and so to enlarge the Power and
Empire of Man. But these were ever very few and singular. Even in that so much
celebrated Time of Democritus these Studies were so rare, that his usual
Exercise of the Anatomy of Beasts was looked upon, as that which made the
Soundness of his Mind questionable, even as a Spice of Madness in him: and
probably much more might the Vulgar of his Age have been amused, had they seen
him torturing Minerals and Metals in the more toilsome Anatomy of Fire.

Now if it be a dishonorable Crimination to an Age, that it has brought out
no Persons who make it their great Endeavor Ne quid profuturum saeculis
lateat: and if the Discovery of one or two persons of this Kind be enough to
expiate for, and take off the Dishonor of the Proletarian Laziness and Luxury
of the Rest, I think I may justly esteem that the exhibiting to the World the
History of the Studyes of the Honorable Author of this Piece may serve to be
the Apology and Defense of our Age against such Censures as that wherewith the
newly cited Satyrist stained his own Time.

And this was one great Reason that has made me very forward to promote the
Publication of This, and diverse other Writings of the same Noble Author. For
were there only Tokens of Endeavor in Them, the proof of This Endeavor (even
without Attainment) ought to wipe off all Imputations of this nature. But this
Motive (though I do account that by exhibiting this Expiation I do somewhat
oblige the Age, whose Honor is thereby defended, yet) was far from being the
most great and forcible. For the Excellence of the Works themselves, even as
soon as they fell from the pen of the Author, did long since in all Equity set
an Imprimatur on them. Nec sumunt aut ponunt secures
Arbitrio popularis Aurae.
Epicurus* when he was casting up the account of his life, upon the very Day of
his Death, mentions a very great pleasure that he even then took in two Parts
of his former Studyes: And these were his Rations, and his Inventa; Points
well argued, and things happily sound out. The two very same particulars are
principally conspicuous in this ensuing Piece. There are good Conclusions
against the Enemies of the Being and Providence of God in the First Part, and
in the Second there be Notices of diverse Inventa profitable to the Use of Man.
By the one sound Notions are proposed to the Readers apprehension from the
Contemplation of God's Creation and Government of the World, and thereby good
Matter is suggested to his Affection for the Advancement of his Devotion; by
the Other, the^e are diverse things delivered, which may tend to enlarge Man's
power of doing Good: By them, in the whole, both our Honor to God, and our
Charity to our Neighbors may be assisted: in which two the Substantial part of
all the most Noble, not only Human but Christian Virtues, both Speculative and
Practical, are certainly contained.

I must not omit, that an Argument of this Nature, at this Time, may justly be
commended for its Seasonableness, when diverse Persons, who know not the way of
Experimental Philosophy, and are loath now to give themselves the trouble of
learning it, have been making some attempts, very unthankfully, to traduce both
It, and its Promoters.

These Considerations passed with me for Reasons, and had upon me this force
and Prevalence, that as soon as I had the Authors leave, I durst not forbear
the committing of them to the Press, notwithstanding his Many arguments, which
were plausible enough to the Contrary: as, namely, that much of the First Part
was written when he was of so immature Years, that should I be particular
concerning his Age then, to any person who has read the Piece, the Paucity of
such Instances might justly make me despair of begetting Credit to my Relation.
Another Objection was, That, though his Method did of necessity lead him to it,
yet it might be looked upon as unbecomming for Him to meddle with the
Physicians Art, of which he never did (nor could, by reason of his Native
Honor) make any Profession. But these Oppositions being raised upon points of
Curiosity in Ceremony and outward Decorum, were of little weight, when the
forementioned Noble Offices of Charity and doing good were in the other Scale.

The greater Question was. Suppose them to be published, But why now? Why so
soon? Should not rather the Edition have been delayed, until it might have
come out together with The second Section of the second Part? (which discovers
the Use that may be made of Experimental Learning, to advance the Empire of Man
over other Creatures) or until the Common Preface, and some other little
Tracts, all written long since, and intended to accompany this, might be
revised by the Author; or at least until the Author might have had leisure to
have made some more new and full Animadversions to the Receipts and Processes
contained in the Appendix? The Consideration which answered this Objection was,
That this Piece, as now printed alone, would make (as you see it does) a very
competent Book, which would have by it Self the perfection, if not of the Whole
yet of a more principal part; and of that part, which to Professors or
Candidates of Learning is most desirable. And then the Author's Avocations and
other Studies being so many, that we could prefix no certain time for the
complement of the mentioned remaining parts, I was loath to hazard the
Preservation of These by deferring the Impression; since I know there is no
Security of the continuance of those Writings which are reposed only in single,
or at most in few written Copies. I remember, the Author had once lost for a
good while one of these very Essays which are now here Printed, and put beyond
that Danger for the future. Besides other Casual accidents, the very
Contingency of Humane life, and the chance of a Man's papers after Death, (For
to them the Question of King Solomon is most proper and pertinent, Who knows
whether then they may happen to fall into the hands of a Wise man or a Fool?)
were of force enough to persuade me to secure these, when it was in my power,
unto the Common Use. Would not Printing in all probability have preserved unto
Us that Universal History of Vegetables from the Cedar of ^ibanus unto the Moss
that grows upon the Wall, written by that Wise and Learned King, and the loss
of which we now in vain lament? Would not Printing have saved that Excellent
Book of Democritus, which he inscribed his XEIPOKMHTA or EXPERIMENTS of his own
personal Trial, so utterly lost, that the Name of the piece is not mentioned
among the Catalogue of his Writings in Laertius? And may not the Printing of
this Piece be a means of the preservation (besides the Notional part) of
diverse very useful XEIPOKMHTA of the Honorable Author, who has been ever
unwearied in the Trial of all probable Experiments, that may increase the Light
or advance the Profit of Mankind?

But before I leave the Reader, I must give him this single Advertisement, that
the Passages included within the Paratheses or Crotchetts, as the Press styles
them, that is, between any two such Marks as these [] were inserted long since
the writing of these Essays, upon the Relection of some parts of the Book
before He sent it to me: Which I therefore did so distinguish, and do intimate,
that there may appear no inconsistency in our Author, and the Reader may not
marvel to find somethings very Recent in a Book written several Years ago.
Farewell.

TO: SHARROCK.

The Author's ADVERTISEMENT about the following ESSAYS.
THat the Title of the following Treatise might not raise in the Reader an
Expectation of more then he will find in the Book, I think my self obliged to
inform him, That, though it come not forth before, diverse parts were sent to
the Press in 1660, or 1661, and this present Y^ar 1663, yet the very Last Essay
of it was written diverse Years before. Since when those Papers were left,
sometimes in the hands of Friends, and sometimes in distant places where I
could not come at them: which I mention, that the Reader may neither wonder nor
blame Me, if he now meet with some things in them that have already been
published by others, or are more vulgarly known then my way of mentioning them
implies. For it may, this notwithstanding, very well be, that when I writ them,
no body had yet lighted on some of them, and that others of them did then but
begin to be taken notice of. And as for the Five first Essays, which treat of
The Usefulness of Natural Philosophy to the Mind of Man, though by my
addressing them all the way to the Gentleman I call Pyrophilus, they may seem
to have been Originally written to the same Person, and about the same time
with the Essays, that make up the Second Part; yet indeed a great Portion of
the First part was written, as I remember, 10 or 12 years ago, (when I was
scarce above 21 or 22 years old) to another Friend, to whom the Considerations
that served to confirm Piety, and excite Devotion, were far more acceptable
then those that were more purely Physiologicall: so that having, whether
through laziness, or w^nt of leisure contented my self to substitute the name
of Pyrophilus for that of my other Friend (who was not unwilling I should do
so) in a Discourse written when I was so Young; I would not have the Reader
think, that I do now so app^ove of all those Youthful Discourses (which I
therefore suffer to pass abroad without a Name) as to think all the Tenets they
proposed to be irrefragable T^uths, or all the Reasonings they contein, to be
Demonstrative; and that I would at present have my Judgment estimated according
to their Cogency. But yet I do without much Reluctance comply with those
Friends, who would by no means consent, that the Five first Essays of this
Treatise should not come forth with the Rest; partly because not writing all
things for all Readers, I hold it not unfit to publish something to gratify
those, who desire with me to be both excited and assisted to admire and praise
the Great and Wise Author of all things; partly because the Treatise would
seem main'd and incomplete, if the latter Essays should come abroad without the
Rest; and partly too because Learned Men have been pleased to assure me, that
those Essays are not destitute of Notions and Ratiocinations, that are not
altogether vulgar or contemptible. However those Readers, that either cannot
relish, or at least desire not any thing, but what is merely Physiologicall,
may, thus advertised, pass by the former part of this Treatise, and content
themselves to read over the Latter, though they who shall take the Pains to
read Both, will not perhaps think their Labor lost: Since I have taken Care to
leave even the former Part as little disfurnisht with Experiments and useful
Notions, as, the Argument considered, I conveniently could. And since also for
the Paucity of such things in the First Part, I have endeavored to make amends
in the Second, which is almost wholly Physiological; concerning which
nevertheless I shall admonish the Reader. And indeed the whole Tenets that make
up the following Book, are by no means to be looked upon as Published for an
acurate Treatise of the Usefulnes of true Physiology, but as Familiar Writings,
that want only the formality of Salve and Vale to pass for Physiological and
Medical Epistles; consisting of such loose Observations, as I thought might be
this way preserved, and did not so properly belong to my other Writings as they
seemed fitted for the use, and whereto I have applied them; namely, that being
drawn up together into one Treatise, their Union might enable them to make the
greater Impression, and might (somewhat at least) recommend that sort of
Learning to a Beginner. And one thing that must be especially comprehended in
this Admonition is, that the Particulars I have mentioned, to show of what use
Chemical Experiments may be to a Physician, are not, possibly, the chiefest
that even I could set down, if I were not restrained by some justifiable
Considerations; especially 'till I see what Entertainment, the things I now
venture abroad, will meet with there: Some of those I reserve, appearing such
to me, that I confess I do not slight them enough to be fond of obtruding them
upon the Public, if I thought they would not be welcome to it. And I do so
little desire to have, what I have written, look^d upon as the most that can be
said, to show the Usefulness of Experimental Philosophy, that I scruple not to
acknowledge there are things which incline me to suspect, that some in the
world, though not particularly known to me, may have Arcana, to which most of
the Processes I reserve, as well as all that is commonly known in Chemistry,
may prove little more then Trifles.

Of the USEFULNESS of EXPERIMENTAL PHILOSOPHY, Principally as it Relates to
the MIND of MAN.
THE NATURAL PHILOSOPHY wont to be taught in most Schools, being little other
then a Systeme of the Opinions of Aristotle, and some few other Writers, is
not, I confess, Pyrophilus, very difficult to be Learned; as being attainable
by the perusal of a few of the more Current Authors. But, Pyrophilus, that
EXPERIMENTAL PHILOSOPHY, which you will find Treated of in the following
Essays, is a Study, if duly prosecuted, so difficult, so chargable, and so
toilsome, that I think it requisite, before I propose any particular Subjects
to your Enquiries, to possess you with a just value of true and solid
Physiologie; and to convince you, That by endeavoring to addict you to it, I
invite you not to mispend your time or trouble on a Science unable to merit and
requite it. In order, Pyrophilus, to the giving you this satisfaction, Give me
leave to mind you, that it was a saying of Pythagoras, worthy so celebrated a
Philosopher, That there are two things which most ennoble Man, and make him
resemble the Gods; To know the Truth, and To do Good. For, Pyrophilus, that
Diviner part of Man, the Soul, which alone is capable of wearing the Glorious
Image of its Author, being endowed with two chief Faculties, the Understanding
and the Will; the former is blessed and perfectionated by Knowledge, and the
latter's Loveliest and most improving property is Goodness. A due Reflection
upon this excellent Sentence of him to whom Philosophers owe that modest name,
should, me thinks, Pyrophilus, very much endear to us the Study of Natural
Philosophy. For there is no Humane Science that does more gratify and enrich
the Understanding with variety of choice and acceptable Truths; nor scarce any
that does more enable a willing mind to exercise a Goodness beneficial to
others.

To manifest these truths more distinctly, Pyrophilus, and yet without
exceeding that Brevity my Avocations and the bounds of an Essay exact of me, I
shall, among the numerous advantages accruing to Men from the Study of the Book
of Nature, content my self to instance only in a Couple, that relate more
properly to the Improving of Men's Understandings, and to mention a few of those
many, by which it increases their Power.

The two chief advantages which a real acquaintance with Nature brings to our
Minds, are, First, by instructing our Understandings and gratifying our
Curiosities; and next, by exciting and cherishing our Devotion.

And for the first of these, since, as Aristotle teaches, and was taught
himself by Common Experience, all Men are Naturally desirous to Know: that
Propensity cannot but be powerfully engaged to the Works of Nature, which being
incessantly present to our senses, do continually solicit our Curiosities: Of
whose potent inclining us to the Contemplation of Natures Wonders, it is not
perhaps the inconsiderablest Instance, That though the Natural Philosophy
hitherto taught in most Schools, has been so Litigious in its Theorie, and so
barren as to its Productions; yet it has found numbers of Zealous and Learned
Cultivators, whom sure nothing but Men's inbred fondness for the Object it
converses with, and the end it pretends to, could so passionately devote to it.

And since that (as the same Aristotle taught by his Master Plato well
observes) Admiration is the Parent of Philosophy, by engaging us to enquire
into the Causes of the things at which we marvail; we cannot but be powerfully
invited to the Contemplation of Nature, by living and conversing among Wonders,
some of which are obvious and conspicuous enough to amaze even ordinary
Beholders; and others admirable and abstruse enough to as^onish the most
inquisitive Spectators.

The bare prospect of this magnificent Fabric of the Universe, furnished and
adorned with such strange variety of curious and useful Creatures, would,
suffice to transport us both with Wonder and Joy, if their Commonnesse did not
hinder their Operations. Of which Truth Mr Stepkins, the famous Oculist, did
not long since supply us with a memorable Instance: For (as both himself and
an Illustrious Person that was present at the Cure informed me) a Maid of about
Eighteen years of Age, having by a couple of Cataracts, that she brought with
her into the World, lived absolutely blind from the moment of her Birth; being
brought to the free Use of her Eyes, was so ravished at the surprising spect^cle
of so many and various Objects, as presented themselves to her unacquainted
Sight, that almost every thing she saw transported her with such admiration and
delight, that she was in danger to loose the eyes of her Mind by those of her
Body, and expound that Mystical Arabian Proverb, which advises, To shut the
Windows, that the House may be Light.

But if the bare beholding of this admirable Structure is capable of pleasing
men so highly, how much satisfaction, Pyrophilus, may it be supposed to afford
to an Intelligent Spectator, who is able both to understand and to relish the
admirable Architecture and skillful contrivance of it: For the Book of Nature
is to an ordinary Gazer, and a Naturalist, like a rare Book of Hieroglyphics
to a Child, and a Philosopher: the one is sufficiently pleased with the Odnesse
and Variety of the Curious Pictures that adorn it; whereas the other is not
only delighted with those outward objects that gratify his sense, but receives
a much higher satisfaction in admiring the knowledge of the Author, and in
finding out and enriching himself with those abstruse and veiled Truths
dexterously hinted in them.

Yes, Pyrophilus, as the Understanding is the highest faculty in Man, so its
Pleasures are the highest he can naturally receive. And therefore I cannot much
wonder that the famous Archimedes lighting in a Bath upon an Expedient to
resolve a perplexing difficulty in Natural Philosophy, should leap out of the
Bath, and run unclothed like a madman, crying nothing but (...), I have found
it, I have found it. Nor do I so much admire as deplore the ^atally venturous
Curiosit^ of the Elder Pliny, who, as the Younger relates, could not be
deterred by the fo^mi^ablenesse of the destructive flames vomite^ by V^suvius,
from indevoring by their Light to read the Nature of such Vulcanian Hills; but
in spite of all the disswasi^ns of his Friends, an^ the ^ff^^ghting eruptions
of that hideous Place, he resolved that Flaming Won^er should rather kill him,
then escape him; and thereupon approch'd so near that he lost his Life to
satisfy his Cu^iosity, and fell (if I may so speak) a Martyr to Physiologie.
For we daily see Alchymists hazard their L^ves on Mineral Experiments in
Furnaces, where though the fires are not so vast and fierce, as those that
Pliny went to consider; yet the (dangerous when not pernicious) Fumes do
sometimes prove as fatal.

One would think, Pyrophilus, that the conversing with dead and stinking
Carkases (that are not only hideous objects in themselves, but made more
ghastly by the putting us in mind that our selves must be such) should be not
only a very melancholy, but a very hated employment. And yet, Pyrophilus,
there are Anatomists who dote upon it; and I confess its Instructiveness has
not only so reconciled me to it, but so enamored me of it, that I have often
spent hours much less delightfully, not only in Courts, but even in Libraries,
then in tracing in those forsaken M^nsions, the inimitable Workmanship of the
Omniscient Architect.

The curious Works of famous Artificers, are wont to invite the V^sits, and
excite the wonder of the generality of inquisit^ve Persons. And I remember,
that in my Travels, I have often taken no small pains to obtain the pleasure of
gaz^ng upon some Masterpiece of Art: But now, I confess, I could with more
del^ght look upon a skilful Dissection, then the famous Clock at Strasburg.
And, methinks, Aristotle discou^ses very Philosophically in that place, where
p^ssing from the consi^^^ation of the sublimist productions of Nature, to
just^fie his diligence in recording the more homely Circu^st^nces of the
History of Animals, he thu^ dis^o^^^es: R^stat (says he^ ut d^ animanti natura
d^sseramus, A^ist: de Part: Aa^m: l^b. 1. c. 5.
nihil p^o viribus omitten^es v^l viliu^ vel nobilius. Nam and in iis quae hoc
in g^nere minus grata nostro occurrunt sensui, Natura parens and author omniu^
miras excitat voluptates hominibus, qui intelligunt causas and ingenue
Philosophan^ur. Absurdum enim nulla ration^ p^obandum est, si imagines quid^m
rerum naturalium non sine delectatione p^opterea inspectamus, quod ingen^um
contempla^ur quod illas condiderit, id est, artem pingendi aut fingendi; rerum
autem ipsarum naturae ingenio miraque solertia constitutam contemplationem non
magis prosequamur atque exosculemur, modo causas perspicere valeamus: It
remains (says he) that we discourse of the natures of Animals, being
circumspect to omit none, either of the nobler or inferior sort: For even from
those Creatures which less please our sense, does the universal Parent, Nature,
afford incredible contentments to such Persons, as understand their causes, and
Philophize ingenuously. Since it were absurd and inconsistent to reason, if we
should behold the Portraitures of Natural things with delectation, because we
observe the accuratness wherewith they are designed, namely, the skill of
Painture or Sculpture; and not much more aff^ct and pursue the contemplation of
things themselves, contrived by the exquisite Artifice and Sagacity of Nature,
provided we be able to und^rstand their causes. And the better to make out to
you, Pyrophilus, the delightfulness of the study of Natural Philosophy, let me
observe to you, That those pleasing Truths it teaches us, do highly gratify
our intellectual Faculties, without displeasing any of them: for they are none
of those Criminal Pleasures, which injured and incensed Conscience does very
much allay, even in the Fruition, and turns into Torments after it. Nor are the
Enquiries I am recommending of that trifling and unserviceable sort of
Employments, which though Conscience condemns not as unlawful for a Christian,
Reason disapproves as not worthy of a Philosopher; and wherewith to be much
delighted, argues a weakness; as to be pleased with Babies and Whistles,
supposes unripe and weak Intellectuals: But the contemplation of Nature, is an
Employment, which both the Possessors of the sublimest Reason, and those of the
seve^est Virtue, have not only allowed, but cultivated. The Learne^ Author of
the Book De Mundo, ascribed to Aristotle, begins it with this Elogium of
Natural Philosophy: Mihi quid^m saepe (says he) divina quaedem res, Alexander,
admirationeque digna visa est Philosophia; praecipue vero in ea part in qua
sola ipsa sublime sese t^llens ad contemplandas rerum naturas, magno illic
studio contendit existentem in ^is veritatem pernoscere. Philosophy (says he)
O Alexander, has oftentim^s seemed to me a Divine and Admirable Thing; but
chiefly, that part of it, which aspires to contemplate the Natures of things,
employing its utmost power in searching out the truth contained in them. The
reasonableness of which Commendation, he handsomely enough prosecutes in the
subsequent Discou^se: To which I shall refer you, that I may proceed to mind
you, that Pythagoras, Democritus, Plato, and diverse others of those whose
Wisdom made after-ages reverence Antiquity, did not only esteem the Truths of
Nature worth studying for, but thought them too worth Traveling for as far as
those Eastern Regions, whose Wisemen were then cried up for the best
Expositors of the obscure Book of Nature. And that severe Teacher, and
persuasive Recommender of the strictest Virtue, Seneca (whose eminent Wisdom
made him invited to govern Him that was to govern the World, and who so often
and so excellently presses the husbanding of our time) does not only in
several Passages of his Writings praise a contemplation of Nature, but Writes
himself seven Books of Natural Questions, and addresses them to that very
Lucilius, whom in his Epistles he takes such pains to make completely Virtuous;
and in his Preface, after he had said according to his manner, loftily, Equidem
tunc Naturae rerum gratias ago, cum illam non ab hac part video, quae publi^a
est, Seneca in P^aes. lib. I. Not: Quaest.
sed cum secretiora ejus intravi, cum disco quae Universi Materia sit, quis
Author, aut Custos, etc. Then do I pay my acknowledgements to Nature, when I
behold her not on the outside, which is obvious to public view, but am
entered into her more secret Recesses; when I understand what the Matter of the
Universe is, who its Author, and Preserver, etc. He concludes in the same
strain, Nisi ad haec admitterer, non fuerat operae pretium nasci: Had I been
debarred from these things, it would not have been worth coming into the World.
And to add what he excellently says in another Treatise, Ad haec quaerenda
natus (says he, having spoken of Enquiries concerning the Universe) aestima
quam non multum acceperit temporis, etiam si illud totum sibi vindicet, cui
licet nihil facilitate eripi, nihil negligentia patiatur excidere; licet horas
suas avarissime servet, and usque in ultimae aetatis humanae terminos procedat,
nec quicquid illi ex eo quod Natura constituit fortuna concutiat; tamen homo ad
immortalium cognitionem nimis mortalis est. Ergo secundum Naturam vivo, si
totum me illi dedi, si illius Admirator Cultorque sum. Natura autem utrumque
facere me voluit and agere, and contemplationi vacare. Being born designedly
for searching out these things, Sen: de Otio Sa^. c. 32.
consider that the portion of time allotted to Man, is not great, if this study
should ingross it all; since though he should pr^serve his hours with the
greatest frugality all his lifetime, not suffering any to be stolen from him,
or slide away negligently, and never be disturb^d by Accidents of Fortune in
the Employment Nature has appointed him, yet is he too Mortal to attain the
knowledge of Immortal Things. Wherefore, I live agreeably to Nature, when I
give up my self wholly to Her, and am Her Admirer and Adorer. Moreover, Nature
has d^signed me to act, and employ my self in Contemplation. How far Religion
is from dis-approving the Study of Physiology, I shall have occasion to
manifest ere long, when we shall come to show, That it is an act of Piety to
offer up for the Creatures the Sacrifice of Praise to the Creator; For, as
anciently among the Jews, by virtue of an Aaronical Extraction, Men were born
with a Right to Priesthood; so Reason is a Natural Dignity, and Knowledge a
Prerogative, that can confer a Priesthood without Unction or Imposition of
Hands. And as for Reason, that is so far from making us judge that Employment
unworthy of Rational Creatures, that those Philosophers (as Aristotle,
Epicurus, Democritus, etc.) that have improved Reason to the gr^atest height,
have the most seriously and industriously employed it to investigate the
Truths, and promote the study of Natural Philosophy.

And indeed, that noble Faculty called Reason, being conscious of the great
progress it may enable us to make in the knowledge of Natures Mysteries, if it
were industriously employed in the study of them, cannot, but like a great
Commander, think it self disobliged by not being considerably employed. And
certainly we are wanting to our selves, and are guilty of little less then our
own Degradation, that being by Gods peculiar vouchsafement, endowed with those
noble Faculties of Understanding, and Discoursing, and placed amidst a
numberless variety of Objects, that incessantly invite our Contemplations, can
content our selves to behold so many Instructive Creatures which make up this
vast Universe, whose noblest Part we are designed to be, with no more, or but
little more discerning Eyes then those less favored Animals, to whom Nature
has denied the Prerogative of Reason, as we deny our selves the use of it.
Aristotle well observes, that among Animals, Man alone is of an erected
Stature; and adds, That it is because his Nature has something in it of
Divine: Officium autem Divini (infers he) est intelligere atque Sapere: De
Part. Anim. lib. 4. c. 1^.
The Qualifications of a Divine Being, are Understanding and Wisdom. And it
cannot but mis-become the dignity of such a Creature to live Ignorant or
Unstudious of the Laws and Constitutions of that great Commonwealth (as diverse
of the Ancients have not improperly styled the World) whereof he is the
eminentest part: And were we not lulled asleep by Custom or Sensuality, it
could not but Trouble, as well as it Injures a reasonable Soul to Ignore the
Structure and Contrivance of that admirably Organized Body in which she lives,
and to whose intervention she owes the Knowledge she has of other Creatures.

It Is true indeed, that even the generality of Men, without making it their
design, know somewhat more of the Works of Nature, then Creatures destitute of
Reason can, by the advantage of that Superior Faculty, which cannot but even
unurg'd, and of its own accord make some, though but slight, reflections on the
Information of the Senses: But if those Impressions be only received and not
improved, but rather neglected; and if we (contenting our selves with the
superficial account given us of things by their obvious Appearances and
Qualities) are beholding for that we know, to our Nature, not our Industry, we
faultily loose both one of the noblest Employments, and one of the highest
Satisfactions of our rational Faculty: And he that is this way wanting to
himself, seems to live in this magnificent Structure, called the Universe, not
unlike a Spider in a Palace; who taking notice only of those Objects that
obtrude themselves upon her Senses, lives ignorant of all the other Rooms of
the House, save that wherein she lurks, and discerning nothing either of the
Architecture of the stately Building, or of the Proportion of the Parts of it
in relation to each other, and to the entire Structure, makes it her whole
business, by intrapping of Flies to continue an useless Life; or exercise her
self to spin Cob-webs, which though consisting of very subtle Threads, are
unserviceable for any other then her own trifling uses. And that the
contemplation of the World, especially the higher Region of it, was designed
for Man's Employment by Natures Self, even the Heathen Poet (perhaps instructed
by Aristotle) could observe, who Sings, Pronaque cum spectent Animalia caetera
terram,
Os homini sublime dedit, coelumque tueri
Jussit, and erectos ad sidera tollere vultus.
Wise Nature, framing Brutes with downward looks,
Man with a lofty Aspect did indue,
And bad him Heaven with its bright Glories view.
I might annex, Pyrophilus, the Story Josephus tells us in the beginning of his
Jewish Antiquities, that 'twas the holy Seth and his Posterity (who are in
Genesis styled the Sons of God) that were the Inventers of Astronomy, whose
more Fundamental Observations (to perpetuate them to Mankind, and sever them
from the foretold destructions by Fire and Water) they engraved upon two
Pillars, the one of Brick, the other of Stone; the latter of which our
Historian reports to have been extant in Syria in his time. And it is an almost
uncontrolled tradition, that the Patriarch, whom God vouchsafes to style his
Friend, Isaiah 41.^. James 11.23.
was the first Teacher of Astronomy and Philosophy to the Egyptians, from whom,
long afterward, the Grecians learned them. Berosus himself records him to have
been skilled in the Science of the Stars, as he is cited by Josephus, (Ant.
lib. 1. c. 8.) who a little after speaking of Abraham and the Egyptians,
expressly affirms, that Numerorum scientiam and sid^rum benign illis
communicavit: Nam ante Abrahami ad se adventum, Aegyptii rudes erant hujusmodi
disciplinarum; quae a Chaldeis ad Aegyptios profectae, hinc ad Graecos tandem
pervenerunt.

But, Pyrophilus, to put it out of question that the sublimest reason needs not
make the Possessor of it think the study of Physiologie an Employment below
him, that Unequalled Solomon, who was pronounced the Wisest of men by their
omniscient Author, did not only Justify the Study of Natural Philosophy by
addicting himself to it, but ennobled it by teaching it, and purposely
composing of it those matchless Records of Nature, from which I remember some
Jewish Authors relate Aristotle to have borrowed diverse; which (if it be true)
may well be supposed to be the choicest pieces that adorned his Philosophy,
and which Providence perhaps deprived the World of, upon such a score as it did
the Jews of the Body of Moses, lest men should Idolize it; or as some Rabbis
are pleased to inform us, lest vicious men should venture upon all kinds of
Intemperance, out of Confidence of finding out by the help of those excellent
Writings the Cure of all the Distempers their dissoluteness should produce.

And, Pyrophilus, yet a little further to discover to you, the Delightfulness
of the Contemplations of Natures works, Give me leave to mind you of their
almost unimaginable Variety, as of a Property, that should methinks not
faintly recommend Natural Philosophy, to curious and active Intellectuals.

For most other Sciences, at least as they are wont to be taught, are so narrow
and so circumscribed, that he who has read one of the best and recentest
Systems of them, shall find little in the other Books published on those
subjects, but disguised repetitions; and a diligent Scholar may in no long time
learn as much as the Professors themselves can teach him. But the objects of
Natural Philosophy, being as many as the Laws and Works of Nature are, so
various and so numberless, that if a Man had the Age of Methuselah to spend,
he might sooner want time then matter, for his Contemplations: And so pregnant
is each of that vast multitude of Creatures, that make up the Naturalists
Theme, with useful matter to employ Men's study, that I dare say, that the
whole life of a Philosopher spent in that alone, would be too short to give a
full and perfect account of the Natural Properties and Uses of any one of
several Minerals, Plants, or Animals, that I could name. It Is an almost
incredible variety of Vegetables, that the teeming Earth, impregnated by Gods
Producat Terra, does in several Regions produce. Botanists have a pretty while
since, reckoned up near 6000 Subjects of the Vegetable Kingdom; since when,
diverse other not-described Plants have been observed by Herbarists; the chief
of which will, I hope, be shortly communicated to the World, by that Curious
and Diligent Botanist my Industrious Acquaintance, Dr. How, to whom I not long
since presented a peculiar and excellent kind of Pepper, whose Shell tastes
not unlike Cinnamon, and smells so like Cloves, that with the Odor I have
deceived many, which he confessed to be new even to him; it having been lately
g^thered in Jamaica (where it abounds) and presented me by the inquisitive
Commander of the English Forces there. And yet, Pyrophilus, this great variety
of Simples could not deter either Ancient or Modern Inquirers from Writing
entire Treatises of some particular Ones. So Pliny tells us, Pli^. lib. 25*
cap. 8.
That Themison the Physician published a Volume (for so he called it) of that
vulgar and despised Herb called Plantain: So the same Id. lib. 18. cap. 26.
Author tells us, That Amphilochus* writ a Volume De Medica Herba, and Cytisa;
and King Id: lib. 25. cap. 7.
Juba another, of a sort of Nymphaea by him found on Mount Atlas. And in our
Times, not to mention those many Books that have been written by Physicians, Of
the Structure of Man's Body, and De Usu Partium: Carolus Rosenbergius writ some
Years since an entire Book of Roses, which he calls his Rhodologia: Martinus
Blochwitius since published another Book of Elder, under the Title of Anatomia
Sambuci. Among the Chemists, Angelus Sala published in distinct Treatises, his
Vitriologia, Tartarologia, Saccharologia: Untzerus also writ peculiar Tracts,
De Mercurio, De Sulphur, De Sale. And Paracelsus himself vouchsafed distinct
Treatises to Hypericon, Persicaria, Helleborus, and some other particular
Plants. Basilius Valentinus (one of the most Knowing and Candid Chemical
Writers) published long since an excellent Treatise of Antimony, inscribed
Currus Triumphalis Antimonii; but though in his other he has also taught us
diverse other things concerning it, yet he left so much undiscovered in
Antimony, that Angelus Sala was thereby emboldned to publish his Anatomia
Antimonii. And Hamerus Poppius (if that be his true name) Johannis Tholdius,
and the experienced Alexander van Suchten, thought fit to write entire
Treatises of that same Mineral; by which if they seem to Eclipse the diligence
of Basilius, at least they bore witness to his Judgment: for modestly inviting
his Readers to make further enquiries into the Nature and Preparations of that
abstruse Mineral, He gives this account of his leaving many things unmention'd,
That the shortness of Life makes it impossible for one man thoroughly to learn
Antimony, in which every day something of new is discovered. And I remember,
that having lately given a Chemist, upon his request, some Directions for
drawing, not an imaginary Mercury of Antimony, as those which are wont to be
taught by Chemists, but a real fluid Quicksilver; he some days since brought
me about an Ounce of it (which you may command when you please) as the first
Fruits of Directions, differing enough from those which I have hitherto met
with in Authors A peculiar way likewise of separating from Antimony, not such a
Substance as those which are as improperly as vulgarly called Antimonial
Sulphurs, but a really combustible Body, which looks and burns so like common
Brimstone, that it is not easily distinguishable from it, we shall elsewhere,
God willing, Pyrophilus, teach you. And I remember, that whereas according to
the way mentioned by Basilius in his Currus Triumphalis, and both generally
transcribed by Authors, and formerly practiced by our selves, the Tincture of
the Gl^ss of Antimony is very tedious to make, being to be drawn with Spirit of
Vinegar, I once made a Menstruum to draw it more expeditiously, which having
not hither to met with in any of the Authors I have read, I shall not conceal
from you: Taking then an arbitrary quantity of the best French Verdegreece, and
distilling it orderly in a strong naked Fire, I found the extorted Liquor to
extract (even in an ordinary digesting heat) from powdered Antimonial Glass, a
Blood-red Tincture in three or four hours; and my curiosity leading me to
abstract the Menstruum from the tinging Powder, and put it again upon
^ulveris'd Glass, I found it again h^ghly Tincted in a very few hours. And
prosecuting the Experiment, I found that by drawing off the Menstruum, and
^igesting Spirit of Wine upon the remaining Calx, I could soon obtain a red
Tincture, or Solution, From which some Chemists, if I should tell them what I
have now told you, would perhaps expect no ordinary Medicine. But this, I
suppose, you will think less strange, then that with a Liquor easily separated,
by a way which I may elsewhere teach you, from an obvious Vegetable, of which
you may safely eat a whole Pound at a time, I have drawn a deep red Tincture,
even from crude Antimony, and that in not many hours, and without heat.

And to these Experiments of Antimony, I might (partly from the communication
of my Friends, and partly from some trials of my own) add diverse other
undivulg'd Experiments relating to that Mineral; if it were not now more
seasonable, reserving them for other Papers, to mind you, That the Learned
Kircherus has enriched us with a great Volume in Folio, of Light and Shadows;
and another in Quarto, of the Load stone: and yet none of these have so
exhausted the Subjects they have treated of, but that an after-Enquirer may be
able to recruit their Observations with many new ones, perhaps more numerous or
more considerable then the former: As after our Learned Countryman Gilbertus
had written a Volume of the Lodestone, the Jesuit Cabeus was not by that
deterred from writing another of the same Subject: And though since Cabeus, the
Ingenious Kircherus have so largely prosecuted it in his Voluminous Ars
Magnetica, yet he has not reaped his Field so clean, but that a careful Gleaner
may still find Ears enough to make some Sheaves. And what I have lately tried
or seen, makes me think it very possible to recruit those many of Kircherus,
with some further Magnetical Experiments unmention'd in his Book. And I have,
the very day I writ this, made in that admirable Stone a not-inconsiderable
Experiment, not extant (that I remember) there: For taking an oblong
Lodestone, and heating it red-hot, I found the attractive Faculty in not many
minutes, either altogether abolished, or at least so impaired and weakened, that
I was scarce, if at all, able to discern it. But this has been observed,
though not so faithfully related, by more then one; wherefore I shall add,
That by refrigerating this red-hot Lodestone either North or South, I found
that I could give its Extremes a Polarity (if I may so speak) which they would
readily display upon an excited Needle freely placed in Aequilibrium: And not
only so, but I could by refrigerating the same and sometime North and sometime
South, in a very short time change the Poles of the Lodestone at pleasure,
making that which was a quarter of an hour before the North Pole, become the
South; and on the contrary, the formerly Southern Pole become the Northern: And
this change was wrought on the Lodestone, not only by cooling it directly
North and South, but by cooling it perpendicularly; that end of it which was
contiguous to the Ground, growing the Northern Pole, and so (according to the
Laws Magnetical) drawing to it the South en^ of the Needle; and that which was
remotest from it, the contrary one: As if indeed the Terrestrial Globe, were,
as some Magnetic Philosophers have supposed it, but a Great Magnes, since its
Effluviums are able, in some Cases, to impart a Magnetic Faculty to the
Lodestone it self. Some other Experiments of this nature, not extant in
Kircherus, we may have elsewhere fit opportunity to mention. And indeed, that
Enigmatical Mineral (if I may so call it) the Lodestone, is a subject so
fertile in Rarities, that I hear, he himself is Reprinting that accurate
Treatise, with new and large Additions.

Nor are the smallest and most despicable productions of Nature so barren, but
that they are capable both to invite our Speculations, and to recompense them.
Pliny in the eleventh Book of his Natural History, where he treats of Insects,
is a little after the entr^nce, transported with an unwonted admiration of the
Workmanship of Nature in them: Nusquam alibi (says he) spectatiore Naturae
rerum artificio: In nothing elsewhere (says he) is the workmanship of Nature
more remarkable then in the contexture of these little Creatures. And after a
Wonder, not unworthy a Philosopher, he concludes, Rerum Natura nusquam magis
quam in minimis tota est: Nature in her whole Power is never more wholly seen
then in her smallest Works. To which Epiphonema he adds this Sober and
Philosophical Admonition, Quapropter, quaeso ne haec legentes, quoniam ex his
spernunt multa, etiam relata fastidio damnent, cum in contemplatione Naturae
nihil possit videri supervacaneum: Wherefore I would request the Perusers of
these Discourses, that although the subjects we treat of are contemptible in
their eyes, they would not therefore disdain the relations we shall make of
them; since nothing ought to seem superfluous in the contemplation of Nature. I
remember that it is from the consideration of so despicable a part as the skin
of the Sole of the Foot, that Galen takes occasion to magnify the Wisdom of
God in those excellent terms that we shall have occasion to mention hereafter.
And, as he says rarely well, though some Creatures seem made of much courser
Stuff then others, yet even in the vilest the Makers Art Shines through the
despicableness of the Matter. For Idiots admire in things the Beauty of their
Materials, but Artists that of the Workmanship: To which, after a great deal of
Philosophical Discourse, he adds, N^que oculo nec cerebro deterius est pes
constructus, si utraque pa^s ad actiones, cujus gratia fuit facta, se habeat
optime; neque cerebrum sine pede se probe haberet, neque pes sine cerebro: Eget
enim, opinor, illud vehiculo, hic autem sensu: Nor is the Foot worse contrived
then the Brain or Eye, provided each part be duly disposed for performance of
the actions to which it was designed: Since the Brain could not conveniently
want the Foot, nor the Foot the Brain: For, I conceive, that one stands in need
of a support for local motion, and the other of a source from whence to derive
the faculties of Feeling. To which we may annex that Judicious reasoning of
Aristotle, who descending from the Contemplation of the sublimer Works of
Nature, to treat of the Parts of Animals, thus endeavors to keep his Readers
from thinking that the Object of it must render that Enquiry despicable: Restat
(says he) ut de animante Natura disseramus: And having set down those Words
which you have not long since read in connection to these, he thus prosecutes
his Discourse: Quamobrem, viliorum animalium disputationem perpensionemque
fastidio quod am puerili sprevisse, molesteque tulisse dignum nequaquam est:
Cum nullares sit Naturae, inqua non mirandum aliquod habeatur. Et quod
Heraclitum ferunt dixisse ad eos, quicum alloqui eum vellent, quod forte in
Casa furnaria quadam caloris gratia sedentem vidissent, accedere temperarunt,
ingredi enim eos fidenter jussit, Quoniam, inquit, ne huic quidem loco Dit
desunt immortales; Hoc idem in indaganda quoque natura animantium faciendum
est. Aggredi enim quaeque sine ullo pudore debemus; cum in omnibus Naturae
numen, and honestum pulchrumque insit Ingenium; Wherefore it is altogether
unseemly to reject with a kind of Childish nicetie, or be offended at the
Discourse and Speculation of inferior Animals; Since there is nothing in all
Nature, but contains in it somewhat worthy of Admiration. And as it is
recorded of Heraclitus, that seeing some persons desirous to speak with him,
refuse to approach toward him, because they beheld him warming himself in a
miserable Cottage, he bad them come in without scruple, since here also (said
he) are the Immortal Gods present: So in like manner ought we to be highly
persuaded of the Dignity of Animals, when we make Enquirtes into their Natures.
Which we ought in no wise to be ashamed of; since the mighty Power and laudable
Wisdom of Nature is conspicuous in all things. Nay Paracelsus himself, as
haughty as he was, was Philosopher enough not to disdain to write a Book De
Mysteriis Vermium; wherein, though according to His manner he have set down
many extravagances, he is more Candid in the Delivery of several Remedies
(which Experience has recently taught us to be more effectual then probable)
then in most other of his Writings: And in that Treatise he justly reprehends
the Laziness and Pride of those Physicians, who not only neglect and scorn
Enquiries of Nature themselves: but when the fruits of such Enquiries are
presented them by others, instead of a grateful acceptance, receive them with
contempt and derision. To which a while after he adds, what is most true, That
God has Creat^d nothing so Vile, Despicable, Abject, or Filthy in the World,
that may not make for the Health and Use of Man. And certainly what ever God
himself has been pleased to think worthy his Making, its Fellow Creature, Man,
should not think unworthy of his Knowing. Nor is it a disparagement to a Humane
Notion, to represent a Creature, which has the Honor to have been framed
according to a Divine Idea: and therefore the Wisest of Men in His Natural
History, scruples not to write as well of abject Reptil's, as of Lions, Eagles,
Elephants, and other Noble Animals: and did not only Treat of the tall Cedars
of Lebanon, but that despicable Plant (whatever it be that is designed by the
Hebrew Ezob) which grows out of the Wall. For my part, If I durst think my
Actions fit to be Examples, I should tell you, that I have been so far from
that effeminat^ squeamishness, that one of the Philosophical Treatises, for
which I have been gathering Experiments, is of the Nature and Use of Dungs. And
though my condition does (God be praised) ennable me to make Experiments by
others Hands; Yet have I not been so nice as to decline dissecting Dogs,
Wolves, Fishes, and even Rats and Mice, with my own Hands. Nor when I am in my
Laboratory do I scruple with them naked to handle Lute and Charcoale.

I should here, Py^ophilus, cease to entertain you with Discourses of the
pleasantness of Natural Philosophy, but that I remember I have not yet told
you, that the Study of Physiologie is not only Delightful, as it teaches us to
Know Nature, but also as it teaches us in many Cases to Master and Command her.
For the true Naturalist (as we shall see hereafter) does not only Know many
things, which other men Ignore, but can Perform many things that other men
cannot Do; being ennabled by his skill not barely to understand several
Wonders of Nature, but also partly to imitate, and partly to multiply and
improve them. And how Naturally we affect the Exercise of this Power over the
Creatures may appear in the Delight Children take to do many things (which we
may have occasion to mention elsewhere) that seem to proceed from an Innate
Propensity to please themselves in imitating or changing the Productions of
Nature.

And sure it is a great Honor that the Indulgent Creator vouchsafes to
Naturalists, that though he gives them not the power to produce one Atome of
Matter, yet he allows them the power to introduce so many Forms (which
Philosophers teach to be nobler then Matter) and work such changes among the
Creatures, that if Adam were now alive, and should Survey that great Variety of
Man's Productions, that is to be found in the shops of Artificers, the
Laboratories of Chemists, and other well-furnished Magazine^ of Art, he would
admire to see what a new world, as it were, or set of Things has been added to
the Primitive Creatures by the Industry of His Posterity.

And though it be very true, that Man is but the Minister of Nature, and can
but duly apply Agents to Patients (The rest of the Work being done by the
applied Bodies themselves) yet by His skill in making those Applications, he is
able to perform such things as do not only give him a Power to Master
Creatures otherwise much stronger then himself; but may ennable one man to do
such wonders, as another man shall think he cannot sufficiently admire. As the
poor Indians looked upon the Spaniards as more then Men, because the knowledge
they had of the Properties of Nitre, Sulphur and Charcoale duly mixed, ennabled
them to Thunder and Lighten so fatally, when they pleased. And this Empire of
Man, as a Naturalist, over the Creatures, may perchance be to a Philosophical
Soul preserved by reason untainted with Vulgar Opinions, of a much more
satisfactory kind of Power or Sovereignty then that for which ambitious Mortals
are wont so bloodily to contend. For oftentimes this Latter, being commonly but
the Gift of Nature or Present of Fortune, and but too often the Acquist of
Crimes, does no more argue any true worth or noble superiority in the possessor
of it, then it argues one Brass Counter to be of a better Metal then its
Fellows, in that it is chosen out to stand in the Account for many Thousand
Pounds more then any of them. Whereas the Dominion that Physiologie gives the
Prosperous Studier of it (besides that it is wont to be innocently acquired, by
being the Effect of his Knowledge) is a Power that becomes Man as Man. And to an
ingenious spirit, the Wonders he performs bring perchance a higher
satisfaction, as they are Proofs of his Knowledge, then as they are Productions
of his Power, or even bring Accessions to his Store.

ESSAY II. OF THE SAME.
THe next Advantage, Pyrophilus, that we mentioned the Knowledge of Nature to
bring to the Minds of Men, is, That it therein excites and cherishes Devotion;
Which when I say, Pyroph. I forget not that there are several Divines (and
some of them Eminent ones) that out of a Holy Jealousy (as they think) for
Religion, labor to deter men from addicting themselves to serious and
thorough Enquiries into Nature, as from a Study unsafe for a Christian, and
likely to end in Atheism, by making it possible for Men (that I may propose to
you their Objection as much to its Advantage as I can) to give themselves such
an Account of all the Wonders of Nature, by the single Knowledge of Second
Causes, as may bring them to disbelieve the Necessity of a First. And
certainly, Pyrophilus, if this Apprehension were well grounded, I should think
the threatened Evil so considerable, that instead of inviting you to the Study
of Natural Philosophy, I should very earnestly Labor to Dissuade you from it.
For I, that had much rather have Men not Philosophers then not Christans,
should be better content to see you ignore the Mysteries of Nature then deny
the Author of it. But though the Zeal of their Intentions keep Me from
harboring any unfavourable Opinion of the Persons of these Men, yet the
Prejudice that might redound from their Doctrine (if generally received) both
to the Glory of God from the Creatures, and to the Empire of Man over them,
forbids Me to leave their Opinion unanswered; though I am Sorry that the
Necessity of Vindicating the Study I recommend to You from so Heinous a Crime
as they have accused it of, will compel me to Theologize in a Philosophical
Discourse: Which that I may do, with as much Brevity as the Weight and Exigency
of my Subject will permit, I shall Content my self only in the Explication of
my own Thoughts, to hint to you the grounds of Answering what is alleged
against them.

And First, Pyrophilus, I must premise, That though it may be a Presumption in
Man, (who to use a Scripture Expression, Is but of Yesterday, and knows
Nothing, because his Days upon the Earth are but as a shadow) precisely and
peremptorily to define all the Ends and Aims of the Omniscient God in His
Great Work of the Creation; Yet, Job 8.9.
perhaps, it will be no great venture to suppose that at least in the Creating
of the Sublunary World, and the more Conspicuous Stars, two of God's Principal
Ends were, the Manifestation of His own Glory, and the Good of Men. Prove. 16.4.
For the First of these; The Lord has made all things for himself, says the
Preacher; For of Him, and through Him, and to Him, are all things, says the
Apostle. And, Thou have Created all things; and for Thy Pleasure they are and
were Created, Romans 11.36.
say the Twenty four Prostrate Elders (Representatives, perhaps, of the whole
Church of both Testaments, propagated by the Twelve Patriarchs, and the like
number of Apostles) to their Creator, which Truth, were it requisite, might be
further confirmed by several other Texts, which to decline needless prolixity,
I here forbear to insist on. Consonantly to this we hear the Psalmist
Proclaiming that The Heavens Declare the Glory of God, and the Firmament
shows his Handy-Works. To which purpose we may also observe, Psalm. 19.1.
that though Man were not Created till the close of the Sixth Day (the
Resident's Arrival being Obligingly Suspended till the Palace was made ready to
entertain Him) yet that none of God's works might want Intelligent Spectators
and Admirers, the Angels were Created the First Day, as Divines generally infer
from the Words of God in Job; Where wast thou when I laid the Foundations of
the Earth? and a little after; When the Morning Stars sang together, and all
the Sons of God shouted for Joy. Job 3^.5, 7.
Where by the Morning Stars and Sons of God are supposed to be meant the newly
Created Angels; one of whose earliest exercises was, it seems, to applaud the
Creation, and take thence occasion to sing Hymns to the Almighty Author of it.
I should not, Pyrophilus, add any thing further on this subject, but that
having since the writing of these thoughts met with a Discourse of Seneca's,
very consonant to some of them, I suppose it may tend to your delight as well
as to their advantage, if I present you some of the Truths you have seen in my
courser Languag, dressed up in his finer and happier Expressions. Curiosum nobis
(says he) natura ingenium dedit, and artis sibi pulchritudinisque conscia,
spectatores nos tantis rerum spectaculis genuit, Sen. de Otio Sap. Cap. 32.
perditura fructum sui, si tam magna, tam clara tam subtiliter ducta, tam
nitida and non uno genere formosa solitudini ostenderet; Ut scias illam
spectari voluisse, non tantum aspici, vide quem locum nobis dedit; nec erexit
tantummodo hominem, sed etiam ad contemplationem Viae facturum; ut ab ortu
sidera in occasum labentia prosequi posset and vultum suum circumferre cum
toto, Sublime illi fecit caput, and collo flexibili imposuit. Deinde sena per
diem, sena per noctem signa produxit; nullam non partem sui explicuit, ut per
haec quae obtulerat ejus oculis cupiditatem faceret etiam caeterorum: nec enim
omnia nec tanta visimus quanta sunt, sed acies nostra aperit sibi investigando
viam, and fundamenta very jacit, ut inquisitio transeat ex apertis in obscura,
and aliquid ipso Mundo inveniat Antiquius. And least you might be offended at
his mentioning of Nature, and silence of God, give me leave to inform you,
that about the close of the Chapter immediately preceding that, whence the
Passage you come from Reading is transcribed, having spoken of the Enquiries of
Philosophers into the Nature of the Universe, he adds, Haec qui contemplatur,
quid Deo praestat? ne tanta ejus Opera sine test sint.

And to proceed to that which we have formerly assigned for the Second End of
the Creation; That much of this Visible World was made for the use of M^n, may
appear, not only from the time of his Creation (already taken notice of) and by
the Commission given to the first Progenitors of Mankind, to replenish the
Earth, and subdue it, and to have Dominion over the Fish of the Sea, and over
the Fouls of the Air, and over all the Earth, and over every living thing that
creeps or moves on the Earth: Genesis 1.2^, 29.
But also by God's making those noble and vast Luminaries, and other Bodies
that adorned the Sky to give light upon the Earth, though inferior to them in
Dimensions, and to divide between the Day and between the Night, and to be for
Signs, and for Seasons, and for Days, and for Years. Genesis 1.14, 1^, 16.
To this agrees that Passage in the Prophet, Thus says the Lord that Created
the Heavens, God himself that formed the Earth, and made it, He has
estab^ished it, He Created it not in Vain, He formed it to be Inhabited, etc.
And the Inspired Poet speaks of Man's Dignity in very comprehensive Terms, Is.
45.2^.
For thou (says he to his Maker) have made him little lower then the Angels,
and have Crowned him with Glory and Honor; Psa^. 5. ^, 6.
Thou made him to have Dominion over the Works of thy Hands, thou have put
all things under his Feet.

The same truth may be confirmed by diverse other Texts, which it might here
prove tedious to insist on. G^n. 2.28, 26, 29. Ps^^ 8 7. Heb 2 7. Job 5 3. Ho.
2.28, 21, 22. Romans 8 28. 2 Cor 3.22. 2 Timothy 4 3.
And therefore I shall rather observe, that consonantly thereunto, God was
pleased to consider man so much more then the Creatures made for him, that he
made the Sun it self at one time to stand still, and at another time to go
back, and diverse times made the parts of the Universe forget their Nature, or
Act contrary to it; And has (in sum) vouchsafed to alter by Miracles the
Course of Nature, for the instruction or relief of Man (As when the Fire
suspended its destructive Operation, whilst the three resolute Jews with their
Protector walked unharm'd in the midst of those flames that destroyed the
Kindlers; 2 King, 6.5, 6.
and as the heavy Iron emerg'd up to the swimming piece of wood, miraculously
by Elisha made Magneticall.) And you may also, Pyrophilus, take notice, that
when Adam had transgressed, immediately the ground was cursed for his sake. And
as it is not unusual in Humane Justice to raze the very houses of Regicides and
resembling Traitors; So when the provocations of Sodom swelled high enough to
reach Heaven, God did not only Destroy the Inhabitants from the Face of the
Earth, but for the Inhabitants Sins destroyed the very Face of the Earth. So
when in Noah's time a Deluge of Impiety called for a Deluge of Waters, God
looking upon the living Creatures as made for the Use of Man, stuck not to
Destroy them with him, and for him; but involved in his Ruin all those Animals
that were not necessary to the perpetuation of the Species, and the Sacrifice
due for Noah's preservation. And so when (in the Last days) the Earth shall be
replenished with those Scoffers mentioned by St Peter, who will walk after
their own Lusts, 2 Pet. 3.3, 5, 6, 7, 8, 10.
and deride the Expectation of God's foretold coming to Judge and Punish the
Ungodly, their Impiety shall be as well punished as silenc't by the unexpected
Flames (perhaps hastened by that very impiety) that shall either Destroy or
Transfigure the World. For as by the Law of Moses, Lev. 13.54, 55.
the Leprous Garment which could not be recovered by being washed in Water, was
to be burnt in the Fire, so the World which the Deluge could not Cleanse, a
general Conflagration must Destroy.

Nor is reason it self backward to countenance what we teach. For it is no
great presumption to conceive, that the rest of the Creatures were made for
Man, since He alone of the Visible World is able to enjoy, use, and relish many
of the other Creatures, and to discern the Omniscience, Almightinesse and
Goodness of their Author in them, and return Him praises for them. It Is not
for themselves that the Rubies fl^me, other Jewels sparkle, the Bezar-stone is
Antidot^^l; n^r is it for their own advantage that fruitful trees spend and
exhaust themselves in Annual profusions. The Light which he diffuses through
the World is useless to the Sun himself, whose inanimate being makes him
incapable of delighting in his own splendour; which he receives but to convey it
to the Earth, and other by him illuminated Globes: whence probably the Hebrews
called him Shemesh, which Grammarians derive from the Root Shemash signifying
in the Chaldean Tongue, to serve, or minister to; the Sun being the great
Minister of Nature, and Servant general of the Universe. And as Animals alone
among the Creatures seem to have a proper sense of, and complacency in, their
own Being; So Man alone among Animals is endowed with Reason, at least such a
pitch of it, as by which he can discern God's Creatures to be the Gifts of
God, and refer them to their Creator's Glory. This truth I find not only
embraced by Christians, but assented to even by Jews and Heathens; Among the
Jews my Learned Acquaintance, Manasseh Ben Israel, I^ P^obl. de Creat.
professedly labors to prove it by Scripture and Tradition (though in some of
his Arguments he might appear more a Philosopher, if he would have appeared
less a Rabbi) and among other passages I remember he alleges that, wherein
the Wise man says (as our Translators English it) That the Righteous is an
everlasting Foundation; which he renders, Justus est columna Mundi, Prove.
10.25. Genesis 6.9.
The Just Man is the Pillar of the World. And indeed if the Context did not
somewhat disfavour the Interpretation, the Hebrew words [ tzaddik yesod olam]
would well enough bear the sense assigned them. Congruously whereunto, I
remember that when Noah (who is called in Scripture a Righteous man, and (...),
a Herald, or Proclaimer of Righteousness) offered up that noble Sacrifice of
all the sorts of clean Beasts and Fowls, as a Thank-offering for the Reprieve
of the World, God is said to have smelled a Savor of Rest, 2 P^t. 2.15.
and to have resolved in his Heart never to Curse the ground for Man's sake,
Genesis 8.21, 22.
but to continue the vicissitudes of Summer, and Winter, Day, and Night, etc,
as long as the Earth shall remain. And among the Philosophers themselves, the
Truth we are now manifesting, has not been altogether ignor'd. For though
Seneca somewhere, more wittily then truly, says, Non causa mundo sumus hyemem
aestatemque referendi; 2 do De Ira cap. 27.
suas ista leges habent, quibus divina exercentur. Nimis nos suspicimus, si
digni nobis videmur, propter quos tanta moveantur: Yet Lactantius (not to
mention other Authors) tells us that the Stoics generally believed the World to
have been made for man. De Ira Dei cap. 13.
Vera est (says he) sententia Stoicorum, qui ajunt nostra causa Mundum fuisse
constructum. Omnia enim quibus constat, quaeque generat ex se Mundus, ad
utilitatem hominis accommodata sunt. And Seneca himself speaks elsewhere
almost as if he had read and believed the beginning of Genesis; Dii (says he)
non per negligentiam nos genuere, De B^n^s. cap. 23.
quibus tam multa genuerant: Cogitavit enim nos ante Natura quam fecit.

Nor were the Stoics the only Philosophers to whom the Contemplation of the
Universe discovered this End of it. For to instance now in Cicero only; 2 do De
Not. Deo^.
Quorum igitur causa (says that great Orator) effectum esse mundum? Eorum
scilicet Animantium, quae ratione utuntur: Hi sunt Dii et Homines, quibus
profecto nihil est melius.

Having thus prem^sed, Pyrophilus, that two of God's principal aims in the
Creation, were the manifestation of his own Glorious Attributes, and the
Welfare of his noblest Visible Creature, Man; It will not be perhaps difficult
for You to discern, that those who labor to deter men from sedulous
Enquiries into Nature, do, (though I grant, designelessely) take a course which
tends to defeat God of both those mentioned Ends.

For to speak first to the Last of them; that man's external fruition of the
Creatures, and the Delight and Accommodation which they may afford him, must be
highly prejudiced and impaired by his ignorance of that Natural Philosophy,
wherein his Dominion over the Creatures chiefly consists, what we shall say
hereafter concerning the usefulness of the Knowledge of Nature to humane Life,
will sufficiently evince. But such an Animal fruition (if I may so call it) of
the Works of Nature, affords not Man all the good that God designed him in
them. For Religion being not only the great Duty of Man, but the grand
Instrument of his future Happiness, which consists in an Union with and
Fruition of God, during that endless Term that shall succeed the expiration
of his transitory Life on Earth; what ever increases or cherishes his Religion
deserves to be looked on as a great contributer to his Happiness. And we may
therefore venture to affirm that the knowledge of the Creatures does less
advantage Man, as it ennables him to Master them; then as it Assists him, by
admiring and serving him, to become Acceptable to their Author. And what ever
our distrustful Adversaries are pleased to surmise to the contrary, certainly
God intended that his Creatures should afford not only Necessaries, and
Accommodations to our Animal part, but Instructions to our Intellectual. The
World is wont to be styled not unfitly by Divines, The Christians Inn; but
perchance it may be altogether as properly called his Ship: for whereas both
Appellations suppose him a Traveller, the Inn, though it refresh him in his
Journey, does not further him in it, but rather retard his progress by
detaining him in one place; whereas a Ship not only serves the Passenger for an
Inn when he is weary, but helps to convey him toward his Journey's End. And
according to this Notion, to suppose that God has placed in the World
innumerable things to feed Man, and delight him, and none to instruct him, were
a conceit little less injurious to God, then it were to a wise Merchant, that
sends Persons, he loves, to a far Country, to think that he would furnish
their Cabinets with plenty of Provisions, soft Beds, fine Pictures, and all
other accommodations for their Voyage, but send them to Sea disprovided of
Sea-Charts and Mariners Compasses, and other requisite helps to steer their
Course by, to the desired Harbor.

And indeed so far is God from being unwilling, that we should Prye into his
Works, that, by diverse Dispensations he imposes on us little less then a
necessity of studying them. For first he begins the Book of Scripture with the
Description of the Book of Nature; of which he not only gives us a general
account, to inform us that he made the World; since for that end the very
first Verse in the Bible might have sufficed: But he vouchsafes us by retaile
the Narrative of each Day's Proceedings, and in the two first Chapters of
Gen^sis, is pleased to give nobler hints of Natural Philosophy, then men are
yet perhaps aware of. Though that in most other places of the Scripture, where
the Works of Nature are mentioned but incidently, or in order to other
purposes, they are spoken of rather in a Popular then Accurate manner, I dare
not peremptorily deny, being unwilling to interesse the reputation of Holy Writ
(designed to teach us rather Divinity then Philosophy) in the doubtful
contentions of Naturalists, about such matters as may (though the History of
the Creation cannot) be known by the mere Light of Natural Reason. We may next
observe, that God has made some knowledge of his Created Book, both conducive to
the belief, and necessary to the Understanding, of his Written one: Our
Savior making it one cause of the Sadduces great Error about the Resurrection,
that they knew not the Power of God. And the Scripture being so full of
Allusions to, and comparisons borrowed from the properties of the Creatures,
that there are many Texts not clearly Intelligible without some knowledge of
them; as may appear even by the first Gospel (The Promise that the Seed of the
Woman should Bruise the S^rpents Head, and have his Heel bruised by that
subtle Creature) preached to fallen Man in Paradise, and by the representation
of the Worlds Four great Monarchies, and the Genius of each of them, under the
Notion of Four Beasts, in Daniels prophetic Vision: and that often repeated
Precept of our great Master to his Disciples, is coucht in an expression
alluding to the properties of Animals: For where he commands them to be Wise as
Serpents, and Harmless as Doves, he does not only recommend to them a
Serpentine wariness in declining dangers, but seems also to prescribe not
alone an inoffensivenesse toward others (the conspicuousnesse of which quality
in Pigeons have made them, though erroneously, be supposed to have no Gall) But
also as harmless a way of escaping the dangers they are actually engaged in,
as that of Doves, who being pursued by Birds of Prey, endeavor to save
themselves not by fight but, only by flight.

And indeed so many of the Texts in Scripture are not to be competently
illustrated, without some knowledge of the properties of the Creatures related
to in them, that I wonder not, that Levinus Lemnius, Frantzius, Rueus, and
other Learned Men have thought it requisite to publish entire Treatises, some
of the Animals, others of the Stones, and others of the other Works of Nature
mentioned in Scripture: Only I could wish that they had been as wary in their
Writings, as commendable for their Intentions, and had not sometimes admitted
doubtful or fabulous accounts into Comments upon that Book, whose Prerogative
it is to teach nothing but Truth.

Nor ought their Labors to deter others from cultivating the same Theme; For
as (such is Gods condescension to Humane weakness) most of the Texts, to whose
Exposition Physiologie is necessary, may be explicated by the knowledge of the
external, or at least more easily observed qualities of the Creatures; So, that
there are diverse not to be fully understood without the Assistance, of more
penetrating indagations of the Abstrusities of Nature and the more unobvious
properties of things, an Intelligent and Philosophical peruser will readily
discern.

Now if you should put me upon telling you, Pyrophilus, what those Attributes
of God are, which I so often mention to be visibly displayed in the Fabric of
the World, I can readily answer you, that though many of Gods Attributes are
legible in his Creatures, yet those that are most conspicuous there, are his
Power, his Wisdom, and his Goodness, in which the World, as well as the
Bible, though in a diff^ring, and in some points a darker way, is designed to
instruct us, which that you may not think to be affirmed gratis, we must insist
a while on each of the Three.

And first, How boundless a power, or rather what an Almightinesse is
eminently displayed in Gods making out of Nothing all Things, and without
Materials or Instruments constructing this Immense Frabrick of the World, whose
Vastness is such, that even what may be proved of it, can scarcely be
conceived, and after a Mathematical Demonstration, its Greatness is
distrusted? Which yet is, I confess, a wonder less to be admired then the
Power expressed by God in so immense a Work, which nevertheless some modern
Philosophers (whose opinions I find some Cabalists to countenance) suppose to
be not the only Production of Gods Omnipotence. Not to mention Elephants, or
Whales, some of which an Hyperbolist would not scruple to call moving Mountains
and Floting Islands; and to pass by those stupendous Hills, and those Seas,
where the Light looses it self, as Objects which their neernesse only
represents so Bulky; let us hasten to consider, that whereas the Terrestrial
Globe we Men inhabit, contains, besides all those vast Kingdoms the Unions of
some of which constituted the Worlds four celebrated Monarchies, those
spacious (since detected) American Regions, that have been deservedly styled
The New World: And that whereas the Common Account makes the circuit of this
Terrestrial Globe to be no less then 22600 Italian miles, consisting each of
1000 Geometrical Paces (which number the more recent account of the accurate
Gassendus makes amount to 26255 Miles of the same measure) whereas, I say, this
Globe of Earth and Water seems to us so vast, Astronomers teach us, that it is
but a Point in comparison of the Immensity of Heaven; which they not
irrationally prove by the Parallaxis (or Circular difference betwixt the place
of a Star, supposed to be taken by two Observations, the one made at the
Center, and the other on the surface of the Earth) which Gassendus confesses
to be undiscernable in the fixed Stars: as if the Terrestrial Globe were so mere
a Point, that it were not material, whether a fixed Star be looked upon from the
Center, or from the surface of the Earth. This may lessen our wonder at the
Ptolomaeans, making the Sun (which seems not half a Foot over) to be above a
hundred sixty and six times bigger then the Earth; and distant from it One
thousand one hundred sixty and five Semi-Diameters of the Earth, each of which
contains, according to the aforementioned computation of Gassendus, 4177
Miles; and at their supposing the fixed Stars (whose distance the same Author,
as a Ptolomaean, supput's to be 19000 Semi-Diameters of the Earth) so great,
Gassend. Inst. Astr. lib. 2. c. 13.
that they conclude each of the fixed or smallest Magnitude to be no less then
18 times greater then the whole Earth, and each Star of the First or Chief
Magnitude to exceed the T^rrestrial Globe 108 times. And as for the Coperricans
(that growing Sext of Astronomers) they, as their Hypothesis requires, suppose
the vastness of the Firmament to be exceedingly greater then the Ancients
believed it. For Philippus Lansbergius, who ventured to assign Distances and
Dimensions to the Planets and Fixed Stars (which Copernicus forbore to do)
supposes as well as his Master, Gass^^d. lib. 3. ca^. 11.
that the Great Orb it self (as the Copernicans call that in which they esteem
the Earth to move about the Sun) though its Semi-Diameter be supposed to be
1500 times as great as that of the Earth, is but as a Point in comparison of
the Firmament or Sphere of the Fixed Stars; which he supposes to be distant from
the Earth no less then 28000 Semi-Diameters of the Great Orb, that is, 42000000
of Semi-diameters of the Earth; or according to the former Computation of
common Miles 175434000000, which is a Distance vastly exceeding that which the
Ptolomaeans ven^ur'd to assign, and such as even imagination it self can hardly
reach to. I confess indeed, that I am not so well satisfied with the exactness
(nor perhaps with the Grounds) of these kind of Computations, by reason of the
Difficulty I have met with in making exact Celestial Observations with either
Telescopes, or other Instruments, sufficiently witnessed, by the great
disparity remarkable betwixt the Computations of the best-Artists themselves.
But on the other side I am not sure, but that even the Copernicans ascribe not
too great a distance to some of the Fixed Stars; since (for ought we yet know)
those of the sixth Magnitude, and those which our Telescopes discover (though
our bare Eyes cannot) are not really less then those of the first Magnitude,
but only appear so by reason of their greater Distance from our Eyes; as some
Fixed Stars seem no bigger then Venus and Mercury, which are much lesser then
the Earth. And therefore upon such Considerations, and because the modestest
Computation allows the Firmament to be great enough to make the Earth but a
Point in comparison of it; it will be safe enough, as well as just, to conclude
with the Psalmist, Great is the Lord, and greatly to be praised; and his
greatness is unsearchable.

The next Attribute of God that shines forth in his Creatures, is his Wisdom;
which to an intelligent Considerer appears very manifestly expressed in the
World, whether you contemplate it as an Aggregate or System of all Natural
Bodies, or consider the Creatures it is made up of, both in their particular
and distinct Natures, and in Relation to each other, and the Universe which
they constitute. In some of these the Wisdom of God is so conspicuous, and
written in such large Characters, that it is legible even to a vulgar Reader:
But in many others the Lineaments and Traces of it are so delicate and slender,
or so wrapped up and covered with Corporeity, that it requires an attentive and
intelligent Peruser. So numberless a multitude, and so great a variety of
Birds, Beasts, Fishes, Reptiles, Herbs, Shrubs, Trees, Stones, Metals,
Minerals, Stars, etc. and every one of them plentifully furnished and endowed
with all the Qualifications requisite to the Attainment of the respective Ends
of its Creation, are productions of a Wisdom too limitless not to be peculiar
to God: To insist on any one of them in particular (besides that it would too
much swell this Discourse) might appear injurious to the rest; which do all of
them deserve that extensive Exclamation of the Psalmist, How manifold are thy
works, O Lord; in Wisdom have thou made them all. Psalm. 104.24.
And therefore I shall content my self to observe in general, That as highly as
some Naturalists are pleased to value their own knowledge, it can at best
attain but to understand and applaud, not emulate the Productions of God. For
as a Novice, when the curiosest Watch the rarest Artist can make, is taken in
pieces and set before him, may easily enough discern the Workmanship and
Contrivance of it to be excellent; but had he not been shown it, could never
have of himself devised so skilful and rare a piece of Work: So, for instance,
an Anatomist, though when by many and dexterous Dissections of humane Bodies,
and by the help of Mechanical Principles and Rules (without a competent skill
wherein, a Man can scarce be an Accomplished and Philosophical Anatomist) he
has learned the Structure, Use and Harmony of the parts of the Body, he is able
to discern that matchless Engine to be admirably contrived, in order to the
exercise of all the Motions and Functions whereto it was designed: And yet this
Artist, had he never contemplated a humane Body, could never have imagined or
devised an Engine of no greater Bulk, any thing near so fitted to perform all
that variety of Actions we daily see performed either in or by a humane Body.
Thus the Circular motion of the Blood, and structure of the Valves of the Heart
and Veins (The consideration whereof, as himself told me, first hinted the
Circulation to our Famous Harvey) though now Modern Experiments have for the
main (the Modus seeming not yet so fully explicated) convinced us of them, we
acknowledge them to be very expedient, and can admire Gods Wisdom in contriving
them: Yet those many Learned Anatomists, that have for many succeeding Ages
preceded both Dr Harvey, and Columbus, Caesalpinus, Padre Paulo, and Mr Warner
(for each of these four last are supposed by some to have had some notion of
the Circulation) by all their diligent contemplation of humane Bodies, never
dreamed (for ought appears) of so advantageous an use of the Valves of the
Heart, nor that nimble Circular motion of the Blood, of which our modern
Circulators think they discern such excellent Use, not to say, Necessity.

And though it be true, that the greater Works of God do as well declare his
great Wisdom as his Power, according to that of the Inspired Philosopher; Prove.
13.19, ^0
The Lord by Wisdom has founded the Earth, by Understanding has he
established the Heavens. By his Knowledge the depths are broken up, and the
Clouds drop down the Dew: Yet does not his Wisdom appear less in lesser
Creatures; for there is none of them so little, but it would deserve a great
deal of our Wonder, did we attentively enough consider it. And as Apelles (in
the Story) was discovered by the skilful Protagoras, by so neat and slender a
Line, that Protagoras, by being scarce able to discern it, discerned it to have
been drawn by Apelles: So God, in these little Creatures, oftentimes draws
traces of Omniscience, too delicate to be liable to be ascribed to any other
Cause. I have seen Elephants, and admired them less then the structure of a
dissected Mole, which has better Eyes then those, that will not see a
designation in the dimness of its Eyes (made only to see the Light, not other
Objects by the help of it) and the unwonted posture of its Feet, given it not
to run on the Ground, but to dig it self a way under Ground. And, as despicable
as their Littleness makes the Vulgar apt to think some Creatures, I must
confess my wonder dwell not so much on Natures Clocks (if I may so speak) as on
her Watches, and is more exercised in the coyness of the sensitive Plant, and
the Magnetical Properties of a small and abject Lodestone, then the bulk of
the tallest Oaks, or those vast Rocks, made famous by Shipwracks. I have
passed the Alps, and have seen as much to admire at in an Ant-hill, and have
so much wondered at the Industry of those little Creatures themselves that
inhabited it, that I have ceased to wonder at their having given a Theme to
Solomon's Contemplation. Those vast Exotic Animals which the Multitude flocks
to see, and which Men give Money to be allowed to gaze on, have had many of
them less of my Admiration, then the little Catterpillar (as Learned
Naturalists esteem it) to which we are beholden for Silk. For (not to mention
all the Observables crowded by Nature in that little Worm) I thought it very
well deserved my wonder (when not long since I kept some of them purposely to
try Experiments) how this curious Spinster, after he had buried himself alive
in the precious Tomb he had wrought for himself out of his own Bowels, did cast
off his former Skin and Legs, and, in show, his former Nature, appearing for
diverse days but an almost movelesse Magot; till at length, divesting this
second Tegument also (in which Nest, Phenix-like, he had been regenerated out
of his own Remains) he came forth (if I may so speak) out of this attiring Room
under another form, with Wings, Eyes, and Legs, etc. to act a new part upon
the Stage of the World; which (having spent some days without feeding (that I
could observe) in providing for the propagation of his Species) he forsakes and
dies. And I the rather mention the Silkworm, because that there have been of
late diverse subtle Speculators, who would fain persuade us, That Animals do
nothing out of Instinct, or, if you please, innate or seminal Impressions; but
Spin, build Nests, and perform all the other Actions for which they are
admired, barely by Imitation of what they have seen done by others of the same
Kind. But in the Silkworm (at least here in England) this plausible Opinion
will not hold: For the Silkworms I kept, were not hatched but in the Spring,
out of Eggs laid some Days in the Sun; and the Worms that laid those Eggs,
being every one of them dead the Winter before, it was impossible these new
Silkworms, when they first began to spin their scarce imaginable fine Web, and
enclose themselves in Oval Balls of a very Artificial Figure and Texture,
should have wrought thus by Imitation; there not having been for many Months
before, in the place where they were hatched (nor perhaps in the whole Country)
any Silkworms alive which they might imitate. But I must leave these curious
Spinsters to their Work, and proceed to tell you, That Seas and Mountains, with
the other Hyperboles of Nature (if I may so term them) proclaim indeed Gods
Power, but do not perhaps more manifest his Wisdom, then the contrivance of
some living Engines, and (if I may so call them) Breathing Atoms, that are so
small that they are almost all Workmanship; so that, as before, in the
Psalmists Expression we truly said of Gods Greatness, That it was
unsearchable; we may now as truly say of his Wisdom in the Prophets Words, and
in the same Text where he represents him as the Creator of the ends of the
Earth, Isa. 40.28.
That there is no searching of his Understanding.

And if I durst, Pyrophilus, make this part of this Essay of a length too
disproportionate to the rest, I could easily, as well as willingly, represent
to you diverse things which might serve to Illustrate the (...), Ephesians. 3.10.
manifold Wisdom of God (as St. Paul speaks on another occasion) But though I
dare not expatiate on this Subject, yet neither dare I altogether conceal from
you, that I have sometimes admired to see what scarce imaginable variety of
living Engines his Plastic skill (if I may so speak) has been able to produce,
(especially in the Waters) without scarce any other resemblance betwixt them,
then that they are each of them excellent in its own Kind, and completely
furnished according to the exigency of its Nature. And that which much
increases this Wonder, is the disproportion of those living Engines, wherein
the great [ Yotzer hakkol] Former of all things (as the Scripture justly calls
God) has been pleased to display an almost equally skilful Contrivance. Jer.
10.16.
Amongst Terrestrial Animals we have the Elephant, of whose stupendous
vastness such strange things are related, even by eminent Writers, that I know
not well how either to dis-believe them, or give credit to them: And therefore
we shall content our selves to mention that which is left on Record by the
accurate Gassendus in the Life of Peireskius; Gassend* in Vit. Pe^resk^, lib. 4.
For this matchless Gentleman having caused an Elephant, in the Year 1631, to
be weighed in a Scale, purposely provided, he was found to weigh, of the Roman
Pounds (consisting of twelve Ounces apiece) very near Five thousand: And yet
surely that this Elephant was very far from being one of the largest of that
sort of Beasts, he that shall consider the bigness and length of some of their
Teeth, as they are commonly called, which are to be seen at diverse places, both
in England and elsewhere, and is not resolved not to believe the consonant
Relations of Eastern Travelers (among whom Linschoten tells us there have been
some Teeth found to weigh Two hundred pounds apiece, each pound consisting of
twenty four Ounces) may be easily persuaded. On the other side let us reflect
upon the smalness of some Terrestrial Animals; and not to mention that little
white Creature bred in Wax, which Aristotle call (...), and speaks of as
supposed to be the least of all living Creatures whatsoever: Let us consider
those little Mites that are bred in moldy Cheese; for diverse of these scarce
amount to the weight of a Grain, and every Pound containing Five thousand seven
hundred and sixty Grains; supposing each Mite did weigh a whole Grain, yet that
formerly mentioned small Elephant would exceed him near 28800000 times. And yet
though a Mite seem but a moving Atome, and unless there be diverse together, is
not easily discerned by the unassisted Eye; yet in an excellent Microscope I
have, you know, several times both seen and shown to others, even in a gloomy
Day, and a disadvantageous Place, not only the Limbs of this little Animal,
but the very Hair growing upon his Legs. Now let us but consider how strangely
skilful and delicate a Workmanship must be employed to contrive into so narrow
a compass, the several Parts Internal and External, requisite to make up this
little Animal; how many must go to the texture of the Eyes, and other Organs
of Sense; how many to the Snout (which he has, not unlike a Hog) and the
several parts of it; how many to the Stomach and Guts, and the other Inward
Parts addicted to the digestion of Aliment, and exclusion of Excrements; and to
be short, how inimaginably subtle must be the Animal Spirits running too and
from Nerves suitable in such little Legs: And if, as we have observed them to
multiply by Eggs, the little Creatures be hatched in those little Eggs, after
the manner of diverse other Oviparous Animals, how much smaller then a hatched
Mite must be a Mite upon the Animation of its delineated Parts? since in Hens
Eggs we have sometimes seen the Chick manifestly alive, and its Limbs clearly
delineated, whilst yet it took up so small a portion of the Egg, that both the
White and the Yolk (betwixt which it is generated, and not of the Chalaza or
Tredle, as Aquapendente and other Moderns teach) seemed to be sometimes yet
entire, as well as involved in their peculiar Membranes. But it is not so
conspicuous in gradient Animals (if I may so speak) as in swimming ones; How
vastly disproportionate Masses of Matter the wise Former of all things can
fashion into living Engines. For Whales are much more stupendous Creatures
then Elephants: And not to mention what Hartenius (apud Johnstonum) tells us of
twenty sorts of Whales, whereof the eighteenth Species, which he calls
Nordhwal, is by him related to be Ninety Else long; but what Else he means, I
know not: Nor to mention those less incredible Accounts which are given of the
vastness of Whales by our English Navigators, who are wont to Fish for them; I
shall only set down what is related by one of the eminentest Modern Lyncean
Philosophers, because he speaks as an Eyewitness, Jo: Fabe^ Lynceu^ in hi^
Exposit^on of some Passages of p. 568.
when he tells us, That in the Year 1624, there was cast upon a place near
Santa Severa, about 30 Miles from Rome, a dead Whale of 91 Psalms in length,
and 50 in thickness: He adds, That its Mouth was 16 Palms long, and 10 high; in
which, being opened and kept gaping; a Man on Horseback might find competent
room; this Mouth being used to harbor a Tongue of twenty Palms (which may make
out fifteen Foot) in length. The same inquisitive Writer adds, That four Years
before, near the Island of Corsica, not far from the Coast of Italy, another
Whale was cast, One hundred Foot long; which being a Female, was found to be
big with a Cub of thirty Foot long, 1500 pound weight. But that which will let
you see, Pyrophilus, the disproportion betwixt there kind of Fishes and common
Elephants, is, that which the same Author adds, That the Lord only, or Fat (as
he speaks Carnea pinguedo) of this corpulent Creature, weighed One hundred and
thirty five thousand pound, that is, above Twenty seven times the weight of the
whole Elephant, which was caused to be weighed by Peireskius. And though the
Omnipotent Creator be able to make swimming Creatures of such prodigious
bigness, that the Ocean it self may seem to be but a proportionate Pond for
such Fishes; yet is the same Omniscient Continuer, as able to make a swimming
Engine more slender then a Cheese mite, and so little, that a small part of a
Grain may outweigh diverse of them. For, Pyrophilus, I must here acquaint you
with a strange Observation, which I have been informed to have been some while
since made in Italy by Panarola a Famous Physician in Rome, who is said, by the
help of an excellent Microscope, to have discerned in Vinegar small Living
Creatures, which he takes to be Worms. The mention of so unlikely an
Experiment, made me engage some excellent Philosophers and Mathematicians to
assist me in examining it: But though our Microscopes exceeded the best that
were brought us over from Rome, yet all our diligence and attention did but
make them conclude that Panarola's Eyes had been deluded. Notwithstanding
which, causing a somewhat hollow bottom of pure Crystalline Glass to be fitted
to my Microscope, I prosecuted the Enquiry my self; and at length was so lucky,
as not only to discover these little Creatures with a Microscope, but by
holding the Liquor in a Crystal Viol, almost upon the strong Flame of a Candle,
to discover multitudes of them with my naked Eyes, as weak as they are. But
though I have already convinced those that formerly derided such Observations,
as not to be made with the best Microscope, yet the great weakness of my Sight
has not permitted me to perfect my Observations concerning these Creatures. And
therefore reserving the more particular mention of this odd Observation till
another time, I shall now only tell you as much as is pertinent to our present
purpose; namely, That having with a certain parcel of strong White Wind Vinegar
(for it is not in every Vinegar that they are constantly to be found) filled up
to the top thin Viols with long and slender Necks; and having likewise with the
same Liquor filled other small Crystalline Viols, though short-neck'd, and held
them betwixt my Eye and the Sun, or a Window open toward it, or very near a
great Candle, I have often in these Glasses, especially in their slender Necks,
after having a while fixed my Eye on them (attention being in this case very
necessary) admiringly observed great numbers (and sometimes as it were Shoals)
of living Creatures, which seemed to be rather Fishes then Worms; for they swim
freely up and down the Liquor, and often hover about the top of it, with a
wrigling motion, like that of Eels, to which likewise their long and slender
shape resembles them. And though these swimming Creatures be not all exactly of
a size, yet some of them seemed slenderer then any sort of living ones, that
has hitherto been taken notice of by the unassisted Eye: And I remember, that
having looked in a good Microscope upon one of them, and a Cheesemite much
about the same time, the Fish appeared so slender, that we judged it not much
thicker then one of the Legs of the Mite: So that considering what a vast deal
of matter the great Creator can manage and fashion into a Whale, and in how
little room he can contrive all the parts requisite to constitute a Fish, we
may justly say to him in the Psalmists Language, Psalm. ^6.^.
There is none like unto thee (O Lord) neither are there any works like unto
thy works.

The last of the three Properties of God, which we mentioned him to have
manifested in the Creation, is his Goodness; Of which all his Creatures do in
their due measure partake, partly by their having a Being vouchsafed them, and
partly by their being preserved in it as long as their subordination to higher
purposes, and to more powerful creatures do permit, by that supporting
Influence of God which keeps them from relapsing into their first Nothing;
according to that memorable Passage, where Nehemiah having mentioned God as the
Creator of the Heavens, the Earth, the Seas, N^hem. 9.6.
and all the Creatures belonging to them, He calls Him the Preserver, or (as
the Original has it) The enlivener of them all. And as for Animals, who are
more capable of enjoying, though not most of them of discerning His bounty, His
Goodness to them is more conspicuous. For besides that in Scripture he is
called The Preserver both of Man and Beast, and accordingly is said to give
food even to the young Ravens that cry, Genesis 8.1.
and to have after the Flood remembered not only Noah, but every living thing
that was with him in the Ark, His Goodness to them is apparent by the
plentiful and easily attainable provision he makes according to the exigence of
their several Natures. For that innumerable swarm of various Birds, Beasts,
Fishes, Reptiles, and other Animals that People the Terrestrial Globe, and the
contiguous parts of the World, and by his endowing each of them, with all the
Qualifications requisite to the perpetuation of their Species, and the
preservation of their Lives, as far forth as is consistent with his Ends in
their Creation. But most resplendent does the Goodness of God appear toward
his Favorite Creature, Man, whom having vouchsafed to ennoble with his own
Image, he makes most of the Creatures of the world visible to us, pay homage to
him, and in some manner or degree do him service: God's liberality at once
bestowing on him all those Creatures by endowing him with a Reason enabling him
to make use of them; so that even those Creatures which he is not able to
subdue by his Power, he is able to make serviceable to him by his Knowledge; as
those vast Globes of Light, which are so far above him, that their Immensity
and Brightness can scarce render them visible to him, are by man's
Mathematics forced to give him an account of all their Motions, and waiting
upon his Dials keep time for him; and even the defects of such works of Nature,
are by man's skill made serviceable to him, as the Eclipses of the Moon serve
Geographers notably in that difficult and useful work of finding Longitudes.
The Stars serve for Candles to give man light, and the Celestial Orbs are his
Candlesticks. He breaths the Air, the Fire wa^mes him, and serves him not only
in his Kitchen, but to master most other Bodies in his furnaces. The Clouds
water his Land, the Earth supports him and his Buildings, the Sea and winds
convey him and his Floating-houses to the remotest parts of the World, and
enable him to possess every where almost all that Nature or Art has provided
for him any where. The Earth produces him an innumerable multitude of Beasts to
feed, cloth, and carry him; of Flowers and Jewels to delight and adorn him;
of Fruits, to sustain and refresh him; of Stones and Timber, to lodge him; of
Simples, to cure him; and in sum, the whole sublunary World is but his
Magazine. And it seems the grand business of restless Nature so to constitute
and manage his Productions, as to furnish him with Necessaries, Accommodations,
and Pleasures.

Of such a Number of Plants, Animals, Metals, Minerals, etc. that people and
enrich the Terrestrial Globe, perhaps there is not any one, of which Man might
not make an excellent use, had he but an insight into its Nature: nor are the
most abject and despicable therefore the least useful. There is not any Stone,
no not the sparkling Diamond it self, to whom Man is so much beholden, as he is
to the dark and unpromising Lodestone, without which the New-World probably
had never been detected, and many Regions of the Old World would have little or
no commerce with each other. Nor have the Lion, the Eagle, and the Whale,
joined all together (though reputed the Chief of Birds, Beasts, and Fishes)
been so serviceable to M^n, as that despicable Insect, The Silkworm. And if we
impartially consider the Lucriferousness (if I may speak in my Lord of St
Albans Style) of the properties of Things, and their Medical Virtues, we shall
find, That we trample upon many things, for which we should have cause to
kneel, and offer God Praises, if we knew all their Qualities and Uses: But of
this subject we may elsewhere purposely treat.

To which I must only add, Pyrophilus, That you will injure Nature, if you
suppose, either that all the Concretes, endowed with excellent Properties, have
long since been notorious, or that all the Medicinal Virtues of Simples,
commonly used, are already known; or that all those Concretes are destitute of
considerable Properties, to whom none have been yet ascribed by eminent
Authors. For almost every day either discloses new Creatures, or makes new
Discoveries of the usefulness of things; almost each of which has yet a kind
of Terra incognita, or undetected part in it: How many new Concretes, rich in
Medicinal virtues, does the New World present the Inquisitive Physicians of the
Old? Notatu dignum (says the Ingenious Piso, in his newly published Medicina
Brasileensis, lib. 1.) quod eximiae tot arbores, frutices, and innumerae
herbae, figura, foliis and fructibus a veteris orbis Vegetabilibus, paucis
exceptis, dissimillimae appareant. Idem de avibus, animantibus and piscibus
deprehenditur, ut and insectis alatis, atque alis destitutis; quae ineffabili
colorum pulchritudine and portentosa multitudine generantur, partim nota nobis,
partim incognita. And of the known American Simples, How many latent Virtues
does experience from time to time discover? And (to mention now no others) the
Febrifugal property of that Peruvian Tree, called by the Natives Gannanaperide,
whose Bark, called commonly China Febris, has been at Rome, and freshly also at
London, found so wonderfully eff^ctual against those stubborn Diseases,
Quartain Agues; and though a Lea^ned Author endeavors to depreciate it, by
alleging, That it is wont rather to suspend the Fits, then truly cure the
Disease, which after awhile will return again; yet, besides that, it may be
often very beneficial to a weakened Patient, to have his Fits put off, the
Physitia^ thereby also gaining Opportunities to employ strengthening and
preventing Remedies: Besides this, I say, if you will credit that great Person,
Sir Kenelm Digby, it is rather the Patients or Doctors fault, then the
Medicines, if the Disease return. For having purposely consulted him about this
Objection against the Use of the Cortex Febrifugus, he solemnly assured me,
That of betwixt Twenty and Thirty Persons, that he had himself cured of
Quartanes by this Remedy, not so many as Two fell into a Relapse.

And now I am upon the more freshly discovered Virtues of American Drugs, I
might acquaint you with the admirable Properties, not only in Diseases, but
even in Wounds of a certain Mineral, which (though careful examination of it
has not yet taught me to what Species of Stones to reduce it) you cannot but
have heard mentioned with wonder, under the name of Sir Walter Raleigh's Stone,
which my Father, (...), enjoyed, and did strange things with for many years,
and by his Will bequeathed (as the highest Legacy he could leave him) to his
dearest Friend, the most Learned and Famous B^ Usher, Primate of Ireland: But
of this Stone, the merit of the subject makes me reserve what I have to say, to
a Discourse, wherein I may be allowed to say more to it then now I dare: and
therefore I shall proceed to tell you, that it is not in the Simples of the New
World only, that new Medicinal properties may be discovered; for even those
which daily obtrude themselves upon our careless Eyes, or are trampled under
our regardlesse Feet, may possess Virtues, to which the major part of
Botanists are mere Strangers. To which purpose, I remember that I have often
gathered a little short-lived and despicable Plant, with which alone (slightly
infused in Beer) I lately knew a young Kinsman of Sir Kenelm D^gby's, in few
Days, and without pain, as both Himself, his Mother, and his Physician assured
me, cured of that stubborn and seldom vanquished Disease of the Kings Evil,
against which it does Wonders; and yet having consulted not only some of the
famousest and recentest Herbals, both English and Latin, about this, but also
enquired of two or three eminent Herbarists, I could find neither any such
Virtue, nor almost any at all, ascribed by Authors to that excellent Plant.

And whereas Gods bounty to Man in the Creatures, seems a little clouded and
straightened by his permitting some Poisonous Plants and Venomous Animals to
have a Being in Nature; to that it may be replied, First, That many Poisonous
Bodies contain their own Antidotes; insomuch that the diligent Piso, who has
had great opportunities to examine the Effects of both, ventures to say,
treating of the Poisons and Antidotes to be met with in Brasil, Equidem vix
dixeris, Venena an Alexiteria plura sint pronata: and a little lower, Sic
folia, flores, and fructus herbarum Tangaraca and Juquerii, venena Brasiliae
facile prima, propriam suam unaquaeque radicem oppositum habet Antidotum: and a
little after, Barbari viperarum pinguedinem and capita, tum and integra Insecta
quae vulnera intulerint, ex art parata, audacter and felici cum successu
venenatis ictibus applicant; adeoque per ipsos effectus comprobare nituntur in
omni veneno contineri suum Antidotum: And next, that the noxiousnesse of many
(and therefore not improbably of all of them) is not so incorrigible, but that
by Man's Art and Chemical Preparations, they may be made, not only innocent and
harmless, but useful too. This Truth, Pyrophilus, Antimony and Quicksilver,
and some other noxious Bodies (which Men have learned to make Medicinal) have
already taught our Modern Physicians; who prescribe, even in their
Dispensatories, diverse Medicines made out of those churlish Minerals, to which,
in the ensuing Discourses, you will find diverse others (perhaps not inferior)
added. That Opium is reckoned by Physicians among Poisons, I need not tell you;
and yet such powerful Remedies may be made with it for many desperate Cases,
especially in hot Countries, that the good it may do, so much exceeds the
harm, that Physicians would be so^ry there were none of it in the World. The
Oil of Scorpions is not only Antidotal against their Stings, but is witnessed,
by experience, to be very useful to bring away the descending Stone of the
Kidneys, and to remedy diverse other Mischiefs, besides those that Scorpions can
do. And to these I shall need but to add one instance more, because of the
nobleness of that single one, and that is the Root Mandihoca, so common all
over the West Indies: for Nature is so far from having been a Stepmother to
Man in making that Plant abound so much in those Countries, though in its c^ude
simplicity (as the Helmontians speak it be confessedly a rank Poison, that she
has scarce in any one Plant been so bountiful to the Americans. For by a
slight and easy preparation, which we shall hereafter mention, it affords many
popu^ous Nations almost all the Bread they eat, and some of them a good part of
their Drink; the Root freed by a strong Press from the noxious Juice, and
d^y'd, affording them that Cassavie Meal, whereof they m^ke their Bread; which
by the taste and color I could not discern to be other then good. Nor is this
the only use this Poisonous Plant affords them: For the above-commended Piso
gives us this short, but comprehensive Cha^acter of it; Ex Mandihoca radice
maximo scatente veneno, optimum Alimen^u^ non solum, sed and Antidotum
concinnatur^ (lib. 3o) But ^oncerning the use that may be made of Poisonous
Cre^tu^es, we elsewhere professedly discourse: And shall therefore now proceed
to observe to you here, that I have not yet ment^on'd to you the instance which
most manifests the greatness of the Good which God intended Man in the
Creatures: For, not content to have provided him all that was requisite either
to Support or Accommodate him here, he has been pleased to contrive the World
so, that (if Man be not wanting to himself) it may afford him not only
Necessaries and Delights, but Instructions too; For each Page in the great
Volume of Nature is full of real Hieroglyphics, where (by an inverted way of
Expression) Things stand for Words, and their Qualities for Letters. The
Psalmist observes, Psalm. 19.1.
That the Heavens declare the glory of God: And indeed, they celebrate his
Praises, though with a soundless Voice, yet with so loud a one (and which gives
us the Moral of Plato's exploded notion of the Music of the Spheres) to our
intellectual Ears, that he scruples not to affirm, that There is no Speech nor
Language where their voice is not heard (or as Junius and Tremellius render it,
without violence to the Hebrew Text, There is no Speech nor Words; yet without
these their Voice is understood) and that their Line is gone throughout all the
earth; that is (as the Learned Diodati expounds it) their Writing in gross and
plain Draughts, and their Words to the end of the World: Their Language having
so escaped the confusion of Tongues, that these Natural and Immortal Preachers
give all Nations occasion to say of them, as the Assembly at Pentecost did of
the Inspired Apostles, Acts 2.11.
We do hear them speak in our Tongues the wonderful Works of God.

Nor can we without listening to these Sermons, derive the entire (perhaps not
the chiefest) Benefit designed us in the Creatures: For sure, that God, who
has composed us both of Body and Soul, has not confined the uses of so many
admirable Creatures, and so much inimitable Workmanship to that ignoble part of
Man which coupleth him to the Beasts, with the neglect of that Diviner Portion,
which allies him to the Angels; vouchsafing to the Lord of the Creature^ in the
fruition of this his Palace, no higher Prerogative then he is pleased to allow
to the Brutes, that serve but to complete the variety requisite for its
embellishment. Of this Opinion I lately found that excellent Writer, St
Austine, to have been before me: For, Non debes uti oculis (says he) ut pecus,
tantum ut videas, quae addas ventri, non menti: utere, ut homo, intend Coelum,
and intend Facta, and quaere Factorem; aspice quae vides, and quaere quem non
vides, creed in eum quem non vides, propter ista quae vides. Nolite fieri sicut
equus and mulus, etc.

Nor can the Creatures only inform Man of Gods Being and Attributes (as we
have already seen) but also instruct him in his own Duties: D. Aug. Hom. 3.
For we may say of the World, as St Austin did of the Sacraments, that it is
Verbum visibile. And certainly, God has never so confined himself to instruct
Men by Words or Types, as not to reserve himself the liberty of doing it by
things: Witness his appointing the Rainbow to Preach his Goodness to all
Nations, and fortify the Faith of Mankind against the fear of a second
Deluge. It Is something to high a saying for an Heathen, that of Plato, where he
teaches, That the World is Gods Epistle, written to Mankind. For by Solomon
God sends the Sluggard to school to the Ant, to learn a provident Industry:
Christ commands his Disciples to learn of Serpents and Pigeons prudence and
inoffensiveness: The same Divine Teacher enjoins his Apostles to consider the
Lilies, or (as some would have it) the Tulips of the Field, and to learn thence
that difficult Virtue of a distrustless relyance upon God: 1 Cor. 15.36, 37.
And St Paul seems almost angry with the Corinthians, That their Faith, in so
abstruse Mysteries as that of the Resurrection, was not informed and
strengthened, by considering the meliorating death of Corn committed to the
Earth: And the Royal Poet learns Humility, by the Contemplation of the most
elevated parts of Nature; When I consider (says he) the Heavens, the work of
thy Fingers, the Moon and Stars which thou have ordained, Psalm. 8.3, 4.
What is Man, that thou visitest him? Thus you may see that God intended the
World should serve Man, not only for a Palace to live in, and to gaze on, but
for a School of Virtue; to which his Philanthropy reserves such inestimable
Rewards, that the Creatures can, on no account, be so beneficial to Man, as by
promoting his Piety, by a competent degree of which, Gods goodness has made no
less then Eternal Felicity attainable.

ESSAY III. Containing a Continuation of the Former.
HAving thus, Pyrophilus, endeavored to evince, that the Opinion that would
deter Men from the scrutiny of Nature, is not a little prejudicial to Man's
Interests, and does very much lessen the Advantages he may derive from the
Creatures, both in relation to his accommodation in this Life, and his Felicity
in the next: Let us proceed to consider, whether the Doctrine we oppose do not
likewise tend, in its own nature (though not in the Intentions of its Patrons)
to defeat God of much of that Glory which Man both ought and might ascribe to
him, both for himself and the rest of the Creatures. How unlikely is it that we
should be able to offer to God that Glory, Praise, and Admiration, he both
expects and merits from such a contemplation of the Creatures, as though it be
requisite to the true knowledge of their Nature and Properties, is yet supposed
either pernicious, or at least dangerous, You, Pyrophilus, or any other
impartial Person may easily determine.

For the Works of God are not like the Tricks of Juglers, or the Pageants that
entertain Princes, where concealment is requisite to wonder; but the knowledge
of the Works of God proportions our admiration of them, they participating and
disclosing so much of the inexhausted Perfections of their Author, that the
further we contemplate them, the more Footsteps and Impressions we discover of
the Perfections of their Creator; and our utmost Science can but give us a
juster veneration of his Omniscience. And as when some Country Fellow looks
upon a curious Watch, though he may be hugely taken with the rich Enamel of the
Case, and perhaps with some pretty Landscape that adorns the Dial-plate; yet
will not his Ignorance permit him so advantageous a Notion of the exquisite
Makers skill, as that little Engine will form in some curious Artist, who
besides that obvious Workmanship that first entertains the Eye, considers the
exactness, and knows the use of every Wheel, takes notice of their proportion,
contrivance, and adaptation altogether, and of the hidden Springs that move
them all: So in the World, though every Peruser may read the existence of a
Deity, and be in his degree affected with what he sees, yet is he utterly
unable to descry there those subtler Characters and Flourishes of Omniscience,
which true Philosophers are sharp-sighted enough to discern. The existence of
God is indeed so legibly written on the Creatures, that (as the Scripture
speaks in another sense) He may run that reads it; Habb. 2.2.
that is, even a perfunctory Beholder, that makes it not his business, may
perceive it. But that this God has manifested in these Creatures a Power, a
Wisdom, and a Goodness worthy of himself, needs an attentive and diligent
Surveyor to discover. How different notions of Gods Wisdom do the Eggs of Hens
produce in the ordinary Eaters of them, and in curious Naturalists, who
carefully watch and diligently observe from time to time the admirable progress
of Nature in the Formation of a Chick, from the first change appearing in the
Cicatricula (or little whitish speck discernable in the Coat of the Eggs Yolk)
to the breaking of the Egg-shell by the perfectly hatched Bird, and on Natures
exquisite method in the order and fashioning of the parts, make such
Philosophical reflections as you may meet with (not to mention what Aristotle
and Fabricius ab Aquapendente, have observed on that subject) in the Ingenious
Treatise of Generation, which our accurate and justly Famous Anatomist, Dr
Highmore, has been pleased to Dedicate to me; and in the excellent
Exercitations, De Ovo, of that great Promoter of Anatomical Knowledge, Dr
Harvey. And whereas it may be alleged, That the Attributes of God, which are
not taught us, but after much speculation of the World, are things of which no
Man but an Atheist doubts; to this it may be replied, That besides that, it ill
becomes the sense we ought to have of our weakness to despise any helps
vouchsafed us of God to assist us to know or serve him; besides this, I say,
God loving, as he deserves, to be honored in all our Faculties, and
consequently to be glorified and acknowledged by the acts of Reason, as well as
by those of Faith, there must be sure found a great disparity betwixt that
general, confused, and lazy Idea we commonly have of his Power and Wisdom, and
the distinct, rational, and affecting notions of those Attributes which are
formed by an attentive inspection of those Creatures in which they are most
legible, and which were made chiefly for that very end. The Queen of Sheba had
heard in her own Country a very advantageous Fame of the Wisdom of Solomon; but
when the curiosity of a personal Visit made her an Eyewitness of those
particular both exquisite Structures, and almost Divinely prudent Conducts and
Contrivances wherein that Wisdom did inimitably display it self, she then brake
forth into Pathetick and Venerating Exclamations, that acknowledged how much
juster and improved a Character (of his Wisdom) her Eyes had now given her,
then formerly her Ears had done.

Very like a Philosopher, methinks, does the Great Mercurius Trismegistus (if
we grant him to be the Author of the Books ascribed to him) speak, when he
tells his Son, There can be no Religion more true or just, Merc. Trism. lib. 1.

Englished by Dr. Everard.


then to know the things that are, and to acknowledge thanks for all things to
him that made them; which thing I shall not cease to do: (he continues) Be
Pious and Religious, O my Son! for he that does so is the best and highest
Philosopher; and without Philosophy it is impossible ever to attain to the
height and exactness of Piety and Religion. And 'twas perhaps, Pyrophilus, to
engage us to an industrious industrious indagation of the Creatures, that God
made Man so indigent, and furnished him with such a multiplicity of Desires; so
that whereas other Creatures are content with those few obvious and easily
attainable necessaries, that Nature has almost every where provided for them;
In Man alone, every sense has store of greedy Appetites, for the most part of
Superfluities and Dainties, that to relieve his numerous Wants, or satisfy his
more numerous Desires, He might be obliged with an inquisitive Industry to
Range, Anatomize, and Ransack Nature, and by that concerned survey come to a
more exquisite Admiration of the Omniscient Author. To illustrate this subject
yet a little further, Pyrophilus, give me leave to observe to you, That
Philosophers of almost all Religions have been, by the contemplation of the
World, moved to consider it under the notion of a Temple: Ne adoremus (says
Plutarch) Elementa, Coelum, Solemn, Lunam, etc. specula sunt haec, in quibus
artem illius singularem intueamur, qui mundum condidit, and adornavit; nec est
aliud Mundus quam Templum ejus: Let us not venerate the Elements, the Heaven,
the Sun, the Moon, etc. these are but Miroirs, wherein we may behold his
excellent Art, who framed and adorned the World; nor is the World any thing
else but his Temple: Homines (says Cicero) tuentur illum Globum, quem in Templo
hoc medium vides, qui terra dicitur: Men abide upon that Globe which you see in
the m^ddle of this Temple, and is called the Earth; which Macrobius handsomely
thus expounds: Quicquid humano aspectui subjicitur, Templum ejus vocavit qui
sola mente concipitur, ut qui haec veneratur ut templa, cultum tamen maximum
debeat Conditori, sciatque quisquis in usum Templi hujus inducitur, ritu sibi
vivendum sacerdotis: All that humane view reaches, he terms his Temple, who is
apprehended by the mind alone; to the end that who so reverences these things
as Temples, might render the greatest worship to the Maker; and every one that
is brought to converse in this Temple, might know himself obliged to live like
a Priest.

And the Lofty Seneca (to mention now no other Heathens) in diverse passages of
his excellent Writings, styles the World a Temple; and I remember in his
Treatise, De Beneficiis, he avers in terms not unworthy his Mind or his
Subject, Totum mundum Deorum esse immortalium Templum, Sen. li. 7. cap. ^.
solum quidem amplitudine illorum ac magnificentia dignum. That the whole World
is the Temple of the immortal Gods, being alone worthy of their Grandeur and
Magnificence. The assent of the Jewish Philosophers, to this Notion, you may be
pleased to receive from their Eloquent Philo, Philo Jud. de Monarchia.
who not only gives the World the Name of Temple, but gives us this account of
that appellation; Templum Dei supremum and vere tale existimare totum hunc
mundum, qui sacrartum quidem habet, purissimam rerum naturae partem, Coelum;
ornamenta, stellas; sacerdotes, administros potentiae ejus, Angelos, and
incorporeas animas. The whole World is to be accounted the chiefest Template
of God; the Sanctu^ Sanctoru^ of it is the purest part of the Universe, Heaven;
the ornam^nts, the Stars; the Priests, the Ministers of His Power, Angels, and
immaterial Souls. And as for Christian Philosophers, I suppose it would be
needless to enumerate the passages wherein they adapt the Notion of the World
already mentioned; and therefore I shall content my self to add, Heb. ^.2, 5.
that the Scripture it self seems to Authorize it by representing to us in the
8th and 9th Chapters of the Epistle to the Hebrews, the Mosaical Tabernacle, as
an adumbration of that Great Temple of the World; and particularly there is a
signal Text in the latter of those Chapters, Heb. 9.24.
where it is said that Christ is not entered into Holy places made with Hands
[(...)] which are copies of the true [(...)] but into Heaven it self, now to
appear in the presence of God for us.

Upon what account, Pyrophilus, I esteem the World a Temple, I may elsewhere
have occasion to Declare; but this for the present: It will not be rash to
infer that if the World be a Temple, Man sure must be the Priest, ordained (by
being qualified) to celebrate Divine Service not only in it, but for it. For as
in Schools, when the Prince or some munificent Benefactor confers some large
possession or rich annuity upon the Foundation, though all the Boys be
concerned in the benefit, yet because most of them are too young to be sensible
of it, or too unlearned to be able to make the retribution of a handsome
acknowledgment, either the Master or that other person of the Society, who is
most capable and the best spoakesman, is by a kind of natural right engaged to
the duty of returning praise and thanks, not for himself alone, but in the name
of all the rest: So in the World, where there are so many inanimate and
irrational Creatures, that neither understand how much they owe to their
Creator, by owing him even themselves, nor are born to a condition inabling
them to acknowledge it; Man, as born the Priest of Nature, and as the most
obliged and most capable member of it, is bound to return Thanks and Praises
to his Maker, not only for himself but for the whole Creation. In which sense
we may reconcile those two current Assertions, That God made all things for His
own Glory, and that God made all things for Man, and Man for himself. Since
whether or no Man be a Microcosme or Little World in Paracelsus's sense, if not
as a resembler, yet as a representer of the Macrocosme or Great World, he
presents with his own adorations the Homages of all the Creatures to their
Creator, though they be ignorant of what is done, as Infants under the Law were
of the sacrifices offered on their account. And in this Relation may the
Creatures answer the Solemn invitation made them in the whole 148 Psalm, and
numerous other Scriptures: which they may do (to borrow a barbarous but
significant School-terme) objectively, though not formally; I mean, by proving
occasions, though not singers of his praises, and being such objects as prompt
and invite Man to pay God that praise upon their score, which they cannot
actually pay him themselves; even God's mutest works being capable of being
said to praise him in the same sense (though in an incomparably transcendenter
degree) that Solomon says of his virtuous Woman (in the last Verse of the
Proverbs) Let her own Works praise her in the Gates; that is, Prove. 3^.^3.
give the considerers of them occasion to extol her: and thus by man's
referring the knowledge of the Creature to the Creator's Glory, it becomes in
some sense, and congruously to its own Nature, the praiser of its Maker, as may
seem intimated in this Economy of the Last part of one of the Psalms, Bless
the Lord, all ye His Hosts, Ps. 103:
the Ministers of His that do His pleasure. Bless the Lord, all His Works, in
all places of His Dominion: Bless the Lord, O my Soul. Where by shutting up
the rest of God's Creatures betwixt Angels and Man's Soul, he seems to
insinuate that the irrational Creatures bless the Lord by the mouth of those
that are Intelligent.

And truly, Pyrophilus, I fear it may relish a little of selfishnesse, to make
such a disparity betwixt Perfections, all of them equal, because all of them
infinite, as to let God's mercy, because it most advantages us, so to ingrosse
our thoughts, and wonder, as to make us neglect the contemplation of those
other Glorious Attributes, his Power and his VVisdome, which were those that
exacted both Man and Angels adoration, before sin gave occasion to the exercise
of the first. And I shall not scruple to confess unto you, that I dare not
confine the Acts of Devotion to those which most men suppose to comprise the
whole exercise of it; not that I at all undervalue, or would depreciate any,
even the meanest practices of Devotion, which either Scripture or reason
consonant to it recommends; but that I esteem that God may be also acceptably
(and perhaps more nobly) served and glorified by our entertaining of high,
rational, and as much as our nature is capable of worthy notions, attended with
a profound and proportionable admiration of those divine Attributes and
Prerogatives for whose manifesting he was pleased to construct this vast
Fabric.

To which purpose I consider, that in the Life to come, when we shall
questionless glorify God exactliest, we shall have little either need or use
of Faith, Prayer, Liberality, Patience, and resembling Graces; but our Worship
will chiefly consist in elevated Notions, and a prostrate Veneration of Gods
Omnipotence, Wisdom, Goodness, and other Perfections; and such a one as this is
represented in the Apocalypse, to be the present employment of the Blessed Spirits
in Heaven, where the Elders that assist about the Throne of God, are described,
casting their Crowns before it, and saying to him that sits on it, Thou art
worthy, O Lord, to receive Glory, and Honor, and Power: for thou have created
all things, Rev. 4.11.
and for thy pleasure they are and were created.

By this time, Pyrophilus, I hope you begin to think, that the Doctrine that
tends to deter Men from enquiring into Nature, is as well derogatory from Gods
Glory, as prejudicial to Man's Interests. And indeed, I purposed to content my
self with the having dispersed throughout the past Discourse, the grounds of
answering their Objection against the study of Physiology, who pretend it is
apt to make Men Atheists: But because I am much concerned to have you satisfied
of so important a Truth, as that which we have hitherto been laboring to
evince, I must beg your leave, Pyrophilus, to add, ex abundanti (as they
speak) to what has been already alleged, some things that may more directly
answer the Objection of our Adversaries, and manifest how little their severity
is befriended, either by Scripture, Reason, or Experience.

And first, it seems not at all probable, That if the Omniscient Author of
Nature knew that the study of his Works did really tend to make Men dis-believe
his Being or Attributes, he would have given Men so many Invitations, and
almost Necessities, to study and contemplate the Nature of his Creatures: Of
these Invitations diverse have been mentioned already, and more might be added
to them, if we thought it requisite. But what has been above alleged, will
make us forbear the annexing of any, save that of the ancient Institution of
the Sabbath, which many eminent Divines do not groundlesly hold to have been
ordained to commemorate the Creation, and give Men the opportunity every
Seventh Day to contemplate God in his Works, as he himself was pleased to rest
on the first Seventh Day, and contemplate Himself in the works of the first
six. And though our Western Churches, for certain Reasons (not here to be
inquired into) have long since disused the Solemnizing of the Saturday, and
appointed the Sunday for the Celebration of both the Works of the Redemption,
and Creation of the World together; yet it is evident enough that the Primitive
Christians did for the most part keep the Saturday as Holy Day, as well as the
Sunday: For that ancient Book (whoever be resolved to have written it) which
goes under the Name of Clement's Constitutions, affords us, among others, these
two memorable Passages to our purpose: And first, Lib. 7. cap. 24.
(...) (says he) (...). Keep the Sabbath and the Lords Day as Holy Days; that
being dedicated to the remembrance of the Creation, and this to that of the
Redemption: To which we shall add this second Passage of the same Author,
(...), etc. Let Servants work for five days; but on the Sabbath, and the
Lord's Day, let them attend in the Church the Doctrine of Godliness. To which
purpose, I remember the most Learned Grotius observes, See of the Abyssine or
Ethiopian Christians; and likewise of the Maron^tes in the East, in reference
to their Celebration of the Saturday, Alex: Rasse in his view of all Religions,
and the Authors by him ci^ed.
That the converted Emperor Constantine, forbad the compelling Christians to
appear before Tribunals on either of those Days, as being their Festivals: Nay,
and if Modern Travelers do not mis-inform me, I find that diverse of the
Eastern Churches, particularly the Abyssine Christians, to this day do as well
sanctify the Sabbath Day in commemoration of Gods having created the World, as
the Lord's Day to commemorate the Resurrection of Christ. And as for the Jews
sense of the Fourth Commandment, some of the Learned of their Critics are
pleased to distinguish betwixt the Words Zachor and Smor, Remember and Keep,
employed in the Command of solemnizing the Sabbath: For, the remembering of it
they hold to be an act of Religion, performable by all Mankind that are
capable of it, and acquainted with its having been commanded; though the
keeping of it Holy they suppose only enjoined to the Israelites: On, which
occasion, I remember I was one Sabbath Day entertained at his own Lodgings, by
a Learned Jew (who taught me the Holy Language) with Meat then newly dressed:
to remove my wonder at which, he told me, That it was dressed by Christians,
who, being Gentiles, were not obliged to the strict and legal observation of
the Sabbath. But whatever be to be thought of this Jewish Notion, yet
questionless if the Fourth Commandment do not, at least, diverse other Passages
of Scripture do much discountenance their severity, who would fright Men from
the indagation of Nature. And he that shall duly consider diverse Texts obvious
enough in the Book of Job, and the Psalms (besides other parts of the Bible)
will not readily conclude, that Natural Philosophy and Divinity are at such
variance, as the Divines we deal with would persuade us. Romans 1.20.
St Paul seems to inform us, that the invisible things of God from the Creation
of the World, are clearly seen, being understood by the things that are made,
even his eternal Power and Godhead: So that they that were mentioned before
are without excuse. And though I ignore not, that not only several of the
Socinians following their Master Socinus, but some few Orthodox Writers, are
pleased to give a very differing Interpretation of that Text, and make the
(...), to signify those things of God that have been Invisible ever since the
Creation of the World, and referring the (...) to things not made, as we
Translate it, but done (as the Miracles of Christ and his Apostles) yet I see
no necessity why the (...) should be taken in a sense exclusive of the
Creation, and not at least admitted to take in all the Ways and Methods
employed by God to manifest the invisible things there intimated unto Man: And
certainly, however St Paul may be supposed to appear but darkly, yet Job was
clearly of a differing Opinion from theirs, who teach, That the study of Nature
leads to Atheism: For ask now the Beasts (says he) and they will teach thee,
Job 12.7, 8, 9.
and the Fowls of the Air, and they shall tell thee: or speak to the Earth, and
it shall teach thee, and the Fishes of the Sea shall declare unto thee. Who
knows not in all these that the hand of the Lord has wrought this? And
consonantly hereunto (which 'twere not amiss for our Adversaries to take notice
of) we may observe, That almost all the Writers of Natural Theology, and the
most also of those that have labored to demonstrate the Truth of Christian
Religion (diverse of whom have been as well Profound Divines, as otherwise
Eminent Scholars) have undertaken to evince, by the consideration of the
Universe, both that there is a God, and that he is the Author of it: Which I
the rather mention, Pyrophilus, because I would not be mistaken, as if I
disputed against Divines in general, or were guilty of the least Irreverence
toward a Faculty, in whose Study I have thought my self obliged, as a
Christian, to spend much of my time; and especially, I would not appear
dis-respectful to Divines in England, where they have already been but too much
vilified, though questionless for their Sins against God, yet, I fear, not
without the Sin of their Oppressors.

In the next place I consider, That since Physiology is said to tempt to
Atheism, but by enabling Men to give an account of all the Phenomenon of
Nature, by the knowledge of Second Causes, without taking in the First, it will
not be so easy a matter as many presume, for the contemplation of Nature, to
turn a considering Man Atheist. For we are yet, for ought I can find, far
enough from being able to explicate all the Phenomenon of Nature by any
Principles whatsoever. And even of the Atomical Philosophers, whose Sect seems
to have the most ingeniously attempted it, some of the eminentest have
themselves freely acknowledged to me, their being unable to do it convincingly
to others, or so much as satisfactorily to themselves: And indeed, not only
the Generation of Animals is a Mystery, which all that Naturalists have said to
explain it, has been far enough from depriving of that Name; but we see that
to explicate all the various Phenomenon that belong to that single in^nimate,
and seemingly homogeneous Body, Mercury, so as not to make any Hypothesis
assumed to make out one of its Properties or Effects incongruous to any other
Hypothesis requisite to the explanation of any of the rest, has been hitherto
found so difficult, that if our Posterity be not much happier Unriddlers, then
our Forefathers, or we have been, it is like to prove a Task capable of
defeating the Industry and Attempts, I say not of more then one Philosopher,
but of more then one Age; even our Chemical Tortures hitherto, having, from
that deluding Proteus, forced no Confessions that bring us not more Wonder then
Satisfaction, and do not Beget almost as many Scruples as they Resolve.

ESSAY IV. Containing a requisite Digression concerning those that would
exclude the Deity from intermedling with Matter.
I Ignore not that not only Leucippus, Epicurus, and other Atomists of old,
but of late some Persons, for the most part Adorers of Aristotle's Writings,
have pretended to be able to explicate the first Beginning of Things, and the
Worlds Phenomenon, without taking in, or acknowledging any Divine Author of it:
And therefore, though we may elsewhere, by the assistance of that Author, have
an opportunity to give You an Account of our unsatisfiedness with the Attempts
made by some bold Wits in favor of such Pretensions; Yet since the main Truth
We plead for, in this Discourse, is so nearly concerned in what has been
taught by those that would keep God from being thought to have any share in the
Production of the Universe; I can scarce forbear (as unwilling as I am to
digress) to represent to You, on the present occasion, a few Considerations
which may assist You, if not to lessen the Arrogance of such Persons, at least,
to keep Your self from thinking their Evidence as great as their Confidence is
wont to be. Now of the Philosophers we speak of, some being Atomists, and
others not, it will be requisite to say something to each of the two sorts: And
because we not long since, in an Illustrious Company, where You, Pyrophilus,
are not unknown, met with one of them, who avowedly, grounded his Opinions on
the Aristotelean or vulgar Physiology, We shall first recommend to You two or
three Considerations concerning such arrogant Peripateticks (For I speak not of
that Sect in general, of which I know there are diverse excellent Men.)

First then, You will in many Passages of the following Essays, find, that
dive^s things that have been very Magisterially taught, and confidently
believed among the Followers of Aristotle, are Errors or Mistakes; and that as
several, even of the obvious Phenomenon of Nature, do contradict the common
Peripatetick Doctrine, so diverse, at least of those that are more abstruse, are
not explicable by it; and as confidently as these his Followers talk of the
expounding the very Riddles of Nature; yet I remember that he himself somewhere
(for I cannot call to mind the place) did not scruple to confess, that As the
Eyes of Owls are to the splendour of the Day, so are those of our Minds even to
things obvious and manifest.

I shall next take notice, That Philosophers, who scorn to ascribe any thing to
God, do often deceive themselves, in thinking they have sufficiently satisfied
our Enquiries, when they have given us the nearest and most immediate caus^s of
some things; whereas oftentimes the assignment of those Causes is but the
manifesting that such and such Effects may be deduced from the more Catholic
affections of things, though these be not unfrequently as abstruse as the
Phenomenon explicated by them, as having only their Effects more obvious, not
their Nature better understood: As when, for instance, an account is demanded
of that strange supposed Sympathy betwixt Quicksilver and Gold; in that we
find, that whereas all other Bodies swim upon Quicksilver, it will readily
swallow up Gold, and hide it in its Bosom. This pretended Sympathy the
Naturalist may explicate, by saying, That Gold being the only Body heavier
then Quicksilver of the same bulk, the known Laws of the Hydrostaticks make it
necessary, that Gold should sink in it, and all lighter Bodies swim on it: But
though the cause of this Effect be thus plausibly assigned, by deducing it from
so known and obvious an affection of Bodies, as Gravity, which every man is apt
to think he sufficiently understands; yet will not this put a satisfactorie
period to a severe Inquirers Curiosity, who will, perchance, be apt to
allege, Physiologo qui veritatem contemplatur ultimarum causarum cognitio non
finis est, sed initiu^ ad primas supremasque causas proficiscendi. Pluta^ch:
lib. de primo Frigido.

(...). Aristot. Ethic. Nicom. lib. 3. cap. 8.


That though the Effects of Gravity indeed be very obvious, yet the Cause and
Nature of it are as obscure as those of almost any Phenomenon it can be brought
to explicate. And that therefore he that desires no further account, desists
too soon from his Enquiries, and acquiesces long before he comes to his
Journies end. And indeed, the investigation of the true nature and adequate
cause of gravity, is a task of that difficulty, that in spite of ought I have
hitherto seen or read, I must yet retain great doubts whether they have been
clearly and solidly made out by any Man. And sure, Pyrophilus, there are diverse
Effects in Nature, of which, though the immediate Cause may be plausibly
assigned, yet if we further enquire into the Causes of those Causes, and desist
not from ascending in the Scale of Causes till we are arrived at the top of it,
we shall perhaps find the more Catholic and Primary causes of Things, to be
either certain, primitive, general and fixed Laws of Nature (or rules of Action
and Passion among the parcels of the Universal Matter) or else the Shape, Size,
Motion, and other primary Affections of the smallest parts of Matter, and of
their first Coalitions or Clusters: especially those endowed with seminal
Faculties or Properties, or (to dispatch) the admirable conspiring of the
several parts of the Universe to the production of particular Effects; of all
which it will be difficult to give a satisfactory Account, without
acknowledging an intelligent Author or Disposer of Things.

And the better to clear so weighty a Truth, let us further consider on this
occasion, That not only Aristotle, and those that, misled by his Authority,
maintain the Eternity of the World, but very many other Philosophers and
Physitian^, who ascribe so much to Nature, that they will not be reduced to
acknowledge an Author of it, are wont very much to delude both themselves and
others in the account they presume to give us, as satisfactory of the Causes or
Reasons of very many Effects: I will not instance in the Magnetic Properties
of Things, nor any of those numerous abstrusities of Nature, which it is well
known that the Aristoteleans are wont to refer to Sympathy, Antipathy, or
Occult Qualities, and strive to put Men off with empty Names, whereby they do
not so much lessen our Ignorance, as betray their own.

But I shall instance in those more obvious Phenomenon, of which they suppose
they have given us very satisfactory Accounts: If you ask one of those I speak
of, whence it comes to pass that if a Man put one end of a long Reed into a
Vessel full of Water, and suck at the other end, his Mouth will be immediately
filled with that Liquor; he will readily tell you, That the Suction drawing the
Air out of the cavity of the Reed, the Water must necessarily succeed in the
place deserted by the Air, to prevent a Vacuity abhorred by Nature. If you
likewise ask such a Man, Why to Women about a certain Age, their Purgationes
Menstruae do commonly supervene, he will think he has sufficiently answered
you, when he has told you, that about that Age, beginning to beripe for
Procreation, Nature has wisely provided that their superfluous Blood should be
sent to the Uterine Vessels, partly to dis-burthen the Mass of Blood of an
useless load, and partly to contribute Matter, or at least afford Nourishment
in case of Conception. But though these Solutions are wont to be acquiesc'd in
by such as those that give them, yet I see not how they can satisfy a rigid
Reasoner. For not now to mention what may be objected against them out of some
Modern Mechanical and Anatomical Observations, let us a little consider, that
to say that the ascent of the Water in the first Problem, proceeds from Natures
Detestation of a Vacuity, supposes that there is a kind of Anima Mundi,
furnished with various Passions, which watchfully provides for the safety of
the Universe; or that a Brute and Inanimate Creature, as Water, not only has a
power to move its heavy Body upwards, contrary (to speak in their Language) to
the tendency of its particular Nature, but knows both that Air has been sucked
out of the Reed, and that unless it succeed the attracted Air, there will
follow a Vacuum; and that this Water is withal so generous, as by ascending, to
act contrary to its particular inclination for the general good of the
Universe, like a Noble Patriot, that sacrifices his particular Interests to the
public ones of his Country.

But to show Men by an easy Experiment how little Attraction is performed to
avoid a Vacuum, I have sometimes done thus; I have taken a slender Pipe of
Glass, of about four Foot long, and putting one of the open ends of it into a
Vessel full of Quicksilver, I have sucked as stronly as I could at the other,
and caused one to watch the ascent of the Quicksilver, and mark where it was
at the highest, and I found not that at one suck, I could raise it up much
above a Foot; and having caused a couple of strong Men, one after another, to
suck at the same end of the same Pipe, I found not that either of them could
draw it up much higher. Nor did it appear that by repeated Suctions, though the
upper end of the Pipe were each time stopped, to hinder the relapse of the
Quicksilver, it could at all be raised above the seven and twenty Digits at
which it used to subsist in the Torrecellian Experiment De Vacuo: Whereas the
same end of that Tube being put into a small Vessel of Water, I could at one
suck make the Water swiftly ascend through the perpendicularly held Tube into my
Mouth, which argues, that the ascension of Liquors upon Suction, rather depends
upon the pressure of the Air, and their respective measures of Gravity and
Lightness compared to that Pressure, then it proceeds from such an abhorrency
of a Vacuum as is presumed.

And so likewise in the other Question proposed, it is implied, that there is
in a Female Body something, that knows the rule of Physicians, that of a
Plethora, the Cure is the convenient Evacuation of Blood, and that this
intelligent Faculty is wise enough also to propose to it self the double end
abovementioned, in this Evacuation, and therefore will not provide a Quantity
of Blood great enough to require an Excretion, nor begin it till the Female be
come to an Age wherein it is possible for both the Ends to be obtained; and that
also this presiding Nature is so charitable, as that Mankind might not fail,
it will make the Female subject to such Monthly Superfluities of Blood, from
which Experience informs us, that a whole Set of Diseases peculiar to that Sex,
does frequently proceed. And in a word, there is a multitude of Problems,
especially such as belong to the use of the Parts of a humane Body, and to the
Causes and Cures of the Diseases incident thereunto, in whose Explication those
we write of, content themselves to tell us, That Nature does such and such a
thing, because it was fit for her so to do; but they endeavor not to make
intelligible to us, what they mean by this Nature, and how mere, and
consequently bruit, Bodies can act according to Laws, and for determinate Ends,
without any knowledge either of the one or of the other. Let them therefore,
till they have made out their Hypothesis more intelligibly, either cease to
ascribe to irrational Creatures such Actions as in Men are apparently the
Productions of Reason and Choice, and sometimes even of Industry and Virtue; or
else let them with us acknowledge, that such Actions of Creatures in themselves
Irrational, are performed under the superintendence and guidance of a Wise and
Intelligent Author of Things. But that you may not mistake me, Pyrophilus, it
will be requisite for me, to acquaint you in two or three words with some of my
present thoughts concerning this subject: That there are some Actions so
peculiar to Man, upon the account of his Intellect and Will, that they cannot
be satisfactorily explicated after the manner of the Actings of mere corporeal
Agents, I am very much inclined to believe: And whether or no there may be some
Actions of some other Animals, which cannot well be Mechanically explicated, I
have not here leisure or opportunity to examine. But for (most of) the other
Phenomenon of Nature, methinks we may, without absurdity, conceive, That God,
of whom in the Scripture it is affirmed, That all his Works are known to him
from the Beginning; having resolved, Acts 15.18.
before the Creation, to make such a World as this of Ours, did divide (at
least if he did not create it incoherent) that Matter which he had provided
into an innumerable multitude of very variously figured Corpuscles, and both
connected those Particles into such Textures or particular Bodies, and placed
them in such Scituations, and put them into such Motions, that by the
assistance of his ordinary preserving Concourse, the Phenomenon, which he
intended should appear in the Universe, must as orderly follow, and be
exhibited by the Bodies necessarily acting according to those Impressions or
Laws, though they understand them not at all, as if each of those Creatures had
a Design of Self-preservation, and were furnished with Knowledge and Industry
to prosecute it; and as if there were diffused through the Universe an
intelligent Being, watchful over the public Good of it, and careful to
Administer all things wisely for the good of the particular Parts of it, but so
far forth as is consistent with the Good of the whole, and the preservation of
the Primitive and Catholic Laws established by the Supreme Cause. As in the
formerly mentioned Clock of Strasburg, the several Pieces making up that
curious Engine, are so framed and adapted, and are put into such a motion, that
though the numerous Wheels, and other parts of it, move several ways, and that
without any thing either of Knowledge or Design; yet each performs its part in
order to the various Ends for which it was contrived, as regularly and
uniformly as if it knew and were concerned to do its Duty; and the various
Motions of the Wheels, and other parts concur to exhibit the Phenomenon
designed by the Artificer in the Engine, as exactly as if they were animated by
a common Principle, which makes them knowingly conspire to do so, and might, to
a rude Indian, seem to be more intelligent then Cunradus Dasypodius himself,
that published a Description of it, wherein he tells the World, That he
contrived it, who could not tell the hours and measure time so accuratly as his
Clock. And according to this Notion, if you be pleased to bear it in your
memory, Pyrophilus, you may easily apprehend in what sense I use many common
Phrases, which custom has so authorized, that we can scarce write of
Physiological subjects without employing either them, or frequent and tedious
Circumlocutions in their stead: Thus when I say, that a stone endeavors to
descend toward the Center of the Earth, or that being put into a Vessel of
Water, it affects the lowest place: I mean that not such a Mathematical Point
as the Center of the Earth, has power to attract all heavy Bodies, the least
of which, it being a point, it cannot harbor; or that a Stone does really aim
at that unknown and unattainable Center; but that, as we say, that a Man
strives or endeavors to go to any place, at which he would quickly arrive, if
he were not forcibly hindered by some Body that holds him fast where he is, and
will not let him go: So a Stone may be said to strive to descend, when either
by the Magnetical Steams of the Earth, or the pressure of some subtle Matter
incumbent on it, or by what ever else may be the cause of Gravity, the Stone is
so determined to tend downwards, that if all Impediments, interposed by the
Neighboring Bodies, were removed, it would certainly and directly fall to the
ground; or being put into a Vessel with Water, or any other Liquor much less
heavy then it self (for on Quicksilver, which is heavier, Stones will swim)
the same Gravity will make it subside to the bottom of the Vessel, and
consequently thrust away its bulk of Water, which though heavy in it self, yet
because it is less ponderous then the Stone, seems to be light. And so in our
late instance in the Clock, if it be said that the Hand that points at the
Hours affects a circular motion, because it constantly moves round the Center
of the Dial-plate, it is evident that the inanimate piece of Metal affects not
that motion more then any other, but only that the impression it receives from
the Wheels, and the adaptation of the rest of the Engine, determine it to move
after that manner. And although if a Man should with his Finger stop that Index
from proceeding in its course, it may be said, in some sense, that it strives
or endeavors to prosecute its former Circular Motion; yet that will signify no
more, then that by virtue of the Contrivance of the Engine, the Index is so
impelled, that, if the Obstacle, put by the Finger of him that stops it, were
taken away, the Index would move onwards, from that part of the Circle where it
was stopped, toward the mark of the next Hour. Nor do I by this, Pyrophilus,
deny that it may in a right sense be said, as it is wont to be in the Schools,
that Opus Naturae est opus Intelligentiae: Neither do I reject such common
Expressions as Nature always affects and intends that which is best, and Nature
does nothing in vain. For since I must, according to the abovementioned
Notion, refer many of the actions of irrational Creatures to a most wise
Disposer of Things, it can scarce seem strange to me, that in those particulars
in which the Author intended, and it was requisite that irrational Creatures
should operate so and so for their own Preservation, or the Propagation of
their Species, or the public good of the Universe, their Actions being ordered
by a Reason transcending Ours, should not only oftentimes resemble the Actings
of Reason in Us, but sometimes even surpass them. As in effect we see that
Silkworms and Spiders can, without being taught, spin much more curiously
their Balls and Webs, then our best Spinsters could; and that several Birds can
build and fasten their Nests more Artificially then many a Man, or perhaps any
Man could frame and fasten such little and elaborate Buildings. And the
Industries of Foxes, Bees, and diverse other Beasts, are such, that it is not
much to be wondered at that those Creatures should have Reasons ascribed to
them by diverse Learned Men, who yet perhaps would be less confident, if they
considered how much may be said for the Immortality of all rational Souls. And
that the subtle Actings of these Beasts are determined to some few Particulars
requisite for their own Preservation, or that of their Species; whereas on all
other occasions, they seem to betray their want of Reason, and by their Voice
and Gestures seem to express nothing, but the Natural Passions, and not any
Rational or Logical Conceptions. And therefore, as when (to resume our former
comparison) I see in a curious Clock, how orderly every Wheel and other part
performs its own Motions, and with what seeming Unanimity they conspire to show
the Hour, and accomplish the other Designs of the Artificer, I do not imagine
that any of the Wheels, etc. or the Engine it self is endowed with Reason, but
commend that of the Workman who framed it so Artificially. So when I
contemplate the Actions of those several Creatures that make up the World, I do
not conclude, the inanimate Pieces, at least, that it is made up of, or the vast
Engine it self, to act with Reason or Design, but admire and praise the most
wise Author, who by his admirable Contrivance can so regularly produce Effects,
to which so great a number of successive and conspiring Causes are required.

And thus much, Pyrophilus, having been represented concerning those, that
rejecting from the Production and Preservation of Things, all but Nature, yet
embrace the Principles of the vulgar Philosphy, you will perhaps think it more
then enough: but Object, That what is not to be expected from the barren
Principles of the Schools, may yet be performed by those Atomical ones which we
our selves have within not very many Pages seemed to acknowledge Ingenious. And
I know indeed, that the modern Admirers of Epicurus confidently enough pretend,
that he and his Expositors have already, without being beholding to a Deity,
clearly made out, at least the Origin of the World, and of the principal
Bodies it is made up of: But I confess, I am so far from being convinced of
this, that I have been confirmed rather, then unsettled in my Opinion, of the
difficulty of making out the Original of the World, and of the Creatures,
especially the living Ones that compose it, by considering the accounts which
are given us of the Nativity (if I may so speak) of the Universe, and of the
Animals, by those great Denyers of Creation and Providence, Epicurus, and his
Parapharst Lucretius: Whose having shown themselves (as I freely confess they
have) very subtle Philosophers in explicating diverse Mysteries of Nature,
ought not so much to recommend to us their impious Errors, about the Original
of Things, as to let us see the necessity of ascribing it to an Intelligent
Cause. This then is the account of this matter, which is given us by Epicurus
himself, in that Epistle of his to Herodotus, which we find in Diogenes
Laertius: Quod ad Meteora attinet existimari non oportet, aut motum, aut
conversionem, aut Ecclipsin, aut or^um occasumve, aut al^a hujuscemodi ideo
fieri quod sit Praefectus aliquis, qui sic disponat, disposueritue ac simul
beatitudinem immortalitatemque possideat: And having interposed some Lines, to
prove that the Providence of God is not consistent with his Felicity, he adds,
Quare opinandum est, tum cum Mundus procreatus est, factos fuisse eos
circumplexus convolventium se Atomorum, ut nata fuerit haec necessitas, qua
circuitus tales obierint: And elsewhere in the same Epistle, Infiniti (says he)
sunt mundi, alii similes isti, alii vero dissimiles. Quippe Atomi cum sint
infinitae, ut non multo ante demonstratum est per infinitatem spatiorum, and
alibi aliae, ac procul ab hoc ad fabrefactionem Mundorum infinitorum vary
concurrunt. And least this Epicurean Explication of the Worlds Original should
seem to owe all its unsatisfactoriness to its obscure brevity, we shall not
scruple to give you that elegant Paraphrase and Exposition of it, which
Lucretius has delivered in his 5th Book, De Rerum Natura: Sed quibus ille
modis, conjectus, materiai
Fundarit Coelum, ac Terram Pontique profunda
Solis, Lunai cursus ex ordine ponam,
Nam certe, neque conciliis primordia rerum
Ordine se quaeque atque sagaci mente locarunt,
Nec quos quaeque darent motus pepigere profecto:
Sed quia multa modis multis primordia rerum
Ex infinito jam tempore percita plagis,
Ponderibusque suis, consuerunt concita ferri,
Omnimodisque coire, atque omnia pertentare,
Quaecunque inter se possent congressa creare;
Propterea fit, ut magnum volgata per aeuum,
Omnigenos coetus and motus experiundo,
Tandem conveniant: ea quae conjuncta repent
Magnarum rerum fiant exordia soepe
Terrai maris, and coeli generisque animantum.


The Hypothesis expressed in these Verses (which please our Author so well,
that he has almost the same Lines in several other places of his Poem) he
prosecutes and applies to some particular parts of the Universe in the same 5th
Book: But whilst he thus refuses to allow God an Interest in the Worlds
production, his Hypothesis requires that we should allow him several things,
which he does assume, not prove: As First, That Matter is Eternal. 2. That from
Eternity it was actually divided, and that into such insensibly small parts, as
may deserve the name of Atoms; whereas it may be supposed, that Matter, though
Eternal, was at first one coherent Mass, it belonging to Matter to be
divisible, but not so of necessity, to be actually divided. 3. That the number
of these Atoms is really infinite. 4. That these Atoms have an inane Infinitum
(as the Epicureans speak) to move in. 5. That these Atoms are endowed with an
almost infinite variety of determinate Figures, some being round, others
cubical, others hooked, others conical, etc. whereas not to mention beforehand
what we may elsewhere object, besides against this Assumption, he shows not
why, nor how this Atome come to be Spherical rather then Conical, and another
Hooked rather then Pyramidal: But these Assumptions I insist not on, because of
two others much more considerable, which our Author is fain to take for granted
in his Hypothesis: For 6ly, He supposes his Eternal Atoms to have from Eternity
been their own Movers, whereas it is plain that Motion is no way necessary to
the Essence of Matter, which seems to consist in extension: For Matter is no
less Matter, when it rests, then when it is in motion; and we daily see many
parcels of Matter pass from the state of motion to that of rest, and from this
to that, communicating their motion to Matter that lay still before, and
thereby loosing it themselves. Nor has any Man, that I know, satisfactorily
made out how Matter can move it self: And indeed, in the Bodies which we here
below converse withal, we scarce find that any thing is moved but by something
else; and even in these motions of Animals that seem spontaneous, the Will or
Appetite does not produce the motion of the Animal, but guide and determine
that of the Spirits, which by the Nerves move the Muscles, and so the whole
Body, as may appear by the weariness and unweildiness of Animals, when by much
motion the Spirits are spent. And accordingly I find that Anaxagoras, though
he believed, as Aristotle did after him, that Matter was Eternal, yet he
discerned that the notion of Matter not necessarily including motion, there was
a necessity of taking in a Men's, as he styles God, to set this sluggish Matter
a moving. And I remember Aristotle himself, in one place of his Metaphysics,
Aristot: Metaphys: lib. 12. cap. 6.
disputing against some of the antienter Philosophers, asks, Quonamque modo
movebuntur si nulla erit actu causa? non enim ipsa materia seipsam movebit
(...) rerum opifex Virtus: But though elsewhere I have met with Passages of his
near of kin to this, yet he seems not to express his Opinion uniformly and
clearly enough to engage me to define it or make a Weapon of it: And therefore
I shall rather proceed to take notice, That according to the Epicurean
Hypothesis, not only the motion, but the determination of that motion is
supposed. For Epicurus will have his Atoms move downwards, and that not in
parallel Lines, lest they should never meet to constitute the World, but
according to Lines somewhat inclining toward one another; so that there must
be not only motion, but gravity in Atoms, before there be any Center of
gravity for them to move toward; and they must move rather downwards then
upwards, or side-ways, and in such Lines as nothing is produced capable of
confining them to. Which are Assumptions so bold and precarious, that I find
some, even of his Admirers, to be ashamed of them: Which will save me the labor
of arguing against them, and allow me to take notice in the 7th place, That
this Epicurean Doctrine supposes that a sufficient number of Atoms, and their
motion downwards being granted, there will need nothing but their fortuitous
concourse in their fall, to give a Being to all those Bodies that make up the
World. Indeed, that the various coalitions of Atoms, or at least small
Particles of Matter, might have constituted the World, had not been perhaps a
very absurd Opinion for a Philosopher, if he had, as Reason requires, supposed
that the great Mass of lazy Matter was Created by God at the Beginning, and by
Him put into a swift and various motion, whereby it was actually divided into
small Parts of several Sizes and Figures, whose motion and crossings of each
other were so guided by God, as to constitute, by their occursions and
coalitions, the great inanimate parts of the Universe, and the seminal
Principles of animated Concretions. And therefore I wonder not much that the
Milesian Thales (the first of the Grecian Philosophers (as Cicero informs us)
that inquired into these matters) should hold that Opinion which Tully
expresses in these Words: De Not: Deorum, lib. 10.
Aquam dixit esse initium rerum, Deum autem eam Mentem quae ex aqua cuncta
finxerat: And that of Anaxagoras, the same Author should give us this account,
Idem ibidem.
Omnium rerum descriptionem and modum mentis infinitae vi ac ratione ratione
designari and confici voluit: For though these great Men exceedingly erred, in
thinking it necessary that God should be provided of a pre-existent, and by him
not created Matter to make the World of, yet at least they discerned and
acknowledged the necessity of a Wise and Powerful Agent to dispose and fashion
this rude Matter, and contrive it into so goodly a Structure, as we behold,
without imagining with Epicurus, that chance should turn a Chaos into a World.
And really it is much more unlikely, that so many admirable Creatures that
constitute this one exquisite and stupendous Fabric of the World should be
made by the casual confluence of falling Atoms, justling or knocking one
another in the immense vacuity, then that in a Printers Working-house a
multitude of small Letters, being thrown upon the Ground, should fall disposed
into such an order, as clearly to exhibit the History of the Creation of the
World, described in the 3 or 4 first Chapters of Genesis, of which History, it
may be doubted whether chance may ever be able to dispose the fallen Letters
into the Words of one Line. I ignore not that sometimes odd Figures, and
almost Pictures may be met with, and may seem casually produced in Stones, and
diverse other inanimate Bodies: And I am so far from denying this, that I may
elsewhere have opportunity to show You, that I have been no careless Observer
of such Varieties.

But first, even in diverse Minerals, as we may see in Nitre, Crystal, and
several others, the Figures that are admired are not produced by chance, but by
something analogous to seminal Principles, as may appear by their uniform
regularity in the same sort of Concretions, and by the practice of some of the
skilfullest of the Saltpeter Men, who when they have drawn as much Nitre as
they can out of the Nitrous Earth, cast not the Earth away, but preserve it in
heaps for six or seven Years; at the end of which time, they find it
impregnated with new Saltpeter, produced chiefly by the seminal Principle of
Nitre implanted in that Earth. To prove that Metalline Bodies were not all made
at the beginning of the World, but have some of them a Power, though slowly to
propagate their Nature when they meet with a disposed Matter; you may find
many notable Testimonies and Relations in a little Book of Physico-Chymical
Questions, Written by Jo: Conradus Gerhardus, a Germane Doctor, and most of
them recited (together with some of his own) by the Learned Sennertus: But lest
you should suspect the Narratives of these Authors, as somewhat partial to
their Fellow Chemists Opinions, I shall here annex that memorable Relation
which I find Recorded by Linschoten, and Garcias ab Horto, a pair of
unsuspected Writers in this case concerning Diamonds, whereby it may appear
that the seminal Principles of those precious Stones, as of Plants, are lodged
in the Bowels of the Mine they grow in: Diamonds (says the first, in that
Chapter of his Travels where he treats of those Jewels) are dug like Gold
out of Mines, where they dug one year the length of a Man into the Ground,
within three or four years after there are found Diamonds again in the same
place, which grow there; sometimes they find Diamonds of 400 or 800 Grains.
Simpl: in India nascenti. lib. 1. cap. 47.
Adamantes (says the latter) qui altissime in terrae visceribus, multisque
annis perfici debebant in summo fere solo generantur and duorum aut trium
annorum spatio perficiuntur: Nam si in ipsa fodina hoc anno ad cubiti
altitudinem fodias Adamantes reperies. Post biennium rursus illic excavato
ibidem, invenies Adamantes. And next, how inconsiderable, alas, are these
supposed Productions of Chance, in comparison of the elaborate Contrivances of
Nature in Animals? since in the Body of Man, for instance, of so many hundred
Parts it is made up of, there is scarce any that can be either left out, or
made otherwise then as it is, or placed elsewhere then where it is, without an
apparent detriment to that curious Engine; some of whose parts, as the Eye, and
the valves of the Veins, would be so unfit for any thing else, and are so
fitted for the uses that are made of them, that it is so far from being likely
that such skilful Contrivances should be made by any Being not intelligent,
that they require a more then ordinary Intelligence to comprehend how skilfully
they are made.

As for the account that Lucretius, out of Epicurus, gives us of the first
Production of Men, in I know not what Wombs adhering to the Ground, and which
much more becomes him as a Poet, then as a Philosopher, I shall not here waste
time to manifest its unlikelyness, that witty Father Tanta ergo qui videat, and
talia potest existimare nullo aff^cta esse consilio, nulla p^ov^^^nt^a, nulla
rat^one divina, s^d (...) subtil^bus ex (...) ^ss^ tanta m^racula* Nonne
p^od^g^o simile est, aut natum esse hom^nem qui haec d^ceret, ut Lucippum, aut
ext^t^^s^ qui creder^t, ut Democ^itum, qui aud^tor ejus fu^t, vel Ep^cu^^m in
quem v^nita^ omni^ ^e Lucippi font profluxit. lib. 2. cap. 11
Lactantius having already done that copiously for me. And indeed it seems so
pure a Fiction, that were it not that the Hypothesis he took upon him to
maintain, could scarce afford him any less extravagant account of the Original
of Animals, The unsuitableness of this Romance, to those excellent Notions with
which he has enriched diverse other parts of his Works, would make me apt to
suspect, that when he writ this part of his Poem, he was in one of the Fits of
that Frenzy, which some, even of his Admirers, suppose him to have been put
into by a Philtre given him by his either Wife, or Mrs Lucillia; in the
Intervals of which, they say, that he writ his Books.

And here let us further consider, That as confidently as many Atomists, and
other Naturalists, presume to know the true and genuine Causes of the Things
they attempt to explicate, yet very often the utmost they can attain to in
their Explications, is, That the explicated Phenomenon May be produced after
such a Manner as they deliver, but not that they really Are so: For as an
Artificer can set all the Wheels of a Clock a going, as well with Springs as
with Weights, and may with violence discharge a Bullet out of the Barrel of a
Gun, not only by means of Gunpowder, but of compressed Air, and even of a
Spring. So the same Effects may be produced by diverse Causes different from one
another; and it will oftentimes be very difficult, if not impossible for our
dim Reasons to discern surely which of those several ways, whereby it is
possible for Nature to produce the same Phenomenon she has really made use of
to exhibit them. And sure, he that in a skilful Watch-makers Shop shall observe
how many several ways Watches and Clocks may be contrived, and yet all of them
show the same things, and shall consider how apt an ordinary Man, that had
never seen the inside but of one sort of Watches, would be, to think that all
these are contrived after the same manner, as that whose Fabric he has already
taken notice of; such a Person, I say, will scarce be backward to think that so
admirable an Engineer as Nature, by many pieces of her Workmanship, appears to
be, can, by very various and differing Contrivances, perform the same things;
and that it is a very easy mistake for Men to conclude, that because an Effect
may be produced by such determinate Causes, it must be so, or actually is so.
And as confident as those we speak of use to be, of knowing the true and
adequate Causes of Things, yet Epicurus himself, as appears by ancient
Testimony, and by his own Writings, was more modest, not only contenting
himself, on many occasions, to propose several possible ways whereby a
Phenomenon may be accounted for, but sometimes seeming to dislike the so
pitching upon any one Explication, as to exclude and reject all others: And
some Modern Philosophers that much favor his Doctrine, do likewise imitate his
Example, in pretending to assign not precisely the true, but possible Causes of
the Phenomenon they endeavor to explain. And I remember, that Aristotle
himself (what ever confidence he sometimes seems to express) does in his first
Book of Meteors ingeniously confess, that concerning many of Natures
Phenomenon, he thinks it sufficient that they May be so performed as he
explicates them. But granting that we did never so certainly know in the
general that these Phenomenon of Nature must proceed from the Magnitudes,
Figures, Motions, and thence resulting Qualities of Atoms, yet we may be very
much to seek as to the particular Causes of this or that particular Effect or
Event: For it is one thing to be able to show it possible for such and such
Effects to proceed from the Various Magnitudes, Shapes, Motions, and
Concretions of Atoms, and another thing to be able to declare what precise, and
determinate Figures, Sizes, and Motions of Atoms, will suffice to make out the
proposed Phenomenon, without incongruity to any others to be met with in
Nature: As it is one thing for a Man ignorant of the Mechanics to make it
plausible, that the motions of the famed Clock at Strasburge are performed by
the means of certain Wheels, Springs, and Weights, etc. and another to be able
to describe distinctly, the Magnitude, Figures, Proportions, Motions, and (in
short) the whole Contrivance either of that admirable Engine, or some other
capable to perform the same things.

Nay, a Lover of disputing would proceed farther, and question that way of
reasoning, which even the eminentest Atomists are wont to employ to demonstrate
that they explicate things aright.

For the grand Argument by which they use to confirm the truth of their
Explications, is, That either the Phenomenon must be explicated after the
manner by them specified, or else it cannot at all be explicated intelligibly:
In what sense we disallow not, but rather approve this kind of Ratiocination,
we may elsewhere tell you. But that which is in this place more fit to be
represented, is, That this way of arguing seems not in our present case so
Cogent, as they that are wont to employ it think it to be: For besides that, it
is bold to affirm and hard to prove that, what they cannot yet explicate by
their Principles, cannot possibly be explicated by any other Men, or any other
Philosophy; besides this, I say, that which they would reduce their Adversaries
to, as an Absurdity, seems not to deserve that name: For supposing the Argument
to be conclusive, That either the proposed Explication must be allowed, or Men
can give none at all that is intelligible, I see not what absurdity it were to
admit of the consequence: For who has demonstrated to us, That Men must be able
to explicate all Natures Phenomenon, especially since diverse of them are so
abstruse, that even the Learned Atomists scruple not to acknowledge their
being unable to give an account of them. And how will it be proved that the
Omniscient God, or that admirable Contriver, Nature, can exhibit Phenomenon by
no ways, but such as are explicable by the dim Reason of Man? I say,
Explicable rather then Intelligible; because there may be things, which though
we might understand well enough, if God, or some more intelligent Being then
our own, did make it h^s Work to inform us of them, yet we should never of our
selves find out those Truths. As an ordinary Watch-maker may be able to
understand the curiousest Contrivance of the skilfullest Artificer, if this Man
take care to explain his Engine to him, but would never have understood it if
he had not been taught. Whereas to explicate the Nature and Causes of the
Phenomenon we are speaking of, we must not only be able to understand, but to
investigate them.

And whereas it is peremptorily insisted on by some Epicureans, who thereby
pretend to demonstrate the excellency and certainty of their Explications, that
according to them, Nature is declared to produce things in the way that is most
facile and agreeable to our Reason: It may be replied, That what we are to
enquire after, is, how Things have been, or are really produced, not whether or
no the manner of their Production be such, as may the most easily be understood
by us: For if all things were, as those we reason withal maintain, casually
produced, there is no reason to imagine that Chance considered what manner of
their Production would be the most easily intelligible to us. And if God be
allowed to be, as indeed he is, the Author of the Universe, how will it appear
that He, whose Knowledge infinitely transcends ours, and who may be supposed to
operate according to the Dictates of his own immense Wisdom, should, in his
Creating of things, have respect to the measure and ease of Humane
Understandings, and not rather, if of any, of Angelical Intellects, so that
whether it be to God, or to Chance, that we ascribe the Production of things,
that way may often be fittest or likelyest for Nature to work by, which is not
easiest for us to understand.

And as for the way of arguing, so often employed (especially against the Truth
we now contend for) and so much relied on by many Modern Philosophers, namely,
That they cannot clearly conceive such or such a thing proposed, and therefore
think it fit to be rejected; I shall readily agree with them in the not being
forward to assent to any thing, especially in Philosophy, that cannot well be
conceived by knowing and considering Men: But there is so much difference among
Men, as to their faculty of framing distinct Notions of things, and through
Men's partiality or lazyness, many a particular Person is so much more apt, then
these Men seem to be aware of, to think, or at least, to pretend, that he
cannot conceive, what he has no mind to assent to, that a Man had need be wary
how he rejects Opinions, that are impugn'd only by this way of Ratiocination,
by which, I hope, it will not be expected that we should be more prevailed
with, then that Sect of Philosophers that imploys it most. And among those that
resolve the Phenomenon of Nature into the Mechanical Powers of Things, or the
various Figures, Sizes and Motions of the parts of Matter; I meet with some, as
the Epicureans, who tell us, They cannot frame a Notion of an Incorporeal
Substance or Spirit, nor conceive how, if the Soul were such, it could act upon
the Body: And yet others that seem no less speculative, seriously and solemnly
profess, That they can conceive a clear and distinct Notion of a Spirit, which
they believe the humane Soul, that regulates at least, if not produces diverse
Motions of the Body, to be; denying on the other side, That it can be clearly
conceived, either that any thing that is only material can think, or that
there can possibly be any Vacuum (that is, Place without any Body) in the
Universe; both which the Epicureans profess themselves not only to conceive as
Possible, but to believe as True.

And thus much, Pyrophilus, it may suffice to have said in relation to those
who would reject God from having any thing to do, either in the Production or
Government of the World, upon this ground, that they, if you will believe them,
can explicate the Original and Phenomenon of it without him; but it is not all,
nor the greatest part of the Favorers of the Atomical Philosophy, that presume
so much of themselves, and derogate so much from God: To say therefore
something to the more moderate and judicious of that Persuasion, we will
heartily propose on their behalf the most plausible Objection we can foresee
against the Truth we have been all this while pleading for. They may then thus
argue against us, That though the Atomists cannot sufficiently demonstrate from
what Natural Causes every particular Effect proceeds, and satisfactorily
explicate after what determinate manner each particular Phenomenon is
produced; yet it may suffice to take away the necessity of having recourse to a
Deity, that they can make out in general, That all the things that appear in
the World, may, and must be performed by merely corporeal Agents; or if you
please, That all Natures Phenomenon may be produced by the parcels of the great
Mass of Universal Matter, variously shaped, connected, and moved. As a Man that
sees a screwed Gun shot off, though he may not be able to describe the number,
bigness, shape and coaptation of all the Pieces of the Lock, Stock, and Barrel,
yet he may readily conceive that the Effects of the Gun, how wonderful soever
they may seem, may be performed by certain pieces of Steel or I^on, and some
parcels of Wood, of Gun powder, and of Lead, all fashioned and put together
according to the exigency of the Engine, and will not doubt, but that they are
produced by the power of some such Mechanical Contrivance of things purely
Corporeal, without the assistance of spiritual or supernatural Agents.

In answer to this Objection, I must first profess to you, That I make a great
doubt whether there be not some Phenomenon in Nature, which the Atomists cannot
satisfactorily explain by any Figuration, Motion, or Connection of material
Particles whatsoever: For some Faculties and Operations of the reasonable Soul
in Man, are of so peculiar and transcendent a kind, that as I have not yet
found them solidly explicated by corporeal Principles, so I expect not to see
them in haste made out by such. And if a spiritual Substance be admitted to
enter the Composition of a Man, and to act by and upon his Body; besides that,
one of the chief and fundamental Doctrines of the Epicureans (namely, That
there is nothing in the Universe but Corpus and Inane) will thereby be
subverted; it will appear that an Incorporeal and Intelligent Being may work
upon Matter, which would argue, at least a possibility that there may be a
spiritual Deity, and that he may intermeddle with, and have an influence upon
the Operations of things Corporeal: But to insist no longer on this, let us
give a further and direct Answer to the proposed Objection, by representing,
That although as things are now established in the World, an Atomist were able
to explain the Phenomenon we meet with, by supposing the parts of Matter to be
of such Sizes, and such Shapes, and to be moved after such a manner as is
agreeable to the Nature of the particular Phenomenon to be thereby exhibited,
yet it would not thence necessarily follow, That at the first production of the
World, there was no need of a most powerful and intelligent Being to dispose
that Chaos, or confused heap of numberless Atoms into the World, to establish
the universal and conspiring Harmony of things; and especially to connect
those Atoms into those various seminal Contextures, upon which most of the more
abstruse Operations, and elaborate Productions of Nature appear to depend: For
many things may be performed by Matter variously figured and moved, which yet
would never be performed by it, if it had been still left to it self without
being, at first at least, fashioned after such a manner, and put into such a
Motion by an Intelligent Agent. As the Quill that a Philosopher writes with,
being dipped in Ink, and then moved after such and such a manner upon White
Paper, all which are Corporeal things, may very well trace an excellent and
rational Discourse; but the Quill would never have been moved after the
requisite manner upon the Paper, had not its motion been guided and regulated
by the Understanding of the Writer: Or rather, yet once more to resume our
former Example of the Strasbourgh Clock, though a skilful Artist, admitted to
examine and consider it, both without and within, may very well discern that
such Wheels, Springs, Weights, and other Pieces of which the Engine consists,
being set together in such a coapt^tion, are sufficient to produce such and
such Motions, and such other Effects as that Clock is celebrated for, yet the
more he discerns the aptness and sufficiency of the parts to produce the
Effects emergent from them, the less he will be apt to suspect that so curious
an Engine was produced by any casual concurrence of the Parts it consists of,
and not rather by the skill of an intelligent and ingenious Contriver; or that
the Wheels, and other parts, were of this or that Size, or this or that
determinate Shape, for any other reason, then because it pleased the Artificer
to make them so; though the reason that moved the Artificer to employ such
Figures and Quantities, sooner then others, may well be supposed to have been,
that the Nature of his Design made him think them very proper and commodious
for its accomplishment, if not better then any other suited to the several
Exigencies of it.

If an Epicurean should be told, that a Man, after having been for some days
really dead, became alive again, I think it will not be doubted, but that he
would reject such a Relation as impossible, and therefore too manifestly false
to be believed by any Man in his Wits: And yet, according to his Principles,
the Man, as well Soul as Body, consisted only of diverse Particles of the
Universal Matter, by various Motions brought together, and disposed after a
certain manner: And consequently, he must ground his persuasion that it is
impossible to redintegrate the Engine once spoiled by death, upon this, That as
Chance cannot with the least probablity be presumed to have produced such a
strange Effect; so according to him, there can be no Cause assigned, knowing
and powerful enough, to rally and bring together again the disbanded and
scattered parcels of Matter (or substitute other equivalent ones) that together
with the remaining Carcass, composed the dead Man, so to reunite them to the
rest; and lastly, so to place and put into Motion both the one and the other,
as were requisite to make a living Man once more result from them. I know that
this Example reaches not all the Circumstances of the Controversy we have been
debating; but yet, if I mistake not, it will serve the turn for which I propose
it: For, not now to insist upon this inference from it, That a considering Man
may confidently reject a thing that is not absolutely impossible, provided it
be highly incredible; not to insist on this, I say, the thing I aim at in the
mention of it, is only to show, That such things may possibly be effected by
Matter and Motion, as no wise Man will believe to have been produced by a bare
Agitation of the Particles of Matter, not guided by the superintendency of a
Powerful and Knowing Director.

Now that the Atoms, or Particles of Matter of which the World consists, made
no agreement with each other to convene and settle in the manner requisite to
constitute the Universe, Lucretius does not so properly confess, as affirm, in
that forecited Passage where he judiciously tells us, That -- Certe neque
consiliis Primordia rerum
Ordine se quaeque, atque sagaci mente locarunt:
Nec quos quaeque darent Motus pepigere profecto.


And the thing it self is manifest enough, from the Nature of Atoms confessedly
inanimate and devoid of understanding.

So that although we should grant, Pyrophilus, the possible Emergency of the
innumerable Effects we admire in the World, from the various Properties and
Coalitions of Atoms, yet still you see the formerly mentioned difficulty
(touching the Resulting of All things from Matter left to it self) would recur;
and it would as well be incredible that an innumerable multitude of insensible
Particles, as that a lesser number of bigger Parcels of Matter, should either
conspire to constitute, or fortuitously justle themselves into so admirable and
harmonious a Fabric as the Universe, or as the Body of Man; and consequently
it is not credible that they should constitute either, unless as their motions
were (at least, in order to their seminal Contextures and primary Coalitions)
regulated and guided by an intelligent Contriver and Orderer of things. And I
should so littte think it a Disparagement to have but so much said of any
Hypothesis of mine, that I suppose I may affirm it, without offending either
the most sober, or the generality of the Atomical Philosophers, to whom, and to
their Doctrine, my Writings will manifest me to be no otherwise affected then I
ought.

ESSAY V. Wherein the Discourse interrupted by the late Digression, is resumed
and concluded.
IT remains now, Pyroph: that we at length return into the way from whence the
foregoing Digression has, I fear, too long diverted us, and that to prosecute
and finish our Discourse, we take it up where we left it and were tempted to
digress, namely, at the end of the III Essay; betwixt which, and the beginning
of this V, all that has been interposed may be looked upon but as a long
Parenthesis.

In the third place then I consider, That whether or no it be true which our
Antagonists suggest, that there are some things in Nature which tempt
Philosophers more then they do the Vulgar, to doubt or deny a God; yet
certainly there are diverse things in Nature that do much conduce to the
evincing of a Deity, which Naturalists either alone discern, or at least
discern them better then other Men: For besides the abstruse Properties of
particular Bodies, not discovered by any but those that make particular
Enquiries into those Bodies, there are many things in Nature, which to a
superficial Observer seem to have no relation to one another; whereas to a
knowing Naturalist, that is able to discern their secret Correspondencies and
Alliances, these things which seem to be altogether Irrelative each to other,
appear so Proportionate and so Harmonious both betwixt themselves, and in
reference to the Universe they are parts of, that they represent to him a very
differing and incomparably better Prospect then to another Man: As he that
looks upon a Picture made up of scattered and deformed pieces, beholding them
united into one Face, by a Cylindrical Looking-glass aptly placed, discerns the
skill of the Artist that drew it, better then he that looks only on the single
parts of that Picture, or upon the whole Picture, without the uniting Cylinder.
Which brings into my mind, That whereas in the Sacred Story of the Creation,
when mention is made of Gods having considered the Works of each of the first
six Days, at the end of it, it is said of the Work of every Day, That God saw
that it was good (except of the second Day, because the separation of the
Waters was but imperfectly made on that day, and completed in the next, on
which it is therefore twice said, That God saw that it was good) whereas, I
say, when God looked upon his Works in particular, it is only said, That he
saw that they were good; when He is introduced at the close of the Creation, as
looking upon, and surveying his Creatures in their Harmony, and entire System,
it is emphatically said, That he saw every thing that he had made, and behold
it was very good. And if Aristotle be indeed the Author of the Book De Mundo ad
Alexandrum, which passes for his, and is said to have been Written by him
toward the end of his Life, it would not be unworthy our Observation to take
notice, how he that in his other Writings is wont to talk of Gods Interest in
the Creatures darkly, and hesitantly enough, is wrought upon by the
Contemplation of the Universe, as it is an orderly Aggregate or System of the
Works of Nature, to make Expressions of the Divine Architect, which are not
unworthy of Aristotle, though being merely humane they cannot be worthy of God.
Amongst many I shall single out some; and I hope, Pyrophilus, you will excuse
me, if in this Essay, and some of the precedent ones, I do contrary to my
custom, employ pretty store of Passages taken out of other Authors. For first,
the nature of my Design makes it requisite for me to show what Opinion the
Heathen Philosophers had of the Study of Physiology, and what Power their
Contemplation of Nature had to engage them to Acts of Religion. And next, since
diverse of the same Passages wherein they had set down their Opinions, contained
also the Grounds and Reasons of them, whereby they have anticipated much of
what we should say upon the same subjects, I was unwilling to deprive you of
their pertinent Ratiocinations, or rob them of the Glory of what they had well
Written. And this necessary Apology premised, let us proceed to consider his
Passages; and first, Arist: de Mundo, Cap. 6:
Restat (says he) ut summatim de Causae disseramus, quae cunctarum ipsa rerum
vim habet tutricem and continentem, quemadmodum caetera perstrinximus: Flagitii
enim instar esset, cum de mundo dicere instituerim, tractatu si minus exquisito
fortasse, at certe qui sat esse possit ad formulam doctrinae crassiorem,
intactam praecipuam mundi partem principemque praeterire. And a little after,
Etenim (says he) cunctarum quae rerum natura complectitur, cum servator est
Deus, Ibidem.
tum vero quaecunque in hoc mundo quoquomodo perficiuntur eorum omnium idem est
Genitor: Non sic tamen ipse ut opificis in morem, animalisque lassitudinem
sentientis labor affici possit, ut qui ea facultate utatur, quae nulli cedat
difficultati, cujus ipse vi facultatis omnia in potestate continet, nec minus
etiam quae longius ab ipso videntur esse summo^a: To which purpose he elsewhere
says, Augustius decentiusque existimandum est, Eodem Cap.
Deum summo in loco it a esse collocatum: Numinis ut tamen ejus vis per
universum mundum pertingens, tum Solemn, Lunamque moveat, tum Coelum omne
circumagat, simulque causam praebeat eorum quae in Terra sunt salutis atque
incolumitatis: And in the same Book he adds, Eodem Cap.
Ut vero su^matim loquamur quod in navi Gubernator est, quod in Curru agitator,
quod in Choro praecentor, quod denique lex in Civitate, and dux in exerctiu,
hoc Deus est in mu^do. Nisi si hactenus interest, quod labor, and motus
multiplex illos exercet, and curae angunt variae, cum huic illaborata succedunt
o^nia, omnis molestiae expertia. And certainly he that is a stranger to
Anatomy, shall never be able to discern in the circulation of the blood, the
motion of the Chyle, and the contrivance of all the parts of a humane Body,
those Proofs, as well as Effects, of an Omniscient (...), or Artist, which a
curious Anatomist will discover in that elaborate and matchless Engine: as I
remember, I had occasion not long since to take notice of in the shape of that
strange Muscle (the obturator internus) which some call from its Figure
Marsupialis, serving to the motion of the Thigh. For this Muscle seems so made,
as if Nature had designed in it, to manifest, That she is skilled in the
Mechanics, not only as a Mathematician that understands the powers of
Distance, Weight, Proportion, Motion and Figure; but as an Artificer, or
Handy-crafts man, who knows by dextrous Contrivances to furnish the more
endangered parts of his Work, with what is more useful to make it lasting:
There being (to omit other Observables, belonging to that Muscle) a deep notch
made in the Coxendix, to shorten the way betwixt the two extremities of the
Muscle, and make it bear upon the Bone with a blunter Angle. And because the
Tendon is long, lest, notwithstanding the former provision, it should be apt to
fret out upon the edge of the Bone, Nature has provided for it a Musculous
piece of Flesh, wherein it is as it were sheathed, that so it might not
immediately bear, and grate upon the Bone; just as our Artificers use to sow
Cases of Leather upon those parts of silken Strings, which being to grate upon
harder Bodies, were otherwise endangered to be fretted out by Attrition.

And a like skilfulness of Nature in the Mechanical Contrivance of the Parts,
is more obviously discernable in the Structure of that admirable Engine, by
which such variety of other Engines are made, the Hand: where (not to mention
the Ligamentum latum, or Wrist-band, that keeps the Tendons that move under it
from inconveniently starting up upon the Contraction of the respective Muscles)
the wonderful perforations that are made through the Tendons of the Musculi per
forat, by those of the Musculi perforantes, for the more commodious motion of
the Joints of the Fingers, may conspicuously manifest the Mechanical Dexterity
of Nature; as it may her Husbanding (if I may so speak) of her Work, That in a
F^^tus, whilst it lies in the Womb, because the Lungs are not to be displayed
as afterward, and so the Blood needs not circulate through Them from the right
Ventricle of the Heart, into the left, for the use of Respiration, as it must
in grown Animals, she contrives a nearer way; and by certain short Pipes,
peculiar to such young Creatures, she more commodiously performs in them the
Circulation of the Blood, proportioned to their present condition; and
afterward, when the Animal is brought out of the Womb into the open Air, and
put upon the constant exercise of his Lungs, these temporary Conduitpipes
little by little vanish. So careful is Nature not to do things in vain.

And therefore I do not much wonder, that Galen, though I remember he somewhere
(unprovokedly and causelessly enough) derides Moses, and seems not over much
inclined to make Religious acknowledgements; yet when he comes to consider
particularly the exquisite Structure of a humane Body, should break forth into
very elevated, and even pathetical Celebrations of God, and tell us, That in
his Books, Galenus, lib. 30. De usu Partium.
De usu Partium, he composed Hymns to the Creators praise. And certainly, he
that shall see a skilful Anatomist dexterously dissect that admirable part of
Man, the Eye, and shall consider the curious Contrivance of the several Coats,
Humors, and other Parts it consists of, with all their adaptations and uses,
would be easily persuaded, That a good Anatomist has much stronger Invitations
to believe, and admire an Omniscient Author of Nature, then he that never saw a
Dissection, especially if he should see how all of these concur to make up one
Optical Instrument to convey the Species of the visible object to the Optic
Nerve, and so to the Brain; as I have, with pleasure considered it, in the
recent Eye of a Cat (for with keeping, it will grow flaccid) cut cleanly off,
where the Optic Nerve enters the Sclerotis, and is going to expand it self
into the Retina, for holding this Eye at a convenient distance betwixt yours
and a Candle, you may see the Image of a Flame lively expressed upon that part of
the back side of the Eye at which the Optic Nerve enters the abovementioned
Sclerotis: Some thing of this kind we have also shown our Friends with the
eyes of dead Men, carefully severed from their heads; and with the (dexterously
taken out) Christalline humor of a Humane Eye, we have often read, as with a
Lens or Magnifying glass. And to assist you in so pleasing a speculation, as
that of the Eye, we shall add, That by reason Ox Eyes are much larger, and
much easier to be had then humane ones, we are wont to make much use of them,
and to discern some things better in their Coats, we immerse them for a little
while in boiling Water, and to be able to consider the form and bigness of the
Vitreous and Crystalline humors, better then the fluidity of the one, and the
softness of the other are wont to allow Anatomists to do; we have sometimes, by
a way hereafter to be set down, speedily frozen Eyes, and thereby have turned
the Vitreous humor into very numerous and Diaphanous Films (as it were of Ice,
and the Crystalline into a firm Substance, but (which perhaps you will wonder
at) not Transparent. An eye thus frozen, may be cut along that which Optical
Writers call the Optical Axis, and then it affords an instructive Prospect,
which we have not been able to obtain any other way. But because,
notwithstanding this Expedient in the Eyes of Men, and the generality of
Terrestrial Animals, the Opacousness of the Sclerotis hinders the Pictures that
outward Objects (unless they be lucid ones) make with in the Eye to be clearly
discerned. We think our selves obliged to that excellent Mathematician of your
Acquaintance, Pyrophilus, who, upon some Discourse we had with him concerning
this Subject, lately advised us to make use of the Eyes of white Rabbets (for
if those Animals be of another color, he says, their Eyes will not prove so
fit for our purpose) For having held some of these Eyes at a convenient
distance betwixt my Eyes and the Window, I found them to be so transparent,
That the rays proceeding from the Panes of Glass, Iron Bars, etc. of the
Window, passing through the Crystalline humor, and in their passage refracted,
did on the Retina exhibit in an inverted Posture, according to the Optical
Laws, the contracted, but lively Pictures of those external Objects; and those
Pictures, by reason of the transparency of the Sclerotis, became visible
through it to my attentive Eyes: As in a darkened Room the shadows of Objects
without it, projected on a fine sheet of Paper, may, by reason of the thinness
of the Paper, be seen through it by those that stand behind it. By Candlelight
we could see little in the bottom of these eyes, but lucid Objects, such as the
flame of the Candle, which appeared tremulous, though inverted; but by
Daylight we could manifestly discern in them both the motions of very
neighboring Objects, and the more vivid of their colors.

And really, Pyrophilus, it seems to me not only highly dishonorable for a
Reasonable Soul to live in so Divinely built a Mansion, as the Body she resides
in, altogether unacquainted with the exquisite Structure of it; but I am
confident, it is a great obstacle to our rendering God the Praises due to him,
for his having so excellently lodged us, that we are so ignorant of the curious
Workmanship of the Mansions our Souls live in; for not only the Psalmist, from
the consideration of the Divine Art displayed by God, in the moulding and
fashioning his Body in the Womb, takes a just occasion to celebrate his Maker,
I will praise thee (says he) because I am fearfully and wonderfully made,
mavelous are thy works, and that my Soul knows right well: My substance was
not hid from thee, Psalm. 139 v. 14, 15, 16.
when I was made in secret, and curiously wrought (with as much curiosity as
Tapstry or Embrodery, as the Hebrew Rukkamti seems to import) In the lowest
parts of the Earth, thine eyes did see my substance, yet being unperfect; and
in thy Book all my members were written, which in continuance were fashioned,
when as yet there were none of them. But even from Galen himself Anatomical
Reflections have been able to extort Expressions of Devotion: Cum igitur (says
he) quod in omnibus recte fit, omnes ad artem referunt, Galen de plac: Hip: and
Plat: Libr: 7.
quod ^utem in uno, aut duobus non ad artem, sed fortunam; merito ex nostri
structura corporis licet admirari summam artem, aequitatem, and vim naturae,
quae nos construxit. Constat siquidem corpus nostrum ex ossibus pluribus quam
ducentis, ad singula ossa vero pervenit nutriens vena; sicut ad musculos: cum
hac etiam arteria, and Nervi; pariaque adamussimsunt, and animo similia in
dextra animantis part sita, iis quae in altera sunt; Os ossi, Musculus
musculo, Vena vena, Arteria arteriae, ac Nervus nervo; idque exceptis
visceribus, atque nonnullis particulis quae habere propriam descriptionem
videntur. Duplices itaque corporis nostri parts, omnino inter se sunt similes,
and magnitudine and conformatione, sicuti and consistentia quam voco juxta
mollitiem, duritiemque differentia. Quemadm^dum igitur de Humanis effectibus
judicium facimus, ex navi summa art constructa cognoscentes peritiam
artificis, ita etiam de Divinis facere convenit, corporisque nostri Opificem
admirari, quicunque tandem is Deorum existat, etiamsi eum non videmus.

Perhaps it may be truly said yet further, That although in humane Bodies, many
Wonders, as we have lately mentioned, have been discovered to us by Anatomy,
yet Anatomy it self has not discovered to us all the Wonders to be met with in
a humane Body, nor will detect them, till Anatomists be skilled in some other
things over and above that of dexterously Dissecting: For it seems very
probable, that the excellent contrivance of some parts will never be fully
apprehended, without a competent knowledge of the Nature of those Juices tha^
are to pass through them, and some of them receive their beginning or some
alteration in them; And the Nature of these Juices will scarce be exactly
known, without some skill in diverse parts of Physiology, and especially in
Chemistry. Besides, the reason of the Origination, Shape, Bulk, Length,
Progress, and Infection of each particular Muscle, can hardly be well accounted
for, without some skill in the Principles of Mechanics, and in the nature and
properties of Leavers, Pulleys, etc. Moreover, there is a certain Harmonious
Proportion betwixt the parts of a humane Body, in reference both to the whole,
and to one another, which is not wont to be heeded by Anatomists, but much
taken notice of by Statuaries and Painters: For they reckon, that when a Man's
Arms are displayed, the distance betwixt his middle Fingers is equal to the
height of his Body; so they reckon sometimes seven, sometimes eight lengths of
the Head, to the length of the Body, and four times the length of the Nose to
that of the Head, as three times the same length to that of the Face: And
diverse such Observations we have met with among them, which we shall not now
insist on, but rather tell you, That without some skill in Optics, it will be
hard for an Anatomist to show the Wisdom of God in making the Crystalline humor
of the Eyes of Men, only of a somewhat unequal or lenticular form, rather then
as those of Fishes of an almost perfectly Spherical one. Nor do I remember that
in Anatomy Schools I have heard any account given of this difference, which yet
tends much to manifest the Wisdom of the Author of Nature, who has so
excellently suited the Eyes of Animals to the several parts of the Universe he
designed them to inhabit. For Men, and other Terrestrial Animals living in the
Air, the Beams of Light, reflected from visible Objects, and falling over the
Cornea and the Aqueous humor, do necessarily suffer a Refraction there, as
coming from the Air, which is a thinner Medium into a thicker, and so there
needs the less of further Refraction to be made by the Crystalline humor, and
consequently its Figure needs to be but moderately unequal; whereas Fishes
living constantly in the Water, the Medium, through which they see things, is
almost of a like thickness with the Cornea and Aqueous humor; so that there
being little or no Refraction made in their Eyes but by the Crystalline it
self, it was necessary that that should be exceedingly unequal, that it might
make a very great Refraction, and thereby unite the Beams nearer at hand; which
if the Crystalline were less unequal, would tend to a point of Concourse beyond
the Retina, and consequently paint on it but a languid and confused Picture of
the Object they should represent.

As for Paracelsus, certainly he is injurious to Man, if (as some eminent
Chemists expound him) he calls Man a Microcosm, because his Body is really made
up of all the several kinds of Creatures the Macrocosm or greater World
consists of, Lib. 3. De usu Part.
and so is but a Model or Epitomy of the Universe: For (to omit that the
Ancients (as Galen informs us) gave the Title of Microcosms to Animals in
general) it is the Glory and Prerogative of Man, that God was pleased to make
him not after the Worlds Image, but His own. On which occasion, give me leave
to tell you, That however, the consideration of the dignity conferred on us in
the Image of God, (in whatever that Image be resolved to consist) should,
methinks, be some engagement to us to look upon our selves as belonging unto
God; As our Savior, from the Image of Caesar stamped upon a Coin, pronounced it
fit to render unto Caesar the things of Caesar, and to God, those of God.

In the fourth place, I consider that the universal experience of all Ages
manifests, That the contemplation of the World has been much more prevalent to
make those that have addicted themselves to it, Believers, then Denyers of a
Deity: For it is very apparent that the old Philosophers, for the most part,
acknowledged a God, and as evident it is by their want of revelation, by many
Passages in their Writings, and by diverse other things not now to be insisted
on, That the consideration of the works of Nature, was the chief thing that
Induced them to acknowledge a Divine Author of them. This Truth I could easily
make out, were I at leisure to transcribe Testimonies, which, because I am not,
I shall content my self to mention to you one, which may well serve for many,
it being a Confession made by Aristotle, or whatever other Learned Philosopher
it was, who writ the Book De Mundo, That Gods being the Architect and Upholder
of the World, was the general belief of the Ages that preceded his: Vetus (says
he) sermo est a majoribus proditus, inter omnes homines, universa tum ex Deo
tum per Deu^ constituta fuisse, atque coagmentata, Libro de Mundo, Cap. 6.
nullamque naturam satis instructam ad salutem esse posse, quae citra Dei
praesidium, suae ipsa demum tutela permissa sit: And as for both the Opinion of
that eminent Author himself, and the Grounds of it, he speaks of God and the
Creation almost in the terms of St Paul: Alibi eodem Cap.
Proinde (says he) haec etiam de Deo sentienda nobis sunt, illo quidem, si vim
spectes, Valentissimo, si decorem, Formosissimo, si vitam Immortali, denique si
virtutem Praestantissimo. Quapropter cum sit inconspicabilis naturae omni
interiturae, ipsis nihilominus ipse cernitur ab operibus, atque ea quidem quae
aere quoquomodo affecto, quae in terra, quae in aqua, ea certe Dei opera esse
merito dixerimus; Dei inquam opera, eum imperio summo Mundum, ac pro potestate
obtinentis, Ex quo deo ut inquit Empedocles Physicus.

Omnia quotquot erunt, quot sunt praesentia, quotque
Orta fuere antehac stirpes, hominesque feraeque
Inde etiam volucres, piscesque humoris Alumni.
And those few Philosophers (if ever there have been any at all) that have been
really Atheists, are no ways considerable for their number, in respect of those
that have asserted a Deity; and their Paradoxes have been looked upon as so
Irrational, that as soon as they have been proposed, they have been
disdainfully rejected and condemned by all the rest of Mankind, who have
looked upon the Patrons of them as Monsters rather then Philosophers. And if
there be, at this day, any Nations (as Navigators inform us there are in
Brasil, and some other parts of the Indies) that worship no God, they consist
not of Naturalists, but Bruit, and Irrational Barbarians, who may be supposed
rather to ignore the Being of God, then deny it; and who at least are little
less strangers to the Mysteries of Nature, then to the Author of it. And if it
be a Truth that there are really such Atheistical People, it may serve to
recommend to us the Study of Physiology, by showing us, That without the help
of any such innate belief, or persuasion of a God, as is supposed connatural to
Man, Reason exercised upon the Objects the Creation presents us with, is
sufficient to convince Philosophers of a Deity; and indeed such a care has God
taken, to make his Being conspicuous in his Creatures, that they all seem
loudly and unanimously to speak to their attentive Considerers, in the
Psalmists Language, Know ye that the Lord, he is God: Psalm C. 3.
it is he that has made us, and not we our selves: And as it is said, Judge. V.
20.
That the Stars in their courses fought against Sisera, so it may be truly
said, That not only the Stars, but all the rest of the Creatures do in their
courses fight against the Atheists, by supplying an unprejudiced Considerer of
them with Weapons fit to overthrow his impious Error. To which purpose, I
remember Aristotle, in his Book De Mundo, makes use of a pretty Simile to
declare the conspicuousness of the Creator in his Creatures: Fama est (says he)
Phidiam illum statuarium, Cap. 6.
quum Minervam illam quae est in Arce, coagmentaret, in medio ejus scuto faciem
suam expressisse, oculosque fallenti artificio ita devinxisse simulachro,
eximere ut inde ipsam siquis cuperet, minime posset, aliter quidem certe, quam
ut ipsum solveret simulachrum, opusque ejusmodi compactile confunderet; Hanc
eandem rationem Deus habet in Mundo ut pote qui universorum coagmentationem
cohaerentem cohibeat and coarctet, incolumitaetemque Universitatis conservet;
Nisi quatenus non medio ille loco in Terra scilicet, ubi Turbida Regio est, sed
in excelso situs est, purus ipse in puro loco.

But to declare how Atheists may be reduced either to confess a first Cause, or
to offer violence to their own Faculties, by denying things as certain as
those, which it is apparent that (in other cases) themselves firmly assent to,
would require a Discourse too large to be proper to be prosecuted here; and
therefore if I have not, in another Treatise, an opportunity of insisting on
that subject, I must content my self to refer you for further satisfaction on
it, to the Writers of Natural Theology.

Nor does Physiology barely conduce to make Men believe the existence of a
Deity, but admire and celebrate the Perfections of it: And the noblest Worship
from that greater part of the World, to which God did not vouchsafe any
explicit and particular Revelation of his Will, has been paid Him, by those
whom the beauty of this goodly Temple of the Universe, transported with a
rational Wonder at the Wisdom, Power, and Goodness of the Divine Architect. And
this kind of Devotion being commonly proportionate to the discoveries of
Nature that begot it, it needs not seem strange, that diverse of the best
Philosophers amongst the Heathens, should be the greatest Celebrators of God:
And 'twas therefore perhaps not without cause that the Indian Gymnosophists,
the Persian Magi, the Egyptian Sacrificers, and the old ^auls De^ides, were to
their Peoples both Philosophers and Priests; and that in diverse Civilized
Nations, Philosophy and Priesthood were so allied, that those whose Profession
should give them most interest in the definition of Man, made a more strict
profession of celebrating and praising God. I might easily, with diverse
Instances, manifest how great a Veneration the Study of the Creatures has given
Philosophers, for those Attributes of God that are stamped upon them, and
conspicuous in them: But my willingness to hasten to the more Experimental part
of what I have to say concerning the usefulness of Physiology, makes me content
my self to present you with a couple, or a leash of Authorities, for proof of
what has bee^ alleged; the first shall be of Galen, in his third Book De usu
Partium, where treating of the Skin that invests the sole of the Foot: Cutem
ipsam (says he) non laxam, aut subtilem, a^t mollem, sed constrictam, and
mediocriter duram, sensilemque ut non facile pateretur subdidit pedi
sapientissimus Conditor noster: Cui commentarios hos, ceu hymnos quosdam
compono, and in e^ pietatem esse existimans, non si Taurorum (...) ei plurimus
quispiam sacrificarit, and casias aliaque sexcenta unguenta suffumigarit: Sed
si noverim ipse primus deinde exposuerim aliis quaenam sit ipsius Sapientia,
quae Virtus, quae Providentia, quae Bonitus; ignorantia quorum summa Impietas
est, non si a sacrificio abstineas. Quod enim cultu convenienti exornavit
omnia, nullique bona inviderit id perfectissimae Bonitatis specimen esse
statu^, Invenisse autem quo pacto omnia adornarentur summae Sapientiae est, at
effecisse omnia quae voluit Virtutis est invictae. To which Illustrious Passage
he annexes much more, worthy of Galens Pen, and your perusal.

To this let me add, in the second place, that of Hermes Trismegistus, almost
at the very beginning of his first Book, Englished by Dr. Everard: He that
shall learn and study the things that are, and how they are ordered and
governed, and by whom, and for what cause, or to what end, will acknowledge
thanks to the Workman, as to a good Father, an excellent Nurse, and a faithful
Steward; and he that gives Thanks shall be Pious or Religious, and he that is
Religious shall know both where the Truth is, and what it is; and learning
that, he will be yet more and more Religious: To which I cannot but add a
resembling Passage of that great Hermetical Philosopher (as his Followers love
to call him) Paracelsus: Oppido (says he) admir abilis, in suis Operibus,
Parac^l: de Mineral; Tract. 1.
Deus est; a quorum contemplatione nec interdiu, nec noctu desistendum, sed
jugiter illorum indagationi vacandum est, Hoc enim est ambulare in Viis Dei.
All which bears witness to, and may, in exchange, receive Authority from that
remarkable passage of that Great and Solid Philosopher, Sir Francis Bacon, Sir
Francis Bacon Advan: of Learning, Lib. 1.
who scruples not somewhere to affirm, "That it is an assured Truth, and a
conclusion of Experience, That a little or superficial taste of Philosophy,
may, perchance, incline the mind of a Man to Atheism, but a full Draught
thereof, brings the Mind back again to Religion. For in the entrance of
Philosophy, when the Second Causes, which are next unto the Senses, do offer
themselves to the Mind of Man, and the Mind it self cleaves unto them, and
dwells there, a forgetfulness of the Highest Cause may creep in: But when a Man
passes further, and beholds the Dependency, Continuation, and Confederacy of
Causes, and the Works of Providence, then according to the Allegory of the
Poets, he will easily believe that the highest Link of Natures Chain must needs
be tied to the foot of Jupiters Chair; or (to speak our Chancellors thoughts
more Scripturally) That Physiology, like Jacobs Vision, discovers to us a
Ladder, Genesis 28.
whose top reaches up to the footstool of the Throne of God: To which he
deservedly adds, Let no Man, upon a weak conceit of sobriety, or ill-applyed
moderation, think or maintain that a Man can search too far, or be too well
studied in the Book of Gods Word, or in the Book of Gods Works, Divinity, or
Philosophy: But rather le^ Men awake themselves, and cheerfully endeavor and
pursue an endless progress or proficiency in both; only let them beware lest
they apply Knowledge to Swelling, not to Charity; to Ostentation, not to Use:
And again, That they do not unwisely mingle and confound these distinct
Learnings of Theology and Philosophy, and their several Waters together.

In the fifth place, Pyrophilus, I consider, that when the Divines we are
answering suppose Physiology likely to render a Man an Atheist, they do it (as
has above been noted already) upon this Ground, That Natural Philosophy may
enable him to explicate both the regular Phenomenon, and the aberrations of
Nature, without having recourse to a first Cause or God. But though this
supposal were as great a Truth, as we have endeavored to make it a Mistake, yet
I see not why a Studier of Physiology, though never so great a Proficient in
it, may not rationally be an utter Enemy to Atheism: For the Contemplation of
the Creatures, is but one of the ways of coming to be convinced that there is a
God; and therefore, though Religion were unable to make use of the Argument
drawn from the Works of Nature, to prove the existence of a Deity, yet has she
other Arguments enough besides, to keep any Considerate and Impartial Man from
growing an Atheist. And here give me leave, for the sake of these Divines, to
observe, That though the Devils be Spirits, not only extremely knowing in the
Properties of Things (by their hidden skill in Physiology, by which they teach
Magicians, and their other Clients, to do diverse of the strange things for
which they are admired) But also unmeasureably proud, and willing to pervert
their knowledge to the cherishing of Atheism; yet St. James informs us, That
they themselves believe there is a God, Jam. 11.19.
and tremble at him; which argues, either that skill in Natural Philosophy does
not necessarily lead to Atheism, or that there are other Arguments, besides
those drawn from Science, sufficient to convince the most refractary of the
existence of a Deity.

But not to insist on any thing of this nature, nor so much as to mention what
proofs the consideration of our own Minds, and their inbred Notions, may
affo^d us of a Deity, I shall content my self to mind you, That the several
Patefactions which God has been pleased to make of himself, to Man especially,
those made by seasonably accomplished Prophesies, and by Miracles, do not only
demonstrate the Being, but the Providence, and diverse of the Attributes of God.
And indeed, methinks, the Divines we reason with may well allow these
Patefactions to be capable of evincing the existence of a God, since they are
sufficient, and, for ought I know, the best Arguments we have to convince a
rational Man of the truth of the Christian Religion. For the Miracles of Christ
(especially his Resurrection) and those of his Disciples, by being Works
altogether supernatural, overthrow Atheism; and being owned to be done in Gods
Name, and to authorize a Doctrine ascribed to his Inspiration; his Goodness,
and his Wisdom, permit us not to believe that he would suffer such numerous,
great, and uncontrouled Miracles, to be set as his Seals to a Lie, and delude
Men little less then inevitably into the belief of a Doctrine not true. And as
for the Miracles themselves (especially that of Christ's Resurrection, so much,
and so deservedly insisted on by Peter to the Jews, and Paul to the Gentiles)
the truth of them is so ascertained to us by many of the solemnist, and most
authentic ways of Attestation, whereby the certainty of Matters of Fact is
capable of being satisfactorily made out, that it is hard to show how these
Testimonies can be denied, without denying some acknowledged Principle of
Reason, or some other received Notion, which these Contradictors Opinions or
Practice manifest them to look upon as a truth. And upon this account, so much
might be said to evince the reasonableness of assenting to the Christian
Religion, and to show, that as much may be said for it, as need be said for any
Religion, and much more then can be said for any other; that it need be no
wonder, that, as Learned Men as ever the World admired, have not been many of
them Embracers, but some of them Champions of it. But having more fully, in
another Treatise, discoursed of this subject, I shall content my self to make
this Inference from what has been alleged, that since the most Judicious
Propugners of Christianity have held and found, that, upon the score of Gods
miraculous Revelations of himself, rational Men might be brought to believe the
abstruser Articles of the Christian Religion, those Revelations cannot but be
sufficient to convince them of so fundamental and refulgent a Truth (which all
the others suppose) as that of the existence of God.

In the sixth and last place, I will here add (on this occasion) that an
insight into Physiological Principles, may very much assist a Man to answer the
Objections of Atheists, against the Being of a Deity, and the Exceptions they
make to the Arguments brought to prove that there is one: For though it has
long been the custom of such Men, to talk as if themselves, and those of their
mind, were not alone the best, but almost the only Naturalists; and to
perplex others with pretending, that, whereas it is not conceiveable how there
can be a God, all things are by the Principles of the Atomical Philosophy, made
clear and facil. Though this, I say, have long been used among the Opposers of
a Deity, yet he that not regarding their confidence, shall attentively consider
the very first Principles of things, may plainly enough discern, that of the
Arguments wherewith Natural Philosophy has furnished Atheists, those that are
indeed considerable, are far fewer then one would readily think; and that the
difficulty of conceiving the Eternity, Self-existence, and some other
Attributes of God (though that afford them their grand Objection) proceeds not
so much from any absurdity belonging to the Notion of a Deity, as such; as from
the difficulty which our dim humane Intellects find to conceive the Nature of
those first Things (whatever we suppose them) which, to be the Causes of all
others, must be themselves without cause: For he that shall attentively
consider, what the Atomists themselves may be compelled to allow concerning the
Eternity of Matter, the Origin of local Motion (which plainly belongs not to
the Nature of Body) the Infinity or Boundlesness of space, the Divisibleness or
non-Divisibility of each Corporeal Substance into infinite Material Parts, may
clearly perceive that the Atomist, by denying that there is a God, cannot free
his Understanding from such puzling Difficulties as he pretends to be the
Reasons of his Denial. For instead of one God, he must confess an infinite
number of Atoms to be Eternal, Self-existent, Immortal, Self-moving, and must
make Suppositions, encumbered with Difficulties enough to him that has
competently accustomed his Thoughts to leave Second Causes beneath them, and
contemplate those Causes that have none. But I am unwilling to swell this
Essay, by insisting on such Considerations as these, especially since you may
find them more aptly deduced in other Papers, some of which treat of the Truth
of Christian Religion, and others are designed for the Illustration of some
things in this and the foregoing Essays. For I must confess to you,
Pyrophilus, that by reason of the sundry Avocations, I have been so diverted
from proposing some of the Reasons I have employed, to their best advantage,
that I my self, at another time, could have both mentioned them with lesser
disadvantage, and have added diverse others: And therefore I have not only had
thoughts of enlarging upon some Passages of our past Discourse, but I long
since made a Collection (though it be not now in my power) of Observations, and
Experiments to elucidate a Point in one of those Discourses, whereby may be
enervated one of the three chief Physiological Reasonings, that I have met with
among the Atheists.

Upon consideration of all the Premises, I confess, Pyrophilus, that I am
inclined to think there may, perhaps, be more cause to apprehend, that the
delightfulness of the Study of Phisiology should too much confine your Thoughts
and Joys to the Creatures, then that your Proficiency in it should bring you to
dis-believe the Creator: For I have observed it to be a fault, incident enough
to Ingenious Persons, to let their minds be so taken up, and, as it were,
charmed with that almost infinite variety of pleasing Objects, which Nature
presents to their Contemplation, that they too much dis-relish other Pleasures
and Employments, and are too apt to undervalue even those wherewith the
improved Opportunities of serving God, or holding Communion with Him, are
capable of Blessing the Pious Soul.

But, Pyroph: though comparatively to Fame, and Mistresses, and Baggs, and
Bottles, and those other transient, unsatisfactory, (in a word) deluding
Objects, on which the greatest part of mistaken Mortals, so fondly dote, the
entertaining of our Noblest Faculties, with Objects suited to them, and proper
both to gratify our Curiosity, and to enrich our understandings, with variety
of acceptable and useful Notions, affords a satisfaction that very well
deserves the choice and preferrence of a rational Creature: Yet certainly,
Pyrophilus, as God is infinitely better then all the things that he has made,
so the Knowledge of Him is much better then the knowledge of them; and he that
has placed so much delightfulness in a Knowledge, wherein he allows his very
Enemies to become very great Proficients, has sure reserved much Higher, and
more contenting Pleasures to sweeten and endear those Disclosures of Himself,
which He vouchsafes to none but those that love Him, and are loved by Him.

And therefore, Pyrophilus, though I will allow you to expect from the
Contemplation of Nature a greater satisfaction, then from any thing you need
decline for it* yet I would not have you expect from it any such satisfaction
as you may entirely acquiess in, for nothing but the enjoyment of Him that made
the Soul for Himself can satisfy it, the Creatures being as well incapable to
afford us a complete Felicity by our Intellectual Speculations of them, as by
our sensual Fruitions of them; for though the knowledge of Nature be
preferrable by odds to those other Idols which we have mentioned, as inferior
to it, yet we here attain that knowledge, but very imperfectly, and our
acquisitions of it cost us so dear, and the Pleasures of them is so allayed
with the disquieting Curiosity they are wont to excite, that the wisest of Men,
and greatest of Philosophers among the Ancients, scruples not, upon his own
experience, Eccles. 1.13.
to call the addicting of ones heart to seek and search out by Wisdom,
concerning all things that are done under the Heaven, a sore travel given by
God to the sons of Men, to be exercised (or, as the Original has it, to
afflict themselves) therewith: And the same experienced Writer elsewhere tells
us, That he that increases knowledge, Eccles. 1.18.
increases sorrow. And 'twas perhaps for this reason that Adam was formed out
of Paradise, and afterward by God brought into it, to intimate, That Felicity
is not a thing that Man can acquire for himself, but must receive as a free
gift from the liberal Hand of God: And as the Children of the Prophets sought
translated Elias with very great diligence, but with no success, 2 Kings cap. 2.
so do we as Fruitlesly as Industriously, seek after perfect Happiness here,
both they and we, missing of what we seek for the same reason; because we seek
for that on Earth, which is not to be found but in Heaven: And this I forewarn
you of, Pyrophilus, not at all to discourage you from the study of Physiology,
but to keep you from meeting with that great Discouragement of finding in it
much less of satisfaction then you expected, and overgreat expectation from it,
being one of the disadvantagiousest Circumstances with which it is possible for
any thing to be enjoyed.

But at length, Pyrophilus, though late, I begin to discern into how tedious a
digression my zeal for Natural Philosophy, and for you, has misled me, and how
it has drawn from my Pen some Passages, which may seem to relish more of the
Preacher, then the Naturalist; yet I might allege diverse things to justify,
or, at least, extenuate what I have done: As first, That if in making this
Excursion I have erred, I have not done so without the Authority of great
Examples; for not only Seneca does frequently both season his Natural
Speculations with Moral Documents and Reflections, and owns, that he purposely
does so, where he says, Omnibus rebus, Seneca Not: Quaest: lib. 2. cap. 59.
omnibusque sermonibus aliquid salutare miscendum est, cum imus per Occulta
Naturae, etc. but even Pliny (as far as he was from being guilty of overmuch
Devotion) does from diverse Passages in his Natural History, allow himself to
take occasion to inveigh against the Luxury, Excesses, and other Epidemical
Vices of his time. And I might next represent, that perhaps the endeavoring to
manifest, that the knowledge of the Creatures should, and how it may be
referred to the Creators Glory, is not altogether impertinent to the design I
have of promoting Physiology, for it seems consonant both to Gods Goodness, and
that repeated Axiom in the Gospel, which tells us, That he that improves his
Talents to good uses, shall be entrusted with more, That the employing the
little Knowledge I have in the service of Him I owe it to, may invite Him to
increase that little, and make it less despicable. And perhaps it is not the
least cause of our ignorance, in Natural Philosophy it self, that when we study
the Great Book of Nature, called The Universe, we consult, peradventure, almost
all other Expositors to understand its Mysteries, without making any address
for instruction to the Author, who yet is justly styled in the Scripture, Jam.
1.17.
That Father of Lights (in the plural Number) from whom descends every good and
every perfect Gift, not only those supernatural Graces, that relate to another
World, but those intellectual Endowments, that qualify Men for the prosperous
Contemplation of this: And therefore in the Evangelical Prophet, Isa. 28.25, 26.
he is said, to instruct even the Plough man, and teach him the skill and
understanding he displays in his own Profession. And though I dare not affirm,
with some of the Helmontians and Paracelsians, that God di^closes to Men the
Great Mystery of Chemistry by Good Angels, or by Nocturnal Visions, as he once
taught Jacob, to make Lambs and Kids come into the World speckled, Genesis 31.
and ring-streaked; yet persuaded I am, that the favor of God does (much more
then most Men are aware of) vouchsafe to promote some Men's Proficiency in the
study of Nature, partly by protecting their attempts from those unlucky
Accidents which often make Ingenuous and Industrious endeavors miscarry; and
partly by making them dear and acceptable to the Possessors of Secrets, by
whose Friendly Communication they may often learn that in a few Moments, which
cost the Imparters many a Years toil and study; and partly too, or rather
principally, by directing them to those happy and pregnant Hints, which an
ordinary skill and industry may so improve as to do such things, and make such
discoveries by virtue of them, as both others, and the person himself, whose
knowledge is thus increased, would scarce have imagined to be possible: And in
effect, the chiefest of the Secrets that have been communicated to me, the
Owners have acknowledged to me to have been attained, rather, as they were
pleased to speak, by accidental Hints, then accurate Enquiries: confessions of
this nature I have diverse times met with in the Writings of the more Ingenious
of the Chemists, and of other Naturalists, and by one of these accidental
Hints, of late, the acute and lucky Pecquet was directed to find the newly
discovered Lactea Thoracica, as before him Asellius found without seeking, as
himself confesses, the Lactea Mesenterica; and by an accident too (as himself
has told me) did our industrious Anatomist, Dr. Jolive, first light upon those
yet more freshly detected Vessels, which afterward the Ingenuous Bartholinus,
without being informed of them, or seeking for them, has met with, and
acquainted the World with, under the name of Vasa Lymphatica; and the two great
Inventions of the later Ages, Gunpowder, and the Loadstones respect unto the
Poles, are supposed to be due rather to Chance, then any extraordinary skill in
Philosophical Principles (which indeed would scarce have made any Man dream of
such extravagant Properties, as those of Magnetic Bodies) As if God designed
to keep Philosophers humble, and (though he allow regular Industry, sufficient
encouragement, yet) to remain Himself dispenser of the chief Mysteries of
Nature.

To what has been represented, Pyrophilus, I might add much more to excuse my
Excursions, if I were not content to be beholden to you for a Pardon, and to
invite you to grant it me, I shall promise you to be very careful not to repeat
the like offense; and whereas most Chemical Writers take occasion from almost
every Discovery or Process they acquaint us with, to digress and wander into
tedious, and too often dull and impertinent Theological Reflections or Sermons.
I have troubled you with almost all that I have to say (to you) of Theological
at once, and I have endeavored to sprinkle it as far as the subject would allow
me, with some Passages Experimental. And indeed I should not at all have
engaged my self into so long a Discourse of the not only Innocence, but
Usefulness of the knowledge of Nature, in reference to Religion, but that I
could not acquiess in what I had met with on that subject in any of the Writers
I have perused, Divines being commonly too unacquainted with Nature, to be able
to manage it Physiologically enough, and Naturalists commonly esteeming it on
part of their work to treat of it at all. And therefore I scruple not to
confess freely to you, Pyrophilus, that, as I shall think my self richly
rewarded for all the ensuing Essays, if the past Discourse but prove so happy
as to bring you to value, and to make the Religious use of the Creatures
recommended to you in it: So I had rather any of my Papers should be passed by
unperused, then those parts of these Essays that treat of that use. And indeed
it is none of the least of Satisfactions, I hope, to derive from my Physical
Composures, that by premising before them the now almost finished Discourse, I
have done my hearty endeavor to manifest and recommend the true use of all the
Discoveries of Nature, which either my Enquiries, or your own, may afford you.
And indeed for my part, Pyrophilus, I esteem the Doctrine I have been pleading
for of that importance, that I am persuaded, That he that could bring
Philosophical Devotion into the request it Merits, should contribute as much to
the solemnizing of Gods Praises, as the Benefactor of Choristers and Founders
of Chauntries, and not much less then David's so celebrated designation and
settlement of that Religious Levitical Music, instituted for the solemn
Celebration of God.

For the sensible Representations of Gods Attributes to be met with in the
Creatures, occurring almost every where to our observation, would very
assiduously solicit us to admire Him, did we but arightly discern Him in them:
And the Impressions made on the Mind by these Representations, proceeding not
from a bare (and perhaps languid) whether Belief or Notion of the Perfections
expressed in them, but from an actual and operative intuition of them, would
excite an admiration (with the Devotion springing thence) by so much the more
intense, by how much (it would be) more rational. And sure, Pyrophilus, so much
admirable Workmanship as God has displayed in the Universe, was never meant
for Eyes that wilfully close themselves, and affront it with the not judging it
worthy the speculating. Beasts inhabit and enjoy the World: Man, if he will do
more, must study, and (if I may so speak) Spiritualize it: It Is the first act
of Religion, and equally obliging in all Religions: It Is the duty of Man, as
Man; and the Homage we pay for the Privilege of Reason: Which was given us,
not only to refer our selves, but the other Creatures, that want it, to the
Creators Glory. Which makes me sometimes angry with them who so busy
themselves in the Duties and Employments of their second and superinduced
Relations, that they will never find the leisure to discharge that Primitive
and Natural Obligation, who are more concerned as Citizens of any place, then
of the World; and both worship God so ba^ely as Catholic or Protestants,
Anabaptists or Socinians, and live so wholly as Lords or Counselors, Londoners
or Parisians, that they will never find the leisure, or consider not that it
concerns them to worship and live as Men. And the neglect of this Philosophical
Worship of God, for which we are pleading, seems to be culpable in Men
proportionably to their being qualified, and comply with that invitation of the
Psalmist, to sing Praises to God with understanding, Psalm. 47.7.
or (the Expression in the Original being somewhat ambiguous) to sing to him a
learned Canticle, as he elsewhere speaks, Psa. 150.2.
to praise him according to his excellent Greatness. For Knowledge being a gift
of God, entrusted to us to glorify the Giver with it, the Greatness of it must
aggravate the neglect of employing it gratefully; and the sublimest Knowledge
here attainable will not destroy, but only heighten and enoble our admiration,
and will prove the Incense (or more spiritual and acceptable part, of that
Sacrifice of Praise (for those reflections which their Nature makes only acts
of Reason, their End may make acts of Piety) wherein the Intelligent Admirer
offers up the whole World in Eucharists to its Maker. For admiration (I do not
say astonishment or surprise) being an acknowledgement of the Objects
transcending our Knowledge, the learneder the transcendent Faculty is, the
greater is the admired Objects transcendency acknowledged: And certainly, Gods
Wisdom is much less glorified by the vulgar astonishment of an unlettered
Starer (whose ignorance may be as well suspected for his Wonder, as the
excellency of the Object) then from their learned Hymns, whose industrious
Curiosity has brought their understandings to a prostrate Veneration of of
what their Reason, not Ignorance, has taught them not to be perfectly
comprehensible by them.

And as such Persons have such piercing Eyes, that where a transient or
unlearned glance scarce observes any thing, they can discern an adorable
Wisdom, being able (as I may so speak) to read the Stenography of Gods
omniscient hand; so their skilful Fingers know how to choose, and how to touch
those Strings that may sound sweetest to the Praise of their Maker. And on the
opened Body of the same Animal, a skilful Anatomist will make reflections, as
much more to the honor of its Creator, then an ordinary Butcher can; as the
Music made on a Lute, by a rare Lutanist, will be preferable to the noise made
on the same Instrument by a Stranger unto Melody. And give me leave to tell
you, Pyrophilus, that such a reasonable Worship ((...)) of God (to use St.
Paul's Expression, Romans 12.1.
though in an other sense) is perhaps a much nobler way of adoring him, then
those that are not qualified to practice it, are aware of, and is not improper
even for Christians to exercise: For, Pyrophilus, it would be considered, That
as God has not by becoming (as the Scripture more then once styles him) our
Savior laid by his first Relation to us as our Creator (whence St. Peter
exhorts, Tim. 1.1. Tit. 2.10.
even the suffering Christians of his time, 1 Pet. 4.19.
to commit their Souls to God under the notion of a Faithful Creator) so
neither has he given up his right to those Intelligent Adorations from us,
which become us upon the account of being his rational Creatures; neither are
such performances made less acceptable to him by the filial relation into which
Christ has brought us to him, that Glorious relation as well endearing to him
our services as our persons.

And let me add, Pyrophilus, that not only Galen (as we have seen already)
tells us, That the discerning ones self, and discovering to others the
Perfections of God displayed in the Creatures, is a more acceptable act of
Religion, then the burning of Sacrifices or Perfumes upon his Altars; and not
only Trismegistus forbidding Asclepius to burn Incense, Hermes Tresmeg. In
Asclep. cap. 15.
tells him, That the Thanks and Praises of Men, are the noblest Incense that
can be offered up to God: But God himself (in his written Word) is pleased to
say, That he that sacrifices Praise (for so it is in the Original) honoreth
him: And the Scripture consonantly mentions as a very acceptable part of
Religious Worship, the Sacrifice of Praise, and the Calves of our Lips: By
offering up of which, Hebr. 13.15.
we make that true use of the Creatures, of so referring them to their Creators
Glory, that (to conclude this Discourse by Crowning it (as it were) with that
excellent Circle mentioned by the Apostle) As all things are of him, Romans 11.36.
and Through him, so they may be To him: to whom be Glory for ever Amen.

The Citations Englished.
P. 24. Seneca de Otio Sap. Cap. 32.NAture, conscious to her Self of her own
Beauty and Artifice, has given us a curious searching Wit, and to so excellent
and great shows, begat us to be Spectators; otherwise, she would have lost the
Fruit of her Self, if to a desert and solitude she should have set forth so
magnificent, so famous, so finely drawn, so fair and many ways beautiful
Pieces. That you may know she would not only have them seen, but looked upon,
take notice of the place she has given us: For she has not only made Man of
an upright Stature, but being so made, for better Contemplation, that he might
follow with his Eye the course of the Stars, from the Rising to the Setting,
and carry about his Looks, together with his whole Body, she has both given
him a tall Head, and placed that upon a flexible Neck: Then she shows six
Constellations by Day, and six by Night; She has laid open every part of her
Self, that by those things which she has offered to the Eyes of Man, she might
breed a desire of knowing the rest. Yet neither do we see all her Works, nor
those that we see, do we see in those Proportions which they truly have: But
our Sight, by searching, does open a way unto it self, and lay the grounds of
Truth, that so Inquiry may pass from things that are plain to things that are
obscure, and find somewhat more Ancient even then the World it self, See Sen.
de Vita Beata, Cap. 32.

Page 28. What does he that contemplates the Nature of the Universe, of honor
unto God? This, that his great Works are not without a Witness.

P. 28. Sen. 2. de Ira. cap. 27. We are not the cause of the seasons and
returns of Summer and Winter to the World: These have their own Laws,
accommodated to the Exercise of Divine Beings: We arrogate too much honor to
our selves, if we esteem our selves worthy that such vast Bodies should fulfill
such Motions for our sakes.

Ib. Lactantius de Ira Dei, cap. 13. True is the Opinion of the Stoics, that
say, How that for our sakes the Wo^ld was made for all things that are, and the
World does by it self generate, are accommodated to the Advantage of Man.

Ib. Seneca de Benef. cap. 23. The Gods were not careless or unconcerned in the
making of Man, for whom they made so many other Creatures: For Nature designed
us, and drew us out in Idea before she made us.

Ib. Cicero 2. De Not: Deorum. And for whose sake then was the World made? For
those Beings that have Reason and Intelligence viz. Gods and Men, then whom no
Being is more excellent.

P. 43. Piso in Medicina Brasil: Lib. 1. It is observable, That so many
excellent Trees, Shrubs, and an innumerable company of Herbs, some few
excepted, should all appear so unlike the Vegetables of the Anciently known
World, both in Figure, Leaf and Fruits: And the same Observation is made of
Birds, Beasts and Fishes; and of Insects both Flying and Creeping, which are
monstrously numerous, and of unspeakable Beauty in Color, some known to us,
and some unknown.

P. 47. Piso, ib. You can scarce determine, whether in these Countries there
are found mote Poisons or Antidotes: The Leaves, Flowers, and Fruits of the
Herbs Tangarack and Juquer, the two most potent Venoms of Brasil, each of these
has its proper Root for an opposite Antidote -- The Barbarians apply the Fat
and Heads of Vipers, and the whole Bodies of those Insects, prepared according
to Art, that stung or struck any Person, and that with boldness, and happy
success, to the Wounds made by them, and so by the effects do attempt to prove,
That in every Venom its own Antidote is contained.

P. 49. Piso, ib. From the Root Mandihoca, that abounds with a very potent
Poison, there is made not only excellent Aliment, but even Antidote too.

P. 50. Ex Augustino. You ought not to use your Eyes as a Bruit, only to take
notice of Provisions for your Belly, and not for your Mind: Use them as a Man:
Pry up into Heaven: See the things made, and enquire the Maker: Look upon those
things you can see, and seek after Him whom you cannot see, and believe on Him
you cannot see, because of those things you see: And be not like the Horse and
Mule, etc.

P. 75. Epicurus in Epist: ad Herod: in Laertio. As to the Meteors, you ought
not to believe that there is either Motion, or Change, or Eclipse, or the rise
or setting of them, because of any superior President, which does, or has so
disposed of it, and himself possesses all the while Happiness and Immortal
Life: Wherefore you must think, that when the World was made, those
implications and foldings of Atoms happened, which caused this necessity, that
these Bodies should pass through these Motions. There are infinite Worlds, some
like this, some unlike it: For since Atoms are infinite (as I newly showed from
the infiniteness of the Spaces) some in one, others in others, distant parts of
these Spaces far from us, variously concur to the making of infinite Worlds.

P. 75. Lucretius, Lib. 5. But how at first, when Matter thus was whirled,
Heaven, Earth, and Sea, the high and lower World,
The Sun and Moon, and all were made, I Will show:
For sure the first rude Atoms never knew
By sage Intelligence, and Council grave,
T'appoint the places that all Beings have:
Nor will I think, that all the Motions here
Ordered at first by fixed Agreements were,
But the Elements that long had beat about,
Been buffeted, now in, now carried out:
Screwed into every hole, and tried to take,
With any thing, in any place to make
Somewhat at last; after much time and coyl,
Motions and Meetings, and a world of toil
Made up this Junto. And thus being joined:
And thus in kind Embraces firmly twined,
And linked together, they alone did frame,
Heaven, Earth and Sea, and the Creatures in the same.


P. 77. Aristot: Metaph: 12. c. 6. How shall things be moved if there be no
actual cause: For Matter cannot move it self, but requires to be moved by a
Tectonic' thing-creating Power.

P. 78. Ciceronis de Thalete. He said, Water was the Principle of all things,
but God was that Intelligence, that made all things out of Water: Ejusdem de
Anaxagora: The delineation and manner of all things he thought to be designed
and made by the power and reason of an infinite Intelligence.

P. 80. Garcias ab Horto, L. 1. simp: c. 47. Diamonds, which ought to be
brought to perfection in the deepest Bowels of the Earth, and in a long tract
of Time, are almost at the top of the Ground, and in three or four Years space
made perfect: For if you dig this Year but the depth of a Cubit, you will find
Diamonds; and after two Year dig there, you will find Diamonds again.

P. 93. Arist: de Mundo. cap. 6. It remains that we speak briefly concerning
that (...), whose Power preserves and supports all things, in like manner, as
we have compendiously handled other matters: For it would seem criminal to pass
over the chief part of the World untouched, having designed to discourse of the
Universe in a Treatise, which, if less accurate, yet certainly may be
sufficient for a rough platform of Doctrine.

Ibid. For God is both the Preserver of all things contained in the Universe,
and likewise the Producer of every thing whatsoever which is any wise made in
this World: Yet not so as to be sensible of labor, after the manner of a
Workman, or a Creature, which is subject to weariness; for he is endued with a
power which is inferior to no difficulty, and whereby he contains all things
under his authority, even such as seem most distant from him.

It Is more magnificent and agreeable to conceive God, so resident in the
Highest Place, that nevertheless his Divine Energy being diffused throughout
the whole World, moves both the Sun and Moon, turns round the whole Globe of
Heaven, and affords the causes of Safety and Preservation of such things as are
upon the Earth.

But to sum up all in brief; what the Pilot is in a Ship; what the Driver in a
Chariot; what the chief Singer is in a Dance: finally, what Magistracy is in a
Commonwealth, and the General in an Army, That is God in the World: Unless
there be this difference, That much toil and manifold cares perplex them; but
all things are performed by God without labor or trouble.

P. 98. Galen. de Plac: Hipp: and Plat: Lib. 7. Whereas therefore (says he)
all Men ascribe that to Art, which is made aright in all respects; but that
which is so only in one or two, not to Art, but Fortune: The structure of our
Body gives us cause to admire the excellent Art, exactness and power of Nature
which framed us. For our Body consists of above Two hundred Bones; to each of
which tends a Vein for conveying of nourishment (in like manner as to the
Muscles) which is accompanied with an Artery and a Nerve, and the parts are
exactly pairs, and those placed in the right side of an Animal, are wholly
alike to those in the other, Bone to Bone, Muscle to Muscle, Vein to Vein,
Artery to Artery, and Nerve to Nerve; excepting only the Bowels, and some
other parts, which seem to have a peculiar construction. So that the parts of
our Body are double, and altogether alike among themselves, both in greatness
and shape, as also in consistence, which I place in the diversity of softness
and hardness. As therefore we use to judge of things made by Men, acknowledging
the skill of a Workman, by the building of a Ship with extraordinary Art; so
also it behooves to do in those of God, and to admire the Framer of our Body,
whosoever of the Gods he were, although we do not see Him.

P. 101. Arist: de Mundo, Cap. 6. It Is an ancient Tradition (says he) diffused
amongst all Mankind from our Ancestors, That all things were made and produced
of God, and by God; and that no Nature can be sufficiently furnished for its
own safety, which is left without the support of God, to its own protection.

P. Ead: Thus therefore we ought to conceive of God; If we consider His Power,
He is Omnipotent; if His Shape, most Beautiful; if His Life, Immortal; and
finally, if His Virtue, most Excellent. Wherefore though undiscernable by any
corruptible Nature, yet He is perceived by such, in His Works; and indeed those
things which are produced in the Air, by any mutation whatsoever; in the Earth,
or in the Water, we ought deservedly to term the Works of God; which God is the
absolute and sovereign Lord of the World, and out of whom (as says Empedocles
the Naturalist)

All things beginning have, which ever shall be,
Are present or to come, Plants, Men and Beasts,
And Fowl, and Fish the offspring of the Sea.
Page 102. Arist: de Mundo, Cap. 6. It Is reported, That when Phidias, the
excellent Statuary, made the Image of Minerva, which is in the Castle at
^thens, he contrived his own Picture in the middle of her Shield, and fastened
the Eyes of it to the Statue by so cunning Workmanship, that if any one were
minded to take it away, he could not do it without breaking the Statue, and
disordering the connection of the Work. After the same manner is God in the
World, retaining and upholding the coherence of all things, and preserving the
safety of the Universe: Only, He is not in the midst of it (namely the Earth)
which is a turbulent Region, but in the highest place, which is suitable to His
Purity.

P. 103, 104. Galen de Usu partium. Our most wise Creator has placed under the
Foot a skin, not loose, or thin, or soft, but close, and of indifferent
hardness and sense, to the end it might not easily suffer injury: To Him I
compose these Commentaries as certain Hymns, esteeming Piety not to consist in
Sacrificing many Hecatombs of Oxen to Him, or burning Cassia, and a thousand
other Perfumes; but in this, first to know my self, and then to declare to
others, what His Wisdom, Power, Providence and Goodness is: the ignorance of
which, not the abstaining from Sacrifice, is the greatest Impiety. For I
account it an evidence of most perfect goodness, that He has furnished all
things with convenient ornament, and denied. His benefits to none. Now, to have
devised how all things might be handsomely framed, is the part of highest
Wisdom; but to have made all things which he would, of insuperable Power.

P. 104. Paracelsus de Mineral: Tract. 1: God is very admirable in His Works;
from the Contemplation of which we ought not to desist Night or Day, but
continually be employed in the inquisition of them. For this is to walk in the
ways of God.

The INDEX to the First part.
THe reason why the Author endeavors to possess Pyrophilus with the true
value of Experimental Philosophy. 1 That Experimental Philosophy is conducive
to the improving of man's Understanding, and to the increasing of man's power.
2 Arguments to prove that Man's Curiosity for Knowledge is much thereby
gratified. ibid. A relation of the transport and surprisal of a Maid born
blind; when being about 18. years old she obtei^ed the first sight of the
various Objects this world presented her with. 3 That the knowledge of the
inward Architecture and contrivanecs of Nature is more delightful then the
sight of the outward shapes. 4 Examples and Instances of the prevalence ^f the
pleasure that arises from the attainment of Knowledge. 4 That the knowledge of
the most curious Artificial works is not more delightful then the knowledge of
Natural. 5. That the delight herein is altogether inoffensive. 6 Instances of
the Esteem diverse ancient Philosophers had for it. 6, 7 How this study
consists with Religion. 8 The absurdity of not employing humane faculties on
the contemplation of those Objects to which they are fitted. 9. Illustrated by
the similitude of a Spider in a Palace, taking notice of nothing besides her
own Cobweb. 10 The Opinions that Seth, Abraham, Solomon, Ovid had of man's
fitness for the study of Astronomy, and other Physiology. 11 Why Providence
might deprive us of Solomon's Physiology. 11 Of the delight that may arise from
the variety of Objects which Nature produc^th. 12 That there be above 6000
Subjects of the Vegetable Kingdom. ib. Of an excellent Jamaica Pepper newly
brought over. ib. How many Treatises are already made of Antimony, which yet
has not been perfectly discovered. 13 Of a real Mercury of Antimony. 14. and a
real combustible Sulphur of Antimony that burns like ordinary Brimstone. 14 A
new Tincture of Antimonial Glass, with the entire process to draw it. 14 Of
Gilbertus, Cabeus, and Kircher, who successively writ the Experiments of the
Loadstone. 15 Of some new Experiments hitherto undiscoverd of that Stone. ib.
That admirable speculations may arise from the most despicable productions of
Nature. 16, 17 What ever God has thought worthy of making, man should not
think unworthy of knowing. 18, 19 Of the Dominion and Power that Physiology
gives the prosperous studiers of it. 20, 21 That the Knowledge of Nature excites
and cherishes Devotion. 22 The Ends of God's Creation, his own Glory. 23, 24
That Man's Good is a second Eud, proved by Scripture. 25. The same proved by
Reason and Authority. 26, 27, 28 How the Sun [Shemesh] is the great minister of
the Universe. 27, That accommodation and delight which the Creatures might
afford Man is much impaired by the want of Natural Philosophy. 29 That the
instructions to our Intellectual part are more considerable then the
accommodations we have from Nature to our Animal part. ib. Of the Hints of
Natural Philosophy in the History of the Creation, and other references to it
in other places. 30, 31 How God's Power is conspicuous in the Creatures. 32,
33, 34. How God's wisdom is conspicuous in them. 34 Particular Observations of
the structure of Humane Body. 35 Of the eyes and feet of Moles. 36 Of the
Silk-worme. 37. That it works by Instinct and not by Imitation. 37, 38 Of the
vastness of the Elephant, and its disproportion to the (...), and such like
Mites. 39, 40 Of the vastness of the Whale, and its disproportion to the small
Worms or Fishes lately discovere'd in Vinegar. 41, 42 How God's Goodness is
conspicuous in his Creatures, by his provision of accommodations for them all;
but especially for his Favorite, Man. 43, 44, 45 Of the unknown and new
detected Properties and Virtues of diverse Concretes. 45 Of the Peruvian Bark,
commonly called the Jesuits Powder, and other Concretes observable for their
unknown Properties. 46 Of the use of diverse noxious Concretes, and that they
contein their own Antidotes. 47, 48 Of that excellent West Indian root
Mandihoca. 48 How we are by the Creatures instructed to Devotion. 40, 50, 51
That their Opinion who would deter men from the scrutiny of Nature tends to
defeat God of much of that Glory Man should ascribe unto him. 53, 54, 55 That
Philosophers of all Religions have considered the World under the notion of
God's Temple. 56 That in this Temple Man must be the Priest. 57, 58 The
contemplation of Gods mercy ought not so to ingross our thoughts, as to make us
neglect the Glory of his Power and Wisdom. 59 That the study of Physiology is
not apt to make men Atheists. 60. Proved further from the ancient Institution
of the Sabbath. 61 That Physiology cannot explicate by second causes all the
Phenomenon of Nature, so as to exclude the first. 63. Proved by the Instance of
the unknown nature Mercury, etc. 64 That same of the Peripatetick Sect are
guilty of this endeavor. 65 That their Hypothesis is very full of mistakes. 66
That these excluders of the Deity make but imperfect explications of the
Phenomenon of Nature. ib. And do not explain the Scale of Causes to the last
Cause. 67 Instances of things wherein their account is not satisfactory: 68. as
1. In the particulars, the causes of which they assign Occult Qualities. ib. 2.
when they assign Natures abborrency of Vacuity to be the cause that Water does
ascend in Suction. ib. whereas the contrary is proved in the Suction of Quick
silver, 69 3. When they assign the causes of the Purgationes Menstrnae. 69, 70
And when in other cases they ascribe to irrational Creatures such actions as in
men are the production of Reason and Choice. 70 The Author's conceit concerning
God's Creation of the parts of the World, and so placing them, that they (by
the assistance of his ordinary concourse) must needs exhibit these Phenomenon.
71. Illustrated by the Clock at Strasburg. ib. How far such borrowed and
Metaphorical Phrases, which Custom h^s authorized, may be used. 72 Quicksilver
being heavier then Stones, they swim thereon, yet sinck in lighter liquors. 72
That the Instances of the Actions of diverse Creatures resembling Reason commend
the Wisdom of God. 73, 74 Defects in the Explication of Nature by the
Epicureans, who deny the concurrence of God. 75, 76, 77, 78 That the figures in
Nitre, Crystal, and diverse Minerals are produced not by chance, but by
somewhat Analogous to seminal principles. 79 That the Generation of Animals is
much less to be accounted the production of Chance. 80 That the Hypotheses of
Philosophy only show that an effect may be produced by such a cause, not that
it must. 81 That to a perfect Knowledge there must not only appear the possible,
but the definite and real, not only the general, but the particular causes. 82
Some defects in the ways of Reaoning used by the most eminent Atomists. 83,
84, 85 The most plausible argument of the Opposers of a Deity considered. 86,
87, 88, 89 That there are some things in Nature which conduce much to the
evincing of a Deity, which are only known to Naturalists. 91. Explained by the
comparison of the Uniting scattered pieces of Paint into one face by a
Cylindrical Looking Glass. 92 The Testimony of the Author of the Book De Mundo
ascribed to Aristotle introduced. ib. Of the admirable contrivance of the Make
of the Musculus Marsupialis. 94. and of the parts of the Hand. ib. The
contrivance for the Circulation of the Blood in a Foetus before the use of
Respiration. 95 Galen's Speech, That his Books De Usu Partium were as Hymns to
the Creator. ib. The Fabric of the Eye considered: ib. Some Experimental
Observations of the Eye, and the use of its parts in order to Vision. 96 The
way to prepare the Eyes of Animals for the better making observations on them.
ib. Some particulars wherein the Eyes of white Rabbets are better then others
for Observation. 97 That it is dishonorable for the Soul to be unacquainted
with the exquisite structure of the Body, being its own Mansion. 97. Proved out
of Instances in the Psalmist and Galen. ib. Why the anterior part of Fishes
Eyes ought to be more Spherical then those of men. 99 That God made Man not
after the World's Image, but his Own. 100 That the Image of God on us should
engage us to esteem our selves us belonging to God. ib. Arguments from
Authority, and the Experience of all Ages, That the Contemplation of the World
has addicted Man to the Reverence of God. 100 That those People who worship not
God, are not Naturalists but Barbarians, and that their Atheism does continue
for want of the Contemplation of the World. 101 A comparison of the Image of
God on the Creature, to that of Phidias on Minerva's Shield. 102 The noblest
worship that has been paid to God from such who have not had particular
Revelation of his will, has arose from the speculation of God's Wisdom, Power,
and Goodness in the fabric of the Creature. 103. The Testimonies of Galen,
Hermes, Paracelsus, L. Bacon. 104. That Religion has other Arguments besides
those drawn from the works of Nature, enough to keep any considering man from
Atheism. 106 That the Difficulty of conceiving the Eternity, Self-Existence,
and other Attributes of one God, is less then to conceive infinite, eternal,
self-existent, and self-moving Atoms. 108 As God is infinitely bettter then
all his Creatures, so the Knowledge of him is better then the Knowledge of his
Creatures. 110 The Imperfection and Disquiet that there is in humane Science.
110, 111 How the Favor of God conduces to promote men's. Proficiency in the
study of Nature. 112 The Reason of the Authors so long Discourse on this
Subject. 114 Beasts inhabit and enjoy the World, it is Man's duty to
Spiritualize it. 115 That it being the prime Duty of Man to give God the Honor
of his Creatures, it is to be preferred before secondary Duties. ib. That the
different greatness in the Knowledge make a like difference in the Honor given
to the Creator. 117 God, by becoming our Savior, has not laid aside the
Relation of a Creator. 117 That he, who sacrifices Praise, honors God. ib.
The Conclusion. 118
ERRATA in the First Part.
Page 24. lin. 22. lege contemplationem factum. p. 62. l. 28. l. (...). p. 69.
l. 7. l. his private Interests. l. 28. of the Air against the Suckers chest. p.
73. l. 32. have Reason. l. 34. Souls. And. p. 75. l. 3. of Animals. p. 77. l.
5. principally in Extension. p. 75. l. 4. any Centrum gravium. p. 79. l. 24.
are not unquestionably produced by chance but perhaps. p. 81. l. 6. dele *. l.
11. Animals; the. p. 85 l. 15. Ratiocination. By. l. 17. most. p. 87. l. ult.
l. Things or their Motions. p. 88. l. 15. Parts it. p. 94. l. 32. Musculi
perforati. p. 98. l. 8. sunt and omnino. l. 33. Insertion of. p. 99. l. 17.
perfectly Spherical one as to the Anterior part which is obverted to the
outward Objects. p. 107. l. 15. Not only.

OF THE VSEFVLNESSE OF Natural Philosophy.

The Second Part.

Of its Usefulness to promote the Empire of Man over things CORPOREAL.

OXFORD, Printed by HEN: HALL Printer to the University, for RIC: DAVIS. In the
year of our Lord, 1663.

OF THE VSEFVLNESSE OF Natural Philosophy.

The Second Part.

The first SECTION. Of it is Usefulness to PHYSIC.

ESSAY I. Containing some Particulars tending to show the Usefulness of Natural
Philosophy to the Physiolological part of Physic.
AFter having, in the former part of this Treatise, Pyrophilus, thus largely
endeavored to manifest to you the advantagiousness of Natural Philosophy to the
mind of Man, we shall now proceed to speak of its Usefulness, both to his Body
and Fortune. For I must ingeniously confess to you, Pyrophilus, That I should
not have near so high a value as I now cherish for Physiology, if I thought it
could only teach a Man to discourse of Nature, but not at all to master Her;
and served only, with pleasing Speculations, to entertain his Understanding
without at all increasing his Power. And though I presume not to judge of other
Men's knowledge, yet, for my own particular, I shall not dare to think my self a
true Naturalist, till my skill can make my Garden yield better Herbs and
Flowers, or my Orchard better Fruit, or my Fields better Corn, or my Dairy
better Cheese then theirs that are strangers to Physiology. And certainly,
Pyrophilus, if we seriously intend to convince the distrustful World of the
real usefulness of Natural Philosophy, we must take some such course, as that
Milestan Thales did, who was by the Ancients reckoned among the very first of
their Naturalists, and their seven celebrated Wisemen: Of this Thales it is
reported, That being upbraidingly demanded what advantage the Professors of
Astrology could derive from the knowledge of it; he Astrologically foreseeing
what Year it would prove for Olives, before any wonted signs of it did appear
to Husbandmen, Engrossed, by giving earnest, the greater part of the Olives,
which the next Season should afford to Chios and Miletus; And being thereby
enabled, when most Men wanted Oil, to sell his at his own rates, he made
advantage enough of his skill, to let his Friends see, That Philosophers may
have the acquisition of Wealth more in their power then in their aim.

Me thinks, it should be a disparagement to a Philosopher, when he descends to
consider Husbandry, not to be able, with all his Science, to improve the
precepts of an Art, resulting from the lame and unlearned Observations and
Practice of such illiterate Persons as Gardeners, Plow-men, and Milkmaids. And
indeed, Pyrophilus, though it be but too evident, that the barren Philosophy,
wont to be taught in the Schools, have hitherto been found of very little use
in humane Life; yet if the true Principles of that fertile Science were thoroughly
known, considered and applied, it is scarce imaginable, how universal and
advantageous a change they would make in the World: For in Man's knowledge of
the nature of the Creatures, does principally consist his Empire over them.
(his Knowledge and his Power having generally the same limits) And as the
Nerves, that move the whole Body, and by it, that great variety of Engines
employed by Man on his manifold occasions, proceed from the Brain; so all the
operations, by which we alter Nature and produce such changes in the Creatures,
flow from our knowledge of them. Theological inquiries excepted, there is no
^mployment wherein Mankind is so much and so generally concerned, as it is in
the study of Natural Philosophy. And those great Transactions which make such a
noise in the World, and establish Monarchies or ruin Empires, reach not to so
many Persons with their influence, as do the Theories of Physiology.

To manifest this Truth, we need but consider, what changes in the Face of
things have been made by two Discoveries, trivial enough; the one being but of
the inclination of the Needle, touched by the Lodestone, to point toward the
Pole; the other being but a casual Discovery of the supposed antipathy between
Saltpeter and Brimstone: For without the knowledge of the former, those vast
Regions of America, and all the Treasures of Gold, Silver, and Precious Stones,
and much more Precious Simples they send us, would have probably continued
undetected; And the latter, giving an occasional rise to the invention of
Gunpowder, has quite altered the condition of Martial Affairs over the World,
both by Sea and Land. And certainly, true Natural Philosophy is so far from
being a barren speculative Knowledge, that Physic, Husbandry, and very many
Trades (as those of Tanners, Dyers, Brewers, Founders, etc.) are but
Corollaries or Applications of some few Theorems of it.

If I had not a great respect for the Great Hippocrates, I should venture to
say, That some of those rigid Laws of Draco (whose severity made Men say, That
they were written in Blood) have, perhaps, cost fewer Persons their Lives, then
that one Aphorism of Hippocrates, which teaching, That if a teeming Woman be
let Blood, she will miscarry, has for diverse Ages prevailed with great numbers
of Physicians, to suffer multitudes of their Female Patients to die under their
hands, who might propably have been rescued by a discreet Phlebotomy, which
experience has assured us (whatever the close of Hippo. Apho 31. lib. 5. (...).
the Aphorism says to the contrary) to have been sometimes not only safely,
but usefully employed, even when the Infant is grown pretty big. But my respect
for so great a Person as Hippocrates, makes me content it should be thought,
That till of late, Physicians have for the most part mistaken their Dictators
meaning in this Aphorism, provided it be granted me, That through this mistake
numbers of teeming Women have been suffered to perish, who might probably, by
the seasonable loss of some of their Blood, have prevented that of their Lives.

And if an Error, which occasioned only a fault of omission, has been so
prejudicial to Mankind, I suppose you will readily grant that those Errors of
Physicians, that are apt to produce faults of commission, and rash attempts,
may prove much mo^e hurtful. And so much I find to be acknowledged by Galen,
in that honest and excellent Passage of his, in his Comment upon the Aphorisms,
Commen^: in Aph: 1. lib. 1.
where having mentioned the danger of trying conclusions upon Men, by reason of
the nobleness of the Subject; and having added, That the Physicians Art is not
like that of a Potter, a Carpenter, or the like, where a Man may freely try
what he pleases to gratify his curiosity, or satisfy himself about his
Notions, because that if he spoils (for instance) the Wood he works on, no Body
is endangered by his miscarriage: He thus concludes, In corpore autem Human^ ea
tentare, quae non sunt experientum comprobata periculo non vacat; cum temeraria
experientiae finis sit totius Animantis internecio.

And indeed, since the Physician borrows his Principles of the Naturalist, I
cannot but somewhat admire to see diverse Persons, who are by themselves and
others thought such wise Men, think the study of Natural Philosophy of small
concernment: for when by their Policy or good Fortune they have acquired never
so much Wealth or Power, and all other transitory Goods, and are blessed with
Children to inherit them, if the Principles of Natural Philosophy be mis-laid,
we oftentimes see the ignorance or the mistake of a Doctor, deprive them of all
at once, and show how dangerous it is to be sollicitous of the means of
attaining the accommodations of Life, with the contempt of that Knowledge which
in very many cases is humanely necessary to the preservation of Life it self.

But, Pyrophilus, though our unintended prolixity in the former part of our
Discourse concerning the Usefulness of Physiology, oblige us to the greater
brevity in this latter part of it; yet to show you, That of the two things,
which you may remember we told you Pythagoras pronounced most God like in Man
(The Knowledge of Truth, and the Doing of Good) Physiology as well qualifies us
for the latter, as it inriches us with the former. It will not be amiss a
little more particularly (though as succinctly as so copious a Subject will
permit) to consider the probability there is that no small Improvement may be
made by Men's proficiency in Experimental Knowledge of those Arts which are the
chiefest Instruments of Man's dominion over the Creatures. These Arts (to
divide them not accurately, but popularly) do serve either to relieve Man's
necessities, as Physic and Husbandry; or for his accommodation, as the Trades
of Shoo-makers, Diers, Tanners, etc. or for his delight, as the Trades of
Painters, Confectioners, Perfumers, etc. to all which Arts, and many others
allied to them, Philosophical Experiments and Observations, may, by a knowing
Naturalist, be made to extend a meliorating Influence.

If I should, Pyrophilus, say this, without offering any thing at all by way of
Proof that I say it not inconsideratly, You would, I fear, believe, that I
deliver it too slightly for a Matter of that moment: And if, on the other side,
I should in this Discourse present to you all the Particulars that I think I
could, without Impertinency, employ to countenance what I have said, it would
swell this Treatise to a Volumn, and defraud diverse of my other Essays. And
therefore I hold it not unfit to choose a middle way, and set down, on this
occasion, either only or chiefly those things which do the most readily occur
to me, and do not so properly belong to the rest of my physiological papers.
And to avoid Confusion, I shall, according to the Division newly proposed,
employ one Section of this Second part of the present Treatise, in setting down
such things as relate to the Improvement of Physic: And in the other Section,
deliver such particulars as concern those other useful Arts that depend upon
Natural philosophy. But in regard that (as I have already intimated) the
following Discourse is to consist chiefly of those things that belong not to
any of my other Essays, You will not, I presume, expect that I should handle
any subject fully or Methodically on this occasion: Which warning I especially
intend for that part of the ensuing Discourse that relates to physic. For you
will easily believe, that I am far from pretending to be a Doctor in that
Faculty: And accordingly, in this and the four following Essays, I shall only
throw together diverse such particulars as not belonging to my Writings, would,
perhaps be lost, if I did not lay hold on this Opportunity for their
preservation, of which they are not altogether judged unworthy by some knowing
Men, whose Encouragements, to mention them to you, have dissuaded me from
wholly passing by, in this Discourse Matters properly Medical, what scruples
soever I had to venture at speaking of them, Especially since I have not now
the Convenience to furnish these Essays with diverse Particulars (by some
thought not inconsiderable) which I may, pe^haps be invited to add to them
hereafter, if I find by your Reception of these that the others are like to be
welcome.

To say something then of Physic, and to suppose the fitness of the now
received division of it into five Parts: The Physiological (the Physician
taking that in a stricter sense then Philosophers, and then we do every where,
save in this Essay) Pathological, Semeiotical, Hygieinal and Therapeutical, let
us briefly take notice how each of these is indebted to, or capable of being
improved by experienced Naturalists. And indeed, such is the affinity between
Natural Philosophy and Physic, or the dependence of this on that, that we need
not wonder at the judicious Observation of Aristotle, Arist. lib. de sensu and
sensili, cap. 1.
where he thus writes, Naturalium fere plurimis and Medicorum, qui magis
Philosophice artem prosequuntur, illi quidem finiunt ad ea, quae de Medicina;
hi vero ex iis qua de Natura, incipiunt quae de Medicina. But we must instance
these things more particularly: And first for Physiology, it is apparent, That
the Physician takes much of his Doctrine in that part of his Art from the
Naturalist: (...) to ment^on now no other parts of Physiology, in its stricter
acception, the experience of our own age may suffice to manifest, what light
the Anatomical doctrine of Man's Body may receive from Experiments made on other
subjects. For since it were too barbarous, and too great a violation of the
Laws, not only of Divinity but Humanity, to dissect humane Bodies alive, as
did Herophilus and Erasistratus, who (as I find in some of the Ancients)
obtained of Kings the Bodies of Malefactors for that purpose, and scrupled not
to destroy Man to know him; And since, nevertheless diverse things in Anatomy,
as particularly the motion of the Blood and Chyle cannot be discovered in a
dead dissected Body (where the cold has shut up and obliterated many Passages)
that may be seen in one opened alive; it must be very advantageous to a
Physicians Anatomical knowledge, to see the Dissections of Dogs, Swine, and
other live Creatures, made by an inquisitive Naturalist: Consonantly whereunto
we may remember, that the discoveries of the milky Vessels in the Mesentery by
Asellius, of those in the Thorax by Pecquet, and of the Vasa Limphatica by
Bartholinus, were first made in Brute Bodies, though afterward found to hold
in humane ones. Nor is it a small convenience to the Anatomist, that he may in
the Bodies of Bruits make diverse instructive Experiments, that he dares not
venture on in those of Men; as for instance, that late noble, and by many not
yet credited Experiment of taking out the Spleen of a Dog without killing him:
For that this Experiment may be very useful, we may elsewhere have occasion to
show. And that it is possible to be safely made (though many, I confess, have
but unprosperously attempted it, and it has been lately pronounced impossible
in Print) our selves can witness. And because I have not yet met with any
Author that professes himself not to relate this Experiment (of the exemption
of a Dogs Spleen) upon the credit of others, but as an eyewitness; I am
content to assure you, That that dextrous Dissector, Dr Jolive (of whom we
formerly made mention) did the last Year, at my request, take out the Spleen of
a young Setting-dog I brought him: And that it might not be pretended, the
Experiment was unfaithfully or favorably made, I did part of it my self, and
held the Spleen (which was the largest in proportion to his Body that ever I
saw) in my Hand, whilst he cut assunder the Vessels, reaching to i^, that I
might be sure there was not the least part of the Spleen left unextirpated, and
yet this Puppy, in less then a Fortnight, grew not only well, but as sportive
and as wanton as before: which I need not take pains to make you believe, since
you often saw him at your Mothers House, whence at length he was stolen. And
though I remember the famous Emperick Fiorouanti, in one of his Italian Books,
mentions his having been prevailed with by the importunity of a Lady (whom he
calls Marulla Greca) much afflicted with Splenetick distempers, to rid her of
her Spleen; and adds, That she outlived the loss of it diverse Years. Yet he
that considers the situation of that part, and the considerableness of the
Vessels belonging to it in humane Bodies, will probably be apt to think, that
though his relation may be credited, his venturousness ought not to be
imitated. The Experiment also of detaining Frogs under Water for very many
hours (sometimes amounting to some days) without suffocation, may, to him that
knows that Frogs have Lungs and Breath as well as other Terrestrial Animals,
appear a considerable discovery, in order to the determining the Nature of
Respiration. Besides, the scrupulousness of the Parents or Friends of the
deceased Persons, deprives us oftentimes of the Opportunities of Anatomizing
the Bodies of Men, and much more those of Women, whereas those of Beasts are
almost always and every where to be met with. And 'twas, perhaps, upon some
such account, that Aristotle said that the external parts of the Body were best
known in Men, the internal in Beasts, Sun^ enim (says Arist. Hist. Any. l^b. 1.
cap. 16.
he, speaking of the inward parts) hominum imprimis incertae atque incognitae:
quamobrem ad caeterorum animalium parts quarum similes sunt humanae referentes
eas contemplari debemus. And questionless in many of them, the frame of the
parts is so like, that of those answerable in Men, that he that is but
moderately skilled in Andratomy (as some of the Moderns call the Dissection of
Man's Body, to distinguish it from Zootomy, as they name the Dissections of the
Bodies of other Animals) may, with due diligence and industry, not despicably,
improve his Anatomical knowledge. In confirmation of which truth, give me leave
to observe to you, That though Galen has left to us so many, and by Physicians
so much magnified Anatomical Treatises, yet not only diverse of those Modern
Physicians, that would eclipse his Glory, deny him to have learned the skill he
pretends to, out of the inspection of the Dissected Bodies of Men or Women, or
so much as to ever have seen a humane Anatomy. But I find even among his
Admirers, Physicians that acknowledge that his Knives were much more conversant
with the Bodies of Apes, and other Bruits, then with those of Men, which in his
time those Authors say 'twas thought little less then Irreligious, if not
Barbarous, to mangle; which is the less to be wondered at, because even in this
our Age, that great People of the Muscovites, though a Christian and European
Nation, has denied Physicians the use of Anatomy and Skeletons; the former, as
an inhumane thing; the latter, as fit for little but Witchcraft, as we are
informed by the applauded Writer Olearius, Secretary to the Embassy lately send
by that Learned Prince, Voyage de Muscovie and de Perse, page 128
the present Duke of Holsteine, into Moscovia and Persia. And of this, the same
Author gives us the instance of one Quirin, an excellent German Chyrurgion,
who, for having been found with a Skeleton, had much ado to escape with his
Life, and was commanded to go out of the Kingdom, leaving behind him his
Skeleton, which was also dragged about, and afterward burnt.

To these things we may add, Pyrophilus, that the diligence of Zootomists may
much contribute to illustrate the Doctrine of Andratomy, and both inform
Physicians of the true use of the parts of a humane Body, and help to decide
diverse Anatomical Controversies. For as in general it is scarce possible to
learn the true Nature of any Creature, from the consideration of the single
Creature it self: so particularly of diverse parts of humane Body it is very
difficult to learn the true use, without consulting the Bodies of other
Animals, wherein the part inquired after is by Nature either wholly left out as
needless, or wherein its differing bigness, or situation, or figure, or
connection with, and relation to other parts, may render its use more
conspicuous, or at least more discernable.

Th^s Truth may be somewhat illustrated by the following Observations, which at
present offer themselves to my thoughts upon this occasion.

The Lungs of Vipers, and other Creatures (whole Hearts and whose Blood, even
whilst it circulates, we have always found, as to sense, actually cold) may
give us just occasion to inquire a little more warily whether the great use of
Respiration be to cool the Heart.

The sudden falling and continuing together, which we may observe in that part
at least of a Dogs Lungs, that is on the same side with the Wound, upon making
a large Wound in his Chest, though the Lungs remain untouched, is a
considerable Experiment, in order to the discovery of the principal Organ of
Respiration.

If you dexterously take out the Hearts of Vipers, and of some smaller Fishes,
whose coldness makes them beat much more unfrequently and leisurely, then those
of warm Animals, the contraction and relaxation of the Fibers of the Heart may
be distinctly observed, in order to the deciding or reconciling the
Controversy about the cause and manner of the Hearts motion, betwixt those
Learned modern Anatomists, that contend, some of them, for Dr. Harvey's
Opinion; and others, for that of the Cartesians.

Toward satisfying my self in which difficulty, I remember, I have sometimes
taken the Heart of a Flownder, and having cut it transversly into two parts,
and pressed out, and with a Linen cloth wiped off the Blood contained in each
of them, I observed, that for a considerable space of time, the severed and
bloodless parts held on their former contraction and relaxation. And once I
remember that I observed, not without Wonder, That the severed portions of a
Flownders Heart, did not only, after their Blood was drained, move as before,
but the whole Heart, observed for a pretty while, such a succession of motion
in its divided and exsanguious pieces, as I had taken notice of in them whilst
they were coherent, and as you may with pleasure both see and feel in the
entire Heart of the same Fish.

Some of the other Controversies agitated among Anatomists and Philosophers,
concerning the use of the Heart, and concerning the principal seat of Life and
Sense, may also receive light from some such Experiments, that we made in the
Bodies of Bruits, as we could not of Men.

And the first of these that we shall mention, shall be an Experiment that we
remember our selves formerly to have made upon Frogs: For having opened one of
them alive, and carefully cut out his Heart, without closing up the Orifice of
the Wound (which we had made wider then was necessary) the Frog notwithstanding
leaped up and down the Room as before, dragging his Entrals (that hung out)
after him; and when he rested, would upon a puncture leap again, and being put
into the Water, would swim, whilst I felt his Heart beating betwixt my
Fingers. The Hearts of others of them were taken out at an Incision, no greater
then was requisite for that purpose; when we had stitched or pined up the
Wound, we observed them to leap more frequently and vigorously then the former:
They would, as before they were hurt, close and open their Eye lids upon
occasion: Being put into a Vessel not full of Water, they would as orderly
display their fore and hinder Legs in the manner requisite to swimming, as if
they wanted none of their parts, especially not their Hearts; they would rest
themselves sometimes upon the surface of the Water, sometimes at the bottom of
it, and sometimes also they would nimbly leap, first out of the Vessel, and
then about the Room, surviving the exsection of their Hearts; some about an
hour, and some longer. And that which was further remarkable in this
Expe^iment, was, that we could, by gently pressing their Breast and Belly with
our Fingers, make them almost at pleasure make such a noise, as to the
Bystanders made them seem to croak; but how this Experiment will be reconciled
to the Doctrine ascribed to Mr. Hobs, or to to that of the Aristotelians, who
tell us, That their Master taught, the Heart to be the seat of Sense (whence
also though erroneously, he made it the original of the Nerves) let those that
are pleased to concern themselves to maintain all his Opinions, consider.

And whereas Frogs, though they can move thus long without the Heart, yet they
cannot at all bear the exemption or spoiling of the Brain; we will add what we
have observed, even in hot Animals, whose Life is conceived to be much more
suddenly dissipable, and the motion of each part much more dependent upon the
influence of the Brain: We opened then an Egg, wherein the Chick was not only
perfectly formed, but well furnished with Feathers, and having taken him out of
the Membrane that involved him, and the Liquors he swam in, and laid him on his
Back on a flat piece of Glass, we clipped away, with a pair of Sciffers, the
Head and the Brest-bone; whereby the Heart became exposed to view, but remained
fastened to the Headless Trunk: and the Chick lying in this posture, the Heart
continued to beat above a full hour, and the Ears seemed to retain their motion
a pretty while after the Heart it self had lost his; the motion of none of the
other Parts appearing many moments to survive the loss of the Head: and which
is most considerable, the seemingly dead Heart was diverse times excited to new,
though quickly ceasing motion, upon the puncture of a Pin, or the point of a
Penknife. And to evince that this was no casual thing, the next Day we dealt
with the Chick of another Egg, taken from the same Hen, after the above
recited manner; and when the motion of the Heart and Ears began to cease, we
excited it again, by placing the Glass over the warm steam of a Vessel full of
hot Water, bringing still new Water from off the Fire to continue the heat,
when we perceived the former Water to begin to cool; and by this means we kept
the Heart beating for an hour and an half by measure. And at another time, for
further satisfaction, we did, by these and some other little industries, keep
the Heart of a somewhat elder Chick, though exposed to the open Air, in motion,
after we had carefully clipped off the Head and Neck, for the space of (if our
memory do not much mis inform us) two hours an^ an half by measure. Upon what
conjectures we expected so lasting a motion in the Heart of a Chick, after it
had lost the Head, and consequently the Brain, would be more tedious and less
fit to be mentioned in this place, then the strange vivacity we have sometimes,
not without wonder, observed in Vipers: Since not only their Hearts clearly
severed from their Bodies may be observed to beat for some hours (for that is
common with them to diverse other cold Animals) but the Body it self may be
sometimes two or three days after the Skin, Heart, Head, and all the Entrals
are separated from it, seen to move in a twining or wrigling manner: Nay (what
is much more) may appear to be manifestly sensible of punctures, being put into
a fresh and vivid motion, when it lay still before, upon the being pricked,
especially on the Spine or Marrow with a Pin or Needle.

And though Tortoises be in the Indies many of them very large Animals, yet
that great Traveller, Vincent le Blanc, in his French Voyages, giving a very
particular account of those Tortoyses, which the East Indian King of Peg^ (who
was much delighted with them) did, with great curiosity, cherish in his Ponds,
adds this memorable Passage as an Eyewitness of what he relates: When the King
has a mind to eat of them, they cut off their heads, and five days after they
are prepared; and yet after those five days they are alive, as we have often
experienced. Now although I will not say, that these Experiments prove, that
either it is in the Membranes that sensation resides (though I have sometimes
doubted whether the Nerves themselves be not so sensible, chiefly as they are
invested with Membranes) or that the Brain may not be confined to the Head, but
may reach into the rest of the Body, after another manner then is wont to be
taught: Yet it may be safely affirmed, that such Experiments as these may be of
great concernment, in reference to the common Doctrine of the necessity of
unceasing influence from the Brain, being so requisite to Sense and Motion,
especially if to the lately mentioned Particulars we add on this occasion what
we have observed of the Butter-flies, into which Silkworms have been
Metamorphosed; namely, That they may not only, like common Flys, and diverse
other winged Insects, survive a pretty while the loss of their Heads, but may
sometimes be capable of Procreation after having lost them: as I not long since
tried (though not perhaps without such a Reluctance as Aristotle would have
blamed in a Naturalist) by cutting off the Heads of such Butter-flies of either
Sex. Quamvis enim Mas cui prius amputatum est caput nequaquam adduci posset
(quaecunque Insecti illius est salacitas) ut Faeminam comprimeret: Decollata
tamen Faemina marem alacriter admisit. Et licet post horas aliquot coitu
insumptas it a requierit immota ut mortuam per multas horas cogitarem; non
solum quia omnem penitus motum perdiderat, and in Thorace satis magnum
apparebat foramen, quod a part aliqua Corporis simul cum capite a trunco
disrupta factum videbatur; verum etiam quoniam eodem permansit statu idque per
plures horas, ultra tempus quo, post coitionem cum Mare hujus generis
Animalcula solent ordiri prolificationem. Tandem vero postquam jam diu de Vita
ejus desperatum esset, Ova faetare tam confertim coepit ut vel exiguo temporis
intervallo eorum plura in manu mea deponeret. An vero Prolifica sint futura
nondum comperi.

Their Opinion that ascribe the redness of the Blood to the color of the
Liver, through which it passes, is not discountenanced by the Livers of Men:
But in Hen-eggs, about the third or fourth day after incubation (for we have
found the circumstances of time much to vary) you may observe the Punctum
saliens, or Heart, to be ever and anon full of conspicuously red Blood, before
the naked Eyes can so much as discern a Liver, at least before they can
discover in it any redness; a yellowness being all I could observe in the
Parenchyma of the Livers of diverse Chickens perfectly formed, and furnish^d
with Feathers, though not great enough to make their way out of the Shell. And
in diverse great Fishes I have found the Vessels of the Liver full of very red
Blood, though the Parenchyma or substance of it were white, or at least did not
at all participate much less impart a sanguine color.

The Doctrine so unanimously delivered by Physicians and Chirurgions,
concerning the irreparable loss of the Limb of an Animal, once violently
severed from the Body, will appear unfit to be admitted, without some
restriction by what may be experienced in Lizards, in Lobsters and Craw-fishes,
and perhaps in some other living Creatures. For of Lizards it has been often
observed in hot Countries, and even in France, that their Tails being struck
off will grow again. And the like has been of old observed by Pliny, and the
experienced Bontius delivers it upon his own knowledge in these words: Hoc in
domesticis meis non semel animadverti dum filioli mei lusitabundi bacillo
caudas iis decutiebant, quas tamen post diem unum aut alterum ad solitum
pabulum revertentes vidi, caudasque iis paulatim reaccrescere.

That the Claws likewise of Lobsters being torn off, another will sometimes
grow in the room of it, is not only said by Fishermen, but has been affirmed
to me by very credible persons, one of which assured me, that he himself had
observed it very often. And I am the more apt to believe it, because the like
is to be met with among Craw-fishes, which are so like Lobsters, that by many
they are taken (though not considerately enough) to be but a smaller kind of
them. For I remember, that going to look upon a Repository where a multitude of
them was kept, and causing diverse of the fairest to be drawn up, that I might
take the stony concretions, commonly called Oculi Cancrorum, out of their Heads
I observed one large Fish that had one of his Claws proportionable to the bulk
of his Body, but the other so short and little, that the greater seemed to be
four or five times as big as it; whereupon its good shape and fresh color,
seeming to argue it to be but young and growing, invited me to ask one of them
that had the oversight of the Fish, whether he had formerly seen any Claws torn
off to grow again; he affirmed to me, That in that sort of Fish it was very
usual.

I could also tell you how fruitlesly I have indeavored to discover that
stomachical Acidity, to which many of our Modern Physicians are pleased to
ascribe the first digestion of the Nutriment of Animals, in the purposely
dissected Stomachs of ravenous Sea-fishes, in whose Stomachs, though our taste
could not perceive any sensible acidity, yet we found in one of them a couple
of Fishes, each of them about a Foot long, whereof the one, which seemed to
have been but newly devoured, has suffered little or no alteration in the
great Fishes Stomach; but the other had all its outside, save the Head,
uniformly wasted to a pretty depth, beneath the former surface of the Body, and
looked as if it had been not boiled, or wrought upon by any considerable heat,
but uniformly corroded, like a piece of Silver Coin kept a while in
Aquafortis, according to the criminal tricks of Adulterators of Money.

Yet I am loath, till I have perfected what I design in order to that enquiry,
either to embrace or reject the Opinion I find so general among the Moderns,
concerning the Solution of Meat in the Stomach by something of Acid. And I
remember, that when I was considering what might be alleged for, as well as
against that Opinion, I devised this Experiment, among others, in favor of it:
I provided a Liquor, with which I drenched a piece of the Wing of a roasted
Pullet, hav^ng first well crushed it between my Fingers, to make some amends
for the omission of chewing it; and having a little incorporated the Liquor and
the musculous Flesh, they immediately changed color, and in about an hour,
grew to be a kind of Gelly, in color and consistence not unlike Quince
Marmalade: This mixture, by the next Morn^ng, did, as I expected, turn to a
deep Blood red, or sometimes rather a lovely purple Liquor, though all this
while there had been no external heat employed to promote the action of the
Menstruum. And the like Experiment I tried also with a piece of Mutton, with
Bread, and a piece of Veal, and other edible things, which at that time occurred
to me, and found the operation of the Liquor almost uniform, though it seemed
to act most effectually upon Flesh. And to gratify in some measure your
curiosity, Pyrophilus, I am content to tell you, that the Menstruum was drawn
from Vitriol, and that with the bare Oil of it I have (though I could not with
Aqua fortis) performed no less then what I have yet mentioned; but least this
should be thought a digression, let it suffice to have, on this occasion,
mentioned thus much upon the by.

To what we lately took notice of concerning the Heart, may be added, That on
the Seacoast of Ireland, I observed a sort of Fishes, about the bigness of
Mackrels, whose Hearts were of an inverted Figure, compared to those of other
Animals, the basis or broad end of the Heart being nearest the Tail, and the
accuminated part or apex being coherent to the great Artery, and respecting the
Head.

To all these trifling Observations, diverse more considerable ones might be
added, but they may be more seasonably insisted on elsewhere; and those already
mentioned, may suffice to let you see, That the Naturalist by his Zootomy, may
be very serviceable to the Physician in his Anatomical Inquiries.

Nor is it only by the dissection of various Animals, that the Naturalist may
promote the Anatomists knowledge, but perhaps also he may do it by devising
ways to make the dead Bodies of Men, and other Animals, keep longer then
naturally they would do: For since experience teaches us, That Men find it
very easy to forget the originations, windings, branchings, insertions, and
other circumstances of particular Vessels, and other parts of the Body, as well
as those that study Botanicks, are wont to complain of their easy forgetting,
the shapes, differences, and alterations of smaller Plants, it cannot but be a
great help to the Student of An^tomy, to be able to preserve the parts of
humane Bodies, and those of other Animals, especially such Monsters as are of a
very singular or instructive Fabric, so long that he may have recourse to them
at pleasure, and contemplate each of them so often and so considerately, till
he have taken sufficient notice of the shape, situation, connection, etc. of
the Vessel, Bone, or other part, and firmly impressed an Idea of it upon his
memory, We find our selves much helped to retain in our memory, the figures
and differences of Vegetables, by those Books which some curious Botanists
make, wherein the Plants themselves, artificially dried, are displayed upon,
and fastened to Leaves of white Paper; if it were not for one of those Books,
wherein I have in one vast Volumn almost all the Plants of one of the chief
Physick-gardens in Europe, I should every Year forget, by the end of Winter, to
know again most of the smaller Plants I had learned to take notice of in the
Spring. And by the way it is observable, how long Plants, by being carefully
indeed, but barely dried in the shade betwixt Sheets of Paper, which help to
soak up the superfluous moisture, may be preserved. For I have diverse Years had
an Herbal, wherein several of the Flowers, and other Plants, retain their
native yellow and blue, etc. (but somewhat faint) though by the date it
appeared to be 22 or 23 Years old. And I am apt to think, that it would be very
possible for Anatomists also to preserve the Bodies they contemplate for a
considerable time: For experience has informed us in good number of such
Animals, that Butter-flies, and diverse other flying Insects, may have their
shape and colors preserved, I know not how long, by running them through in
some convenient part with Pins, and therewith sticking them to the inside of
large Boxes. And on this occasion, I remember, that having sometimes reflected
upon the Lasting of Spiders, Flys, and other small living Creatures, that
having been casually enclosed in Amber whilst it was soft, are ever preserved
entire and uncorrupted, I thought it not amiss to try whether some Substance,
like Amber (at least as to the newly mentioned use of it) might not easily be
prepared by Art: And hereupon I quickly found, that by taking good clear Venice
Turpentine, and gently evaporating away about a third part of it (sometimes
more, sometimes less, according to the exigency of my particular purpose) I
could make a reddish Gum, diaphanous and without Bubbles, which would melt with
a very gentle heat, and easily (being suffered to cool) become again so hard as
to be brittle. This resinous Substance should be melted with as little heat as
is possible (and therefore should be first powdered) that the texture of the
Vegetable or Animal Bodies to be cased over with it, might receive the less
alteration: And when it is brought to the requisite degree of fluidity, then
the Body to be preserved (being, if that be needful, stuck through with a Pin)
must be gently plunged into it, and presently taken out and suffered leisurely
to cool, being turned, from time to time, this way or that way, if there be
occasion, that the investing Matter may be every where of an equal thickness
upon it. And if at the first time the Case be not thick enough, it may again,
when it is cold, be immersed into the liquid Matter (as Chandlers are wont to
thicken their Candles, by dipping them frequently into melted Tallow) of which
some will every way adhere to it. And though these Cases be inferior to Amber,
in regard of their being more apt to be sulli'd by dust, or otherwise; yet that
inconvenience may be easily remedied, by keeping them shut up in Glasses or
Boxes, at those times when one has not occasion to consider them: And their
clearness (especially if they be thin) and their smooth surfaces, together with
their exactly keeping out the Air from the Body they enclose, may, perhaps,
make so cheap and easy an Experiment a not unwelcome trifle, especially
considering how easily it is capable of Improvement.

But to return to the Preservation of more bulky Bodies, it is a known thing, to
the Collectors of Rarities, that the external Idea of F^shes, Crocodiles,
Birds, and even Horses, may be preserved for many Years, by taking out the more
corruptible parts, and stuffing their prepared Skins with any convenient
Matter. And that the internal membranous parts of Bodies may be long and easily
kept from putref^ction, is not unknown to many Anatomists. And not to mention
what we have tried of this sort, we have seen the Veins, Arteries, and Nerves
of a humane Body, laid out in their natural situation upon three Boards, by the
pains and skill of an accurate Anatomist of Padua. And elsewhere, Uterum
vidimus atque omnia mulieris genitalia, together with the Bladder, all displaid
upon a Board, preserved for many Years so entire, and in a situation so near
the Natural, that this Scheme was far more instructive, then the most accurate
Printed one could possibly be. We have likewise known the flesh of Vipers, kept
not only sweet, but efficacious, for diverse Years, by the smoke of a peculiar
Powder, chiefly consisting of Aromatic Ingredients, and of which, you,
Pyrophilus, may command the Composition.

We have also seen the Skeleton of a Monky, made, by an excellent French
Chyrurgion of our acquaintance, whereon the Tendons and Fibers of the Muscles
were so preserved, that it was looked upon as a rarity, very useful to show
their Originations and Insertions, and to explain the motions of the Limbs: And
perhaps there may be some way to keep the Arteries and the Veins too, when they
are emptied of Blood, plump, and unapt to shrink overmuch, by filling them
betimes with some such substance, as, though fluid enough when it is injected
to run into the Branches of the Vessels, will afterward quickly grow hard.
Such may be the liquid Plaster of burnt Alabaster, formerly mentioned, or
Ising-glass steeped two days in Water, and then boild up, till a drop of it in
the cold will readily turn into a still Gelly. Or else Saccarum Saturni, which,
if it be dissolved often enough in Spirit of Vinager, and the Liquor be each
time drawn off again, we have observed to be apt to melt with the least heat,
and afterward to grow quickly into a somewhat brittle consistence again. But I
must not insist on these Fancies, but rather add, That I have known an Embrio,
wherein the parts have been very perfectly delineated and distinguishable,
preserved unputrifi'd for several Years; and I think it still continues so, by
being seasonably and artificially embalmed with Oil (if I much mis-remember
not) of Spikes. And I have elsewhere seen a large Embrio, which after having
been preserved many Years, by means of another Liquor (whose composition I do
as yet but guess at) did, when I saw it, appear with such an admirable
Entireness, Plumpness, and Freshness, as if it were but newly dead: And that
which concurs to make me hope that some nobler w^y may be yet found out, for,
the preservation of dead Bodies, is, that I am not convinced that nothing can
powerfully resist Putrefaction in such Bodies, but things that are either
saline and corrosive, or else hot; nor that the Embalming Substances cannot be
effectually applied, without ripping open the Body to be preserved by them. For
Josephus Acosta, a sober Writer, relates, That in certain American Mountains,
Men, and the Beasts they ride on, sometimes are killed with the Winds, which
yet preserve them from putrefaction, without any other help. So insensible a
quantity of Matter, such as it may be, may, without Incision made into the
Body, both pervade it, and as it were Embalm it. I know also a very experienced
and sober Gentleman, who is much talked off for curing of Cancers in Women's
Breasts, by the outward Application of an Indolent Powder; some of which he
also gave me, but I have not yet had the opportunity to make trial of it: And I
shall anon tell you, that I have seen a Liquor, which without being at all
either acid or caustic, is in some Bodies far mo^e effectual against
Putrefaction, then any of the corrosive Spirits of Nitre, Vitriol, Salt, etc.
and then any of the other saline Liquors that are yet in use. We have also
tried a way of preserving Flesh with Musk, whose effects seemed not despicable
to us, but must not here be insisted on.

Nor were it amiss that diligent Trial were made what use might be made of
Spirit of Wine, for the Preservation of a humane Body: For this Liquor being
very limpid, and not greasy, leaves a clear prospect of the Bodies immersed in
it; and though it do not fret them, as Brine, and other sharp things commonly
employed to preserve Flesh are wont to do, yet it has a notable Balsamic
Faculty, and powerfully resists Putrefaction, not only in living Bodies (in
which, though but outwardly applied, it has been found of late one of the
potentest Remedies against Gangrens) but also in dead ones. And I remember that
I have sometimes preserved in it some very soft parts of a Body for many
Months (and perhaps I might had done it for diverse Years, had I had
opportunity) without finding that the consistence or shape was lost, much less,
that they were either putrifi'd or dried up: We have also, by mixing with it
Spirit of Wine, very long preserved a good quantity of Blood, so sweet and
fluid, that 'twas wondered at by those that saw the Experiment. Nay, we have
for curiosity sake, with this Spirit, preserved from further stinking, a
portion of Fish, so stale, that it shined very vividly in the dark; in which
Experiment, we also aimed at discovering whether this resplendent quality of
the decaying Fish would be either cherished, or impaired by the Spirit of Wine
(whose operations in this trial we elsewhere inform you of) and it would be no
very difficult matter for us to improve, by some easy way, this Balsamical
Virtue of Spirit of Wine, in case you shall think it worth while: But not to
anticipate what I may more properly mention to you elsewhere, I shall at
present say no more touching the Conservation of Bodies, since probably by all
these, and some other Particulars, we may be induced to hope so well of humane
Industry, as not to despair, that in time some such way of preserving the
Bodies of Men, and other Animals, will be found out, as may very much
Facilitate, and Advance too, Anatomicall Knowledge. Neither is it only by
advancing This, that the Naturalist may promote the Physiologicall Part of
Physic: for since the Body consists not only of firm and consistent Parts, as
the Bones, Muscles, Heart, Liver, etc. but of fluid ones, as the Blood, Serum,
Gall, and other Juices. And since consequently to the complete Knowledge of the
use of all the Parts we should investigate, not only the Structure of the Solid
ones, but the Nature of the Fluid ones, the Naturalist may do much more then
has yet been done, toward the perfecting of this Kowledge, not only by better
explicating what it is in general makes Bodies either Consistent or Fluid, but
by examining particularly, and especially in a Pyrotechnicall way, the Nature
of the several Juices of the Body, and by illustrating the Alterations that
those Juices, and the Aliments they are made of, receive in the Stomach, Heart,
Liver, Kidneys, and other Viscera. For although a humane Body being the most
admirable Corporeal Piece of Wo^kmanship of the Omniscient Architect, it is
scarce to be hoped, but that even among the things that happen ordinarily and
regularly in it, there will be many which we shall scarce be able to reach with
our Understanding, much less to imitate with our Hands. Yet paradventure, if
Chymicall Experiments, and Mechanical Contrivances, were industriously, and
judiciously, associated by a Naturalist profoundly skilled in both, and who
would make it his Business to explain the Phenomenon of a Humane Body, not
only many more of them then at first one would think, might be made more
intelligible then as yet they have been; but diverse of them (especially those
relating to the motions of the Limbs and Blood) might be by artificial Engines
(consisting as the Pattern not only of Solid but Liquid and Spirituous Parts)
not ill represented to our very Senses: since a humane Body it self seems to
be but an Engine, wherein almost, if not more then almost, all the Actions
common to Men, with other Animals, are performed Mechanically. But of the
difference of these living Engines from others, I may elsewhere have a fitter
opportunity to discourse to You. For at present, Pyro: I have employed so much
of the little time my Occasions will allow me to spend upon the Treatise I am
now writing, in making out to you the Usefulness of Natural Philosophy, to
the Physiologicall Part of Physic, that I must not only not prosecute this
Subject, but must both hasten to mention, and to mention the more cursorily its
serviceablenesse to the four remaining Parts of the Physicians Art.

ESSAY II. Offering some Particulars relating to the Pathologicall Part of
Physic.
AND to say something in the next place of Pathology, that the Naturalists
knowledge may assist the Physician to discover the nature and causes of
several Diseases, may appear by the light of this Consideration, that, though
diverse Paracelsians (taught, as they tell us, by their Master) do but
erroniously suppose, that Man is so properly a Microcosme, that of all the
sorts of Creatures whereof the Macrocosme or Universe is made up, he really
consists; yet certain it is that there are many Productions, Operations, and
Changes of things, which being as well to be met with in the great, as in the
little world, and diverse of them disclosing their natures more discernably in
the former, then in the latter; the knowledge of the nature of those things as
they are discoverable out of man's body, may well be supposed capable of
illustrating many things in man's body, which receiving some Modifications
there from the nature of the Subject they belong to, pass under the notion of
the Causes or Symptoms of Diseases. If I were now, Pyrophilus, to discourse to
you at large of this Subject, I think I could convince you of the truth of what
I have proposed. And certainly, unless a Physician be, (which yet I fear every
one is not) so much a Naturalist, as to know how Heat, and Cold, and Fluidity,
and Compactnesse, and Fermentation, and Putrefaction, and Viscosity, and
Coagulation, and Dissolution, and such like Qualities, are generated and
destroyed in the generality of Bodies, he will be often very much to seek, when
he is to investigate the causes of preternaturall Accidents in men's bodies,
whereof a great many depend upon the Presence, or Change, or Vanishing of some
or other of the enumerated Qualities, in some of the Fluid or Solid Substances
that constitute the body. And that the Explications of a skillful Naturalist
may add much to what has hitherto commonly been taught concerning the Nature
and Origin of those Qualities, in Physicians Schools, a little comparing of
the vulgar Doctrine, with those various Phenomenon, to be met with among
Natural things, that ought to be, and yet seem not to be, explicable by it,
will easily manifest to you. And questionless it is a great advantage to have
been taught by variety of Experiments in other bodies, the Differing ways
whereby Nature sometimes produces the same effects. For since we know very
little a priori, the observation of many such effects, manifesting, that nature
does actually produce them so and so, suggests to us several ways of
explicating the same Phenomenon, some of which we should perhaps never else
have dreamed of. Which ought to be esteemed no small Advantage to the
Physician; since he that knows but one or few of Natures ways of working, and
consequently, is likely to ignore diverse of those whereby the proposed Disease
(or Symptom of it) may be produced, must sometimes conclude, that precisely
such or such a thing is the determinate Cause of it, and apply his Method of
relieving his Patient accordingly; which often proves very prejudicial to the
poor Patient, who dearly paies for his Physicians not knowing, That the Quality
that occasions the Distemper, may be as probably, if not more rationally,
deduced from an other Origin, then from that which is presumed. This will
scarce be doubted by him that knows how much more likely Explications then
those applauded some ages since, of diverse things that happen as well within as
without the body, have been given by later Naturalists, both Philosophers and
Physicians: and how much the Theory of the Stone, and many other diseases, that
has been given us by those many Physicians, that would needs deduce all the
Phenomenon of diseases from Heat, Cold, and other Elementary Qualities, is
Inferior to the Account given us of them by those ingenious Moderns, that have
applied to the advancement of Pathologie, that Circulation of the Blood, the
Motion of the Chile by the Milky vessels to the Heart, the consideration of the
effects deducible from the Pores of greater bodies, and the motion and
figuration of their minute parts, together with some of the more known
Chymicall Experiments: though both of those, and of the other helps mentioned
just before them, I fear men have hitherto been far enough from making the best
use, which I hope it will daily more and more appear they are capable of being
put to. He that has not had the curiosity to enquire out and consider the
several ways, whereby Stones may be generated out of the body, not only must
be unable satisfactorily to explicate how they come to be produced in the
Kidneys and in the Bladder, but will, perhaps, scarce keep himself from
embracing such errors, because authorized by the suffrage of eminent
Physicians, as the knowledge I am recommending would easily protect them from.
For we find diverse famous, and, otherwise, learned Doctors, who (probably
because they had not taken notice of any other way of hardening a matter once
soft into a stonelike consistence) have believed and taught that the Stone of
the Kidneyes is produced there by slime baked by the heat and dryness of the
Part; as a portion of soft Clay may, by external heat, be turned into a Brick
or Tile. And accordingly they have for cure, thought it sufficient to make use
of store of Remedies to moisten and cool the Kidneys; which, though in some
bodies this be very convenient, are yet far inferior in efficacy to those
Nobler medicines, that by specific qualities and properties are averse to such
coagulations as produce the Stone. But (not to mention what a Physician skilled
in Anatomy would object against this Theory from the nature of the part
affected) it is not unlike, the embraces of this Hypothesis would not have
acquiesc'd in it, if they had seen those putrefactions out of the bodies of
men, which we elsewhere mentioned. For these would have informed them, that a
Liquor abounding with petrescent parts, may not only turn Wood (as I have
observed in a petrifying Spring) into a kind of Stone, and may give to Cheese
and Moss without spoiling their pristine appearance a strong hardness and
weight; but may also produce large and finely shaped Christalline bodies
(though those I tried were much less hard then Crystal) in the bosom of the
cold water, which brings into my mind, that I have diverse times produced a
body of an almost stony hardness in less then half an hour, even in the
midst of the water, by tying up in a rag, about the quantity of a nutmeg, of
well and recently calcined Alabastre, which being thus tied up and thrown into
the botome of a basin full of water, did there speedily harden into a Lapideous
Concretion. And that even in the bodies of Animals themselves such concretions
may be generated much otherwise then the Hypothesis we have been speaking of
supposes, may appear by what happens to Craw-fishes, which though cold animals,
and living in the waters, have generated at certain seasons in their heads
Concretions, which for their hard and pulverizable consistence, diverse Authors
call lapides Cancrorum, though in the Shops they are often but abusively styled
Oculi cancrorum. And such strong concretions are affirmed to be generated in
these Fishes every Year, which I the less scrupled at, because I have not found
them at all times in the Head of the Fish. And besides, these and many more
Concretions, that had they been observed by the Physicians we have been
speaking of, might easily have kept them from acquiescing in, and maintaining
their improbable explication of the manner of the Stones nativity: There is yet
another kind of Coagulation, which may both be added to the former, and perhaps
also serve to recommend the use of Chemical Experiments, in investigating the
Causes of Diseases: This is made by the mixture of exquisitely dephlegm'd
Spirit of fermented humane Urine, with as exactly rect^fied Spirit of Wine; for
upon the confusion of those two volatile Liquors in a just proportion, they
will both of them, as after Lullius Experience has informed us, suddenly
coagulate into a white Mass, which Helmont calls Offa alba, and by which, he
endeavors to declare the procreation of the Duelech: for supposing himself to
have found in humane Urine a potential Aqua vitae, or Vinous Spirit, capable of
being excited by a putrid Ferment, Helmont de Lith: cap. 3. and 4.
and coagulable by the volatile Salt of the same Urine, if there were any
volatile Earth lurking in the Liquors, That being apprehended by the uniting
Spirits, and coagulated with them both; he supposes there may emerge from the
union of those three Bodies such an anomalous Concretion, as he, after
Paracelsus, calls Duelech.

And that a subtle Terrestrious Substance may lurk undiscerned, even in limpid
Liquors, may appear, not only in Wine, which rejects and fastens to the sides
of the containing Vessel, a Tartar, abounding in Terrestrious Feculency; and in
common Urine of healthy Men, which, though clear at its first emission into the
Urinal, does, after a little rest there, let fall an Hypostasis, or Sediment,
which, if distilled before fermentation, leaves in the bottom of the Cucurbite
an Earthy Substance, and commonly some Gravel: but even in rectified Spirit of
Urine it self, I have had opportunity to observe, That after very long keeping,
there has spontaneously precipitated a Feculency, copious enough in proportion
to the Liquor that afforded it. Nay, in an other parcel of Spirit of Urine,
that has been kept much longer then that already mentioned, we observed the
other day, that not only there was a Terrestrial residence fallen to the
bottom of the Glass, but to the sides of it as far as the Liquor reached, there
adhered a great multitude of small Concretions; which, as far as appeared by
looking on them through the Crystal Viol, to whose insides they were fastened,
were no other then little grains of Gravel, such as are often found sticking to
the sides of Urinals, employed by calculous persons.

To which we might add an Experiment of ours, whereby we are wont almost in a
moment, by barely mixing together a couple of Liquors, both of them distilled
and transparent, and yet not both of them salin'd to thick them very notably
and permanently, insomuch that they seem not to precipitate each other; yet
having once, for curiosity sake, distilled them with a pretty strong Fire, I
obtained a great quantity (as I remember, a fourth of the whole mixture) of a
blackish Mass, that was not only coagulated and dry, but even brittle: But of
the coagulation of distilled Liquors, such as even Chemists themselves are not
wont to look upon as at all disposed to coagulation, I may elsewhere have a
better opportunity to entertain you, and therefore I shall forbear to do it now.

And by this way, Pyrophilus, does Helmont, if I understand him aright, attempt
to make out the generation of the Stone in humane Bodies: In which Theory,
though some difficulties do yet keep me from acquiescing, yet, besides that
perhaps what you will meet with by and by (about the distillation of the
Duelech) may make you the less wonder at this explication. Besides this, I say,
granting that none of the enumerated ways of Petrescency (if I may so speak)
deserves to be looked upon as satisfactory; yet to give so much as an account,
not very absurd, of a Disease so anomalous and abstruse, and hitherto so
unluckily explicated by Physicians, is perhaps more difficult, then it were to
give (at least) a plausible account of diverse other Distempers.

And possibly it may be safely enough affirmed, That not only Physiology, in
its full extent, but that Handmaid to it, which is called Chemistry, may not a
little contribute to clear up the nature of both of the digestions, and of
those deficiencies or aberrations in them, which produce a great part of
Diseases; especially if we allow what, as well Physicians, as Spagyrists agree
in (whether warily enough or not, I shall not now dispute) viz. That whatever
is separable from Bodies by the Fire, was, as a Constituent Element (or
Principle) pre-existent in them.

Perhaps I need not mind you, Pyrophilus, that it is usual with the merely
Galenical Doctors themselves, to explicate the nature of Catarrhs, by comparing
the Stomach to a seething Pot, and the Head to an Alembick, where the ascending
Vapors, being, by the coldness of the Brain, condensed into a Liquor, sometimes
distill upon the Lungs, and sometimes fall upon other weakened parts; in which
explication, though for diverse reasons I cannot acquiesce, yet it may suffice
to show you how little scruple many Learned Men, not like to be partial in the
Case, would make of employing Chemical Operations to illustrate the Doctrine of
Diseases. And indeed, since the Liquors contained in the Body abound, diverse of
them, with saline or sulphurous parts, he that has been by Chemistry taught
the nature of the several sorts of Salts and Sulphurs, and both beheld and
considered their various actions one upon another, and upon other Bodies, seems
to have a considerable help to discourse groundedly of the Changes and
Operations of the humors, and other Juices contained in the Body, which he has
not that has never had Vulcan for his Instructor. He that finds that there
may be acid Juices in the Stomach, and elsewhere (as is frequently evident in
the sharp Liquors which many Stomachs cast up) and that there are also
Sulphurous Salts in the Body (as is apparent in Blood and Urine, which abound
with such.) He that knows that the Serum that swims upon the Blood out of the
Body, is by a gentle heat immediately coagulable into a thick whitish Substance,
not unlike a Custard; and that Chymically analiz'd Blood yields store of
volatile and sulphurous, but (as far as our trials have hitherto informed us)
no acid saltness.

He that knows that these animal Salts and Spirits may be so powerful, that we
have been able with Spirit of Urine, or of Hartshorn, to make a red Solution
of Flowers of Sulphur, and that with Spirit of Urine (though drawn without
violence of Fire) we have (as we elsewhere more particularly declare) dissolved
both in a very gentle heat, and in a very short time, the un-open'd Body of
crude Copper, so as to make thereof a Solution of a rich, deep, and even
opacous Blew: And that we have done almost the like with unrectified Spirit of
Man's Blood.

He that has, as we have done, examined by Fire (especially produced by the
help of a Burning-glass) that limpid Liquor that is to be found in the
Limphatick Vessels, and has taken notice of that odd consistence, smell,
crackling, and other qualities discernable in it by heat.

He that observes how acid Liquors loose their acidity, by working upon some
Bodies; as when Spirit of Viniger grows almost insipid upon the coral it has
corroded, and how those saline Liquors, by working upon certain Bodies,
degenerate into Salts of another nature, as we have sometimes observed in Oil
of Vitriol, working upon the fourth part of its weight of Quicksilver, and how
the contrariety of acid and sulphurous Salts makes them sometimes disarm,
sometimes, after some ebullition, precipitate each other; and sometimes unite
into a third substance, of a differing nature from either of those from whose
coalition it results, as we see in Tartaru^ Vitriolatu^; and, as I have
observed, in a Salt, I sometimes make to emerge from a due proportion of Oil of
Vitriol and Spirit of Urine, freed, after conjunction, from their aqueous
moisture: And He, in a word, that has carefully analiz'd and made trials on
many parts, both of the Macrocosm and Microcosm, and heedfully applied his
Experiments made on the former, to the illustration of the changes observable
in the latter, shall be likely to explicate diverse particulars in Pathology,
more intelligibly then he that is a stranger to Chemistry.

And though I am very unwilling to meddle with Medical Controversies, and am
apt to think, that Chemists are wont to speak somewhat too slightingly of the
humors of the humane Body, and allow them too little a share in the production
of Diseases; yet (to skip other reasons) the strange stories related by
Skenkius, and other eminent Physicians, of the corrosiveness of some Juices,
which, rejected by Urine or Vomits, have been able to boil on Brass, fret
Linen, and stain Silver; together with some odd Observations of this nature,
our selves have had opportunity to make, do very much incline us to believe,
That the generality of former Physicians have ascribed too much to the Humors,
under the notion of their being hot and dry, cold and moist, or endowed with
such other Elementary Qualities, and have taken a great deal too little notice
of the saline (if I may so speak) and Sulphurous Properties of things. And in
this Opinion I am not a little confirmed by the authority of Hippocrates
himself, both in other passages, and especially where he says, Non calidum,
frigidum, humidum, aut siccum, esse quod magnam agendi, vim habet, verum amarum
and salsum and dulce and acidum and insipidum and acerbum, etc. are the things
which, though inoffensive to the* Body, whilst they duly allay each other,
prove hurtful to it, and distemper it, when any of them comes to sever it self
from the rest, and grow predominant. And indeed, if the Juices of the Body were
more Chymically examined, especially by a Naturalist that knows the ways of
making fixed Bodies volatile, and volatile fixed, and knows the power of the
open Air in promoting the former of those Operations; it is not improbable,
that both many things relating to the nature of the Humors, and to the ways of
sweetning, acuating, and otherwise altering them may be detected, and the
importance of such Discoveries may be discerned.

And perhaps it would add to the usefulness of such an examination, if it
were extended to the noxious Juices in distempered bodies: such as the rotten
Phlegm spit up by those, whose Lungs are disaffected; the slimy excretions
voided in the Lyantery, and the liquor that distends the abdomen in the Dropsy
and Ascites: concerning which (to tell you that upon the by) I found that it
was of a differing nature from either Water or Urine. For a paracentecis being
made in the abdomen of one dangerously sick of this sort of Dropsy, I found
that the Liquor would keep a pretty while without putrefaction, (nor did the
Patient's body, when I afterward saw it opened, smell almost at all, though
the inside of the abdomen looked well near as black, as if it had been
sphacelated:) and having steam'd away some of it, whilst it was pretty fresh,
over a somewhat slow fire; it first coagulated into a substance like Whites of
Eggs, and, by a little farther evaporation, turned to such a glutinous
substance, as tradesmen are wont to call Size; and being kept longer on the
fire grew to be hard like fish glue, but more brittle, and transparent enough,
but with a little tincture of a greenish yellow; and some of the forementioned
liquor being distilled in a Retort, did toward the end of the operation so
darken the vessel with a thick blackish oil, as hindered me from discerning
what else perhaps I might have seen. And I suppose it may prove a useful
instance to the former purpose, if I somewhat circumstantially annex here what
occurred to me, when I was accidentally considering of the Calculus humanus.

Having therefore obtein'd of a skillful Lithotomist of my acquaintance diverse
Stones, which he had cut out of men's bladders, I chose a couple of them (which
were whitish almost, of equal bigness, and figure, which was near ovall, and
which together weighed about two ounces and an half, these with the help of a
strong knife I carefully opened, to find whether or no either of them consisted
of an entire and uniforme matter, (as most other stones, and even some calculi
humani do) and I found that each of them was made up of several shells, as it
were, successively involving one another, like the rinds of an Onion, and such
shells, but more soft, and more of a color; we likewise observed in a great
stone taken a while since out of an Oxe's Gall, and sent us for a present; and
though all of these were of an almost stony hardness, yet that hardness was
not equal in them all; and in one of the stones we observed one of the rinds
(to make use of that expression) to be of a differing color both frm that
which immediately embraced it, and from that which it immediately embraced: some
of these rinds equalled in thickness the length of a barley corn, and others
were somewhat thinner. Though they did closely embrace one another, yet they
were actually separable, as well as visibly distinguishable. And proceeding
very warily in the breaking one of these stones, we found that in the center of
it, there lay a small and soft ovall stone, as it were the kernel of those
conglomerated shells; and this kernel lay so loose, that with a little
industry and patience we picked it out of the shell, and kept it by us as a
rarity. This done, being desirous to know whither Chymicall tortures would
force these Concreats to a further confession of their nature, we caused them
to be finely powdered, and put into a small but strongly coated glass Retort,
whereunto luting a much larger Retort for a Receiver; we found that these two
ounces and half of powder, being distilled for some hours in a naked fire,
afforded us great store of volatile Salt (partly gray and partly white) which
almost coverd the inside of the Receiver, and a pretty quantity of reddish
spirit, which in the Receiver it self soon coagulated into Salt, and having
severed our vessels, we found in the neck of the Receiver a very little darkish
oil, but in the neck of the Retort a greater quantity of the same adust Oil,
incorporated with a pretty quantity of volatile Salt, whose smell did readily
recall to my mind that peculiar kind of stink which I had sometimes taken
notice of in the volatile Salt of unfermented Urine; nor were the taste of
these two Salts unlike. The caput mortuum consisted of a fine, light,
cole-black Powder, not unlike the finest sort of Soot; and by weighing but of
six Drachmes, it informed us, that above two thirds of the distilled calculi
humani had been, as being volatile, forced from the Terrestrial Parts, even in
a close Vessel, wherein the caput mortuum, though it were left insipid enough,
yet retained stink enough to make us think, it still contained pretty store of
heavy Oil: as indeed, having put it into a Crucible, and kept it a competent
while in a stronger fire, we found it reduced to about two Drachmes of a
br^ttle Mass of insipid white Calx, which did not slack, or fall asunder like
Lime when it is cast into Water.

To this Example of the usefulness of Chemistry, to discover the unobserved,
and otherwise scarce discoverable difference of the calculus humanus from other
stones; we may venture to add, That though some Paracelsians do take too much
liberty, when they crudely tell us, that there are arsenicall, vitriolate,
aluminous, and other mineral substances, generated in humane bodies, yet if
they had more warily proposed their Doctrine, it would not perhaps appear so
absurd, as they are wont to think it, who considering only the nature of the
Aliments men usually feed upon, cannot conceive that such being but either
Animals or Vegetables, can by so gentle a heat as that of man's body, (by which
they suppose all the changes of the Aliments must be effected,) be Exalted to
an energie like that of such bodies as are composed of active Mineral
substances, and have some of them perchance acquired a violence of operation
from the fire. But we see that Concretions, so like Stones, (which belong to
the Mineral Kingdom,) as to pass generally for such, may be produced in the
bodies not only of men but of sucking children, whose Aliment is fluid Milk:
and it seems a mistake to imagine (how many soever do so) that Heat must needs
be the Efficient of all the changes the matter of our Aliments may happen to
undergo in a humane body: where there are Streiners, and Solvents, and new
Mixtions, and perhaps Ferments, and diverse other powerful Agents, which by
successively working upon the assumed matter, may so fashion and qualify it,
as, in some cases, to bring the more disposed part of it to be not unlike even
fossile Salts, or other mineral substances. A very eminent person was lately
complaining to me, that in the fits of a distemper, which almost as much puzzls
her Physicians as her self, she sometimes vomits up something so sharp and
fretting, that, after it has burnt her throat in its passage, almost like
scalding water, it does not only Stain the Silver vessels that received it,
but also work upon them, as if it were a Corrosive Menstruum. And there dyed a
while since a very intelligent person, much employed in public affairs, who
complained to me, that in the fits of the strange distemper he labored under,
he diverse times observed, that, that part of his pillow which his breath passed
along, would by the strange fuliginous Steams, which that carried off with it,
be blackt over, as if it had been held in some sooty smoke or other.

We may also consider, that the Rainwater, which in its passage through a
Vine, or an Apricok-tree, or the like plants, is turned into a sweet fruit; in
its passage through those plants that bear Lemmons and Barberries, is
transmuted into a liquor sharp enough to corrode, not only Pearls but Coral,
lapides cancrorum, and other hard Concrets, as spirit of Vitrioll would do. And
writers of unsuspected credit, affirm, that an Indian fruit, (whose name I
cannnot readily call to mind) will speedily corrode and wast the very steel
knives it is cut with, if its Juice be left long upon them: and we see that some
sorts even of our Apples and Pears, will quickly black the blades of Knives on
which the Juice is suffered to continue. And least what I freshly mentioned
about Limmon trees, should be questioned, I will here add, that I remember
also that I have made not only some other hot and strongly tasted Herbs, but
even a Ranunculus it self, to grow and inc^ease notably in weight as well as
bulk, though I fed it but with fair water: and allowd it nothing else to shoot
its roots into. Wherefore since this plant is reckoned amongst those, that
either are poisonous, or want but little of being so; and since its operation
is so violent, that this sort of Vegetables, is taken notice of from the
experience of Country people, to be able by outward application to draw
blisters, and since nevertheless that which this plant, without any heat
discernable by the touch, transmutes into so virulent a substance, is but so
unactive a body as water; why may not such aliments, as may have in them diverse
parts of a far more operative nature, be in a humane body, by an unusual
concourse of Causes and Circumstances, so altered and exalted, as to approach
in operations (especially upon the more tender parts) to those of fossile Salts
or other Minerals? So that a Chemist might upon such an account, without any
great absurdity, teach some parcels of morbifick matter to be of an Arsenicall,
or a Vitriolate, or an Antimoniall nature, especially since we see that
sometimes Cancers, Ulcers, and sharp Juices generated in the body, do by their
vitiating and wasting the invaded parts, but too much emulate the pernicious
operations of Arsnick, and of fretting Salts: and the infusion of Antimonie
does scarce more stimulate nature to disburthen her self both upwards and
downwards, then does sometimes an humor, such as that which causes the Cholera
morbus, and perhaps more violent diseases.

And that such degenerations of Innocent aliments should sometimes happen in
discomposed bodies, you will perhaps think the less strange, if you duly
perpend what I lately mentioned, of the transmutation of Water into hot and
vesicatory substances; and if thereto I annex, that from a single pound of so
common and temperate an Aliment as Bread, I can by an easy way, (and that
without addition,) obtain many ounces of a menstruum, which (as trial has
informed) will work more powerfully upon bodies, more compact then some hard
mineralls, or perhaps Glass it self: then a wary Chemist would expect to see
Aqua fortis do. These things I have mentioned, Pyrophilus, to intimate some of
the Reasons, why I think Chymicall Experiments may be usefully applied, to
illustrate some things in Pathologie, either by imitating out of the body, the
production of some sorts of morbifick matter, or by such resolutions of that
which is generated in the body, as may conduce to the discovery of its nature.
And not that I think, as Spagyrists do, the experiments or notions of vulgar
Chemists sufficient to explicate the whole doctrine either of Digestion or of
Diseases: for it would be very difficult for them to make out the manner of
Nutrition, or so much as how they that feed only on Vegetables, should (to
propose the difficulty in their own Terms) have their Blood and Urine copiously
enriched with a volatile sulphurous Salt, of which sort, plants are not wont
to yield any in distillation. And much more difficult would it be for them by
principles peculiar to Chemists to make out the propagation of Hereditary
diseases: or how madness, and some other distempers, that do not visibly
vitiate the organes of those functions that they pervert, should not only prove
hereditary, but lurk very many years in the inheriting person's body, before
they begin to disclose themselves: and sometimes too, be transmitted from the
Grandfather to the Grandchild, and skip immediately the intervening Son. And
therefore I say again, that I pretend not that Vulgar Chemistry will enable a
Physician to explicate all or most of the Pathologicall Phenomenon; but that
True Chemistry may assist him to explicate diverse of them, which can scarce be
solidly explicated without it. And let me add, that he that thoroughly
understands the nature of Ferments and Fermentations, shall probably be much
better able then he that ignores them, to give a fair account of diverse
phenomenon of several diseases (as well Fevers as others) which will perhaps
be never thoroughly understood, without an insight into the doctrine of
Fermentation, in order to which, for that and other reasons, I designed my
Historical notes touching that subject.

Yet I am not sure, but there may be effervescences, (and perhaps periodicall
ones) in the Blood and other Juices of the body without Fermentation properly
so called. For there may be diverse other ways of begetting a praeternaturall
heat in the Blood. We often see that in Coughs, when the phlegm is rottten (as
they speak) that is, when its former viscous texture is altered, it does no
longer stick fast to the vessels of the Lungs, to which it obstinately adhered
before. And so at certain times other humors in the body, either by growing
more fluid themselves, or by some change in the Blood, whereby it becomes
fitter to dissolve such humors, may swim in, and be circulated with, the
mass of blood, and thereby occasion praeternaturall heats: either by their
indisposition to be well, and incorporated therewith: or by altering its
texture: or disturbing the wonted motion of its minute parts: or by opposing
its due Rarefaction as it passes through the Heart: or by obstructing the more
slender Vessels, and so hindering the free Circulation of the Blood through
them; perhaps also causing some Extravasation, as we see that wounds and
bru^ses are attended with some inflammation, more or less, of the part
affected;) or by some other of the ways not now to be declared. And trial
has taught me, that there are Liquors, in which the bare admixture of Milk,
Oil, or other Liquors, nay or of cold water, will presently occasion a notable
heat: and I sometimes employ a menstruum, in which nothing but a little flesh
being put, though no visible Ebullition ensue, there will in a few minutes, be
excited a Heat, intense enough to be troublesome to him that holds the Glass.
And yet it seems not necessary that this should be ascribed to a true
fermentation, which may rather proceed from the perturb'd motion of the
Corpuscles of the menstruum, which being by the adventitious liquor or other
body put out of their wonted motion, and into an inordinate one, there is
produced in the menstruum a brisk confused Agitation of (...) small parts that
compose it; and in such an agitation, (from what cause soever it proceeds,) the
nature of Heat seems mainly to consist. But to dispatch, I scarce doubt, but
that if in the history of diseases, there were better notice taken of those
Phenomenon, that agree not with the opinions already in request, as well as of
those that are thought consonant to them; and if also Chymicall trials were
skilfully varied and judiciously applied to the illustrating of Pathologicall
Phenomenon, the former might be made conducing to the better explication of the
latter: especially if the business were managed by a Naturalist well versed
both in Chymicall Experiments, and in Anatomy, and the history of Diseases,
without being too much addicted either to the Chymist's notions, or the
received opinions of Physicians.

And as the Naturalist may thus illustrate Pathologie as a Chemist, so may he
do the like as a Zoologer; for either the true knowledge of Anatomy must be
much less useful to Physicians then they have hitherto believed, or else the
discoveries made by recent Anatomists of the Asellian, Pecquetian, and
Bartholinian vessels, by either overthrowing the received doctrine of
Digestions, (from whose aberrations many diseases spring) or at least by making
diverse discoveries in relation to the aeconomy of Digestions unknown to the
Ancients, most probably contribute much to the clearing up of diverse
Pathologicall difficulties in the explication of some diseases; besides, that
the very liberty of making those Experiments in live Beasts, which are not to
be made but in living creatures, nor are allowable to be made in living men,
may enable a Zoologist, by giving us a clearer account of diverse parts of the
body, to determine diverse Pathologicall difficulties springing from either our
ignorance or mistakes of the use of those parts, as by the formerly mentioned
Experiment of the exsection of a live dogge's Spleen, and a watchful
observation of all the diseases upon that Account, befalli^^ ^im and other Dogs
so served; much light perhaps may be given to the doct^in of the use of the
Spleen, together with the diseases supposed to depend on that part, which I
fear is hitherto (to the no small prejudice of the Sick) by few Physicians
thoroughly understood, and by many unhappily enough mistaken.

And here we may represent unto you, Pyr: that not only the dissections of
sound Beasts may assist the Physician to discover the like parts of a humane
body, but the dissections of morbid beasts may sometimes illustrate the
doctrine of the causes and seats of diseases. For that this part of Pathology
has been very much improved by the diligence of modern Physicians, by
dissecting the bodies of men killed by Diseases, we might be justly accused of
want of curiosity, or gratitude, if we did not thankfully acknowledge; For
indeed much of that improvement of Physic, (for which the Ancients, if they
were now alive, might envy our new Physicians) may, in my poor opinion, be
ascribed to their industrious scrutiny of the Seat and Effects of the peccant
matter of Diseases in the bodies of those that have been destroyed by them.

And that the instructions deducible from such observations may be either
increased or illustrated by the like observations made in the bodies of Beasts,
we have been inclined to think, partly by the having Chymically analyz'd (as
they phrase it) the blood of diverse Bruits, as Sheep, Deer, etc. and found its
Phlegm, Spirit, Salt, and Oil, very like that of humane blood; and partly by
our having observed in the bodies of several Bruits, (not excepting Fishes)
Worms, Imposthumes, and the like, some of which seemed manifestly to spring
from such causes, as are wont to produce resembling distempers in men: and if
the acute Helmont had been a more diligent dissector of Beasts, he would
perchance have escaped the Error he after others run into (and into which his
Authority has tempted others to run) when he affirmed, that the Stone was a
disease peculiar to men, for, that in the bodies of Beasts, especially very Old
ones, Stones are sometimes to be found, not only several Butchers have assured
me, but you may gather partly from that taken out of an Oxe's Gall, which I
have formerly mentioned, which was about the bigness of a Wallnut) but
principally from what I elsewhere delivered on purpose to disprove that fond
assertion: and greater leisure may, upon another occasion, invite us to mention
some pathologicall Observations made in diseased Beasts, by which, (were we not
willing to hasten,) we might now perhaps much confirm what we have proposed
touching the possibility of illustrating, by such Observations, the nature of
some of the Diseases inciden^ to humane bodies.

And here we may also consider that there are diverse Explications of
particular Diseases, or troublesome Accidents proposed by Physicians,
especially since the Disco^ery of the Bloods Circulation, wherein the
Compression, Obstruction, or Irritation of some Nerve, or the Distension of
some Vein by too much Blood, or some Hinderance of the free Passage of the
Blood through this or that particular Vessel, is assigned for the cause of
this or that Disease or Symptom. Now in diverse of these cases the Liberty
lately mentioned, that a skillful Dissector may take in Beasts, to open the
Body or Limbs, to make Ligatures strong or weak on the vessels, or other
inward parts, as occasion shall require, to leave them there as long as he
pleases, to prick, or apply sharp liquors to any nervous or membranous part,
and whenever he thinks convenient, to dissect the Animal again, to observe
what change his Experiment has produced there: such a Liberty, I say, which is
not to be taken in humane bodies, may in some cases either confirm or confute
the Theories proposd, and so put an end to dive^se Pathologicall Controversies,
and perhaps too occasion the Discovery of the true and genuine causes of the
Phenomenon disputed of, or of others really as abstruse.

To this let me add, that there is a whole classis of diseases to be met with
in Physicians Books, which proceed not originally from any internal distemper
of the Patient, but are produced by some exterior Poison, and are therefore
wont to be called by Doctors, Morbi a veneno orti, to the more acurate
knowledge of diverse of which Diseases, Experiments made on Bruits may not a
little conduce: For though I deny not that some things may be Poisons to Man,
that are not so to some Beasts; and on the contrary (as we have more then once
given to a Dog, without much harming him, such a quantity of Opium, as would
probably have sufficed to have killed several Men) yet the greater number of
Poisons being such both to Man and Bruits, the liberty of exhibiting them,
when, and in what manner we please, to these (which we dare not do to him)
allows us great opportunities of observing their manner of operation and
investigating their Nature, as our selves have tried, and that sometimes with
unexpected events (as when lately a Cat ran mad, so that her Keeper was fain to
kill her) upon a large dose of Opium which we caused to be given her.

And on this occasion I shall not scruple to transcribe an Observation out of a
Discourse, I some years since writ to a Friend, about the tu^ning Poisons into
Medicines, because that Treatise, I am like, for certain reasons, to suppress:
The words, as I there find them, are these,

Before I take leave of Vipers (or Adders, as some will have, those that here
in England commonly pass for Vipers) it will not be impertinent to tell you,
That it may be justly doubted, whether they be to be reckoned amongst poisonous
Creatures, in such a sense as those other venomous Creatures, who have in them
a constant, and, if I may so speak, gross and tangible Poison; for it may be
supposed, that the venom of Vipers consists chiefly in the rage and fury
wherewith they bite, and not in any part of the Body, which has at all times a
mortal property: Thus the madness of a Dog makes his teeth Poisonous, which
before were not so: And Authors of good repute supply us with instances of
hurts in themselves, free from danger, that have been made fatal by a Venom
created by the fierceness of the enraged (though not otherwise poisonous)
Creatures that inflicted them. And Baccius, if I mistake not, in his Treatise
De Venenis, tells us a memorable Story (whereof he affirms himself to have been
an eyewitness) of a Man who was killed within three days, by a slight hurt
received in his left hand, from an enraged Dunghill Cock: And that no parts of
the Viper have any constant inherent Poison in them, I have been induced to
suspect upon this Experiment; That dissecting some live Vipers, there came in
accidentally a strange Dog, to whom I gave the Head, Tail, and Gall (which are
the parts supposed to contain the Poison) of one of them, and the Head and Gall
of another, wrapped up in meat; after which, I locked the little Dog up in my own
Chamber, and watched him, but found not that he was sick, or offered to vomit
at all, but only lap'd up gre^dily some drink which he espyd in the Room; nor
was he alone very jocund, for diverse hours that I kept him in, but liked his
entertainment so well, that he would afterward, when he met me in the Street,
leave those that kept him to fawn on and follow me. And having since related
this Experiment to an inquisitive Friend of mine, he assured me, That to
satisfy himself further in this particular, he gave to a Dog a dozen Heads and
Galls of Vipers, without finding them to produce in him any mischievous
symptom: To which I shall add, That the old Man, you know, that makes Viper
Wine, does it (as himself tells me) by leaving the whole Vipers, if they be not
very great, perhaps for some months, without taking out the Galls, or
separating any other part from them in the Wine, till it has dissolved as much
of them as it can.

And though it may seem somewhat improper, whilst we are discoursing of
Poisons, to insist on a remedy against them; yet the mention of Vipers
recalling into my mind a memorable Experiment which I tried against the biting
of Vipers, I shall choose rather to decline the dictates of Method, then those
of Charity, which forbids me to suppress a remedy that may possibly rescue from
sudden death, a Person or other fit to live, or unprepared to dye, because it
does not strictly belong to the Theme whereto it is referred. The remedy then
is this, That as soon as ever a Man is b^iten (for if the Poison have had time
enough to diffuse it self, and gain the Mass of Blood, I doubt the Experiment
will scarce succced) a hot Iron be held as near the place as the Patient can
possibly endure, till it have, as they speak, drawn out all the Venom: which
Eyewitnesses assure me (for I have not yet seen that my se^f) will sometimes
adhere like a yellowish spot to the surface of the Iron. But being upon
competent grounds satisfied of the Experiment, to convin^e a Physician that
mistrusted it, I last Summer hired a Man (who doubted it as little as I) to
suffer himself to be bitten by a Viper; and having in the Physicians house and
presence, pick^d out of a good number of them one of the blackest I could find
(those of that color being supposed the most mischi^vous) and commanded the
fellow to provoke and anger it (which to my wonder he did, a pretty while
before the Beast would fasten on him) At length, being by his very rude
handling thoroughly exasperated, it bit him with great fury, as it seemed, for
immediately his hand began to swell, and the injured part was grown tumid
before we could take from the Fire, which was hard by, a knife that lay heating
there; and having applied it as near as he could suffer it, for about ten or
twelve minutes, we found that the swelling, though it decreased not, did not
spread; and the Man glad of his money, without further Ceremony, went about his
affairs, and told me since, That though the tumor continued a while, he had no
other inconvenience attending it, and has diverse times got money by repeating
the Experiment; though otherwise, by the casual bitings of Vipers, he has been
much distressed, and his Wife almost kill^d.

But, Pyrophilus, to return to the Experiments of Poisons made on Beasts, we
could wish Physicians were more diligent to make trials of them, not only by
giving Beasts poisons at the mouth, but also by making external applications of
them, especially in those parts where the Vessels that convey Blood more
approach the surface of the Body, and also by dexterously wounding determinate
Veins with Instruments dipped in Poisons (especially moist or liquid ones) that
being carried by the circulated Blood to the Heart and Head, it may be found
whether their strength be that way more uninfringed, and their operation more
speedy (or otherwise differing) then if they were taken in at the mouth. For I
remember sober Travelers have showed me some Indian Poisons, whose noxious
efficacy they affirmed to be by great intervals of time, differingly mortal,
according as the slight hurt made by the points of Arrows, infected with them,
did open a capillary, or larger Vein, and were inflicted on a part more or less
distant from the Heart; but having not yet made any trial of this my self, I
dare not build upon it. Yet I find that the formerly commended Olearius,
Voyage de Moscovie and de Perse, page 334
in his Travels into Muscovie and Persia, takes notice of a venomous Insect in
Persia, which the Natives call Encureck, and which he (how justly I know not)
makes to be a kind of Tarantula, because it is, as that Creature, in shape
almost like a Spider, and speckled, though of twice the bigness of a Thumb:
This Insect (says he) instead of stinging or biting, lets his Venom fall in
form of a drop of Water, which immediately produces insufferable pains in the
part to which it fastens, and suddenly penetrating, as far as to the Stomach,
sends up vapors to the Head, which sends again (to use his expression) so
profound a sleep to all the Patients limbs, that it is impossible to awaken
him, but by one only Remedy, which is to crush one of these Creatures upon the
hurt, whence he abstracts all the Poison. Some horrid and unusual symptoms of
this Venom, which yet agree not so well with those that are wont to be produced
in persons bitten by Tarantula's, our Author proceeds to mention; and furnishes
us with a proof of what we were lately saying, when we told you that some
things were poisonous to Men, which were not to some Beasts: by adding, as an
admirable singularity, that the Sheep of those parts do not only eat these
fatal Insects, but seek for them. I know also, by sad experience in my self,
what an outward application even of Cantharides can do; for having occasion to
have a large blister drawn on my Neck, the Surgeon I employed, unknown to
me, made use of Cantharides, among other Ingredients of his vesicating
Plaster, which a few hours after I had taken it, wakened me with excessive
torment, to which it put me about the neck of my Bladder, so that I apprehended
it might proceed from some Stone unable to get out; of which sudden and
sensible pain, after I had a while in vain conjectured what might be the cause,
I at length suspected that which was indeed the true one; and having sent for
the Surgeon, he confessed to me, upon my demand, that he had put some
Cantharides in his Plaster, not thinking it would have had such an operation:
whereupon I soon relieved my self, by drinking new Milk very well sweetened with
Sugar candy.

Postscript.
TO enable you, Pyrophilus, to gratify those inquisitive Persons that have
heard some, and yet but an imperfect Report, of a much noised Experiment, that
was some Years ago devised at Oxford, and since tried in other places before
very Illustrious Spectators; I am content to take the occasion afforded me, by
what was in the foregoing Essay lately mentioned concerning the Application of
Poisons, to inform you, That a pretty while after the writing of that Essay, I
happened to have some Discourse about matters of the like Nature, with those
excellent Mathematicians, Dr. I. Wilkins, and Mr. Christopher Wren; at which
the latter of those Virtuosi told us, That he thought he could easily contrive
a way to convey any liquid Poison immediately into the Mass of Blood.
Whereupon, our knowledge of his extraordinary Sagacity, making us very desirous
to try what he proposed, I provided a large Dog, on which he made his
Experiment in the presence, and with the assistance of some eminent Physicians,
and other learned Men: His way (which is much better le^rn'd by sight, then
relation) was briefly this: First, to make a small and opportune Incision over
that part of the hind-leg, where the larger Vessels that carry the Blood, are
most easy to be taken hold of: Then to make a Ligature upon those Vessels, and
to apply a certain small Plate of Brass (of above half an Inch long, and about
a quarter of an Inch broad, whose sides were bending inward^) almost of the
shape and bigness of the Nail of a Man's Thumb, but somewhat longer. This Plate
had four little holes in the sides, near the corners, that by threads passed
through them, it might be well fastened to the Vessel: And in the same little
Plate there was also left an Aperture, or somewhat large Slit, parallel to the
sides of it, and almost as long as the Plate, that the Vein might be there
exposed to the Lancet, and kept from starting aside. This Plate being well
fastened on, he made a Slit along the Vein, from the Ligature toward the
Heart, great enough to put in at it the slender Pipe of a Syringe: By which I
had proposed to have injected a warm solution of Opium in Sack, that the effect
of our Experiment might be the more quick and manifest. And accordingly our
dexterous Experimenter having surmounted the difficulties which the tortured
Dogs violent struglings interposed, conveyed a small Dose of the Solution or
Tincture into the opened Vessel, whereby, getting into the mass of Blood (some
quantity of which, it is hard to avoid shedding in the operation) it was
quickly, by the circular motion of That, carried to the Brain, and other pa^ts
of the Body. So that we had scarce untied the Dog (whose four feet it had been
requisite to fasten very strongly to the four Co^ners of the Table) before the
Opium began to disclose its Narcotick Quality, and almost as soon as he was upon
his feet, he began to nod with his head, and faulter and reel in his pace, and
presently after appeared so stupifi'd, that there were Wagers offered his Life
could not be saved. But I, that was willing to reserve him for further
observation, caused him to be whipped up and down the Neighboring Garden,
whereby being kept awake, and in motion, after some time he began to come to
himself again; and being led home, and carefully tended, he not only
recove^'d, but began to grow fat so manifestly that 'twas admired: But I could
not long observe how it fared with him. For this Experiment, and some other
trials I made upon him, having made him famous, he was soon after stolen away
from me. Succeeding attempts informed us, that the Plate was not necessary, if
the Finger were skilfully employed to support the Vessel to be opened; and that
a slender Quill, fastened to a Bladder, containing the matter to be injected,
was somewhat more convenient then a Syringe; as also that this notwithstanding,
unless the Dog were pretty big, and lean, that the Vessels might be large
enough and easily accessible, the Experiment would not well succeed: The
Inventor of it afterward practiced it in the presence of that most Learned
Nobleman, the Marquess of Dorchester, and found that a moderate Dose of the
infusion of Crocus Metallorum did not much move the Dog, to whom it was given:
but once that he injected a large Dose (about two Ounces or more) it wrought so
soon, and so violently upon a fresh one, that within a few hours after he
vomited up Life and all, upon the Straw whereon they had laid him. I afterward
wished, that not only some vehemently working Drugs, but their appropriated
Antidotes (or else powerful liquid Cordials) and also some altering Medicines,
might be in a plentiful Dose injected. And in Diuretics, a very ingenious
Anatomist and Physician told me, he tried it with very good success. I likewise
proposed, That if it could be done, without either too much danger or cruelty,
trial might be made upon some humane Bodies, especially those of Malefactors.
And some Months after a foreign Ambassador, a curious Person, at that time
residing in London, did me the Honor to visit me, and informed me, That he had
caused trial to be made, with infusion of Crocus Metallorum, upon an inferior
Domestic of his that deserved to have been hanged; but that the fellow, as soon
as ever the Injection began to be made, did (either really or craftily) fall
into a Swoon; whereby, being unwilling to prosecute so hazardous an Experiment,
they desisted, without seeing any other Effect of it, save that it was told the
Ambassador, that it wrought once downward with him, which yet might, perhaps,
be occasioned for fear or anguish: But the trials of a very dexterous Physician
of my acquaintance in humane Bodies, will, perhaps, when I shall have received
a more circumstantial account of them, be not unwelcome to you. And in Dogs,
you may possibly from our own Observations, receive a further Account of an
Experiment, of which, I now chiefly designed but to relate to you the Rise and
first Attempts.

ESSAY III. Containing some Particulars relating to the Semiotical Part of
Physic.
THe Semiotical part of the Physicians Art, seems capable of the least
improvement by Natural Philosophy. In which yet, first the Naturalist may, by
illustrating the Anatomical and Pathological parts, assist the Physician to
make more certain conjectures from the signs he discovers of the constitution
and distempers of his Patient. For you will easily believe that caeteris
paribus, he that better knows the nature of the parts and juices of the Body,
will be better able to conjecture at the events of Diseases, then he that is
less skilled in them. And secondly, The Naturalist by improving the
Therapeutical, may, at least, much change and alter the Prognostics of the
duration, ferocity and event of Diseases. For, Pyrophilus, it would be
considered, that the Predictions hitherto current in Authors, and commonly made
by Physicians, suppose the use of the received Remedies, and the dogmatical
method of Physic; but if there were discovered such generous and commanding
Medicines, as, by powerfully assisting Nature, or nimbly proscribing the
Morbifick Matter that does either produce or (though produced by them) cherish
Sicknesses, might enable Nature to hinder the Disease from continuing its
course, and acting almost all the Scenes of its Tragedy in the Body; Physicians
need not, in acute Diseases, wait so often for a crisis to instruct their
Prognostics, and the threatening Symptoms of Chronical Distempers would often
prove false Prophets.

To illustrate this but with a not ignoble instance, give me leave to tell you,
That when that Peruvian Bark, that now begins to be somewhat taken notice of,
under the name of The Jesuits Powder, had scarce been so much as heard of in
this part of Europe, I went to visit a Virtuoso, who had been for some Months
afflicted with a Quartan Ague, so violent and stubborn, that it had frustrated
the skill, and almost tired the endeavors of the most eminent Doctors of this
Nation; of one of which, who was then accidentally with his Learned Patient, I
enquired how my Friend did, and was answered, That he hoped he would recover
when the Season would give him leave; but in the Winter he knew no Quartanes
cured. Yet the Gentleman acquainting me with his having procured some of the
American Bark against Agues, which we mentioned in a former Essay, and I (after
having tasted and considered it) having encouraged him, as I have others, to
make Trial of it; as the strange Effects I have observed of it, has diverse
times invited me to do: The candid and learned Doctor, not only opposed not my
Persuasions, but added his own to them. And my Friend taking two Doses of this
Powdered Bark, though it were at the unhopefullest Season of the Year (the
Winter Solstice) and though he scarce found any sensible operation (unless a
little by sweat) of the Peruvian Medicine, had by the first Dose his Fit very
much lessened, and by the second quite removed. And though through some
irregularities of Diet (to which that keen Appetite, like that of recovering
Persons, which I have observed this Powder to be wont to produce, tempted him)
he did, as I then foretold him he would, after missing eight or ten Fits,
relapse, yet by the repeated use of the same Remedy, he again recovered, and
has continued so ever since. Having also lately persuaded the use of the same
Medicine, in the same Disease, to one of the greatest Ladies in this Nation,
she told me the other day, That it immediately, and in unlikely weather, freed
her from those Fits, from whence she despaired to be delivered till the Spring.
Having likewise sent some of it to a couple of Gentlemen, sick of the like
Malady, I had word brought me; That the one had missed his Fits for a Month,
though in the midst of Winter; and the other was by the first Dose cured, and
continues so. And diverse eminent Physicians, to whom I have commended this
Specific, have used it with such success, that one of the severest of them,
though he had formerly despised it, confessed to me, that in a short time he
tried it upon eight or nine several Persons, without finding it to fail in any,
though one of them especially, were, before he was called, judged
irrecoverable; the obstinate Quartan being complicated with other almost as
dangerous Distempers. And I confess, I somewhat wonder that Men have not the
Curiosity to try the efficacy of this powerful Bark, in other Diseases then
Agues: It being highly probable, That a Medicine, capable to prevail so
strongly against so obstinate a Disease, as a Quartan (wherein most commonly
diverse of the considerabler parts of the Body are much affected) cannot be
useless to several other Distempers. I deny not that those that have taken this
Powder, have diverse of them, after having missed six or seven Fits, relapsed
into them (as it likewise happened to one of the Gentlemen I sent it to) yet
(as I have elsewhere told you) it is much, and more then any common Remedy does
to stop the Fits so long. Nor is it a small matter to be able to give the
Patient so much breathing time, and allow the Physician the opportunity of
employing other Remedies. And the Relapses we speak of are commonly cured by
the same Powder: And we have known them prevented, when the Medicine has been
administered, not by unskilful Persons, but by a prudent Physician who knows how
to assist it, by opening and gently purging Physic. Wherefore that which I
should the most gladly be satisfied of, about this Remedy, is, whether or no it
do indeed either proscribe the Morbifick Matter, or so alter its Texture as to
make it harmless; or else, whether it does secretly leave such noxious
Impressions upon the Spleen, Guts, or some other important Part, as may shorten
Life, by producing in process of time, either the Scurvy, or the Dropsy, or
some other formidable Disease. But because the Resolution of this Doubt must be
a work of time, we must at present refer it to future Observations, And
therefore shall now subjoyn, that if the famous Riverius have not, in his
learned Observations, flattered his own Febrifugum, Riverius in Observat:
whatever be resolved touching this Indian Bark, there will not want a safe
Remedy which may allow Physicians to make more cheerful Predictions about the
lastingness and event of Quartains, then have hitherto been usual.

How painful and stubborn a Disease, the Kings Evil is wont to prove, is scarce
more known, then that it is seldom cured without a tedious course of Physic:
And yet, by the Herb mentioned in one of the former Essays, the young Gentleman
there spoken of, was cured in a short time, and with little or no pain or
trouble. And that these are not the only Diseases in which Observations,
tending to our present purpose, may be made, the following part of this
Treatise will afford you opportunity to observe.

I might add, Pyrophilus, that I was lately visited by an ancient Chemist,
ennobled by diverse eminent cures, who promises to me an Experiment of making
very unusual, and yet rational Predictions in some abstruse Diseases, by a
peculiar way of examining the Patients Urine. But because some Chemists have
written extravagantly enough upon a like subject; and because I have not yet
made or seen the Experiment of it my self, I dare not yet give this new method
of foretelling, for an instance of the Usefulness of Natural Philosophy to the
Semiotical part of Physic. Though I dare not deny but by precipitations, and
some other ways not yet vulgarly practiced of examining the Urine, made by the
same Patient at several times, before, in, and after some notable alteration in
his Body, diverse things (especially in Feavors, and other acute Diseases)
relating to the state of it, may be discovered, especially if thereto be added
a skilful and seasonable Chemical Examen of the other Excrements, and vitiated
Substances of the Patients Body.

You will perchance expect, Pyrophilus, that on this occasion I should handle
that controversy which is so hotly agitated, betwixt the Paracelsians and
their Adversaries, concerning the curableness of all Diseases: But, for ought I
can perceive, the difference betwixt the more sober Men of both parties, is
more about Words then Things, and might be reduced to a much less distance, if
Men could but calmly consider, That it is one thing to dispute, Whether all
Diseases by curable; and another, Whether all Persons be recoverable: For a
Disease may be called incurable, either in its own Nature, or by accident; that
is, either because such a Disease is not to be cured in any Patient, or that it
is so circumstantiated in this or that Patient, as not to be naturally curable
in him. Now this distinction, duly considered, may conduce much to reconcile
the two Opinions, if not the Parties that maintain them: For neither would a
sober Paracelsian affirm (though Paracelsus himself does somewhere seem to do
so). That every Disease is curable in every Patient; there being some Palsies,
Gouts, or Blindnesses, or the like, so obstinate, that (especi^lly if they are
born with a Man, or inherited from his Parents) the tone of some necessary or
considerable part of the Body, being thereby rather abolished, then barely
vitiated, it were a folly to promise recovery to such a Patient. And on the
other side, a moderate Galenist, that is not unacquainted with the Discoveries
which these latter Ages have made, of the power of Nature and Art, will not be
forward to pronounce (as others do, and as the Paracelsians tax the Galenists
too indiscriminately for doing) That the Gout (for instance) the Dropsy, the
dead Palsy, the Stone, are Diseases universally incurable: Since, in the
Writings of Erastus, and in the Observations of Schenkius, and others, there
are Instances recorded of some Cures performed of the Dropsy, and one or two
more of those stubborn Diseases, even by Galenical Remedies.

But, Pyrophilus, though we cannot but disapprove the vainglorious Boasts of
Paracelsus himself, and some of his Followers, who, for-all-that, lived no
longer then other Men; Yet I think Mankind owes something to the Chemists,
for having put some Men in hope of doing greater Cures, then have been formerly
aspired to, or even thought possible, and thereby engage them to make Trials
and Attempts in order thereunto. For not only before Men were awakened and
excited by the many Promises, and some great Cures of Arnoldus de villa nova,
Paracelsus, Rulandus, Severinus and Helmont, Many Physicians were wont to be
too forward, to pronounce Men, troubled with such and such Diseases, incurable,
and rather detract from Nature and Art, then confess that those two could do
what ordinary Physic could not. But even now, I fear there are but too many,
who though they will not openly affirm, that such and such Diseases are
absolutely incurable; yet if a particular Patient, troubled with any of them,
be presented, they will be very apt to undervalue (at least, if not) deride
those that shall attempt and hope to Cure him.

And I am apt to think, that many a Patient has been suffered to die, whose
Life might have been saved, if Physicians would have but thought it possible to
save it. And therefore I think it were no ill piece of service to Mankind, if
a severe Collection were made of the Cures of such Persons as have recovered
after having been judged irrecoverable by the Doctors: That Men might no longer
excuse their own Ignorance by the impotency of Nature, and bear the World in
hand, as if the Art of Physic, and their skill, were of the same extent. And
the Cures that seem performed by Nature herself, need not be left out of such a
Collection: For still they show what is possible to be done by Natural means,
to evacuate the Morbifick matter, or alter its Nature (how dangerous soever it
is grown) Or how far the tone of a part or strength of the Body may be vitiated
or impaired, and yet be capable of some restitution. And such an observation I
received from our most experienced Harvy, when, having consulted him about my
weak Eyes, he told me, among other things (as a very remarkable one) that he
had once a Patient (whose Name and Profession he told me, but I remember not)
that had a confirmed Cataract in his Eye, and yet upon the use of Physic, to
which he could not ascribe so wonderful an effect, that Cataract was perfectly
dissipated, and the Eye restored to its wonted Function. Which brings into my
mind another Observation, imparted to me, a while since, by that excellent and
experienced Lithotomist, Mr. Hollyer. who told me, that among the many Patients
sent to be cured in a great Hospital (of which he is one of the Chirurgions)
there was a Maid of about eighteen Years of age, who, without the loss of
motion, had so lost the sense of feeling in the external parts of her Body,
that when he had, for trial sake, pinned her Handkerchief to her bare Neck, she
went up and down with it so pinned, without having any sense of what he had
done to her. He added, That this Maid having remained a great while in the
Hospital without being cured, Dr. Harvey, out of Curiosity, visited her
sometimes; and suspecting her strange Distemper to be chiefly Uterine, and
curable only by Hymeneal Exercises, he advised her Parents (who sent her not
thither out of poverty) to take her home, and provide her a Husband, by whom,
in effect, she was according to his Prognostic, and to many Men's wonder, cured
of that strange Disease. That in acute Sicknesses, Persons given over by the
Physicians, may recover, the more judicious, even of those Galenists, that are
of a dispondent temper, will not deny. For not only Celsus gives us this sober
admonition, Neque ignorare aportet in acutis morbis fallaces magis notas esse
and s^lutis and mortis; But even Hypocrates himself, who was so skilful in
Prognostics, confesses, that Morborum acutorum non in totum certae sunt
praenunciationes neque salutis neque mortis: Whence the French have a
Proverbial saying, that Il vaut mieux estre condamne par les Medecins, que par
le Prevost des Mareschaux, as if in English we should say, It is better to be
condemned to die by the Doctor, then by the Judge. And even in Chronical
Diseases, where Events are wont much better to answer Physicians Predictions,
there are sometimes such Cures performed, as may encourage humane Industry, and
keep a sick Man's friends from forsaking the Cure of him, till Life it self have
unquestionably forsaken him. For not only it has been not unfrequently seen,
that diverse Persons, who have been given over by some Physicians, have been
cured by others, perchance rather more lucky then more skilful: But those that
have been given over, and that too (sometimes rather upon the believed
incurableness of the Disease, then the personal Condition of the Patient) even
by judicious and experienced Physicians, if such as are acquainted but with the
ordinary Remedies, have been recovered by the use of extraordinarily powerful,
and especially, Chemical Physic. Of such Cures I have sometimes met with a
few, which, because I may elsewhere relate, I shall now only mention, on this
occasion, what I have heard concerning the cures of Cancers, performed by Dr.
Haberfeld, one of the principal Physicians of Bohemia. And among other
relations, of this kind, made me by credible Persons. I cannot omit one, that
was, Of a certain English Woman, of sixty and odd Years of age, who had long
lain in an Hospital in Zeeland, sick of a Cancer in the Breast, and by this
Doctor was, with one single inward Remedy, perfectly cured in the space of
three Weeks. For this relation was made me by persons of very strict veracity;
the one a Doctor of Physic, who was an Eyewitness of the Cure; the other a
Child of Cornelius Drebell's, who not only saw the Cure, but knew the Woman
before, and out of Charity brought her to him that healed her. The same Persons
likewise informed me, That the Chemical Liquor the Doctor constantly made use
of, does, in the Dose, of about a spoonful or two, work suddenly and nimbly
enough by Vomit, but has very quickly ended its operation, so that within an
hour, or less, after the Patient has taken it, he is commonly well again, and
very hungry. And they having presented me some spoonfuls of this Liquor, I
find the taste to be offensive enough, and not unlike that of Vitriol, which,
by the taste and emetick operation, I guess to be, at least, its principal
Ingredient, however it be prepared. The same Persons assured me, that having
obtained of Dr. Haberfeld a good quantity of his Specific, they had been (in
England, as well as elsewhere) partly Eyewitnesses, and partly Performers of
wonderful Cures by the help of it alone, under God, in the Kings Evil. Insomuch
that an eminent Gentleman of this Nation, now alive and healthy, has been
cured by it, when the Kings Evil had brought his Arm to that pass, that the
Chirurgions had appointed a time to cut it off. And with the same Liquor, only
taken inwardly, they profess themselves to have seen and done diverse Cures of
inveterate external Ulcers, whose proud Flesh, upon the taking of it, is wont
to fall off, and then the Ulcer begins to heal at the bottom; but of the recent
effects of this Liquor, we may elsewhere, perhaps, further entertain you. That
Suffusions or Cataracts, may, by a manual operation, be cured even in a Patient
that was born with them, I formerly told you, when I related the Cure done by
my Ingenious Acquaintance, Mr. Stepkins, on a Gentlewoman of about eighteen
Years of age, that brought a couple of Cataracts with her into the World. And I
remember I was somewhile since in the company of another Woman, who told me,
She was brought to Bed of five Children (if I much mistake not the number)
successively; of which, she saw not any in a long while after, by reason of a
couple of Suffusions, that had many Years blinded her; and yet now, by the help
of a Dutch Oculist of my Acquaintance, she sees, and reads well, and has
freely enjoyed the restored use of her Eyes for some Years already.

But these are rather Chirurgical, then Medicinal Cures, and therefore we shall
subjoyn the Mention of a very memorable Observation of the Learned Petronius,
which being collated with that a little above recited, from Dr. Harvey, they
may serve to keep each other from passing for incredible: Al^xand: Trajan
Pet^onius. l^b. 5. De M^r: Gall^co, c. 1. apud Ske kium in Observe: lib. 1.
Quidam (says our Author) qui antequam Morbo Gallico afficeretur, altero oculo
caecus erat, suffusione densissima (vulgus Cataractam vocat) oculum occupante,
Hydrargyri inunctione a Morb^ Gallico, and a suffusione, quod maxim mirum est,
evasit. Neque a ratione alienum est inunctione illa Cataractas posse dissolvi,
cum frequens Experientia doceat praeduros tumores ex pituita crassa and
concreta, genitos, illitu Hydrargyri potenter dissolvi.

I need not tell you what sad Prognostics Physicians are wont to make of
Dropsies, especially of that sort which they call Ascites: And indeed the Event
does but too frequently justify their Predictions, when none but ordinary
Remedies are employed. But I remember, that being acquainted with an Ingenious
Person that was very happily cured of a Dropsy, and inquiring who it was that
had performed the Cure; I was informed, that that, and a multitude of the like
had been wrought by a Germane Physician, of whom, and of his Remedy, I had
heard much Commendation in Holland, where he lived: And though on diverse
occasions I found him a modest Man; and accordingly, when I asked him
concerning his Cures of the Dropsy, he answered me, That he neither did, nor
would undertake to cure so formidable a Disease; yet he scrupled not to tell
me, That as far as he had hitherto tried, he had one Remedy which had not
failed him, though he had tried it upon persons of differing Ages, Sexes, and
Complections. But of this Specific more hereafter. For, at present, I must
proceed to take notice, that as incurable a Disease as the radicated Gout is
thought to be (especially in Patients not very temperate) and as tedious a
course of Physic as one would expect to be requisite to the Cure of it, in
case it can be cured; Yet I have been several times visited by an honest
Merchant of Amsterdam, who was there noted for his Wealth, and his skill in
Art tinctoria: This Man, ten or twelve Years ago, had been for a long time so
tormented with the Gout, both in Hands and Feet, that his Fits would sometimes
vex and confine him for a great part of the Year, and not leave him without
hard Knots, as unwelcome Pledges of their Return: But once, that he was
tortured to a degree that made him much pitied, one came and informed him of an
Emperick, who had received from a great Chemist who had lodged in his House, a
Secret, with which he had already thoroughly cured many, in a short time:
Whereupon sending for this Person, and offering him any thing for some relief;
the other refused to take above ten Crowns, which, as it seems, was the usual
rate for the Cure; and would not receive that neither, till the reality of it
had been evinced by the Patients continuing above six Months well: And
accordingly, with a very few Doses of a certain Powder and Tincture, the
Merchant was quickly freed, not only from his Pains, but from his Gouty
Tophy: And though he indulge himself the drinking of Rhenish Wine very freely,
yet he never had a Fit since, as himself assured me one Morning, wherein, for
Exercise sake, he walked five or six Miles to give me a Visit; adding, That the
Man that cured him, dying suddenly, never could discover what the Secret was,
wherewith so many had been freed from a Disease that does so often mock the
skill of the greatest Doctors.

I might, perhaps, if I had leisure, relate to you some other strange Stories,
which may invite you to think, That as the Naturalists skill in Chemistry, and
other Arts retaining to Physiology, may much assist him to discover more
generous Remedies then are yet usual; so the Knowledge of such Remedies, may,
in diverse cases, make a happy Change in the Rules of Prognosticating what will
prove the Course and Event of a Sickness. But I shall not, at present,
particularly consider any more then one Disease, namely, The Stone in the
Bladder. For whereas it is by most, even of the judicious Physicians,
unanimously pronounced incurable by Physic, in what Person soever, if it
deserve the name of a Stone, and be too big to be voided whole, the
Remedilesness of this Disease may be justly questioned. I remember the famous
Monardes, treating of the Seed of a Peruvian Plant, which they call Chalchoos,
tells us, That it is highly esteemed by the Inhabitants of the Country it grows
in, and affirmed not only to be diuretic, and to bring away Gravel, but to
break the Stone in the Bladder it self, if it be not too much hardened: Ejusque
rei (adds he) tam multa proferunt exempla ut admirationem mihi pariat: He tells
us indeed, that he is of opinion that nothing but Section can cure the Stone of
the Bladder. Aiunt tamen (says he) illius semen (of the Calchoos) tritum, ex
aqua aliqua ad eam rem idonea sumptum, calculum in lutum dissolvere, quod
excretum denuo concressit and in lapideam duritiem convertitur. Adolescentem
vidi cui hoc obtigisse scio, is cum vesicae calculo torqueretur, idque a
Lithotomis qui calculum deprehenderant intellexissem, and ex Symptomatis quae
patiebatur agnoscerem; hominem, veris initio, ad fontem, qui a Petro nomen
habet, ablegavi, ubi cum duos menses haesisset a calculo liberatus redit and
lutum omne quod paulatim ejecerat denuo in lapidum fragmenta concretum in
charta secum retulit. Which passage I wonder such a Writer should immediately
annex, to the Declaration of an Opinion that must appear confuted by it, to a
Reader that considers not so much what is thought, as what is proved.

The very learned and experienced Dr. Gerard Boot, of whose skill, you,
Pyrophilus, have found very good effects in your Self, and who was one of the
two Professors that writ the Philosophia naturalis reformata, had a very famous
Remedy (which (now he is dead) I intend, God willing, to communicate) against
the Stone; and with it he told me that he had very often cured that Disease in
the Kidneys: but for the Stone in the Bladder, he thought it impossible to be
dissolved, which circumstances I recite, that you may the more readily believe
what he told me a little before his death, namely, That he had cured lately one
Mr. Moulin of a real Stone in the Bladder; adding, That he could not brag of
being the Inventor of that Remedy he had employed, having but lately learned it
of a Country Gentleman, whom going to visit last Summer, he saw a Load of
Persicaria, or Arsmart, brought to him by some of the Country People; and
desiring to know what he intended to do with so vast a quantity of it, the
Gentleman replied, That he yearly used as much, having by the Water of it, made
by bare distillation in a common Rose Water Still, cured so many of the Stone,
even in the Bladder, that he was usually solicited by Patients, numerous
enough, to exhaust all the Liquor which he yearly prepared.

What we, Pyrophilus, have observed concerning this excellent Liquor, of which
we use to prescribe a draught every morning for some Months together, we may
elsewhere have occasion to relate. But now we shall go on to tell you, that
being some Years since in Ireland, I met with an ancient Emperick, who was very
famous in those parts, for cutting of the Stone of the Bladder, and for curing
sore Eyes: This Man having given (in the Parts where I then was, and whilst I
was there) some good proof of his skill, I sent for him to me, upon the account
of a suspicion I long had of the Stone in the Bladder, which, upon search, he
assured me I was free from, and so (God be praised) I have afterward found it.
He was more a Traveller then a Scholar, and yet finding him, to my wonder, very
modest and sober, I inquired of him, Whether he had never any where met with a
Remedy that could dissolve the Stone in the Bladder, offering him much more for
a Cure of that kind, then he would require as a Lithotomist: He answered me,
That he could cure no Man of a confirmed Stone, but by the help of his Knife;
but if the Stone confisted of a lump of Gravel not very firmly cemented
together, he had, by a certain inward Remedy he used, and a dexterous way of
crushing the Stone from without with his Fingers, so broaken the Stone, partly
by crumbling it, and partly by dissolving the Cement, as to make it voidable by
Urine. And he added, That he had formerly cured a Citizen of Cork, of a good
large Stone of the Bladder (for where I then was, he gave proof of his skill,
in telling beforehand those he was to cut, the bigness and shape of the Stones
that troubled them.)

Passing afterward by Cork, I sent an intelligent Servant to inquire after
this Citizen, but he being casually absent, his Wife sent me, by my Man, a
Relation very agreeable to that which he had made me: The Receipt I purchased
of him, and, though it seem not very artificial, yet I suppose you will not
quarrel with me for annexing so experienced a one, to the end of this Essay.
But because this Remedy needed the assistance of a manual operation, We shall
further proceed to tell you, That Cardan, De Li^h: c. 7. number: 14.
as he is quoted by Helmont (for I have not now his Works by me) relates, That
in his time there rambled a Man over Lombardy, who did commonly, and in a few
days, by a certain Liquor which he administered to his Patients, safely,
speedily, and certainly, cure those that were troubled with the Stone in the
Bladder: Adding (says Helmont) his Judgment, That he doubted not of this Man's
being in Hell, for having, when he dyed, envyed Mortals so excellent an Art.

I insist not on the Testimony that the same Helmont gives to Paracelsus of his
curing the Stone, though he often handle him very severely in other places of
his Writings, because that the Epitaph of Paracelsus (out of which he labors to
prove his having cured the Stone) makes no express mention of it. Nor shall I
enumerate those Passages from whence the same Helmont's Followers collect, That
he himself was able to cure that Disease, by the resolution of Paracelsus his
Ludus; but this experience has evinced to me, that a much slighter preparation
of that Stone, then was mentioned by Paracelsus and Helmont, has been able to
do more in that Disease then a wary Man would readily believe. But to detain
you no longer on this subject, I shall only add, That Wilhelmus
Laurembergius, a learned Physician, and Professor at Rostoch, has told the
World how he cured himself of a confirmed Stone of the Bladder, by the use of
prepared Millepedes (by some in English called Woodlice) and other Remedies,
which he has particularly recorded in the History which he has published, and
I have seen of this admirable Cure: which having been epitomized by Sennertus,
and other eminent Physicians, I shall not need to insist on it. And the
Arguments alleged (even by the most Judicious) against the curableness of the
Stone, though very plausible, seem not to me unanswerable; for whereas first,
they appeal to the innumerable fruitless attempts that have been made to cure
great Princes, and rich Men, without cutting, that Argument drawn from
experience, may, by the former Experiments, be answered; especially since
Horatius Augenius (upon whose account Laurembergius tried Millepedes) tells us,
not only that he cured a young Man at Rome, that was going to be cut for the
Stone, but that the Jesuit that chanced to confess this Youth, and persuaded
him to the use of Millepedes, had experimented their efficacy both upon himself
and others: And indeed, we our selves have found them to be highly Diuretic
and Aperitive.

And whereas it is next objected, That Medicines must necessarily loose their
efficacy before they can reach the Bladder, I confess, that for the most part,
it is very true: But yet that it is possible for some Medicines to retain their
Nature, after many alterations and digestions we have elsewhere declared. And
in our present Case, we not only find that Turpentine and Asparagus, do
manifestly affect the Urine (as I have often observed in my own, and almost any
Man may observe it in his) But that which is most to our purpose, Rubarb tinges
the Urine of those that have taken any quantity of it. And lastly, whereas it
may be yet further alleged, That not only there has not been yet a Liquor
found capable of dissolving so solid a Body as a Stone; but if there were, it
must necessarily be so corrosive as to destroy the Patient, by fretting his
Stomach, or Guts, or Bladder, which are parts so much more tender. To the first
part of this plausible Objection it may be replied, That even good Viniger will
dissolve, not only those stony Concretions, called Lapides Cancrorum, which,
like the Calculi we treat of, are formed in the Bodies of Animals; but even the
more hard and solid Body of Coral, which will loose but little of its weight,
in a Fire that would waste a great part of the Duelech: And that the bare
Juices of Vegetables (such as Lemmons and Barberies) will readily dissolve both
Pearl and Coral, is known even to the Apothecaries Boys. Indeed what Paracelsus
and Helmont relate of their Alkahest, with which they prepare their Specific
against the Stone, and with which the later of them, if not both, pretend to be
able to reduce, not only the Stone they call Ludus, but all other Stones,
Vegetables, Minerals, Animals, etc. into insipid Water, is so strange (not to
say incredible) that their Followers must pardon me, if I be not forward to
believe such unlikely things, till sufficient experience has convinced me of
their truth.

But yet I must not conceal from you, That a Chemist, whom you have often seen,
advised with me several times about the way of preparing this immortal Liquor
(as Helmont calls it) and that, when we had agreed that such a way was the most
promising, he prosecuted it so long, and so industriously, that at length he
obtained, and showed me a Liquor, which (though it seemed to me far short of
the Alkahest) I confess I admired; and not I alone, but our Ingenious Friend
Dr. C. (who had been employed into several parts of Europe, by a rich and
curious Prince, to purchase Rarities) agreed with this Chemist, to give Two
hundred Crowns for a Pint of this Menstruum; and confessed to me withal, That
he saw him, with this Liquor, not only dissolve common Sulphur, and bring it
over the Helm, but reduce Antimony into sweet Chrystals; with a few of which it
was, that he (I mean Dr. C.) to the wonder of many, did, without Purge or
Vomit, cure our good Friend Sir C. C. of a very radicated and desperate
Disease, as the restored Patient soon after told me. And to the second part of
this Objection it may be answered, That if we knew and considered well, how
many of the operations of Natural Bodies depend upon the suitableness and
difference of the Figures of their Parts, and the Pores intercepted between
them, the number of impossibilities would not, perhaps, be thought so great, as
by many Learned Men it is.

That it is very possible for a Body to have an effect upon another determinate
Body, without being able to operate, in like manner, upon a multitude of other
Bodies, which may seem more easy to be wrought on by it; may appear by the
Lodestone, which will draw and work only upon Iron, and (which is but refined
Iron) Steel, but not upon wood or straws, or any of those innumerable Concrets
that are lighter, and of a more open texture then the heavy and solid Body
which it attracts. And to give you an instance that comes nearer to our case,
Quicksilver, that will not corrode our skin, nor so much as taste sharp upon
our tongue, will yet readily dissolve that most compact Body of Gold, which
even Aqua fortis, that can insinuate it self into all other Metals, and
corrode them, will not meddle with; though the same Quicksilver will not
dissolve Iron, which yet Aqua fortis will very nimbly fret asunder. So that
although I dare not confidently believe all that I have found averred even by
eminent and learned Chemists, of their having made or seen Liquors, which,
without appearing any way sharp to the Tongue, would dissolve Gold and Silver,
and other hard compact Bodies; because I have not yet, my self, seen any severe
and satisfactory trial made to evince the efficacy of insipid Dissolvents: yet,
by reason of diverse things I have read and heard, and of some things too I have
seen, I dare not peremptorily deny the possibility of such Menstruums. And who
knows, but that in Nature there may be found, or by Art there may be prepared,
some Liquor, whose parts may have such a sutableness to the Pores of a humane
Calculus, as those of Quicksilver have to the Pores of Gold, and yet may as
little work upon the rest of the Body, as we have observed the same
Quicksilver to do upon Iron (which yet is a much more porous and open Metal)
even when it has been distilled in Iron Vessels? And as to that part of the
Objection wherein the strength of it chiefly lies, let me tell you, Pyrophilus,
that I have sometimes, for curiosity sake, taken an Egg, and steeped it in
strong Vinegar for some days, and by taking it out, and showing that the shell
was so eaten away, that the Egg could be squeezed into unusual Forms, but the
thin skin that involves the white continued altogether unfretted, I convinced
an Ingenious Man, that the operations of Dissolvents are so determined by the
various textures of the Bodies on which they are employed, that a Liquor, which
is capable to corrode a more hard and solid Body, may be unable to fret in the
least, an other more soft and thin, if of a texture indisposed to admit the
small parts of the Menstruum. And I must confess to you, Pyrophilus, That one
thing, among others, which has made me backward to affirm with many Learned
Men, that there can be no potent Dissolvent that is not corrosive enough to
fret in pieces the parts of a humane Body, has been a Story, which I diverse
years since chanch'd to meet with in the Learned Sennertus's Paralipomena,
where, though he relates it to another purpose, yet it is so pertinent to our
present design, and in it self so singular, not to say matchless, that I cannot
forbear to mention it here on this occasion. He tells us then, That in the end
of the Year, 1632. Johannes Nesterus, Medicus Rochlizensis.
an eminent Physician, and his great Friend, informed him, That there lived at
that time in the Neighborhood, and belonging to a Noble Man of those Parts, a
certain Lorainer, whom he also called Claudius, somewhat low and slender, and
about 58 Years of age: Hic (says he) nihil foetidum, nihil injucundum
abhorret; Vitra; Lapides, Ligna, Carbones, Ossa, Leporinos, and aliorum
animalium pedes cum pilis, lineos, laneosque pannos, viva animalia and pisces
adhuc salientes, imo etiam Metalla, patinas and orbs stanneos dentibus
confringere and vorare saepissime visus est; Vorat praeterea lutum sevum and
candelas sebaceas, integras testas cochlearum, animalium stercora, cum primis
bubulum calidum adhuc, prout e matre venit: potat aliorum Urinas cum Vino and
cerevisia mixtas, Vorat foenum, stramen, stipulas and nuper duos mures viventes
adhuc deglutivit, qui ipsius ventriculum ad semihoram usque creberrimis
morsibus lancinarunt, and ut brevibus complectar, quicquid illi a Nobilibus
devorandum offertur, vilissima mercede proposita, dictum ac factum, ingurgitat,
ita ut intra paucos dies integrum vitulum crudum and incoctum cum corio, and
pilis se estaturum promiserit. Testis inter alios quamplurimos ipse ego sum,
quippe qui, etc. To this, and the following part of the Letter, Sennertus
adds, That not having, during some Years, heard any thing concerning this
Claudius, he sent about four Years after to the same Physician, Dr. Nesterus,
to enquire what was become of him; and that the Doctor sent him back a Letter
of the Minister of the Church of that place, by way of confi^mation of all the
formerly mentioned particulars, and answered himself, That the Lorainer whom he
had long hoped to dissect, was yet alive, and did yet devour all the things
mentioned in his former Letter; but not so frequently as before, his Teeth
being grown somewhat blunter by age, that he was no longer able to break Bones
and Metals. Some other examples of this nature, though none so strange, we
have also met with in Writers of good credit, and especially that of the
Glass-eater, recorded by Columbus in his excellent Anatomical Observations; of
which also Sennertus makes mention, as we shall see by and by, and with which
we may elsewhere entertain you to another purpose. And not long ago there was
here in England a private Soldier (who, for ought I know, is yet alive) very
famous for digesting of Stones: And a very inquisitive Man, that gave me the
accuratest account I have met with concerning him, assures me, That he knew him
familiarly, and had the curiosity to keep in his company for 24 hours together
to watch him, and not only observed that he eat nothing in that time, save
Stones (or Fragments of them) of a pretty bigness, but that his grosser
Excrement consisted chiefly of a sandy Substance, as if the devoured Stones had
been in his Body dissolved and crumbled into Sand. But let us not omit, that to
the second Epistle abovementioned, Sennertus adds this Reflection, not
impertinent to our purpose: Causam (says he) hujus voracitatis, etiam in
cadavere, invenire proculdubio erit difficillimum. Posset quidem ad illud, quod
in cadavere Lazari Vitrivoracis observavit Columbus, quidam confugere; and
statuere quartam illam nervorum conjugationem, quae gustus gratia in hominibus
a natura producta est, neque ad Palatum, neque ad Linguam pertendere. Verum hoc
modo saltem gustus aboliti causa redderetur, nondum vero causae daretur, cur
res tam miras assumere sine ventriculi laefione, imo coneoquere potuerit. Quae
proculdubi^ in (...) and peculiari constitutione ventriculi and intestinorum
quaerenda esset: quae tamen oculis investigari non potest sed saltem ex effectu
patet. And indeed this memorable Story seems to argue, not only what we have
already alleged it to prove, but also that a Menstruum, not so corrosive as to
fret the Body, may dissolve Stones, Metals, and other compact Substances. And
since one Liquor, prepared by Nature only, could in this Man's Stomach dissolve
that great variety of Bodies above enumerated, why should it be thought that
the Alkahest, or some other Menstruum wherein Nature is skilfully assisted, and
to the utmost highten'd by Art, should not be able to dissolve Concretes of
very differing Textures. For though Chemists must acknowledge that such common
Menstruums as will dissolve one Body, will not oftentimes meddle with another;
as Aqua fortis will dissolve Silver, and not Gold, and if by Salarmoniack you
turn it into Aqua Regis, it will indeed dissolve Gold, but then it will not
Silver: Yet since that may be supposed to proceed rather from our want of skill
to prepare the most potent Menstruum, then from the impossibility of one
Menstruums dissolving great variety of Bodies; Why may not Nature and Art
afford a Menstruum, whose variety of Parts, and Figures, and (perhaps also)
Motion, may give it ingress into Bodies of very differing Textures? as in our
former Instance, though Aqua Regalis will dissolve Gold, not Silver; and Aqua
fortis Silver, but not Gold; yet Quicksilver will dissolve both, and Copper,
Tin, and Lead to boot.

If I were not at present under some restraint, I might tell you, some things,
that you would, perhaps, think no weak Confirmations of the past Discourse: And
however, since I have observed it to be the main thing, that keeps judicious
Men from seeking, or so much as hoping for nobler Dissolvents, that they are
scarce to be persuaded there can be considerably piercing Menstruums, that are
not proportionably corrosive: I will here acquaint you with a Liquor, that may,
I presume, assist you to undeceive some of them. We take then ordinary household
brown Bread (I like that of Rye, but I have diverse times used that of Wheat)
and when it is cut into slices, and somewhat dried, we almost fill a glass
Retort with it, and placing that in a sand Furnace, by degrees of Fire, we draw
off what will be made to come over, without much difficulty: The Oil, as
useless to our purpose, being by a Tunnel, or a Filter, severed from the rest
of the Liquor, we also, by a gentle heat, free the Spirit from some of its
Phlegm, which yet sometimes we find no great necessity to do. And yet this
Spirit, which you will easily believe is no such Corrosive as Aqua fortis, or
other distilled Liquors of Mineral Salts, will work upon the hardest sorts of
Bodies, and perform things that Chemists counted of the judiciousest, would not
have us expect from the most sharp and corrosive Menstruums now in use. For
with this we have, in a short time, and that in the cold, drawn Tinctures (which
is done by the solution of the finer parts of the Concrete) not only from crude
Corals, and some of the more open Minerals, but likewise from very hard Stones,
such as Blood stone, and Granates (even unpowder'd) Nay, and though Ruby's seem
to be the hardest Bodies yet known, save Diamonds (for I have learned from
those that cut precious Stones, that they can grind other Gems with the Powder
of Rubies, but not these with any Powder, save their own, and that of Diamonds)
yet have, even these, afforded me in the cold, a not ignoble Tincture. And not
to anticipate what I may elsewhere have occasion to tell you concerning the
efficacy of this Menstruum, which is the same that I have intimated, without
naming it, in the last, and another of the former Essays. I shall now only
add, That an expert Chemist assures me, he has, but tells me not how, done
greater matters with it, or the like; and that to satisfy my self that these
high Tinctures, proceeded not from the standing or digestion of the Menstruum
(as we elsewhere observe concerning some other Liquors) I not only tried, that
from some Minerals it will draw a much higher Tincture then from others, and
from some scarce any at all, but that it would, if kept by it self, for many
Months continue clear and limpid. What further use I have made, or think
others may make of this odd Menstruum, I must not, as I said at present,
express; but returning to what I was discoursing concerning the cure of the
Stone, annex, That besides what has been objected against the possibility of
making a Liquor, which, without being highly corrosive, can be able to work
upon Stone; It may indeed be also alleged against the hopes we seem to
countenance, that what has cured the Stone in one Man's Bladder, may be unable
to do the like in another: But first, the truth of that has not been proved;
and next, we highly value those Specificks that can remove Agues, Fluxes, and
the like Diseases, though scarce any of them do alike succeed in all Patients,
especially so as to secure them, during their whole lives, from ever relapsing
into the like Disease; and besides all this, it will be no small matter to
find that the Disease, in its own nature, is not incurable; and it would
recompense Men's Industry to be able to free, even a few Patients, from so
painful and stubborn a Disease. Which I have rather then any other, chosen to
insist upon, because it is so generally believed not to be curable by inward
Remedies in any Person whatever.

But I have entertained you so long on this subject, that I must reserve, for
some other opportunity, what I have to say to you concerning the Dropsy, and
some other Diseases, commonly put into the Catalogue of the incurable ones, and
therefore shall now only tell you in general, That as on the one side I think
the Arguments which Helmont and others draw from the Providence of God, for the
curableness of all Diseases are not very cogent, and somewhat irreverent (For
God being not obliged any more to continue Life or Health to sinful Man then to
Beasts that never offended Him, we ought humbly to thank Him, if He has, among
His Creatures, dispersed Remedies for every Disease, but has no right to
accuse Him if He have not) so on the other side, I am not much convinced by the
grand Argument alleged against Paracelsus, and the Chemists, that hold all
Diseases to be in their own Nature curable; namely, That they themselves, many
of them (no nor even their very Master) lived not to the Age attained by many
Strangers to Chemistry.

For this, That many of them (not destroyed by War, or outward accidents) died
young enough, and consequently by Sickness; and that Paracelsus himself
outlived not the 47th Year of his age, is a much stronger Objection against
the Men, then against their Opinion; for it infers indeed plausibly, that they
had not such Remedies as they boasted of (since probably, had they had any
such, they would have cured themselves with them) but concludes not that no
such Remedies can be prepared by any other. And this you will be the less apt
to think irrational, if you consider, how much more learned, sober and
experienced, it is possible for many a Man to be, then Paracelsus appears to
have been: For he seems not by his Writings to have been any great Logician or
Reasoner; he manifestly despised many parts of Learning, useful to a Physician;
he lived not many Years, and spent diverse of those few which he lived, in an
unsettled and disadvantagious course of life; and yet this Paracelsus attained
to some such Remedies, as both in his own, and after times, have made him a
very considerable Person, in spite of all his indiscretions and deficiencies.
And among his other Remedies, his famous Laudanum did such wonders, that
Oporinus himself, in that short account, which seems to be rather a Satyr then
a Narrative of his Life, has this Passage of it: De Laudano (says he) suo
(ita vocabat pilulas instar murium stercoris, quas impari semper numero, in
extrema tantum morborum difficultate, tanquam sacram medicinam exhibebat) ita
gloriebatur, ut non dubitarit affirmare ejus solius usu se e mortuis vivos
reddere posse; idque aliquoties dum apud ipsum fui, re ipsa declaravit. So
signal a Testimony coming from one whom the Paracelsians call his fugitive
Servant, hired by his Enemies to slander him, under pretense of writing his
Life, deserves not to be slighted: and though it manifestly contains an
Hyperbole, yet I do the less wonder at the Hyperbole, by reason of those
strange things which your Mother, and diverse other of your Friends, can tell
you, they have seen performed in England by Helmont's Laudanum opiatum (though
much inferior to that of Paracelsus.) And I remember, that a Friend of yours
and mine, that is a great enemy to all kinds of Chemical Remedies, and was
before also to Chemistry, having begged of me a little Bottle of it, which I
had obtained from a Friend of the younger Helmont's, to whom he communicated
the Preparation, gave me awhile after, an account of such Cures that had been
performed, with that small quantity, upon almost dying Persons, as I think it
not discreet for me, that was not an Eyewitness of them, to relate. And I
remember too, that the same Friend of young Helmont's, being, at the persuasion
of one Woman whom he had cured of a dangerous Consumption, called to another
that was thought to be dying of an Asthma, came to advise with me whither he
should meddle with so desperate a Patient; telling me, That she had been many
Years sick of that stubborn Disease, which, in process of time, passing into an
Orthopnea, had at last put her, by want of sleep (from which the violence of
her sickness had very long kept her) into a Fever, and so desperate a
condition, that it was scarce expected she should live till the next morning.
But I, representing to him that her condition being avowedly desperate, he
might exercise his Charity without danger to his Reputation; and persuading him
to try Helmont's Laudanum, together with the Spirit of Man's Blood (which we
elsewhere teach you to prepare) he gave her that Night a Dose of those
Remedies, which made her both sleep and breath pretty freely; and a Week after,
he coming to visit me, told me, he had casually met his Patient well and abroad
in the Streets. Helmont in the Treat^se which he entitles Butler.
But these are trifles to the Cures which Helmont relates to have been
performed by our Irish Butler, for he tells us, That this Man, by slightly
plunging a little Stone, he had, into Almond Milk or Oil, imbued those Liquors
with such a sanative efficacy, that a Spoon-full of the former cured (and that
without acquainting him with what was given him) a Franciscan Friar (a very
famous Preacher) of a very dangerous Erysipelas in the Arm, in one hour; and
one drop of the latter, being applied in his presence, to the Head of an old
Laundress, that had been sixteen Years troubled with an intolerable Hemicrania,
the Woman was presently cured, and remained so, to his knowledge, for diverse
Years. He adds almost as strange a Cure done in one Night, upon a Maid of his
Wife's, by anointing the part affected with four drops of that Oil: He further
tells us, That the Master of the Glass-house at Antwerp, being troubled and
made unweildy with too much fat, begged some relief of Butler; who, having
given him a little fragment of his little Stone, with order to lick it nimbly
with the tip of his Tongue once every Morning, I saw (says Helmont) within 3
weeeks, the compass of his waste lestned by a span, without any prejudice to
his health. And to these, Pyr: he adds some other Narratives, which, though I
confess I know not well how to believe, yet there are Circumstances which keep
me from daring to reject them: For first, as he well observes, that which was
most stupendous in this Remedy, was but the smalness of the quantity. Next, a
Gentleman in France, being not long since reported to have a fragment of this
Stone, and to have cured several Persons (and especially one very dignified) of
inveterate Diseases, by leting them lick it; my Noble Friend Sir Kenelm Digby,
then in France, was solemnly requested from hence to inquire into the truth of
that Report, and answered, That he could not, upon examination, find it other
then true. Besides, Helmont not only relates these Cures as an Eyewitness of
them, but tells us, how upon an occasion that he mentions, he once suspected
the efficacy of the Oil, and that, without expecting that it should do any
thing, he anointed it on the right arm and the ancles of his own Wife, who had
for some Months been tormented with great pains in the former, and very great
tumors in the latter of those parts; and that almost in a trice, motion was
restored to her arm, and all the oedema of her legs and feet vanished; adding,
That at the time of his writing she lived healthfully, and had done so since
that recovery, during nineteen Years: And this Story, she, long after her
Husband^ death, confirmed to our ingenious Friend Dr. C. who is acquainted with
her, and much extolls her: These Circumstances, may be assisted by two more
very considerable ones; the one is, That Helmont is the more to be credited in
these Relations, because mentioning Cures not performed by himself, but by
another, and that by Remedies unknown to him, he seems by these Narrations, out
of loyalty to truth, to eclipse his own Reputation: And the other is, that in a
memorable Story which we may elsewhere relate to you (it being not here proper
to insert so long a one) you will find an eminent and strange testimony given to
Butler's Secrets, by our famous Country man, Dr. Higgins, whose confession you
will not doubt, if you consider how rare a Physician and Chemist he was, how
familiarly he lived in the same House with Butler; and how studiously, at last,
they endeavored to take away each others Life.

But whatever be to be thought, Pyr: of Helmont's Relation, we may well enough
make this reflection on the other things that have been delivered concerning
formidable Diseases, that since the power of Nature and Skill may reach much
farther then many distrustful (not to say lazy) men have imagined, it will not
be charitable to rely too much upon the Prognostics, even of famous Writers,
when they tell us, That such and such Diseases, or Patients in such and such
conditions cannot possibly be cured. But rather to follow the sober council of
Celsus: Oportet (says he) ubi aliquid non respondet, non tanti putare Authorem
quanti aegrum, and experiri aliud atque aliud. De Medicina, lib. 3. cap. 10.
And this great Physicians authority I therefore make the most use of in the
ensuing Essays, because he is accounted very judicious by the Lord Verulam, and
other Writers that are unquestionably so themselves.

ESSAY IV. Presenting some things relating to the Hygieinal Part of Physic.
THat the Dietetical part of Physic, Pyrophilus, may, as well as the others,
be improved by Natural Philosophy, were not uneasy to manifest, if my haste
would permit it: For it is known, that Drinks make a very considerable part
(sometimes, perchance, amounting almost to the one half of our Aliments) and
most Drinks, as Wine, Beer, Ale, Mead, etc. consist of fermented Liquors: Now
as on the one side the ignorance of the Doctrine of Fermentation, and of the
wholesome way of both preserving Liquors and making them pleasant, does
questionless occasion more then a few Diseases, which in diverse places may be
observed evidently to proceed from the unwholesome quality of either ill made,
or sophisticated Drinks; so on the other side, the distinct knowledge of the
true nature and particular Phenomenon of Fermentation, would enable Men to
prepare a great variety of Drinks, not only as harmless, but as beneficial, as
pleasant.

How much preparation may do to correct and meliorate both hard and liquid
Aliments, is notably instanced by the account that we receive from both the
French and English that inhabit the Barbados, St. Christophers, and other
Caraibes Islands, who solemnly inform us (what is attested also by Piso, and
other Learned Travelers that write of it) that the Plant Mandioca (whose
prepared Root makes Cassavy, and which we have also seen flourishing here in
Europe) to which the Indians are so much beholden, is a rank Poison. And though
I shall not too resolutely affirm it, to be a Poison properly so called; yet in
confirmation of its being very noxious, I shall tell you, That having purposely
enquired of a very intelligent Gentleman, who commanded an Army of Europeans in
America, what experience he had seen of the qualities of this Plant, he told
me, That between thirty and forty of his Soldiers, having on a time (whilst
they were unacquainted with the Country) either through ignorance or
curiosity, eaten of it unprepared, it cost most of them their Lives. And yet
this pernicious Root, which some Herbarists call Yucca, by the rude Indians
ordering, comes to afford them both almost all their Bread, and no small part
of their Drink: For this Root being grated, and carefully freed from its
moisture, by being included in Bags, and very strongly pressed till all the
Juice be squeezed out; it is afterward dried in the Sun, and so made into the
Meal of which they make their Bread: And this very Root, though (as we said) it
be poisonous, they cause their old, and almost toothless Women, for the better
breaking and macerating it, History of the Barbado's, page 29, 30, 31, 32.
to chew and spit out into Water. This Juice will, in a few hours, work and
purge it self of the poisonous quality, affording them a Drink which they
esteem very wholesome, and at the Barbado's call Perino, and account it to be
the likest in taste to our English Beer, of any of those many Drinks that are
used in that Island.

This nasty way of preparing Drink, Pyrophilus, may seem strange to you, as it
did to me when I first heard of it; but besides the consenting relations both
of French and English concerning it, it may be confirmed by the strange
assertion of Gulielmus Piso, in his new and curious Medicina Brasiliensis,
where, having spoken of several of the Brasilian Wines, he tells us, That they
make Liquors of several Plants, besides the Root of Mandioca, after the same
nasty manner. Idem fit (says he) ex Mandioca, Patata, Milio, Voyage de
Muscovie and de Perse, p. m. 23.
Turcico, Oryza and aliis, quae a vetulis masticantur, masticataque multa cum
salira exspuuntur, hic liquor mox vasis reconditur donec ferveat, faecesque
ejiciat.

In Muscovia it self, notwithstanding the unskilfulness of that rude People,
Olearius informs us, That the Ambassadors, to whom he was Secretary, we^e
presented at one time with two and twenty several sorts of Drink. And at a
Country House here in England (where I was, by a very Ingenious Gentleman that
is Master of it, presented with diverse rare Drinks of his own making) I was
assured that he had lately, at one time in his House, at least the former
mentioned number of various Drinks, and might easily have had a greater, if he
had pleased.

And on this occasion, I am not willing to pretermit what is practiced in some
of our American Plantations, as I am informed by the Practisers themselves,
where, finding it very difficult to make good Malt of Maiz, or Indian Corn (by
reason of hindrances not to be discoursed of in few words) they brew very good
Drink of it, by first bringing the Grain to Bread; in which operation, the
Grain being both reduced into small parts, and already somewhat fermented, is
disposed to communicate easily its dissoluble and Spirituous parts to the Water
it is boiled in: To which I shall add, That I have to think, that the Art of
Malting may be much improved by new and skilfully contrived Furnaces, and a
rational man^gement of the Grain.

Nor are we alone defective in the knowledge of fermenting Drinks, but even in
that of the Materials of which Drinks may be prepared.

In that vast Region of China, which is enriched with so fertile a Soil, and
comprizeth such variety of Geographical parallels, they make not (as Semedo
informs us) their Wine of Grapes, but of Barley; and in the Northern parts, of
Rice, where they make it also of Apples; but in the Southern parts, of Rice
only: yet not of ordinary Rice, but of a certain kind peculiar to them, which
serves only to make this Liquor, being used in diverse manners. And of the Wine
there drank, even by the vulgar, our Author gives us this character: History of
China, par. 1. cap. 1.
The Wine used by the common People, although it will make them drunk, is not
very strong or lasting; it is made at all times of the Year, but the best only
in the Winter: It has a color very pleasing to the sight, nor is the smell
less pleasing to the sent, or the savor thereof to the taste; take altogether,
it is a vehement occasion that there never wants Drunkards, etc. And of the
Inhabitants of the Kingdom of Japan, I remember also, Pyrophilus, Linschoten's
Voyages, Book 1. Chap 26
that Linschoten, in his description of those Islands, tells us, That they
drink Wine of Rice, wherewith they drink themselves drunk.

We have here in England, at the House of our experienced Mint-master, Dr
Gordon, tasted a Wine, which he made of that sort of Cherrys which are commonly
called Morellos, that was, when we drank of it, about a Year and a half old,
but it was somewhat sower, and needed Sugar; And therefore I shall rather take
notice to you of my having since drunk Wine made of the Juice of good, but not
of extraordinary Kentish Cherrys, which, with the help of a Tantillum of Sugar
added in the Fermentation, kept so well; that though it were above a Year old
when I tasted it, I found it a strong and pleasant Wine, not inferior to many
Wines that are brought us from foreign parts. But this is nothing to what is
averred upon his own experience, by a Learned Divine (to whom you, Pyrophilus,
and I, am related) who affirms himself to have made out of some sort of wild
Apples and Pears, by bare Fermentation, such Liquors, as though at first
somewhat harsh, will not only keep diverse years; but at the end of two or
three, attain such strength, and so pleasingly pungent a taste, that they may
compare even with choice outlandish Wines, and excel those that are not of the
very best sorts of them.

But till we have in another Essay an opportunity of presenting you something
out of the Observations of Olearius, the newly mentioned Divine, and our own,
concerning Fermented Liquors, we shall content our selves to manifest our want
of curiosity about the materials of which Drinks may be prepared, by this, That
the Drinks of one whole Country, are oftentimes unknown to the Inhabitants of
another: That the Wine made of Rice, which we lately mentioned to be of
frequent use in the Kingdoms of China and Japan, is of little or none in
Europe, I need not prove to you. I have been in diverse places where Beer and
Ale, which are here the common Drinks, a^e greater rarities, then the medicated
Liquors sold only in Apothecaries Shops. In diverse parts of Muscovie, and some
other Northern Regions, the common Drink is Hydromel, made of Water fermented
with Honey: And indeed, if a due proportion betwixt those two be observed, and
the Fermentation be skilfully ordered, there may be that way, as experience
has assured us, prepared such a Liquor, both for clearness, strength, and
wholsomeness, as few that have not tasted such a one, would readily believe.

The French and English Inhabitants of the Canibal Islands, make, by
Fermentation, a Wine of the dregs collected in the boiling of Sugar. A like to
which Piso tells us, That they make in Brasil, Lib. 4. Cap. 1.
and commonly call Garapa, which, though made by the mixture of Water, the
Inhabitants are very greedy of; and when it is old, find it strong enough to
make them drunk. And how also in these colder Countries, a good Wine may be made
of only Sugar and Water, we may elsewhere have occasion to teach you.

And in Brasil they likewise, as the same Author informs us, Lib. 4. Cap. 6.
make a Wine (unknown to most other Regions of the World) of the Fruit of
Acaju, which yet, upon his experience, he much commends; telling us, That it is
strong enough to inebriate, and may, he doubts not, be kept good many Years;
and that though it be astringent, yet both in himself and others he found it
diuretical.

In the Barbada's they have many Drinks unknown to us; such as are Perino, the
Plantane-drink, Grippo, Punch, and the rare Wine of Pines, by some commended
more then the Poets do their Nectar; some of which we therefore make not,
because the Vegetables whereof they are produced, grow not in these colder
Climats: But others also they have, which we have not, though they are made of
Plants to be met with in our Soil; as for instance, the drink they call Mobbie,
made of Potato's fermented with Water, which, being fit to drink in a very few
days, and easy to make as strong almost as the maker pleases, would be of
excellent use, if it were but as wholesome as it is accounted pleasant.

In the Turkish Dominions, where Wine, properly so called, is forbidden by
Mahomet's Law, the Jews and Christians keep, in their Taverns, a Vinous Liquor
made of fermented Raisons, after a manner, which (when we shall elsewhere
acquaint you with it) you will easily discern to be capable of much improvement
from the knowledge of Fermentation. And indeed, by the bare fermenting of
Raisons and Water in a due proportion, without the help of Barm, Leaven,
Tartar, or other additament to set them a working, we have diverse times, in a
few days, prepared a good Vinous Liquor, which having for trials sake
distilled, it afforded us greater store, then we expected, of inflammable
Spirit, like that of other Wine.

But I have sometimes wondered, that Men had no more curiosity to try what
Drinks may be made of the Juices obtainable, by wounding or cutting off the
parts of several Trees, and some other Vegetables: For that in the East Indies,
their Sura is made of the Liquor dropping from their wounded Coco Trees, we
have not long since out of Linscoten informed you. And sober Eyewitnesses have
assured us, That in those Countries they have but too often seen the Seamen
drunk, by the use or Liquors weeping out of the Incisions of wounded
Vegetables, and afterward fermented.

And that even in Europe, the Alimental Liquor, drawn by Trees from the Earth,
may receive great alterations from them before it be quite assimulated by them,
may be gathered from the practice of the Calabrians and Apulians; who, betwixt
March and November, do by Incisions obtain from the common Ash Tree, and the
Ornus (which many Botanists would have to be but a wild Ash) a sweet Juice, so
like to the Manna, adhearing in that Season to the Leaves of those kind of
Trees, that the Natives call it in their Language, Manna del corpo, or
Trunk-manna; and least we should think they draw all this sweetness from the
Soil of that particular part of Italy where they grow, you may be satisfied by
the Learned Chrysostomus Magnenus, in his Treatise De Manna, that it is to be
met with in several other places. And he adds, That in the Dukedom of Milane,
where he professes Physic, there is no other Manna used then that which is
(as he speaks) Vel e trunco expressum (which he somewhere calls Manna
Truncinum) aut in ramis stiriatim concretum; De Manna cap. 18.
and that yet it is safely and prosperously used.

I had communicated to me, as a rarity, a secret of the King of Polands, which
is said to do wonders in many Diseases, and consists only in the use of the
Liquor which drops about the beginning of the Spring, from the barred and
wounded Roots of the Walnut-tree: but because I have not yet made trial of it
my self, I shall pass on to observe to you, that in some Northern Countries,
and even in some parts of England, bordering upon Scotland, the almost insipid
Liquor that weeps in March, or the beginning of April, out of the transversly
wounded Branches (not Trunks) of the Birch-tree, is wont to be used by Persons
of Quality as a preservative from the Stone; against which cruel Disease,
Helmont highly extols a Drink made of this Liquor and semen dauci, and
Beccabunga, and I think not without cause. For not to mention all the
commendations that have been given me of it by some that use it, I have seen
such strange relief, frequently given among others, to a Kins-man of mine, to
whom hardly any other Remedy (though he tried a scarce imaginable variety) was
able to give ease (and in whose dissected Bladder, after another Disease had
killed him, a Stone of many Ounces was found) that I usually every Spring take
care to provide a quantity of this Water, with which alone, without the other
Ingredients mentioned by Helmont, my Kins-man used to be relieved as long as he
could keep it, which you may do the longer, by pouring upon the top of it a
quantity of Sallet Oil, to defend it from the Air; and perhaps also by
Distillation: By which (last named) way, I know an Ingenious Man that is wont
to preserve it for his own use, and says, he finds it not thereby impaired in
virtue. But the most effectual way that ever I yet practiced, Pyrophilus, to
preserve both this and other Liquors and Juices, is dexterously and
sufficiently to impregnate them with Fume of Sulphur, which must be at diverse,
and often times as it were, incorporated with the Liquor by due agitation; the
manual Operation belonging to this Experiment, I may hereafter have occasion to
describe more fully, together with the particular Effects of it in several
Bodies. And therefore it may here suffice to tell you, that if you practice it
carefully, you will, perhaps, think your self obliged to thank me for the
discovery of it, though a heedful Reader may find it, not obscurely, hinted in
Helmont's Writings.

I might here annex the great commendation which I have found given to this
Birch-water, by eminent Writers, against the hot d^stempe^s of the Liver, and
diverse other affections; In consilio Medicinali in catarrh^ calido pro Principi
quodam.
and especially how Freitagius commends it very much to dilute Wine with: and
adds, Haec est dulcacida and grati saporis, sitim sedat viscerum and sanguinis
fervorem temperat, obstructiones reserat, calculum pellit.

But I suppose you will think it high time for me to proceed to another
subject; and indeed I should not have spent so much time in discoursing of
Drinks, but that I am apt to think, that if there were greater variety of them
made, and if they were more skilfully ordered, they might, by refreshing the
Spirits, and insensibly altering the mass of Blood, prevent and cure (without
weakening or much troubling the Patient) almost as many Diseases as the use of
our common, unwholesome, and sophisticated Wines is wont to produce.

For in Fermentation, the Sulphurous (as Chemists call them) the Active, and
the Spirituous parts of Vegetables, are much better loosened, and more entirely
separated from the grosser and clogging parts, in most Mixts, then they are by
the vulgar ways of Distillation, wherein the Concrete is not opened by previous
Fermentation. And these nobler parts being incorporated with our Aliments, are
with them received freely, and without resistance carried into the mass of the
Blood, and therewith, by circulation, conveyed to the whole Body where their
Operation is requisite. And I remember, that discoursing one day with an
eminently learned and experienced Physician, of the Antinephritical virtue of
our common wild Carret-seed, fermented in small Ale; he smilingly told me,
that he found its efficacy but too great: For having prescribed it to some of
his rich Patients, who were wont frequently to have recourse to him in their
Nephritical distempers, after the use of this drink for a pretty while, he
seldom heard of them any more. And for your encouragement, Pyrophilus, to make
trials of this nature, we will add, That though the Seed it self be not
over-well tasted, yet being fermented in a due proportion with the Liquor (we
used an Ounce and half of the Seed, to a Gallon of the Ale) the Drink composed
of both tasted pleasantly, almost like Lemmon beer.

And that you may the less wonder at the efficacy of fermented Liquors, it is
worth considering, what virtue is ascribed to the bare decoction of that Herb,
which the French and we call The, or Te, which is much magnified here; and as
far as my little experience in my self, and others (of which more hereafter)
reaches, not altogether without cause: But among the Chinese and the
Japonians, it is the common Drink of Persons of Quality, by whom it is so
highly praised, that the experienced Tulpius, Obs: Lib. 4. Cap. ultimo.
in the new Edition of his Observations, tells us, That one pound of the
Japonical T'chia (as the Natives call it) is not unfrequently sold for one
hundred pounds of Silver; which is not to be wondered at, if they justly ascribe
to it, that in those Countries Men are not subject to the Stone, or the Gout,
and if but one half of the Virtues he there attributes to it, be for the most
part to be found in it.

I might, when I told you of the variety of Materials not used among us, have
added one strange Drink, which a Chyrurgion, that a while since lived at in the
East Indies, told me, he saw much used thereabouts: They make it of the raw
Flesh of Goats, Capons, and the like, which, together with Rice and Molossos
(or black course Sugar) they put into a quantity of Water, and distill it in an
Alimbick till the Liquor be stronger then Brandy (as they call common weak
Spirit of Wine or of Lees of Vinous Liquors) And this Rack (as the extravagant
Liquor is called) is often drunk in hot weather, and found very comfortable:
those that use it, prizing it much, as supposing it draws a nutritive and
cherishing virtue from the Flesh; as indeed, if any quantity of the nobler
parts of that, do concur to the constituting of the Liquor, it may probably be,
at least to diverse Bodies, very wholesome in that Country, where they find
strong Drinks necessary to recruit their Spirits, exhausted by the excessive
heat of the Climate. As I remember, the experienced Bontius, in his Medicina
Indorum, tells us, That the Merchants traveling through the scorching Deserts
of Arabia, Persia, or Turkey, Dialogo 3.
find it best to quench their thirst by a draught of the Spirit of Wine, or
else of the strongest Persian or Spanish Wine.

And of the great use, if not necessity of either Brandy, or such other strong
and Spirituous Drinks in the hot Climats of the Indies, diverse intelligent
Persons of our own Country, have, upon their own experience, sufficiently
satisfied us.

Nor, Pyrophilus, is Natural Philosophy able only to improve our Drinks, but
the rest of our Aliments also: For not to mention, that Experience has assured
us, that by skilfully contrived Ovens (wherein the heat plays every way about
the Bread, without yet suffering any of the smoke or steams of the Fire to come
at it, and wherein what degree of heat you please may be continued from first
to last) better Bread may be baked, then in our common Ovens, where the Bread
rests upon the Harth, and the heat is continually decaying. Not to mention
this, I say, Physiologie can enable us to confer a very grateful taste on very
many of the things we eat, barely by a skilful and moderate untying and
exciting the formerly clogged Spirits, and other sapid parts contained in them.
It can teach us to make better Bread then is commonly eaten: And by discovering
to us a better Art of Cookry, then Apitius and his Successors have left us, and
by substituting innocently sapid things, instead of those unwholesome ones,
their deliciousness endears to Men; It can teach us to gratify Men's Palates,
without offending their healths: and in preserving of fresh Meats, Fruits, etc.
beyond their wonted seasons of duration, the Naturalists skill may perform much
more then you will readily believe.

And yet to incline you not to be too diffident in this particular, let me
inform you, That much has been already performed, as to the preservation of
Aliments, even by those that have not troubled themselves to make Philosophical
enquiries after the Causes and Remedies of Putrefaction in Bodies, but only
have been taught by obvious and daily Observations, that the Air does much
contribute to the corruption of some Bodies, and the exclusion of Air to the
hindering it. I remember, the inquisitive and learned Mr. Borreel, assured me
some while since, That he had in his Country, Holland, eaten Biscuit that was
yet good, after it had been carried from Amsterdam to the East Indies, and
brought back thence again (in which Voyage, between two and three Years are
wont to be spent) And to confirm my conjecture of the way of preserving this
Bread so long: He told me, that the curious Merchant whose it was, used no
other Art, then the stowing his Biscuit, well baked, in Casks exactly calk'd;
and besides, carefully lined with Tin, for the more perfect exclusion of the
Air. Adding, That to the same end the Biskets were so placed, as to leave as
little room as possibly might be in the Cask, which also was not opened, but in
case of absolute necessity, and then presently and carefully closed again.

I may elsewhere tell you of an eminent Naturalist, a Friend of yours and mine,
that has a strange way of preserving Fruits, whereby even Goof-berries have
been kept for many Months, without the addition of Sugar, Salt, or other
tangible Bodies; but all that I dare yet tell you, is, That he assures me his
Secret consists in a new and artificial way of keeping them from the Air.

But it seems more difficult, as well as more useful, to be able to preserve
Meat long without Salt; for it is sufficiently known to Navigators, how
frequently, in long Voyages, the Scurvy, and other Diseases, are contracted by
the want of fresh Meat, and the necessity of feeding constantly upon none but
strongly poudred Flesh, or salted Fish; and therefore, he is much to be
commended that has first devised the way to keep Flesh sweet, without the help
of those freeting Salts Men are wont to use to make it keep. This way is not
unknown known to some ingenious Persons in London: One of the most noted of
whom, upon my conjecturing how it may be performed, confessed to me, that I had
hit upon the way in general: But the most satisfactory account I could get of
it, was from an English Man, that lately practiced Physic in the East Indies,
who, finding I was no stranger to what I asked him about, told me freely, that
he had seen both Goats-flesh, and Hens, so well preserved by this way, that
though it were put up in the East Indies awhile before he came thence, yet he
eat of it, and found it good and wholesome, between the Islands of Cape Verd (as
the Seamen call them) and England; so that this Meat-continued sweet above six
Months, notwithstanding the heat and closeness of the Ship, the excessive heat
they met with in their Passage under the Line, and consequently through the
Torrid Zone: and that the way was only this, That the Meat being well roasted,
and cut in pieces, was carefully and conveniently ranged in a very close Cask,
into which, afterward, there was poured as much Butter melted, skimmed, and
decanted from the grosser and ranker Parts, as would fill up all the intervals
left between the several pieces of Flesh, and swim about them all, and thereby
keep out the Air from approaching them; and then the Cask, being exactly
closed, was stowed up in a convenient place in the Ship, and kept unopen'd till
the Meat was to be eaten. And it must not be omitted, that the Relator, and
others that had the care of making Provision for the Voyage, were fain, instead
of Butter made of Cows Milk (which could not be had where they took in their
Lading) to make use of that made of Goats, or Ews Milk, which is not (as the
Indians make it) so good, and to whose rankness he ascribed that which he had
observed in some of the Meat buried in it, which he thought might have been
preserved longer, and better tasted (for wholesome and incorrupt he said it was)
in our European Butter, whose power to preserve Meat buried in it, after due
Coction, has been confirmed to me upon their own observation, by an
experienced Officer of the English Fleet, that had the oversight of the
Provisions, and by others that had opportunity to observe it.

But how much the Naturalists skill may advance the Dietetical part of Physic,
by enabling Men to make Aliments much lastinger then naturally they are, I must
not here labor to convince you by other instances, that I may not anticipate
what we have elsewhere to acquaint you with, from other Men's Experiments, and
our own, about the conservation of Bodies. Only I shall at present tell you in
general, That I hope there will be ways found out to preserve even raw Flesh it
self (for of the keeping of roasted, we have just now given you an instance)
with things that do not so much fret it, nor give it so corrosive a quality,
when eaten, as our common Salt does. For not to mention what several curious
Persons have practiced, of salting Neats Tongues with Saltpeter, which though
done only to make them look red, shows that a Body, not corrosive like common
Salt, may preserve Flesh: I have, for trial sake, kept an entire Puppy of
pretty bigness, untainted for many Weeks (and that in the midst of Summer) and
that without slaying, drying (by Fire or otherwise) or so much as exenterating
him, or cleansing him, or doing any thing toward the preserving of him, save
the keeping him immersed in a well stopped Vessel, under Spirit of Wine (from
whose taste, I presume, Meat may be easily freed by Water) and there seemed
small cause to doubt, that the only thing that hindered me from keeping him
much longer, was the want of time to pursue the Experiment, and take notice of
its success: For I remember, I have the same way kept a soft Substance, taken
raw from an Ox or Cow, for many Months (if I mistake not, eighteen or twenty)
and found no putrefaction or ill sent in the immersed substance, which, for
ought I know, might have been preserved diverse Years together the same way, or
at least, by an easy improvement of this method, of which, as I lately
intimated, I intend you hereafter an account.

And I shall further add on this occasion, That if we reflect upon Sugar,
which is (at least in these Western Regions) but an almost recent discovery,
and consider how many Bodies are with it, by Confectioners and others, not
only preserved, but rendered exceeding grateful to the taste; that single
instance may suffice to make us think it probable, that expedients yet
unthought of, may, by an insight into Nature, be found out, for the
preservation of Bodies; especially, if our ingenious Friend, Mr. W. would show
us, how out of diverse other Concreats, besides the Sugar Cane, a Substance not
unlike Sugar (though of different taste, according to the nature of the
Vegetable that affords it) may, by a peculiar industry, be prepared: which,
that you may not think unfeazable, let me mention to you (for perhaps he has
not yet taken notice of it) what even Indians have done of this nature. And
first, let me inform you of what we are told by Linschoten Linscotens Voyages,
chap. 56. -- When they desire to have no Cocus, or Fruit thereof (namely of the
Palm Trees) they cut the Blossoms of the Cocus away, and bind a round Pot,
with a narrow mouth (by them called Calao) fast to the Tree, and then stop the
same close, round about with Pot-ea^th, so that neither Wind nor Air can enter
in, or come forth; and in that sort, the Pot, in short space, is full of Water,
which they call Sura; and is very pleasant D^ink, like sweet Whay, and somewhat
better.
concerning that Drink, which in the East Indies they call Sura, and made of
the Liquor dropping from the Blossoms, that they cut away from the Indian Palm
Tree which bears the Coco Nut. For of this Sura, he tells us, That amongst
other things, they make Sugar (which is called Jagra) which is made by boiling
that Liquor, and setting it in the Sun, where it congeals to Sugar.

And though I must not conceal from you, that our Author adds, that it is not
much esteemed by reason of its brown color, and for that (to use his words)
they have so great quantity and abundance of white Sugar th^^ughout all India,
yet the latter reason, of the cheapness of Jagra, seems to be the principal.
For probably, if other Sugar were scarce, the melioration of this would be
attempted; and it is very likely, That if a skilful Naturalist had the ordering
of that sweet Juice, of which the Indians make their Jagra, he might very well
make of it a Sugar of no small use; and such a Sugar would be very convenient
in many cases, and to many Persons, for its being different from the common
Sugar, though it should not be better. Garcillassus also (a much applauded
Writer concerning the West Indies) treating of the Fruits of a Peruvian Tree,
called by some Molle, Apud Joh: de Lact. descrip. Indiae, l. 10. c. 3.
and by others Mull^ conficiunt (says he) ex eo potum confricando blande inter
manu^ in aqua calida donec dulcor omnis defricetur: Percolam hanc aquam
seruantque dies tres quatuorve donec subsideat. potus est limpidissimus, etc.
Aqua eadem cocta convertitur in optimum mel: And of the same Plant, Petrus de
Cieca has this confirming Passage, Ex hujus fructu cum aqua decocto, Apud
cu^dem ^odem loco.
pr^coctura modo, fit aut vinum sive potio admodum bona aut acetum aut mel. And
that there is a great affinity betwixt such Vegetable Hony's and Sugar,
especially if the Juices be ordered with a design of turning them rather into
Sugar then Honey, you may easily gather from the next and more memorable
instance which we are to mention, and which is afforded us by the diligent
Describer of the Brasilian Plants, who treating of the Caraguata, or Erva
Babosa (or as some would have it, Herba innominata caul portulaca) has these
words to our present purpose: Porro (says he) radendo novacula petrosa
stolones, emanat ex concavitate liquor quidam tanta copia ut ex una solummodo
planta (Mirabile dictu) interdum 50. aut plures arobae effluant e quo liquore
fit vinum, acetum, mel and saccharum: liquor quippe per se dulcis coquendo
redditur multo su^^^ior and spissior, ita ut tandem in saccharum congelascat.

Since the writing of these last Lines, being visited by an ancient Virtuoso,
Governor to a considerable Colony in the Northern America, and inquiring of
him, among other particularities touching his Country, something in relation to
the thoughts I had about the making of several kinds of Sugar, he assured me,
upon his own experience, that there is in some parts of New England, a kind of
Tree, so like our Wallnut-trees, that it is there so called, whose Juice that
weeps out of its Incisions, etc. if it be permitted slowly to exhale away the
superfluous moisture, does congeal into a sweet and saccharine substance; and
the like was confirmed to me, upon his own knowledge, by the Agent of the great
and populous Colony of the Masathusets. And very lately demanding of a very
eminent and skilful Planter, why, living in a part of America, too cold to bare
Sugarcanes, he did not try to make Sugar of that very sweet Liquor, which the
Stalks of Maiz, by many called Indian Wheat, affords, when their Juice is
expressed; he promised me he would make trial of it: Adding, That he should do
it very hopefully, because that though he had never been solicitous to bring
this Juice into a saccharine form, yet having several times, for trial sake,
boild it up to Syrup, and employed it to sweeten Tarts, and other things, the
Guests could not perceive that they were otherwise sweetened then with Sugar.
And he farther added, That both he and others, had, in New England, made such a
Syrrup with the Juice of Water Melons.

Nor, Pyrophilus, is it only by teaching Men to improve the wholesomness and
tastes of the Aliments, or to keep them long uncorrupted, that the Naturalist
may contribute to the preservation of Man's health: For from the ingenious
attempts of Sanctorius, in his Medicina Statica, we may be invited to hope,
that there may be ways, as yet unthought of, to investigate the wholesomness or
insalubrity of Aliments; as he, by the weight of Bodies, after having fed on
such and such Meats, finds that Swines Flesh, Melons, and some other things
that he names (in the third Section) do much hinder insensible Perspiration,
and consequently are unwholesome; though, as I take it, it were not amiss, that
before such Observations be framed into general and established Aphorisms, they
were carefully made in Bodies of differing Ages, Sexes and Complexions, and
with variety of Circumstances: But then again, presuming these Maxims to be
judiciously framed, the same Statica Medicina makes it hopeful, that there may
be unthought-of Methods found, whereby, by ways different from those formerly
used by Physicians, a Man may be much assisted in the whole manner of ordering
himself, so as to preserve health, and to foresee and prevent the approach of
many Distempers. And perhaps by such unthought-of ways, diverse Paradoxes of
concernment to Man's health may be made out, as the diligent Sanctorius to that
Observation proposed in these words Semel aut bis in mense facto excessu in
cibo and potu, die sequenti, Sect. 3. Aphorism 96.
licet sensibiliter non evacuet, minus solito perpendit annexus (in the
following Aphorism) adds this important Corollary: Victus uniformis caret
beneficio illorum qui semel vel bis in mense excedunt: expultrix enim a copia
irritata excitat tantum perspiratus, quantum sine statica nemo crederet. And
indeed, experience has informed us, that the promoting or suppressing of
insensible transpiration, by which, in a day, the Body may discharge it self of
four or five pound of excrementitious Matter, has a much greater power to
advantage or prejudice health, then is wont to be taken notice of; so that we
see that the Staticks, which, though long known, were thought useless to
Physic, may afford several important directions in reference to the
preservation of Man's health; to which there are likewise other ways whereby the
Naturalist may contribute. For he may also devise means, whereby to judge of
the qualities of Aliments, especially Drinks in their respective kinds; and
likewise of the temperature of the Air in this or that place assigned, we
shall, in one of the following Essays, describe to you a small slight
Instrument, by the help of which, one that is acquainted with this or that
particular sort of Wine, may give a near guess whether it be embased with Water
or not. And whereas in most hot Countries, where Water being the common Drink,
it is of great concernments to Man's health to be able to make a good estimate of
the salubrity of it; And whereas Physicians are wont to think Water caeteris
paribus, the better and purer the lighter it is, this Instrument presently
manifests, without any trouble of weighing in Scales, what among any Waters
proposed is the heaviest, and which the lightest, and what difference there is
of gravity betwixt them: And this disparity may sometimes be so great, that I
remember some of our English Navigators tell us, That upon bringing home a so^t
of Water out of Africa into England, they found, by the common way of
ponderation, the African Water in the same bulk, to be about four Ounces in the
pound lighter then the English. And as the thickness or lightness of Waters may
be thus presently discerned by this Hydrostatical way, so it is possible, by
some Chemical Experiments, easily enough to discover some other qualities,
wherein Waters, that are thought to be of the same nature, differ from each
other; as we find that very many Pump-waters will not bear Soap, as
Rain-waters, and the generality of Spring-waters will do: some Water will not
well dye Scarlet, or some other particular color, because they are secretly
imbued with some kind of saline Substance, that has an operation it should
not have upon the Ingredients employed by the Dyer. And I have sometimes
discovered a latent Sea Salt in Water, where others suspected no such matter,
by pouring into it a solution of good Silver, made in Aqua fortis: For as
common Salt, as well as the Spirit of it, will precipitate the Metal out of
such a solution, in the form of a white Calx; so it seemed rational to
conceive, that in case the Water I suspected had been imbued in its passage
through the Earth with a saline quality, though not conspicuous enough to be
taken notice of by the taste; these saline Corpuscles diffused through the
Water, would, though faintly, act their parts upon the dissolved Silver, and
accordingly I found, that upon the mixtures of such Waters, and the Metalline
solution, there would immediately be produced a kind of whiteness (from some
parts of the Metal precipitated by the Salt:) to avoid which, I have often been
fain to use, in places where I met with such Waters, either Rainwater, or that
which is freed from its common Salt, by a slow Distillation.

And as for the temperature of the Air, which is acknowledged to be of
exceeding great consequence, both as to health, and as to the prolongation of
life; and which is possibly yet of greater moment to both then most Men
imagine, the skilful Naturalists sagacity, if it were employed to that purpose,
might probably find diverse ways of discovering the qualities, and consequently
the salubrity and unhealthfulness of the Air in particular places. For the
diligent Sanctorius (in the second Section of his Medicina Statica) teaches us
how to estimate the healthfulness and insalubrity of the Air, by the weight of
those Men's Bodies that live in it. And besides this (nice) way, we see, that by
the late Invention of Weather-Glasses, it is easy to discern which of two
Neighboring Houses, and which of two rooms in the same House is the colder. And
I remember, I have sometimes bethought my self of a slight way (to be mentioned
in one of the following Essays) by the help of which, it is not hard to
determine in which of two places proposed, the Air is caeteris paribus, the
dryer or the moister; And to give also some guess, both how much at the same
time the Air of one place exceeds that of the other, and how the temperature of
the Air changes in the same place at several times, either of those qualities.
And that the differing operations of several Airs, upon certain sorts of Flesh
hung in them, upon some fading colors, upon Bodies subject to gather rust, or
to be tarnish'd; and in a word, upon diverse other subjects, may be more
considerable then Men seem yet to have taken notice of, I shall think it
sufficient to have intimated in this place, being desirous to hasten to the
following Essay (wherewith I am to conclude, what I have to offer to you
concerning Physic) that I may have the more time to employ on it.

ESSAY V. Proposing some Particulars wherein Natutural Philosophy may be useful
to the Therapeutical part of Physic.
ANd now, Pyrophilus, the method that we formerly prescribed to our selves (a
little after the beginning of the first Essay) requires, that we consider
awhile the Therapeutical part of Physic, which is indeed that, whose
improvement would be the most beneficial to Mankind; and therefore I cannot
here forbear to wish, That diverse Learned Physicians were more concerned, then
they seem to be, to advance the Curative part of their Profession; without
which, three at least of the four others may prove indeed delightful and
beneficial to the Physician, but will be of very little use to the Patient,
whose relief is yet the principal end of Physic: whereunto the Physiological,
Pathological, and Semiotical parts of that Art ought to be referred. There was,
awhile since, a witty Doctor, who being asked by an Acquaintance of mine
(himself an eminent Physician, and who related this unto me) why he would not
give such a Patient more Generous Remedies, seeing he grew so much worse under
the use of those common Languid ones, to which he had been confined, that he
could not at the last but dye with them in his Mouth? briskly answered, Let him
die if he will, so he die secundum artem. I hope there are very few of this
Man's temper, but it were to be wished, that there were fewer Learned Men that
think a Physician has done enough, when he has learnedly discoursed of the
seat and nature of the Disease, foretold the event of it, and methodically
employed a company of safe, but languid Remedies, which he had often before
found almost as unable to cure the Patient, as unlikely to kill him. For by
such an unprofitable way of proceeding, to which some lazy or opinionated
Practizers of Physic (I say some, for I mean not all) have, under pretense of
its being safe, confined themselves; they have rendered their whole Profession
too obnoxious to the Cavils of such Empericks, as he that (as the Lord Verulam
reports) was wont to say, Your European Physicians are indeed Learned Men, but
they know not the particular Cures of Diseases; and (unreverendly enough) to
compare our Physicians to Bishops, who had the Keys of binding and loosing, and
nothing else: Which brings into my mind, what Monsieur De Balsac relates (in
his witty French Discourse of the Court) of a Physician of Millain, that he
knew at Padua, who being content with a Possession of his Science, and (as he
said) The enjoyment of the Truth, did not only not particularly enquire into
the Cure of Diseases, but boasted, That he had killed a Man with the fairest
Method in the World: E mort^ (said he) canonicamente, e con tutti gli ordini.
And such Scoffs and Stories are readily enough entertained by the major part of
Men, who send for Physicians, not so much to know what ails them, as to be
eased of it; and had not rather been methodically killed, then Empirically
cured. And it does indeed a little lessen even my esteem of the great
Hippocrates's skill, to find mentioned in his Writings so many of his
Patients, of whom he concludes, that they dyed: And I had much rather, that the
Physician of any Friend of mine, should keep his Patient by powerful Medicines
from dying, then tell me punctually when he shall die, or show me in the opened
Carcass why it may be supposed he lived no longer. But, Pyrophilus, my concern
for Mankind, and for the reputation of many excellent Physicians, whose
Profession suffers much by the want of either Industry or Charity, in such as
we have been speaking of, has diverted me longer then I thought, from telling
you, That I suppose it will not be very difficult to persuade you, that this so
useful Therapeutical part of Physic is also capable of being much improved by
a knowing Naturalist, especially if he be an intelligent and expert Chemist, as
in this Essay we will suppose him.

CHAP. I.
SOme Paracelsian would, perhaps, set forth, how much more easy to be taken
Chymically prepared Medicines are wont to be, then those loathsome and clogging
Galenical Potions Bolus's, etc. which are not only odious to the Takers, but
(which is much worse) are to many so offensive, that either the Patients cannot
get them down, or the incensed Stomach returns them, by Vomit, before they have
stayed long enough in the Body to do any more then distemper it. But I shall
not much insist on this, because I think wholesomness to be much more
considerable in a Remedy then pleasantness: though, I confess, I could wish
that Physicians were more careful to keep Patients from being almost as much
troubled by Physic, as by the Disease, and to cure according to the old
Prescription, not only cito and tuto, but jucunde too: Especially considering
that, as we were saying, the loathsomness of some Medicines makes the Stomach
reject them, before they can have performed their Operations. And it is, I
presume, on this account as much as on any other, that at Oxford Learned and
Practical Physicians, of your Acquaintance, make very frequent use (on Patients
not Feverish) of the resin of Jalap, barely drawn with Spirit of Wine; since as
we have tried six, eight or ten, or more Grains, of this almost insipid Resin,
being cleanly prepared, according to Art, and with a little Gum-tragacanth, and
half its weight of powdered Cinnamon, or some such thing, made up, may be taken
in the Morning, in form of Pills, instead of a Potion; and is wont to evacuate
plentifully enough, and yet gripe the Patient much less then common Purges.
But, as I said, I shall not insist on this. I might better commend the
usefulness of Chemistry to the Therapeutical part of Physic, from hence, That
it is probable, that even emptying Medicines may, by the Spagyrists Art, be so
prepared, as not only to be less offensive then common Purges or Vomits in the
taking, but to be less painful in the working: As I have often observed, both
in my self and others, that upon the taking of the clear, and not loathsome
Mineral Waters of Barnet, though the Medicine wrought with me ten or twelve
times in a Morning, yet it did not either pain me, or make me sick, or disorder
me for the remaining part of the day, any thing near so much as a common Pill
or Potion that had wrought but once or twice would have done. And I shall
elsewhere (God permitting) teach you a preparation of Silver, whereof about
three or four Grains being made up (with any proper Conserve) into a little
Pill, is wont to make a copious evacuation of Serum especially (in Bodies that
abound with it) without making the Patient almost at all sick, or griping him:
Insomuch that I know some Persons, both Physicians and others, with whom though
this Medicine work frequently in a day, and though (which is stranger) once
taking of it will with some Persons work so for two or three, or more days
successively, yet they scruple not to go abroad and follow their business; and
some that take it, tell me, That when it works not with them (as for the most
part, when it has freed the Body from superfluous Serum, it will cease, and in
some Bodies will scarce purge at all, it neither puts them to pain, nor makes
them sick.)

And now I am speaking of the painless ways of relieving the sick, I shall
add, That there is another way, whereby it is to be hoped, many Patients may be
rescued from a great deal of pain, and that is by finding out Medicaments, that
may in several Distempers, that are thought to belong peculiarly to the
Chirurgions hand, excuse the need of Burning, Cutting, Trepaning, and other as
well painful as terrible manual Operations of Surgery. Helmont tells us,
Helmont, De Febribus, c. 14. See also the same Author in Tractat: quem vocat
Arcana. Paracels: and Lib. de Febr. Cap. 14.
That he knew a Country Fellow, who cured all fresh Wounds by a Drink made (as
I remember) of burnt Tilia. I have informed you in another Essay, of the Cure I
observed to be made of the exulcerated Tumors of one sick of the Kings Evil, by
the use of Beer, altered by a little Plant, that did not at all disturb the
Taker. If we may believe, Helmont's and Paracelsus's Praecipitatus
Diaphoreticus, taken at the Mouth, does cure, to use his own Words, Carcinoma,
Lupum and quodlibet Aesthiomenum cacoethes ulcus, sive externum sive internum.
And if there be any truth in what has been affirmed to me by several
Eyewitnesses, as well Physicians as others, concerning the Weapon Salve, and
Powder of Sympathy, we may well conclude, That Nature may perform diverse Cures,
for which the help of Surgery is wont to be implored, with much less pain to
the Patient, then the Surgeon is wont to put him to. I know a very ingenious
Man, that is Famous as well for his Writings as for a Remedy, wherewith he
undertaketh to cure constantly the exulcerated Cancers of Women's Breasts,
without any considerable pain: But having not yet had opportunity to make trial
of that which I have lying by me, I shall only tell you, he assures me, That
his Medicine is indolent, and mortifies the ulcerous parts as far as they are
corrupted, without disordering the Party troubled with them; which I the less
doubt, because, that (to add thus much on this occasion) partly by the color,
etc. of his Powder, and partly by his own confession to me, it seems to be a
dulcification of Arsenick, first fixed with Nitre, and then carefully freed from
its corrosiveness, by very frequent Distillations of fresh Spirit of Wine. I
shall ere long have occasion to teach you a Drink, whereby exulcerated (but not
Cancerous) Breasts have been very happily cured. The learned Bartholinus, in
his late Observations) mentions the cure of some hurts in the Head, done
without Trepaning, in cases where that formidable and tedious Operation is wont
to be thought necessary. As for the terrible way of stopping the violent
Bleeding in great Wounds, by seering the Orifices of the Vessels with hot
Irons, it would be little needed, if we knew such Remedies as that which the
Inquisitive Petrus de Osma, in his curious Letter to Monardes from Peru,
mentions in this Passage, Apud Mo^ard: de simplic: Medic. page 84.
which I find among his other Observations: Anno (says he) 1558. in urbe D.
Jacobi quae est in Provincia Chyle, quidam Indi captivi sur as sibi amputarunt,
and eas assas prae faeme ederunt and (quod mirabile dictu) cujusdam Plantae
folia vulneribus imponentes, ilico sanguinem sistebant. I knew a rich Man,
extremely corpulent, who having long had a strange kind of Fistula in his
Breast, and having traveled from one Country to another, to consult with the
ablest Chirurgions, was at length brought to that pass, that at a Consult they
resolved, by opening his Breast, to try if they could track the winding
Fistula, and save his Life: And as the Instruments, for this sad operation, lay
upon the Table, another famous Surgeon casually coming into the House, told
the Patient that he had an art of curing Fistula's without cutting them open,
and without any considerable pain or trouble: Whereupon the rich Man offering
him what he pleased for the Cure, the Surgeon quickly performed his Promise,
as the Patient himself, who showed me his Breast, confessed to me, and that by
the use of an almost indolent Remedy, which he purchased of the Surgeon, and
which by his favor came to my hands: And that even very ill-condition'd
Fistula's may be cured without Chirurgical Operations, by Medicines taken at
the Mouth, I shall ere long have occasion to show you by a notable Example.

In the mean time I shall add, That a Man, whom I suppose you have often seen,
having a while since received such a kick of a Horse, as made the Doctor and
Surgeon that tended him, to conclude the part gangrenated, and the Patients
condition, by the accession of a violent Fever, so desperate, that they
desired to meddle with him no longer; a large Dosis of Sir Walter Rawleigh's
Cordial, sent him by an excellent Lady you are nearly related to, not only
freed him from his Fever, and the Delirium that attended it, but, to the
wonder of all that observed it, restored the Limb that was concluded
gangrenated to its former soundness.

And to bring credit to all these Relations, I shall crown them with that
memorable Passage of Gulielmus Piso, of as great things that he saw done by the
illiterate Indians themselves: Memini (says he) in castris membra militum
globulis sclopetorum icta, and jamjam ab Europae is Chirurgis, tam Lusitanis
quam Batavis, amputanda, barbaros recentibus gummi succis and balsamis a ferro
and igne liberasse and feliciter restituisse. Oculatus it idem testis sum in
Nosocomiis relicta ulcera and gangrenas ab illis vel solo succo Tabaci curata.

But, Pyrophilus, That the making of diverse Helps to Recovery less distateful,
or less painful to the Patients, is not the only, nor perhaps the greatest
service that Chemistry may do him that attempts the Cure of Diseases, I shall
now endeavor to manifest in some Particulars.

CHAP. II.
ANd first, The skilful Naturalist, especially if a good Chemist, may much
assist the Physician to discover the Qualities of Medicines, whether simple or
compound; That the Experiments of the Spagyrists may much contribute to the
examining those many things themselves prepare, you will, I presume, easily
grant: That also diverse Mineral Waters are of the nobler sort of Medicines, is
sufficiently confessed on all hands; and it is known too, that the Industry of
Chemists has produced some good directions toward the discovery of the
Minerals predominant in diverse Medicinal Springs: But I am much mistaken, if
they have not left much for others to do, which may be easily done. And I
scarce doubt, but that by the various ways that might be proposed, of trying
what such Waters hold, and what saline or other Qualities are predominant in
them, not only the nature of those Medicinal Waters that are already used,
might be more thoroughly understood; but undetected Properties, might in many
others that are now not taken notice of, be discovered; of some of which ways
of examining Mineral Waters, I may elsewhere give you an intimation. And I have
made several trials that have, I confess, much inclined me to think, that the
fault is rather in us, then either in Nature or Chemistry, that Men do not, by
the help of Chemical Experiments, discover more of the nature of diverse
Medicaments, then hitherto they seem to have so much as aimed at: For though
the abstruse Endowments of Specificks will not, I fear, be learned in haste,
otherwise then by particular Trials and Observations; yet many Simples have
other Qualities, which seem chiefly to reside, though not in an Elementary Salt
or Sulphur, yet in a part of the Matter that seems of kin to a Salt or Sulphur:
such as sowerness, saltness, a caustic or a healing faculty, abstersiveness,
and the like, upon whose account such Remedies seem chiefly to work in a
multitude of cases. And toward the Investigation of such Qualities, a Chemist
may oftentimes do much, without making all his Trials in humane Bodies. But
though, to illustrate this matter, I have sometimes made several Experiments,
yet not having now my Notes and Observations at hand, I shall only mention a
few things as they offer themselves to my memory, reserving the more distinct
handling of this subject to another opportunity: And the rather, because that
till such Phenomenon have been more diligently observed, and reduced to their
distinct sorts, I would have them looked upon but as hints to further
Enquiries, not as sufficient Authority to ground general Rules on.

There are some Plants, whose Juices, especially when the superfluous moisture
is exhaled or abstracted, will, some by the assistance of a gentle Heat and
Filtration, and some, even of themselves, in time (which I remember has in
some succulent Plants amounted but to a very few hours) coagulate in part into
a kind of Salt, which, if you please, you may call Essential: And by this
Nitro-Tartareous Salt (as it seems to be) those Vegetables, whose Juice affords
it (such as are, if I mistake not their names, Parietaria, Borrage, Bugloss,
etc.) may be discriminated from those many others, from whence it is not (at
least by the same way) to be obtained. And possibly also these Salts may, to a
heedful Surveyor of them, appear to differ enough from each other in shape,
taste, or other obvious Qualities, to deserve to be sorted into differing kinds.

If likewise we compare the Essential Salts and Spirits of these Plants, with
those of Scurvy Grass, Brook-lime, and other Vegetables that are counted
Antiscorbutical, and abound in Volatile and Saline parts: And if we also
examine other Plants, by diverse Chemical Operations, and observe not only
their disposedness or indisposition to yield Spirits or Oils by Fermentation,
or without it; but those other Particulars wherein they will appear to agree
with, or differ from each other: there is little doubt but such Trials will
make them discover, to a considering Naturalist, much of their Nature and
Properties, and especially of such as depend chiefly upon the plenty or paucity
of the saline, unctuous, sour, spirituous, lazy, tenacious or volatile Parts.

It may be also observed, that the Infusion or Decoction of some Plants, as of
Brazil, Senna, etc. will be heightened into a redish color, by putting
Alkalizate Salts, as of Tartar, or of Potashes, in the Water that extracts
their Tinctures: Whereas acid Spirits, at least some of them, will much impair,
if not destroy their color; as a little Aqua fortis will immediately tu^n a
red Tincture of Brazil, made in fair Water, into a pale yellow: Whereas on the
other side, I have observed, that a small quantity of a strong Solution of
Potashes, dropped into an Infusion of red Rose-leaves, has presently turned it
into a muddy color, that seemed to partake of green and blew, but was dark and
dirty; whereas a little Aqua fortis, or good Spirit of Salt poured into the
same simple Solution, did immediately turn it into a fine red, and so it would
do to the muddy Mixture lately mentioned, if it were put to it in a far greater
quantity. I observed also, that with a very strong (though clear and well
filtrated) Lixivium of Potashes, I could precipitate some pa^ts of the
Infusion or Decoction of red Roses, which grosser parts, when the Mixture was
filtrated through Cap-paper, remained like a dirty colored (though somewhat
greenish) Mud in the Filtre; the fluid and finer part of the Mixture passing
through, in the form of a Liquor high colored, almost like Muscadine.

And on this occasion, I remember, that as Galls, a very stiptick Vegetable
excrescence, will yield a Decoction, with which, and Copper is, the common Ink
is made; so diverse other Plants, of notably astringent parts, may be employed
to the like use: For, by casting Vitriol into a Decoction either of Oaken Bark,
or red Roses, or even a bare Infusion of either Log-wood, or Sumach, to name
now no other Plants of the like nature, I have presently made a Mixture that
might make a shift to serve for Writing Ink; but whether all stiptick Plants,
or they only, will with Vitriol make an Ink, I refer to further Enquiry: And
as a Solution of Vitriol, and the Decoction of the abovementioned Plants, do
precipitate each other to make Ink; so I remember I have tried, that by
dissolving the Crystals of pure Silver (made the common way with Aqua fortis,
or Spirit of Nitre) in a good quantity of fair Water, that the Liquor having no
color of its own, the colors it produces in other Bodies may be the better
observed, I found that I could with this Liquor precipitate out of the
Infusions alone of several Vegetables, Substances differingly colored,
according to their respective dispositions: And so I have found, with less
cost, that Saccharum Saturni, which seems to be a kind of Vitriol of Lead,
whilst it lies dissolved in the same Spirit of Vinager which extracted it from
the Metal, being put to the bare Infusion of Log-wood, Lignum Nephriticum, red
Roses (to name those I now remembe^ I made trial of) they will precipitate each
other.

I might farther add, That I have tried that sulphurous Salts, such as Oil of
Tartar, made per Deliquium, being dropped into the expressed Juices of diverse
Vegetables, will, in a moment, turn them into a lovely Green, though the
Vegetables were of colors differing from that, and from one another (as I
remember one of those Vegetables, in which I expected, and found that change,
was of a fine Carnation) And I could tell you, that though it be disputed
whether Quicklime have any Salt dissoluble in Water, and of what sort it is,
the Examen of that Question may be much furthered, by trying, as I have done,
that the Water of Quicklime, well made, will precipitate a Solution of
sublimate made in fair Water, and will presently turn Syrup of Violets (which
is Blew) if well mixed with it, into a fair Green. Experiments I say of this
nature I might easily annex, but having already set down diverse of them in what
I have written concerning colors, I shall refer you thither: And now only
add this Observation, that the Investigation of diverse Medical Qualities, even
of Animal Substances, may be much assisted by the Naturalist, especially a
Chemist; as we elsewhere have by the Distillation of the Calculus humanus
shown, how much it differs from the Stones that are found in the Earth. And if
you take those hard Concretions, found at certain times in the Heads of
Craw-Fishes, that are wont to be called Lapides Cancrorum, and commit some of
them to Distillation, and infuse some in Vinager, and others in old
Rhenish-Wine, or strong White Wind, you will probably discover some thing of
peculiar in the nature of this Concrete, of which I may possibly elsewhere make
further mention to you: And not only so, but in some Animal Substances, you
may, by fit Experiments, discover notable Changes to be made, and their
Qualities to be much heightened, when the Eye scarce perceives any Change at
all, as I have purposely observed, in keeping Urine in close Glasses* and a
moderate heat for many Weeks: For at the end of that time, the Virtues that
depend upon its volatile Salt will be so heightened, that whereas upon putting
Spirit of Salt to fresh Urine, the two Liquors readily and quietly mixed,
droping the same Spirit upon digested Urine, there would presently ensue a
Hissing and Ebullition, and the volatile and acid Salts would, after a while,
concoagulate into a third Substance, somewhat of the nature of Sal Armoniack.
And whereas the Syrup of Violets, formerly mentioned, being dissolved in a
little fresh Urine, seemed to be but diluted thereby; a few drops of the
fermented Urine, tempered with it, did presently turn it into a deep Green: And
the same digested Urine being dropped upon a Solution of Sublimate made in fair
Water, presently turned it white, by precipitating the dissolved Mercury. With
what (various) success we have likewise made upon some other parts of a humane
Body, as well consistent as fluid, some Trials, analogous to what we have
recited of Urine, I may elsewhere perchance take notice to you: But of such
kind of Observations I must give you but this Hint at present.

CHAP. III.
SEcondly: By these and other ways of investigating the Medicinal Qualities of
Bodies, the Naturalist may be enabled to add much to the Materia Medica: And
that two several ways.

For, he may by his several ways of trial, and by his Chemical preparations
discover, that diverse Bodies, especially of a Mineral nature, that are as yet
not at all employed by Physicians, at least internally, may be brought into use
by them; and that others that are naturally so dangerous, as to be used but in
very few, and for the most part extreme cases, may with safety be more freely
employed. Some Modern Chemists (as particularly Glauberus) have of late
p^epar'd Remedies not unuseful out of Zinck or Spelter. And I have already
mentioned unto you an excellent Medical use of Silver, of which, prepared (as
is there intimated) I have now this to add, That since I began to write of it
to you, I met with a considerable Person, who assures me, That she her self was
by the use of it, in a short time, cured of the Dropsy, though, by reason of
her having a Body very corpulent, and full of humors, she have been thought
more then ordinarily in danger of that stubborn Disease. I have sometimes
wondered, that there has been so little care taken by Physicians, and even by
Chemists, to investigate the Qualities of Mineral Earths, and those other
resembling Bodies, that are, or may be, plentifully enough dug up in most
Countries, though not the self-same in all; for however Men are pleased to pass
them slightly over, as if they were but Elementary Earth, a little stained, or
otherwise lightly altered: I have seen great variety of them, that have been
dug sometimes within the compass of a little spot of Ground: and the
differences of diverse of them, both as to color, taste, consistence, and other
Qualities, have been too great, not to make me suspect they were of very
differing natures. And the true Bolus Armenus, and the Terra Lemnia, which is
now brought us from the Island that gives it that name (marked with a Seal,
which makes many call it Terra sigillata, though that name be for the same
reason applied to the Terra Silesiaca, and other Medical Earths) have been so
esteemed, both by Ancient and Modern Physicians, as well against Malignant
Diseases, and the Plague it self, as against diverse other Distempers; that it is
the more strange, that (since the greatest part of those two Earths, that are
now brought into our Countries, have not, as the more skilful complain, the true
marks of the genuine Earths, whose names they bear) Physicians have not been
more careful to try whether their own Countries could not furnish them with the
like, or as good, especially in regard some of the few attempts of that nature,
that have of late times been made, may give them much encouragement. For, not
to believe the boasts of the Silesian Johannes Montanus (who passes for the
Inventor of the Terra Sigillata Silesiaca Strigoniensis) in the Writing he
published of the virtues of it, That it is Gold prepared and transmuted, by
provident Nature, into an admirable Medicine; I find that Learned Physicians
prefer it before the Lemnian Earth, that is now brought from Turkey: And the
experienced Sennertus gives it this commendation, Epitome scientia naturalis.
lib. 2. c. 1.
Experimentis (says he) multis jam probatum est, ejus infignes ^sse vires
contra pestem, febres malignas, venenatorum animalium morsus, diarrhocan,
dysenteriam: What he adds, that the Chemists name it Axungia solis, brings into
my mind (what I shall hereafter have occasion to mention more particularly to
you) that I had once brought me a certain Earth, by a Gentleman that dug it
up in this, or some neighboring Country, which, though it seemed but a Mineral
Earth, did really afford, to a very expert tryer of Metals of my acquaintance,
a not despicable proportion of Gold. They have also found in Hungary, an Earth,
which they call Bolus Tockaviensis, which is affirmed by Crato (in Sennertus)
to melt in the Mouth like Butter, and to have all the other proofs of the true
Bolus Armenus, and therefore is, by that Judicious Physician, preferred before
the Modern Bolearmony, even that which was brought out of Turkey to the Emperor
himself; and he relates, not only its having succeeded very well against
Catarrhs, but his having experimentally found it of great efficacy in the
Plague, that reigned in his time at Vienna. To which I shall add, That a very
Learned and Successful English Doctor, now dead, did, some Years since during a
great Plague that then raged in the City where he lived, find a vein of red
Earth, not very far from that Town, and prescribed it with very good success in
Pestilential Fevers, as I was informed by an Ingenious Friend of his, that
used to administ^r it, and showed me the place where he dug it.

I remember also, the experienced Chemist Johannes Agricola, in his Notes upon
what Poppius delivers of Terra Sigillata, after having much commended the Terra
Silesiaca in diverse Diseases, and equaled it to the best of Turkey, where he
had traveled, relates one strange thing of it, with many Circumstances, and in
a way as if he spoke upon his own trial, namely, That the Spirit of Terra
Sigillata, by which I think he means the Strigoniensis, does, though slowly,
dissolve Gold as well as an Aq. Regis, and that into a red Solution; whence in
two or three days, the Gold will fall of it self into a very fine and subtle
Powder. And the same Author tells us, That he has seen another Earth dug at
the Rheinstran, not far from Westerwaldt, which was more inclinable to white
then to yellow, which is preferable to the Silesian, and gives more Salt then
it, and dissolves Silver better then other Menstruums; since, as he says, the
Silver may thereby be easily made potable, and be prepared into a very useful
Medicine for the Diseases of the Head. And for my part, I do not much wonder at
the efficacy of these Earths, when I consider, that diverse of them are probably
imbued, as well as died, with Mineral Fumes; or tincted with Mineral Juices,
wherein Metals or Minerals may lie, as the Chemists speak, in solutis
principiis; in which form, having never endured the Fire, many of their
usefullest parts are more loose and volatile, and diverse of their Virtues less
locked up, and more disposed to be communicative of themselves, then they are
wont to be, in a more fixed or coagulated state, or when they have lost many of
their finer parts by the violence of the Fire.

Besides, there are several Mineral Bodies, which though perhaps they may not
be of themselves fit for the Physicians use, may, by addition of some other
convenient Body, or by sequestration of the more noxious parts, or by some such
other Chemical Preparation, as may alter the Texture of such Minerals, be
rendered fit to increase the Materia Medica. As I have known, that by a
preparation of Arsenick, with Salt Peter, whereby some of the more volatile and
noxious parts are driven away, and the remaining Body somewhat fixed and
corrected by the Alcali of the Nitre it has, by a farther dulcification with
Spirit of Wine, or Vinegar, been prepared into a kind of Balsamum fuliginis,
which wonderfully cured a Physician of my acquaintance, as he himself confessed
to me, of dangerous Venereal Ulcers (diverse of which penetrated even to the
Meatus Urinarius) which had reduced him to great extremity.

And though Bismutum have not, that I know, till very lately been used, unless
outwardly, and especially for a Cosmetick (hereafter to be taught you) yet the
Industrious Chemist, Samuel Closseus, by calcination and addition of Spir^t of
Vinegar, Apud Sh^od^rum in Pharmacop: lib. 3. cap. 18. Dr. J. C.
and Cremor Tartari, makes two Medicines of it, which he highly extols in the
Dropsy; and (to reserve for another place, what I have tried upon Tin-glass) a
very expert Chemist of my acquaintance, does, by preparing it with common
Sublimate (carried up, by which I remember it has afforded a very prettily
figured Body) make it into a white Powder (like Mercurius vitae) which he
assures me he finds, in the Dose of a few Grains, to purge very gently,
without being at all (as Mercurius vitae is wont to prove, violently enough)
emetick.

2. But the Naturalist may add to the Materia Medica, not only by
investigating the Qualities of unheeded Bodies, but also by gaining admittance
for diverse, that, though well enough known, are foreborn to be used upon the
account of their being of a Poisonous nature; for by digestion with powerful
Menstruums, and some other skilful ways of Preparation, the Philosophical
Spagyrist may so correct diverse noxious, nay poisonous Concrets, unfit in their
crude simplicity for the Physicians use, at least in any considerable quantity,
as to make them useful and effectual Remedies. Helmont, who though frequently
extravagant in his Theory of Physic, does often make no bad estimate of the
power of Remedies, after having told us, That he adored and admired the
Clemency and Wisdom of God, for creating Poisons, gives this account of his so
doing: Nam venena (says he) noluit nobis esse venena aut nocua. Nec enim
mortem fecit, Helmont in Pharmac: and dispens: Modern. numero 46.
nec Medicamentum exterminii in terra: sed potius ut parvo nostri studio,
mutarentur in grandia amoris sui pignora, in usuram mortalium, contra futurorum
morborum saevitiem. In illis nempe latitat subsidium, quod benigniora and
familiaria simplicia recusant alias. Ad majores and heroicos medentum usus
venena tam horrida servantur. And though I would not forbid you, Pyrophilus, to
think there is some Hyperbole in the Encomiums he here and elsewhere gives
Poisonous Simples; yet when I consider, what great things are oftentimes
performed by Antimony, Mercury and Opium, even in those not over-skilful ways
of preparing them, that are diverse of them vulgarly used by Chemists,
especially when the preparations are (which does seldom happen) rightly and
faithfully made: I can scarce think it very unlikely, that those active Simples
may, by a more skilful way of ordering and correcting them, be brought to
afford us very noble Remedies, And the same Examples may in part prevent the
main Objection that I can foresee in this case, which is, That whatever
corrects Poisons, must, with their virulency, destroy their activity; for the
abovenamed Simples, though so prepared as to be Medicines safe enough, have
yet activity enough left them to let them be very operative, their energy
being, by preparation, not only in part moderated, but in part so over ruled,
as to work after a more innocent manner; as in Bezoardicum Minerale, skilfully
prepared (for it very seldom is so) the laxative and emetick virulency of the
Antimony, is changed into a diaphoretick, resolving and deoppilative power;
which probably made the experienced Riverius (though counted a Galenist) so
particularly recommend this Medicine to Physicians, which, if I be not
mistaken, may well be praised without being flattered: And Helmont supplies me
with an easy Experiment to our present purpose, H^^mont Tractat: su^ra
al^egato. Numero 46.47.
by telling us, That Asarum, which when crude, does, as is well known, provoke
Vomits, by a slight preparation (presently to be mentioned) is so altered, that
its virulency is changed, to use his expression, in deoppilans, diureticum
tardarum febrium remedium; which I the rather take notice of, because I find,
upon enquiry purposely made of some Ingenious Physicians of my acquaintance,
that upon trial, they commend this preparation of Helmont's, and confess, that
by it the Asarum loses its emetick, and acquires a diuretical Quality.

Now that all other Animal and Vegetable Poisons may be corrected, without
loosing their force with their virulency, H^lmont page 466.
is the affirmation of Helmont concerning Paracelsus's and his Sal circulatum
(majus.) And as for Vegetables, he elsewhere tells us, That the Lapis Cancrorum
resolved in formam, as he speaks, Helmont de Lithiasi. lib. 7. cap. 32.
Pristinae lactis, habet remedium contra inclementias multorum vegetabilium vi
laxante infamium. And I remember that I knew two Physicians, the one of which
affirmed to me, his having seen trial made (by the help of a noble Menstruum)
of what Helmont here teaches, and found it true; the other a person severe,
and apt enough to dissent from Helmont, assured me, That with the volatile Salt
of Tartar, he had seen Vegetable Poisons, and particularly Napellus, so
corrected by a light digestion with it, that it lost all its Poisonous
Qualities; for proof of which, he freely offered me, to take himself as much of
that fatal Herb as would kill three or four Men (but at that time, and in that
place, I could not get any of the Plant to make the Experiment with.) And
though I shall say nothing now concerning Helmont's Sal Circulatum, yet as to
the volatilization of the Salt of Tartar, what I have seen, scarce permits me
to doubt that it is possible. And if I could now clearly acquaint you with my
^easons, you would, perchance, not wonder to find me inclinable to think, that
some such Methods (perhaps a Menstruum) may be found to correct poisonous
Simples, without rendering them ineffectual: And though it must be some very
powerful corrective, whether Salt or Liquor, that shall be able to correct any
store of differing Poisons; yet it is not irrational to think, that diverse
particular Concretes may be prepared without any such abstruse or general
corrective, some by one way of handling it, and some by another: And in such
cases, skill, in the natures of particular Bodies to be managed, or lucky
hits, may supply the place of a meliorating Dissolvent, of which Helmont
affords me a considerable instance, Helmont i^ Pharmacop. and dispens. Modern.
N. 46, 47.
where he teaches (in the place lately quoted) That the emetick property of
Asarum may be taken away, and the Plant turned into a noble diuretic, only by
boiling it awhile in common Water. And whereas a wary Man would be apt to
suspect, that this change is made but by the avolation of some subtle parts,
driven away by the heat of the boiling Water, I find that our Author affirms,
that though it be boiled with the like degree of Fire in Wine, instead of
Water, it will not so loose its violence. I have known white Hellebor, Opium,
and some other noxious Bodies, so prepared, as to be given not only harmlesly,
but successfully in such quantities, as were they not skilfully corrected,
would make them pernicious. We daily see, that the violent emetick and
cathartick properties of Antimony, may singly, by calcination with Saltpeter,
be destroyed. And (which is though a known, yet a notable Experiment among
Chym^sts) Mercury sublimate may be deprived of its deadly corrosiveness, and
prepared into a Medicine inoffensive even to Children, by bare resublimat^ons
with fresh Mercury. And to give you one instance more of what the knowledge of
the effects of Chemical Operations, and of the disposition of a particular
Body, may enable a Man to do, in changing the pernicious nature of it; I shall
add, that the violently vomitive Flowers of Antimony, which our wonted, though
sumptuous and specious Cordials are so unable to tame, I can show you (which
perhaps you will think strange) so corrected, without the addition of any thing
besides heat and skill, that in a treble Dose, to that wherein they are wont to
be furiously emetick, we have not found them to work otherwise then gently by
sweat: But some more Particulars applicable to our present pupose, you will
meet with by and by.

CHAP. IV.
THirdly, And now, Pyrophilus, that I am speaking of the service that the
Naturalist may do Physic, I must not pretermit that he may assist the
Physician to make his Cures less chargeable: For though to cure cheaply, be not
properly, and in strictness, any part of the end of the Art of Physic, which
considers Men's Health, and not their Purse; yet it ought in Charity, if not
also in Equity, to be the endeavor of the Physician, especially when he deals
with Patients that are not rich. For not now to say any thing of the Fees of
Physicians, which in some places are not very moderate, it is certain that the
Bills of Apothecaries, especially in Chronical Diseases, do often prove so
chargeable, that even when the Remedies succeed, by that time a poor Patient is
recovered, he is undone, and pays for the prolongation of his Life, that which
should have been his livelihood: Whence it comes to pass, that the more
necessitous sort of People are either fain to languish unrelieved, for want of
being able to purchase health at the Apothecary's rates; or are deterred from
applying themselves to the Physician, till their Diseases have taken too deep
^oot to be easily, if at all, eradicated: And this oftentimes, not more through
the fault of the Apothecary, then of the Doctor, who in his Presciptions might,
for the most part, easily direct things that would be much more cheap, without
being much less efficacious.

Now there are several Particulars, wherein it may be hoped, that the
Naturalist may assist the charitable Physician to lessen the charge of his
Patients.

And first, He may persuade the Physician to decline that more frequent, then
commendable custom, of stuffing each Recipe with a multitude of Ingredients:
It Is not that I approve the practice of some Chemists, who too freely censure
the compounding of Simples; for I know, at some times, a complicated Distemper
requires in its Remedy more Qualities, then are, perhaps, to be met with in any
of the known Simples that the Physician has at command (though one and the
same Simples may sometimes answer diverse Indications; as a Plant that is hot
and dry, may serve for a Distemper that is cold and moist:) And I know too,
that in some cases to that Ingredient, that is as it were the Basis of the
Medicine, other things must be added either to correct its noxious Qualities,
or to allay its vehemence, or to serve for a Vehicle to convey it to the Part
affected, or to make it easier to be taken by the Patient, or to preserve it
from corruption, or for some such like reason. But yet I think Physicians may
well be more sparing, as to the number of the things prescribed, then most of
them use to be, both to save charges to their Patients (upon which account it
is that I here mention it) and for other considerations. For the addition of
needless Ingredients adding to the bulk of the Medicine, makes it but the more
troublesome to be taken, and the more apt to clog the Stomach: And oftentimes
the Efficacy of the more useful Ingredients, as well as their Quantity in each
Dose, is much abated, by their being yoked with those that are less
appropriated, or less operative. Besides, it seems a great impediment to the
further discovery of the Virtues of Simples, to confound so many of them in
Compositions: For, in a mixture of a great number of Ingredients, it is so hard
to know what is the operation of each, or any of them, that I fear there will
scarce in a long time be any great progress made in the discovery of the
virtues of simple Drugs, till they either be oftener employed singly, or be but
few of them employed in one Remedy. And besides all this, whereas when one of
these Mixtures is administered, the Physician expects but such operations as are
suitable to the Quality which he conceives will be predominant in the whole
Compound; several of the Ingredients may have particular Qualities that he
dreams not of, which working upon a Body, that the Physician considers as
subject only to the Sickness he endeavors to cure, may therein excite diverse
latent Seeds of other Distempers, and make new and unexpected commotions in the
Body. On which occasion I remember, that whereas Parsley is a very usual
Ingredient of aperitive and diuretic Decoctions and Apozems, a famous and
learned Oculist tells me, he has very often observed, That when he has
unawares, or for tryal-sake employed Parsley, either inwardly, or even
outwardly to those that were troubled with great Distempers in their Eyes, he
found the Medicines wherein that Herb was but one Ingredient among many, to
cause either great pain or inflammation in the Eyes. In confirmation of which,
I shall add, that awhile after having a slight Distemper in my Eyes, I one day
found it upon a sudden strangely increased, without being able to imagine
whence these new Symptoms proceeded; till at length, recalling to mind all I
had done that day, I remembered, that at Dinner I had eaten Sauce wherein there
was a pretty deal of Parsley, mixed with other things. And whereas in diverse of
these Compositions some noxious Ingredients are allowed, upon a supposition
that their ill Qualities will be lost, by their being, as it were, tempered
with the rest; though this may sometimes happen, yet it would be considered,
that in Treacle (especially at one age of it) the Opium does not, considering
the small proportion of it to the rest of the Ingredients, loose much, if any
of its power, by being mingled with sixty odd other Drugs, which Composition
possibly ow's much of its virtue to that little Opium. And perhaps one reason
why those that accustom themselves to be ever and anon taking Physic, though
they often escape dangerous Diseases (by preventing the accumulation of humors,
and taking their Sicknesses at the beginning) are yet almost ever troubled with
one Distemper or other, may be, That by the multiplicity of Medicines they take
into their Bodies, diverse things are excited to disorder them, which otherwise
would have lain quiet. I am not ignorant that it may be alleged, That in
compounded Medicines, as Treacle and Mithridate, how many soever the
Ingredients be, they do so clog and temper one another activity in the
composition, that there results from them all, one or more Qualities fit for
the Physicians turn, and which is the thing he considers and makes use of. And
I confess, that in some cases this Allegation does not want its weight: For I
consider, that a decoction of Galls, and a solution of Copperas, though neither
of them apart be blackish, will, upon their mixture, turn to Ink: And that when
Brimstone, Saltpeter, and Coals are well mingled together in a due proportion,
they make Gunpowder, a mixture, that has Qualities much more active then any
of the severed Ingredients. But I fear, that when a multitude of Simples are
heaped together into one compound Medicine, though there may result a new
crasis, yet it is very hard for the Physicians to know beforehand what that
will be; and it may sometimes prove rather hurtful then good, or at least by
the coalition the virtues of the chief Ingredients, may be rather impaired then
improved: As we see that crude Mercury, crude Nitre, and crude Salt, may be
either of them safely enough taken into the Body in a good quantity; whereas of
sublimate, consisting of those three Ingredients, a few Grains may be rank
Poison. As for those famed Compositions of Mithridate, Treacle, and the like,
though I cannot well, for the mentioned Reasons, commend the skill of those
that first devised them, and though I think that when one or two Simples may
answer the same Indications, they may for the same Reasons be more safely
employed; Yet I would by no means discommend the use of those Mixtures, because
long experience has manifested them to be good Medicines in several cases. But
it is one thing to employ one of these Compositions, when trial has evinced it
to be a lucky one, and another thing to think it fit to rely on a huddle of
Ingredients, before any trial has manifested what kind of Compound they will
constitute. And, in a word, though I had not the respect I have for Matthiolus,
and other famous Doctors that devised the Compositions, whereinto Ingredients
are thrown by scores, if not by hundreds, yet however I should not reject an
effectual Remedy, because I thought that it proved so rather by chance, then
any skill in the Contriver: And I think a wise Man may use a Remedy, that
scarce any but a Fool would have devised.

Another thing, upon whose account the Naturalist (whom we here suppose an
expert Chemist) may assist a Physician to lessen the expensiveness of his
Prescriptions, is by showing, That in very many Compositions, several of the
Ingredients, and oftentimes the most chargeable, whether they be proper or no
for the Disease, are unfit for the way of management prescribed, and
consequently ought to be left out. I need not tell you, that since Chemistry
began to flourish amongst us, very many of the Medicines prepared in
Apothecaries Shops, and commonly the most chargeable, are distilled Waters,
Spirits, and other Liquors: And he that shall survey the Books and Bills of
Physicians, shall find, that (very few perhaps excepted) the most usual
Prescription is to take such and such Ingredients (for the most part numerous
enough) and pouring on them either Water or Wine, if any Liquor at all, to
distill them in Balneo, rarely in Ashes or Sand. But I confess I have not
without wonder, and something of indignation, seen in the Prescriptions of
Physicians, otherwise eminently Learned Men, and even in the public
Dispensatories, I know not how many things ordered to be distilled, with
others, in Balneo, which in that degree of heat will yield either nothing at
all, as the fragments of Precious Stones, Leaves of Gold, prepared Pearl, etc.
Or if they do yield any thing (for that has not been yet, that I know of,
evinced) do probably yield but a little nauseous Phlegm, or at least some few
loose parts, far less efficacious then those that require a stronger heat to
drive them up: such are Sugar, Raysins, and other sweet Fruit, Bread,
Hartshorn, Flesh prepared by Coction, etc. which though wont to be thrown away
with the Caput Mortuum, oftentimes there retain their pristine Texture and
Nature, or at least are almost as much more considerable, then that which they
yielded in Distillation: as a boiled Capon is, then the Liquor that sticks to
the Cover of the Pot. And though as to some of these Ingredients it may be
thought that they may yield even in Balneo some of their useful parts, yet this
can, with any probability, be supposed but of some of such Ingredients: And
even as to them it is but supposed that they may yield Something in so mild a
heat, and how that Something will be qualified, is but presumed: at least, by
the Analogy of the Experiments vulgarly made, there seems so small cause to
exspect, that these more fixed Ingredients will add half so much to the virtue
of the Medicines, as they will to the cost; especially since though it could be
proved, or were probable, that fixed Substances may communicate their virtues
to Wine or Water, yet it would not follow that those impregnated Liquors,
distilled in Balneo, will carry those virtues with them over the Helm. All
which I have more largely proved in another Discourse, where I show both that
the nobler parts of many Ingredients wont to be distilled in Balneo, do
commonly remain in the Caput Mortuum, and that it is very unsafe to conclude
always the Virtues of distilled Liquors from those of the Concrets that
afforded them.

But there is another way of putting unfit Ingredients into Medicines, by
confounding those in one Composition, which, though perhaps they might apart be
properly enough employed, do, when mixed, destroy or lock up the Virtues of one
another; and of this fault, even famous Chemists themselves are but too often
guilty. I know not how many Processes I have met with, wherein saline
Substances, of contrary natures, are prescribed to be mingled, as if because
they were all of them saline, they must be fit to be associated; whereas it is
evident to any Man, that considers as well as employs the Operations of
Chemistry, that there are scarce any Bodies in the World betwixt which there is
a greater contrariety, then betwixt acid Salts: and as well those that the
Chemists call volatile, as the Spirits and Salts of Hartshorn, Blood, Flesh
and the like, as those others which are made of Incineration, as Salt of
Tartar, and of all burnt Vegetables. So that oftentimes it happens, that by an
unskilful Mixture, two good Ingredients are spoiled; as when Vinegar, Juice of
Lemmons, Juice of Barberies, and the like, are prescribed to be distilled with
other Ingredients, whereof the Salt of Wormwood or some other Plant makes one,
for then the acid and alcalizate Salts, working upon one another, grow more
fixed, and yield in Balneo but a Phlegm: and so Spirit or Urine, which is highly
volatile, and Spirit of Salt, which is also a distilled Liquor, being mingled
together, will, by their mutual Operation, constitute a new thing, which in
such a heat as that of a Bath, will yield a Phlegm, leaving behind the nobler
and active Parts concoagulated into a far more fixed Substance, much of the
nature of Sal Armoniack. And indeed where Salts, especially active ones, are
made Ingredients of Mixtures, unless they be skilfully and judiciously
compounded, it often happens that they spoil one another, and degenerate into a
new thing, if they do not also spoil the whole Composition, and of diverse
useful Ingredients compose one bad Medicine.

CHAP. V.
ANother way by which the Naturalist (skilled in Chemistry) may help to lessen
the chargeableness of Cures, is by showing, that as to diverse costly
Ingredients, wont to be employed in Physic, there has not yet been sufficient
proof given of their having any Medical Virtues at all, or that at least as
they are wont to be exhibited, either crude, or but slightly prepared in
Juleps, Electuaries, etc. there is not any sufficient evidence to persuade us,
that their efficacy is as much greater, then that of many cheap Ingredients, as
their price is. I am not altogether of their mind, that absolutely reject the
internal use of Leaf-Gold, Rubies, Sapphyrs, Emerauds, and other Gems, as
things that are unconquerable by the heat of the Stomach: For as there are rich
Patients that may, without much inconvenience, go to the price of the dearest
Medicines; so I think the Stomach acts not on Medicines barely upon the account
of its heat, but is endowed with a subtle dissolvent (whence so ever it has
it) by which it may perform diverse things not to be done by so languid a heat.
And I have, with Liquors of differing sorts, easily drawn from Vegetable
Substances, and perhaps unrectified, sometimes dissolved, and sometimes drawn
Tinctures from, Gems, and that in the cold. But though for these and other
Considerations, I do not yet acquiess in their Reasons, that laugh at the
administration of crude Gems, etc. as ridiculous; yet neither am I altogether
of their Adversary's mind. For though I deny not that the Glass of Antimony,
which looks like a kind of Gem or Ruby, will easily enough impart to Liquors
an emetick Quality; yet I know too, there is great odds betwixt Ruby's and
other Gems (which will endure violent Fires, and remain undissolved in diverse
strongly corrosive Liquors) and the Glass of Antimony, which is a Body so far
less compact and fixed, that Spirit of Vinegar it self will work upon it, and a
strong Fire will, in no long time, dissipate it into smoke. But that which I
chiefly consider on this occasion, is, That it is one thing to make it probable,
that it is possible Gold, Ruby's, Sapphyrs, etc. may be wrought upon by a humane
Stomach; and another thing, to show both that they are wont to be so, and that
they are actually endowed with those particular and specific Virtues that are
ascribed to them: Nay, and (over and above) that these Virtues are such, and so
eminent, that they considerably surpass those of cheaper Simples. And I think,
that in Prescriptions made for the poorer sort of Patients, a Physician may
well substitue cheaper Ingredients in the place of these precious ones, whose
Virtues are not half so unquestionable as their Dearness.

What strange Excellency there may be in the Aurum Potabile, made by a true
Adeptus, or by a Possessor of the Liquor Alcahest, I shall not now dispute, not
knowing what powerful and radical Dissolvents the profound skill of such Men
(if any such there be) may furnish them with, to open the Body of Gold. But as
for the attempts and practices of the generality of Chemical Physicians to make
Gold potable, besides that, their attempts to make their Solutions volatile,
succeed so seldom, that even Learned Physicians, and Chemists, have pronounced
the thing it self unfeasible; I confess, I should much doubt whether such a
potable Gold would have the prodigious Virtues its Encomiasts ascribe to it,
and expect from it: For I find not that those I have yet met with, deliver
these strange things upon particular Experiments duly made, but partly upon the
Authority of Chemical Books, many of which were never written by those whose
Names they bear. And others, I fear, commend Aurum Potabile, prepared after
another-guess manner then that we are now speaking of, partly upon a
presumption that if it be made volatile, it must be strangely unlocked, and
exalted to a mere Spiritual Nature; and partly upon rational Conjectures (as
they think them) drawn from the nobleness and preciousness of Gold. But for my
part, though I have long since bethought my self of a way, whereby I can, in a
short time, and a moderate Fire, make my Menstruum bring over cru^e Gold, in
quantity sufficient to make the Liquor look at the first or second
Distillation, of a high golden color; yet finding that I could, by an easy
Art, quickly recover out of this volatile Liquor, a corporal and malleable
Gold, I dare not brag that my Tincture (as an Alchymist would call it) must
needs do strange feats, because there is so noble a Metal brought over in it.
And if this or other preparations of Aurum Potabile prove good Medicines, it
would be further enquired, whether the Virtues may not in great part be rather
attributed to the Menstruum, then the Gold (that requiring a very subtle
Liquor to volatilize it) or to the association of the Corpuscles of the Gold,
with the saline Particles of the Menstruum, into a new Concrete, differing
enough from Gold, though never so well opened. And as for the nobleness and
pretiousness of this Metal, That depends upon the Estimation of Men, whence in
America the Indians that abounded with it, had not such a great value for it;
And in diverse Countries, at this day, it is postponed to Iron or to Copper, and
has rather a Political (if I may so speak) then a Natural Virtue. Nor will it
follow, that because it is the fixedst and pretiousest of Metals, that
therefore it must be an admirable Medicine: For we see that Diamonds, though
they be the hardest of Bodies, and very fixed ones, and in much greater esteem,
caeteris paribus, then Gold, are yet so far from being accounted highly
Medicinal, that they are commonly (though, perhaps, not so deservedly) reckoned
among Poisons. But I see I have digress'd, That which I chiefly aimed at, being
to inculcate, that whether Gold and Gems, and the like precious Ingredients,
may be good Medicines or no, 'twere a good work to substitute cheap ones for
the poorer sort of Patients; and that Physicians are much to blame, who prize
Simples, as Drugsters do, according as they are brought from remote Countries,
and are hard to be come by, and cannot imagine that what does not cost much
Money in the Shops, can do much good in the Body; as if God had made Provision
only for the Rich, or those People that have Commerce with China or the
India's: whereas indeed it may oftentimes happen, that what the Chemists call
their Caput Mortuum, and perhaps throw away as an useless Terra Damnata, may
have as great Virtues as those nobler Parts, as they call them, which they have
extracted from it; and a desp^sed Simple, nay, even an Excrement or an Infect,
may in some cases prove nobler Remedies, then those that Men call and think
very noble Bodies, not to say then, I know not how many Extracts and
Quintescences.

I shall not trouble you with many Instances to prove this Doctrine, having
more fully discoursed of it in one part of another Of the efficacy of
unpromising Medicines.
Treatise: But yet some Instances I suppose you will here expect, and therefore
I shall present you with a few of those that at present come into my mind.

When the Distillation of Aqua fortis is finished, the Caput Mortuum, as
deserving that name, is wont, by common Distillers, to be thrown away; and I
have seen whole heaps of it thrown by, as useless, by those that make Aqua
fortis in quantity to sell it: And yet this despised Substance does, in common
Water it self, yield a Salt, which being only depurated by frequent Solutions
and Filtrations, is that famous Panacca Duplicata, or Arcanum Duplicatum, which
that great Virtuoso and knowing Chemist, The Duke of Holstein, whose name it
also bears, thought worth purchasing at the rate of Five hundred Dollars; and
of which the Princes experienced Physician thus writes to the Industrious
Schroder, Schroder Pharnacop. lib. 3. c. 23.
Mill experimentis salis hujus Efficaciam Aula nostra comprobavit in
melancholicis affectibus, febribus quibuscunque continuis and intermittentibus,
calculo, scorbut^, etc. Quin and somnu^ conciliasse praesertim in Melancholicis
non semel notavimus. Dosis a scrup: 1. ad scrup: 2. Libras aliquod quotannis
absumimus. And another very skilful Physician that frequented that Excellent
Princes Court, confirmed to me the same Medicin's diuretic and deoppilative
Virtues: (But upon my own Experience I can say little of it, having casually
lost a great quantity I caused to be prepared to make trial with, before I had
opportunity to employ it.)

But whereas in the Caput Mortuum of Aqua fortis there remains pretty store of
easily soluble Salt; In the Caput Mortuum of Vitriol, when not only all the
Oil is forced away by the Fire, but all the fixed Salt is exactly separated by
Water, There seems to remain nothing but a worthless Terra Damnata: And yet
it is of this, that, as I shall teach you ere long, I make those Colcotharine
Flowers, which are possibly a nobler Medicine then either the Oil, the Spirit,
or the Salt of Vitriol.

As for the Bezoar-stone, which is so often prescribed by Physicians, and so
dearly paid for by Patients, the experienced Bontius, a very competent Witness
in this case (and whose account of the manner of its generation, agrees the
best of any I have seen with that I received from an Intelligent Person, that
was employed into Persia by the late King) has in one place a Passage
concerning it; and elsewhere writes such things of the Stone cut out of a Man's
Bladder (though that, whilst crude, be despis^d as a thing vile and useless in
Physic) as may be justly applicable to our present purpose: Bo^tius in cap.
45. Garcia ab Orta.
Caeterum (says he, speaking of the Bezoar-stone) quantum ad hyperbolicas
hujus lapidis virtutes and facultates portentosas non tantos in eo mill
experientiis edoctus inveni: And elsewhere speaking of those contemptible and
excrementitious Stones that are found in humane Bladders: Nil pooro (says he)
de his lapidibus addo ne videar eos elevare and lithotomos monere ut vel cum
periculo plures mortales secent: Idem cap. 46.

Gartia ab Orta.


Hoc certe compertum habeo lapidem in vesica hominis repertum urinam and
sudores probe ciere quod tempore ingentis illius pestis quae Anno 1624 and 1625
Leydam patriam meam and reliquas Hollandiae Civitates miserandum in modum
vastabat, in penuri^ lapidis Besoartici nos exhibuisse memini and sudorificum
(ausi^^ dicere) melius and excellentius invenisse, etc.

Soot is generally looked upon as so vile a thing, that we are fain to hire Men
to carry it away; and yet, as I elsewhere show that it is a Body of no ignoble
Nature, so I must here tell you, that it is no unuseful one in Physic. And not
to mention that Riverius commends it crude, to the quantity of a Drachme, in
Plurisies: I have tried, with the Spirit of it well drawn, some things, that
make me look upon it as a considerable Liquor. And I know by their own
confessions, that some Medicines, even of eminent Physicians, that pass under
other Names, have the Spirit of Soot for their principal Ingredient. I knew, a
not unlearned Emperick, who was exceedingly cried up for the Cures he did,
especially in difficult Distempers of the Brain, by a certain Remedy, which he
called sometimes his Aurum Potabile, and sometimes his Panacaea; and having
obtained from this Man, in exchange of a Chemical Secret of mine he was greedy
of, the way of making this so celebrated Medicine, I found that the main thing
in it was the Spirit of Soot, drawn after a somewhat unusual, but not excellent
manner; in which Spirit, Flowers of Sulphur were, by a certain way, brought to
be dissolved, and swim in little drops that looked of a golden color.

You will easily grant, Pyrophilus, that there are not any Medicines to be
taken into the Body, more cheap and contemptible then the Excrements of Men and
Horses, and then Insects: And yet that even these want not considerable Medical
Virtues, we elsewhere show. And (not to meddle with such nasty things as the
grosser sort of humane Excrements, though they outwardly applied, either in
Powder or otherwise, do sometimes perform strange things) the Juice of
Horse-dung, especially of Stone-horses, being strongly expressed (after the
Dung has been awhile steeped in Ale, or some other convenient Liquor, to
facilitate the obtaining the Juice and to afford it a Vehicle) does oftentimes
so powerfully relieve those that are troubled with the stoppage of Urine, with
Wind, Stitches, and even with Obstructions of the Spleen and Liver, that You,
Pyrophilus, and I, know a great Lady, who though very neat, and very curious of
her Health, and wont to have the attendance of the skilfullest Physicians,
scruples not, upon occasion, to use as I have known her do, in Silver Vessels,
this homely Remedy, and prefer it to diverse rich Cordials, and even to what
some Chemists are pleased to call Essences or Elixirs: And with the same Remedy
very many poor People were cured of the Plague it self, when it lately swept
away so many thousands in Ireland (and the Doctors with the Patients) as I was
assured by a Person who cured so many, as to invite men to secure themselves
that assistance, by refusing the Party the liberty to leave the Town. But (to
add that upon the by) this Person, in exchange of a Secret of mine, confessed
to me, That the Arcanum, which had cured such numbers, and to which the Juice
of Horse-dung was a Succedaneum, was only a good Dose of the Powder of fully
ripe Ivy-berries, which did usually, as also the Horse-dung, work plentifully
by Sweat, and which I presently remembered to be one of those few things that
Helmont commends against the Plague.

The Medical Virtues of Man's Urine, both inwardly given, and outwardly
applied, would require rather a whole Book, then a part of an Essay to
enumerate and insist on: But referring you to what an industrious Chemist has
already collected touching that subject, I shall now only add, That I knew
ancient Gentlewoman, who being almost hopeless to recover of diverse Chronical
Distempers (and some too of these abstruse enough) was at length advised,
instead of more costly Physic, to make her Morning-draughts of her own Water;
by the use of which she strangely recovered, and is, for ought I know, still
well. And the same Remedy is not disdained by a Person of great Quality and
Beauty, that You know; and that too, after she has traveled as far as the
Spaw for Her healths sake. And I remember on this occasion, that passing once
through one of the remoter Parts of England, I was visited by an Emperick, a
well-wisher to Chemistry, but a Novice in it, who pressing me, to communicate
to him some easy and cheap Preparation, that he might make use of among the
C^untrey People; I directed him to Dist^l, with a gentle heat, a Spirit out of
Urine, putrified for six or seven Weeks on a Dunghill, or some analogous heat,
but in well closed Glasses, or other glazed Vessels; and having rectified this
Spirit once or twice, that it might be rich in volatile Salt, to give ten,
twenty, or thirty drops of it in any convenient Liquor for the Plurisie, for
most kind of Coughs, and diverse other Distempers, as a Succedaneum to the
Essence of Hearts horn: And awhile after this Emperick returned me great thanks
for what I had taught him; and I found by him and others, that he had cured so
many with it, especially of Plurisies (a Disease frequent and dangerous enough
in that Country) that this slight and seemingly despicable Remedy had already
made him be cried up for a Doctor, and was like to help him to a comfortable
Subsistence.

Great store of healthy Men's Blood is wont to be thrown away, as altogether
useless, by Chirurgions and Barbers, that let Men Blood (as is usual in the
Spring and Fall) for prevention of Diseases; and yet from a Man's Blood
skilfully prepared, though without addition of any thing, save Spirit of Wine
to keep it at first from putrefying, may be easily obtained a Spirit, and
volatile Salt, that have much the same Virtues, with those of the newly
mentioned Spirit of Urine, but more noble (as far as I can guess) then either
that, or even Spirit of Hearts horn, as having performed in Consumptions,
Asthma's, and other obstinate cases, such things as I, as well as others, could
not but admire. But in this place, mentioning humane Blood only in transi^u, I
shall pretermit what I have observed about the preparation of it; yet leaving
you a liberty to call for my Observations upon a Medicine, which is perhaps
nobler, then the most costly and elaborate Chemical Remedies that are wont to
be sold in Shops, and which has been almost alone excepted out of the Censure
made by a Learned Modern Writer, of the Medicines found out by Chemistry.

I shall add but one Instance more, of the efficacy that may be found in the
most obvious and abject Creatures; and this Instance is afforded me, by those
vile Insects commonly called in English, Wood-lice, or Sows, and in Latin
Millepedes, which I have often both recommended to others, and taken my self:
What their Virtue is against the Stone, the World has been informed by
Laurembergius, who has published a Narrative, how by the use of them he was
cured, even of the Stone in the Bladder; and he was invited to use them by
credible information, that others had been cured of that Disease, by the same
Remedy. And of late Years, in England, an Emperick being much resorted to, for
the relief he gave in that tormenting Sickness, a Physician, famous for his
Learned Writings, wondering at what was done, was very curious (as himself
afterward told me) to find out the Emperick's secret, and at length was so
industrious as to discover, That 'twas a slight preparation of Millepedes. But
my having found them in my self very diuretical and apertive, is not that which
chiefly recommends them to me; For I knew, and lived in the same House with a
pious Gentlewoman, much better skilled in Physic, then her Sex promised, who
having lost the use of one Eye by a Cataract, and being threatened by the
Oculists with the speedy loss of the other, especially in regard of her being
very aged and corpulent, she nevertheless did, for some Years, to my wonder,
employ her Eye to read and work with, without finding, as she told me, any
decay in it, or any increasing danger of a suffusion: And she assured me, that
her Medicine was to bruise first five Millepedes, then ten, then fifteen, then
twenty, etc. (daily increasing the number by five, till it had reached, if I
mistake not, fifty or sixty) in White Wind (or Small-ale) and to drink upon an
empty Stomach, the strongly expressed Liquor; And when I desired to know how
she came by this Specific, she answered me, That having made enquiries among
all those, both Oculists and others, that she thought might assist her against
so sad a Distemper, she was advised to the use of Millepedes, by a Woman, that
not only much magnified their virtue in such cases as hers, but assured her
(if I much mis-remember not) that she her self had been cured by them, of no
less then an incipient suffusion in one or both of her Eyes.

[Since the writing of the former part of this Page, relating what I newly told
you to a very Ingenious Physician, he assures me, That being some Yea^s since
in Holland, he there met with a Woman who was cured, as her self confessed to
him, of a real Cataract, by the juice of Millepedes, beginning with that of
three at a time, and so increasing to nine at once, and then gradually
lessening the Dose by one Insect each day, t^ll she were come back to three at
a time; after which, she gradually increased the Dose as before: And he adds,
That this Woman was advised to this Medicine by an Emperick, that was said to
have performed diverse Cures with the same Medicine.]

[What strange things these same Millepedes have done in the sore, and even
exulcerated Breasts of Women (provided they be not cancrous) though they be
given without preparation only, to the number of three first, and so on to
nine at once (which number may perhaps be usefully increased) stamped with a
little White Wind or Beer, that the Liquor strained out may be drunk in a
draught of Beer, Morning and Evening; during which time, Linen clothes dipped
in White wine, and applied warm, are to be kept upon the Breast, I may
elsewhere have a fitter opportunity to relate. I shall now only subjoyn, as a
further proof of the great Virtue that may be even in vile and costless
Insects, and that without any elaborate or Chemical Preparation, this memorable
Story; That after all the trials I had made about these Millepedes, I met with
a young Lady, who by diverse strangely winding and obstinate Fistula's, that had
made themselves Orifices in many places of her Body, was not only lamed, but
so consumed and weakened, that she was scarce able to turn her self in her bed;
and this, notwithstanding the utmost endeavors of the eminentest Chirurgions,
both English and Foreigners, that could be procured: But when both the hopes of
her Friends, and those that endeavored to cure her, were lost, she was in a
short time not alone freed from her Fistula's, but recovered to a thriving
condition of Body, by the frequent use of an internal Medicine, which, as both
her Parents and the Person that taught in them informed me, was only a Drink
(to be taken twice or thrice a day) made of a small proportion of a couple of
Herbs (very common, and not much more likely to do Wonders in this case, then
Wormwood and Mint) and of Three hundred of these Millepedes well beaten (when
their Heads are pulled of) in a Mortar, and tunn'd up with the Herbs, and
suspended in four Gallons of small Ale, during its fermentation. The wonderful
efficacy of this Medicine in this and many other cases, which by occasion of
this Cure were related to me, being almost wholly ascribed to the Millepedes,
by the Illustrious Imparter of it, whose leave I have not yet, by naming him,
to disclose, that this is the Secret He makes use of.]

CHAP. VI.
ANother way there is whereby the Naturalist may assist the Physician to make
the Therapeutical part of Physic less chargeable, and that is, by showing
those that are wont to employ most Chemical Remedies, that much of the cost and
labor in many cases might be spared. I am not altogether of their mind, that
indiscriminatly cry down Chemical Preparations as excessively dear: For of many
of those that seem very dear, when bought by the Pound or the Ounce, a Dose may
be cheap enough; as if for instance, an Ounce of precipitate of Gold and
Mercury cost ten times its weight of Silver, under which rate I have bought it
of honest Men, that make it themselves, yet that Ounce containing 480 Grains,
(of which three or four may be a Dose) a taking of this dear Powder, may cost
far less then a Dose of many Galenical Medicines, where the quantity that is
taken at once, makes up what is wanting in the costliness of the Ingredients.
But though this be the case of some Chemical Remedies, yet we must not deny,
that many others are chargeable, and though perhaps not more so then many
Galenical ones employed for the same purposes: Yet if those be dearer then they
need be, that grievance ought to be redressed in Chemical Medicines, how justly
soever the same thing may be imputed to Galenical ones.

Now there are two Particulars, wherein the Chemists, and those Physicians that
imitate them, are wont to be blameable in reference to this matter; The one,
their employing Chemical Preparations on all occasions, even where Simples or
slight Compositions might serve the turn: and the other is, Their making many
of their P^eparations more laborious, and consequently more chargeable then
needs.

As for the first of these: It Is known there are diverse Chemists, and others
that practice Physic, who so dote upon the Productions of their Furnaces, that
they will scarce go about to cure a cut Finger, with less then some Spagyrical
Oil or Balsam: And in slight Distempers have recourse to Chemical, and perhaps
to Mineral Remedies, which being, for the most part, such as vehemently alter
the Body, especially by heating and drying it, they do often more harm then
good, when employed in cases that need not such active Medicines. And methinks
those that practice, as if Nature presented us nothing worth the accepting,
unless it be cooked and perfected by Vulcan, might consider, That Paracelsus
himself oftentimes employeth Simples for the cure even of formidable Diseases.
And though for particular Reasons I be incl^nable enough to think, that such
searching and commanding Remedies, as may be so much of kin to the Universal
Medicine, as to cure great numbers of differing Diseases, will be hardly
obtained without the help of Chemical Preparations, and those perhaps of
Minerals: Yet as to most particular Diseases, especially when not yet atriv'd
to a deplorable height, I am apt to think, that either Simples, or cheap, or
unelaborate Galenical Mixtures, may furnish us with Specificks, that may
perform much more then Chemists are wont to think, and possibly be preferable
to many of their costly Magisteries, Quint-essences and Elixirs. Helmont,
Pharma: and Dispensat: Nov. p. 458
Helmont himself, a Person more knowing and experienced in his Art, then almost
any of the Chemists, scruples not to make this ingenious Confession: Credo
(says he) simplicia in sua simplicitate esse sufficientia, pro sanatione
omnium morborum: And elsewhere he truly affirms, That there may be sometimes
greater Virtue in a Simple, such as Nature affords it us, then in any thing
that the Fire can separate from it. And certainly the specific Properties of
diverse, if not most Simples, are confounded and lost by those Preparations,
wherein that Texture, which is the foundation of those Properties, is either
destroyed by the Fire, or changed by the taking away of some of the Parts; or
the adding of some other Substance to it, with which compounded, it may
constitute a new thing. The more Judicious of the Chemists themselves do
several of them now acknowledge, that the bare reducing of Pearls to fine
Powder, affords a Medicine much richer in the Virtues of the Pearls, then the
Magistery, prepared by dissolving them in acid Spirits, and precipitating them
with Oil of Tartar, and afterward scrupulously edulcorating them. And one may
easily observe, that by making the Magistery of Hartshorn the same way, the
Virtues seem to be more locked up then they were in the crude Horn, which may
easily enough impart its Virtue in the Body, since fair Water will reduce a
good part of it into a Jelly; whereas the Magistery remains a fixed Powder, not
easily dissoluble, even in acid Menstruums; and, which thrown upon hot Iron,
will scarce send forth that stinking Smoke, which argues the avolation of the
saline and sulphurous Parts. I never knew any of the vulgar Chemists Essences
or Elixirs half so powerful a Remedy to stanch Blood, as a slight Mixture of
two Drachmes of Hyosciamum, or Henbane-seed, and the like weight of white
Poppey-seeds, beaten up with an Ounce of Conserve of red Roses, into a stiff
Electuary; with which, given in the quantity of a Nutmeg, or Wall-nut, I have
snatched some, as it were, out of the Jaws of Death; and with which an eminent
Physiti^n, now dead, affirmed, That he, and the Inventor of the Remedy, had
very frequently cured profuse bleedings at the Nose, and in Women, at other
Parts besides. Nor did I ever see, to give an instance in a resembling Disease,
such wonderful Effects against spitting and vomiting of Blood, of the most
elaborate Chemical Preparations, as I have of a slight Syrrup, made only of a
convenient quantity of fine Sugar, and the strongly expressed Juice of twelve
handfulls of Plantain-leaves, and six Ounces of fresh Cumfrey-roots, well
beaten together; with which Syrrup, besides what I have tried my self, two
eminent Physicians performed in that Disease unusual Cures, though (for reasons
elsewhere mentioned) I forbear to name them, otherwise then by telling you,
That one of them is that Ingenious and Friendly Dr T.C. to whose skill both You
and I owe so much.

But I consider further, that as oftentimes those I am reasoning with make use
of Chemical Remedies, when much more easily parable ones may suffice; so in
diverse cases, where Spagyrical Medicines are proper enough, their Preparations
of them are more tedious and expensive then is necessary. There are more then a
few who seldom prescribe, and seldomer esteem a Chemical Process, that is to be
perfected in less then many Weeks; as if a Chemical Medicine, like an Embryo,
must needs be an Abortive, if it be produced in less then so many Months. And
as if in Preparations, the Virtue depended less on the skilfulness, then the
elaboratness, they seem to estimate the efficacy of Remedies by the time and
pains requisite to prepare them, and dare not think, that a Medicine can
quickly cure, that was not long a making; as indeed theirs (especially those
where Cohobations and Digestions, till they have such and such effects upon the
Matter to be wrought on by them, are prescribed) are many of them far more
toilsom and tedious, then those that have but read such Processes, without
working them, are apt to suspect. And this is the humor of diverse, not only as
to those stable Medicines, that ought always to be found ready in Apothecary's
Shops, but even as to those that are designed for particular cases, and perhaps
acute Diseases; in which Emergencies, if a Physician had no other Remedies then
those he must make according to such Processes, it would, ^ fear, too often
happen, that before the Medicine could be ready, the Patient would either be
past the need of it, or past the help of it. And that which oftentimes
increases the tediousness of Chemical Processes, is the unskilful
Prescriptions of those that devise them. It Is not unusual in Chemists Writings
to meet with Processes, wherein the Matter to be prepared, is exposed to I know
not how many several successive Operations: But if you should ask why such a
thing should be, for instance, rather precipitated, then exhaled ad siccitatem,
or why such and such an Operation is to be used after such another, rather then
before it; nay, perhaps, if one should demand why some of those Operations
should be used at all, the Devisers of those unskilful Processes would possibly
as soon be able to finish their Operations, as to give a satisfactory answer.
Nay, sometimes they lengthen their Processes by Operations, so injudiciously
prescribed, that they cross one another; And the Chemist vexes himself, and
the Matter he works upon, to leave it at last no better, if not a worse,
Medicine then he found it; of this we have already given an instance in the
common Magisteries.

But I lately met with another Example of it, in the Writings of a Famous,
Modern Chemist, where to purify the fixed Salts of Vegetables, to the height,
after I know not how many Solutions, Filtrations and Coagulations (which alone
would abundantly serve the turn) he prescribes the dissolving them in Aqua
fortis; after which, he says, they will become very pure and chrystalline, and
not so easily resoluble in the Air: Of which I make no doubt, for diverse Years
before I met with this Process, I have, with the fixed Salts of more then one
kind of Vegetable, by joining them with Aqua fortis, and after awhile exhaling
the superfluous moisture, made good inflammable Salt peter; by which you may
easily guess, how judiciously the solution in Aqua fortis is prescribed only
as a further depuration, and how fit such Authors are to be credited, when they
ascribe to these Chrystalline Salts the several Virtues, (and those improved
too) of the respective Vegetables, from which the Alcalies were obtained. And
indeed, as to those exact Depurations, which some Chemists so strictly require
in all their Preparations, though their Processes be oftentimes hereby made
incredibly tedious, I will willingly allow, nay I assert, that in some cases,
and especially in the making of powerful Menstruums, which by their activeness
and penetrancy, are to unlock other Bodies, Chemists do rather err in making
their Depurations less exquisite then they should, then on the other hand: Yet
in many other cases, such exact refining and subtiliation of a Remedy, is not
so necessary as they imagine; and sometimes too, may do more harm then good, by
sequestring those parts of a Simple, as faeces, which concurred with the finer
parts to that determinate Texture, whereon the specific Virtues of it did
principally depend; but of this more elsewhere. And therefore I shall here
present you with two or there Instances, to show you, That Remedies, at least
as noble as such vulgar Chemical ones as are more tedious and costly, may be
prepared in a shorter time, and cheap enough to be fit for the use of the Poor.

And to comply, Pyrophilus, with your curiosity, to know the Preparations of
those Chemical Medicines, that I do the most familiarly employ, the three
following Instances shall be of such, namely, The Flores Colchotaris, The
Balsamum sulphur is crassum, and, The Essentia Cornu cervini, that you may see
what slight and easy Preparations afford the Remedies, whose Effects you have
so often heard of, if not also seen.

The first of these, is the same Powder, which passes under the name of Ens
Veneris, which appellation we gave it not out of a belief, that it equals the
Virtues ascribed by Helmont, to what he calls the true Ignis Veneris, but
partly to disguise it a little, and partly upon the account of the occasion
whereon it was first found out, which was, That an Industrious Chemist (whom
you know) and I, chancing to look together upon that Tract of Helmont's, which
he calls Butler, and to compare it somewhat attentively with other Passages of
the same Author, we both resolved to try, whether a Medicine, somewhat
approaching to that he made in imitation of Butlers Stone, might not be easily
made out of calcined Vitriol; And, though upon trials we found this Medicine
far short of what Helmont ascribes to his, yet finding it no ordinary one, we
did, for the Minerals sake it is made of, call it Ens primum Veneris.

The Preparation, in short, is this: Take good Dantzick Vitriol (if you cannot
get Hungarian or Goslarian) and calcine it till the calx have attained a dark
red, or purplish color, then, by the frequent affusion of boiling, or at least
warm Water, dulcifie it exactly; and having freed it as well as you can from
the saline parts, dry it thoroughly, and after mix it exquisitly, by grinding,
or otherwise, with an equal weight of pure Sal Armoniack, very finely powdered.
Put this Mixture into a glass Retort, that may be but a third part filled with
it, and subliming it in a sand Furnace, by degrees of Fire, for ten or twelve
hours, toward the latter end increasing the Fire, till the bottom of the
Retort (if you can) be brought to be red hot: That which is sublimed must be
taken out, and if it be not of a good yellow, but pale (which usually happens
for want of an exact commistion of the Ingredients) it may be returned to the
residue, mingled better with it again, and subli^'d once more: The yellow, or
reddish Sublimate may be sublimed a second time, not from the Caput Mortuum,
but by it self; but if you re-sublime it oftener, you may, though you will think
that strange, impair the Color and the Sublimate, instead of improving them.
The Dose is from two or three Grains, to ten or twelve (in some Bodies it may
be increased to twenty or thirty, without danger) in distilled Water, or small
Beer, or other convenient Vehicles: It may be given at any time upon an empty
Stomach, but I most commonly give it at Bedtime. It works, when it works
sensibly, by Sweat, and somewhat by Urine. That it is a potent Specific for
the Rickets, I think I scarce need tell ^ou, Pyroph: whose excellent Mother and
Aunt, together with some Physicians, to whom I also gave it ready prepared,
have cured perhaps a hundred, or more Children, of that Disease, diverse of whom
were looked upon as in a desperate condition. I give it also in Feavors, and
other Distempers, to procure sleep, which it usually does where it is wanting:
In the Head ache likewise, in which, if the Disease be inveterate, the Remedy
must be long continued; with the like admonition it has done Wonders, in
suppressione Mensium obstinata: In the Worms it has sometimes done strange
things; and for provoking of Appetite, I remember not that I have either taken
or given it without success: And though I seldom take (for I often give more)
above two or three Grains of it at a time, yet in that small Dose it usually
proves Diaphoretical to me the next Morning.

But the Experiments we have had of the several Virtues and Efficacy of this
Medicine, would be here too tedious to recite; and therefore I shall now pass
them by, though, if you require it, I shall not be backward to set you down, by
way of observations, most of the cases wherein I or my Friends have given it,
and of the principal Cures that have been performed by it: In the mean time,
because this exalted Colcothar, being given in so small a Dose, may prove, if
it be rightly and dexterously prepared, what Helmont says of his imitation of
Butlers Drif, A Medicine for the Poor, and yet requires more care, not to say
skill, to Prepare it well, then upon the bare reading of the Process you will
imagine, I shall to gratify your Charity annex to the end of this Essay, (for to
insert them here would make too prolix a Digression) as many of the Particulars
relating to the Preparation of it as I can readily meet with among my loose
Notes, And least you should think me a Mountebanck for want of knowing in what
sense it is, that I commend this and the other particular Medicines, I shall
likewise to those Observations subjoyn a Declaration of my meaning in such
particulars, and of the sense, wherein I desire you should understand what you
meet with in the Praise of Remedies either in this Essay or any other of my
Writings, which I hope it will be sufficient to give you this Advertisment of
once for all.

The next Medicine I am to mention to you is the Balsamum Sulphuris which being
made but with gross Oils drawn by Expression may be called Crassum to
distinguish it from the common and thinner Balsom of Sulphur, that is made with
the Distilled Oil or Spirit of Turpentine.

This Balsom is made in an Hour or less, without a Furnace, only by taking to
one part of good Flower of Brimstone, four or five times as much (in weight)
of good expressed Oil, either of Olives or Nuts, or Poppey-seeds, and boiling
the former in the latter in a Pipkin half filled with both, till it be
perfectly Dissolved into a Blood-red Balsom. But as easy as this Preparation
seems (and indeed is) to them that have often made it, it will not at first be
so easy to make it right; For the Fire which ought to be of well kindled
Coals, must be kept pretty quick, and yet not over-quick, least the Oil boil
over, or do not well Dissolve the Flowers of Sulphur, but turn them with its
self into a Clotted and almost Liver-colour'd Mass: And to avoid these
Inconveniences, and the adustion of the Matter, special care must be had to
keep it constantly stirring, not only whilst the Pot is over the Fire, but
after it is taken off, till it be quite Cold. You may if you think fit Dissolve
this simple Balsom in Chymicall Oil of Anny-seeds, or any other Essential Oil
like to advance its Efficacy in this or that particular Distemper: But those
Oils being generally very hot, I most commonly Prescribe the Balsom without
those Additions, especially if long Digestion have somewhat lessened the
Offensiveness of the smell, which though no peculiar fault of this Preparation
being common to Sulphurous Medicines is yet the chief Inconvenience of it. I
will not too resolutly affirm that this is the very Balsamum Sulphuris Rulandi
of which that Author relates such wonderful things in his Centuries; but if it
be not the same, it is so like it, and so good, that I doubt not but by perusing
those Centuries, you may find diverse uses of it, that I have not made trial
off: And in Coughs, old Strains, Bruises, Aches, (and sometimes the Incipcent
fits of the Gout it self) and especially Tumors, some of your friends can
inform you, that it does much greater things then most Men would expect from so
slight and easy a Preparation; And indeed greater then I have seen done by very
costly and commended Balsoms and Ointments, sold in Apothecaries Shops: And in
those Observations, I lately told you you might command, you will find that
this Balsom outwardly applied, has cured such obstinate Tumors, as Men either
knew not what to make off, or what to do with them, of which skilful
Physicians, to whom I gave it to make trial off in difficult cases, can bear me
witness; Though it ought sufficiently to endear this Balsam to us both, that it
was the Means of rescuing your Fair and Virtuous Sister E: from a dangerous
Consumption. In outward Applications it is to be well warmed, and to be chaf^'d
into the part affected, which should be afterward kept very warm, or else
Lint dipped in it may be kept upon the place. Inwardly some drops of it may be
given at any time, when the Stomach is not full; either rol'd up with Sugar, or
mingled with any convenient Vehicle. But as for the Particulars that concern
the Preparation of this Balsam, you will find, those I can readily meet with
among my loose Papers, annexed with the Notes concerning Ens Veneris to the end
of this Essay.

And therefore I shall now proceed to mention the third Medicine, which you
have often heard off, under the name of Essence of Hartshorn; but which is
indeed only the Simple, but well Purified and Dephlegm'd Spirit of it. And
though Men are pleased to imagine by the Effects this Remedy often produces that
I have some Mysterious or elaborate way of Preparing it, yet to deal
ingenuously with you, the chief thing I have done to bring it into credit, is
the teaching some Physicians and Apothecaries a safe and easy way of making it:
For whereas before those that went about to Distill it, commonly used, as the
Apothecaries are wont to do in what they make of the same Matter, Shavings or
Raspings of Hartshorn, and Distilled it with a strong and naked Fire, the
fugitive and subtle Spirits were wont to come over in that plenty, and with
that impetuosity, as to break the Glasses to pieces, whereby Apothecaries and
even Chemists were discouraged from drawing the Spirit, and they not having it
in their Shops, its Virtues remained unknown: Whereupon considering that if it
were only broken on an Anvil into pieces of about the bigness of ones little
finger, besides that this way of comminution would be far less chargeable then
Rasping, the fumes would not be driven out so fast, and considering too, that a
violent Fire was requisite, not to Distill the subtle Spirit, but to drive over
the Gross and heavy Oil; I thought it was needless to take pains to force
that over, which not being (that I observed) used in Physic, would but cost me
further pains to separate it again: And therefore, trying to Distill Hartshorn,
in naked Retorts, placed but in Sand, I found I could Distill two or three pound
at a time, and obtain from each of them, almost, if not quite, all the Spirits
and Volatile Salt, which I afterward separated from the redish and lighter
Oil, and freed them from Phlegm and Feculencies by a couple of Rectifications,
made in tall Glasses, and with very gentle heats: (commonly of a Lamp Furnace)
The Dose may be from eight, or ten Drops of the Spirit, or Grains of the Salt,
to six times the quant^ty of either, in warm Beer, or any Vehicle that is not
acid, except Milk. Finding it to be a Medicine of an attenuating, resolving,
and Diaphoretical Nature, and one that much resists Malignity, Putrefaction,
and acid Humors (whence being mingled with Spirit of Vinager, and the like
sour Juyces, it destroys their acidity.) I direct it ( Praemissis
Universalibus) in Fevers, Coughs, Pleurisies, Obstructions of the Spleen,
Liver, or Womb, and principally in Affections of the Brain, as Stoppages of the
Head, Feverish Deliriums, and even in Phrenitide. And since I wrote a good
part of this Essay, I had an Experiment of it in a Child, who being, by many
violent Convulsion fits, reduced to a desperate condition, was recovered by one
Dose of five or six Drops of th^s Spirit, that I sent it. It Is true that I have
another Medicine, that is more elaborate and costly, and more properly bears
the name of Essentia Cornu Cervi, which I more value then this; But I cannot
communicate that, without prejudicing a third Person, and an excellent Chemist
who makes a great advantage of it. But this I can tell you, that most of the
Cures, for which my Preparation of Hartshorn has had the good fortune to be
esteemed, have been performed with the above described Simple Spirit and Salt,
with which some skilful Physicians, and other Ingenious Persons, who had it
from me, have within these few Years saved so many Lives, that I am inclined to
think, I have done no useless piece of Service, in bringing so happy a Medicine
into Request, especially with those that have skill and opportunity to make
better use of it then I. But, Pyrophilus, I find I have detained you so long
with so prolix a Mention, of the three above described Remedies, that I should
think it requisite, to make you a solemn Apology; but that I hope your Charity
will as well invite you to Pardon the fault, as mine induced me to commit it.

CHAP. VII.
A Fourth way of lessening the Charges of Cures, may be this; That whereas the
dearness of very many Medicines proceeds from the Chargeableness of those
Chemical Operations, whereby they are wont to be Prepared, it is to be hoped
that a greater measure of skill in Physiology, and other Experimental Learning,
will suggest cheaper and better ways of doing many things in Chemistry, then
are, as yet, usually practiced.

And those thrifty Expedients, I conceive, may be of several kinds, of which I
shall at present mention, and that but transiently, three or four.

And first, I doubt not but Chemists may be taught to make better Furnaces, for
several purposes, then those that have been hitherto most used among them: For
professed Chemists, having been for the most part unacquainted enough with many
other parts of Learning, and particularly with the Mechanics, their
contrivances of Furnaces and Vessels have been far enough from being as good as
knowledge in Mechanics and dexterity in contrivances might, and, I doubt not,
hereafter will, supply them with; whether as to the saving of Fuel, or to the
making the utmost use of the Heat afforded by the Fuel they do employ, or as to
the intending heat to the height, or as to the regulating of heat at pleasure.

It Is somewhat wonderful, as well as pleasant, to see how many Vessels may be
duly heated by one Fire (perhaps no greater then common distillers employ to
heat one Vessel) if the Furnace be so contrived, as that the Flame may be
forced to pass in very crooked and winding Channels, toward the Vent or Vents,
and the heat may be skilfully conveyed to the several parts of the Furnace,
according to the Exigency of the work it is to do: And as for the intention of
heat, I remember I have had odd effects of it, by the contrivance of a certain
Furnace, that held but very few Coals, and to which I used no Bellows. But
though by this way I could vitrifie sometimes the very Crucibles, and though
possibly I could, with a slight alteration, melt down the sides of the Furnace
themselves; yet a Disciple of Cornelius Drebell, and a very credible Person,
assured me, That he knew a way of Furnaces that was yet fitter to bring heat to
the superlative Degree: and that he himself, the Relator, could, by the mere
force of Fire in his Furnace, bring Venetian Talk to flow; which is more, I
confess, then ever I have been able to do either in mine, or those of the
Glass-house. But Experience has assured me, it is easy to make a Furnace give
that heat as expeditiously enough, and in other respects very conveniently to
Cupel both Gold and Silver, without the least help of Bellows: That also
Furnaces may be so ordered, as that the heat may be better regulated, then That
in our ordinary ones, I may elsewhere show you cause to believe: And in the
mean time I shall only tell you, that I look upon the skill of intending and
remitting heat at pleasure, and especially the being able to keep a gentle heat
long and equal as a thing of much greater moment, both as to Physic and
Philosophy, then Chemists are wont to think (the powerful effects of constant
and temporate heats, being as yet known to few save those that have made trial
of them) And with Lamp Furnaces, well ordered, diverse things may be done in
imitation of nature; some friends of mine having, as several of them assure me,
in such Furnaces, brought Hens eggs to manifest Animation. That also Furnaces
may be so built, as to save much of the Laborants wonted attendance on them,
may appear by the obvious invention of Athanors or Furnaces with Towers,
wherein the Fire is for many Hours, (perhaps for twenty-foure or forty-eight)
supplied with a competent proportion of Coals, without being able to burn
much faster then it should: And that in many cases the labor of Blowing may be
well spared, and the annoyance of Mineral fumes in great p^rt avoided, by an
easy contrivance, is evident by those Furnaces which are blown by the help of
a Pipe, drawing the Air, as they commonly speak, either at the top, as in
Glaubers fourth Furnace, or at the bottom, as for want of room upwards, I have
sometimes tried: To which may be added, that the casting of the Matters ^o be
prepared upon quick Coals, as Glauber prescribes in that which he calls his
first Furnace, is in some cases a cheap and expeditious way of preparing some
Minerals, though his method of making Spirit of Salt in that Furnace would not
succeed, according to his promise with me, and some of my acquaintance. And
there are other more commodious Contrivances, by casting some things upon the
naked Fire, which invites me to expect, That there will be several good
Expedients of employing the Fire to Chemical operations, that are not yet made
use of, nor, perhaps, so much as dreamed of.

And as Furnaces, so the Vessels that more immed^ately contain the Thing to be
prepared, are questionless capable of being made more durable, and of being
better contrived, then commonly they are. Good use may be made of those Earthen
Reto^ts, that are commonly called Glauber's second Furnaces, in case they be
made of Earth that will well endure strong Fires; and in case there be a better
way to keep in the Fumes, then that he proposes of melted Lead, which I h^ve
therefore often declined for another, as having found it liable to such
inconveniences as I elsewhere declare.

But for Materials that are cheap, and to be distilled in quantity, as Woods,
Hartshorn, etc. the way is not to be despised, and is, as we may elsewhere
have occasion to show, capable of improvement; though in many cases this kind
of Vessel is inferior to those tubulated Retorts, that were of old in use, and
mentioned by Basilius Valentinus, and from which Glauber probably desum'd that
which we have been speaking of. The utility of the way of sealing Glasses
hermetically, and of the Invention that now begins to be in request of stopping
the Bottles, that contain corrosive and subtle Liquors with Glass-stopples,
ground fit to their Necks, instead of Corks, together with some other things,
not now to be mentioned, keep me that I scarce doubt but that if we could
prevail with the Glass-men and the Potters, to make Vessels of Glass and Earth
exactly, according to directions, many things in Chemistry might be done better
and cheaper then they now are; and some things might be then done, that with
the forms of Vessels now in use cannot be done at all. And if that be true
which we find related in Pliny, and with some other Circumstances in Dion
Cassius, of a more ingenious then fortunate Man, who, about his time, was put
to death for having made malleable Glass, as the truth of that Story, if
granted, would show the retriving that Invention, a thing not to be despaired
of: So he that could, now Chemistry is so cultivated, find again the way of
making Glass malleable, would be, in my Opinion, a very great Benefactor to
Mankind, and would enable the Virtuosi, as well as the Chemists, to make
several Experiments, which at present are scarce practicable; And some Chemists
would perhaps think this attempt more hopeful, if I tell them first, that I
remember Raymund Lully expressly reckons it among three or four of the principal
Virtues he ascribes to the Philosophers Stone, that it makes Glass malleable;
and then, that an expert Chemist seriously affirmed to me, that he met with an
Adeptus, who, among other strange things, showed him a piece of Glass, which
the Relator found, would endure and yield to the Hammer: But what my own
Opinion is concerning this matter, and what are the (uncommon) Inducements I
have to be of it, I must not here declare.

And on this occasion, I remember I have seen an Instrument of Tin, or Pewter,
for the drawing of Spirit of Wine (which you know is one of the chargeablest
things that belong to Chemistry) so contrived, that whereas in the ordinary way
much time, and many rectifications, are requisite to dephlegm Spirit of Wine;
one distillation in this Vessel will bring it over from Wine it self, so pure
and flegmless, as to burn all away. And I remember, that the ancient French
Chemist, in whose Laboratory I first saw one of these Instruments, told me,
That 'twas invented, not by any great Alchymist or Mathematician, but by a
needy Parisian Chyrurgion. And now I speak of Spirit of Wine, I shall add,
That as the charges of Chemistry would be very much lessned, if such ardent
Spirits could be had in plenty, and cheap; so I think it not improbable, that
in diverse places there may be found, by Persons well skilled in the Nature of
Fermentation, other Vegetable Substances far cheaper then Wine, from which an
inflammable, and saline Sulphurous Spirit, of the like virtue for dissolving
resinous Bodies, drawing Tinctures, etc. may be copiously obtained: For not
only, it is known, that Sydar, Perry, and other Juyces of Fruits will afford
such a Spirit; and that most Graine^, not very unctuous, as Barley, Wheat, etc.
will do the like; but other Berries that grow wild, as those of Elder, will
yield a Vinous Liquor. And in the Barbada's they make a kind of Wine, even of
Roots, (I mean their Mobby, which they make of Potatos; as I have also, for
curiosity sake, made Bread of the same Roots) nay, even from some sorts of
Leaves, such a Liquor may be obtained: For I have observed Roses well
fermented, to yield a good Spirit very strongly tasted, as well as inflammable.
And as to the Preparing of pure Spirit of Wine it self, I know ways (and one
of them cheap) that may exceedingly shorten the time, and pains of dephlegming
it; but that being to be done otherwise, then by any peculiar contrivance of
Furnaces or Glasses, I reserve it for a fitter place, in one of the following
Essays.

And as more expedient and thrifty ways, then the vulgar ones, of making
Chymicall Furnaces and Vessels, may be devised; so it is to be hoped that a
skilful Naturalist may find cheaper ways of heating the Chemists Furnaces, or
Distilling in his Vessels (either by finding combustible Materials, not
formerly in use in the places where we work, or by making those already
employed fitter for use) by bringing them, by some cheap alterations, either to
give a greater, or a more durable heat, or to be less offensive by their smoke
or smells; or else by discovering some cheap way of doing, in some cases,
without Fire, what was wont to be done by it.

We see that in some places, especially here in England, where Char-coale was
only burnt in Furnaces, Pit coal is substituted in its room; and at this Day
there are several of those that make Aquafortis, in great quantities, that
Distill it with such Coals, which cost nothing near so much as those made of
Wood. And experience has informed me, that even in other sorts of Furnaces,
the same Fuel may be employed, provided the Bars of the Grates be set wider
asunder, and a little Char-coale be mingled with it for the better kindling;
and since of late Years Pit coal have been found in several places among us,
where they were not formerly known to be, it seems not improbable, that many
other Countries may afford Chemists, and the rest of their Inhabitants the like
advantage, if search were duly made, by boring of the ground, by the
observations of the Waters, and the Steames of places suspected, and by other
ways of inquiry that a skilful man might direct; But because the abundant
Smoke of Pit-coale, uses to be very offensive, and the smaller Coals easily
run through the Grates, and because of other inconveniences, there has been a
way found out of charring these Coals, and thereby reducing them into coherent
Masses, of a convenient bigness and shape, and more dry and apt to kindle; and
these though, quantity for quantity, their price be little inferior to that of
Char-coale. Yet those that consume great proportions of Coals, tell me they
find them almost as cheap again, in regard they will not only last much
longer, but give (especially near at hand) a far more intense heat: And
therefore it must be a very useful thing to Chemists, to show a way of charring
Sea-coales, without the help of those Pots, which make them of the price they
now bear. And that it is not only possible, but very easy, I could quickly
show you, if it would not prejudice an industrious Laborant, whose profession
being to make Chymicall Medicines in quantity, obliges him to keep great and
constant Fires, and did put him upon finding a way of charring Sea-coale,
wherein it is in about three hours or less, without Pots or Vessels, brought
to Char-coale; of which having, for curiosity sake, made him take out some
pieces, and cool them in my presence, I found them upon breaking to appear
well charr'd, and much thereof in show not unlike a Marchasite. And that which
was very convenient in this Contrivance was, that whilst the Pit coal was
charring, it afforded him a very intense heat to melt or calcine the Minerals,
he had occasion to expose to it: And he confessed to me, that by this Method, he
saved three parts in four of the Charges the keeping such great and constant
Fires, with common Char-coale, would cost him. In Holland, likewise, they have
a way of charring Peat, (which is a combustible Turfe, that they dig under
Ground) and a skilful Distiller, that much employed it, commends it to me, as a
very good Fuel, even for Chemical Fires; which I therefore mention, because the
way of charring Peat, is not yet brought into several Countries, where Peat is
dig'd up: And probably, it would be found in diverse Regions, where it is yet
unknown, if due search were made for it. To which I may add, that it is not
unlike, that some Countries may afford such combustible Materials, fit for
Chemical Furnaces, as have not, as yet, been so much as named by Mineralist's;
as I remember I have seen, and had, a sort of Coals, some of which looked like
Marchasites, that burned clear with a good Flame, and had this convenient
quality, for the Chymist's use, that they were not apt, like the common
Pit-coales, to stop the Grates with their Sinders, but burnt to whitish Ashes
almost like Char-coale made of Wood; and yet gave so great a heat, that an
Industrious Chemist of my acquaintance, who kept many things constantly at
work, found it worth while to have them brought him, above a days journey, on
Horses backs.

But it is not impossible, that when Men grow better Naturalist's, they may find
ways, of exciting heat, enough for many Chymicall operations, without the help
of Fire; and consequently, without the consumption of Fuel. We find that by the
attrition of hard Bodies, considerable degrees of heat may be produced, not
only, in combustible Materials, as Wood, and the like, (which would therefore
be improper, to be here insisted on) But in others also, and particularly in
Iron and Steel, one may by attrition soon produce a smart heat, as you may
quickly try, by nimbly Filing a piece of Iron, with a rough File; or swiftly
rubbing, though but for a few minutes, a thin piece of Steel against a Board.
And whether some contrivance may not be found, by the help of cheap Engines
moved by Water, or otherwise, to produce a durable heat in Iron Vessels, fit to
digest in, we may elsewhere have further occasion to consider; But this is
known, that from some succulent Plants, a Liquor may be drawn, only by exposing
them in Glasses, purposely contrived to the Beams of the Sun. And there is
nothing more common, then for Chemists to make their Digestions by the warmth
of Hors-dung, whereby they might also (as some Analogous trials incline me to
think) conveniently enough, Distill some fermented Liquors; especially, if the
way were improved by the skilful addition of Quicklime, and seasonable
aspersions of Water. And I doubt not but many cheap Materials might, by a few
trials, be found, whereby portable digesting Furnaces, without Fire, (if I may
so call them) might be made, without the ill smell and nastiness, which
discommends the use of Hors-dung. For not only we see, by what happens in the
Spontaneous heating of Malt, and some other familiar substances, that probably
most sort of Grains, and Berries, fit for Fermentation may be brought to
yield, for a good while, a heat great enough to putrify, or digest with: But I
have, several Years ago, by many trials found; that I could, by invironing
Glasses with refuse Hay well pressed down and equally wetted throughout,
produce for diverse days such a heat, as made me decline the employing of
Hors-dung; and yet (which is the chief thing for which I mention this) the
quantity of Hay was so small, that in all my trials I found not, that the Hay
did of it self, though kept close enough, take Fire; as else is usual in Ricks
of Hay not sufficiently dried, where the quantity, and consequently the weight,
that presses the lowermost parts close together, is considerable.

But further, in diverse operations, where an actual Fire is requisite, it may
be hoped that Knowing Men, may discover ways of saving much of the Fire, and
making Skill perform a great part of the wonted office of heat. To obtain the
Spirit of fresh Urine, you must Distill away near nine parts of ten, which will
be but Phlegm, before the Spirit or Volatile Salt will (and that scarce, without
a pretty strong heat) regularly rise. And there are several Chymist's that, to
this day, make use of no better way of Distiling Urine; But he that knows, how
Putrefaction opens many Bodies, may easily save himself the expense of so much
Fire: For if you let Urine stand well stopped, for eight or ten Weeks, the
Saline and Spirituous parts will so extricate themselves, that the Spirits that
before stayed behind the Phlegm, will now, even with the gentlest heat, rise up
first, and leave the Phlegm behind. And on this occasion I shall teach you, what
I do not know to have been mentioned by any Writer; namely, That even of fresh
Urine, without Digestion or Putrefaction, I can, by a very cheap and easy way,
make a subtle and penetrant Spirit, ascend, first, even in a gentle heat; And I
am wont to do it only by pouring Urine, how fresh soever, upon Quicklime, till
it swim some Fingers breadth above it, and then distilling it as soon as I
please. But I did not find, upon many trials, that this Spirit, though even
without Rectification very strong and subtle, would Coagulate Spirit of Wine,
like that of putrified and fermented Urine; though, perhaps, for diverse other
purposes it may be more powerful.

And here I shall advertise You, that whereas I just now took notice, that
there was a pretty strong Fire requisite to force up the Salt of unfermented
Urine, out of that part, which after the abstraction of the Phlegm, remains of
the consistance of Honey; trial has informed me, That the volatile Salt may
out of the thick Liquor be obtained, better and more pure, with ease, and with
a, scarce credibly, small heat; barely, by tempering the Urinous extract with a
convenient quantity of good Wood Ashes, whereby (for a reason elsewhere to be
considered) the volatile part, of the Salt of Urine, is so freed from the
grosser Substance, that with strange facility it will ascend, fine and white,
to the top of very tall Glasses. But of the differing Preparation of Urine,
more perhaps elsewhere. I now proceed to tell you, that I think it not unlikely,
that even Bodies, which are more gross and sluggish, may by the affusion of
such Menstruums, as humane Industry may find out, be far more easily, either,
volatiliz'd or unlockt, then common Chemists are wont to think. For I know a
Liquor, not very rare among Chymist's, by whose help I have, often enough,
distilled Spirit of Nitre, (whose distillation requires much about the same
violence of Fire, with that of Aquafortis) even in a moderate he^t of Sand,
and without a naked Fire. This Spirit may easily enough be brought over, even
in a Head and Body; and, for a Wager, I could obtain a little of it without any
Fire or outward heat at all. And I remember, also, That having once digested a
certain Menstruum, for a very short time, upon crude Antimony, and abstracted
it, in a very gentle heat, of Sand; the Liquor, not only, brought over some of
the Antimony in the form of red Flowers, swiming in it, and united other parts
of the Mineral, with it self, in the transparent Liquor, but the gentle heat
raised to the top of the Retort, diverse little Masses of a substance, that were
very transparent, like Amber, which were inflammable, and smelt, and burnt
blew, just like common Sulphur; And yet the Menstruum, which was easily again
recoverable from the Antimony, was no strong Corrosive, tasting, before it was
poured on, not much unlike good Vinager.

But besides all the ways, above mentioned, of saving the Chemist, either,
Time, or Fire, or Labor; I despair no^ that diverse others, yet unthought on,
will be in time found out by the Industry of skilful Men, taking notice of the
nature of things, and applying them to Chemical uses; as we see, that by
Amalgamations with Mercury, the calcination of Gold, and Silver, may be much
easyer performed, then by a long violence of Fire. And, (if it be true, what
Helmont, and Paracelsus, tell us of their immortal Liquor Alkahest) Medicines
far nobler, and otherwise more difficult to make, then those hitherto in use
among the Chymist's, may be Prepared with greater ease, and expedition, and
with far less expense of Fire, then the nature of the Metals, and other
Concretes, to be opened by it, would let a vulgar Chemist suspect. However, I
see no great cause to doubt that there may be Menstruum's found that will much
facilitate difficult Operations, since not to mention again the Liquor, I
lately told you, would work such a change on Nitre (and, I might have added, on
some other compact Bodies) it is very like, there may be Menstruum's found, that
will not be so spoiled by a single Operation, made with them, as our vulgar
saline Spirits are wont to be. For I have tried that a Menstruum, made by the
bare distillation of good Verdigrease, will not only draw, as I have formerly
told you, a Tincture of Glass of Antimony, or perform some other like Operation
for once, but being drawn off from the dissolved body, or the extraction, will
again serve, more then once, for the like Operation upon fresh Materials.

The fifth, and last way, Pyrophilus, that I intend to mention, of lessening
Chemical expenses; is, That the Naturalists may probably find out ways of
preserving some Chemical Medicines, either longer or better, then those ways
that are usual. But of this preservation of Bodies, being like, as I formerly
intimated, to have elsewhere further occasion to Treat; I shall now only say,
That the purified Juyces, liquid Extracts, Robs, and other soft Medicaments,
made of Plants, may be Conserved far cheaper, as well as better, then with Sugar
(which clogs most Men's Stomachs, and otherwise disagrees with many
Constitutions) in case Helmont say true, where he tells us, That for a small
piece of Money, he can, for I know not how long, preserve whole Barrels of
Liquor. And a way he intimates, of fuming liquors with Sulphur, I have already
told you, is a very good way of keeping them uncorrupted; provided, that
(though he prescribes it not) they be six or seven several times (seldomer or
oftener, according to the quantity or nature of the Liquor) well impregnated
with that embalming Smoke; to which purpose it is convenient to have two
Vessels, to pour from one to the other, that whilst the Liquor is shaking in
the one, the other may be well filled with Smoke; whereto I shall only subjoyn
this secret, which a friend of mine, practices in preserving the fumigated
Juyces of Herbs (as, I elsewhere inform you, I do to preserve other things) with
^ success that I have somewhat wondered at; which consist's, in adding to the
thick Liquor, to be preserved, a due, but small, proportion of the white
Coagulum, (which I often elsewhere mention) made of the pure Spirits of Wine and
Urine.

But I have made this excursion too prolix, and therefore I shall only add as
a general admonition, that we are not, by the common practice of Vulgar
Chymist's, to estimate what Knowing Naturalist's, skilled in Mechanical
contrivances, may be able in time to do, toward the making of Chemical
Remedies, as well more cheap as more effectual; and, indeed, to make them more
effectual, is the best way to make them more cheap.

For, Pyrophilus, after all the ways, that I have mentioned, whereby the
charges, of the Therapeutical part of Physic, may be lessned; I must advertise
you, both, That I make no doubt but there may be diverse others found, which
either through want of skill or leisure I have pretermitted, and that I have
not yet named the principal of all; which is, That the deep insight into
Natural Philosophy may qualify him that has it by several ways, and
especially by discovering the true Causes and Seats of Diseases, to find out
such generous and effectual Remedies, (whether Specificks, or more Unive^sal
Arcana) as by quickly freeing the Patient from his Disease, may exempt him from
needing, either, much Physic from the Apothecary, or many chargeable visites
from the Doctor of Surgeon. Thus the rich Merchant I mentioned in one of the
former Essays to have been freed, by a Specific, from the Gout; and the young
Lady, cured of her Fistulas, by the infusion of Millepedes; might well, in the
ordinary way, have spent, even supposing them thrifty, a hundred times more,
upon Physicians and Physic, then the potent and nimble Rem^dies, whereby they
were so happily recovered, cost them.

[To which I shall add, by way of Confirmation, both of this and of what I
lately told you; concerning the Efficacy that may be, even, in slightly
Prepared Simples; what I came to learn, since the writing of the former part of
this Essay, namely, that a young Lady, who (though of great Birth, is yet of
far greater Beauty and virtue, whom I presume I need not name to you) having
been long troubled with an almost hereditary Epileptical Distemper, and after
having been wearied by courses of Physic prescribed her, by the famousest
Doctors that could be procured, without at all mending, but rather growing
worse, so that sometimes She would have, in one day, eight or ten of such
dismal Fits, as You and I have seen her in; was cured only by the Powder of
true Misseltoe of the Oak; given as much as would lie upon a Sixpence, early
in the morning, in black Cherry Water, or even in Beer, for some days near the
full Moon. And I am assured, partly, by the Patient her self, and, partly, by
those that gave her the Medicine, That though it had scarce any other sensible
Operation upon her, and did not make her sickish, especially, when she slept
upon it; Yet, after the first day she took it, she never had but one Fit. And
this Remedy, an ancient Gentleman, who, being casually present when she
suddenly fell down as dead, gave it her, professed himself to have constantly
cured that Disease with it, when he could procure the right Simple, which is
here exceeding scarce. And what further Experiment some Friends of Yours have
succesfully made, of its Virtue, I may elsewhere have occasion to relate.]

To which I shall only add, That one of the Skilfullest Methodist's I ever
knew, having had much ado to preserve a young Cousin of Yours from a very
dangerous Cough, by a long course of Physic; the party, at the beginning of
the next Winter, falling into a Relapse more threatening then the first Disease,
was rescued from it in two or three days, by not many more takings of a
Specific sent her, made of nothing else but Hartshorn prepared as I lately
taught You. And if such slight Medicines, consisting, each of them, but of a
single Simple, not elaborately prepared, may sometimes (for I say not always)
perform such speedy cures even in Chronical Di^tempers, what may not be hoped
from the Arcana m^jora (such as Paracelss's Laudanum, so praised by Operinus
himself; and Butlers Driff, so extold by Helmont) when the skilfullest
Preparations, of the noblest Simples, shall come to be known by Learned and
Judicious Men, intelligent in the Theory of Physic, and especially versed in
the History of Diseases? And though Riverius were none of the greatest
Naturalists, or, at least, Chemists, Yet if in his Observation, and elsewhere,
he flatter not his own Febrifugum; how many Patients did that one Specific,
rescue from Quartanes, that would else probably have proved as Chargeable as
Tedious?

But, Pyrophilus, having said so much, that I fear you have thought it
tedions, to show that a Naturalist, skilled in Chemistry and the Mechanics,
may assist the Physician to make his cures less Chargeable; it is high time,
that after so long an excursion, I proceed to consider in what other
particulars he may be a benefactor to the Physicians Art.

CHAP. VIII.
Fifthly, then, that the Naturalists skill may improve the Pharmaceutical
Preparations of Simples, by several ways partly touched already, and partly to
be, either, added or further treated of; the great variety of new Remedies,
wherewith the Laboratories of Chemists have furnished the shops of
Apothecaries, may convinceingly inform you. To which I must take the liberty to
add (and that upon serious Consideration) That the Chemical Preparations,
hitherto common in Dispensatories, are, as to the Generali^y of them, far
enough from being the most Dextrous, or Noble, that can be devised: For our
Vulgar Chemistry (to which our Shops owe their venal Spagyrical Remedies) is as
yet very incomplete, affording us rather a Collection, of loose and scattered
(and many of them but casual) Experiments, then an Art duly superstructed upon
Principles and Notions, emergent from severe and competent Inductions, as we
have elsewhere endeavored, more particularly, to manifest. And therefore till
the Principles of Chemistry be better known, and more solidly established, we
must expect no other, then that very few vulgar Chemical Remedies should be of
the Noblest sort; and that in the Preparation of many others, considerable
errors should be wont to pass unheeded; and faults, gross enough, be apt to be
mistakenly committed. But, of this Subject, we may elsewhere have diverse
occasions to entertain You; and our single Essay, of the ^^^mical Distinctions
of Salts, will perhaps discover to You no small mistakes, in the Preparation of
diverse applauded Vulgar Medicines. For it is not the Elaborateness, but the
Skilfulness of Preparations, that produces the Noble Remedies, and a few
Teeming Principles well known and applied, will enable a man with ease to make
better Remedies, then a great many Furnaces and Glasses, though never so well
contrived, and though very useful in their kind. To make out this in some
measure, I shall name some such Instances, as may withal confirm what I
formerly delivered in this Essay, touching the possibility and usefulness of
Correcting either poisonous, or otherwise very noxious Simples. I never knew
Opium so much Corrected by Saffron, Cinnamom, and other Aromatical and Cordial
Drugs (wherewith it is wont to be made up into Laudanum) nor by the most tedious
tortures of Vulcan, as I have known it by being a while Digested in Wine,
impregnated with nothing but the weight of the Opium of pure Salt of Tartar; as
we elsewhere more fully de^lare. (a much nobler Laudanum may be made by adding
to the Opium, instead of the Salt, two or three appropriated Simples, and by
due Fermentations and Digestions of them with it) And for that violent Vomiting
Medicine, by Chemists flatteringly enough, called Mercurius Vitae; a whole
Pound of Cordial Con^erves, or Liquors, will not so well moderate its
evacuating force, as the keeping it continually stirring in a fl^ttish and well
glazed earthen Vessel, placed over a Ch^fingdish of Coals till it emit no more
fumes, but grow of a grayish Color: which I am very credibly informed to be
the Preparation of Merc-Vitae purgans, often mentioned and commended by the
famous Practitioner Riverius, in his Observations. A not unlike, but far more
sudden, Correction of tha^ ^^tive Powder, I elsewhere teach. And as for those
Operative Minerals, Quicksilver and Antimony, though long Experience of their
churlish and untractable Nature have made many, of the waryer Physicians and
Chemists shy to meddle with either of them single: Yet these Concretes, which
seem so Incorrigible, may, by being barely (in the gradual Distillation, of
Butter of Antimony) sublimed up together into a Cinnaber, and then that
Cinnaber six or seven times resublim'd per se, be united into a Medicine, that
not only is not wont to work, either upwards or downwards, but of which I have
known safely taken, even in substance, to the Dose of many Grains; and a few
Drachmes, of which, infused in a Pound or two of Wine, has made it of that
inoffensive Efficacy (taken, in the quantity of a Spoonful or two, daily upon
an empty stomach) That, if it still succeed as well as we have observed it two
or three times to do, we may think that our having thus acquainted You with the
Virtue of this one unlikely Remedy, (though we have also met with it, even, in
P^inted Books) may make you amends for all the rest of this ted^ous Discourse.
I once knew a slight (but altogether new and tedious, as well as Philosophical)
Preparation, of Salt of Tartar Correct and Tame such Poisons, as ten times the
quantity of the highest Vulgar Antidotes, or Cordials, would (I was confident)
scarce have so much as weakened: And I have known by the same Prepared Salt,
dexterously Specificated by Simples, the Virtues of some Vegetables so exalted,
That, without any Cathartique or Emetique Operation, they have (if many
Patients, of whom I had casual opportunities to enquire of the Effects of those
Remedies upon them, do not mis-inform me) proved more effectual in Tameing
diverse stubborn Diseases, then Crocus Metalloru^, Mercurius Vitae, (as it is
abusively called) and those other dangerous Remedies; which make the Vulgar
wont to say of Chemists, that they quickly either cure their Patients or kill
them. And to let You see, Pyrophilus, by one plain, and yet noble, instance;
That the knowledge of the Specific Qualities of Things, skilfully applied to
Preparations, may perform, with ease, what neither costly Materials, nor
elaborate Processes are able to effect; Give me leave to inform You; That,
whereas, Chemists and Physicians have not been able by infusing the true Glass
of Antimony (made per se) in Spirit of Wine, or the richest Cordial Liquo^s;
nor yet by torturing it after several tedious and artificial manners, to
deprive it of its Emetique quality, That Vomitive faculty, of Antimonial Glass,
may be Corrected by so slight a way, as that of Digesting it with pure Spirit
of Vinegar, till the Menstruum be highly tinged. For if you gently abstract all
the Liquor, and on the remaining yellow or red Powder, you Digest well
dephlegmated Spirit of Wine; You may after a while obtain a Noble and not
Emetique Tincture: Of which though Basilius Valentinus prescribes but five or
six Drops for a Dose, yet a Domestic of mine having, out of curiosity, taken
to the quantity of thirty Drops at a Time, he found it not at all Vomitive. And
this Tincture we the rather mention, Because, not only, See his Currus
Triumphalis Antimonii.
Basilius Valentinus, but other skilful Persons, highly extol it for several
Diseases.

And let me add, Pyrophilus, (and be pleased to mark well what I tell you)
That by bare reiterated Digestions, and Fermentations, there may be Prepared,
out of many Vegetables, Saline and Sulphurous Essences (whose Bulk is
exceeding small, in proportion to the Concrets whence they are Extracted) which
will keep many Years, as I can show you some above three Years old, and contain
more of the Crasis (if I may so call it) of the Simple, then the vulgar
Vegetable Waters, Spirits, Extracts or Salts, hitherto extant in Laboratories
and Shops. But there is so great a length of Time required, to the Prepar^tion
of these Efficacious Juyces, That my ambulatory condition of Life, has not
allowed me to furnish my self with many of them.

And, Pyrophilus, if You will not dis-believe a Person for whom You have so
just an esteem, as You have for that Ingenious, and Experienced, Monsieur L. F.
who was the French Kings Chemist, when You knew him at Paris; I can, present
You with a yet Nobler instance, to persuade You; That, if skill be not wanting,
a single Herb, without any violence of Fire, may, by other ways then are in
use among Chemists, be easily enough brought to afford Medicines, endowed with
some Nobler Virtues, then any of the most compounded, costly, and elaborate
Medicines, whether Minerals or others, that are to be met with among Vulgar
Chemists. This Efficacious part of the Plant, whence it is obtained, Paracelsus
call's the Primum Ens of the Plant that yields it; But though, indeed, I have
found the way of Preparing it much plainer, and better delivered, then is usual
in his Writings, at the end of his Book De Renovatione and Restauratione; Yet I
freely acknowledge, That, I should scarce have thought it worth the Trial, if
it had not been for what the Experienced Chemist, above mentioned, affirmed to
me, upon his own Observations, concerning it, partly, because I am not wont to
be forward so much as to try long Processes upon Paracelsus's credit, and
partly, because what he call's Sal Solutum seemed to me somewhat ambiguous;
since, in the same Page teaching to draw the Ens Primum of Gold and Antimony,
he makes not use of Sea Salt, but of (a Salt of an incomparably higher Nature)
his Sal Circulatum; and in the Process immediately preceding ours, to make the
Ens Primum of Emeralds, he Prescribes the Calcining them in Sale Soluto, which
agrees far better with his Sal Circulatum then with any Solution of Sea salt,
which seems very unlikely to be able to Calcine and, as he says it must,
dissolve Emeralds. But the way, that our French Chemist told me he used, was in
substance this: Gather, in a convenient season and time of Day, Baulm for
instance, or some other fit Herb, (for experience has taught, both him and me,
that all Herbs are not fit, by this way, to be reduced into Liquors) and having
beaten it well, in a marble Mortar, to a soft mash, placed in a Bolt-head
hermetically sealed, to Digest forty days in a Dunghill or some analogous
heat; then, opening the Vessel, take out the Matter, which will be far more
Liquid then before, from which, having separated the grosser parts, You must
Digest it in a gentle Bath, that the yet remaining grosser parts may subside;
to which, being filtrated. You must, according to him, (for I find not that
Paracelsus requires it) join the fixed Salt, of the grosser parts above
mentioned, dried and calcined. To this, Prepared Liquor, You must add equal
parts of the Liquor of good Sea Salt well purified, and then melted, and
suffered to run Per Deliquium: This Liquor, being also sealed up in a
convenient Glass, must be exposed to the Sun for about six Weeks; at the end of
which time there will swim at the top of it, the Primum Ens of the Plant in a
Liquid form, transparent, and either green or red, or, perhaps, of some other
Color according to the Nature of the Plant. And though Paracelsus prescribes
but Celandine, and Baulm, to be used, Yet having enqu^r'd of our Chemist, he
told me, he had made such Prima Entia of Scrophularia, and, as I remember, of
one or two other Herbs. But that which makes me thus, particularly, take notice
of these kind of Medicines, is, That not only Paracelsus ascribes to the Primum
Ens of Baulm, (or Celandine) the power of renovating them that use so much of
it in good Wine as will give it a Tincture, early every Morning; till, first of
all, the Nails of their Fingers, then those of their Toes, afterward their
Hair, and Teeth, fall off, and, lastly, the Skin be dried and exchanged for a
new one: But Your ingenious acquaintance assured me several times, and once, in
the presence of a famous Physician, and another Virtuoso, to whom he appealed,
as knowing the truth of what he said; That an intimate Friend of his, whom he
n^med to me, having, after the above mentioned manner, Prepared the Primum Ens
of Baulm, to satisfy himself the better of its effects, made the Trial upon
himself, and took of it, according to the Prescription, for about a Fortnight;
Long before which his Nails, both of Hands and Feet, began to loosen
themselves from the Skin, (but without any pain) which at length falling off,
of their own accord, this Gentleman keeps yet by him in a Box for a rarity, but
would not pursue the Trial any further, being satisfied with what he had found,
and being in no need of such Physic; But having given of the same Medicated
Wine, for ten or twelve Days, to a Woman that served in his house, and was
near seventy years of Age, without letting her know, what he expected it should
do, Her Purgationes Menstruae came upon her again in a sufficiently great
quantity, to fright her so much, that he durst prosecute the Experiment no
further. And when I asked, why he made no trial upon Beasts? It was answered,
that though he had but little of the Medicine, yet he put apart an old Hen, and
moistning her food with some drops of it for a Week, about the sixth day she
began to moult her Feathers by degrees, till she became stark naked; but before
a fortnight was past, she began to regain others, which when they were come to
their full growth, appeared fairer, and better colored then the first; And he
added, That besides that, her crest was raised, she also laid more Eggs, then
she was wont. And as to the Primum Ens of the greater Scrophularia, by the
relater himself, though he ascribed not to it any renovating power, as to that
of Balm or Celandine, yet he assured me, he had found it enobled, by other
great and extraordinary Virtues. But of this kind of Preparation, I might ere
now, possibly, have been able to give You a better account, if in my trials
about them, I had not met with some unhappy accidents, which I hope my next
attempts will escape: which if they do, I may possibly, with an account of
them, send You one of some attempts to prepare the like Medicines another and
shorter way, together with a consideration, whether Paracelsus and others
deservedly call such accidents as the abovementioned change of Nails Hair, and
even of Teeth a real renovation or rejuvenessence.]

It Is likewise a way of preparation, differing enough from those that are
common among Chemists, which Helmont (as he says out of commiseration to the
sick) delivers, where he teaches that which he calls the Via Media of making
the Elixir Proprietatis, In tractatulo cui titul. sequuntur ^uaedam
Imperf^ctio^a.
of which he gives us this commendation: Hoc medicamine tam Quartanam, quam
continuam statim absolvi. Adeo ut qui noctu susceperat sacresanctum viaticum,
and olei extremam unctionem, me in prandio convivam circa lectum habuerit. And
though many think, that he has rather fraudulently, then rightly set the
process down; yet experience has invited me to absolve him in this particular.
(Though I must tell You, that because a Languid heat is not sufficient to make
a Spirituous liquor ascend and circulate as he requires; it is not every
Chemist, that will, especially in his first trials, avoid the breaking of the
Glasses, or at least the burning of the materials, to which accidents this
preparation is very obnoxious, if it be not as well watchfully as skilfully
made.) And though for my part, I have scarce used this Elixer but as a Cordial;
yet I know some very expert Physicians, that have given it with great success
in diverse difficult cases, and particularly a Friend of the younger Helmonts
gives it so succesfully, that partly his Patients, and partly others that have
tried it, have sometimes taken of him, at a great rate, whole Pounds in a Year
or too; and yet I know by his own confession, that, besides the skill he
emploies in making it dexterously, he adds nothing but one Ingredient, to which
I confess, I am not apt to ascribe any considerable part of the efficacy of the
Medicin^; which, when made, he sometimes perfumes by cohobations with Musk, and
Amber.

And Pyrophilus, that you may not wonder, that I, who think much of Helmonts
Theory scarce intelligible, and take great exceptions at many things in his
writings, should yet now and then commend Medicines upon his Authority, I must
here confess to you once for all, that (always excepting his extravagant
piece, De magnetica vulnerum curatione,) I have not seen cause to disregard
many things he delivers, as matters of fact, provided they be rightly
understood; having not found him forward to praise Remedies without cause,
though he seem to do it sometimes without measure, and having more then once,
either known, or even had, considerable effects of Medicines he commends, which
one of the happiest Practitioners I have met with, and one not lavish in
extolling Chymicall Remedies has solemly assured me, he has generally, though
not always, found more then ordinarily effectual. And upon occasion of this
odd preparation of the Elixir Proprietatis, I shall add that, Since
Experience shows us, by what is daily done in Chymicall Laboratories, that
upon the operation of the fire upon several Concretes, substances of Nature
oftentimes very differing both from the body that afforded them, and from one
another, may be obtained; as the Oils, and fixed Salts, even of cold Plants or
Hot: Since also, by the mixture of active Bodies new Concretes, endowed with
new qualities, may be produced; as we see that Saccharum Saturni emergeth from
the conjunction of Lead, with the Acid Salt, distilled Vinegar; and Since too
the same Concrete, according to the differing manners, after which it is
handled, may acquire differing Qualities, as is clear in the various Medicines,
afforded us by Quicksilver, and by Antimony, according as each of them is
ordered; I cannot but think, that if Chemistry did no more then assist us, by
the resolution of bodies, to extricate their more active parts, and, partly by
such resolutions, and partly by associating bodies together, to alter the
former texture of Natures Productions, or present us with new Concretes of new
Textures; by this very means, if men want not Curiosity, and Industry to vary
and prosecute experiments, there must necessarily arise such a store of new and
active Medicines, that in all probability, many of them will be found endowed
with such Virtues, as have not been, at least in that degree, met with in the
usual Medicines, whether simple or compound, to be bought in Apothecary shops;
and consequently, even without any notable discovery, or improvement of
Principles, Chemists, (even as matters now stand with them) may considerably
add to the Pharmaceutical part of Physic. But if the Operations of Chemistry
were seriously inquired into, and thoroughly understood, I make little doubt,
but by a skillful application of them, and especially by a series of them, in a
rational and orderly way, succeeding one another, there may be found out a
great many preparations of Remedies, both very differing from the common ones,
and far more noble then they. And to make this seem probable, I need but repeat
some of the examples formerly mentioned; To which I shall add now, that
Experience has informed me there is a way, whereby firmer consistent
substances, belonging to the bodies of Animals, may without the addition of any
extraneous matter, and without any violence of heat, be reduced almost totally
into Liquor, and if I much misremember not, these Liquors without any violence
of heat, afford their Spirituous and Saline parts, in a very gentle heat, and
that before their Phlegm. And I must peculiarly inculcate this, That if we had
but a few potent Menstruums, to dissolve and unlock bodies with, I scarce know
what might not be done in Chemistry. But when I speak of noble Menstruums, I
mean not such as work like the generality of Corrosives, and the like Acid or
Saline Liquors, which work but upon few kinds of bodies, and soon coagulate, or
exantlate themselves by working, and thereby become unfit for future
operations; but I mean such as either are separable with all their efficacy
from the dissolved Body; as is said of the Alkahest, or such Saline or other
piercing Liquors, as not being precisely either Acid, Urinous, or Alcalizate
can resolve a great variety of Concretes, without having their Virtue, I say
not impaired, but destroyed thereby; and unlock Mineral bodies, far more then
vulgar Menstruums, (as for instance by volatilizing them, or else making them
irreducible, or working the like grand changes in them:) and if it be not quite
separated from the dissolved Body, is yet so friendly to Humane Nature, as to
be free from either fretting, or other such dangerous and offensive Qualities,
and rather to be of it self a powerful Medicine. I should therefore exhort
both You, and such other ingenious persons, as wish the advancement of
Chemistry, and Physic, (I might possibly add Natural Philosophy too) to apply
their Chemical attempts, chiefly to the finding out of Noble Menstruums, for by
being possessor but of one of these, a Man may be able to do a great number of
things, that otherwise are not to be performed; As one of our ordinary
Goldsmiths, by the bare knowledge he has of Aquafortis, can make many useful
Experiments, about Silver, and Gold, that before that Menstruum was found out,
all the Men of his profession in the World, were never able in many ages to
compass. Nor do I much wonder at that advise, which Helmont gives those that
aim at the improvement of Physic, in these Words: Helm. de febr. cap. 5. number.
26.
Quod si ad istud ignis arcanum non pertingatis (he was speaking of a
prodigious, not to say incredible Liquor) discite saltem, salem Tartari reddere
volatilem, ut hujus medio vestras solutiones perficiatis. Qui etsi sua soluta,
anatice homogenea deserat, digestus in nobis: illorum tamen aliquot vires
mutuatus est, quos intra defert, plurimorum morborum do^itrices. For concerning
this Salt, he not only elsewhere says: Helm. de feb^. ca^. 17. verse. f^acm.
Dicam saltem pro ingenuis, quod Spiritus Salis Tartari, si unicornu, argentum,
hydrargyrum, lapides cancrorum, vel aliquod e simplicibus dissolverit, nedum
febrim, sed and plures affatim morbos sanet, etc. But in another place he gives
us, together with some account of its way of working, this great and
comprehensive commendation of it. Mirum sane, says he, quantum sal Tartari,
vel unicum, volatile factum, Helm. de scholar. Humo^ista. pass, decept. cap. 2.
numero 89.
non praestiterit: Nam omnem e venis amurcam detergit and obstruentium
contumaciam, dispergitque apostematum suscepta conciliabula. De hoc salis (and
non olei) spiritu, verum est illud Paracelsi, quod quocunque non attigerit
vixalius potentior perveniet. These passages I should not think worth
transcribing and laying together, but that I find that besides the concurrent
Testimonies of Helmont, Paracelsus, and Basilius in prase of this Salt, the
generality of the more inquisitive Chemists, without excepting the more sober
and judicious, do, by the various and painful, though fruitless, attempts
they have made to Volatilize Salt of Tartar, conspire in acknowledging it a
thing highly worth laboring for; nor do I for my part see (whatever some say
to the contrary, and however I have indeed found it more difficult, then
perhaps a Novice in Chemistry would think) it should be impossible, for I have
more then once with ease enough, made Gold it self volatile, though it be
confessed to be the fixest body in the World, and consequently more fixed then
Salt of Tartar, which in an open Vessel, may be in time made to fly away by a
vehement fire; And I have likewise by an unusual Method, that I have elsewhere
delivered, more then once obtained from a mixture of crude Tartar, and two or
three Mineral bodies good store of true Volatile Salt, which I could see no
just cause not to think afforded by the Tartar. But I consesse this may be
rather a volatile Salt of Tartar, then Salt (that is Alcali) of Tartar made
volatile, and therefore the principal thing I mention it for, is to show you,
that Tartar it self, by an unusual way of management, may be b^ought to afford
an unusual kind of Salt. But this I can tell You, that an ingenious
acquaintance of mine, whom notwithstanding my wonted distrusts of Chemists, I
durst credit, affirmed to me, that he had himself seen a true and real Sal
Tartari volatile made of Alcali of Tartar, and had seen strange things done
with it, insomuch that he believed most of the things, that Helmont delivers of
it. For my part I am inclined to think, that Salt of Tartar may be made
volatile, (whether in the form of a Sublimate or a Liquor) by more ways then
one, though not all of them near equally good: and whereas one of the best (if
not the very best) of the ways of volatilizing it, seems to do it principally
with Spirit of Wine, and the great difficulty of that way consists in bringing
this Spirit to associate with the salt: I have seen Salt of Tartar of my own,
brought to that pass, which great Virtousi have long in vain attempted to
bring it unto, namely, to flow readily upon a red hot Iron, and also to take
fire, and burn with a conspicuous flame, besides that when it had been dried by
a smart fire to drive away any parts that did not firmly adhere to it, it would
yet readily dissolve in high rectified Spirit of Wine, which you know Salt of
Tartar will not otherwise do; not to mention the change of its Alcalizate
taste, and other lesser alterations; but what I can further say of this matter,
I must not declare in this place.

And Pyro. That You may not be as many other Virtousi, discouraged from
laboring for noble Menstruums, by the confident persuasion of many, who
believe Angelus Sala and Guntherus Billychius (whom I deny not to have been
Learned Men, but do not take to have been great M^sters of Chymicall Arcana)
fit to determine with Autho^ity, what can, and what cannot be done by
Chemistry, least I say You should be, by such men's inconsiderate severitie,
brought to despair of ever seeing any noble Menstruum, that is not sharp to
the taste, nor of any of the three peculiar kinds of Saline Liquor. (Acid as
Aquafortis Urinous, as the Spirits of Blood, Urine, and other Animal
substances, nor Alcalizate, as Oil of Tartar Per deliquium) I shall assure
you, that to my own knowledge there is in the World a kind of Menstruum, that
consists of a pure Chryst^lline substance, that is made by the fire, and as
truly Saline as Salt of Tartar it self, which strange Salt, though well
purified, and readily dissoluble, as well in dephlegmed Spirit of Wine, as
common Water, and though it be totably volatile (whence you may guess of how
Saline a nature it is) and also be either way reducible to a noble Menstruum,
does really taste sweet; I mean not in the Chemical sense, by want of sowerness
(as when they say that the Calces of corroded and precipitated things are
dulcified by frequent ablutions) but by a positive sweetness. And whereas the
vulgar Saline Menstruums, (which alone seem to have been known to Sala and
Billychius) are so specificated, if I may so express it, that what an Acid
Menstruum dissolves, an Alcalizate, or an Urinous will precipitate, and e
converso; And whichsoever you choose of these three sorts of Menstruums, one of
the other two will disarm, and destroy it. I found by tr^al, not only that a
Red Tincture of Glass of Antimony, being drawn with a Menstruum that was but a
degree to this Liquor, I could not precipitate it like our common Tinctures,
either with Spirit of Urine, or an Alcalizate Solution. But that (which is for
more considerable) though it would readily mix with Acid Spirits, as Oil of
Vitriol, with Volatile and Urinous Spirits, as Spirits of Urine it self, and
with Alkalizate Solutions; yet would neither of these three make any Ebullition
at all with it, or seem to work at all upon it. But of such Matters no more at
present.]

CHAP. IX.
YOu will perhaps expect, Pyrophilus, that, Treating of the advantages that may
accrue to the Therapeutical part of Physic, from a more accurate knowledge of
Natural Philosophy; I should tell you with the Chemists, that Chemistry it
self, and much more Physiology in its full extent, is not only capable of
improving the Pharmaceutical part or Preparation of Remedies; (for, that we
have confessed already) but also of affording us a new and much better Methodus
medendi, or skill of using the Helps, that Nature or Art has provided against
Diseases. And indeed the Physicians Art is so difficult, and a man must know so
many things to be, though not tolerably, yet perfectly skilld in it, that it
may without disparagement to Physicians, be thought yet capable of being
improved, if not of being reformed. Hippocrates begins his Aphorisms with a
complaint, that Life is short, but the Art long. And Paracelsus himself, though
he say after his boasting manner, Ars est longa, vita brevis, ubi autem donum
finis (as he speaks) est, ibi ars est brevis, vita verum longa si arti
conferatur: Yet expounding the same words a little above, he says, Itaque
Hippocrates merito de eo conqueritur: nam and asseclis ipsius idem accidit: Ars
medica consistit in Philosophia, Astronomia, Alchymia and Physica, merito
igitur dici potest Artem esse longam. Multum enim requiritur temporis, ad
quatuor has Columnas Medicinae disscendas and perscrutandas. Celsus, who has
been styled Hippocrates Latinorum does more then once call Physic a
Conjectural Art, as particularly in that place where he says, Est enim haec
ars conjecturalis, Lib. 2. c. 6.
neque respondet ei plerumque non solum conjectura sed etiam Experientia. And
well might these great men acknowledge their Art to be difficult, In Praefa^^^,
Lib. 1.
since the two Instruments (as Galen calls them) of finding Arts, being
Judgment and Experience, Hippocrates gives this Character of them; (...). And
that Experience may be uncertain without the Theory of Physic, he that so
much builds upon Experiments, Paracelsus himself seems to confess where
expounding those words of Hippocrates, he says, Hoc modo se habuit: Medicina
in Principio, ut nullam Theoriam habuerit, sed solum Experientiam hoc laxare,
hoc constipare, quomodo autem and cur, id ignoratum fuit: ideo unus salvatus
est, alter perditus, nunc autem, etc. And concerning the Critical part of
Physic (to allude to Hippocrates his expression) Galen who exercised his
reason so much about it tells us, that Per rationem judicium haud quaquam
facile existit, In Commentar. Apho^is. 2.
sed, si quid aliud, maximam habet difficultatem. And to confirm the difficulty
of finding the best way of employing reason to the cure of Diseases, not only
by the Authority of Galen, but his Arguments; Let me inform you, that after
having told us how difficult a thing, and how rarely to be found is that
reason, which considers, and determines what on every occasion is to be done,
Neque enim (adds he) si veritas esset inventu facilis, tot ac tanti viri in ea
quaerenda occupati, in tam contrarias sectas fuissent unquam dispertiti. And
Paracelsus, whatever he often elsewhere boastingly affirms of himself, yet
handsomely enough both expresses and confesses the difficulty of being a good
Physician, in one of his Prefaces to the Students of Physic, where he says,
Non Titulus, non Eloquentia, non Linguarum peritia, Pa^acelsus in his P^eface
to his Be^theona, or Chirurgia Mi^o^.
nec multorum Librorum lectio (and si hac non parum exornant) in Medico
consideranda, sed summa rerum ac Mysteriorum cognitio, quae una facile aliorum
omnium vices agit. Rhetoris quidem est diserte posse loqui ac persuadere atque
judicem in suam sententiam trahere. Medici autem affectuum genera, causas ac
(...) novisse, and iis insuper sagacitate ac industria Pharmaca applicare,
atque pro cujuslibet ingenio ac ratione vel cunctis mederi: But though,
Pyrophilus, after the acknowledgments made by such great men of the almost
insuperable difficulty of their Art, you would perhaps think it no great
presumption, if a man should attempt to innovate in any part of it, and
consequently even in the Methodus medendi: Yet Pyrophilus, I am much too young,
too unlearned, and to unexperienced, to dare to be dogmaticall in a matter of
so great moment. And the Physicians are a sort of men, to whose Learned
Writings on almost all subjects, the Commonwealth of Learning is so much
beholden, that I would not willingly dissent from them, about those notions in
their own profession, wherein they seem generally to agree; And do very much
disapprove the indiscreet practice of our common Chemists and Helmontians, that
bitterly and indiscriminately rail at the Methodists instead of heartily
acquiescing in those manifest Truths, their Observations have enricht us with,
and civilly, and modestly showing them their Errors where they have been
mistaken. And yet, Pyrophilus, Since diverse of the eminentest Methodists
themselves have more then once ingeniously acknowledged to me, and seriously
deplored with me, the incompleatnesse of their Art, (which perhaps made (that
Learned Prince) the Late King tell them, that they were at best but good
guessers) and since about diverse particular dise^s^^ we have observed, the
Method of some of the most reputed Doctors in England (which yet, I think, is
at this day as well stored with Learned Men of that profession, as any part of
Europe) not only very differing, but repugnant to each other; I suppose we may
without disrespect to their profession, dissent from the most of them about
those cases, about which they are reduced to disagree so much among themselves.
And it would be worth an impartial disquisition, whether, since the Methodus
medendi ought to be grounded on and accommodated to the Doctrine of Diseases,
the new Anatomical discoveries formerly mentioned, and others not yet published
do not by innovating diverse things in Pathology, require some alterations and
amendments in the Methodus Medendi? But in this particular, I dare yet affirm
nothing, and therefore shall proceed to observe to you, that the unusual
efficacies of new remedies, may probably make the Method of curing more
compendious, because (as I lately also intimated) one Medicine may be so richly
Qualified, as to answer several intentions, which in the common way, require
diversity of Helps and Remedies. Thus, for instance in the Cure of the
King's Evil, by the received Method, the Physician must propose to himself
several scopes (suited to several indications) and prosecute them successively
with distinct and appropriated Remedies. But I have (as I formerly also told
you to another purpose) known a single Specifique Simple, given only in small
Beer, in not very many days, without any sensible Evacuation, wast the peccant
humor, appease the pains (which before were very great) and discuss the
unbroken Tumors, and heal the broken ones. Thus, according to the known
Method, the great Remedy in Plurisies is copious Blood-letting, which is
strictly prescribed even to Aged persons and teeming Women, by the famousest of
our Practitioners, and, I confess, not irrationally, where the Physician is
furnished but with vulgar Remedies: and yet by some Helmontian Medicines, we
have known Plurisies cured even in young men, without Phlebotomy, and our
selves some while since made a succesful trial of that Nature in a young
Gentleman not unknown to you, which I mention not, with Helmont, to reject or
so much as to disparage Phlebotomy in this disease (for so it be moderate and
seasonable Experience shows it frequently proves useful) nor as if we had
observed all Helmonts boasted Remedies (though for the most part good ones) to
be constantly succesful; but to give you an instance of the truth, of what I
was saying before, That new and more generous Remedies may so far alter the
received Methodus Medendi, as to make diverse of its prescriptions unnecessary.
Of this truth, Pyrophilus, another instance might be afforded us by the
Rickets, a new and abstruse Disease, at least as is supposed, and sometimes so
stubborn, that one of the famousest Physicians in Europe, (whom I think I need
not name) has not been able of late to cure it in several of his own Children.
And yet I suppose you may have heard that Excellent Person your Mother, several
times mention her having performed diverse cures (some of them improbable
enough) of this Disease, barely by that slight preparation of Colcothar, lately
taught you, and presented Her by us; And by which (we having made and
distributed, at Her desire, a considerable quantity of it) several other
Persons have freed Children from that disfiguring Sickness: Of which, but few
Months since, your little Cousin D. being sick almost past hope, was a while
since brought out of danger, by Gods blessing upon some of the same Remedy,
wherewith we presented her Mother, together with our persuasions to try it on
her own Child, as she had successfully done on the Children of diverse others.
And yet this Remedy (to add that upon the By, in favor of something to be
said anon) works almost insensibly, save that in many bodies it is, especially
at first, diaphoretique. And this property of ^^at Remedy minds me to add,
that it would not be amiss for Physicians, to consider whether or no (However,
Bleeding, Purging, Vomiting, Issues, Glisters, Scarifications, and those other
painful ways of Evacuation be not (however Chemists are too bitterly and
unreservedly wont to reject them) to be altogether condemned and laid aside,
yet) there may not in some particular diseases and bodies be found more gentle,
and yet effectual ways of discharging Nature of that which offends her, then
those painful and debilitating ones, which we have mentioned (without the use
of one of the chief of which namely Phlebotomy we see that almost all kind of
Diseases are cured in Children.) The contributing to render the ways of Cure
less painful and weakening, would gratify so great a part of those who may need
Physic, that I hope you will easily pardon my spending some Pages to that
purpose. I consider then, that oftentimes the peccant matter, though very
offensive by its qualities, is much lesser then is supposed, in quantity, and
might, if we were but Masters of Specifique Remedies, either be breathed out by
insensible transpiration, or carried off by Sweat or Urine, without tormenting,
or weakening the Patient, by those other copious Evacuations of grosser Matter,
which are always troublesome and painful enough, though not always effectual:
Nay that even in Surgery it self, if those that practice it were as knowing
as Nature has been bountiful, there would not be so often a necessity as it is
commonly supposed there is of mutilating or tormenting the Patient to recover
him. You cannot doubt, unless You will deny what Gulielmus Piso affirms, upon
his own Observation, of the Cures done by the illiterate Indian Empericks. The
passage You have seen already; But to it he adds so notable and ingenious an
acknowledgment, that I cannot but honor him for it, and be willing to make way
for the Credibility of a good part of what we are hereafter to deliver, in this
discourse, by premising it. Immo (continues he) ex venenatorum fungorum
aliorumque toxicorum esu, solo potu infusi recentis radicis Jaborandi in
instanti a letho vindicatos, me aliisque Galeni Nepotibus haud parum pudore
suffusis, post tot alexipharmacorum and theriacalium Antidotalium irritos
conatus. Ita ut postea ejusmodi collegas barbaros subinde mihi adjungi passus
sim, non adeo quidem nostratium valetudinem ad tactum arteriarum moderari quam
dictis modis consilii copiam praebere solitos. Thus far he: Which premised,
let us proceed to consider, more particularly, some of the less painful ways
of freeing men from Diseases.

CHAP. X.
THat great Cures may be done by bare outward Applications, You will scarce
deny, Franciscus Bernius, Donzellinus, Ernestus Burgravius, who commend it upon
their own experience, besides very many that commend in general terms.
if you dis-believe not the Relations which are made us, by Learned Men,
concerning the Efficacy of the Lapis Nephriticus, only, bound upon the Pulses
of the Wrist's (chiefly that of the left Hand) against that stuborn and
anomulous Disease the Stone: And that which gives the more credit to these
Relations is, That not only the Judicious De Lapid: and Gemm: lib: 2. cap: 11.
Anselmus Boethius de Boot seems to prize it, but the Famous Monardes professes
Himself not to write by Hearsay, of the great Virtues of this Indian Stone,
but to have made trial of it Himself upon persons of very high Quality: And
that which is related by Nicolaus Monardes de simpli: Ind: Histor: Cap: seu
Tit: 20.
Monardes is much less strange, then those almost incredible things which are
with many ci^cumstances delivered of that Stone, by the Learned Chemist De
Nephrit: lib: 1. cap. 24. where he has nine or ten Observations which he calls
Observationes rarae and inauditae de Lap: Nephritico.
Untzerus. And although it must be acknowledged, That some Stones, that go
under that name, have been ineffectually applied in Nephritick Distempers, Yet
the accurate Johannes de Laet Himself, furnishes us with an Answer to that
Objection, informing us that many of those Nephritick Stones (which differ much
in Color, though the best are wont to be greenish) although not at all
Counterfeited, or Sophisticated, are of little or no Virtue. But that yet there
are some others of them which can scarce be d^stinguished from the former, but
by trial upon Nephritick persons, which are of wonderful Efficacy, as he
Himself has more then once tried in his own Wife. Garcias ab Orta (lib: 1.
cap: 53.) mentions a Stone, found in Balagat, De Gem: and Lapidibus lib. 1.
cap. 23.
called Alaqueca; of which he tells us, That though it be cheap, Hujus tamen
virtus (to use his own words) reliquarum Gemmarum facultates exuperat, quippe
qui sanguinem undiquaque fluentem illico sistat. Monardes (cap: 35.) relates
the great Virtues of a Stone against Hystericall Suffocations, and concludes,
Cum uteri Suffocationem imminentem praesentiunt, adhibito lapide subito
levantur, and si eum perpetuo gestant (Hysterici) nunquam simili morbo
corripiuntur, exempla hujusmodi faciunt ut his rebus fidem adhibeam. The same
Author in the next Chapter, treating of the Lapis Sanguinaris, or Blood Stone,
found in new Spain, (having told us, that the Indians do most confidently
believe, that if the Flesh of any Bleeding part be touched with this Stone, the
Bleeding will thereby be stanched) adds this memorable Observation of his own,
Vidimus nonnullos haemorrhoidum fluxu afflictos remedium sensisse, annulos ex
hoc lapide confectos in digito continue gestando; nec non and Menstruum fluxum
sisti. And of the formerly mentioned Lapis Porcinus, the Experienced Bontius
(having mentioned how the Indians give the Wine wherein it has been steeped,
against the Disease called Cholera; which is as much and as justly feared, by
the Islanders of Java, as the Plague is in Holland) adds this memorable
passage, Pragnantibus tamen hic lapis non been datur; nam abortum provocare
adeo certum est, ut foeminae Malaicae mihi retulerint ut si quando Menstrua
eorum purgatio non been procedat, si saltem hunc lapidem manu gestent
juvamentum se inde sentire. And the relations, Pyrophilus, that I may in
another place present You with, concerning the wonderful Stone, formerly
mentioned, with which your Grandfather performed such eminent Cures,
(particularly of the Stone in the Lord of Falkland, then Deputy of Ireland, and
others, to whose Backs it was applied) will, I suppose, make You the more
readily give credit to the Relations of the Authors we have newly mentioned.
What Monardes mentions of the Virtue of the Lapis Sanguinaris, to Cure
Haemorrhoidal Fluxes, puts me in mind of a yet much stranger thing, which
Helmont affirms, Helm. de Febr. cap. 2.
namely, That he could make a Metal, of which, if a Ring were worn, the pain
of the Haemorrhoids would be taken away, in the little time requisite to recite
the Lords prayer; and within twenty four Hours the Haemorrhoids themselves, as
well internal as external, how protuberant so ever, would vanish, and the
restagnant Blood would (as he speaks) be received again into favor, and be
restored to a good condition. The same Ring he also commends in the suffocation
and irregular motion of the Womb, and diverse other Diseases: But if Paracelsus
be in any case to be credited in an unlikely matter, We may think, by his very
solemn Protestations, that he speaks upon his own experience; That he had a
Ring made of a Metalline substance, by him called Electrum, (which, by his
description, seems to be a mixture of all the Metals joined together under
certain Constellations) which was of far greater Virtue then this of Helmont;
For, hoc loco (says he) non possum non indicare admirandas quasdam vires
virtutesque electri nostri, Paracels. in Archidox Magic. lib. 5.
quas fieri his nostris oculis vidimus, adeoque cum bona veritatis conscientia
proferre attestarique possumus. Vidimus enim hujus generis annulos, quos qui
induit, hunc nec spasmus convulsit, nec Paralysis corripuit, nec dolor ullus
torsit, similiter nec apoplexia, nec epilepsia invasit. Et si annulus hujusmodi
Epileptici digito annulari, etiam in paroxysmo saevissimo, insertus fuit,
remittente ilico paeroxismo, aeger a lapsu ilico resurrexit. etc. But to take
notice of some other outward Remedies. To our present Theme belongs that noble
Cure, De Operat. Chirurg p. 1. cap. 51.
performed by the Famous and experienced Fabritius ab Aquape^dente; who tells
us, That he Cured a man of a Scirrhus Lienis, and a Dropsy, by the long use of
Sponges, moistened with strong common Lime Water, and then expressed and worn
upon the Spleen; notwithstanding the Muscles of the Abdomen, and all the other
parts that ly betwixt the applied Spong and the part affected. And to this we
may add, the strange Cures mentioned by Kircherus; and confirmed to me, by a
Learned Eye witness, to be frequently performed of very dangerous Diseases, in
that Cave, near Rome, where the Patients being exposed stark naked, and tied
Hand and Foot, upon Beds of Straw; and being by the Sulphurous vapor of the
place and sometimes their own fear, cast into a sweat, are licked well by a
great number of peculiar kind of Serpents that inhabit that Grotta. Moreover,
We oftentimes see Agues Cured by Amulets and Applications to the Wrists. And I
my self was, about two Years since, strangely Cured of a violent Quotidian,
which all the wonted Method of Physic had not so much as abated, by applying
to my Wrists a mixture of two handfuls of Bay Salt, two handfuls of the
freshest English Hops, and a quarter of a Pound of blew Currants very
diligently beaten into a brittle Mass, without the addition of any thing moist,
and so spread upon Linen Cloth and tied about the Wrists. And with the same
Remedies (which yet we have observed sometimes to fail) have diverse others been
cured, both of Quotidian and Tertian Agues: Nay an Eminent Physician gave me,
lately, thanks for the great Effects he had found of it, even in continual
Fevers.

And here, Pyrophilus, I shall not scruple to acquaint You, with my having
sometimes wished, That Physicians had been a little mo^e curious to make
Observations and Trials of the distinct Operations of various Bodies outwardly
applied. For I consider that, in some of them, the subtle Corpuscles, (which
seem to insinuate themselves into the Pores of the Body, and into the Mass of
Blood, with little or no alteration) have much the like Operations with the
Body whence they exhale, taken in at the Mouth. As we see in some Preparations
of Sulphur, which have like Virtues, inwardly given and outwardly applied; and
more manifestly in Cantharides, which I have found, by external application, to
work strangly upon the Bladder, as that they excoriated it when taken into the
Body; and yet more manifestly in Quicksilver, which by inunction may be made
as well to Salivate, as if it were swallowed down. And an eminent Physician
lately complained to me, That washing a Child's scabby Head with a Decoction of
Tobacco, to kill and dry up the Scabs, the Boy was made thereby both sick and
drunk: And Learned Men assure us, That, by some Catharticks outwardly applied,
those may be purged that will not swallow Physic. But other Medicines there
are, which, before they get into the Mass of Blood, are much altered; either in
straining through the Flesh and Membranes of the Body, or in the Digestions
they pass through in the Stomach, and elsewhere: And these may have very
differing Effects, inwardly given and outwardly applied; as, in the formerly
mentioned instance of Hops, Currants and Salt, neither any of the Ingredients
inwardly given, nor the mixture has been (that I know of) noted for any
Febrifugal Virtues. So likewise Turpentine and Soot that inwardly taken are
good for quite other Diseases, (as Plurisies, and Obstructions of the Kidneys)
outwardly applied are the main Ingredients of Pericarpiums, extolled against
Agues. And Mille-folium or Yarrow, besides the Virtues it has inwardly against
Diseases of quite other Natures, being worn in a little Bag upon the tip of the
Stomach, was (as Himself confessed to me) the Secret, against Agues, of a great
Lord, who was very curious of Receipts and would sometimes purchase them at
very great Rates; And a very famous Physician, of my acquaintance, did since
inform me, That he had used it with strange success. I know also a very happy
Physician, who assures me, That he has very often cured, both in himself and
others, the Chilblains when they come to be broken, by barely strowing on the
sore parts the fine powder of Quinces thinly sliced and dried. And who knows
what unexpected Operations diverse other Bodies may have, when outwardly
applied, if various Trials of that Nature were skilfully made; especially,
since we see that (for reasons elsewhere to be considered) some Bodies seem to
have quite contrary Operations, when outwardly applied and inwardly taken. For
we see that Spirit of Wine does, in several cases, allay the inflammation of
the external parts, which given inwardly, would quickly inflame the body. And
our often commended Piso, speaking of a choice Remedy for those Distempers of
the Eyes, that used to trouble Men in Brasil, adds, Idem quoque praestat
manipahera, ex radice Mandihoca, quae licet pota venenosa habeatur (as we
formerly noted out of his and other Testimonies) oculis tamen prodest, visumque
emendat. And if the Simples, to be outwardly applied, be skilfully prepared,
That may much vary and improve their operations. As we see that Vitriol, which
is made of Copper, or Iron corroded by, and Coagulated with Acid Salts, has
outwardly diverse Virtues which crude Copper has not, either outwardly or
inwardly. And Gold D^ssolved in Aqua R^gis, and precipitated with Oil of
Tartar, is inwardly, as far as I can discover, gently Purgative; yet the same
Aurum fulminans being calcined with twice or thrice it is weight of Flovvers
of Brimstone, till the Flores be burnt away, is known to be much commended by
Chemists, and others, for a Diaphoretick. But though, as to any outward Virtues
of the same Powder, Physicians and Chemists are wont to be silent, yet probably
it may have very great ones, as well as quite differing from those it has,
being taken at the Mouth. For I know a Person, that being grievously tormented
with exulcerated Haemorrhoides, a very expert Chemist of my acquaintance, not
knowing what else to do, applied to the part affected, an Ointment consisting
only of Aurum fulminans prepared and fixed by a slight and familiar way (which
you may command) and made up with a little Oil of sweet Almonds, into a
requisite consistence; and though presently upon the application of the Remedy,
the pain for a quarter of an Hour hugely increased, yet soon after it abated,
and the Hemorrhoids the next day were closed, and the day after went away; Nor
has the Patient ever since (that is, for some Years) been troubled with any
thing of Relapse. And the same Physician assures me, that with the like Remedy
he has found a strange effect in Venereal Ulcers. And perhaps to this may be
referred what has been found by some friends of mine, that Phlegm of Vitriol,
and Saccharum Saturni, which not only inwardly given are said much to cool the
Blood, but outwardly applied are good for Burns and hot Humors, do yet
potently discuss cold Tumors. But least you should say, that this diversity
may proceed (at least in part) from the Corpuscles of differing Natures, that
may be imagined in the forementioned Medicines; I shall return to what I was
discoursing of before, and take notice of the Efficacy of some other external
Remedies.

[Since the beginning of this ESSAY, I saw a lusty and very sprightful Boy,
Child to a Famous Chemical Writer, who, as his Father assu^'d me and others,
being by some Enemies of this Physicians, when he was yet an Infant, so
bewitched that he constantly lay in miserable torment, and still refusing the
Breast, was reduced by pain and want of food to a desperate condition, the
experienced Relater of the Story, remembering that Helmont attributes to the
Electum Minerale immaturum Paracelsi the Virtue of relieving those whose
distempers come from Witchcraft, did according to Helmonts prescription hang a
piece of this Noble Mineral about the Infants Neck, so that it might touch the
Pit of the Stomach, whereupon presently the Child, that could not rest in I
know not how many Days and Nights before, fell for a while a sleep, and waking
well, cried for the Teat, which he greedily sucked, from thenceforth hastily
recovering, to the great wonder, both of his Parents, and several others that
were astonished at so great and quick a change. And though I am not forward to
impute all those Diseases to Witchcraft, which even Learned Men Father upon it;
yet its considerable in our present case, that whatsoever were the cause of the
Disease, the Distemper was very great and almost hopeless, and the cure
suddenly performed by an outward application, and that of a Mineral; in which
compacted sort of Bodies, the finer parts are thought to be more locked up.]

Among the proofs of the efficacy of appended Remedies, we must not pretermit
the memorable Examples, that are delivered by the Judicious Boethius de Boot, De
Lapid. and Gem. l. 2. cap. 102.
concerning the Virtues of that sort of Jasper, which is blood red throughout
the whole Body of the Stone, not being mingled with any Color: Testari possum
(says he) me, qui alias lapidibus and geminis tantas vires, quantas vulgus
solet, non tribuo, credibile vix, de Jaspidis viribus, observasse. Nam cum
ancilla fluxu menstruorum ita laborasset per aliquot dies, ut nullo modo sisti
posset, Jaspidem rubram impolitam and rudem femori alligari jussi. Alius (in
eadem Domo) cum in pede vulneratus esset, nec sanguinis fluxus cohiberi posset,
admoto lapide, extemplo impeditus fuit, licet vulnus non tegeretur. To these he
adjoynes a much more memorable Example, of a Maid he cured at Prague, who had
been for six Years sick of an Hemorrhagy so vehement, that there scarce ever
passed a Week, in which she did not several times Bleed, neither could she be
relieved by any Remedies, though she had long used them, till she was quite
tired with them; wherefore our Author setting them all aside, lent her a
Jasper, of whose Virtues in such cases he had made good trial, to hang about
her Neck, which when she did, the flux of Blood presently ceased, and she
afterward for curiosity sake, oftentimes laying aside the Stone, and as often
as she needed it, applying it again, observed, That whereas the flux of Blood
did not presently return upon the absence of the Jasper, but after diverse
Weeks, yet upon the hanging it on again it would presently be stopped, so that
she could not ascribe the relief to any thing but the Stone, by which our
Author tells us, that at length she was quite cured: And speaking of the
praises given by others to Green Jasper speckled with Red, he concludes, Sed
ego, quod multoties expertus sum, refero. But amongst the Operations of
outwardly appended Medicines, I have scarce met with a stranger then that which
the Experienced Henricus ab Here, mentions in the fourteenth of those
Observations which he truly styles Rare, In observa. Medic. oppido raris. page
194.
namely, That a Woman, who had by an unskilful Midwife the Bladder Lacerated,
and thereby been subject to a perpetual Incontinentia Vrinae, and had been
reduced constantly to wear a Silver Pipe, was perfectly helped, by wearing, as
a Gypsy had taught her, a little Bag hung about her Neck, containing the
Powder made of a live Toad, burnt in a New Pot: Which relation I the rather
mention, not only because the Author having tried the Remedy upon a Merchant,
to whom an unskilful Lythotomist had left the like Disease, found it presently
to succeed; But because having been very desirous to have further trial made of
so odd a Remedy, by a curious Physician, he lately gave me this Account of it,
that though in one or two it had failed, yet having given some of the powder to
an inquisitive Person, known to us both, he assured him it had succeeded in two
or three. (and the Disease is too unfrequent, to give occasion to have the
Remedy often tried) And the Physician adds, that one of those Patiens tells him,
(the Physician) That though her infirmity were occasioned by a Laceratio
Vesicae, yet the yet the Remedy helps her as long as she wears it about her, in
case she renew the Powder, when the Virtue of it begins to decay: but that
(which is remarkable to our present purpose) if she leaves it off awhile, she
finds the Disease return. The same Henricus ab Here, among his freshly
commended Observations, has another of a little Lady, whom he concludes to
have been cast into the strange and terrible D^stemper, which he there
p^rticularly Records, by Witchcraft. Upon so severe an examination of the
Symptoms made by himself, in his own House, that if, notwithstanding his solemn
Professions of veracity, he mis-relate them not, I cannot wonder he should
confidently impute so prodigious a Disease to some supernatural cause. But
though the Observation, with its various Circumstances, be very well worth your
perusing; yet that, for which I here take notice of it, is, what he adds about
the end of it, concerning his having cured her, after he had in despair of her
Recovery sent her back to her Parents, by an outward Medicine, namely, an
Ointment which he found extolled against Pains produced by Witchcraft, in a
Dutch Book of Carrichter's: (where also I remember I met with it set down a
little differently from what he delivers) Of which wonderful Ointment, the
Ingredient that he found so extremely difficult to procure, namely, The
Misseltoe of Hazel, being in England not so rare, but that I have more then
once got it, and found it, as he intimates, very green, and (what he mentions
not) extremely bitter, I could wish that those that have the opportunity would
make trial. For besides what Carrichter deliv^rs, and our Author relates of it,
a Learned Physician did highly commend it to the Judicious Gregorius Horsius.
And though, if we allow it to cure bewitched Patients, the virtue that may be
in external Remedies, will be made so much the more conspicuous; yet supposing
the Diseases to be, though strange, yet but natural, we cannot but allow that
there may be a wonderful efficacy in an outward Remedy, since it was able,
only by anointing the Joints, and those pained parts with it, to cure a
radicated Disease, attended with such wonderful and horrid Symptoms. And after
this it may seem but little, what else would appear a strange thing, which
Helmont affirms of a Plaster he had, Helmont, de febr. cap. 14. verse. finem.
wherewith he tells us, That he safely cured hundreds of Quartans, even
Autumnal, without relapse: elsewhere he says, That he made this Plaster, for
by the Circumstances I presume he means no other, of a few resolving and
abstersive things; and adds, Cap. 17. in sine.
That it never failed him, but only that in fat Persons it succeeded more
slowly. And yet in these, and the like ways of curing Diseases, though
approved, if not also commended, by eminent Physicians both Ancient and Modern,
there is no sensible evacuation made of peccant Humors, which perhaps
materially remain in the Body, and may, by the Effluvia of these Remedies, be
deprived of their former Qualities, and made so far obsequious to nature, that
she is able, if need be, to ease her self of them by Sweat, Urine, or
undiscerned transpiration.

And that the peccant Humors remaining for awhile materially in the Body, the
Disease may sometimes be removed, may appear by the Cures which we see now and
then performed of Agues by sudden frights; by which no discernable evacuation
is made of Humors, though probably some considerable change be thereby produced
in the temper of the mass of Blood, or in the Texture of the Morbifick Matter:
(as Physicians call it) As seems probable both from diverse other things
mentioned here and there in this Essay, and particularly from the lately
recited Passage of Helmont, where he takes notice of the rectifying of the
peccant, and, by Nature, rejected Blood, without any sensible evacuation upon
the wearing of His Ring. I knew a Gentleman, a strong and a resolute Man, who
had been long a Soldier, and attained the highest sort of Military
Employments; notwithstanding which, he was strangely fearful of Rats, and could
not endure the sight of them: This Gentleman, having been long troubled with an
obstinate Quartan, and traveled with it into several Countries, without being
able to find any Cure for it, coming at length accidentally and suddenly into
a place where a great Rat was in a corner, whence he could not fly from the
Gentleman, he furiously leaped upon him (yet without biting him) and thereby
put him into a fright, Observe: Cent. 1, Observe; 4^.
which freed him from the Ague that had so long importuned him. And the
experienced Salmuth tells us a pleasant Observation, of one who was cured even
of the Gout by a fright. For this Man having his Feet and Hands covered with a
Poultis, made of Turnips, Flower and Milk, and being left in his Chair in a low
Room, was, whilst his Servants were all gone into the Garden, assaulted by a
Sow, who finding the Door open, and invited by the smell of the Cataplasm, came
to devour it; and striving to do so, flung the sick Man and the Chair to the
Ground, and put him into such a fright, that our Author tells us, That that
very Day his Pains decreased, and continued lessening by degrees, till at
length they wholly left him, without ever returning to trouble him again. There
are diverse Instances that discover what great changes may be produced in the
Body, without taking in any thing visibly at the Mouth. And on the other side a
good Air alone does often, in Consumptions and other Diseases, perform what
has in vain been expected from the use of emptying Physic. It were to be
wished that we had, among our European Physicians, the Physic Books of those
of China; For though our Doctors are much more Learned Men then theirs, yet
probably their Writings and their Practice may teach us something that is new,
and something making for our present purpose. For the famous Jesuit Semedo
informs us, H^story of China, part. 1. chap. 12.
That the Books of our Physicians having not yet been brought to China, they
are instructed in their Art by abundance of their own Writers; and that though
in their practice they do not let Blood (as the Learned Varenius tells us, [ N
B]
That neither do the Japonian Doctors) or set Cupping-glasses, though they use
no Syrrups, nor Potions, nor any Issues, but are only Herbarists, using
nothing but Herbs, Roots, Fruits, Seeds, etc. yet Physic (to use our Authors
Words) is in a very good condition in China. Medicinae faciendae mediocr^m
habent peritiam. -- Aegris salsa, acria, and plura propo^unt, dicente Ma^f^o,
pisces and coachylia Pha^maca suavia and odorata.

[NB] Sanguinem nunquam eliciunt, Magnam Medicorum dignitatem vide^e est ex
Epistola Almeidae ubi narrat, etc. Bern: Varenius, in Descript: Regn: Japon.
Cap. 25.


(as Almeida also tells us, That the Physicians are much esteemed in Japan) And
of the skill of some of the Chinese in that Art, he gives us in the same
Chapter some considerable Instances. And though, as we said it is very likely
that their Doctors are much inferior, in point of Le^rning to ours, yet it is
considerable, that in so vast, so civilized, and so poulous a Country, Physic
can be practiced with reputation, without the use of those Evacuations which
are here so frequently made by Phlebotomy, Potions and Issues. Nor should we
only expect some improvement to the Therapeutical part of Physic, from the
Writings of s^ ingenious People as the Chinese; but probably the knowledge of
Physicians might be not inconsiderably increased, if Men were a little more
curious to take notice of the Observations and Experiments, suggested partly by
the practice of Midwives, Barbers, old Women, Empericks, and the rest of that
illiterate crew, that presume to meddle with Physic among our selves; and
partly by the Indians and other barbarous Nations, without excepting the People
of such part of Europe it self, where the generality of Men is so illiterate
and poor, as to live without Physicians. For where Physic is practiced by
Persons that never studied the Art of it in Schools or Books, many things are
wont to be rashly done, which though perhaps prejudicial, or even fatal to
those on whom they were tried, may afford very good Hints to a Learned and
Judicious Observer: Besides, where the Practitioners of Physic are altogether
illite^ate, there oftentimes Specificks; may be best met with. For such
Persons, being wont, for want of skill in Physic, and part^cularly the Art of
m^xing Simples, and in that of varying their Remedies according to
Circumstances, do almost wholly rely upon Specificks; whose Ve^tues, from their
practice, may be sometimes better gathered, then from that of skilful
Physicians, in regard that those Empericks (besides, that they assist not with
any skill in the Methodus medendi the virtues of their Remedies) are wont, for
the Reasons newly mentioned, to try obstinately, and to the uttermost, the
eff^cts of their few specificks. And the nature o^ their Medicines may be the
better known, in regard they are not wont to blend them, as Learned Men but too
often do, with many other Ingredients, whose Mixture, as we formerly noted,
either alters their nature, or makes it difficult to determine (as Galen
himself in a like case confesses, Gal: in Aphor: Hipp. Comment. 1.
Nam ut verum fateamur haec difficilis quoque res est and rara inventu cum post
multa remedia adhibita agrotanti quod ex iis in causa fuisse dicitur ut melius
pejusve habeat) whether the effect be to be ascribed to what is given for the
specific, or to some other of the Ingredients, or to the whole Compound as
such. The experienced Bontius, in his excellent little Tract De Medicina
Indorum, does more then once confess, That it is very undeservedly that the
Europeans look upon the East Indians as Barbarians. Lib. 2. Dialog: 7.
And even of those among them, that are ignorant of other things, he has this
Passage, Hinc etiam fit quod homines caeteris rebu^ idiotae tam exactam
herbarum and stirpium nanciscantur scientiam ut si vel Doctissimus Pawius,
nostri avi Botanicorum princeps e mortuis resurgens huc veniret, miraretur se
ab hisce hominibus barbaris doceri posse. And Linschoten in his Voyages,
Voyages chap. ^4.
speaking of that F^mous Mart of the East Indies, the City of Goa, where the
Viceroy and the Archbishop resided, and he himself lived: These Heathenish
Physicians (says he, mentioning those of Goa) do not only cu^e their own
Nation and Countrymen, but even the Portugals also; for even the Viceroy
himself, the A^ch-Bishop, and all the Monks and Friars, do put more trust in
them then in their own Countrymen, whereby they get great store of Money, and
are much honored and esteemed. I have not now the leisure to acquaint you with
what I might allege, to confirm this truth out of the practices of the
illiterate Natives of some not yet sufficiently civilized parts of Ireland, and
the Inhabitants of some other places where Physicians have not yet settled: But
I shall mind you of the Confession of Celsus, where speaking of Physic, Haec
nunquam (says he) non est: siquidem etiam imperitissimae gentes herbas aliaque
prompta in auxilium vulnerum morborumque noverunt. Preface, Lib. 1.
And I wish that other Learned Men would imitate the commendable example not
only of Prosper Alpinus, who Writ a Treatise De Medicina Aegyptiorum; and of
Jacobus Bontius, in his Medicina Indorum, but of Gulielmus Piso, who has
lately presented the World with the rude ways of curing, used by the Brasilians
themselves, in his new and curious Books De Medicina Brasiliensi, in the
beginning of the second of which, he much confirms what we have been
delivering, in the ensuing Passage: Piso de Medic; Br^si: Lib: 2. Cap: 1.
Quemadmodum multa in tam crassa Barbary cruda vel corrupta arteque
Hippocratica indigna reperiuntur; sic etia^ non pauca utilissima antiquitatem
redolentia: quae vel eruditissimos medicos ad urnas medicinae subjiciunt,
observanda occurunt. Quippe cum multarum Artium rudimenta vel ab ipsis
Animantibus brutis (quibus benigna matter Natura art insita imprimis curandis
morbis destitui noluit) ad nos redundare fatendum sit; Quis dubitet ab his
mortalibus, licet remotissimis a dogmatica and rationali medendi art, non
plurima nobilissima at secreta remedia atque antidota, medendi morbos veteribus
incognitos quotidie ad posteros derivari? quibus paulatim ad manum traditis and
tandem quasi in succum and sanguinem a rationalibus conversis doctorum scholae
and libri superbiunt? And to this agrees very well that grave saying of our
experienced Harvey, to the very Learned Doctor Ent: Georg: Ent in Epistol:
praefix: Exercit Harvei de Gen: Animal.
Nulla gens tam Barbara est quae non aut fortuito, aut inevitabili quadam
necessitate coacta, aliquid in usum communem adinvenerit quod Nationes alias
humaniores latuit. Nor should we disdain the Remedies of such illiterate
People, only because of their being unacquainted with our Theory of Physic.
For though I will not say, as the old Empericks wittily enough did in that
Passage of Celsus, Requirere etiam, ratio idem doceat quod experientia, an
aliud? Si idem supervacuum esse, si aliud etiam contrarium. But lest we should,
by too great reliance on the Galenical, or other ancient Opinions, neglect
useful Remedies, because presented by Persons that ignore them, and perhaps
too, hold Opinions contrary to them, I shall leave you to consider what is in
the Person of the same Emperical Sect, represented by Celsus, where having
spoken of the darkness of the causes of Things, and the uncertainty of the
Theorems of Physic: Ac nihil istas cogitationes (says he) ad Medicinam
pertinere, eo quoque disci, quod qui diversa de his senserint ad eandem tamen
sanitatem homines perduxerint. Celsi p^^es^tione ad Lib. 1.
Id enim fecisse, quia non ab obscuris causis neque a naturalibus actionibus,
quae apud eos diversae erant: sed ab Experimentis, prout cuique respondeant,
medendi vias traxerint, ne inter initia quidem ab istis quaestionibus deductam
esse medicinam sed ab Experimentis, etc. For though this Sentence ascribes too
little to reason, yet there is something in it that deserves to be considered:
Especially since we observe not that the late Anatomical Discoveries of the
motion of the Chyle and Limphatick Liquor, by formerly unknown ways, in newly
detected Vessels, has yet made Men cure Diseases much better then before. Not
that I think that Anatomical and Pathological Discoveries will not, in process
of time (when the Historia facti shall be fully and indisputably made out, and
the Theories thereby suggested, clearly established) highly conduce to the
improvement of the Therapeutical part of Physic; but yet this Observation may
make it the more reasonable to beware of relying so much upon the yet
disputable Opinions of Physicians, as to despise all Practices, though usually
successful, that agree not with them: For of such our Author speaks well, In
omnibus ejusmodi cogitationibus in utramque partem disseri posse, itaque
ingenium and facundiam vincere: morbos autem non eloquentia sed remediis
curari; quae si quis elinguis usu discreta been norit, hunc aliquanto majorem
medicum futurum quam si, sine usu, linguam suam excoluerit. And Paracelsus
spoke well too, if he spoke truly, when in one of his Prefaces, speaking to
those whom he invited to hear him expound his Books of Phyfick and Chyrurgery
at Basil, Illos tamen (says he of the formerly mentioned Books) non aliorum
mo^e ex Hippocrate aut Galeno, aut quibuslibet emendicatus, sed quos summa
rerum doctrina, experientia atque labor assequut us sum, proinde si quid
probaturus experimenta, ac ratio, auctorum loco, mihi suffragantur.

It would, Pyrophilus, I fear, be tedious to trouble you here with all that I
have met with in good Authors applicable to my present subject, and the Design
I have been prosecuting in favor of external Remedies: But yet one Passage
there is, which does so notably confirm what we have delivered, as well
touching the Efficacy of simple Medicines, as the great cures that may, in
diverse cases, be performed by outward Applications, that I must not here omit
the mentioning of it, as I find it in the Epistle Written out of Peru to the
inquisitive Monardes, in these words: In urbe Posto, P^trus de Osma in E^ist.
ad Monard. quae erstat. in libello de simplicibus medicamentis ex Occidentali
India delatis.
ubi aliquot annis vixi, omnis generis morbos Indus quidam curabat solo
cujusdam Plantae succo artubus and parti affectae illito. Aegros deinde
stragulis egregie tegebat ad sudorem provocandum: Sudor e partibus illitis
emanans, merus sanguis erat, quem lineis pannis abstergebat, atque ita in
curatione pergebat, donec satis sudasse putaret, optimis interea cibis eos
alens. Eo Remedio multi morbi deplorati curabantur, imo agri juniores and
robustiores ab ejus usu fieri videbantur; sed neque pretio, neque precibus,
neque minis unquam ^fficere potuimus, ut eam plantam nobis demonstraret.

CHAP. XI.
BUt, Pyrophilus, besides such external Medicines as work after the manner of
those I have heretofore mentioned, we may possibly without absurdity, provided
we do it without cre^ulity, enquire, Whether there may not be a sort of others
that operate, in a more wonderful and extraordinary way? And it would not
perhaps be altogether unworthy the Experiment, to try whether or no, there may
not sometimes be performed, such cures as are wont to pass, either for Fabulous
or Magical; some of them being to be done without exhibiting, or applying any
thing immediately to the Patient, and others by some such unknown ways as those
which Chemists call, either Magnetism, or Transplantation: such as are the
cures reported to be performed by the Weapon-salve, and Sympathetick Powder,
and such as is that cure of the Yellow Jaundice (mentioned with some variation
by Paracelsus) wh^rein seven or nine cakes (for it must, forsooth, be an odd
number) are made up with the newly emitted and warm Urine of the Patient, and
the Ashes of Ashwood, and buried for some days in a Dunghill. For it is not
only by the easy and superstitious vulgar, that the possibility of performing
such cures, by transplantation, or some other Magnetical way (as they are
pleased to call it) has been believed; For within the compass of my own
slender reading, I find that diverse Eminent Physicians, have both made use of,
and commended Magnetical Remedies.

What is to be thought of the Sympathetick Powder; I confess I am as yet in
doubt, but however I shall take this occasion to inform you, That a very honest
Gentleman, whom his Pen has made known to a great part of the Learned Men, and
Virtuosi in Europe, complaining often to me, that though he were much troubled
with, that sad disease, the Stone in the Bladder, yet he was more incessantly
tormented with an Ulcer he had in the same part (all the searching Medicines
that he took to dissolve, as he hoped, the Stone, exasperating the Ulcer:) I
one day advised him to make trial of the Powder of Sympathy, upon some of the
Ulcerous Matter he voided with his Urine; the Remedy being such, as if it had a
Magnetic Virtue, might do him good, and if it had none, could not prejudice
him; a while after, I received both from him in a Letter, and from his
Physician very great thanks for the advice; the Patient having since the use of
the Powder, been eased of the distinct pain he was put to by the Ulcer, and
this relief lasted, if I misremember not, above a Year, and how much longer I
know not. But I shall not insist either upon this, or upon the Testimonies and
Relations of Paracelsus, Helmont, Goclenius, Burgravius, nor even the modern
Roman Doctor Servius, nor any of the other Authors that do professedly take
upon them the defense of the Weapon-Salve, by reason of what we have elsewhere
to Write to you, by way of Examination of that Salve, and the Sympathetick
Powder, though I deny not in some Trials, I have found them unavailable; Yet
besides what I have newly related, I have seen sometimes something follow upon
the use of the Symathetick Powder, that did incline me to think, that sometimes
it might work Cures. But I shall alleadg something of more unsuspected credit,
and first Dominicus Panarola now Professor of Physic at Rome in his newly
divulged Fasciculus Arcanorum presents us two instances to our present purpose,
Panarola Fase: Arcan. 1.
in these wor^s. Mira (says he) quotidie reperiuntur in Medicina ad
confirmationem operis quod Doctissimus Physicus, Petrus Servius (the same we
lat^ly mentioned) complevit de unguento armario, sciendum ^st, quod petia
sanguine imbuta sub cineribus calidis posita menses sistit experimento pluries
comprobata: quin etiam Magister meus Petrus Castellus whose name his late
Anatomy of the Civet Cat, and other Writings have made Famous) ajebat se
expertum fuisse Hemorrihoides, si tangantur tuberosa radice Chondrilla,
siccari, si Chondrilla siccetur; corrumpi vero si corrumpatur: Centur. 3.
Observat. 34.
quapropter sub Camino exsiccanda ponitur, post hujusmodi tactum Chondrilla
tuberosa. The Learned Salmuth in his Observations furnishes us with an Example
of a most violent pain of the Arm, removed by Transplantation: They did beat
up Red Corals with Oaken leaves, and having kept them on the part affected,
till suppuration; they did in the Morning put this mixture into an Hole bored
with an Auger in the Root of an Oak, respecting the East, and stopped up this
Hole with a Peg, made of the same Tree, from thenceforth the pain did
altogether cease, and when they took out the Amulet, immediately the torments
returned sharper then before. A great and excellent Lady (a near Kinsvvoman,
Pyrophilus, of yours and mine) and very far from credulous, confessed to me, as
did her servants also, that with the above mentioned Remedy of Ashes and
Urine, she was not only once cured of the Yellow Jaundice, by a Friend of hers
that had observed, that she had been fruitlesly vexed by a Tedious course of
Physic, prescribed by the famousest Doctor then in England; but that
afterward relapsing into that same Disease she had cured her self by the same
Remedy. I remember, that being some years since brought almost to the brink of
the Grave by a sudden effusion of Blood within my Body, from which without a
signal mercy of God, I should not have recovered, among other men skilled in
Physic that came to assist me, in that danger, I was visited by a Galenist of
much repute, whose pale looks inviting me to enquire what it was that ailed
him, he answered me, That he had not long before been desperately sick of an
obstinate Marasmus, which notwithstanding all the Remedies he could use, did
daily so consume him, that he appeared but a Skeleton, whereupon having found
the uneffectualness of ordinary Remedies, and being hopeless of being relieved
by them, he resolved to try a Sympathetick Medicine, which I remember my self
to have met with in Hartman. He took then an Egg, and having boiled it hard in
his own warm Urine, he with a Bodkin perforated the shell in many places, and
then buried it in an Anthil, where it was left to be devoured by the Emmets,
and as they wasted the Egg, he found his distemper to lessen, and his strength
to increase, insomuch that he now conceived his Disease to have quite left him.

The Experienced Riverius in his last Observations (newly published since his
Death) has two notable Examples to our present purpose. For River. C^nt. 4.
O^ser. 63
first, he tells us, that the eldest Daughter of a great Officer in France, was
so tormented with a Paronychia for four days together, that the pain made her
pass the night sleepless; whereupon having by Riverius his order, put her
Finger into a Cats Ear, within two hours she was delivered from her Pain, and
her whole hand, which before was Tumid, unswell'd again; except the Finger,
which it self was out of Pain. River. Cent. 4. Observe. 19.
The other case was of a Counselors Wife, who by the same Remedy was cured of
a Panaritium (which had for four days vexed her) in a much shorter time then
the other, namely within a quarter of an Hour. But that which chiefly makes
these stories pertinent to our present occasion, is this notable Circumstance,
that in both these cases, the Cat was so manifestly put to pain, that Riverius
thought it had attracted to it self the morbifick matter from which it freed
the Patient; For in the former of these two cases, the Cat loudly complained of
the pain he felt, and in the other, was, in that short time the cure was in
performing, put to so much pain in his Ear, that two men were hardly able to
hold him fast, he struggled so forcibly. And these two relati^ns of Riverius,
may, though there be some disparity in the cases, give some countenance to what
might otherwise be distrusted in the Observations of the Industrious In
Historiar. and Observe. 3. Medico-^hysicar. Cent. 3. Observe. 28.
Petrus Borellus, where he says, Podagra mire levatur, si catelli cumpodagrico
recumbant, morbum enim contrahunt adeo ut vix incedere queant; Aeger vero
levamen suscipit. Which perhaps he may have been induced to write by the story
that goes of, that odd Chemist, Robert Fludd's having transplanted the Gout of
one of his Patients, by making him often sleep, with a Dog that was fond of
him, who thereby became afterward subject to such periodical fits of the Gout,
as the Master had been troubled with.

[And since I begun this Chapter, and met with these Observations, discoursing
of this matter with a judicious person, well skilled in Physic, and whom his
learned Writings have made Eminent, He told me, that he had not very many
Months since, seen a Cure by Transplantation, performed on the Son of one that
was wont to make Chemical Vessels for me: and because the Observation is
considerable, that there might be no mistake in it, he was pleased to set it me
down in writing (attested with his annexed name) which enables me to present it
you in his own words, namely: N. N. of N. Potter, had a Son, who was long
sick of the Kings Evil, which swelled much, and broek into sores at last, which
he could by no ordinary means heal. The old Man had then a Dog, which took an
use of licking the soars, which the Dog continued so long, till he w^sted the
very kernels of the Ulcers that were knit in with the Veins, and perfectly
cured the sore, but had the swelling transplanted to himself, so that he had
hereupon a great swelling, that a^ose and continued on his Throat. The Lad was
hereby freed, and so continued to be till 1660, and for ought I know, is so
this day. This I saw being there at that time to view the Clayes, and bespeak
Retorts of the old man. Some yea^s si^^e the present ESSAY was written, I
light^d on the 66th O^se^vation of the industrious Bartholinus 3 Century, and
the 53 Obs^rvation of his 6 Century, in both which places giving instances of
the Transplantation of Diseases he mentions, besides some of those Examples
delivered by us, diverse others; for which I am willing to refer you to the
alleged places, only in the last of those Observations deliver^ng some^hing as
upon his own knowledge (which he does not in the r^st of the instances.) that
much confirm^s wh^t we have mentioned concerning Fludd. We shall annex it in
his own words, In Catello Milesio Avi nostri materni, quem jam alit in aedibus
suis Av^n^ulus meu^ suspiciendus M. J^c^lus F^^ckius Phys P.P. and Academi^e
nostrae senior, evidentius haec pat^it trah^ndi facultas. Co^ico dolor to^q
^ebatur Avunculus, Canis ventri impositus quum incalui^let, u^gebat ex^tum,
vomuit veheme^ter et To^mina colica Avunc^li re^^serunt. Ancilla ejusdem in
dolor dentium ^un^^m canem g^n^s apposuit, sens^tque levamen, sed canis
do^orum impat^entia h^nc inde curs^ta^e et lat^a^e. Idem ex^ertus est scriba in
Colli Tumore.
]

And to confirm the credibility, as well as increase the number of our
magnetical ways of cure; I shall add, That St Francis Bacon himself Records,
with great solemnity, Centur. X. Exp. 997.
his own having been freed, not only from very many new warts, but from one
almost as old as he, by a piece of Lard, with the skin on it, which after
having rubbed upon them, was exposed out of a Southern Window to putrify. And
therefore, though the vanity and superstition of most of the Authors that speak
of Magnetic Remedies, and the impertinent circumstances, that are usually
prescribed, as necessary to their effectualness, do generally, and justly
enough, make sober men despise, or at least suspect such unlikely ways of
cure; yet in consideration of the instances lately produced (to which we may
perhaps elsewhere add some others) and because diverse men, as well Physicians
as others, have seriously assured me of their having been some of them
eyewitnesses, and others p^rformers of such cures; I am apt to think it fit,
that, a severe indeed, but yet further trial be made of Physical Experiments of
this kind. And I cannot but commend the curiosity of Dr Harvey, who, as rigid a
Naturalist as he is, scrupled not often to try the Experiment mentioned by
H^lmont, of curing some Tumors or Excrescencies, by holding on them for a
pretty while (that the cold may thoroughly penetrate) the Hand of a man dead of
a lingering disease; which Experiment, the Doctor was not long since, pleased to
tell me, he had sometimes tried fruitlesly, but often with good success. N^r
does the grand Objection against such Experiments, namely, that such or such a
person, having once made trial of them, found them not succeed, seem at all to
me, alone, of weight enough to make such Experiments, or those other improbable
ones formerly mentioned, totally rejected: Because, that if they really do
sometimes succeed, though sometimes they chance to fail, yet that possibility
of their succeeding may sufficiently evince, that there are really in Nature
Medicines that work after that extraordinary manner. And I see no reason, why
it should be more required of those Medicines, that work at a distance from the
Patient (or at least are not taken at the Mouth, or injected otherwhere) only
by subtle Effluvia, that they should always cure, then it is exacted of vulgar
Remedies, from which we might reasonably expect more const^nt effects, because
of their being either inwardly given, or more immediately or at least more
durably applied to the Patient. And if Rubarb be, justly affirmed to be an
excellent medicine in Loosenesses, though we daily in Ireland see many swept
away those diseases, in spite of the use of Rubarb and Mirabolans, with other
ast^ingent Remedies to boot: And if quiksilver be, not un^easonably, by most of
our Physicians esteemed, and employed as an effectual Remedy against Venereal
Diseases, because it sometimes removes them; though Fernelius, Montanus, and
many other Learned Authors tell us, as they say upon their own experience, that
(though it often palliate those distempers) it very sesdome cures them. Nay,
and if Diaphoreticks are still esteemed such by the generality of Physicians,
though few Sudor^ficks will cause sweat in all body, and scarce any in some
bodies, I see not, why these Remedies, that wo^k, as it were, by Emanation, may
not deserve the name of Medicines, if they sometimes unquestionably succeed,
though they should not always prove successful ones; Nor why they should,
notwithstanding their sometimes not succeeding be laid asi^e, especially since
these sympathetical ways of cure are most of them so safe and innocent, that,
though, if they be real, they may do much good, if they prove fictions they can
do no harm, (unless by accident, as in case the Patient should so singly rely
on them, as to neglect (which he need not) all other helps to recover.)

CHAP. XII.
BUt you will now perhaps demand, Pyrophilus, how the Naturalist, as such, can
contribute to the Credit or Advancement of the mentioned ways of curing
Diseases, without the wonted weakening and painful Evacuations? In answer to
this Question, I must put you in mind, That it would be no new thing for
Naturalists, not professedly Physicians, to treat of this subject; and that the
Naturalist may afford good Hints to the Practitioner of Physic, both upon
diverse other accounts already touched upon, and by trying on Bruits variety of
hitherto untryed Medicaments or Remedies, and by suggesting to him both the
Events of such Trials, and also what has been already observed about the cures
of the Diseases incident to Beasts. For though (as we formerly told you) there
are some things that are not equally Poisonous, as others not equally Safe, to
Man and to some Bruits; yet there are other Beasts, especially Dogs and
Monkeys, whose Bodies are, by many Poisons, affected almost like those of Men:
And since according to the old Rule, Periculum faciendum est in vili anima,
many things may be very well tried on such Creatures, that we dare not at first
venture to try on Men. We may give Dogs Poisons, only to try the Virtue of our
Antidotes; and we may give them Wounds, to make trial of the efficacy of the
Weaponsalve and Sympathetick Pow^er: Since diverse of my Friends (as I have
intimated above) assure me, That they have some of them seen, and others
performed cures of Horses, lamed by pricking, by sticking the Nails that hurt
them into the Weapon-salve; which for that very use, among others, some of them
are wont to carry about them in Silver Boxes. When Oxen, and suchlike Cattle,
are troubled with that Disease which makes them continually turn about in one
place (and is therefore called The turning Evil, or Sturdy) a common Remedy
here in England, ^s Grasiers that make use of it inform me, is to cast down and
tie fast the sick Beast, and then to open his Skull a good way (or, if need be,
take off a round piece of it over the place supposed to be affected) and at the
open place to take out a little Bag or Bladder, which is usually found to lie
near the Membranes of the Brain, and to be full of Water and Blood, and then
leisurely to heal up the hurt: And this cure is much commended, as both common
and easy, by our experienced Markham. In Goats likewise, that are much
subject to the Dropsy, the Husbandman ventures to slit, and let out the Water
under the Shoulder. Way to get Wea^th. Book. 1.
And diverse hazardous Operations in Surgery, such as are Arteriotomy, the
Exsection of the Spleen and other parts, were, or should have been first
attempted upon Bruits, and then practiced on humane Bodies. And in imitation of
these, it is likely that diverse other Experiments, of good use in Surgery,
may be discovered for the relief of Man, without Endangering him in prosecuting
such Discoveries. And to say nothing of the known practice of splaying Swine
and Bitches; In the Neighborhood of a Country House of mine, in the West of
England, and probably in diverse other parts, some experienced Shepherds have
an odd way of castrating male Sheep, especially Lambs, when they are grown so
old that it is thought dangerous to geld them the common way. A Servant of mine
that deals much in Cattle, and had lately diverse Sheep swigg'd (as they call
it) after this manner, tells me that is thus done: The Beast, on whom the
Operation is to be performed, being held by a strong Man with his Belly
upwards, another strong Man draws a string, as firmly as he can (tying it with
a knot or two, to prevent its yielding or slipping off) about the Testicles, as
if he meant by drawing that string, to cut them off; and then anointing the
part with a little fresh Butter, or some such like thing, he lets the Ram go
to feed; which for the most part (notwithstanding the anguish of this Ligature)
he will begin to do in a short time: And within two or three days, the
Testicles being, by the strict Ligature, denied the Nutriment and Spirits that
were wont to be conveyed to them will grow so rotten as either, together with
the string, to fall off, or be very easily pulled off, sometime stinking very
rankly like Carrion. And even among those things that are already practiced by
Farriers, Shepherds and Graziers there are many such things as we have newly
mentioned, which may serve either to enrich or illustrate the way of curing
humane Bodies: Their ignorance and credulousness, together with the liberty and
meaness of those Creatures they physic, gives them leave to venture on any
thing, having made them try upon Horses and Cattle, many such things as
Physicians dare not try upon Men and Women. And among those many extravagant
things, some, as it oftens happens, have succeeded so prosperously, as to
deserve to be considered by the skilfullest Physicians; Some of whom might,
without disparagement to their Profession, do it an useful piece of service, if
they would be pleased to collect and digest all the approved Experiments and
Practices of the Farriers, Graziers, Butchers, and the like, which the Ancients
did not despise, but honored with the Titles of Hippiatrica and Veterinaria:
And among which, if I had leisure, diverse things may be taken notice of, which
might serve to illustrate the Methodus medendi. As to give you but one Instance
which lately occurred to me, The Usefulness of letting Blood in some cases,
Which is so severely condemned by many Chemists, and the efficacy of a small,
if seasonable, Evacuation, which can scarce be conceived to do more then alter
the course of the Blood, may be illustrated by the Staggers in Horses, and the
Cure of it. For I have seen a Coach-horse, ready to drop down dead of his
Disease upon the Highway, by having his Gums rubbed with the Coachwhip till
the Blood appeared, relieved almost in a moment so much, that though he were
not well able to stand before, yet he was immediately able to go on, and draw
the Coach with his fellows.

CHAP. XIII.
THe next thing we are to observe to you, Pyrophilus; and on which its nature
and importance will engage us somewhat long to insist, is this, That the
Handling of Physical matters was Anciently thought to belong to the Naturalist;
as we are clearly informed by the judicious Celsus, in that memorable Passage,
where speaking of the Origin of Physic, Primo (says he) medendi scientia
Sapientiae pars habebatur; Celsus in Praefatione Lib. 1.
ut and morborum curatio and rerum naturae contemplatio sub iisdem Authoribus
nata sit: Scilicet his hanc maxim requirentibus, qui corporum suorum robora,
inquieta cogitatione nocturnaque vigilia, minuerant. He adds, that many of the
Professors of Philosophy were skilful in Physic, especially Pythagoras,
Empedocles, and Democritus, and that Hippocrates (whom some think to be the
disciple of this last named) was the first who severd Physic from Philosophy,
and made it a distinct Discipline, And this Apology for the ensuing discourse
being thus premised to it, I shall further Answer, that I should perhaps be
obliged to exceed the limits of an ESSAY, if I should in this Discourse insist
on every thing, upon whose account the Naturalist may assist the Physician, if
he be barely a Medicus to cure Diseases, which that you may the more readily
believe, I shall Select and prosecute some of these things in the remaining
part of this ESSAY.

And first I shall represent to you on this subject, That the account upon
which Physicians are wont to reject, if not, deride the use of such Specificks,
as seem to work after a secret and unknown manner, and not by visibly
Evacuating peccant humors (or by other supposedly manifest qualities) being
generally this, That they see not how the promised Effects can well be produced
by Bodies, that must work after so peculiar and undiscerned a manner; This
being, I say, the great thing that hinders Physicians from endeavoring to
find, or, so much as, being willing to make use of Remedies of this sort, the
Naturalists may do much toward the removal of this Impediment, by showing out
of such things as may be met with or performed within the Macrocosme, That
such, or at least as strange operations as are ascribed to these Specificks,
are not without Example in Nature; and consequently ought not to be rejected,
barely as being impossible. And indeed the Physiologie, wherewith Physicians as
well as others are wont to be imbued in the Schools, has done many of them no
small Disservice by, accustoming them to gross apprenhensions of Natures ways
of working. Whence it comes to pass, that not a few even Learned Doctors will
never expect, that any great matter should be performed in Diseases, by such
Remedies as are neither obvious to the sense, nor Evacuate any gross, or at
least sensible matter. Whereas, very great alterations may be wrought in a
Body, especially if Liquid, as is the Blood and peccant Humor, without the
Ingresse or Egresse of any visible matter, by the intestine commotion of the
parts of the same body acting upon one another, and thereby acquiring a
differing Motion, Location (if I may so speak) or Figure, which, with the other
Qualities and Effects resulting thence, may alter the motion and Texture of the
Liquor, and thereby produce great changes in the Body that Harbors it. How
much an unperceived recesse of a few subtle Parts of a Liquor may alter the
Nature of it, may be guessed at, by the obvious change of Wine into Vinegar;
wherein upon the Avolation (or perhaps but the misplacing) of so little of the
Spirituous and Sulphurous part, that it is Presence, Absence, or new
Combination with the other Parts is not discernable to the Eye, the scarce
decreased Liquor, becomes of a quite differing Nature from what it was. And
though in England this Degeneration be not wont to be so suddenly performed by
reason of the coldness of the Climate, yet in hotter Count^ies the change is
much more speedily made. As in Brasil, the above mentioned Piso informs us,
that the expressed Juice of the Sugar Canes, which by Coction, and farther
ordering, would be certainly brought to Sugar, will of it self keep sweet but
about four and twenty Hours, and then begin to sour, Lib. 4. Cap. 10.
and be altogether unfit to make Sugar of, though very fit to turn into good
Vinegar. And this I find confirmed by a Modern and applauded French Writer in
his Description, of some parts of the West Indies, inhabited by his Nation: And
relations of the same sort, concerning the hasty sowring of some other Liquors
in America I have had from our English Travelers and Planters. And in the
East- Indies, Linschoten tells us of a change much more sudden: For speaking
of the formerly mentioned Sura or Liquor, afforded by the wounded Coc^-tree.
The same Water (says he) standing but one Hour in the Sun is very good
Vinegar, Chap. 56.
and in India they have none other. And that even very hurtful Liquors (and why
not then some peccant matter in the body?) may after the like manner change
their Nature may appear by what we have formerly mentioned, and is unanimously
affirmed by credible Writers of several Nations, concerning the juice of
Mandioca, which being Poison, See Piso lib. 1.
when it is first expressed does in a few hours by Fermentation, purge its
self and loose its pernicious Nature. That also by the bare Ingresse of some
Subtle and not visible Matter, such intestine Commotions may be excited in
Liquors, may appear by the sowring which has been often observed upon great
Thunders to happen, not only to wines, but to other Vinous Liquors also, as I
lately received from a great Master of variety of Liquors, a complaint that by
some Thunder, which happened here a few weeks since, almost all the Beer and
Ale in the neighborhood was spoiled. And I remember, that when I returned out
of Italy through Geneva, there happened in that place an Earthquake, upon which,
the Citizens complaind, that much of their wine was sowr'd, though I that
lodged in the highest part of the Town, saw nothing to make me believe, that
the bare Succussion of the Earth was capable to produce so great and sudden an
alteration in the Wine.

That such invisible Corpuscles may pass from Amulets, or other external
Remedies into the Blood and Humors, and there produce great changes, will
scarce seem improbable to him that considers how perspirable according to
Hippocrates a living body is, and that Vegetable and Animal Body's, whose
Texture is more loose and open, may well be supposed to send forth Expirations,
since even diverse Minerals are found to do the like; as may appear by the
odorable steames of rubbed Brimstone, and Amber, by the Corpuscles, which
perform the Magnetic Operations, by the Emetick Quality imparted to Liquors
by the Glass of Antimony, and by Crocus Metallorum barely infused in them,
without sensibly loosing any thing, either of their bulk or weight; and by the
virtue of killing Worms, wherewith Wine, and even Water has been, not only by
Helmont, but by diverse other Physicians observed to be enriched, after a
Quantity of Quicksilver has been for some Hours sh^ken in it, though without
any sensible deperdition of the substance of the Mercury. And indeed I have
somewhat wondered that many Learned modern Physicians, either out of an
affected Severity, or perhaps Animosity against Chemists, ov^rlook or even
deride all operations of this Nature; Since I remember Galen himself, not only
confirms the like Doctrine, by his Reasons and Authority, but delivers a very
strange Example of it; for, De simp. Medi. facultatibus. Libro. 6.
under the Title of Glychysida, Treating of Peony, He thus Discourses, Est
praeterea omnino resiccatoria: Ea propter haud desperaverim eam ex collo pueris
suspensam merito Comitialem morbum sanare. Equidem vidi puellum quandoque octo
totis mensibus morbo Comitiali liberum, ac postea fortuna cum quod a collo
suspensum erat decidisset, protinus denuo convulsione correptum; rursusque
suspenso in locum illius alio, inculpate postea egisse, Porro visum est mihi
satius esse rursum id collo detrahere, certioris experientiae gratia: id cum
fecissem, ac puer iterum esset convulsus, magnam recentis radicis partem ex
collo ejus suspendimus, ac deinceps prorsum sanus effectus est puer, nec postea
convulsus est. Rationabile itaque erat, aut parts quaspiam a radice
d^fluentes, ac deinde per inspirationem attractas, affectos ita locos curare,
aut Aerem a radice assidue mutari and alterari. Nam hoc pacto Succus Cyrenaicus
collumellam plegmone affectam juvat and Melanthion frictum palam Catarrhos and
Coryzas desiccat, Si quis id in calidum linteum, rarum, liget assidueque
calorem ex eo per inspirationem in nares attrahat. Quin etiam si pluribus
linis, and maxim marinae purpurae, collo viperae injectis, illis viperam
praefoces, eaque postea cujuspiam collo obvincias, mirifice profueris tum
Paristhmiis tum omnibus iis quae in collo expullulant. Nay, that such invisible
Bodies, by passing thorough grosser ones, and thereby changing the Motion and
nexus or Juncture of their parts, may produce lasting alterations in their
Textures (though it be a Paradox) seems not to me at all impossible. For we
find the most fluid Body of Quicksilver has been sometimes, (I say sometimes)
and therefore may, without sensible increase of Bulk, be coagulated by a
Metalline Exhalation so, as to be cut like Lead, and to retain that solidity,
'till by some Art or other it be reduced to its pristine Fluidnesse. You may be
inclined to think, that the hard and solid Body of Iron has a permanent
alteration made in it is Texture, if you hold a Needle during a competent time
near the Pole of a Vigorous Loadstone without touching it. For the Magnetical
Effluvia (as may very probably be conceived) will so dispose the parts of the
nearest extreme of the Needle, as that they shall admit the steames that come
from one of the Poles of the Lodestone, and not those that come from the
other: whereas by skilfully holding it to the contrary Pole of the same Stone,
the internal Pores, and consequently the Texture of the Needle, will presently
be quite otherwise disposed in reference to the Magnetical Effluvia; as we more
fully declare in another ESSAY, where we shall, I suppose, also persuade you,
that the Effects of the Lodestone are performed by subtle Bodies issuing from,
or passing through it. What we have in a former discourse told you concerning
our having at pleasure changed the Poles of a Lodestone, by help of the
Magnetica Effluvia of the Earth, may let you see that in Stones, also such
alterations are possible to be made. And in the next ESSAY save one, we shall
give you another Instance, pertinent to our present purpose. For if you heat a
slender piece of Steel (as a graver, or the like) red hot, and suffer it to
cool leisurely in the Air, it will continue flexible enough, and of so soft a
Texture, that you may easily make impressions on it, with any hardened Steel:
But if, instead of cooling it thus slowly, you knock it into such a dry Body,
as we shall there name to you, it will immediately grow so hard, as to be
brittle. Which alteration, whether it be resolved to proceed from the
particular Effluvia of the Body, into which it is knocked, or barely from the
ingresse of the Corpuscles of Cold; (if any such there be) it will be however
an Instance not unfit for our purpose. And those Pyrophilus, that are
conversant in Glass houses, may easily observe, that Glass acquires a more or
less brittle Texture, according as (to speak in the Glass-mens language) it is
baked. For if after Glasses are blown, they be quickly carried into the open
Air, they are wont to be much more subject to break, then those, that after
they are fashioned are placed in a kind of very long Oven (which is wont to be
built over ^he Furnace, wherein the materials, whereof the Glass is made are
kept in Fusion) and are by slow degrees refrigerated, and not 'till after some
hours exposed to the open Air: For whether this difference of Brittleness, and
consequently of Texture, be ascribed to the interrupted Transcursion of some
Etherial matter, through the Pores of the Glass, or to the insinuations of the
Atoms of the Cold, or to this, that the Particles of the Glass agitated by the
heat, were surpised by the Cold, before they could make an end of those
Motions which were requisite to their disposing themselves into the most
durable Texture; it is evident enough, that it is by no gross or visible Body,
that this permanent difference of Texture is produced. Of the like to which we
may elsewhere give you Examples, in some other Concretes. That also in an human
Body, great alterations may be made by very subtle Effluvia, appears
evidently, not only by the instances we have formerly given of the efficacy of
some outwardly applied Remedies, but by diverse other things, as that many are
purged by the bare Odor of Potions, of which I have been assured upon his own
Observation by the experienced Town Physician of Plimmouth Dr D. And of which
Salmuth in his Observations, gives us an instance in a young Gentlewoman, Cent.
3. Obs^r. 4.
whom he saw more happily purged, by the Odor of a Potion, drunk by her Sister,
then she was that took the Medicine. And the same Author tells us, Cent. 3.
Obser. 8.
of one Dr Pfeil an eminent Physician, who was wont, when he had a mind to be
Purged, to go into some Apothecaries shop, where Electuaries electively
purging were preparing, to which having a while smelt, they would by their
Odor, after his return home, work with him six or seven times, as if he had
swallowed the Medicine it self. And Henricus ab Here, in the twenty ninth of
his formly commended Observations, tells us, Of a Woman that not only was wont
to be copiously purged by drinking Bief-broth, but having by a fall broken her
Leg, used no other Cathartick, then the bare Odor of that sort of Broth. And
very Observable to our purpose, is the operation of the Air, all along the ridg
of the high mountain in Peru, called Pariacaca, of which the Learned Jesuit
Joseph Acosta relates, That though he went as well prepared as he could, Lib. 3
cap. ^.
to withstand the Operations usually produced in Travails, by that piercing
Air, yet when he approached to the top of the Mountain, he was (notwithstanding
all his Provision) surpised with such fits, and pangs, of striving and
casting, as he thought he should cast up his Heart too; having after meat,
Phlegm, and Choler, both yellow and green, in the end with over striving cast
up Blood; and continued thus sick for three or four hours, 'till he had passed
into a more temperate Air then that of the top of the Mountain; which runn's
about 500 Leagues, and has every where, though not equ^lly this discomposing
property, having operated upon some of his companions, as well downwards as
upwards. A greater proof of the power of Steams upon the Body may be taken from
the propagation of Infectious Diseases, which being conveyed by insensible
Effluvia, from a sick into a healthy Body, are able to disorder the whole
Economy of it, and act those sad Tragedies, which Physicians do so often
unsuccesfully endeavor to hinder. But you will cease to doubt, that
Corpuscles, though so small as to be below the sense, should be able to
perform great matters upon humane Bodies; if you consider what alterations may
be therein produced by the bare actions of the parts upon one another. This may
appear by the effects of several Passions of the mind, which are often excited
by the bare, if attentive, thoughts of absent things. In obstinate grief and
Melancholy, there is that alteration made in the disposition of the Heart, and
perhaps some other parts by which the Blood is to Circulate, that the lively
motion of that liquor is thereby disturbed, and obstructions and other not
easily removed distempers are occasioned. The bare remembrance of a loathsome
Potion, does oftentimes produce in me (and I doubt not, but the like thought
may have the like Operation in many others) a Horror, attended with a very
sensible Commotion of diverse parts of my Body, especially with a kind of
convulsive motion, in or about the Stomach. And what power the Passions have to
alter and determine the course of the Blood, may appear yet more manifestly in
modest and bashful persons, especially Women, when merely upon the remembrance
or thought of an unchaste, or undecent thing, mentioned before them, the motion
of the Blood will be so determined, as to pass suddenly and plentifully enough
into the Cheeks (and sometimes other parts) to make them immediately wear that
livery of Virtue (as an Old Philosopher styled it) which we call a Blush. And
even by joy, if great and sudden, I not long since saw in persons of both
Sexes, not only the Cheeks and Forehead, but it left (as to the Lady) even the
Neck and Shoulders Died of that Color. And that Passions, may not only alter
the Motion of the Juyces of the Body, but likewise make some separation and
evacuation of them, may appear in grief, which is wont especially in Women to
make all the Commotions requisite to weeping: whereby oftentimes a considerable
quantity of Briny Liquor, is excluded at the Eyes, under the form of Tears, by
which diverse (especially Hysterical) Persons are wont to find themselves much
refreshed, though with some it fares otherwise in teeming Women. Also that
vehement desire we call Longing, may well be supposed to produce great
alterations in the Body of the Mother, which leaves such strange and lasting
impressions upon that of the Infant; since it is the Mother only, and not at all
the Infant that conceives those importunate desires.

CHAP. XIV.
THere are many Instances to be met with in Physicians Books, to show that
Imagination is able so to alter the Imagining person's Body, as to work such a
disposition in the Spirits, Blood and Humors of it, as to produce the
determinate Disease that is excessively feared. And I remember, that soon after
the last Fair Lady R. Died of the Small Pox, I chanced to meet one of her
Sisters with her Mask on amongst some other Persons of High Quality, and
wondering to see her sit Maskt in such Company, her Husband (who was present)
told me, That his Wife having been happily brought to Bed some while before her
Sister fell sick; he had carefully kept the knowledge of her sickness from his
Wife; least the kindness that was betwixt them two might prejudice her in the
condition she was in, but that after, a while a Lady unawares making mention in
her hearing of her Sisters sickness, she immediately fancied, That she should
have it too, and accordingly fell sick of that disfiguring Disease, whose Marks
obliged her for a while to wear a Mask. Nor is it in Women only, but even in
Men, that conceit may produce such real and lasting effects. For many
authentic Histories record examples of those in whom excessive Grief or Fear
has made such a change in the Color of their Hair in a Night, as Nature would
otherwise have scarce made in diverse Years. And I remember, that being about
four or six Years since, in the County of Cork, there was an Irish Captain a
man of middle Age and Stature, who coming with some of his followers to render
himself to your Uncle Broghill, who then commanded the English Forces in those
parts upon a public profer of pardon to the Irish that would then lay down
Arms, he was casually in a suspicious Place, met with by a party of the English
and intercepted. And my Brother being then absent, upon a design, he was so
apprehensive of being put to Death, by the inferior officers, before your
Uncles return, that that Anxiety of mind quickly changed the Color of his
Hair after a peculiar manner: of which I being then at that Castle of your
Unkles whereunto he was brought) had quickly notice given me, and had the
Curiosity to examine this Captain, and found that the Hair of his H^ad, had not
(as in the instances I had met with in Histories) uniformely changed its
Color, but that here and there certain peculiar Tufts and locks of it, whose
Bases might be about an inch in Diameter were thus suddenly turned White all
over: the rest of his Hair (of which you know the Irish use to wear good
store) retaining it is former Reddish Color.

[You will mistake my design Pyrophilus, if you conclude from what I have said,
concerning the Power of Effluvia, to work upon the Body that I am either so
much an Helmontian as to condemn the Use of all those Remedies that make such
more gross Evacuations (if I may so call them) as are made by Vomit, Seige,
and the like; or that I would have you, or am my self so credulous, as to
believe all the Virtues that are, even by Eminent Writers ascribed to the
Remedies called Specificks: For (to mention here but this) we have observed,
that the hopes built upon even excellent Specificks, unless they be of such a
resolving and abstersive Nature, as to be able to make way for themselves into
the Recesses of the Body are oftentimes disappointed, where some Emetick or
Cathartick Remedy has not been first used to free the Stomach and Guts from
those viscous Humors, which obstructing the first passages much enervate the
Virtue of the Remedy, if they do not altogether deny it access to the
innermost parts of the Body. That then which I aim at, is first to keep you
from being prejudiced by the Confidence of some Learned Doctors, who laugh at
the very name of Specificks, and will not allow any Disease to be curable, but
by visible Evacuations of store of what they call peccant Matter; And next to
give you cause to think that such Specificks, as men of judgment and credit do
recommend upon their own Experience ought not to be rejected without Trial,
upon the bare account of their not being either Laxative or Vomitive,
Sudorifick, or Diuretical; Nay, nor so much as for this, that they are not
endowed with any Eminent Degree of any manifest Quality, such as Heat, Cold,
Dryness, Odor, Taste, Astriction and the like; nor able perchance to work any
considerable alteration in a healthy Human Body. For I consider the Body of a
living man, not as a rude heap of Limbs and Liquors, but as an Engine
consisting of several parts so set together, that there is a strange and
conspiring communication betwixt them, by virtue whereof, a very weak and
inconsiderable Impression of adventitious matter upon some one part may be able
to work on some other distant part, or perhaps on the whole Engine, a change
far exceeding what the same adventitious Body could do upon a Body not so
contrived. The faint motion of a man's little Finger upon a small piece of Iron
that were no part of a Engine, would produce no considerable Effect; but when a
Musket is ready to be Shot off, then such a Motion being applied to the Trigger
by virtue of the cont^ivance of the Engine, the Spring is immediately let loose
the Cock falls down, and knocks the flint against the Steel, opens the Pan,
strikes Fire upon the Powder in it, which by the Touchhole Fires the Powder in
the Barrel and that with great noise throw's out the ponderous Leaden Bullet
with violence enough to kill a Man at Seven or Eight hundred Foot distance. And
that also the Engine of a Humane Body is so framed, as to be capable of
receiving great alterations from seemingly slight Impressions of outward
Objects, upon the bare account of its particular contrivance, may appear by
several instances beside those which may belong to this Argument in the
foregoing part of this ESSAY. When a man goes suddenly out into the Sun, it
often happens, that those beams which light upon his Head, and would not in so
short a time have any discernable effect on the least Hair of it, do almost in
a moment produce that strange and violent motion in the head and almost all the
Body, which we call Sneezing. Men that from the top of some Pinnacle or other
high and steep place do look down to the bottom of it are at first very apt by
the bare prospect, (which yet convey's nothing into the Body but those images,
if yet there intervene corporeal ones in sensation of visible Objects that
enter at the Eye) to become so giddy, that they are reduced to turn away their
Eyes from the Praecipice for fear of not being able to stand upon their Legs.
And many that looked fixedly upon a Whirle poole, or upon a very swift stream
have had such a Vertiginous Motion thereby impressed on their Spirits, that
they have been unable to keep their Bodies upright, but have fallen into the
Water they gazed on. And it is no less rem^rkable, that when a man is somewhat
discomposed at Sea, and yet not enough to Vomit freely; the Seamen are wont to
advise him to look from the si^e of the Ship upon the Water, which seeming
swiftly to pass by the Vessel, has upon the gazer the operation of a rapid
stream, and by making him giddy hastens and facilitates his Vomiting, as I h^ve
somet^m^s t^ied upon my self when I had a mind for healths sake to be put into
a fit of Sea sickness. If a person be very Ticklish and you but gently stroke
the Sole of his Foot with the top of a Feather, that languid Impression on the
bottom of the foot shall, whether he will or no, put all those Muscles and
other parts into motion, which are requisite to make that noise, and to
exhibit that shape of the Face (so far distant from the feet) which we call
Laughing; and so the gentle Motion of a straw tickling the Nostrils is able to
excite Sneezing. Most men may observe in themselves, that there are some such
noises as those ma^e by the grating of an ungreas'd Cart-wheele upon the Axle
tree, or the tearing of course Paper which are capable of ^etting the Teeth on
edge, which yet cannot be done without exciting a peculiar Motion in several
parts of the Head. I had a servant, who sometimes complained to me of a much
more rem^^kable and unfrequent disorder, namely, that when he was put to whet a
Knife, that stridulous Motion of the Air was wont to make his Gummes bleed.
Henricus ab Here (in his Twenty n^nth Observation) Records a Story of a Lady,
to whom he was sent for, who upon the hearing of the sound of a B^ll, or any
loud noise, though Singing, would fall into fits of Soun^ing, which was scarce
distinguish^ble from Death; an^ we may confirm that this disposition depended
upon the Texture of her Body in r^ference to M^terial sounds by wh^t he
subjoyns, that having well purged her, and given her for two Months the
Spaa-waters, and other app^op^iate Remedies he thoroughly cured her. And it
often enough happens, that when a Woman is in a Fit of the Mother, another
H^sterical person standing by, is by reason of a peculiar Disposition of her
Body, soon infected with the like strange discomposure. And to show you, that a
distempered Body is both an Engine, and also an Engine disposed to receive
alterations from such Impressions as will make none on a sound body, let me put
you in mind that those subtle Ste^mes that wander through the Air before
considerable changes of Weather disclose themselves, are wont to be painfully
felt by many sickly Persons and more constantly by men that have had great
Bruises or Wounds in the parts that have been so hurt; though neither are
healthy men at all incommodated thereby, nor do those themselves that have been
hurt, feel any thing in those sound parts, whose Tone or Texture has not been
altered or enfeebl'd by outward violence. I have known several also (and the
thing is obvious) whose body's and Humors are so framed and constituted, that
if (as men commonly speak) they ride backward in a Coach, that Motion will m^ke
them giddy, and force them to Vomit. And it is very ordinary for Hysterical
Women to fall into such Fits as counterfeit Epilepsies, Convulsions, and I know
not what violent distempers by the bare smell of Musk and Amber, and other
strong perfumes, whose steames are yet so far from having great, much less
such Effects in other Humane body's, that almost all men, and the generality
even of healthy Women are not affected by them, unless with some innocent
delight. And that even on men Odours (how minute and invisible bodies soever)
may sometimes have very great power, may be gathered from the story told us by
Zacutus Lucitanus, In P^. (...). a^m. lib. 3. Ob. O^se^^at. 99.
of a Fisherman, who having spent all his life at Sea, and being grown Old
there, and coming to gaze upon a solemn reception, made in a Maritine Town, to
Sebastian King of Portugal, was by the perfumes plentifully Burnt, to welcome
the King immediately cast upon the ground thereby into a F^t which two
Physicians judged Apoplectical, and Physi^k'd him accordingly 'till three days
after the Kings chief Physician Thomas a Vega guessing at the cause of his
disease commanded him to be removed to the Sea side and covered with Sea Weeds,
where within four Hours the Maritime Air and steames began to open his Eyes,
and made him know those that were about him, and within not many Days restored
him to health. We may also conjecture how much the alteration produced in the
Body by sickness may dispose it to receive strong Impressions from things that
would not otherwise much affect it, by this, That even a man in perfect health,
and who is wont to Drink cold without the least harm, may, when he has much
heated himself by exercise be cast by a draught of cold Drink into such sudden,
formidable, and dangerous di^tempers as, did not daily Experience convince us,
we should scarce think possible to be produced in a Body, free from Morbid
Humors by so familiar a thing as a cup of small bear or water; insomuch that
Benivenius relates a Story of one, who after too vehement exercise Drinking a
Glass of very cold Water fell into a swoun, that was quickly succeeded by
Death. And yet, to add that on this occasion, in Bodies otherwise disposed a
large draught of cold Water, Drunk even without thirst, may v^ry much relieve
the D^incker, and prevent great Fit^ of the Mother, and partly of the Spleen,
especially upon sudd^in f^ights, to which purposes I know some Hyste^ical
Ladies that find in this Remedy, as themselves assure me more advantage then
one wo^ld easily imagine.

And (further) to show you that the Engine we are speaking of is alt^rable, as
well for the better as for the worse, by such Motions of outward Bodies as in
themselves considered, are languid, or at least may seem despicable in
reference to sickness or recovery; Let me call upon you to consider a few, not
unobvious things, which may also serve to confirm some part of what has
hitherto been delivered.

[The true Moss growing upon a Humane Skull, though I do not find Experience
warrant all the strange things some Chemical Writers attribute to it for the
stanching of Blood, yet I deny not, but in some Bodies it does it wonderful
enough. And I very well know an Eminent Virtuoso who has assured me, as his
Physician likewise has done, that he finds the Effects of this Moss so
considerable upon himself, that after having been let Blood, his Arm falling to
Bleed again, and he apprehending the consequences of it, his Physician, who
chanced to be present, put a little of the abovementioned Moss into his hand,
which barely held there, did, to the Patients wonder, stanch his Blood, and
gave him the cu^iosity to lay it out of his hand, to try whether that Moss
were the cause of the Bloods so oddly stopping its course, whereupon his Arm
after a little while, beginning to Bleed afresh, he took the Moss again into
his hand, and thereby presently stanch'd his Bleeding the second time: and if I
misremember not, he added, that he repeated the Experiment once more with the
like success. The smoke of burnt feathers, or Tobacco blown upon the face of
an Hysterical Woman, does oftentimes almost as suddenly recover them out of
Fits of the Mother, as the odor of per^umes did cast them thereinto.]

And now I speak of Cu^es performable by fumes, it brings into my mind, that a
friend of yours and mine, and a Person of great Veracity professes to have
strangly cured Dysenteries by a way unusual enough, which is to make the
Patient sit over a Chair or Stool close on the sides, and perforated below, so
that the Anus and the neighboring parts may be exposed to the fumes of Ginger,
which must be thrown upon a Pan of Embers, placed just under the Patient, who
is to continue in that posture, and to receive the Fume as long as he can
endure it without too much fainting. And when I mentioned one of the Cures that
was thus performed, to one that is looked upon as a Master of Chemical Arcana
against Diseases; he preferred before it (as he says upon experience) the
shavings of Hartshorn used after the same manner, and the Remedy seems not
irrational. But if in this distemper, the Actual heat applied to the
abovementioned parts of the Body concur not to the Effect, we may too,
warrantably enough, add that Cures may be performed by far more minute
corpuscles then those of smoke, insinuating themselves from without into the
Body. For I know a very dextrous Goldsmith, who, when he over heats himself, as
he often unawares does at hammering of Plate, is subject to fall into Gripings
of the Belly, which lead to Fluxes; but his usual and ready Cure is, as soon as
conveniently he can, to heat his Anvil, and sit upon it for a great while
together, heating it hot again if there be need. But to return to our Medicinal
Smoaks, it is known that some find more good against the Fits of the Colic, by
Glysters of the Smoke of Tobacco, then by any other Physic they take; so that
I know wealthy persons, that relying upon the benefit they find by this Remedy,
have left off sending for their Physicians to ease them of the Colic. And
indeed, when I consider what an odd Concrete, even common Soot is, and that
many Concretes by being resolved into Smoke, may be e^ther more or otherwise
unlocked, then they would be by the Stomach of a Man (so that I may elsewhere
entertain you of the great heightning of some Emetick and Cathartick Simples in
their operation, by their being reduced into Smoke,) and that also probably the
Operation of some Fumes and Odours may be much changed and improved by their
not getting into the Body by the Mouth, but other parts; I am inclinable to
think that there might be made further use of them, if Physi^ians pleased, then
hitherto has been. For I have made such trial of the Virtue of Sulphurous
Smoke, to preserve some Liquors, as I was much pleased with. And not only
Paracelsus, but Helmont highly extol, as a grand Specific in fits of the
Mother, the Smoke of the Warts that grow upon the Legs of Horses, conveyed to
the parts supposed to be primarily affected. And I remember, that lately I met
with a Gentleman curious and intelligent, who, as himself assured me, was by
the Scurvy and ill conditioned Ulcers, and other obstinate distempers brought
so low, that he was scarce able to turn himself freely in his Bed, and
thereupon resolved against taking any more Physic, partly out of despair of
recovery, and partly out of weariness of the tedious courses of Physic the
Doctors had in vain made him pass through: But that some o^ his Friends
b^inging him a certain Surgeon, whom they affirmed to have strangly cured many
desperate dist^mpers, by wa^es very unusu^l and not troublesome to the Patient,
this Gentleman was content to put himself into his Hands, the Surgeon promising
that he would not give him any other Physic, but now and then a Cup of Sack by
way of Cord^al; his way of Cure being to fumigate the Patient very well ^very
Morning with a certain Smoke, which that Gentleman th^nks, by what he took
n^tice of, in the Pow^er that yeel^^d it, to have been some Vegetable
substance. And with this Remedy in a short time he grew perfectly well, and
came home a while since in very good health from a Voyage, which the confusions
of his own Country invited him to make as far as the East Indies. This Surgeon,
whose name I cannot hit upon, dying suddenly, his secret (which was tried upon
diverse others besides this Gentleman) is for ought we yet know, dead with him.

[But as for the efficacy that may be found in appropriated Fumes and Steams.
We have more then once by barely unstopping and holding under her Nose a small
Phial of highly rectified Spirit of Sal Armoniack, or even of Hartshorn almost
presently recovered a Young Beauty I need not name to You; out of strange Fits
that were wont to take her more suddenly then those of the Falling Sickness,
and were looked upon as Epileptical, though perchance they were not merely so.
To which I shall add, that a Lady that both You Pyrophilus and I know and love
very well, though she have been long subject to violent and tedious Fits of the
Headache, and though that distemper have since been much increased by a great
concussion of her Head, occasioned by the overturning of a Coach, yet she is
wont presently to be relieved, barely by holding her Head a pretty while over a
strong decoction of Thee, and breathing in the Steams of it.]

And now I am discoursing of Cures made by Steams, or other seemingly slight
means, I must not pretermit a thing so remarkable, that if it were more
generally known in Europe, I should think it somewh^t strange to find it so
little reflected on by Physicians; and that is the constant and almost sudden
ceasing of the Plague, how raging soever, in the almost incredibly populous
City of Grand Cayro in Egypt toward the latter end of June, about which time
in most Countries in our Hemisphere it is wont to spread fastest and be most
rife. The truth of this is attested by so many Travelers of several Nations,
that 'twere injurious to doubt of it, and not only the Dexterous Mr R. whom y^u
well know, and who lived at Cayro has confir'md to me the truth of it. But the
Learned Prosper Alpinus, who both was an excellent Physician, and spent many
Years in Egypt, De Medicina ^^gyptio^um, l^b. 1. cap. 17.
gives us this particular account of it, Pestis Cayri atque in omnibus locis
Aegypti invadere eos populos solet ineunte Sept^mbri mense, usque ad Junium:
his enim omnibus mensibus, a S^ptembri ad Junium usque, Pestis aliunde per
contagium illuc asportata eam gentem invadere solet: And after a few Lines,
Junio vero mense, qualiscunque and quantacunque sit ibi Pestilentia, Sole
primam Caneri partem ingrediente omnino tollitur, quod multis plane divinum
esse non immerito videtur: Sed quod etiam valde mirabile creditur, omnia
suppellectilia, Pestifero contagio infecta, tunc nullum Contagii effectum in
eam gentem edunt; ita ut tunc ea vobis in tutissimo and tranquillissimo statu
reducatur, ex sum morboso: atque morbi particulares, sporadici, a Graecis
vovati tunc apparere incipiunt, qui nusquam gentium tempore Pestis apparcbant.
And in the next Chapter, inquiring at large into the causes of this Wonder, he
denis it to proceed from the increase of the Nile, which happens to be
coincident in point of time with the extinction of the Plague, because that the
Infection cease before the swelling of the River is considerable; and
ascribes it rather to the alteration of the Air, produced by the Northernly
Winds which then begin to blow, and some other Circumstances: speaking of
which, Haec (says he) per id temporis incipiunt observari a quibus fortasse
non immerito causam extinctionis Pestis morbosique in salubrem statum
mutationis pendere arbitror: Ibidem, cap. 18.
quando nulla alia ex conservatricibus causis, quas vulgus medicorum res non
naturales appellat, aere excepto, ibi eo tempore appareat, in quam morbosi
status in salubrem mutationem refer possumus: ideo necessartum erit hujusce
mutationis causam Aeris mutationi acceptam refer, etc. Upon this Instance,
Pyrophilus, I h^ve presumed the longer to insist, because (if you duly reflect
on it) you will, I suppose, discern, that it much credits and elucidates a
great part of what has been delivered in diverse of the foregoing Leaves,
concerning the possibility of Natures doing great matters against Diseases,
without the help of gross and sensible Evacuations.

CHAP. XV.
ANd since we have represented a humane Body as an Engine, we shall add, That
it may be altered both for the better and for the worse, by such bare motions
or impulses of external Bodies, as act but in a gross and confessedly
Mechanical manner: For it is known, that out of such speedily killing, unless
seasonably remedied Distempers, as Fits of Swounding, Patients of either Sex
are often recovered without any inward Medicine, by being barely pinched in
several places. I, that have endured great and dangerous Sicknesses, have
scarce ever found any so violent for the time, as that which the bare motion and
smell of a Ship and Sea Air has put me into, especially in rough weather, till
I was somewhat accustomed to Navigation; and yet this violent and weakening
Sickness, as it was not produced by any peccant Humor in the Body, so it was
quickly removed by the Air, and Quiet of the Shore, without the help of
Physic. And the like may be observed more suddenly in the newly mentioned
Instances of those in whom, as the bare agitation of a Coach will produce such
violent Fits of Vomiting and such Faintness, that I have known some of them
apprehend they should presently die; so the bare cessation of that discomposing
motion soon relieved them. We see in our Stables, what operation, the currying
of them carefully, has upon our Horses. And Helmont somewhere tells us, That
himself, as I remember, could by the Milk of an Ass, tell whether she had been
that day diligently curryed or no; and so considerable an alteration in Milk
should, me thinks, strongly argue, that a great one in the Blood or other
Juice, of which the Blood is elaborated, and consequently in diverse of the
principal parts of the Body must have preceded it. But to prefer our
consideration from the Bodies of Beasts to those of Men, it is remarkable what
Piso confesses, the illiterate Brasilian Empericks are able to perform with
Frictions, even as unskilfully as they order them: Mira equidem, says he, tum
tuendae sanitatis ergo, Histor. Nae. Med. lib. 2. cap. 5. page 33.
cum in plerisque morbis sanandis, f^ictione and unctione frequenti incolae
praestant, illam in frigidioribus, and chronicis, hanc in acutioribus
adhibentes. Quae remedia lubenter advenae imitantur, and ut par est, ex legibus
artis haec and plura medendi Empiricorum genera moderantur. And as Galen
himself highly extols a skilful Application of Cupping-glasses in the Colic;
so in Brasil they find that the like Remedy is strangely successful: For
Cholera sicca, says our candid Piso in another place, Idem cap. 11.
eisdem fere Remediis (of which he had been speaking) curatur, maxim si
regioni hepatis corneae cucurbitulae applicentur. De quibus merito hoc testor,
quod Galenus de suis cucurbitulis, quas in Colico affectu incantamenti instar
operari tradidit.

We shall add, for further confirmation, that notwithstanding all the horrid
Symptoms that are wont to ensue upon the biting of that Poisonous Spider, the
Tarantula, that lasting and formidable Disease, which often mocks all other
Remedies, is by nothing so successfully opposed, as by Music. Some determinate
tune or other which proves suitable to the particular Nature of the Patients
Body, or that of the Poison producing there such a motion, or determination of
some former motion of the Spirits, or the Humors, or both; as by conducting the
Spirits into the Ne^ves and Muscles inservient to the motion of the Limbs, does
make the Patient leap and dance till he have put himself into a Sweat, that
breaths out much of the virulent Matter which has been probably fitted for
expulsion, by some change wrought in its Texture or Motion, or those of the
Blood, by the Music. For if Sweat and Exercise, as such, were all that
relieved him, why might not Sudorificks, or le^ping without Music, excuse the
Need of Fiddlers? which yet is so great, M^surg. lib. 9. cap. 4.
that Kircher informs us, That the Apulian Magistrates are wont to give
Stipends, at the public charge, to such to relieve the Poor by their playing.
And not only He has a memorable Story of Robertus Pantarus, a Tarantine
Nobleman, whose Disease being not known to proceed from the biting of a Spider,
could by no Remedies be cured; he was at length, even upon the point of death,
suddenly rel^ev'd, and by degrees restored to perfect health by the use of
Music: But Epiphanius Ferdinandus, in h^s accurate Observations concerning
those bitten with the Tarantula, together with Mathiolus, and other Authors
be^r witness thereunto, by resembling Narratives. Now that a Sound (not barely
as a sound, but as so modified) may powerfully operate upon the Blood and
Spirits, I, who am very Musically given, have diverse times observed in my self,
upon the hea^ing of certain Notes. And it might be made probable, both by that
which we have formerly said of the effect of skreaking upon the Teeth and Gums,
and by the Dancing Fit, into which not every Musical Sound, though never so
loud, but some determinate Tune is wont to put the bitten Patien^. But it may
be more manifestly proved, by the following testimony of our inquisitive
Jesuit, wherein he affirms, That the Spiders themselves may, as well as those
they have bitten, be made to Dance by Tunes, suited to their peculiar
Constitutions. Vbi sonatores q^i Musica sua^ hoc ma^u^ etiam publicis
magistratus stipendiis ad pauperum reme^ium solati^^^^ue co^^^cti cu^a^e
con^ueveru^t, ad curas patientium certius faciliusque accelera^das, pri^o ^x
in^^ctis quaerer^ so^^^t ub^, quo loco, aut c^m^o, aut cujus coloris Ta^an^ula
era^, a q^o morsus (...). Quo f^cto indica^^m lo^um (...), ubi f^equentes
numero a^q^e omnis g^neris Ta^antulae (...) te^endorum la^or^bus incumbu^t,
acced^re sol^nt Medici Citharaedi, va^ aque tentare h^rmonia^um (...): ad quae
mi^um dictu, n^nc h^s ^unc ill^s salta^e non secus ac duorum polychordo^um
aequaliter (...), p^rso^atione ill^ chor^ae, quae simil^s si^i fu^rint to^o,
and aequalit^r tensae mo^^ntu^, reliquis (...), ita ut p^o simil^tu^ine and
co^^itione Taran^ular^m nunc ^as nunc illas sal^are compe^iunt. Cum (...)
co^o^is Tar^^^ul^m quae a (...) indicata f^^rat in saltum prorumpere viderint,
pro certissimo (...) h^ben^, mo^u^um se h^b^re ^erum and certum humori
v^ne^ioso (...) proportionatum, and ad (...) aptissim^, quo si uta^tu^
in^allib^l^m (...) effectu^ se co^sequi asseveruunt.] Kircher: Musurg: lib. 9
part. 2. cap. 4.


And this I the less wonder at, because Epiphanius Ferdinandus himself, Histor:
81.
not only tells us of a Man of 94 Years of age, and so weak that he could not
go, unless supported by his Staff, who did, upon the hearing of Music after he
was bitten, immediately tall a dancing and capering like a Kid; and affirms,
Vide Senner^i Practic. lib. 1. p. 2. cap. 16.
That the Tarantula's themselves may be brought to leap and dance at the sound
of Lutes, small Drums, Bagpipes, Fiddles, etc. but challenges those that
believe him not to come and try, promising them an Ocular Conviction: and adds
what is very memorable and pleasant, That not only Men, in whom much may be
ascribed to fancy, but other Animals being bitten may likewise, by Music, be
reduced to leap or dance: for he says, He saw a Wasp, which being bitten by a
Tarantula whilst a Lutanist chanced to be by; the Musician playing on his
Instrument, gave them the sport of seeing both the Wasp and Spider begin to
dance: annexing, That a bitten Cock did do the like.

CHAP. XVI.
I Might also, Pyrophilus, confirm what I told you, when I said, That Sickness
may produce such an alteration in the Fabric of the Body, as to make it
capable to be very much affected, as well for the better as for the worse, by
such things that would not scarce at all affect it if it were sound, from the
consideration of those many and strange (...), or Peculiarities, to be met with
in some Persons in Sickness and in Health. For though many of these differences
between healthy Men, are not likely to be greater then may be observed between
the same Man when well, and himself as the Economy of his Body may be
dis-compos'd by some Distemper; yet we often see, that some Persons have the
Engine of their Body so framed, that it is wonderfully disordered by such
things as either work not at all on others, or work otherwise on them: as it is
common enough for Men to be hugely disturbed, and some of them to fall into
Fits of trembling or swooning, upon the sight or hearing of a Cat. And to such
an affection I know a very eminent Commander obnoxious, Your late Uncle, the
last Earl of Barrymore, a very gallant Noble Man, and who did his Country great
Service in the Irish Wars, had the like apprehension for Tansey. I cannot see a
Spider near me, without feeling a notable commotion in my Blood, though I never
received harm from that sort of Creature, and have no such abhorring against
Vipers, Toads, or other venomous Animals. You know an excellent Lady (married
to a Great Person that has more then once governed Ireland) whose Antipathy to
Honey, which is much talked of in that Country, has displayed it self upon
several occasions: notwithstanding which, her experienced Physician imagining
that there might be something of conceit in her Aversion, took an opportunity
to satisfy himself, by mixing a little Honey, with other Ingredients, of a
Remedy which he applied to a very slight and inconsiderable cut or scratch,
which she chanced to get on her Foot; but he soon repented of his Curiosity,
upon the strange and unexpected disorder which his (in other cases innocent)
Medicine produced, and which ceasing upon the removal of that, and application
of other ordinary Remedies, satisfied him, That those Symptoms were to be
imputed to the Honey, and not the bare hurt. The same excellent Lady, I
remember, complained to me, That when she was troubled with Coughs, all the
Vulgar, Pectoral and Pulmoniack Remedies did her no good, so that she could
find relief in nothing but either the Fume of powdered Amber, taken with
convenient Herbs in a Pipe, or that Balsamum Sulphuris which we have already
taught you in this Essay.

[I know a Person of Quality, tall and strongly made, who lately asked my
Opinion, Whether, when he had need of Vomit, he should continue to make use of
Cauphy, in regard it wrought so violently with him: This gave me the occasion,
as well as curiosity, of enquiring particularly both of Himself and his Lady,
concerning this odd Operation of Cauphy upon him; and I was told, That an
ordinary Wine-glass full of the usual warm decoction of Cauphy, boiled in
common Water, was wont, within about two hours, to prove emetick with him, and
before Noon did give him eight, ten, or sometimes twelve Vomits, with so much
violence, that he was less affected by the infusion of Crocus metallorum, or
other usual emeticks, and therefore was deliberating whether he should not
change Cauphy for some of them, though finding its Operation very certain, he
had for some Years accustomed himself to take that Vomit: And that which is
also remarkable in this m^tter, is, that he tells me, That scarce any Vomit is
more troublesome to him to take, then that abovementioned ^s grown of late, so
that even the odor of Cauphy, as he passes by Cauphy-houses in the Street,
does make him sick; and yet that Simple is to most Men so far from being
Vomitive, that it is by eminent Physiti^ns, and in some cases not without
cause, much extolled as a strengthner of the Stomach. And this very Gentleman,
himself, used it a pretty while against the Fumes that offended his Head,
without finding any Vomitive Quality at all in it.]

The Books of sober and learned Physicians, afford us Examples of diverse such,
and of much more strange Peculiarities, and likewise of such Persons who having
desires of certain things very extravagant, and even absurd (ordinarily not
only improper, but hurtful to their Distempe^s) have been cured by the use of
them, of very dangerous and sometimes hopeless Diseases: Of which kind of
Cures I may also elsewhere tell you what I have observed, and some credit may
be brought to such Relations, by what we ordinarily see more greedily devoured
(without much harm) by longing Women, and Maids troubled with the Greensickness.

But now, Pyrophilus, since the Engine of an humane Body thus appears to be so
framed, that it is capable of receiving great alterations from such unlikely
things as those we have been mentioning, Why should we h^stily conclude against
the efficacy of Specificks, taken into the Body, upon the bare account of their
not operating by any obvious quality, if they be recommended unto u^, upon
their own experience by s^ber and faithful Persons? And that scarce sensible
quantities of M^tter, having once obtained access to the mas^ of Blood (which
is very easily d^ne by the Circulation) may, by the contrary and swift motion,
and by the Figure of the Corpusc^es it consists of, give such a new and
unnatural impe^iment or determination to the motion of the Blood, or so
dis-compose either its Texture, or that of the Heart, Brain, Liver, Spleen, or
some such principal part of the Body (as a spark of Fire reduces a whole
Barrel of Gunpowder, to obey the Laws of its motion, and become Fire too; or
as a little Leaven is able, by degrees, to turn the greatest lump of Dow into
Leaven) need be manifested by nothing, but the Operations of such Poisons as
work not by any of those (which Physicians are pleased to call) Manifest
Qualities. For though I much fear, that most of those that have written
concerning Poisons, supposing that M^n would rather believe then try what they
relate, have allowed themselv^s to deliver many things more strange then true;
yet the known effects of a very small quantity of Opium, or of Arsenick, of the
scarce discernable hurt made by ^ Vipers Tooth, and especially of the biting of
a mad Dog (which sometimes, by less of his Spittle then would weigh half a
Grain, subdues a whole great Ox into the like m^dness, and produces
truly-wonderful Symptoms both in Men's Bodies and Beasts) are sufficient to
evince what we p^oposed.

And that Man's Body may be as well sometimes cured, as we see it too often
discomposed, by such little proportions of M^tt^r, may (not now to mention the
questionable Vertu^s ^scrib'd to many Antidotes) be gathered from that
Expe^iment, so common in Italy and elsewhere, of curing the envenomed biting of
Scorpions, by anointing the bitten and tumid place with common Oil, wherein
store of Scorpions have been drowned and steeped. And a resembling Example of
the Antidotal Virtue, wherewith Nature has enriched some Bodies, is given us
by the above-commended Piso, in his Medicina Brasiliensis, Lib. 4. Cap. 48.
where (treating of the Antidotal Efficacy of the famous Brasilian Herb Nhanby,
eaten upon an empty Stomach) he adds this memorable Story; That he himself saw
a Brasilian, who having caught an overgrown Toad, See the same Author, Lib. 3.
under the Title Cur^ru.
and swelled with Poison (such a one as Brasilians call Cururu) which uses to
be as big again as the European Toad, and desperately venomous (which perhaps
our Toads are not) he presently killed him, by dropping on his back the Juice
of the Flowers and Leaves of that admirable Plant. And you may remember, that
the same Author formerly told us, in effect, that as great and salutary changes
may be produced even in humane Bodies, where he relates, That he had known
those that had eaten several sorts of Poison, Snatched, in a trice, from
imminent death, by only drinking some of the Infusion of the Root he calls
Jaborandi; and this, after I know not how many Alexipharmaca and Theriacal
Antidotes had been fruitlesly administered.

You will perchance tell me, Pyrophilus, that these three or four last
Instances are of Poisonous Distempers and their Antidotes; not of ordinary
Diseases, and their Specific Remedies. But to th^s I have a double Answer: and
First, Many of those Distempers that proceed from Poison, are really Diseases,
and both called by that Name, and treated of, as such, by Physicians. And
indeed they may well look upon them but as Diseases, exasperated by a virulent
Malignity, which yet appears to be not always easily distinguishable from that
of Diseases that proceed not from Poison, by this, That otherwise the
Physicians of Princes and great Men, if after having considered all the inward
Parts of their dis-bowell'd Patients, could not so often doubt and dispute, as
they do, whether or no Poison were accessory to their death. And Piso (who
learned diverse of their detestable Secrets from the Brasilians) relates, That
some of them are so skilful in the cursed Art of tempering and allaying their
Poisons, that they will often hinder them from disclosing their deleterial
Nature for so long a time, that the subtle Murderers do as unsuspectedly as
fatally, execute their Malice or Revenge. These Diseases indeed are wont to
differ in this from Surfeits, and other resembling ordinary Diseases; that in
the one, the venomous matter that produces the Disease, is at first much more
small, then in the other the morbifick Matter is wont to be. But the activity
of this little quantity of hostile Matter does make it so pernicious, that the
Disorders it produces in the Body, being much greater then that of ordinary
Sicknesses is; the cure of such Distempers is the fitter to manifest how
powerfully Nature may be succored, by Remedies that work not by first or
second Qualities, since such are able to deliver Her from Diseases heightened by
a peculiar and venomous malignity.

To this first I shall subjoyn my next, which is, That diverse Passages of the
former Discourse (especially what we have related concerning the cure of Agues,
of the Rickets, and of the King's Evil) may satisfy you, That even of ordinary
Diseases (some at least) may be as well cured by Specificks, as those produced
by Poison are by Antidotes.

You may also say, Pyrophilus, But what if a recommended Sp^cifick do not only
seem unable to produce the promised Effect, but have Qualities, which according
to our Notions of the nature of the Disease, seem likely to conspire with it
and increase it?

I Answer,

First, That though it is better for a Patient to be cured by a rashly an^
unskilfully given Medicine, then to die under the use of the most skilfully
administered Physic; yet that the Physician who loses h^s Patient, after
having done all that his Art prescribed to save him, deserves more commendation
then he that luckily ch^nceth to cure his Patient by an irrational course. And
therefore in such a case as you put, Pyrophilus, I think the Physician ought to
be very well satisfied of the matter of Fact, before he venture to try such a
Remedy, especially if more ordinary and unsuspected means have not been
imploye^ and found ineffectual; for it is not one lucky Cure that ought to
recommend to a wary Physician the use of a Remedy, whose dangerous Qual^ty
seems obvious, whereas its virtue must be credited upon Report.

But then secon^ly, If the Physiti^n be duly s^tisfied of the efficacy of the
Remedy, upon a co^petent number and variety of Patients, I suppose he may,
without ^ashness, make use of such Remedies at least, where ordinary Medicines
have been already fruitlesly tried.

CHAP. XVIII.
THat you may cease to wonder at my daring to say this, Pyrophilus, I must
offer to you three or four Particulars.

And first, it is manifest to those that are inqu^sitive, That the true Nature
an^ Causes of several Dise^ses, are much less certain, and much more disputed
of among the Doctors themselves, then those that are not inquisitive imagine:
Nor is the method of curing diverse particular Diseases more settled and agreed
on, that depending chiefly upon the knowledge of those C^uses, which as I was
saying, are controverted. It Is not that I am either an Enemy to Method in
Physic, or an Undervaluer of it; but I fear the generality of Physiti^ns for I
intend not, nor need not all along this Essay speak of them all have as yet but
an imperfect Method, and have, by the narrow P^inciples they were taught in the
Schools, been persuaded to frame their Method rather to the barren Principles
of the Pe^ipatetick School, then to the full amplitude of Nature. Nor do I
find that Physicians have yet done so fit a thing, as seriously (and with the
attention which the impo^tance of the thing deserves) on the one side, to
enumerate and distinguish the several Causes, that may any whit probably be
assigned, how the Phenomenon of that disordered state of the humane Body, which
we call a Disease, or its Symptoms, may be produced. And on the other side, by
how many and how differing ways the Phenomenon may be removed, or the D^seases
they belong to destroyed: And if this were analytically and carefully done, I
little doubt but that Men's knowledge of the Nature and Causes of Diseases, and
the ways of curing them, would be less circumscribed and more ^ff^ctu^l then
now it is wont to be. And I am apt to think, that even Methodists would then
find that there diverse probable, if not promising Methods (proper to diverse
ca^es) which Ways they yet overlook: And though in a right sense it be true,
that the Physician is but Natures Minister, and is to comply with Her, who aims
always at the best; yet if we take them in the sense those Expressions are
vulgarly used in, I may elsewhere acquaint You with my Exceptions at them, and
in the mean time confess to you, That I know not whether they have not done
harm, and hindered the advancement of Physic, fascinating the minds of Men,
and keeping them from those effectual Courses, whereby they may potently alter
the Engine of the Body; and by rectifying the Motion and Texture of its Parts,
both consistent and fluid, may bring Nature to their bent, and accustom Her to
such convenient Courses of the Blood and other Juices, and such fit times and
ways of evacuating (what is noxious or superfluous etc.) as may prevent or cure
diverse stubborn Diseases, more happily then the vulgar Methodists are wont to
do.

And indeed, it is scarce to be expected, that till men have a better Knowledge
of the Principles of Natural Philosophy, without which it is hard to arrive at a
more comprehensive Theory of the various possible causes of Diseases, and of
the contrivance and uses of the parts of the Body, the Method which supposes
this Knowledge should be other then in many things defective, and in some
erroneous, as I am apt to think, the vulgar Method may be shown to be as to
some particular Diseases. Of this I may perhaps elsewhere acquaint you more
particularly with my suspicions, and therefore I shall now only mention the
last Observation of this kind I met with, which was in a Gentleman, You and I
very well know, who being for some Months much troubled with a difficulty of
breathing, and having been unsuccesfully treated for it by very Eminent
Physicians, we at last suspected, that 'twas not the Lungs, but the Nerves that
served to move the Diaphragme and other Organs of respiration, upon whose
distemper this supposed Asthma depended, and accordingly by a taking or two of
a Volatile Salt of ours, which is very friendly to the genus Nervosum, he was
quickly freed from his trouble some distemper, which afterward he was fully
persuaded did not proceed from any stuffing up of the Lungs. To be short, how
much esteem soever we have for Method, yet since that it self and the Theories
whereon men ground it, are, as to diverse particular Diseases, so hotly disputed
of; even among Eminent Physicians, that in many cases a man may discern more
probability of the success of the Remedy, then of the truth of the received
Notion of the Disease; In such abstruse cases methinks it were not amiss to
reflect upon that reasoning of the ancient Empericks (though on a somewhat
differing occasion) which is thus somewhere expressed by Celsus: Neque se
dicere consilio medicum non egere, and irrationabile Animal hanc artem posse
praestare, sed has latentium rerum conjecturas ad rem non pert nere; Quia non
intersit, quid morbum faciat, sed quid tollat. And as the controverted Method
in the abovementioned Diseases is not yet established or agreed on in the
Schools themselves, so diverse of those that are wholly strangers to those
Schools, do yet by the help of Experience and good Specificks, and the Method
their Mother-wit does, according to emergencies, prompt them to take, perform
such considerable cures, that Piso sticks not to give this Testimony to the
utterly Unlearned Brasilian Empericks. Interim, Hist. Not. and Med. Lib. 2.
page 23.
says he, seniores and exercitatiores eximii sunt Botanici, facilique negotio
omnis generis medicamina ex undiquaque in sylvis conquisitis conficiunt. Quae
tanta sagacitate interne and externe illos adhibere videas, praecipue in morbis
a veneno natis, ut quis illorum manibus tutius and securius se tradat, quam
medicastris nostris sciolis, qui secreta quaedam in umbra nata atque educata
crepant perpetuo, and ob has Rationales dici volunt.

Secondly, There are diverse Medicines, which though they want not some one
quality or other proper to increase the Disease against which they are
administr'd, are yet confidently used by the most judicious Doctors, because
that they are also enriched with other qualities, whereby they may do much more
good then their noxious quality can do harm; as in a Malignant Fe^ver, t^ough
the distemper be Hot, and though Treacle an^ s^^e other Antidotal Su^or ficks
be hot also, yet they are usefu^^y admin^stred in such Dise^s^s, because the
relief they bring the p^tient by oppugning the Malignity of the pecc^nt
matter, an^ perhaps by easing him of some of it by sweat, is more consi^erable
then the h^rm they can do him, by increasing for a while his He^t.

The very experienced Bontius, Chief Physiti^n to the Dutch Plantation in the
East- Indies; in his Methodus medendi Indica, Cap. 2.
Treating of the Spasmus, which (though here unfrequent) he reckons among the
Endemial Diseases of the Indies, commends the Use of Quercetanus's Laudanum, of
Philonium, and principally of an Extract of Opium and Safron, which he
describes and much Extols; and le^st h^s Readers should scruple at so strange a
prescription, he a^^s this memorable passage to our present pu^pose. Fortaf^^s
(sues he) Sciolus quispiam negabit his remediis, propter vim stupefactivam ac
narcoticum nervisque inimicam, esse utendum. Speciosa quidem haec prima front
videntur sed tamen vana s^nt. Nam praeterquam quod calidissima hujus Climatis
t^mp^r^es non requirat, certissimum est in tali necessitate: sine his aeg^um
evadere non posse. Add quod nos tam rite Opium hic praeparamus ut vel infanti
innoxie detur: and sane ut verbo ab^^lvam^ si Opiata hic nobis de^ssent in
morbis calidis hic grass^ntibus frustra remedia adhiberemus quod etsi imperitis
durum, ex progr^ssu tamen me nihil tem^re dix^sse pat^bit.

The drincking freely, especially if the Dr^nk be cold Water, is usually (and
in most c^ses, nor without much reason:) strictly forbidden, as very hurtful
for the Dropsy, and yet those that frequent the Spaa, tell us of great cures
performed by pouring in plenty of Waters unto the Patients already distended
Belly; and I know a Person of great Quality, and Virtue, who being by an
obstinate Dropsy, besides a complic^tion of other formidable diseases, brought
to a desperate condition, was advised to Drink Tunbridg Waters, when I happn'd
to be there, by her very skilful Physician: Who told me, that the Doctors
having done all their Art could direct them unto in vain, she would be cured by
Death, if she were not by these Waters; from whence (the weather proving very
seasonable for that sort of Physic) she returned in so prosperous a condition
of recovery, as exacted both his and my wonder. That the Decoction of so
heating a Simple as Guajacum; would be looked upon by the generality of
Physicians, both Galenists and Chemists, as a dangerous Medicine in P^hisical
and other consumptions, you will easily grant: and yet some eminent Physicians,
and (particularly Spaniards) tell us of wonderful cures they have performed in
desperate Ulcers of the Lungs by the long use of this Decoction,
notwithstanding its manifestly and troublesomely heating Quality. And I know a
Physician eminently learned, and much more a Methodist, then a Chemist, who
assures me, that he has made trial of this unlikely way of curing Consumptions
with a success that has much recommended these Paradoxical Spaniards to him.
It Is also believed, and not without cause, by Physicians, that Mercury is wont
to prove a great enemy to the Genus nervosum, and often produces Palseys, and
other distempers of the Brain and Nerves: and yet one of the exactest and
happiest Methodists I know, has confessed to me, that Mercurial preparations
are those which he uses the most succesfully in Paralytical and the like
distempers of what Physicians call the Genus nervosum. And on this occasion, I
remember, that a Gentlewoman being confined to her Bed by a Dead Palsy, that
had seized on on^ side of her Body, a Physician eminent for his Books and
Cures, giving her a dose of a certain Preparation of Mercury, corrected with a
little Gold, which I put into his hands for that purpose, was pleased to bring
me word, that by the first taking of the Powder, which wrought but gently by
Siege, without either Vomits or Salivation, she was enabled the same or the
next day to quit her Bed, and walk about the Room.

Thirdly there are many things which seem to be against reason whilst they are
barely proposed and not proved for which we afterward discern very good
reason: when experience, having satisfied us they are really true, has both
invited us, and assisted us to enquire into their causes. Of this we have
elsewhere given diverse not Medical Instances in our ESSAY Concerning improbable
Truths: And I could easily enough, if I du^st be tedious, give you some Medical
Illustrations of the some truth. But I dare now only invite you to consider
th^s one thing, which may be of great use to explicate many others, both in
Natural Philosophy, and in Physic too, which is, That ^here are diverse
Concretes, some of them as to Sense, Similar, or Homogeneous, whose differing
parts are endowed with very differing and sometimes contrary Qualities. And
this not only appears in the Chemical Analysis of Bodies made by the fi^e,
where the difference of what Chym^sts call the separate^ Principles of
Concretes is often very manifest and great, but even in diverse Bodies that h^ve
not been resolved by the violence of the Fire; as is evident in Rhubarb taken
in substance, whose subtiler parts are purging, and its terrestrial astringent:
Nay, if those parts which do in much the less quantity concur to the
constitution of the concrete do but meet with a Body disposed to receive their
Impressions, it is very possible, that they may work more powerfully on it then
the other Parts of the same Concrete, of which the Eye judges it altogether to
consist.

This I have made out to some ingenious Men, by showing, that though Sallet Oil
be generally reputed to consist of Fat and Unctuous Particles, and therefore to
be a great resister of Corrosion; yet it contains in it sharp and piercing
parts, which meeting with a disposed subject, do more powerfully operate then
the more purely Oleaginous ones. As we endeavored to evince by keeping for a
short while in a gentle warmth, some pure Oyl-Olive, upon a quantity of Filings
of even crude Copper: For from them the Liquor extracted an high Tincture
betwixt Green and Blew, like that which such Filings would have given to
Distilled Vinegar, which according to Chemists Notions obtains that Color, by
making with its Acid and Corrosive Salt a real solution of some part of the
Copper, as may appear by the recoverablenesse of the metal out of it. Another
proof or two of the Acrimony of some of the parts of Oil we may elsewhere give
you. But now we shall rather confirm our Answer to your Question, by two or
three Examples of Cures performed by unlikely Remedies.

I went once to visit an Ingenious Helmontian, whom I found Sick on his Bed,
and having by the Symptoms of his Disease, discerned it to be a Pleurisy, I
talked with him of seasonably opening a Vein, but he was resolved against it,
and told me he would cure himself by a remedy, which at first seems as likely
to increase such a disease as Phlebotomy is to cure it, namely by the use of
Helmonts Laudanum Opiatum which in effect did in three or four days cure him,
and since he without Blood letting cured some others with it; which I the less
wonder at, because of my having observed that Opium (with which unskilful men
seldom tamper without danger) if duly corrected and prepared proves sometimes
a great resolver, and commonly a great Sudorifick insomuch, that I have known
it make a person copiously sweat, who often complained to me, that other
Diaphoreticks had no such operation on him.

I have oftentimes seen Coughs strangly abated by the use of a Remedy, which I
have not long since told you, how I prepare: and with which (I remember) in a
pretty Child you ( Pyrophilus) know, and who is now very well, I was so happy
as to repress in a few Hours a violent Cough, that threatened her with Speedy
Death, and yet this Medicine has so eminent a saltness, that the Tongue can
scarce suffer it; and how much the use of Salt things is by many Physicians
condemned in Coughs (and indeed in many cases not without Reason) I need not
tell You. And with exceedingly piercing Essence or Spirit of Man's Blood, I have
known, notwithstanding its being very Saline, and its manifestly heating the
Patient, especially for the first Four or Five days, strange things performed
even in a deplorable and hereditary Consumption. This Pyrophilus brings into my
mind, something, that, it may be, you will think odd, which is, that hav^ng
had occasion to advise for a person of high quality, with a very ancient
Galenist, that in his own Country was looked upon as almost an Oracle, and
particularly in reference to Phthisical Consumptions, which was there a vulgar
Disease, He confessed to me, that though his having fallen into it himself,
made him very solicitous to find a cure for it; and though he had in his long
and various practice, made trial of great variety of Methods and Remedies for
the cure of that Disease, yet that with which he cured himself, and afterward
the generality of his chief Patiens was principally Sulphur melted, and
mingled, in a certain proportion to make it fit to be taken, in a Pipe, with
beaten Amber or a Cephalic Herb. The particular circumstances of his Method, I
cannot now set you down, not having by me the Paper wherein they were Noted,
but if I mistake not the Herb, with which he mingled the Brimstone or Flower of
Sulphur was Coltsfoot or Betony; and I well remember, that what he looked upon
as the chief and specific Remedy in his way of curing, was the smoke of the
Sulphur; the other ingredients being added, not so much for their being proper
enough for the Disease, as their helping to fill the Pipe, and thereby to allay
the pungency, wherewith the Smoke, if afforded by a Pipe filled with Brimstone
alone, would be qualified. But yet this Sulphurous Smoke is so predominant in
the Remedy, that he used to have a Syrrup in readiness to ^elieve those, whom
the Acrimony of the Fumes should make very sore, and perhaps blister on the one
side of their Mouths, or Throats, which accident he provided for, by that
cooling and healing Syrrup, without being thereby discouraged from prosecuting
the cure with the same Remedy; wherewith a person very Curious and Rich, has
solemnly assured me, that himself has cured diverse Consumptions, and
particularly in a Lady, even in health very Lean, that he named to me, as being
one I then knew. Now we know that Physicians generally, and in most cases
justly, forbid Acid things to those that have exulcerated or tender Lungs, and
how highly Acid and piercing the Smoke of Sulphur is, the Chemists can best
tell you, who by catching it and condensing it in Glasses shaped almost like
Bells obtain from it that very corrosive Liquor, which readily dissolves Iron,
being the very same that is commonly called Oleum Sulphuris per campanam, and
yet it seems that either the Theory of Consumptions is misunderstood, or that
the drying quality of the Sulphurous steam, and its great power to resist
putrefaction, and as it were embalm the Lungs and season the Blood are
considerable enough to account for the Harm which its Acidity may do.

Eeles are so commonly eaten by Persons of both Sexes without being taken
notice of for any Quality, except their Crudity, that one would scarce believe
such a stinking and odious Medicine as that of their Livers and Galls dried
slowly in an Oven should be more proper for any thing, then to make the taker
Vomit; and yet Helmont in diverse places speaks of this Medicine as if it had
ke^t multitudes of Women from dying of hard Labor. And since him, Panarola in
his New Observations highly extols it. And I knew a very famous Emperick, who
had very few other Secrets, and scarce any one so great to get Reputation and
Money by. And I remember also, That some years since I had occasion to give it
to the Wife of a very ingenious Physician, of whom the Midwives and her Husband
almost despaired, and (as she afterward told me her self) each Dose made her
throws (which before had left her) return, and at length she was safely
delivered she scarce knew how. But I found double the Dose prescribed by
Helmont, requisite to be used at last; and that the quantity of a Walnut of the
Powder of these Livers given in Rhenish or White Wind, and when the Stomach was
most empty, was no more then such a case required.

Scorpions being Venomous Creatures, to suffocate and infuse them in Oil might
seem the way to make it Poisonous, if experience did not assure us, that th^s
Oil is so far from being such, that it Cures the envenomed bitings of
Scorpions, which effect now that Physicians find it upon trial to be true, they
confess to be rational, and ascribe it, how justly I now examine not to the
attraction of the Poison received into the Body, by that which is outwardly
applied to the hurt. And Piso informs us that amongst the Brasilians, whose
country is so much infested with Venomous Creatures it is the most general Cure
to draw out the Poison by applying to the hurt the beaten Body of the Beast
that gave it. As likewise in Italy, they account the crushing of the very
Scorpion that has bit a Man upon the bitten place for a most speedy and
effectual Remedy. And I remember that here in England the Old man, whom you
have seen going about with Vipers, Toads, etc. to sell, tol'd me that when he
was dangerously bitten by a Viper and all swelled by the Poison of it a great
part of his cure was the outward application of Venomous Creatures stamped
'till they were brought to a Consistence fit for that purpose.

That Fluxes are the general and Endemical Diseases in Ireland, I need not tell
you; and yet I remember, that having occasion to consult the ancientest and
most experienced Physician of that Nation Dr F. about the cure of it, he
assured me, that though during his very long Practice he had found diverse
Remedies very prosperous, some on one sort of Patients, and some on another;
yet the Medicine he most relied on, was this. To take unsalted Butter, and boil
it gently 'till a pretty part were consumed, Skimming it diligently from time
to time, whilst it stands over the fire, and of this Butter melted, to give
now and then a considerable quantity, according as the Patient is able to bare
it. A Remedy which at the first proposal may seem more likely to put a man into
a Flux then to cure him of one. And yet the same Remedy which he supposed to
benefit by mitigating the sharp humors and preserving the Entrals from their
Corrosion was afterward much commended to me by another ancient Irish
Physician, who was esteemed among the Doctors the next in Eminency to him that
I have named.

CAP. XIX.
I Should not here, Pyrophilus, add any thing to what I have already said
above in favor of the use of even odd Specificks, but that finding at every
turn, that the main thing, which does (really or in pretense) prevail with many
Learned Physicians (especially in a famous University You have visited abroad)
to reject Specificks, is, That they cannot clearly conceive the distinct manner
of the Specificks working, and think it utterly improbable, that such a
Medicine which must pass through Digestions in the Body, and be whirled about
with the Mass of Blood to all the parts, should, neglecting the rest, show it
self Friendly to the Brain, for instance, or the Kidneys, and fall upon this or
that Juice or Humor, rather then any other. But to this Objection which I have
proposed as plausible as I can readily make it, I shall at present but briefly
offer, according to what has been hitherto discoursed, these two things.

And First, I would demand of these Objectors a clear and satisfactory, or at
least an intelligible explication of the manner of working of diverse other
Medicaments that do not pass for Specificks, as how Rhubarb Purges Choler, and
Hellebor Melancholy rather then other Humou^s, how some Medicines that have
endured a strong fire, as Antimonium Diaphoreticum, and Bezoardicum minerale
well made, are yet oftentimes strongly Sudoririck; why the infusion of Crocus
Metallorum or of Glass of Antimony, though it acquire no pungent, or so much
as manifest t^st, whereby to velicate the Palate or the Tongue, are yet
violently both Vomitive and Cath^rtick; And how Mercury, which is innoxiously
given in many cases Crude to Women in labor and others, does e^sily acquire,
besides many other more abstruse Medicinal Qualities, not only an Emetick and
Purgative, but a Salivating faculty. For I confess, that to me, even many of
the vulgar Operations of common Drugs seem not to have been h^therto
intelligibly explained by Physicians, who are yet, for ought I have observed,
to seek for an account of the manner, how Diuretics, how Sudorificks, how
Sarcoticks, and how many other familiar sorts of Medicines, which those that
consider them but slightly are wont to think they understand thoroughly, perform
their operations. Nay, I much question, whether the generality of Physicians
can yet give us a satisfactory account, why any sort of Medicine purges in
general: And he that in particular will show me, where either the Peripatetick
or Galenical Schools, have intelligibly made out, why Rhubarb does particularly
purge Choler, and Senna more peculiarly Phlegm, Erit mihi magnus Apollo. For I
see not how from those narrow and barren Principles of the four Elements, the
four Humors, the four first Qualities (and the like;) Effects, far less
abstruse then the Operations of Purging Medicines, can satisfactorily be
deduced. Nor can I find, that any thing makes those Physicians, that are
unacquainted with the Philosophy that explains things by the Motions, Siz^s,
and Figures of little Bodies, imagine they understand the account upon which
some Medicines are Purgative, others Emetick, etc. And some Purgative in some
Bodies, Vomitive in other, and both Purgative and Vomitive in most; but because
they never attentively enquire into it.

But (which is the next thing I have to represent) if we duly make use of
those fertile and comprehensive Principles of Philosophy, the Motions, Shapes,
Magnitudes and Textures of the Minute parts of Matter, it will not perhaps be
more difficult to show, at least in general, that Specificks may have such
Operations, as are by the judicious and experienced ascribed to them, then it
will be for those that acquiesce in the vulgar Principles of Philosophy and
Physic, to render the true Reasons of the most obvious and familiar operations
of Medicines. And though the same Objection that is urged to prove, That a
Specific cannot befriend the Kidneys, for Example, or the Throat, rather then
any other parts of the Body, lies against the noxiousness of Poisons to this or
that determinate part; Yet experience manifests that some Poisons do respect
some particular part of the Body, without equally (if at all sensibly)
offending the rest: as we see that Cantharides in a certain Dose are noxious to
the Kidneys and Bladder, Quicksilver to the Throat, and the glanduls
thereabouts, Strammoneum, to the Brain, and Opium to the Animal Spirits and
Genus Nervosum. And if You call to mind, what we have formerly deduced to make
it out, That a Humane Body is an Engine, and that Medicines operate in it as
finding it so; we need not think it so strange, that there being many
Strainers, if I may so call them, of differing Textures, such as the Liver,
Spleen, and Kidneys, and perhaps diverse local Ferments residing in particular
parts, and a Mass of Blood continually streaming through all the parts of the
Body, a Medicine may be quickly by the Blood carried from any one part to any
other, and the Blood, or any Humor mingled with it, may be as easily carried
to the Medicine, in what parts soever it be, and the Remedy thus admitted into
the Mass of Blood, may in its passage through the Strainers, be so altered,
either by leaving some of its parts there, or by having them altered by the
abovementioned Ferments, or by being associated with some other Corpuscles, it
may meet within its passage; whereby the Size, or Figure, or Motion of its
small parts may be changed, or in a word it may by some of those many other
ways, which might, if this ESSAY were not too Prolix already, be proposed, and
deduced, receive so great an Alteration, in reference either to some or other
of the Strainers, or other firmer parts of the Body, or to the distempered
Blood, or some other fluid and peccant matter, that it needs not seem
impossible, That by that time the Medicine (crumbl'd as it were into Minute
Corpuscles) arrives at the part or humor to be wrought upon, it may have a
notable Operation there. I mean Part as well as Humor, because the Motion,
Size, or Shape of the Medicinal Corpuscles in the Blood, though not by sense
distinguishable from the rest of the Liquor they help to compose, may be so
conveniently qualified as to shape, bulk, and motion, as to restore the
Strainers to their right Tone or Texture, as well as the Blood to its free and
Natural course, by resolving and carrying away with them such tenacious matter,
as stuffed, or choked up the slender passages of the Strainer, or at least
Straightened its pores, or vitiated their Figure; And the same Sanative Corpuscles
may perchance be also fitted to stick to, and thereby to strengthen such Fibers
of the Strainers, or such other firmer parts of the Body, as may need congruous
Corpuscles to fill up their little unsupply'd C^vities.

Meats that are Salt, and Ta^tareous, whilst they are whirled about in the Mass
of Blood, may by the other part of that Vital Liquor be so diluted and kept
asunder so, as no^ to be offensive to any part: When they come to be separated
by the Parenchyma of the Kidneys, from the sweet^r parts of the Blood, that did
before temper and allay them, they easily, by their Saline pungency, offend the
tender Ureters and Membranous Bladders of those that are troubled with the
Stone or Strangurie. And perchance it is upon some such account, that
Cantharides are more noxious to the Bladder then to other parts of the Body.
And as S^lt meat thus grows peculiarly offensive to the Reins and Bladder; so
a Specific, disposed to be dissolved, after a peculiar manner, may, in the
Body, either preserve or acquire, as to its Minute parts, a friendly congruity
to the Pores of the Kidneys, Liver, or other Strainers equally, when
distempered; as I formerly observed to You, that New-milk sweetened with
Sugarcandy, though it be not wont sensibly to affect any other p^rt of the
Body; nor would have sensibly affected the Kidneys themselves, had they not
been d^sorder'd, yet after the t^oublesome operation of Cantharides, it ha^ a
very friendly effect upon the distempered Parts; Thus a Specific, for one
Disease, may be resolved in the Body into Minute particles of ^uch Figure and
Motion, that being fit to stick to other Corpuscles of peccant matter, which,
by their vehement agitation, or other offensive qualities di^compose the Body
and make it Feavouri^h, may allay their vehement Motion, and by altering them,
as to bigness and shape, give them new and innocent qualities, instead of those
noxious ones they had before.

Another Specific may dissolve the Gross and Slimy Humors that obstruct the
narrow passages of the Veins; as I have observed that Spirit of Hartshorn,
which powerfully opens other obstructions, and resolves stuffing Phlegm in the
Lungs, will also, though more slowly, resolve prepared Flowers of Sulphur,
crude Copper, and diverse other Bodies; and also it may, by mortifying the Acid
Spirit that oftentimes causes coagulations in the Blood, restore that Vital
Liquor to its Fluidity and free Circulation, and thereby remove diverse
formidable Diseases, which seem to proceed from the Coagulation, or Ropinesse
of the Blood; and on the other side, the Minute parts of some Specificks,
against a contrary Disease, may somewhat thicken and fix the two thin and
agitated parts of the Blood, or of some peccant matter in it, by associating
themselves therewith: as the nimble parts of pu^e Spirits of Wine, and those of
high rectified Spirit of Urine, will concoagulate into Corpuscles, bigger and
far less Agile. And the same Spirit of Wine it self, with another Liquor I
make, will presently concoagulate into a kind of soft, but not fluid Substance.
Nor is it so hard to conce^ve, that a Specific may work upon a determinate
Part or Humor, and let the others alone: as if you put, for instance, an Egg
into strong Vinegar, the Liquor will operate upon and dissolve all the hard
shell, and yet leave the tender skin untouched; And if you cast Coral into the
common rectified Spirit of Tartar, the far greater part of the Liquor, though
strong and spirituous, will remain unaltered thereby, and may be, integris
viribus, abstracted from it; but the Coral will presently find out, or rather
be found out by Acid or Acetuous Particles, and by incorporating it self with
them, take aw^y their sharpness: as in some cases Coral has been observed to do
to Sower Humors abounding in Humane Bo^ies, those Humors being easily, by the
Circulating Blood, brought (in their passage) to the Coral, whilst it perhaps
remains in the Stomach or Guts. And though the Circulation of the Blood be
sufficient to bring, little by little, the Acid Particles of that Liquor in its
passage through the Vessels to work upon Coral; yet in other Medicines the
Operation may be more nimble: The Remedy quickly diffusing it self through the
Mass of Blood, to seek, as it were, and destroy the Acid parts, which it meets
with blended with the rest of the Liquor; as Spirit of Urine being instead of
Coral put into the above mentioned Spirit of Tartar will not (that I have
observed) fasten it self to the Spirituous nor the Phlegmatic parts of the
Liquor, but only to the Acid ones, which it will Mortify or deprive of their
Sowerness by concoagulating with them. And I see not why it should be more
inconceivable that a Specific should have a peculiar Virtue to free the Body
from this or that peccant Humor, and a benign congruity to the distempered
Spleen or Liver, then that some Cathartick should purge Electively, and some
Antidotes have peculiar Virtues against such Poisons, whose Malignity
particularly invades the Brain or Kidneys, or some other determinate part: the
former of which the Physicians, we reason with, scruple not to teach; and the
latter of which is taught us not by them only, but by Experience too.

[Of the credibility of Specificks, and of the Efficacy even of some unlikely
ones, we might easily enough present You with more Proofs and Examples: But
these may possibly be sufficient for our present purpose; especially if you
duly consider, that as Pysick has owed its beginning to Experience, so those
that practice it must enlarge and rectify their Principles, according to the
new discoveries, which are made from time to time of the Operations and Power
of the productions, whether of Nature or of Art. This consideration I thought
to insist upon in my own Expressions; but finding lately the same Notion which
I had, to have been long since that of the ancient Empericks, I will sum up
what I meant to say in their words, as I find them wittily delivered by Celsus,
in that excellent Preface, where having spoken in their Sense of the Origin of
Physic, He continues Sic Medicinam ortam, subinde aliorum salute aliorum
interitu perniciosa discernentem a salutaribus: Repertis deinde Medicinae
remediis, hom^nes de rationibus eorum disserere caepisse; nec post Rationem,
Medicinam esse inventam, sed post inventam Medicinam, Rationem esse quaesitam.
And least the mistaken name of Emperick should make you undervalue so useful a
Consideration, which not the nature of their Sect, but that of the thing,
suggested to them; I shall add in favor of what we have delivered concerning
experienced, though otherwise unlikely Remedies, that it is a sentence ascribed
to Aristotle (and in my opinion, one of the best that is ascribed to him,)
libires constat, si opinio adversetur rei, quaerendam rationem non rem
ignorandam.]

And certainly Pyrophilus, though there be scarce any sort of men, whose
credulity may do the World more mischief then that of Physicians; yet perhaps,
neither nature nor mankind is much beholden to those, that too rigidly, or
narrowly, circumscribe, or confine the operations of Nature, and will not so
much as allow themselves or others to try whether it be possible for Nature
excited and managed by Art to perform diverse things which they never yet saw
done, or work by diverse ways, differing from any, which by the common
Principles that are yet taught in the Schools, they are able to give a
satisfactory account of.

To the many things which you may be pleased to apply to this purpose, out of
the precedent Discourse, diverse others may be added, if without tiring you,
they may be now insisted on. It would scarce have been believed some ages
since, by those that knew no other then Vegetable Purges and and Vomits, that a
Cup made of a Concret, insu^erable by the Heat of Humane Stom^cks should, by
having for a while, Wine or any such other Liquor, b^rely powered on it to make
an infusion, without any sensible diminution of its own bulk or weight, and
without any sensible alteration made in the Color, Taste, or Smell of the Wine,
communicate to it a strongly Emetick and Cathartick Ve^tue, and prov^
oftentimes Vomitive, even when put up in Clysters; and yet that this is
performable by Antimony, slightly prepared with Saltpeter, or without
addition, melted into a Transparent Glass, is commonly known to those that are
not Strangers to the Operations of the Antimonial Cup, and of the Glass made of
the same Mineral. And much more strange is that which is affirmed by
inquisitive Physicians upon their own Trial of the common Crocus Metallorum, or
somewhat corrected Antimony wont to be sold in Shops, namely, That a few
Drachmes of it, infused into some ounces of Wine, will make the Liquor work so
strongly, as if six or eight times the quantity had been steeped in it.

Those that believe that all Diaphoreticks must consist of subtle, sapid and
fugitive part^^ as if only such were easily separated form each other, and
agitated by the gentle heat of a Humane body, will scarce expect that any body
could, in a moderate Dose, be a good Sudorifick, that is so fixed as to be able
to persist diverse hours in a good Fire. And yet that Antimoniu^ Diaphoreticum
is such a Concrete, is now very well known to many besides Chemists.

That a Stone, and a Stone too so fixed, that it will sustain the violence of
reverberated Fire, and is consequently very unlike to be much wrought upon, or
digested by the heat of Humane Stomach, should be capable of agglutinating
together the parts of broken bones, would seem impossible to many, but it is
very well known to those that have made trial of the efficacy of the Lapis
Ossifragus: for though I have sometimes wondered at the Fixtness of this Stone,
above others, in the Fire, yet being for some days successively drunk in Wine,
or Aqua Symphyti, to the quantity of about half a Drachme, or more, it does so
wonderfully cement together the parts of broke and well-set Bones, that it
deserves the name it commonly has in the Shops of Osteocollae, and has
wonders related of it by several eminent, not only Chemical, but Galenical
Writers.

It Is almost incredible what Quercetane relates of what himself saw done with
it as to the cure of broken Bones, without much pain or any of the usual
grievous Symptoms, within four or five days; so that to the stupendous Virtue
he ascribes to this Stone, both inwardly given and outwardly applied, in the
form of a Poultis, with only beaten Geranium and Oil of Roses or Olives, he
thinks fit to annex these words: Quod incredibile videri posset, nisi praeter
me innumerabiles alii oculati and idonei testes extarent. And indeed these need
good proof to make a wary Man believe so strange a thing, since Chirurgions
observe, That Nature is wont to be forty days in producing a Callus to fasten
together the pieces of a broken Bone. But to make this the more credible by the
testimony of Authors more Galenically inclined, Matthiolus relates, That in
many the Bones having been very well set (Which Circumstance he requires as
necessary) have had their broken Parts conglutinated within three or four days:
Fab. Cent. 3. obser. 90.
And not only that most experienced Surgeon Fabricius Hildanus used it much
in Fractures, with only a little Cinnamon and Sugar to make it pleasant; Lib.
5. Part. 5. Cap. 1.
but the Learned Sennertus, who somewhere calls its Virtue admirable, thinks it
requisite, in his Surgery, to give us this caution of it: Verum in juvenibus
and iis qui boni sunt habitus callum nimis auget: Quapropter caute and non nisi
in adultioribus exhibendus: The warrantableness of which caution, and
consequently the strange efficacy of Osteocolla, was, I remember, confi^m'd to
me not long since by a skilful Physician who has particularly studied its
nature; and related to me, That some Years since his Mother, having by a fall
broken her Leg near the Knee, had too suddenly, by the overmuch use of this
Stone, a Callus produced in the part much bigger then he expected or desired.

He that, before the salivating Property of Mercury was discovered, should have
told Physicians of the ^espondent temper of these, we are now discoursing with,
that besides the known ways of disburthening Nature (namely by Vomit, Siege,
Urine, Sweat, and insensible Transpiration) there were a sort of Remedies, that
would make very large Evacuations by Spittle, and thereby cure diverse stubborn
Diseases that had been found refractory to all ordinary Remedies, would
certainly have been more likely to be derided, then believe by them; since no
known Remedy, besides, Mercury, has been, that I remember, observed to work
regularly by Salivation: (for though Ceruss of Antimony have been observed to
make Men, of some Constitutions, apt to spit much, yet it works that way too
languidly, to deserve the name of a Salivating Remedy; and probably owes the
quality it has of enclining to spit, to the Mercurial part of the Antimony,
wherewith the Regulus it is made of abounds) and therefore the greater their
experience of the Effects of Medicinal Operations should be supposed to be, the
greater indisposition it would give them to credit so unallyed a Truth. And yet
the reality of this Fluxing Property of Quicksilver is long since grown past
question, and has been found so useful in the cure of the most radicated and
obst^^^te Venereal Distempers, that I somewhat wonder those Physicians, that
scruple not to employ as boisterous ways of Cure, have not yet applied it to
the extirpation of some other Diseases; as Ulcers of the Kidneys, Consumptions,
and even Palsies, etc. wherein I am apt to think, it may be as effectual as in
those produced by Lust, and much more effectual then vulgar Remedies, provided
that the exceeding troublesome way of working of salivating Medicines be better
corrected then it is wont to be, in the ordinary Medicines employed to produce
Salivation, which they do with such tormenting Symptoms, that they are
scarcely supportable. But if purified Quicksilver be dexterously precipitated
by a long and competent digestion, with a due proportion of refined Gold,
Experience has informed us, that the salivating Operation of it may be
performed with much less uneasiness to the Patient. And that such Mercurial
Medicines, wherein the Quicksilver is well corrected by Gold, may produce more
then ordinary effects, we have been inclined to believe, by the trials which we
procured by Learned Physicians to be made in other then Venereal Diseases, of a
gently working precipitate of Gold and Mercury, of which we may elsewhere set
you down the Process.

[And now I am upon the Discourse of the peculiar Operations of Mercury, and of
unusual ways of Evacuation, I am tempted to subjoyn an odd Story, which may
afford notable h^nts to a speculative Man, as it was related to me both in
private, and before Illustrious Witnesses, by the formerly commended Chemist of
the French King: He told me then awhile since, that there is yet living a
Person of Quality, by name Monsieur de Vatteville, well known by the Command he
has or had of Regiment of Swissers in France, who, many Years ago following
the Wars in the Low Countries, fell into a violent Distemper of his Eyes,
which, in spite of what Physicians and Chirurgions could do, did in a few
Months so increase, that he lost the use of both his Eyes, and languish'd long
in a confirmed Blindness; which continued till he heard of a certain Emperick
at Amsterdam, commonly known by the name of Adrian Glasmaker (for indeed he was
a Glasier) who being cried up for prodigious Cures he had done with a certain
Powder, this Colonel resorted to him, and the Emperick having discoursed with
him, undertook his Recovery, if he would undergo the torment of the Cure; which
the Colonel having undertaken to do, the Surgeon made him snuff up into each
Nostril, about a Grain of a certain Mercurial Powder, which, in a strangely
violent manner, quickly wrought with him almost all imaginable ways, as by
Vomit, Siege, Sweat, Urine, Spitting and Tears, within ten or twelve hours that
this Operation lasted, making his Head also to swell very much: But within
three or four days after this single taking of the Drastick Medicine had done
working, he began to recover some degree of Sight, and within a Fortnight
attained to such a one, that himself assured the Relater, He never was so
Sharp-sighted before his Blindness. And the Relater assured me, that he had
taken pleasure to observe, That this Gentleman, who is his familiar
Acquaintance, would discern Objects farther and clearer then most other Men. He
added, That Monsieur de Vatteville told the Relater, he had purchased the way
of making this Powder of the Emperick, and had given it to an eminent
Surgeon, one Benoest (an Acquaintance of the Relaters) by whom he had been
cured of a Musket Shot that had broken his Thigh Bone, when the other
Chirurgions would have proceeded to amputation; and that this Benoest had with
this Powder, administered as before is related, cured a Gentlewoman of a Cancer
in the Breast. All which, and more, was confirmed to the Relater by the
Surgeon himself. But in what other stubborn and deplorable Cases they use
this Powder, I do not particularly remember. The Preparation of it, which a
Chemist did me the favor to tell me by word of mouth, as a thing himself had
also made, was in short this: That the Remedy was made by precipitating
Quicksilver, with good Oil of Vitriol, and so making a Turbith, which is
afterward to be dulcified by abstracting twenty, or twenty five, times from it
pure Spirit of Wine, of which fresh must be taken at every abstraction. But I
would not advise you to recommend so furious a Powder to any, that is not a
very skilful Chemist and Physician too, till you know the exact Preparation,
and particular uses of it; the reason of my mentioning it here, being but that
which I expressed at the entrance upon this Narrative.]

CHAP. XX.
YOu will perchance wonder, Pyrophilus, that having had so fair an opportunity
as the subject of this Essay afforded me, of discoursing to you about the
Universal Medicine, which many Paracelsians, Helmontians, and other Chemists
talk of so confidently: I have said nothing concerning the existence, or so
much as the possibility of it. But till I be better satisfied about those
Particulars then yet I have been, I am unwilling either to seem to believe what
I am not yet convinced of, or to assert any thing, that may tend to discourage
Humane Industry; and therefore I shall only venture to add on this occasion,
That I fear we do somewhat too much confine our hopes, when we think, that one
generous Remedy can scarce be effectual in several Diseases, if their causes be
supposed to be a little differing. For, the Theory of Diseases is not, I fear,
so accurate and certain as to make it fit for us to neglect the manifest or
hopeful Virtues of noble Remedies, where ever we cannot reconcile them to that
Theory. He that considers what not unfrequently happens in distempered Bodies
by the Metastasis of the Morbifique matter (as for instance, how that which in
the Lungs caused a violent cough removed up to the head may produce (as we have
observed) a quick decay of Memory and Ratiocination, and a Palsy in the Hands
and other Limbs) may enough discern that Diseases that appear very differing,
may easily be produced by a peccant matter of the same nature only variously
determined in its operations by the constitution of the parts of the body where
it setleth: and consequently it may seem probable to him, that the same
searching Medicine being endowed with qualities destructive to the texture of
that Morbifique matter, where ever it finds it, may be able to cure either all,
or the greatest part, of the Diseases which the various translation of such a
Matter ha^h been observed to beget. Moreover, it oftentimes happens that
Diseases, that seem of a contrary nature, may proceed from the same cause
variously circumstantiated; or (if you please) that of diverse Diseases, that
may both seem primary, the one is but Symptomatical or at most Secundary in
relation to the other; as a Dropsy and a slow Fever may, to unskilful men,
seem Diseases of a quite contrary nature, (the one being reputed a hot and dry,
the other a cold and moist Distemper) though expert Physicians know they may
both proceed from the same Cause, and be cured by the same Remedy: And in women
experience manifests, that a great variety of differing Distempers, which by
unskilful Physicians have been adjudged distinct and primary Diseases, and have
been, as such, unsuccessfully dealt with by them, may really be but disguised
Symptoms of the distempers of the Mother or Genus Nervosum; and may, by
Remedies reputed Antihysterical, be happily removed. To which purpose I might
tell you, Pyro. That I, not long since, knew a Practitioner, that with great
success used the same Remedies (which were chiefly Volatile and Resolving
Salts) in Dropsies, and in (not, Symptomatical, but) Essential Fevers. And our
selves have lately made some Experiments of not much unlike nature, with a
preparation of Hartshorn, of equal use in Fevers and Coughs, both of them
primary. I might on this occasion recur to diverse of the Remedies formerly
mentioned in several places of this Essay; since diverse of them have been found
effectual against Diseases, which, according to our common Theory, seem to be
little of kin one to another: And by telling you what I have observed
concerning the various operations of Helmont's Laudanum, of our Ens Veneris,
and even of a Medicine devised by a Woman, the Lady Kents Powder, I might
illustrate what I have lately delivered: But it is high time for me to pass on
to another Subject; and therefore I shall rather desire you, in general, to
consider, whether or no several Differing Diseases, and even some commonly
supposed to be of contrary natures, be not yearly cured by the Spaa waters in
Germany.

And to assist you in this Enquiry, I shall address you to the rare
Observations of the famous and experienced Henricus ab Here, and to his
Spadacrene; in the 8^h Chapter of which he reckons among the Diseases which
those Waters cure, Catarrhs, and the Distempers, which (according to him)
spring from thence; as the Palsy, Trembling of the Joints, and other Diseases
of kin to these, Convulsions, Cephalalgiae, (I name them in the order, wherein
I find them set down) Hemicraniae, Vertigo, Redness of the Eyes, of the Face,
the Erysipelata, Ructus continui, Vomitus, Singultus, Obstructions, and even
Scyrhus's, if not inveterate, of the Liver and Spleen, and the Diseases
springing thence; the Yellow Jaundise, Melancholia flatulenta seu
Hypochondriaca, Dropsies, Gravel, Ulcers of the Kidneys, and Carunculae in
meatu urinario, Gonorrhoeas, and resembling affections, Elephantiasis or the
Leprosy, fluor albus mulierum, Cancers and Scyrrhus's of the Womb, Fluxes and
even Dysenteries, the Worms (though very obstinate, and sometimes so copious as
to be voided in his presence, even with the Urine) Sterility, and not only the
Scabies in the Body and Neck of the Bladder, and clammy pituitous Matter
collected therein, besides Ulcers in the Sphyncter of it: but he relates, upon
the repeated Testimony of an eminent Person that he names, and one whom he
styles Vir omni fide dignissimus, That this Party being troubled with a very
great Stone in his Bladder, and having had it searched by diverse Lythotomists,
before he came to the Spaa, did, by very copiously drinking these Waters,
find, by a second search made by those Artists, that his Stone was much
dimin^shed the first Year, and (by the same way of trial) that it was so the
second Year. And of the Cures of these Diseases, the Physician mentions in the
same Chapter, as to many of them, particular and remarkable Instances; and in
the beginning of the next Chapter, having told his Readers that he expects they
should scarce believe these Waters can have such variety of Virtues, Caeterum,
says he, si in Spaa mature and constantibus naturalibus, vitalibusque
facultatibus venerint; aquasque quo dicemus modo biberint, indubie quae dixi,
vera esse fatebuntur: And though we be not bound to believe (nor does he ^ffirm
it) that the Spaa-waters do universally cure all the afore-mentioned
Distempers; yet it is very much, and makes much for our present purp^se, that
they should in so many Patients cure most of these Distempers, and lessen, if
not cure, the rest. And we may somewhat the better credit him, because even
where he reckons up the Virtues of the Spaa, he denis it some, which other
Physicians ascribe to it. And it is very considerable, what he subjoyns in
these words: Paucissimos enim vel nullos Spadae Incolas Capitis doloribus,
Cardialgia, Cal^ulo, Obstructionibus renum, Hepatis, Lienis, Mesaraicarum,
laborantes invenies, Ictericos, Hydropicos, Podagricos, Scabiosos, Epilepticos,
quod sciam, nullos. But that which I most desire you to take notice of, is,
That besides all the abovementioned Diseases, I find that he ascribes to
these Waters the Virtues of curing such as are counted of a contrary nature,
and are thought to require contrary Remedies: For besides that, he expressly
affirms, in the beginning of the eighth Chapter, That these Waters being
endowed with the Ve^tues both of hot and cold Minerals, they cure both hot and
cold affections, in the same Patients, and in d^ffering Bodies, and that
contrary Effects are performed by them: He has, after some Pages, this
passage, which may go for an Illustrious Proof of what he had asserted: Inter
caetera (says he, speaking of the Spaa-Waters) Mensibus movendis imprimis
idonea, quod millies experientia comprobavit. Et tamen nimium eorum fluxum
quovis alio medicamento felicius sistit.

These Testimonies, Pyrophilus, of our experienced Author, would perhaps obtain
the more credit with You, if You had seen what I la^ely had the opportunity to
observe in a hot and dry Season, at ou^ own Tunbridge-Waters in Kent, when I
was there to drink them. And therefore I shall again invite You not only to
consider, Whether one potent Remedy, such as it may be, may not be able to cure
variety of Diseases, and some supposed to be of contrary natures? But whether
or no diverse Persons, on whom the received Methodus medendi has been long and
fruitlesly employed, be not by their tired and despondent Physicians themselves
sent thither, and there cured of their abstruse and obstinate Diseases, by
Remedies prepared by Nature without the assistance of Art? For if you duly
reflect on this conspicuous Observation, and consider how much it is possible
for Art to meliorate and improve most (especially Mineral) Remedies, afforded
us by Nature, you would probably dare to hope, That Medicines might be prepared
of greater Efficacy, and applicable to more Diseases, then they who think the
more received Theory of Diseases (from which yet very eminent Physicians, in
diverse Particulars, scruple not to recede) incapable of being rectified; and
that judge of all Remedies by them, that are publicly Venal in Apothecaries
Shops, will allow themselves so much as to hope.

If now You demand, Pyrophilus, if I think that every Particular which has
contributed to swell this Discourse into a bulk so disproportionate to that
which the Title of an Essay promised, do directly belong to the Art of Physic?
I shall leave it to the Judicious Celsus (whom Le^rned Men have styled The
Roman Hippocrates) to answer for me, and he will tell you, That Quanquam multa
sint ad ipsas arts non pertinentia, tamen eas adjuvant excitando artificis
ingenium. I suppose I need not remind You, Pyrophilus, that it was not my
design, in what h^th been represented, to subvert those Principles of the
Methodus medendi, from which no sober Physicians themselves recede, and in
which they unanimously acquiess: And that I much less intend to countenance
those venturous Empericks, who, without any competent knowledge of Anatomy,
Botanicks, and the History of Diseases, think Receipts or Processes alone can
enable them to cure the Sicknesses they know not, and who would persuade Men to
lay by, as needless, a Profession, of whose Usefulness to Mankind we may
elsewhere have occasion to discourse. No, Pyrophilus, without peremptorily
asserting any thing, I have but barely represented the Notions I have mentioned
concerning the Methodus medendi, as things probable enough to deserve to be
impartially considered; That in ^ase they prove fit to be declined, they may
appear to have been rejected not by our superciliousness or laziness, but
(after a fair trial) by our experience: And in case they seem fit to be
approved, they may prove additional Instances of the Usefulness of Natural
Philosophy to Physic. Which Usefulness, Pyrophilus, if I have in any
considerable measure been so happy as to make out, I shall not think the time
(and much less the pains) I have bestowed upon that Theme, misspent. For, I
must confess to you, Pyrophilus, that to me it seems, that few things ought
more to endear to us the Study of Natural Philosophy, then that (according to
the Judicious Sentence of our Celsus, Rerum Naturae contemplatio, says he,
quam vis non faciat Medicum, aptiorem tamen Medicinae reddit) a deeper insight
into Nature may enable Men to apply the Physiological Discoveries made by it
(though some more immediately, and some less directly) to the Advancement and
Improvement of Physic.

And I well enough know, Pyrophilus, that if instead of Writing this Essay to
such an one as You, I should Write it to the more critical and severer sort of
Readers, they would be apt to think both that it is impertinent for me, who do
not profess to be a Physician, to treat prolixly of Matters Medicinal; and that
it may appear somewhat below me, in a Book, whose Title seems to promise you
Philosophical Matters, to insert I know not how many Receipts: But I shall not
scruple to tell such a Person as Pyrophilus, That since my Method required that
I should say something to you of the Therapeutical part of Physi^k, I thought
that Christianity and Humanity it self, obliged me not to conceal those things,
which how despicable soever they may seem to aspeculative Philosopher, are yet
such, as, besides that some of them may perhaps afford improveable Hints
touching the Nature of Remedies, if not also of Diseases, Experience has
encouraged me to hope, that others may prove useful to the sick. And as for the
inserting of Receipts, even in Books of Philosophical Subjects, I have not done
it altogether without example. For not only Pliny, a Person of great Dignity
as well as Parts, and Friend to one of the greatest Roman Emperors, has left
us in a Book, where he handles many Philosophical Matters, store of particular
Receipts; but our great Chancellor, The Lord Verulam, has not disdained to
Record some. And as for that Industrious Benefactor to Experimental Knowledge,
the Learned and Pious Mersennus, his Charity made him much more fearful to
neglect the doing what good he could to others, then to venture to lessen his
Reputation by an Indecorum, that in a Mathematical Book, and in a Chapter of
Arithmetical Combinations, he brings in not only a Remedy against the
Erysipelas, but even a Medicine for Corns, where he tells us, That they may be
taken away, by applying and daily renewing for ten days, or a fortnight, the
middle Stalk that grows between the Blade and the Root (for that I suppose he
means by the unusual Word Thallum) of Garlic, bruised. Nor is it without
Examples, though somewhat contrary to my Custom in my other Writings, that in
this, and the four precedent Essays, I have frequently enough alleged the
Testimonies of others, and diverse times set down Processes or Receipts, not of
my own devising. For even among professed and learned Physicians, scarce any
thing is more common, then on Subjects far less of kin to Paradoxes, then most
of those I have been discoursing of, to make use of the Testimonies and
Observations of other approved Writers, to confirm what they teach. And not now
to mention the voluminous Books of Schenkius and Scolzius, that famous and
experienced Practitioner Riverius himself, has not been ashamed to publish
together a good number of Receipts, given him by others, under the very Title
of Observationes communicatae: And Henricus ab Here, has, among his
Observationes oppido rarae, diverse Receipts that came from Mountebancks, and
even Gypsies. And therefore I hope that you, who know that it is not after
every Body that I would so much as relate an Observation, or mention a
Medicine, as thinking them probable, will easily excuse one that has much
fewer Opportunities then a professed Physician to try Remedies himself; if
treating of Subjects not so familiar, I choose to countenance what I deliver by
the Testimonies of skilful Men, and if I scruple not to preserve in these
Papers some not despicable Remedies, as well of abler Men as of my own, that
otherwise would probably be lost. But of this Practice I may elsewhere have
occasion to give you a more full Apology, by showing how much it may conduce to
the enriching and advancement of Physic; an Art, with whose praises I could
long entertain You, if I were at leisure (and durst allow my self) to exhaust
common places.

And yet give me leave to tell you, That Man is so noble a Creature, and his
Health to requisite to his being able to relish other goods; and oftentimes
also to the comfortable performance of what his Conscience, his Country, his
Family, his Necessities, and perhaps his allowable Curiosi^^ challenge from
him, that I wonder not so much at those Ancient Heathens, that being
Polytheists and Idolaters, thought themselves obliged, either to refer so
useful an Art as that of Physic, to the Gods or God-like Persons; or to add
those, that excelled in so noble a Faculty, to the number of those they
worshipped. For my part, Pyrophilus, a very tender and sickly Constitution of
my own, much (impaired by such unhappy Accidents as Falls, Bruises, etc.) has,
besides (as I hope) better motives of Compassion, given me so great a sense of
the uneasinesses that are wont to attend Sickness, that I confess, if I study
Chemistry, it is very much out of hope, that it may be usefully employed against
stubborn Diseases, and relieve some languishing Patients with less pain and
trouble, then otherwise they are like to undergo for Recovery. And really,
Pyrophilus, unless we will too grossly flatter our selves, we can scarce avoid
both discerning and deploring the ineffectualness of our vulgar Medicines, not
only Galenical, but Chemical; (for an active Body may yet be but a languid
Remedy.) For besides that many that recover upon the use of them, endure more
for Health, then many that are justly reckoned among Martyrs, did for Religion;
Besides this, I say, we daily meet with but too many in the case of that
bleeding Woman, mentioned in the Gospel, of whom it is said, That she had
suffered many things of many Physicians, Mark 5.26.
and had spent all that she had, and was nothing bettered, but rather grew
worse. And therefore I reckon the investigation and divulging of useful Truths
in Physic, and the discovering and recommending of good Remedies among the
greatest and most extensive Acts of Charity, and such, as by which a Man may
really more oblige Mankind, and relieve more distressed Persons, then if he
built an Hospital. Which perhaps you will not think rashly said, if you please
but to consider, how many the knowledge of the Salivating, and other active
Properties of Mercury, and of its enmity to putrefaction and Distempers
springing thence, have cured of several Diseases, and consequently how many
more Patients, then have recovered in the greatest Hospital in the world, are
obliged to Carpus and those others, who ever they were, that were the first
discoverers of the medical efficacy of Quicksilver. And for my own particular,
Pyroph. though my Youth and Condition forbid me the practice of Physic, and
though my unhappy Constitution of Body, kept diverse Remedies from doing me the
same good they are wont to do others; yet having more then once, prepared, and
sometimes occasionally had opportunity to administer, Medicines, which God has
been so far pleased to bless on others, as to make them Relieve several
Patients, and seem (at least) to have snatched some of them almost out of the
jaws of death; I esteem my self by those successes alone sufficiently
recompensed for any toil and charge my Enquiries into Nature may have cost me.
And though I ignore not, that it is a much more fashionable and celebrated
Practice in young Gentlemen, to kill men, then to cure them; And that, mistaken
Mortal^ think it the noblest Exercise of virtue to destroy the noblest
Workmanship of Nature, (and indeed in some few cases the requisiteness and
danger of ^estructive valor may make its Actions become a virtuous Patriot)
yet when I consider the Character, given of our great Master and Exemplar, in
that Scripture, which says, That he went about doing good, Acts 10.38. Mat.
4.24*
and Healing all manner ^f Sickness; and all manner of Disease among the people,
I cannot but think such an Employment worthy of the very nobl^st of his
Disciples. And I confess, that, if it were allowed me to envy creatures so much
above us, as are the Celestial Spirits, I should much more envy that welcome
Angels Charitable employment, who at set times diffused a healing virtue
through the troubled waters of Bet esda, John 5.14. 2 Kings 19.35.
then that dreadful Angels fatal employment, who in one night destroyed above a
hundred and fourscore thousand fighting men. But, of the Desireableness of the
skill and willingness to cure the sick, and relieve not only those that
languish in Hospitals, but those that are rich enough to build them, having
elsewhere purposely discoursed, I must now trouble you no longer on this Theme,
but Implore Your much needed pardon for my having been (beyond my first
intentions) so troublesome to You already.

AN APPENDIX TO THE FIRST SECTION OF THE Second Part.
Advertisements touching the following APPENDIX.
I Scarce doubt, but it will be exspected that I should annex to the foregoing
Treatise, those Receipts and Processes, which seem to be here and there
promised in it; But I desire it may be considered, that some Passages, which an
unattentive Reader may have mistaken for absolute Promises, are indeed but
Profers conditionally made to a particular Person, and so not engaging me, till
the condition (which was his desiring the things mentioned to him) be on his
part performed. And as for the other things, which every Reader may suppose to
be promised Him, I have at hand this general excuse, that at least I promised
nothing to the Public; whatever promises I may have made in the foregoing
ESSAYS, having together with them been addressed to a private Friend. And I
have two or three special Reasons to insist on this Excuse, for diverse of my
choicer Books and Papers, having not long since unhappily miscarried through
the negligence of some Men, or the Fraud of others, it is not now possible for
me to retrieve some of the things I was Master of, when I promised them. And
then to revise carefully all the Papers that remain in my hands of Affinity
with the past Treatises, would take up more time then is allowed me by other
Studies and Employments, which I think of greater moment, or at least wherein I
am much more concerned, then to give this Book at present a full or accurate
APPENDIX.

But though I might upon these and other Reasons wholly excuse my self from the
trouble of adding any Appendix; yet because the communicating of good
Medicines, is a work of Charity, and those unpolished and immethodical Notes
that may perchance disparage an Author, may yet relieve many a Patient, I am
willing to do what my occasions will permit, and finding among my Papers many
loose Sheets, concerning Spirit of Hartshorn, Blood, etc. written diverse years
since to a Friend, I choose rather to publish them just as I find them with
Pyrophilus's name, employed in convenient places, and to add some unpromis'd
Receipts, instead of those that are lost, then be altogether wanting, to what
may be expected from me. I know that what I deliver concerning some of the
following Preparations may by severer Critics be thought somewhat unaccurate,
and I confess I am of that mind my self. But meeting with these Collections in
loose Sheets among my old Papers, I must either publish them as I find them, or
take the pains to Polish and Contract them, which would require more time, then
I can at present afford them. And much less can I stay to subjoyn the Histories
of the particular cures performed by the Medicines, whose preparations I set
down, though diverse of them would not perhaps appear inconsiderable. But if I
find by the entertainment of these Papers, that it will be worth while to
revise or enlarge them, I may, God permitting, be invited to do it, and either
supply the things, that are here deficient out of After-observations) or Papers
now out of the way, or make amends for their omission in substituting better
things.

It will not at all surprise me if some Readers think me too prolix in
delivering the preparations of Hartshorn, Ens Veneris etc. with such
particular and circumstantial Observations. But my design being to gratify and
assist those that would make and use the Remedies I recommend: The Experience I
have had, of the difficulties most men find in the preparing things by the
Direction of Chemical Processes not very expressly set down, makes me apt to
hope, that (I say not the great Physicians or Chemists, who may if they please,
leave them unperus'd; but) those for whom I principally intend my Directions
will think my having made them so particular a very excusable fault. And I make
the less difficulty to suffer such things as perhaps I judge to be in
comparison of others, but trifles to pass abroad, because finding of late
Years, that many Persons of Quality of either Sex, who scarce read any other
then English Books, have (as I hope) out of Charity or Curiosity or both, begun
to addict themselves to Chemistry, and venture to be tampering with Spagirical
Remedies, it may not be unseasonable to supply them with some Preparations,
that may both save them time and charges, and put them upon the use of
Remedies, which without being languid, are, if any thing discreetly given, safe
and innocent, and wherein a little Error, either in the making or the
administering will be far less prejudicial to the sick, then if it were
committed in the more vulgar (oftentimes, either falsely or obscurely
prescribed) preparations they (...) wont to make of Acid Salts, Mercury,
Antimony, and other Minerals, whose Activity for the most part makes them need
to be skilfully prepared, and judiciously g^ven.

To the Eightieth Page. The Irish Lithotomists Receipt, for the Stone in the
Bladder.
REc. Aquar. Melon. Citrullar, Filipendulae, Petroselin, sir. e 5 radicibus,
sir. de Bisantiis, ana, unc. ij Oxymelit comp. unc. j. misce, quartam mixti
partem sumas mane jejunus, and postea per octo horas a cibo and potu abstineas,
aliam sumas partem eodem die post coenam cum lectum intrare volueris; denique
sequenti die reliquae sumantur parts ut primae; terti^ vero die.

Rec. Elect. lenit. dragm. iii. sir. Rosat. solut. dragm. ij. pulp. Tamarind.
dragm. j. misceantur ac in sevi lactis unc. iij. dissolvantur: totum bibas mane
quatuor horis ante jus, quarto die suma^ mane sequentis pulv. dragm. j. mixti
in sequentis Apozematis unc. iiij. and olei Amygd dulc. unc. sem.

Rec. Cinerum vitri *, and Scorpionum pulveris, Lapia. Spongiae, and lap.
Judaici, Acori, sem Altheae, Millii solis, Saxifrag^i ^na dragm. i. sem
lactucae, 4 sem. frigid majorum ana dragm. sem. Trokiscor. Alkekengi, rad.
pimpinellae ana dragm. ii, fiat pulvi^ subtilis.

Apozema.
Rec. Parietariae, rad Alth. ana Mj sem petrofelini, Glychyrrhizae ana unc sem.
halicacabi, unc. j. Coqu in aq. pluviae, sext. 2. and vini albissimi sext. i.
ad medietatis consumptionem, and colatura melle hybernico dulcoretur.

Tum quarto illo die passerculum Trogloditem sale antea conditum edas una cum
caena, Et post coenam lumbi, pubes, and tota renum regio oleis e granis Citri
and scorpion. liniantur, etsi possibile esset praedicta olea per meatum urinar.
in vesicam injiciantur, sicque deinde pulvere, Apozemate, Troglodite and oleis
omni die utere, donec arenula aut lap. fragmentae ana cum expulsis apparuerint.

Loco cinerum vitri sumi possunt cineres Camini and vires cinerum scorpionum
supplere potest pulvis lumbricor. terrestr. probe in vino lotorum and postea
exsiccatorum.

* NB. [As far as I could conjecture by the Discourse I had with the owner of
the Receipt, by Ashes of Glass he means the superfluous Saline substance,
which the Glassemen are wont to call Sandiver; but because he did not explain
himself so clearly, and we know not yet a way of Burning Glass to Ashes, I
think it will be most advisable to substitute the Wood Ashes, which in the
Receipt it self toward the close of it are appointed for a Succedaneum.

To the One Hundred and Twentieth Page; [Where the Virtues of the Pilulae
Lunares are touched at.]
THe great benefit that has redounded to many patients, from the use of the
Silver Pills, here briefly mentioned, and commended, invites me to communicate
as a considerable thing, the preparation of them, of which I do not pretend to
be the Inventer; having diverse years since, learnt it by discoursing with a
very Ancient and experienced Chemist, whose name that I do not mention, will
perhaps seem somewhat strange to those Readers that have observed me not to be
backward in acknowledging my Benefactors in point of Experiments, and therefore
I hold it not amiss to take this opportunity of declaring once for all, that
twere oftentimes more prejudicial then grateful to one that makes an advantage
by the Practice of Physic, to annex in his life time his name to some of his
Receipts or Processes; because that when a Man has once got a repute, for
having a Specific in any particular Disease or Case, his Patients, and their
Friends will hardly forbear to apply themselves to him for that Medicine,
though the same Medicine, but not known to be the same, should be made use of
by a stranger, or divulged in a Printed Book. Most Patients being not apt to
rely upon Medicines, that come only that way recommended; whereas if it were
known that the Printed Receipt is the self same, which the Physician employs,
not only other Physicians would quickly make as much advantage of it as he, but
many Patients would think themselves by that discovery dispensed with, in point
of good husbandry, from going to any Physician at all, as knowing before hand
the best prescription they are like to receive from him. The Process of the
Pilulae Lunares is this;

Take of the best refined Silver as much as You please, dissolve it in a
sufficient quantity of cleans'd spirit of Nitre or Aquafortis, then evaporating
away the superfluous moisture, let the rest shoot into thin Chrystals; these
you may in some open mouthed Glass place in sand, and keep in such a degree of
Heat, that by the help of very frequently stirring them, the greatest part of
the more loose and stinking Spirits of the Menstruum may be driven away, and
yet the remaining Chrystals not be brought to Flow: These Chrystals of Silver
you must counterpoise with an equal weight of Chrystals of Nitre; and first
dissolving each of them apart in distilled Rainwater, You must afterward
mingle the Solutions, and abstract or steam away the superfluous moisture, till
the remaining Mass be dry, which you must keep in an open Glass, exposed to
such a temperate heat of Sand, that the Matter may not melt (which you must be
very careful of) and that yet the adhering corrosive Spirits of the Menstruum
might be driven away. And to both these ends You must from time to time stir
the Mass, that new parts of it may be exposed to the Heat, and new ones to the
Air, till you cannot descry in the remaining white Powder any offensive scent
of the Spirit of Nitre, or of the Aquafortis. And lastly You must take the
Crum of good White-bread, made with a little moisture into a stiff Past, and
exactly mingle with the newly mentioned Magistery or Powder as much of this
Past, as is necessary to give it the consistence of a Mass of Pills, which you
may thence form at pleasure, and preserve in a well stopped Glass for use.

NB. First the Silver employed in this Operation, ought to be very pure and
more exquisitely refined, then much of that is wont to be, which here in
England is bought for fine Silver; for if the Copper wherewith Silver-Coyns are
wont to be alloy'd, be not carefully separated upon the Cupel, it may, being
turned by the Acid Menstruum into a kind of Vitriol, when it is taken into the
Body, either provoke Vomits, or otherwise discompose it.

2ly, The Spirit of Nitre, or (which in our case comes almost to one) the
Aquafortis that is used about this Medicine, ought to be cleared, as our
Refiners phrase it, before the Silver be put in, for (as I elsewhere Note) in
Salt Peter, there is oftentimes an undiscerned Mixture of Sea Salt, whose
Spirit coming over in Distillation with that of the Nitre, is apt to
precipitate the Silver, which the Spirit of Nitre has dissolved. This I take to
be the Reason of that practice of the best Refiners to purify their
Aquafortis, by casting in some small piece of Silver, that they may afterward
securely put into it greater Quantities of the same Metal to be dissolved. For
the Saline Spirits fall to the bottom, together with the corroded Silver,
which they precipitate as long as there is any of these Saline Spirits left in
the Menstruum, which after this may be decanted clear; and though you had put a
little more Silver then needed to it, it neither does harm, nor is lost, the
Aqua fortis preserving none unprecipitated, but what there were no more S^line
Spirits to work upon, so that the superfluous Silver put in is already
dissolved to Your hand.

3dly, The dry Mixture obtained from the Solutions of Chrystals of Nitre and
Chrystals of Silver, must be often stirred, and kept longer in the Sand, before
all the offensive Spirits will be driven away, then till Experience had
informed me, I did imagine.

Fourthly, If the Chrystals of Silver be considerably Blew or Green, it is a
sign the Silver was not sufficiently purged from Copper, else the Mixture we
have been speaking of, will look of a White, good enough. And possibly 'twas by
reason of the not being careful to take sufficiently Refined Silver, and of the
not knowing how to improve the Chrystals of Silver, by the addition of those of
Nitre, and especially how to free them from the stinking and Corrosive Spirits
of Aquafortis, that it is come to pass, that though there be in some Chemical
Writers, Processes not very unlike this, yet the Chrystals of Silver have been
censured and laid aside as not always safe even by those, who otherwise much
magnify the Efficacy of those they used.

Fifthly, When You are about to make up this Mixture with the Crum of Bread
into a Mass, and so into Pills, 'twill not be amiss to dispatch that work at
once, for usually it leaves an ugly Blackness on the Fingers, that cannot under
diverse days be gotten off.

Sixthly, In taking of the Pills care must be had, that they be sufficiently
lapp'd up either in a Wafer wetted with Milk, or the Pulp of a Roasted Apple,
or some such thing, that they may not touch the Palate, or the Throat, because
of the extreme and disgusting bitterness, which is to be met with in the
Chrystals of Silver, and which is not the least thing, that with nicer Persons
does Blemish these Pills.

Seventhly, The Dose is somewhat uncertain; because they work much according to
the Constitution of the Body, and especially according as it abounds with
Serous Humors; Wherefore it is advisable to make the Pills of the size of very
small Pease, of which one given at Bedtime, is a sufficient Dose for some
Bodies, others will require two; and in some we must ascend to three; and if
the Patient be Hydropical, o^ be otherwise much molested with serous Humors,
it is observable that sometimes one Dose will work two Days, or four Days,
(may be five or six) successively, but yet moderately and usually, without
weakening the Patient, in proportion to such copious Evacuations.

Eighthly, Besides the Dropsy, wherein we have mentioned this Remedy as a
Specific, it often proves very available in other Cases, wherein Men are
troubled with Serous Humors. But the first distempers, which I heard it
Magnified for, were those of the Head, and Genus Nervosum; and a great Virtuoso
of my acquaintance that inherits a Disposition to the Palsy, has several times
told me, that if when he begins to find himself disordered, he take a Dose of
these Pills, he is thereby constantly relieved. But of the particular Cases,
wherein we have had opportunity to take notice of their Effects, we have not
now, but may perchance another time have leisure to entertain You.

Lastly, That skilful and succesful Chemist Dr N. N. who does much both use and
esteem this Remedy, being desired by me to let me know, if he had any
Objections against it, informs me, that when he has given these Pills
oftentimes, and without intervalls, though they did not either Salivate or
Vomit, or much weaken the Patient, yet they would at last be attended with a
kind of Incipient Leucophlegmatia, which he easily prevents by intermitting for
a while the use of the Pills, after every second or third time that he
administers them, and giving, when he exspects it to be requisite, some Crocus
Martis, Extract of Juniper, or other Astringent or Hepatick Medicines to
corroborate the Viscera and preserve their Tone.

To the One Hundred Twenty third Page. (Where mention is made of the Cure of
one concluded to have a Gangrene, by an inward Medicine.)
THe Cure mentioned in this place, having been performed by that Medicine,
which from the Name of that Great Commander, as well as Virtuoso, who was the
Author of it, passes under the Name of Sr Walter Rawleighs Cordial, and this
being but one of many remarkable (and some of them stupendous) Cures which have
been wrought by it from time to time, especially of late that it has been more
used, I am induced to annex here the yet unpublish'd Receipt, partly, because
there are diverse Receipts that are each pretended to be the true, magnified by
their several Possessors; And I had the liberty of looking it out in a Receipt
Book, preserved by the Authors Son; and partly because, though I will not
affirm, that a skilfuller or more promising Composition of the same Ingredients
could not have been devised; Yet the following Receipt has been abundantly
recommended by Experience. And I remember, that but a while since, a Person of
Note having sent to me, to desire a taking of this Cordial for a certain
Knight, who after all that Skilful Physicians could do, had long lain a dying;
I the other day chanced to meet this Knight at White Hall, well, lively, and
with a Face whose Ruddiness argued a perfect Recovery, and yet he is not very
far from seventy Years of Age, and had before he grew so ill, long conflicted
with a tedious Ague, and fever, which had reduced him to that Extremity, when
the Cordial was brought, that, as himself told me, he neither was sensible when
they gave it him, nor had known what he did, or what was done unto him, during
the space of several days before.

Sr Walter Rawleighs Cordial, after Sr R. K. his way: (set down Verbatim as I
received it.)
TAke Burrage-Flowers, Rosemary-Flowers, Marigold-Flowers, Red July-Flowers,
Rosa-Solis, Elder-flowers of each, one Pottle after they are dried in the Shade.

Take also of Scordium, Carduus, Angelica, Baulm, Mint, Marjoram, Setwall,
Betony ana four handfulls, after they are dried in the Shade.

Take also of the Rinds of Sassafras of Virginia, Lignum Aloes, ana, four
ounces beaten to Powder, of Kermes, Cubebs, Cardamoms, Zedoary, ana, one ounce,
of Saffron half an ounce-Juniper Berries, Tormentil Roots, Round Birthwort
Roots, of each one ounce, of Gentian Roots half an ounce.

Draw the Tincture or Extract of these with Spirit of Wine in Balneo, and save
all the Ingredients after you have taken out the Tinctures, and Burn them and
put their Salt into their Tinctures.

Take six ounces of the Extracts of a^l these with their S^lt, and put thereto
of the Tincture of Coral three ounces, Terra Sigillata four ounces, Pearl
prepared two ounces, Bezar-stone three dragmes, H^rts-horn calcined four
ounces. Amber-greese four dragmes, Musk gr. xxx, Sugarcandy one pound and an
half-ground very fine, and searsed through a fine Searse.

Then the Musk and Amber must be ground, and by little and little mingled with
it, the more you grind the Amber, the better.

Then put to the Sugarcandy all the dry Materials before directed, and make all
as small as possibly You can.

Then upon a great hallow grinding Stone mingle the Tinctures, and dry things
together: (which must be done by a strong man used to that work:) and whilst
it is in grinding* put of Syrrup of Limmons, and Syrrup of Red Roses equal parts
into it, else it will be so dry, that twill neither grind nor mingle.

How to make the Tincture of Coral for this Cordial.
Take eight ounces of Coral, and put it unbeaten into a calcining Pot Unluted,
and let it stand twenty four Hours in a calcining or Glass-furnace, 'till the
Coral be as White as Snow; then put it in three quarts of distilled Vinegar in
a long Glass with a narrow mouth, and with another small Glass or Vial put into
the Mouth of it, the Belly upwards, to save the Vinegar from wasting, Thus And
set it in a Sand furnace, so as the Sand may be as high as the Vineg^r.

Let it boil without intermission twenty four Hours, by which time the Vinegar
will become red; so, when it is cold, pour off the Vinegar into a Glass-Bason,
or a Bell-Glass, and vapor away all the Vinegar in Balneo, and gather the
Coral, being perfectly dry, for your Use. You may strike down Your Pearl with
Oil of Vitriol, and Oil of Sulphur requal parts, which is accounted the best
way to prepare the Pearl. But Sr R. K. did use to prepare his Pearl by juice of
Limmons.

[The Dosis for a Man is about the bigness of a small Hasil-nut, but where
prevention only is aimed at, or some such use as the dissipating the Fumes of
the Spleen, as they call it, the bigness of an ordinary Pease, may suffice; so
in urgent Cases the Dose may be increased to the quantity of a Nutmeg. It is
usually given by it self upon an empty Stomach (the Patient being kept Warm
after it to promote Sweat) in Fevers, Want of Spirits, violent Fluxes, and
several other distempers, where Diaphoreticks and Antidotes are proper, and
(especially) where potent Cordials are required.]

[To the One Hundred Twenty third Page; Where a Receipt that cured Fistula's is
mentioned.] A Water for a Fistula, and all manner of VVounds, and swellings, or
old Ulcers, Cankers, Tetters, Boils, or Scabbs in any place, or Green VVounds.
TAke of Bole-Armoniack four ounces, of Camphire one ounce, of White Vitriol
four ounces; Boil the Camphire and the Vitriol together in a little Black
Earthen Pot till they become thin, stirring them together till they become hard
in settling; then Bruise them in a Mortar to Powder, and Beat the Bole-Armoniack
it self to Powder, and then mingle them together, and keep the Powder in a
Bladder, till such time You use it; then take a pottle of Running Water, and
set it on the Fire till it begin to Sees, then take it from the Fire, and put
in three good Spoonfuls of the Powder into that Water whilst it is hot, and
after put the Water and Powder into a Glass, and shake it twice a day to make
the Water strong: But before You use it, let it be well settled and very Clear,
and apply it as hot as the Patient can well suffer it; and lay a clean Linen
Cloth, four double, to the Sore, it being wet in that Water, and bind it fast
with a Rowler to keep it warm, do it Morning and Evening till it be whole. This
Water must be put into an Oyster-shel, not in a Sawcer when you dress the Sore,
for the Pewter will suck it up. Remember You put three as good Spoonfuls of the
Powder as you can press into the Spoon. Take heed no one Drink of this Water,
for it is Poison. To make it stronger, beat an ounce of Alom to Powder, and
mingle it with the other Powders.

Take of Bole-armoniack half an ounce, White Vitriol one ounce, of Camphire 2
ounces, make them all into Powder; then take a Pottle of Smiths-water, and as
much Spring Water, and mingling them, set thew upon the Fire as soon as it
begins to Sees, put in the Powder very softly, stirring it all the while,
as soon as the Powder is in, take it off the Fire, and dress the wound with it
twice a day, laying a Cloth folded four times and wetted in the Water, it
being very Hot, and so applied to the Wound.

N B. [This is the Receipt Verbatim as I find it among my old Papers, but I am
not sure that among those I cannot now come by, there may not be something
concerning a way of making a small pliable Tent that may accommodate it self to
the crooked Figure of the Cavity of many Fistula's. For methinks I remember,
that the Surgeon prescribed the conveying his Medicine by the means of such
a flexible tent a great way into the cavity, if not to the bottom of the
Fistula, which was thereby to be cleansed.]

To the One Hundred fifty first Page. Where Soot is mentioned.
SOot, Pyrophilus, is a Production of the Fire, whose Nature is almost as
Singular, as is the manner of its being produced, for it is (if I may so call
it) a kind of volatile Extract of the Wood it proceeds from, made instead of a
Menstruum by the Fire, which hastily dissipating the parts of the Body it acts
on, has time enough to sever it into smaller Particles, but not leisure and
aptitude to reduce it into such differing subst^nces as pass for Chemical or
Peripatetick Elements, but hastily carries up the more volatile p^rts, which
being not yet sufficiently freed from the more fixed ones, take them up along
with them in their sudden flight, and so the Aqueous, Spirituous, Saline,
Oleaginous and Terrestrial parts ascending confusedly together, do fasten
themselves to the sides of the Chimney in that loose and irregular Form of
Concretion, which we call Soo^: An enquiry into whose Nature, as it may be
considered in the Survey of the distinctions of Salts, must be elsewhere looked
for; Our mentioning it at present, being only to take occasion to tell You,
that as ill scented and despised a Body as it is, Hartman, (one of the most
experienced and h^ppy of Chemical Writers) scruples not to reckon the Spirit
and Oil of it among the Noblest Confortantia, such as prepared Pearl, Coral,
Ambergreese, and other eminent Cherishers of Nature, His preparation is for
substance this; Take of the best Soot (such as adheres to the lower part of the
Chimney, and shines almost like Jet) what quantity you please, and with it fill
up to the Neck a very well coated Glass Retort, or an Earthen one, and luting
on a capacious Receiver distill the matter in an open fire intended by degrees,
whereby you will drive over the Phlegm, the whitish Spirits, and the Oil first
of a Yellow Color, and then of a Red, separate the Phlegm, and for a while
digest the Spirit and Oil together, on which afterward put half the quantity
of Spirit of Wine, and Distill them several times, whereby you will obtain
together with the Spirit of Wine, the Spirit of Soot, and also a very depurated
Oil, smelling like Camphire. Out of the Calcined Caput mortuum after the common
way extract a Salt, Hartm. prax. Chym. p. 12.
which Hartman commends as a most excellent curer of exulcerated Cancers; This
Salt, says He, is drawn with Vinegar, in which Liquor in a Cold moist place,
it is again Dissolved, and therewith the Cancerous Ulcers being once or twice
anointed, the venenosity will be visibly drawn out like a Vapor, and then the
forementioned Oil being lightly sprinkled upon the place will breed on it a
kind of Crust like a skin, which Spontaneously coming off in five or six Days,
will by its falling off, argue the Consolidation of the Ulcer. What this so
extolled Remedy will perform I know not, having never made trial of it, nor
thinking it very likely, that a bare Alcalizate Salt should have such Specific
Virtues, nor is it requisite I should insist on it, being here to discourse to
You of the distilled Liquors of Soot, in prosecution of which design, let me
tell You, that Hartman prescribes the administering of the Spirit from six to
ten Grains, of the Oil from two to three drops in Wine, or any other convenient
Vehicle, and concerning the Oil he adds, That if three Drops of it be given in
Vinegar to an almost gasping Man, he will be thereby wonderfully refesh'd, and
as it were revived, to which he annexeth this Prognostic, that if the Remedy
produces Copious Sweats, it will recover the Taker; but if not, he will Die.

That this spirit of Soot described by Hartman may be a very good Medicine I am
very apt to think; but because it is not a mere spirit of Soot, but a mixed one
of Spirit of Wine, and spirit of Soot, we have rather chosen to proceed with
the Soot (of Wood) without addition, both as to the distillation of it, and the
ordering of the Distilled Liquors, after the manners to be mentioned ere long,
when we shall acquaint You with our preparations of Blood and Hartshorn, which
if You please to apply to Soot, You may save Your self, and me, the labor of
Repetitions. Yet it may be not amiss to advertise You here of two things: the
one, that if You employ very good and fat Soot, and fill up the Retort with it
to the Neck; You must be very careful to increase the Fire orderly, and but by
moderate Degrees, or else you may chance to make the matter Boil over out of
the Retort into the Receiver, as it lately happened to us, when having warily
ordered the Fire for several Hours we thought our selves past any such danger;
And the other, that as to the Medicinal Virtues of the spirit, and salt of
Soot, I shall not now particularize them, partly that I may save time, and
partly because they may be well enough gathered from their affinity to the
Volatile salts and spirits of animal substances hereafter to be treat'd of, and
from what I shall have occasion to say, of the perfuming of the salt of Soot
toward the close of this APPENDIX.

To the One Hundred Fifty third Page.
VRIN is a Body, which, as homely and despised as it is wont to be, may by
skilful ways of ordering it, be made either alone, or in Conjunction with
other Ingredients, to afford such a variety of useful Substances, that I find
Reusnerus published an Entire Treatise, which yet I never could get sight of,
under the Title of Synopsis Remediorum ex Urina praeparatorum, besides what
other Chemists have since divulged on the same Subject, which I forbear to
mention; because several of them I have not tried, and many others I think
scarce worth trying. But because even all our own Observations concerning the
Preparations and uses of things afforded by Urine, would take up more time and
Room, then I can now allow them, I shall here only take this occasion to
intimate thus much in general, that the Spirit and Salt of Urin may be made far
greater use of, then Men yet are prone to think not only in Physic, but in
Chemistry, and perhaps I durst add in Natural Philosophy too. De Lit^iasi. c.
3. n. 3.
And though Helmont be not wont to lavish his praises upon worthless Remedies,
yet he calls it Nobile ad Icterum, aliosque morbos, Remedium. And in another
place, speaking of the Saline Christals of Urine, he has this Expression: Quae
quanquam ad Veteres Excrementerum Oppilationes conferunt, nihil tamen adversus
Lithiasin, which seems, by denying to the Salt of Urine some Virtues ascribed
to it by many other Chemists, to bring some credit to his praises of it (And
indeed a friend of mine, that has tried it in the Jaundise, affirms it to
deserve the Commendation he gives it in that Disease.) And though I fear our
Author Hyperbolizeth, where He (elsewhere) thus writes: Spernit eos sapientia
(he means sure, that which is proper to the Spagyrists) qui Materiam ex qua
dispositiones, Contenta, Proprietates, Progressum and significationes Lotii
addiscere recusarunt per ignem; Yet perh^ps the Hyperbole is not altogether so
extravagant as most Readers will think it. And I remember, that a while ago,
conferring with the Public Minister of a Foreign Prince, who is a very
inquisitive and experienced Person, He f^eely told me, that though he had
Traveled very much, and diverse times not in a private Capacity, yet the
greatest Chemist that ever he could make acquaintance with, used to tell him,
that Salt of Urine was so precious a thing, that 'twas pity it should be used
in ordinary Diseases; But what his Reasons were for valuing it so much, he
would not declare, and therefore I shall lay no great weight upon his
Testimony. And yet I must not at this time particularly declare, upon what
account it is that I so value the volatile Salt of Urine, of whose Virtues
(whilst it is single) I shall only in a word observe to you now (what is
pertinent to the occasion of my mentioning it at present,) namely, that when
it is well prepared [ according to the w^y plainly enough, though but very
briefly couched already p. 153.
] it differs so little in smell, taste, volatility, penetrancy and some other
manifest Qualities, from the Salt of Hartshorn, and that of Man's Blood; that
such effects, though perhaps somewhat less powerful may be not improbably
exspected from it as are produced by the other.

To the One Hundred Fifty fourth Page.
Though I have not in this place made any absolute Promise, of annexing any
thing, more particular touching the Spirit of Blood, and though I cannot now
find, and I fear may have lost those of my Papers concerning that subject,
which were the least unaccurate; Yet, setting aside former trials, a recent
Account brought me by a Physician, whom I had entrusted with some of it,
represents it as so very good a Medicine, that I am content to subjoyn, what
particulars I have lately found among my loose Papers concerning it, as I many
years ago sent them to a friend, and this I the rather do, because there being
annexed to the Process diverse Observations of general Import to such kind of
Preparations, they will be better understood with it, then without it, and I
have not now the leisure to new mould them. Thus then;

-- TAke of the Blood of an healthy Young man as much as you please, and whilst
it is yet warm, add to it This, if I misremember not, was the Propo^tion I
employed in the exactest of my Experiments of this kind, but it seems to be
Essential to the goodness of the Remedy: the Spirit of Wine serving chiefly
but to keep the Blood from corrupting.
twice its weight of good Spirit of Wine, and incorporating them well together,
shut them carefully up in a convenient Glass Vessel, wherein the matter must be
set to digest in Balneo, or Horse-dung, for six weeks, or more; then in a Glass
head and body, placed in Ashes or Sand, draw off with a gentle Heat as much
Liquor as will come over without necessitating you to impress any Empyreuma
upon it, the remaining matter must be taken out and put into a strong and
capacious Retort, which being placed in Sand, and accommodated with a large
Receiver carefully luted to it, the matter therein lodged must be gradually
pressed with a vehement Fire, which must at length be increased till it be
strong enough to give the bottom of the Retort a red heat. There will first
come over (after perhaps a little Phlegm) Spirit, either accompanied or closely
followed by a copious volatile Salt, fastening it self to the sides and top of
the Receiver; and much about the same time there will also come over an Oil, or
two, or more (for I have not observed the oleaginous part to come constantly
and regularly after the same manner) the Receiver being taken off, all that it
contains may be poured together into a convenient Vial, to be therein digested
for a Month, if you please: or otherwise without that previous digestion, you
may wash down the volatile Salt, adhering to the sides of the Receiver, with
the Spirit and Oil well shaken about it, and pour altogether into a large Glass
Funnel well lined with Cappaper, first moistened with the Spirit or fair Water,
through which the Spirit and as much of the volatile Salt, as it and the Phlegm
can dissolve, will pass first, leaving the Oil behind them in the Paper, which
must be seasonably set aside, or else the Oil also, though more slowly, will
pass through the Filtre: The Phlegm, Salt and Spirit, must be rectified with a
very gentle heat, so often, till the Phlegm be perfectly separated, and they
leave no faces: The Oil also may be rectified two or three times from its own
Caput Mortuum calcined, or else from Salt of Tartar to deprive it of its
muddiness. The Distempers wherein this Arcanum or Spirit of Man's blood is
proper, are diverse, but chiefly Astmah's, Epilepsies, acute Fevers, Plurisies
and Consumptions. But to comply with my present haste, I shall advertise You in
the general, as to the use of this and the other Remedies to be s^bsequently
mentioned, that for Them I must refer you to the particular Narratives, which I
shall scarce, if You seasonably desire them, refuse You: And in the mean time,
because these volatile Remedies are near enough of kin to each other, I shall
add to this first Process (which is at least one of the noblest of them) some
Observations of a more general nature, that they being applicable to diverse
other Preparations, we may both of us avoid the trouble of needless Repetitions.

Observations.
1. I ignore not that there are extant in Burgravius, Beguinus, and diverse
other Chemical Authors, very pompous and promising Processes of the Essence of
M^ns Blood, to which they ascribe such stupendous Faculties as I should not
only wonder to find true, but admire that they can hope the Reader should
believe them so. But of these Preparations, some being, as that of Burgravius
in his Biolychnium, very mystical and unlikely; and others, like Beguinus his
Q. E. Sanguinis humani, exceedingly laborious and not so clear, I have never
put my self to the trouble of making them, but shall be very forward to
acknowledge their excellency, if any Man shall vouchsafe me an Experimental
Conviction of it. For though I think the present Preparation of Blood no bad
one, yet I am far from daring to affirm there cannot be a better.

2. He that intends to have any considerable quantity of this Spirit and Salt,
must provide himself of a large proportion of Blood, or else he is like to fall
far short of his expectation; because as full of Spirits as Blood is supposed
to be, it yields commonly (at least the best I have hitherto met with) no less
then two thirds, or more, of Ph^egm, b^si^es a not despicable quantity of
terrestrial and unservicea^le Matt^r.

3. It is requisite, both that the Retort wherein the dried Blood is distilled
be pretty large and strong, and that the Fi^e be very carefully and gradually
administered, least either the copious Fumes break the too narrow Vessels, or
the Matter too hastily urged boil over into the neck of the Retort or the
Receiver; both which dangers this Advertisement may help you to avoid at a
cheaper rate, then I, who h^ve not been forewarned of them but by unwelcome
Experience.

4. There is a Friend of mine, an excellent Chemist, whose rare Cures first
gave me a value for Remedies made of Blood, who us^th (as himself assures me)
to mingle with the Spirit that other Liquor, drawn over at first in a Head and
Bo^y, and twice or thrice rectified by it self. But that Liquor consisting
almost totally of the Spirit of Wine, and the not over-grateful Phlegm of the
Blood, though there may pe^haps be passed into it some of the more fugitive
Particles of the volatile Salt: Yet they being so few as are scarce
discernable, this Liquor seems fitter to be made a Vehicle, then an associate
of our Spirit, and perhaps too is not in all cases the most proper Vehicle in
which it may be administered: (though if it were not for the Spirit of Wine, I
should somewhat suspect that the Phlegm, though so destitute of the more active
Ingredients, as to be fit to be kept separated from them, may not it self be
quite devoid of specific Virtues.) But my esteem of the Artist I have
mentioned, does make me think it fit to acquaint You with his Practice,
notwithstanding that hitherto his authority be the chief thing that recommends
it to me.

5. Diverse ways may be proposed of purifying this Spirit and Salt we are
discoursing of, but having tried several, that which I now use is this that
follows: I put the Salt, Phlegm, and Spirit together, in one of the highest and
slenderest Bodies I can get, that the Phlegm might not be able to ascend easily
into the Head, and that the volatile Salt may be the better separated: Then in
a very gentle heat (I most use that of a Lamp Furnace) there will ascend a pure
white and volatile Salt, adhering to the cheeks and nose of the Glass-head,
which if I desire by it self, I sweep it away before the Spirit begins to rise;
but most commonly I suffer the Distillation to proceed, and the ascending
Spirit to carry down part of the volatile Salt into the Receiver, and so I
continue the same degree of heat, till there arise so weak a Spirit that it
plainly begins to dissolve the volatile Salt: Then shifting the Receiver, I
reserve the strong Spirit and volatile Salt by themselves, and take the
succeeding weaker spirit by it self also; to which, if I please to fortify it,
I add as much of the volatile salt, formerly reserved, as it is able to
dissolve. In the bottom of the Cucurbit or Vial, there will remain a
phlegmatic kind of Liquor, which usually contains some of the salt or spirit,
and sometimes too (which is somewhat odd) some of the oleaginous part of the
Blood, which did not before appear to have been associated with the spirit, and
to have passed through the Filtre with it. This nauseous Liquor may be kept by
it self till you have a sufficient quantity of it, to be worth the trouble of
severing from it the nobler parts: The spirit and salt abovementioned may be
again rectifyed, per se, with the like gentle heat as before, so often, till
they leave behind them no faeces nor Phlegm at all. But this is requisite to
be done only when to master some stubborn Disease, the Medicine is to be
exalted either to its supreme, or at least to some approaching degree of Purity
and Efficacy, for otherwise so exquisite a Depuration is not always necessary.

6. As for the Oleaginous part which the Fire forces out of Blood, my
Observations of it hitherto have so little agreed, that, I dare as yet speak
but haesitantly concerning it. For sometimes but one Oil has been drawn over,
sometimes two: And I remember, last Year, a parcel of Blood, that was kept in a
Dunghill for many Months, yielded us a blackish and muddy Oil, a purely red
one, and another of pale Amber color, which would not mingle with the darker;
of each of which sorts I yet reserve some by me. This difference may possibly
proceed partly from the previous preparation, or unpreparedness of the Blood,
and partly from the various administration of the Fire employed to distill it.
But for the most part we find these Animal Substances (if the degrees of Fire
be orderly administered, and the heat sufficiently intended toward the close of
the Distillation) to yield a double Oil: the one more light and pure, which
swims upon the Spirit; the other more muddy, adust and ponderous, which sinks
to the bottom of it. The use of these Oils has, by reason of their Fetidness,
been by most Authors absolutely rejected; and even those few that do not
altogether reject them, forbid their inward use, and allow them to be but
externally employed: But considering, Pyrophilus, how much of the efficacy both
of Plants and Animals is observed to reside in their oleaginous part, it seemed
not improbable to me, that these Oils might deserve a better usage, then either
to be wholly thrown away, or confined to outward services; and therefore having
not long since given a Friend of mine some pure yellow Oil of Man's Blood,
dissolved in Spirit of Wine, to try upon a Patient of his, sick of a Hectic
Fever (in which Disease I had seen the Spirit of Blood very successful) within
a few days he brought me wo^d of the unexpected recovery of his Patient, to
whom he administered our Medicine (that I may not conceal from you that
Circumstance) in Balsamus Samech, made with spirit of Vinegar instead of spirit
of Wine; the remaining part of this yellow mingled Oil I keep yet by me, to
make further trials with it. And that such Oils may not be lost, I have been
attempting (for I am yet upon my trials) several ways to make them serviceable.
Some of them that are of a more pure and defecated nature, I have (which is not
unworthy your noting) found capable of readily uniting with Spirit of Wine,
with which they may be allayed at pleasure: In others I have separated the
finer and more volatile part, by drawing them over with a very gentle heat in a
Retort half full of Water, which will carry over the lighter part of the Oil
with it into the Receiver, wherein the Oil will swim upon it, and may be
afterward severed from it by a Separating Glass, or any other convenient way
(but I fear that this method, though it finely clarify Oils, may rob them of
the best part of the Efficacy they may perchance derive from the latent
admixtion of somewhat of the volatile Salt:) at the bottom of the Retort there
will remain a dark and thick substance, whose nature I have not yet had
opportunity to enquire into. Out of some Oils (drawn from unprepared Materials)
which would not dissolve in spirit of Wine, I have, by digestion with spirit of
Wine, drawn much of the scent and taste; the spirit probably imbibing some of
the finer parts of the Oil, or else associating to it self some volatile salt
that yet lay lurking in it: For sometimes I have observed Oils, after long
keeping, to let fall a volatile salt undiscerned in them before. Having also
sometimes mingled the heavier and lighter Oils of the same Body with
dephlegmated spirit of Wine, and in a low Retort drawn over what will rise in a
very gentle heat (inferior to that of a Balneum) I have found the Spirit of
Wine to carry over with it so many of the more subtle and active parts of the
Oil, that it was more richly impregnated therewith, then you will be apt to
expect. But of what use this oleaginous Spirit may be in Physic, I have not
yet had time to consult Experience, which I hope will, ere long, teach me
better ways of improving the rejected Oils we have been speaking of, then are
those almost obvious ones hitherto mentioned, wherein I am very far from
acquiescing; especially, since I cannot but suspect that such active Parts of
such Concretes, would be found very capable of a great Improvement, if we were
as skilful to give it them.

7. The Terrestrial Substance that remains after the Liquors are drawn of, if
the Blood have been duly prepared, affords but so inconsiderable a quantity of
fixed Salt, that unless the Caput mortuum be exceeding copious, the Alkali will
hardly be worth extracting: Besides that, if it could be obtained in a not
despicable quantity, I should, what ever is pretended, very much doubt whether
it would be endowed with very extraordinary Virtues, the violence of the Fire
usually depriving fixed Salts of the specific Qualities of their Concretes:
and even in the first Salt of Serpents themselves, I have not discerned other,
Then the wonted Properties of Alkalizate Salts.

8. Because you may sometimes not have the leisure to wait six Weeks for the
Preparation of Blood; and because oftentimes the occasion of using the
Medicines we have been describing, may be so hasty and urgent, that unless some
speedy course to relieve them be taken before the Physic can be prepared, the
Patients will be dead. I think it not amiss, Pyrophilus, to advertise You, That
though without any previous Preparation of Blood you should immediately distill
it, provided an orderly gradation of heat be carefully observed, it will yield
you a reddish Spirit, and (besides an Oil or two) a volatile Salt; which being
rectified, are so little inferior, in any Properties discernable by the smell
or taste, to the Salt and Spirit of predigested Blood, that it is very probable
their Efficacy will emulate, though not altogether equal that of the more
laboriously prepared.

9. And because it is difficult to get the Blood of healthy Men, and perhaps
not so safe to use that of unsound Persons; and because many have a strong
Aversion, and some an Insuperable, though groundless abhorrency, from Medicines
made of Man's Blood, I have thought it not amiss to try whether that of some
other Animals prepared the same way, might not afford us as hopeful Medicines:
And because the Blood of Deer is chiefly (and perhaps not causlely) commended
by Authors, we have handled it according to the foregoing Process, and thereby
obtained of it a Spirit, and Salt, and Oil, whose penetrancy, and other
resemblances, makes us hope that they may prove good Succedanea, in the defect
of those Analogous Remedies (drawn from humane Materials) which we have been
treating of.

And to this let me, Pyrophilus, on this occasion, annex this Advertisement,
That though in these Papers, and what I have further written of Preparations of
this nature; I name not any great number of Concretes, as having drawn their
volatile Salts and Spirits, yet I have endeavored in these Discourses to give
You in the Instances I insist on, so much variety of Examples, that either by
the Processes therein set down, or by Analogy to them, You may, I suppose, be
directed with the help of a few trials, to obtain the volatile Salts and
Spirits of most Concretes that belong to the Animal Kingdom, and that are
capable of affording any. For by the method we prescribe, a little vary
according to the exigencies of particular Bodies to be distilled, we have drawn
the Spirits, Salts and Oils of Sheeps-blood, Eels, Vipers, etc. the latter of
which yield a Salt and Liquor, which in Italy, by diverse Learned Men, is
superlatively extolled against Obstructions, foulness of the Blood, and I know
not how many Diseases proceeding from these two general Causes. And though I
dare not deny that diverse of those Praises may be well enough deserved, by the
Remedies to which they are ascribed, yet I am not apt to think them much
superior to the generality of volatile Salts: And even the Spirit and Salt of
Sheeps-blood it self, did, by their penetrancy of taste and fugitiveness in
gentle heats, promise little else Efficacy then those others so much celebrated
Medicines.

10. Nor is it only by being administered it self, that one of this sulphurous
and subtle kind of Spirits may become a good Remedy, but also by its being
made a Menstruum to prepare other Bodies: For it will extract Tinctures out of
several sulphurous and resinous Concretes, whose finer parts, by being
associated with so piercing a Vehicle, may probably gain a more intimate
admission into the Body, and have their Virtues conveyed further then otherwise
they would reach. And a Learned Doctor, to whom I recommended such kind of
Remedies, confessed to me, That by the bare extractions of appropriated
Vegetables themselves, with Spirit of Urine, he performed no small matter. But
one difficulty You may meet with in drawing the Tincture of Minerals, and other
very compact Bodies, even with good Spirit of Urine. (for that I account to be
the cheapest of these volatile Menstruum, and the most easy to be obtained in
good quantities) For we have found, but with a little heat, the more fugitive
Particles to ascend to the upper parts of the Glass, and there fasten
themselves in the form of a Salt; by whose recess, the debilitated Liquor was
disabled from drawing the Tincture so powerfully as was expected, wherefore we
were reduced to make our Extractions in short neck'd Glass-Eggs or Vials
exquisitely stopped (which may also be placed stooping in the Sand) and when we
perceived much to be lodged in the necks of the Vessels, by barely inverting
them, the hot Liquor soon reimbib'd the Salt, and was fit to be placed again in
Sand; so that notwithstanding this difficulty, we were able by this means, in
no long time, to impregnate the Spirit of Urine, or of Ha^ts horn (for I do not
perfectly remember which it was) with the Tincture of Flowers of Sulphur, which
may probably prove a noble Med^cine in diverse affections of the Lungs, since in
them these volatile Liquors alone have been found very effectual. And I
remember, I have sometimes made a much shorter and more odd Preparation (which
at any time You may command) of Crude Sulphur, whereby in not many hours I
have, by the means of Salts, brought over such a sulphurous Liquor or
Tincture, as even in the Receiver was of a red Color, as well as of a strongly
sulphurous Scent.

[To the Page 164, 165, etc. where Ens Veneris is treated of.]
BUt before I enter upon Particulars, I think it will not be amiss to tell You
how this Preparation first occurred to Us, because by that Information, Your
happyer Genius may peradventure hereafter be prompted to improve this Remedy,
or to devise one more approaching to the Nature and Excellency of that which we
endeavored, but with very imperfect success to light on, or equal, by our Ens
Veneris. I must then tell You, that an Industrious Chemist (of our
Acquaintance) and I, chancing to Read one day together that odd Treatise of
Helmont, which he calls Butler, when we had attentively perused what he
delivers of the Nature as well as scarce credible Virtues of the Lapis Butleri
he there mentions, we fell into very serious Thoughts, what might be the matter
of so admirable a Medicine, and the hopefullest manner of preparing that
matter. And having freely proposed to one another our Conjectures, and examined
them by what is delivered by Helmont, concerning the Preparation of Butlers
Stone, or some emulous Remedy we at length concurred in concluding that either
the Lapis Butleri (as our Author calls it) or at least some Medicine of an
approaching Efficacy might, (if Helmont did not mis-inform us) be prepared by
destroying (as far as we could by calcination) the body of Copper, and then
subliming it with Sal Armoniack.

And because the Body of Venus seems less locked up in good Vitriol, then in
its metalline form, we concluded that it was best to calcine rather the
Vitriol, then the Copper it self, and, having freed the Colcothar from its
separable Salts, so to force it up with Sal Armoniack. But the Person I
discoursed with, seeming somewhat diffident of this Process by his
unwillingness to attempt it, I desired and easily persuaded him at least to put
himself to the trouble of trying it with the requisites to the work which I
undertook to provide, being at that time unable to prosecute it my self for
want of a fit furnace in the Place where I then chanced to lodge. And though at
first we did not hit upon the best and most compendious way, yet during the
Sublimation, he being suddenly surprised, as both himself and his Domestics
two days after told me, with a fit of sickness, attended with very horrid and
seemingly Pestilential Symptoms, was reduced to take some of this Medicine out
of the Vessels before the due time, and upon the use of it found as he told me
an almost immediate Cessation of those dreadful symptoms, b^t not of the
Palenesse they had produced. This first prosperous Experiment, emboldned us to
give our Remedy the Title of Primum ens Veneris, which, for brevities sake, is
wont to be called Ens Veneris, though I am far from thinking, that it is the
admirable Medicine to which Helmont gives that name, at least if his Ens
Veneris did really deserve half the praises by him ascribed to it. But such as
Ours is, I shall now (as time and my yet incomplete Trials will permit)
acquaint you with that Process of it, which (among some others) we are most
wont to employ, as the most easy, simple, and genuine.

Take then of the best Hungarian, or if you cannot procure that of the best
Dantzick, or other good Venereal Vitriol, what quantity you please, Calcine it
in a strong fire, till it be of a dark Red, Dulcifie it by such frequent
affusions of hot Water, that at length the Water that has passed through it,
appear full as tastless, as when it was poured on it. Let this thus exquisitely
dulcified Colcothar, when it is thoroughly dry, be very diligently ground with
about an equal weight of good Sal Armoniack, and let this mixture be put into a
Glass Retort, and either in as strong a heat as can conveniently be given in
Sand, or else in a naked fire, force up as much of it as you can to the Top or
Neck of the Retort, and this Sublimation being ended, out of the broken Retort
(laying the Caput Mortuum aside) take all the Sublimate, and grind it well
again, that if in any part the Sal Armoniack appear sublimed by it self, it may
be reincorporated with the Colcothar, Resublime this Mixture per se in a Glass
Retort as before, and if you please you may once more elevate this second
Sublimate, but we have not found That always needful. And for the better
understanding of this Process, be pleased to take notice of the following
Particulars.

First, We have always preferred such Vitriol as abounds with Copper, before
our common English Vitriol, about the making of which, those that keep the
Copper as work at Detford are wont, as themselves have upon the place informed
me, to use good store of Iron to increase the quantity of their Vitriol.

Secondly, If You be unwilling to loose the Phlegm, Spirit and Oil of that
Vitriol with which You design to make Ens Veneris, You may distill them away in
an earthen Retort, or one of Glass well coated. But though it be well known
that the distillation of Oil of Vitriol requires a very intense and lasting
Fire (so that unless you have need of the Liquors, the best way will be
without any Ceremony to calcine the Vitriol in a naked Fire and open; yet
afterward it will be for the most part requisite further to calcine the Caput
Mortuum in an open Vessel. For you must take notice, that unless the Vitriol be
very thoroughly calcined, it will be very troublesome for you to dulcifie it,
and sometimes we have observed that the Caput Mortuum which looked Red, and
seemed indifferently well calcined, has been, almost like Crude Vitriol
dissolved in the fair Water which was poured on it to dulcifie it. The weight
of the Calx in reference to the Vitriol, of which it was made, we cannot easily
determine, but we have sometimes found it necessary to reduce the Vitriol to
less, perhaps much less then half its weight to make it fit for Dulcification.

Thirdly, The Water that has been poured on the first and second time to
edulcorate, the calcined Vitriol, may be filtrated and steamed away, till it
come almost to the consistence of a Syrrup or Honey, and then may be put into a
cold place to shoot; for after this manner we have sometimes had many very
regularly figured Chrystals or Grains of Salt, I say sometimes, because
sometimes also you may find it necessary to abstract all the Water, to obtain
the Whitish Salt of Vitriol, which we have known used as a good Vomit, and
which Angelus Sala none of the least sober of the Chemical Writers does highly
extol as an excellent Emetick in his Ternary of Vomitive Remedies, where he
discourses at large of the Virtues of it, and the way of administering it. And
of this Salt, as Chemists are pleased to call it, we have had out of calcined
Copper as a very great quantity, and have sometimes observed it to have been
almost as deeply colored as the Vitriol it self was before Calcination.

Fourthly, We several times tried to sublime dulcified Colcothar with Sal
Armoniack, in Retorts and Urinals placed in Sand, but whether by reason of the
fixedness of the Colcothar, or because the Furnace we were fain to use, though
no very bad one, was none of the best, we never could that way obtain any
considerable Quantity of the desired Sublimate, and that which did ascend was
but of a faint color: wherefore, unless you have an extraordinary good Sand
Furnace, if you will make use of Glass Vessels, which is the cleanliest way,
You will find it expedient to sublime Your Colcothar in coated Retorts with an
open Fire, except you have the Dexterity to sublime in a naked Fire with
Glass, Retorts uncoated, which we have diverse times seen performed by heating
the bottom of the Retort by degrees, and then placing it upon Embers, with
Coals round about it, but to be kindled at a distance from it; for if this
course be watchfully followed, the Retort will be so well neal'd, before it be
reduced to endure any intense degree of heat, that after a while You may safely
lay thoroughly kindled Coals, not only round about it, but upon the top of it,
(which needs not to be done, till toward the end of the Operation) and thereby
drive most of the Sublimate into one lump, and into the Neck of the Retort. And
by this way you may sublime without any Furnace upon a bare Hearth, but if you
desire to give a more intense heat, you may lay first some warm ashes in an
ordinary Iron pot, and having with them, and a few small Coals well kindled,
neal'd your Retort, you may afterward prosecute the Sublimation in the same
Pot, which being once thoroughly heated it self by the Fire, will afterward
considerably increase the heat of it.

Fifthly, Though it be most commonly requisite to resublime the Sublimate, that
comes the first time up, that the Salt and Colcothar may be more exquisitly
mixed, yet as far as we can guess by some trials, it will not be expedient to
resublime it above once (or at most) twice. For in those Trials we have found
the Ens Veneris oftener resublim'd of a paler color, then that which was
resublimed but once. And (N B.) perhaps, by further sublimations, the Salt
instead of being more intimately united with the Colcothar, may be almost
totally severed from it, according to what we elsewhere in other cases declare.

Sixthly, Of these Sublimates, that which has the highest Color, seems to be
the best, as being most enriched with the Colcothar, from whence the redness
proceeds. But at the first Sublimation I have often observed a pretty part of
the Sal Armoniack to come up first white by it self, especially if it had not
been very diligently mixed with the Colcothar. But at the second sublimation
the Ingredients (which we have sometimes almost totally forced up without
leaving a Caput Mortuum in the bottom of the Retort) will be more accuratly
mixed, and the Sublimate will appear Yellow, and perhaps Reddish, of which sort
we have sometimes had, when the Operation has been very carefully managed.

Seventhly, How great a proportion of the Ingredients committed to Sublimation,
will arise in the form of Ens Veneris, we dare not precisely define, but a
Sublimate amounting to the fourth part of the whole Mixture, you will scarce,
if you work skilfully, fail off.

Eighthly, We sometimes made a Sublimate of equal parts of pure Sal Armoniack
and Salt of Tartar, both of them very thoroughly dried (for else they will be
apt to yield rather a Spirit then a Sublimate,) well ground together, and so
sublimed; And with this Sublimate instead of Simple Sal Armoniak we intended to
make Ens Veneris, but by some intervening Accidents and Avocations we were not
able to perfect the Experiment, of which we nevertheless think it fit to give
You this hint, because of the great Efficacy, which an excellent Physician of
my acquaintance, to whom I gave some of it, assures me he has found in it
against Obstructions and some Distempers that are wont to spring from them.

Ninthly, When you are about to make Your first Sublimate, You may if You
please, lute to the Retort, whereinto You put the Ingredients, a small Receiver
to catch the Liquor that oftentimes comes over. For that Liquor, though you
will very seldom get much of it, yet may be worth your preserving, by reason
of the Volatile and Urinous Salt wherewith it will sometimes so abound, that it
may pass for a weak Spirit of Sal Armoniack.

Tenthly, The Caput Mortuum that remains after the first Sublimation, may be
put into a clean Glass, and set in a Cellar, where it will run Per deliquium,
into a thick and high colored Liquor, very richly impregnated (as we elsewhere
manifest on another Occasion) with the somewhat opened body of Copper, from
whence if half those praises be true, which even the best Chemists are pleased
to give to Copper, it may be very well concluded to have derived no small
Virtues against Ulcers, and diverse other Affections, which we are not here to
insist on.

Eleventhly, We have sometimes doubted whether or no our Ens Veneris did really
contain any thing of Cypreous or Colcotharine in it, partly, because of the
fixedness or sluggishnesse of Colcothar, and of the Copper therein contained;
and partly because, that if Sal Armoniack be two or three times sublimed by its
self, its Flowers frequently enough will ascend Yellow, like the paler sort of
Ens Veneris. But first, that Sal Armoniack is capable of carrying up even fixed
and sluggish Bodies seemed probable to us, partly upon our incorporating and
subliming it with finely powdered Coralls (from which, though but very little
of it ascended, yet some of that little was no less red, then the Coralls
themselves before their being beaten) and partly upon our subliming it from
Copper, both Crude and Calcined, since of either of those Bodies it carried up
a little with it, as appeared by the Blew Color of some parts of the
Sublimates.

And secondly, that the reddishnesse of our Ens Veneris proceeded partly, if
not altogether from the Colcothar, seemed probable to us, not only by the
taste, and some other Properties of it, but also by this, that having knowingly
committed the first sublimate to a Fire too weak to resublime it; and having
after some Hours, taken the Vessel out of the Sand, we found that the Fire,
which we supposed was not strong enough to carry up the whole Matter, had
raised the Sal Armoniack to the upper part of the Urinal in Flowers, that were
either White, or but of a pale Yellow; whereas the remaining part of the
Mixture, that lay in good quantity in the bottom of the Vessel, was of a deep
Red, and a fragment of it of about the bigness of a large Pease, being cast
upon glowing Coals, and nimbly blown with a pair of Bellows, colored the
Flame with a somewhat greenish blew like that, but more faint, which we
elsewhere have observed to proceed from the well opened body of Copper.

But those Trials I confess would rather increase my Doubts then lessen them,
because in our Ens Veneris the Color is not Blew, but Reddish, if I did not
consider, that Colcothar is a body that consists of some other matter besides
common Copper (as it is also far more difficult to reduce, though but in part,
into a metal then is vulgar calcined Copper) and consequently when Corpuscles
of differing Natures are by the Sal Armoniack elevated together, that which is
not Metalline, may with the assistance of the Fires Operation alter the Nature
of what is, and thereby produce a Color differing from Blew. But to dispatch
what ever further Trials shall inform us, touching this Question, whether or no
any true and reducible Copper do make an Ingredient in our Ens Veneris, yet
there being in Colcothar other parts as well as those, that by Fusion you may
reduce into a pure Metal, and our Remedy seeming by its Somniferous property
to partake of them, it will not be necessary to the giving our Medicine a Right
to the Appellation I commonly choose of Flores Colcotharis, that in it there is
something of the Colcothar carried up, though possibly the quantity be but
small, and not all reducible into a Metalline form, but perhaps the Question is
not worth a longer Debate, it being sufficient to excuse the name, and
recommend the thing to such a Person as You, that C^lcothar is employed in the
making of it, and that the thing prepared is a noble Medicine, and has some of
the great Virtues ascribed to Vitriol; whether that Mineral be an ingredient of
it or no.

The Dosis of Ens Veneris may be very much varied; To little Children, we give
sometimes one, sometimes two, and sometimes three Grains for many nights
together, as we find them able, without inconvenience, to bear the Operation.
To persons of ripe Years we commonly administer four, five, or six Grains at a
time. But one, to whom we have given quantities of it to ly by him, tells us,
That he has taken to above thirty Grains at once without any inconvenience. We
are wont to give it in two or three Spoonfuls of Sack, or other Wine, if the
Constitution of the Patient, or the Nature of the Disease do not forbid it, and
in such cases we give it in any Cordial Liquor, that is temperate, or any other
convenient Vehicle.

To Children it may be given in Beer, or Ale, or clear Posset Drink, but not in
Milk. If the Patient has supped at a seasonable Hour, we commonly administer
it, when he is going to sleep. It works for the most part by sweat and a little
by Urine, but more by sweat at the beginning, then after the body is used to
it, yet to some bodies it proves so Sudorifick, that two Grains or less of it,
have often made me sweat. That it has once proved Emetick I have heard, but
never observed it my self to provoke Vomits.

As for the Medicall use of Ens Veneris, diverse great Physicians will perhaps
think it were not despicable, though it were no other then oftentimes to prove
a safe and moderatly somniferous Medicine in Fevers, without having any thing
in it of Opium, whose Narcotick power they find as difficult to correct, as it
oftentimes proves dangerous, when being not well corrected, it is administered
without very great Circumspection. But- **************

To the 166h, 167th, 168^h, 169th, and 170th Page. [Finding among my loose
Notes, together with those that do immediately concern the Preparations of
Sulphur and Hartshorn (delivered in these Pages) some other Particulars that
may also serve, either to afford some light to Readers less skilled in
Chemistry, or contribute somewhat or other toward the relief of some Patients,
I am content to let those Papers go together, as I long since addressed them
to a Friend.]
Hartshorn, Pyrophilus, is a Heteroclite Body in Nature, which has but few
resemblers in the universe, for it grow's to a considerable bulk like a
Vegetable, and is (unlike most other Horns of Animals) at certain set Periods
of time, deciduous, and though it be of a Bony substance, yet that middle part
of it which differs from the rest in Color, does (at least in grown Horns)
much more resemble the pith of some Plants then the Marrow of Bones: and yet
this Plant-Animal (if I may so call it) does, when skilfully exposed to the
Fire, afford the same differing substances, with the Blood, Flesh, and other
parts of Animals. It Is no wonder therefore, if Physicians and Chemists have
hoped to find extraordinary Virtues in so extraordinary a Subject, of which we
shall pass by the Usual Preparations as not so pertinent to our present
design, insinuating only in the general, That though even the more Vulgar
Preparations, as well as that which Physicians have been pleased to call
Philosophical, afford us Medcines not despicable; yet these are much inferior
to those Remedies wherewith dexterous Distillations are capable of presenting
us; and certainly if we allow of the Chemical Theory, (whose Truth in these
Papers I question not) Hartshorn being generally acknowledged to be endued
with properties very friendly to our Nature, and even those ways of preparing
it wherein the nobler and more active parts are not truly freed from those
cumbersome ones that fetter them, and hinder them to display their powerful
energies, proving yet oftentimes not unavailable; The Spirit and Salt of
Hartshorn would be in more request, were not Men deterred from making trials
of it, partly by the over-apprehended unpleasantness of the smell, and partly
by the difficulties commonly met with in its distillation; the latter of which
Deterrements has so frighted even Chemists from distilling this Cordial
Substance, that we have very rarely seen any, either Spirit or Salt of
Hartshorn, save what our selves have been reduced to prepare.

There are three ways proposed by the Authors I have met with, to distill
Hartshorn: The one in coated Glass Retorts; the other in Earthen ones; and the
third in Glaubers second Philosophical Furnace.

In the first of these ways, some very skilful Distillers that have often
practiced it, have so complained of their frequent breaking their Vessels by
the copiousness and impetuosity of of the Fumes that rush out of the Matter,
when it once begins to be pressed with a considerable heat, that I confess to You
ingeniously, Pyrophilus, they have hitherto frighted me from making trial of
that way, though I see no very great reason why, by a slow and regular
gradation of the Fire, the mischances incident to this way of distillation may
not (at least most commonly) be avoided.

To distill the Matter we discourse of in Earthen Retorts, is a (...) way then
the former, if the Earth be close and good, and have been sufficiently baked;
as we find in the right Hassian Retorts, wherein we have known the Operation
proceed very prosperously, though a considerable quantity of the Matter has
been distilled at once; but the Retorts made of Earth that is spongy or any
other ways unfit, or in whose baking Fuel has been spared, are commonly (as
Experience has informed us) improper for this service, wherein they are easily
broken: Besides that, it is much to be feared that all Retorts made of Earth,
except it be extraordinarily compact and baked, are apt to imbibe the more
subtle and more penetrant parts of Hartshorn, and other volatile Substances
distilled in them; which we have observed in some, wherein the Matter has
transudated quite through the substance of the Retort, and been manifestly
discernable on the outside of it.

The third way of distilling Hartshorn, is performed by the Instrument
described by Glauber, in his second Philosophical Furnace: But neither is this
way without its Inconveniences; for besides that, if the Earth whereof the
Vessel to be employed is made, be not of very good and well baked Earth, it
will be apt to crack, in so violent a Fire as is requisite in this way of
Distillation, or else it will imbibe part of the finest Spirit it should
transmit into the Receiver: And besides that, it is difficult to work long this
way, without letting some of the active part of the Spirit escape between the
wide Orifice of the Retort and the Cover: Besides these Inconveniences, I say,
it is to be feared that the Matter being to be cast immediately into the
Vessel, made red hot beforehand, it will receive a stronger Empyreuma or
Impression of the Fire, then it would do in the ordinary way of Distillation,
wherein the Fire being orderly and successively increased, much of the Spirit
and Salt comes over into the Receiver, before that last degree of Fire is
administered; which is requisite chiefly to force over the more fluggish and
heavy Oil, which therefore (to speak congruously to the most received Theory of
Distillation) savors much more of the Fire, and is grown almost infamous for
its adustion.

But notwithstanding these Inconveniences, Pyrophilus, we have found these
Retorts of Glauber's not unserviceable, when we have had occasion to Distill
considerable Quantities of such Materials, as were not so precious, as to make
the loss of a part of what they were to afford us considerable.

And this Advertisement may take place, especially if you take along with you,
what we have declared, touching the Ways we substitute to avoid as much as may
be, the newly objected Inconveniences. But having in other Papers taken notice
particularly enough of the Ways we mean, I shall forbear to mention them in
this place, though one of them may easily be made applicable, as Experience
has assured us, even to ordinary Retorts; for it is not difficult to apply to
These, the perforated Receivers, which being almost of the shape of Pears, open
at both ends, by holes of about two or three Inches Diameter (according to the
capacity of the Vessel) may be with greater facility taken asunder and made
clean; and may, by the convenient Insertion of their Extremities into one
another, be easily luted together (in a level) two, three, or as many of them,
as necessity shall require; and then provided there be applied to the remoter
extremity of the last of them, some convenient Vessel open but at one end, the
Receivers will very seldom break: The Fumes that come over too copiously to be
contained in one of them, passing freely thence into the second or the third
(for we very rarely exceed three in all) which will be manifestly cool, and so,
speedily turn into Liquor, the Fumes it receives, whilst the first Recipient
is perhaps hotter then the Hand can endure: But of these Mechanical
Contrivances, elsewhere.

Now whereas Glauber prescribes to mingle with the Distilled Liquors of Hearts
horn rectified Spirit of Wine, to wash out the volatile Salt, and directs the
Distilling again of both those Spirits (of Wine and Hartshorn) together; his
method of proceeding may be justly questioned: For first, dephlegm'd Spirit of
Wine will not so readily, in the way he supposes, dissolve the volatile Salt
of Hartshorn; And next, the Spirit this way drawn is not a simple Spirit of
Hartshorn, but a compounded Liquor of the Spirit of Hartshorn, and that of
Wine; the latter of which may possibly, in diverse cases, rather impair then
improve the virtue of the former. For Spirit of Hartshorn, by reason of its
opening and resolving, as well as Cordial Virtues, is safely and successfully
given in Fevers, wherein it is not observed to inflame the Blood, whereas
Spirit of Wine in such cases is counted dangerous. And this brings into my
thoughts a very questionable Preparation of the Experienced and Ingenious
Hartman, who much extolls, for the Worms in the Stomach, Spirit of Hartshorn
in general, but especially that which he is pleased to call Essensificated
(that is, Pract. Chym. p. 190.
as himself expounds it) with which its own fixed Salt, extracted with some
convenient Water, and its volatile duly depurated, have been dissolved and
united. For first, The fixed Salt of Hartshorn has been perhaps never yet
prepared by any Man; and if Hartshorn does yield a fixed Salt (as I dare not
absolutely deny, but that out of many Pounds a few Grains may be extracted) it
may well be doubted whether that Salt be endowed with specifical Virtues: And
next, The Spirit of Hartshorn, if it be well dephlegm'd, will not (for ought I
could ever find) dissolve its own Salt, unless assisted by the External warmth
of the Ambient Air; Insomuch that I usually keep the Spirit and Salt in the
same Vial, where they remain unmixed; and the Spirit that will dissolve any of
its own Salt I account not sufficiently dephlegm'd, but to have yet an Aqueous
alloy whereby the Salt is imbibed. And I remember that having once exquisitely
rectified some Spirit of Harts-horne, and closed it up in a Vial, after diverse
months it let fall a considerable quantity of Volatile Salt, so far was it from
being able, without the help of some peculiar way, to have dissolved more, had
I cast more into it. I deny not that the Spirit of Hartshorn may, by the
mediation of heat, be brought to take in some of the Salt of the same Body, but
of what use this violent Impregnation of the liquor can be, unless it be
quickly administered, I do not yet understand, having often seen the Spirit let
fall again in the cold, the volatile Salt it had dissolved by the assistance
of heat.

And having thus, Pyrophilus, laid before you the difficulties we have met with
in the abovementioned ways of making of Spirit of Harts-horne proposed by
Authors (neither of which we would yet have you altogether reject) I must
acquaint you with our having attempted a fourth way, which when the matter to
be distilled is not very much, I choose rather to practice then any of the
other, as hitherto seeming more safe and free from inconveniences. Take then
(for Instance) two pounds of Hearts horn broken on an Anvill into pieces, each
of about the bigness of ones finger (for if it be rasped there is danger that
it should emit its fumes too plentifully at once) and put it into a strong
glass Retort uncoated, big enough to contain at least twice as much matter;
Set this in Sand, and fit to it a pretty large and strong (either single or
double) Receiver; then give a slow fire for three, four, or six hours, to
send away first the Phlegm, and more fugitive parts of the Spirit; then
increasing the fire, but warily, and gradually for diverse hours, drive over
the Spirit (which is wont to drop down somewhat tincted) and the more volatile
parts of the Salt; and at length intend your fire till the bottom of the Retort
be glowing hot, and heap also at last quick coals upon the sand round about the
Retort to give, as it were, a fire of Suppression, and so force over the more
sluggish remaining parts of the Salt, and with it the Oil: all which are to be
afterward proceeded with, according to the Directions given concerning the
Spirit, Salt, and Oil of Man's Blood: which having bin sufficiently insisted on
before, will not (I suppose) need to be repeated now. Only it may not be
impertinent to advertise you. 1. That we have more then once had the bottom of
the Retort melted, yet not broken, the melted glass being supported by the
substrated sand. 2. That sometimes in Filtration, some of the thinner parts of
the Oil have unperceivedly passed through the paper with the Spirit, and Salt,
and have not been discovered, but by Rectification, wherein I have almost
admired to see the Oil with a gentle heat of a Lamp ascend to the top of a very
tall head and body; touching which circumstance it may yet be further enquired,
whether it proceed barely from the volatilnesse of the Oil it self, or also
from its being carried up by the Salt and Spirit wherewith it was associated.
3. That by this way of distillation we usually have out of a pound of
Harts-horne between four and five ounces, (seldom or never so little as
four, and often nearer five) of volatile Salt, Spirit^, Oil, and Phlegm; (of
the last of which, if the Harts-horne be not recent, there will be no great
quantity) and when we distilled two pound of the matter at a time, we found the
operation to succeed altogether as well, and to yield us a fully proportionable
quantity of Liquor.

The virtues of the Spirit and Salt of Harts-horne, which differ not much in
Dose, or Efficacy, are probably very great in diverse distempers, wherein we
have yet made no trial of them. For they are considerable in resisting
Putrefaction, comforting nature, opening Obstructions, mortifying the the
Acidities it meets with in the blood, and, by rendering that volatile, promoting
its Circulation, we have known considerable effects of it in Fevers,
Plurisies, Obstructions of the Mesentery, and Spleen; and chiefly (which
perhaps you will think strange) in Coughs and Distempers of the brain, and
nervous parts; in so much that I have by Gods blessing sometimes stopped very
violent (but not inveterate Coughs) with this medicine in a few hours. And
prescribing it to one who was almost daily assaulted with Epilepticall fits, a
few Doses of it did in a pretty while at first make his fits come but seldom,
and after not at all: But whether he be perfectly cured not having heard of him
of late, nor having had opportunity to make further trial of the medicine in
that disease, I am not certain. We prescribed it likewise, not long since, to
a Person who had long lain both distracted, and almost bedridden, and was in a
short time strangely relieved by the use of it, though not perfectly cured
(perhaps because the Patient took but little of the medicine, we being then
not well stored with it;) and on some that have been by Fevers rendered stupid,
it has had very eminent Operations: but for a further account of its virtues,
I must refer you to the particular Narratives, I may when we meet, give you,
by word of mouth: and till then it may suffice to tell you that it works
chiefly by Sweat (and somewhat by Urine) without being observed to leave behind
it such heat as diverse Sudorificks are wont to do: only there must be care not
to administer it when the Primae viae, and passages are too much stuffed and
choked up by gross Humors, lest by agitating the blood, and putting it into
a nimble Motion, it occasion greater Obstructions. The Dose is from five drops,
or grains to a drachme (ten or fifteen drops are wont to make me sweat) in
Wine, Carduus Benedictus water, or any vehicle appropriated to the disease;
only taking care that nothing acid be administered with it, because Acid and
Sulphurous Salts mortify, and disarme one another. Hartman commends it
against the worms of the stomach, against which it may very probably be
available, by reason of its penetrant, and saline nature, and its emnity to
Putrefaction: Glauber writes that the Oil rectified from Salt of Tartar, cares
Quartanes, and inward wounds, and cures the pains produced by Falls,
Contusions, etc. being administered from six to twenty drops to a patient placed
in his bed to sweat after it: but of this my Experience will not enable me to
say any thing. And I fear Pyrophilus, that I have already too long entertained
you about Harts-Horne: and yet I fear too, that you expect that before I
forsake this Subject I should say something to you concerning a much
controverted particular relating thereunto. The Inquiry is, Whether or no, when
it is distilled, the Salt dispose it self in the Receiver into the figures of
Harts-horne, the Affirmative is maintained by many Chemists, and a friend of
mine who is very severe, and not at all credulous, having assured me that he
himself had observed the inside of his Receiver over-laid with such figures or
horns, I dare not deny, but that accidentally the particles of the volatile
Salt may sometimes represent as well the shape of Harts-hornes, as of diverse
other things. But for our parts having several ways, and not unfrequently
distilled that matter, we could never see the pretended Saline Harts-hornes so
clearly as we thought we saw cause to esteem that those who affirmed they
constantly saw them so distinctly looked through the spectacles of prepossest
Imagination: not to mention that it is the usual method of nature in Salts to
make the bigger Concretions of the same figures with the smaller grains, as we
observe in Nitre, Rock-allum, etc. And the grains of the Salt of Harts-horne,
though I have attentively enough considered their shapes, I remember not ever
to have observed of a figure like that of the horns they came from: but it is
the nature of volatile Salts to fasten themselves to the Receiver in various
figures, according as the degree of fire that urges them up, and other
concurrent circumstances do chance to exact; and consonantly hereunto we have
often observed the volatile Salt of the same Harts-horne to be very variously
figured in the same Receiver: and I remember that not long since subliming some
volatile Salt of Urine, it adhered to the upper part of the vessel in figures,
much liker Harts-hornes, then ever I had seen their volatile Salt make up; so
that unless we will merrily say, that the man whose urine was distilled, had
horns given him by his wife, we must acknowledge that nature seems to give
her self liberty to play in the Configuration of volatile Salts, and that
casualities have no unusual influence on them; or to speak more properly,
that the various degree of Fire, the differing copiousness of the Fumes, and
many other intervening accidents do keep those Configurations from being
constantly regular; and I remember that a while since filtring through
Cap-paper a Tincture of glass of Antimony, made with Spirit of Vinegar and
Spirit of Wine, almost according to Basilius; the matter which remained in the
paper (which was placed in a glass funnell, and was of the same shape) did of
it self, when it began to grow dry, cleave into the figures of trees, whose
trunkes, greater boughs, and smaller branches, were both for their shape, and
proportion, as lively represented as if they had been drawn by the curious
pensill of some skillful Painter; which paper I showed to some persons that
beheld it not without wonder, and for ought I know I am yet able to show it
you; nor is this the only instance I could give you if need were, if I had not
trifled too long already to manifest at present, that, now and then, Chance
may make Nature seem to emulate Art.

But as long as I have dwelt, Pyrophilus, on this Subject before I pass to
another; I must not forget to advertise you, that in case Stags Horns cannot be
procured for the preparation of the above mentioned Remedies, you may without
much disadvantage substitute Bucks-horns in their stead; for almost all the
trialls we have had opportunity to make of the Medicines we have been lately
discoursing of, have been made with Remedies whereto Buck-hornes afforded
Materials.

I had almost forgot, Pyrophilus, to tell you, That to keep the rectified
Spirit of Hartshorn, Blood, or the like, is more uneasy, then any thing but
trial would make one think; and yet to keep the Volatile Salt is more
difficult, then to preserve the Spirit; for more then once, when I have kept
these fugitive animal Salts by themselves, they have penetrated the Corks, and
scarce left me in the well stopped Glasses any footsteps of their having been
there, and therefore those Chemists that are not strangers to these Salts, have
taken much pains to no great purpose to keep them from Avolation, some of the
recentest and ingeniousest are wont, that they may moderate their uncurb'd
wildness, to pour on them as much of some such Acid Spirit, as that of Salt of
Vitriol etc. as will produce any manifest conflict with the Volatile Salt,
never considering, that as this course does indeed divest them of their
fugacity, so it does in effect divest them of a great part of their Nature, and
consequently of their peculiar Virtues. For I have elsewhere shown, that the
Saline Corpuscles, obteinable by the Fire from Urine, being united with a
sufficient proportion of Spirit of Salt, will cease to be what they were, and
with the Saline parts of the Acid Liquor, will make up a kind of Sal-Armoniack.
But it is easier for me in this our case to show that another man's Expedient is
not good, then to substitute a good one, especially in this place, where for
some Reasons I must not set down, the way that I the best approve of, only I
shall tell You, that my way long was, nor do I yet despise it, to preserve
volatile Salts in their own rectified Spirit, which swimming over them, kept
them from the immediate contact of the Air, and preserved them so well, that by
this means I have secured even small parcels of the fugitive Salt of humane
Blood for many Years.

[ But since the Spirit and Salt even of this sort of Horns, will not, I fear,
^e found so easy for every Man, especially, if he be a Novice in Chemistry to
procure in any considerable Quantity; and since the declared intent of my
c^mmunicating to the Reader my Observations about these Spirits of Hartshorn,
Blood, etc. was to furnish him with such Chemical Remedies, that men may by
their easiness and cheapness be invited to provide them for the use of the
Poor; I presume it will not be improper to present him with a succedaneum or
two, that may be easily enough obtained from Sal-Armoniack, though these
Preparations have such Conn^xion with diverse other Passages, wherewith they
were Written to the Person, I here call Pyrophilus, that to avoid the too much
d^smembring those Papers, and to make these Processes the better understood, I
must content my self to leave out those Particulars that can best be spared,
hoping that the rest will be easily excused, at least by those who know how
much some Chemists themselves have been deluded in their Trials of the divulged
Processes, diverse of which are either false or very uncertain, and others,
though they should succeed, would give but a sophistical spirit, much of the
obtained Liquor coming from the Distillable Concretes that must according to
such Processes be mingl^d with the Sal-Armoniack, of which I could easily give
instances, even out of modern and applauded VVriters.]

The Spirit of Salt-Armoniack, Pyrophilus, has such wonders ascribed to it by
Chemists, that, if I should conclude these Papers touching Spirits of an
Urinous nature, without saying something to you of that, you might think I had
left the considerablest of them unmentioned; but as I the rather acquaint you
with the little I know of it, because, though I have met with diverse Authors
that extol it, I have scarce met with any that teaches intelligibly, and
heartily how to prepare it, which perhaps most of them did not know themselves,
so I hope you will exact an accurate account of it the less rigidly, because I
can present to you but little on that Subject, besides the few Observations
wherewith my own Curiosity has supplied me; having scarce ever (to my
knowledge) seen any Spirit of Sal-Armoniack save what my own Furnaces have
afforded me, and therefore without presuming to set down solemn processes
about a subject, wherein I have found a small variation of Circumstances hinder
the operations made on it from producing uniform effects, I shall content my
self to give you as true an information as my memory will afford me of a few of
my proceedings with this nice Salt, and the successes of them: only premising
in a Word, that by Sal Armoniack I here mean the Factitious and Venal,
consisting of Urine, Soot, and Sea Salt.

And first, according to the way proposed by Glauber (in the second part of his
Philosophical Furnaces) we distilled it out of an open retort (with a Cover to
c^ap on and take off as occasion requires) with a mixture of Lapis Calaminaris,
and once we, that way, obtained a quantity of Liquor, which seemed exceeding
strong, but before we could make any trials with it, the Vial that contained
it having bin accidentally broken, we lost the opportunity of satisfying our
selves of the efficacy of it: and having not long since attempted to make such
a Spirit the same way, there came over indeed a Liquor which seemed to be the
Spirit of Sal-Armoniack, but when we came to Rectify it in a gentle heat, the
greater part of it to our wonder, coagulated in the Retort, whereinto it was
put to be distilled, into a perfect Sal-Armoniack, (a pretty quantity of which
I yet keep by me) and thereby betrayed the above mentioned Liquor to have been
little else then the Sal-Armoniack it self, forced over by the violence of the
Fire, without having suffered any separation of its Ingredients. Nor is it by
us alone, that the Process set down by Glauber, has been unprosperously
attempted, and yet perhaps it might have constantly enough succeeded with him,
and the difference of the Lapis Calaminaris (in which we have observed much
disparity according to the places it comes from) may have produced the
complained of variety of Successes.

We also attempted to distill a Spirit from Sal-Armoniack (to pretermit diverse
other trials) by mixing it with equal parts of Salt of Tartar, but in this
experiment we met with variety of success, for having exquisitely incorporated
the two Salts by the help of a little fair Water, we have diverse times had the
upper part of the receiver (carefully luted on to a somewhat large retort) all
candy'd over on the inside; with Volatile Salts of several shapes, and the
Liquor afterward forced over has sometimes remained long enough in the form
of a very subtle and penetrant spirit, and sometimes again, it has in the very
receiver almost totally coagulated it self into a lump of Chrystalline Salt;
and when we had mixed the Salt of Tartar, and Sal-Armoniack, without any Water
or other moisture at all, our successes have been very like those above
mentioned. Upon this occasion I dare not omit acquainting you with an
Experiment, which yet I learned not upon this occasion, Take of pure Salt of
Tartar and of good Sal-Armoniack equal parts (let them be both very dry, or
else you may loose your labor) and grind them very accurately together, though
you be deterred from continuing that toil, by a very subtle and fetid Urinous
steam, wont to exhale from the mixture; these Salts being thus exquisitely
incorporated, you must put them into a large Glass Retort, to which you may fit
a Receiver to catch a fetid Liquor that sometimes we have observed to come
over; then administering by degrees a very strong Fire, the top and Neck of the
Retort, will be lined with a pure white Sublimate, which seems to partake as
well (though nothing near so much) of the Salt of Tartar as of the
Sal-Armoniack and of it is Qualities, and yet to differ from either; and though
this Sublimate be far enough from being the true Volatile Salt of Tartar so
highly extolled by Paracelsus and Helmont, yet it is no ignoble Medicine in
obstructions, and some other distempers: And I remember one of the most expert
Chemists I know, having made trial of some I presented him, told me he found
such effects of it, as made him diverse times very pressing and sollicitous for
more. The Fetid Liquor that will come over we have found sometimes to be very
little, and at other times much more copious, without being able to discern
clearly whence the disparity proceeded; and the Caput Mortuum remaining in the
Retort, by Solution, Filtration, and Coagulation, affords a pure Salt of
greater Diureticall efficacy, then almost any I have hitherto met withal:
Another way by which we attempted to obtain a Spirit of Sal-Armoniack, was by
accurately mixing two parts of it, with three or four of Quicklime, whose
virtue had not bin impaired by being exposed to the Air, this mixture being
distilled in a Retort, placed in sand, with a strong fire afforded us (together
with some dry Sublimate in the neck of the Retort, and as I remember a little
volatile Salt in the Receiver) a very strong and yellowish Spirit, so
exceedingly penetrant, and stinking, that 'twas not easy to hold ones nose to
the open mouth of the Vial wherein 'twas kept, without danger of being struck
down, or for a while disabled to take breath, by the plenty and violence of
the exhaling Spirits: But the Liquor forced over by this method, though
exceeding vigorous as to its Qualities, was inconsiderable, as to its Quantity;
and therefore we now choose to vary a little this way of proceeding, and and
let the Quicklime ly abroad in the open Air; (but protected from all other
moisture, except that of the Air) for diverse days, in which time the imbibed
humidity of the ambient Air would in some degrees slake it, and make it
somewhat brittler then it was before, and the Lime thus prepared, being mingled
with Salt-Armoniack, and distilled in all circumstances after the former
manner, afforded us a Liquor so copious, and yet so strong, that we hitherto
acquiesce in this way of distilling this wild Salt, as the best we have yet met
with. But note, that, we used toward the latter end to increase the fire to
that degree, by heaping up Coals on the upper part of the Retort, that, the
mixture in the Retort has been brought to flow. Note also, that though even
the Spirit thus drawn persevered long in the form of a Liquor, yet yesterday
coming to look upon a Vial of it, which we reserved, to try what effect time
would have on it, we found that about a fourth or fifth part of it had
spontaneously coagulated it self into exactly figured grains of a
Chrystalline Salt, the Liquor swimming above it, retaining, nevertheless, a
very strange subtlety: Which Observation concording with diverse others makes
me apt to doubt, whether or no this so celebrated Spirit of Salt-Armoniack be
really much, if at all, other then the resolved Salt of Urine, and S^ot, of
which that body consists, of somewhat subtiliated by the fire, and freed from
the clogging Society of the Sea Salt, to which they were formerly associated
and united; though I confess it seems not improbable, by the great Energy
which may be observed in this Spirit, when it is dexterously drawn, that the
entire Concrete, and the Quicklime, may afford it something that it could not
receive from either of the Ingredients, whence the Mixture did result, as we
see in Aqua Regi^, which dissolves crude gold, though neither the
Salt-Armoniack, nor the Peter, nor the Vitrioll alone affords, by the usual
ways, Spirit capable of producing that effect. The great virtues, and uses of
Salt-Armoniack, especially in Physic, I cannot now stay to treat of, but you
will find them largely enough set down by Glauber; whose Encomiums
nevertheless, must not be all adopted by me, who in this place mention the
Spirit of Sal-Armoniack, but as a Medicine that is near of kin, and may serve
for a Succedaneum to the Spirits of Hartshorne, Urine, Blood, etc.

But although the last mentioned way, Pyrophilus, be the least imperfect one we
have hitherto met with, of distilling Salt-Armoniack, yet because you may
sometimes need a Spirituous liquor impregnated with the activest parts of that
noble concrete when you want either Retorts to distill in, or Furnaces capable
of giving strong fires, I dare not omit to inform you, that, we have sometimes
drawn over such a liquor of Salt-Armoniack after the following manner.
Dissolve pure Salt-Armoniack in a small quantity of fair water, then in a
Cucurbit put such a quantity of strong Quicklime powdered, as may fill up a
fifth or sixth part of the vessel, and water it very well by degrees with the
former Solution of the Salt-Armoniack, and immediately clap an Alembick on the
Cucurbit, and fasten a Receiver to the Alembick, closing the joints very
acurately, and from this mixture, by the gentle heat of a Bath or a Lamp, you
may obtain a Liquor that smells much like Spirit of Urine, and seems to be
much of the same nature; and this volatile liquor being once or twice rectified
per se, with a very mild heat, grows exceeding fugitive and penetrant, and
works by Sweat, and a little, perhaps, by Urine; and I remember that when I
first made it, having been induced by some Analogicall Experiments, I had
formerly made, to give it to one that had a patient troubled with an extremely
violent Cough, I had an account quickly brought me, that he not slowly, but
wonderfully mended upon the very first or second Dose; and indeed the trials
that have hitherto been made of it, make me hope that it will prove little
inferior in efficacy to the other above mentioned more costly Spirits, scarce
any of which being preparable by so safe, and compendious a way, if this
Medicine emulate them in virtue, the Easiness of the preparation (wherein
little time needs be spent, and less danger of breaking vessels incurred) will
much endear it to me. But, Pyrophilus, because I would assist You to make
variety of Experiments about Volatile Salts, and because diverse trials may be
more conveniently made, when the Saline Corpuscles are in a dry form, then when
they are in that of a Liquor; I will take this occasion to mention to You a way
by whose Intervention a change on the fixed body employed about the newly
mentioned Experiment, has sometimes afforded me store of volatile Salt. This
way was only to mingle exquisitly a quantity of Sal-Armoniack, with about
thrice its weight of strong Wood-ashes. For the Spirit that we this way drove
out of a Retort placed in Sand, did quickly in the Receiver Coagulate into a
Salt; and this Method was again experimented with like success. And the Salt
thus made we found so extremely subtle and volatile, that it seemed to be much
of the same Nature with that of Urine, and if it be indeed, (as probably it is)
only the Volatile Salts of the Urine, and perhaps also of the Soot, whereof
the Sal-Armoniack consists, this may pass for a more compendious way of
obtaining such Salts, then others that are hitherto wont to be practiced
amongst Chemists. But I will not undertake that this way of obtaining rather
Salt then Spirit shall constantly succeed, Yet if you find it do not, I shall
not perchance refuse You a better way. But if you could devise a Method (which
possibly is not unattainable) of bringing over into a Spirit, not the bare
Urinous and fuliginous Ingredients of Sal-Armoniack but the whole Body, it may
be, you would have a Menstruum that would make good, if not surpass even
Renanus's, and Glaubers Elogies of the Spirit of Sal-Armoniack.

The affinity betwixt Volatile Salts and Sulphurs, does, Pyrophilus, as well as
your Curiosity invite me to acquaint you, with some of the Trials we have made
about the Preparations of Sulphurous Fetid Liquors, which I am the more
inclined to do, because, though I find mention made of some of them in Chemical
Books, yet they are there delivered with so little Encouragement, amongst many
other processes of which it appears not that the prescribers made trial, that
when I had distilled some of those Sulphurs, diverse expert Chemists were very
desirous to have a sight of them to satisfy themselves that such Liquors could
be so prepared. The way of making the common Balsam, or Ruby of Sulphur, is too
well known to need to be long insisted on. Only, because there is some little
variety used by several in the preparation, it will not perhaps be amiss to
inform you that we are wont to make it by mixing about three parts of Oil of
Turpentine, with two of good Flower of Brimstone, and setting them in a strong
Urinal slightly stopped in an heat of Sand, only great enough to make the Liquor
with a little crackling noise (whencesoever that proceeds) work upon the
Sulphur, till it be all perfectly resolved into a Bloud-red Balsam which will
be performed in six, eight, or ten Hou^es, according to the quantity of the
Ingredients to be unite (...) this Balsam which is indeed in some cases no
despicable Remedy, is by vulgar Chemists, according to their custom very
highly extolled, and sometimes employed in Distempers and Constitutions,
wherein instead of performing the wonders by them expected, its Heat does more
harm, then its drying and Balsamic properties do good: but yet apparent it
will be, by what we shall say anon, that by this preparation, the Body of the
Sulphur is somewhat opened, and therefore (as we said) in some cases the Ruby
of Sulphur may prove no ineffectual Remedy, which may probably be improved if
it be prepared by bare Digestion in a very gentle heat, by which course we have
prosperously prepared it, though not in so short a time, when we made it not in
order to some other Medicine.

To Volatilize the Sulphur thus Resolved we took the Balsam made the former way
in a few Hours, and putting it in a Retort, either with, or without fair
Water, which is supposed to help to carry up the superfluous Oil, we placed the
Vessel in a Sand Furnace, and with a gentle heat drawing off as much of the Oil
of Turpentine as would in that heat come over, we shifted the Receiver, and
carefully luted on the new one; and lastly, giving Fire by degrees, we forced
over a Liquor of a deep and darkish Red, extremely penetrant, but of a smell so
sulphurous and diffusive of it self, that it was scarce to be restrained by
Corks, and was by great odds stronger then that of the Rubie before
distillation.

The like Experiment we tried in a Glass head and body placed in Sand, and
through that way, likewise we obtained a Volatile Balsam of Sulphur, yet we
found it too inconvenient to be equallable with the former; what long
Digestions of this Liquor will do to take away, or lessen its Empyreumatical
and o^^ensive Odor, we have not yet been by experience satisfie^ no more then
of its medical Virtues, though probably the ^reat penetrancy of the Liquor
considered, they will not be languid.

Authors also prescribe the making a volatile Balsam of Sulphur, by driving
over, after the above mentioned manner, a Solution of Flower of Brimstone in
Linseed Oil, and this Remedy they highly extol; but though it may probably
prove a good Medicine, yet since they commend it but by conjecture, and not
upon Experience, I see no great reason why it should be preferable to the
other; for we find that expressed Oils are much more apt to receive an
offensive Empyreuma then Oil of Turpentine, which being much more volatile then
they, requires nothing near so violent a heat to make it ascend; and unless it
be found, that the Sulphurous particles are able to mitigate the corrosive
ones, the distilled Liquor of an expressed Oil may prove noxious in the Body*
For by purposely (for trials sake) distilling Oil Olive, by it self, though not
in a naked Fire, we obtained a Liq^or of that exceeding sharpness, that it
would (takes inwardly* probably corrode, or fret either the Stomach or some
other of the internal Parts.

There is another way of preparing a Sulphurous Balsam, to which Penotus no
ignoble Chemist, ascribes such stupendous Virtues, that though I have not yet
made trial of it in Diseases, yet I dare not leave it altogether unmentioned;
the process being briefly but this. Take good Balsam of Sulphur made with
Spirit or Oil of Turpentine, and having freed it from its superfluous Oyliness
pour on it well deplegm'd Spirit of Wine, and therewith draw by affusion of new
Spirit as often as need requires a sufficient quantity of a Red Tincture, which
by filtration and abstraction in Balneo must be reduced to a Balsamic
consistence; this Liquor you may if you please by degrees of Fire drive through
a Retort placed in Sand, and thereby obtain a volatile Balsam of very great
penetrancy, and probably of no small efficacy; but the Trial I have made of
this process, gives me occasion to advertise You;

1. That unless your Balsam be reduced to a stiff thicknese, and almost to
dryness it self, the Operation will hardly succeed, we having fruitlesly
digested for some months Spirit of Wine upon Balsam, whose consistence was
somewhat too Liquid.

2. That as soon as the Spirit of Wine is sufficiently Tincted, it ought to be
Decanted, and succeeded by new, left by too long digestion, instead of
heightning its Tincture, it let fall that which it has already acquired.

3. That upon a very slow abstraction of most of the Tincted Spirit in a
digesting furnace, we once found the remaining Liquor not to be in the form of
a Balsam, but to consist partly of Spirit of Wine; and partly of a seeming
distinct Oil, whereinto the Sulphurous Tincture was reduced. The Balsam of
Sulphur thus made without Distillation seems likely to be an innocenter and
nobler Medicine then the common Ruby of Sulphur, made with a hot and ill
scented Oil of Turpentine: and by this preparation may also appear the truth
of what we formerly said, when we told you, that the body of the Sulphur was
opened by Solution in Oleaginous Liquors, for out of the common thickened
Balsam, as you may be informed by this process, well Rectified Spirit of Wine
will, in a short time, extract a blood red Tincture, whereas by long digestion
of Spirit of Wine alone upon pure, but undissolved, flowers of Brimstone, we
could not discern any change of color in the Menstruum; though I dare not
deny the possibility of what some Authors affirm, who write, that Spirit of
Wine very excellently Dephlegm'd, will in time, of it self draw a Tincture
from flowers of Sulphur, which Tincture they yet pretend not to make of a
higher then a Lemmon color. And by the way let me tell you, that our red
tincture formerly mentioned is (if it be well made) so strong of the Sulphur,
that probably it would make a very penetrant, and effectual outward remedy in
Aches, and diverse other cold distempers of the nervous parts; for it has been
already found, that good Spirit of Wine alone is one of the powerfullest
Fomentations in diverse cases of that nature; (insomuch that it has been
sometimes found to arrest the spreading Mortification of Gangrenes;) and
therefore being so richly impregnated with Sulphur: which is even without the
assistance of so subtle a vehicle very available in many dissaffections of the
Genus Nervosum; it is probable that the skillful association of two such active
remedies may produce considerable Effects.

Take of pure flowers of Sulphur one part, of the best Oyl-Olive four or five
parts, mix them well together in a strong earthen pot, able to contain a much
greater quantity of the ingredients then is to be put in it: set this vessel
over a moderate fire of Charcoales, thoroughly kindled, till the Oil though
slowly, have perfectly dissolved all the Flowers of Sulphur, which will (if you
work it well) be performed in about half an hour, or an hour, (according to
the quantity of your Materials;) But you must have a great care, during the
whole Operation, first, that the Oil catch not fire, whereby it would not only
be lost it self, but perhaps endanger the firing of the house; and next that
the Mixture be kept nimbly, and constantly stirring from the first beginning of
the Oyl's action on the Sulphur, till the Solution be fully made; and the Pot
(having been taken off the fire) be grown cold again.

The chief Signs whereby you may perceive, that, you have not erred in the
Operations are, First, if the Sulphur be perfectly dissolved in the Oil, which
you must often try before you take it from the fire, by taking up with the tip
of a stick a drop or two of the Liquor yet in Preparation, and letting it cool
on white paper, or on your nail, whereby you may discern, when the Solution
is perfectly made by the deep Redness, and Transparency of the Liquor, and by
its containing no more in it any undissolved Fowers of the Brimstone; Next by
the Consistency of the Balsam which ought to be neither too Liquid (as you will
find it if it has not staid its due time on the fire) nor too thick (as it is
apt to become if you remove it not seasonably from the fire;) but of the
consistence of somewhat thin Honey; and lastly, by the smell which ought to be
strong of the Sulphur, but not of the fire; for though the Sulphurous Stink
is, in this Remedy, to be expected, that Empyreumaticall one, which proceeds
from burning (and by skillful nostrils may be easily discerned,) is very
possible to be avoided.

The Dosis of this Balsam, when it is to be inwardly used, may be from two to
fifteen, or twenty drops, according as the greatness of the distemper, and
chiefly the strength, and Constitution of the Patient shall require and bear.
It may be given upon a fasting Stomach, either alone, or brought to the
Consistence of Pills, or of a Bolus with powdered Sugar, Liquorice, etc. or
else dissolved in any convenient Vehicle, wherewith its Oleaginous nature will
permit it to mingle. Outwardly it may be administered either by bare Inunction
of the part affected, or else by incorporating it with any other convenient
Ointment, or Plaster: after which we are wont to prescribe to have an
application made to the part of two or three little Bags filled with Sand, as
warm as the Patient can easily endure it, and shifted as soon as either of
them begins to cool, that by this means, the Pores being opened, the Virtue of
the Balsam, by being made more penetrant, may reach the farther.



I have been thus particular, Pyrophilus, in the mention of this Remedy,
because though it seem but a slight and trivial Preparation, yet Experience
has given us better opinion of it, then I fear the slightness of the
Preparation will as yet allow You. And indeed its Virtues, I am apt to think
more then I have yet had occasion to observe, and therefore must refer you to
Rulandus his Centuries, where they are often mentioned: but outwardly in
Strains, old Aches, Bruises, and the like, it is wont to be very effectual;
in the beginning of F^ts of the Gout it has several times (though not
constantly) been prosperously applied both to Mr B. B: and diverse other
persons, and sometimes it has been found not ineffectuall even in the Sciatica
it self. And as for Paralyticall distempers, I have had by a skillful
Physician an account sent me of scarce credible things which it has therein
performed: to which I shall only add, that a while since I had great thanks
returned me on the behalf of a fair young Lady, to whom I prosperously
prescribed it against a great Tumor in her neck, which was supposed to be the
beginning of the Kings-evill; But this Tumor was recent enough, which
circumstance I think fit to specify, because I fear that if the Scrophulous
Tumor had been inveterate, the success would not have been so good. Inwardly
the chief Use we made of it has been in Coughs and Distempers allied
thereunto; but its Balsamicall nature, making it both healing, and resistive
(if I may so speak) of Putrefaction, makes it probable that its Virtues may be
more extensive; to which purpose I remember that a while since a friend of mine
tried it with wonderful success in mictu sanguinis fere deplorato, having
first by a gentle heat reduced it to such a Consistence, as allowed him to make
it up into Pills. But of the particular Cases, wherein our Remedy has been
succesfull, no more at present; We shall rather subjoyn, That though this have
been the way which we have the oftenest employed in the making of the Balsam,
yet we must not conceal from You, that we have diverse times met with Accidents,
which frustrated our endeavors and expectations. For if the fire administered
be too languid, the Solution of the Sulphur by the Oil proceeds not well, and
on the otherside have found, that not only a strong heat is apt to burn the
matter, or to make the Oil boil over, and perhaps take fire, but even that upon
a very little excess in the degree of heat, the Oil and Sulphur would, before
it could be expected, degenerate together into a heavy and viscous Lump (almost
of the color of the liver of an Animal) which coagulated Matter proved
afterward exceeding difficult to be by the affusion of fresh Oil dissolved and
reduced to a due consistence. Wherefore we tried to prepare this Balsam by
putting the proportion of Ingredients formerly mentioned into a strong Urinall,
which we placed in Sand, and making under it no more fire then was sufficient
to make it slowly work upon the Flowers, (which did often during their
Solution make a crackling noise,) we continued the Operation for diverse
(perhaps many) hours, at the end of which we found the Sulphur dissolved, and
the mixture reduced to a Balsamic color and consistence. So that if you
distrust your dexterity to prepare this Balsam by the former way with a naked
fire, we must advise You to make use of this latter way, as that which is the
safer, though it be the longer way of proceeding. Nay when we had leisure
enough, we did for trials sake, prosperously attempt the Solution of Flow^es
of Brimstone, with common Oil by the far gentler heat of bare Digestion, and by
that means obtained a Balsam perfectly free from adustion, but of somewhat too
liquid a consistence, which may be easily remedied by the mixture of powdered
Liquorice, Sugar, or any other such convenient Concrete. We must also advertise
you that this Balsam may also be prepared with Oil of Nuts, of Poppy seeds, of
Hypericon, instead of Oyl-olive, or any other expressed Oil, appropriated to the
particular distemper against which the Physician intends to employ the remedy,
only care must be had, that the Specific qualities of the Oil be not so
fugitive, as to be destroyed by the Ebullition requisite to the making of the
Balsam, which if it be to be enriched with specific virtues in relation to any
particular disease, may perhaps be best prepared by the last mentioned way (of
digestion) wherein the subtle Spirits that impregnate the Oil are not in such
danger to be dissipated by the fire.

The knowingest Chemists themselves ( Pyrophilus) are wont so much (and perhaps
not altogether undeservedly) to to extol the efficacy of Antimony, that we
were thereby invited, besides diverse Preparations of it for internal use, to
attempt the making of some remedies of it, that might also be externally
applicable; and in prosecution of this design, we found that by boiling four
or five fingers height of good Oil of Turpentine upon very finely powdered
Antimony, put with the Liquor into a strong Glass Urinall, placed in Sand, the
Oil after some hours would grow exceeding high Tincted; and being gently in in
great part abstracted, would leave behind it a body of a Balsamic consistence,
and a deep redness; which may, I presume, be applied to resolve, and discuss
hard Tumors, and remedy diverse other outward Evils, with more effect then the
simple Balsam of common Sulphur formerly described. And from this Antimoniall
Balsam abstracted to a st^ffer consistence, we found that Spirit of Wine would
draw a Tincture, which I likewise suppose might prove a very powerful
Fomentation; though the Spirit we used (perhaps because it was not sufficiently
Dephlegmated) did not in a few days attain to more then a very pale
redness:) but this Tincture being slowly freed from the most part of the
Spirit of Wine, became of the consistence of somewhat liquid Honey, and of a
deeper color, thereby affording us a purer Balsam; which we have not yet,
(being hindered by some accidents) attempted to bring over the Helm^. Nor did we
here desist, but by diverse trials found that the Antimoniall Balsam, above
mentioned, being put into a Retort, placed in Sand, and pressed by degrees of
fire, would at length emitt Steams, which would condense in the neck of the
Retort, and fall thence into the Receiver in sanguine drops: this volatile red
Balsam (especially if by this volatilization the Antimony have lost its Emetick
property) we cannot but think endowed with more then ordinary Virtues, outward
and perhaps inward too; considering the great penetrancy of the Liquor, and the
Energy of the Mineral, with whose subtle parts it is richly impregnated, if it
consist not mainly of them. But we are yet in prosecution of this Preparation,
and therefore till we have seen how far we are like to improve this Remedy, We
shall forbear any further mention of it especially since we have already in
this very Paper, given you as we suppose, sufficient proof, that We are more
sollicitous for your Satisfaction and proficiency, then for our own
Reputation, (of being a severe Critic in estimating of Medicines) For
otherwise we should not have been so indiscreet, as to acquaint you with any
Preparation, of whose medicall Virtues we have not yet made much trial, whilst
we are not destitute of other remedies, whose efficacy has been manifested to
us by Experience. But we have often observed, that diverse useful Chymicall
Preparations are mentioned so obscurely, and unintelligibly by the Authors that
write of them, or else are without any particular, or encouraging note of
Distinction mentioned amongst a crowd of other Processes, some of which have
perhaps already been found to be false, or trivial, and others of which may be
rationally enough distrusted; that most Physicians, and Chemists themselves,
are deterred from attempting to prepare those remedies, not so much because
they seem unlikely to prove confiderable, as because they are afraid that the
Processes are false, or fraudulently set down, and consequently, that
concretes of such a Consistence, Color, Scent, and other obvious qualities, as
are ascribed to the Remedies proposed, are not preparable by the published
Directions. And that you might see, Pyrophilus, what discouragements I have met
with even from Artists themselves to keep me from trusting to Printed
Chymicall proeesses, I think it not amiss to mention here a memorable passage
of the famous, and experienced Alexander Van Suchten, who is reported to to
have gotten more by the practice of Chymicall Physic then any of the
Contemporary professors of it; for he toward the end of his Book of the
secrets of Antimony (of which he clearly discloseth not any in that Treatise,)
gives this account of his Crypticall way of writing; Quod in hoc Tractatu
nullum Recipe proposuerim ob id factum est, quod vos seducere nolo, Recipe enim
illa seducunt juniores Medicos: sed neque a Theophrasto ullum Recipe Scriptum
est, quod ad Medicinam, quin occultum seusum habeat, and in quo nihil vel
deerit, vel abundet; and hoc non fit sine magnis causis. Wherefore make
account, that besides that such changes of the qualities, of Bodies, may afford
much light to Naturalists, he does Chemists no useless piece of service, that
acquaints them with the success of the nobler sort of processes mentioned in
Authors, though he should give them little or no account of the Virtues of the
Remedies prepared by those Processes; but this I hope is not altogether our
case, for besides that our Observations are likely to save You much trouble,
and perhaps some mistakes, and mis-adventures, besides that (I say) we have had
opportunity to observe such eminent effects of several of the volatile Liquors
described in these Papers, as may justly give us promising! Expectations of the
Properties of the rest, which are in their obvious qualities so near of kin to
them. And this sort of Medicines having been found sometimes to do wonders, and
generally to be safe (which of a few of the known operative, and not Specific
Medicines can be truly affirmed) I not apt to think, that he that shall bring
these Remedies in spite of their ill Scent, into the good opinion of
Physicians, may make no inconsiderable number of Patients beholden to him.

I should not, Pyrophilus, proceed to make You repent Your Curiosity to know my
thoughts of the Urinous, and Sulphurous Remedies it has hitherto made me
treat of, were it not, that there yet remains something to be said, without
which, all that has been said, will scarce signify very much toward the
effectual recommending of those medicines to Your esteem and practice.

For I do not ignore, Pyrophilus, that not only the Generality of the
Galenicall Physicians, but diverse of the more eminent, and judicious of the
Chemists themselves, have been pleased to condemn the internal use of Liquors
driven through a Retort, by the violence of fire, upon the scores of their
being offensively Empyreumaticall, and Stinking; among which sort of Liquors I
cannot expect, that our Spirits of Blood, Harts-horne, etc. will escape the
being reckoned. But forasmuch as the prosperous Effects I have had opportunity
to see, of diverse Remedies of that Nature, have given me for them rather an
esteem, then either a detestation or contempt; I suppose it may prove no
unseasonable piece of Justice to the Spirit of Blood, and the other Noble,
though fetid Remedies I have been setting you down; nor no unserviceable piece
of Charity to Men, if in this place, and once for all, I spend some lines in
endeavoring to rescue these criminated Medicines from the great Prejudice they
suffer under, and from a reputation, which whilst it renders them more odious
then even their smell can do, is likely to make men deny themselves the benefit
of them.

I might here on this Occasion call in Question, whether not only Galenists,
but even many Chemists themselves, be not somewhat more afraid, then they need
be, of what they call Empyreuma. But I will suspend a while that Question, and
at present confess to You, that I have sometimes doubted whether or no that
stink which is generally called by the newly mentioned name, do always, and
necessarily proceed from the Impressions of a violent fire. For to make a pure
Spirit, and Salt of Urine, there needs nothing, but to let it in a well stopped
vessel putrify for a competent time (as we elsewhere teach) in a Dunghill, or
any resembling warmth, (and that it self, perhaps, is not necessary to its
Putrefaction;) and then to draw off an eight or tenth part of the Liquor that
first ascends by the gentle heat of a Bath. By which, or by the yet milder
warmth of a Lamp-furnace, it may be sufficiently rectified, and brought to
yield, besides the Spirit, good store of Salt. And since the Spirit thus made
differs so little in Smell or Taste from those of Blood and Harts-horne, that
most men's Noses are not critical enough to distinguish them, (and We have
sometimes taken pleasure to make Chemists themselves to mistake the one of
those Liquors for the other.) It seems worth considering, whether or no the
fetid and urinous Taste and Smell, which in these Spirits is said to be
Empyreumaticall, and to proceed from the Adustion of the fire, be not the
Genuine Taste and Odor of the Spirituous and Saline particles of the mixed
Bodies themselves, which they would manifest if they were copiously extricated,
(to speakin the Kings language) separated from the other Principles or
Ingredients and associated into one Body, though without the violence of the
Fire. For to distill the Spirit of putrified Urine, wherein the like Smell and
Taste are eminent, there needs (as we said) no greater heat, then that of a
Lamp-furnace, or of Hors-dung, (since in the latter of these only, Urine too
long kept, and but negligently stopped, has been observed to have lost its
volatile Salt and Spirit, before it was taken out of the Hors-dung. And such a
H^at seems not great enough to impress an Empyrema upon such a Liquor. For we
see that most things dist^ll'd in the g^eater heat of a Bath, are commended by
Physicians and Chemists, for their being free from Empyreume. And what
Activity may be acquired by the subtle parts of a mixed Body, by the convening
(if I may so speak) of such Spirituous Particles disengaged from those other
parts which clogged or imprisoned them, without any Empyreumaticall Impression,
from any violent external Heat, may appear by the Chymicall Oils of Spices.
For though though they be usually drawn by Chemists and Apothecaries, by the
help of Water in Limbecks; and though they have by us been drawn after another
manner (which we may elsewhere teach You) with a much gentler heat (sometimes
not not exceeding that of an ordinary Balneum) yet these well Dephlegm'd
Liquors retaining so well the Genuine Taste and Smell of the Concretes they
were drawn from, that they pass unaccus'd of Empyreume, are some of them much
stronger and hotter then the Spirit or Salt of Man's Blood, or of Hartshorn: As
may appear especially by the Oil of Cinnamon, which if pure, is more penetrant
and fretting, then any thing but trial could easily have persuaded me. And
lest you should object, that the Fire does considerably contribute to the
strength of these Liquors, otherwise then by disengaging the Particles they
consist of from the unactive parts of the Concrete, and assembling them
together, I must advertise You, that I have observed little less Heat and
Penetrancy then in diverse of these, in some Liquors separated without the
assistance of Distillation: As for Instance, in the purer sort of the true
Peruvian Balsam, and in another kind of natural Balsam, almost of an Amber
color, which belonged to an Eastern Prince) who carried it up and down with
him as a Jewel) whose Domestics at his death sold it, whereby I came to
procure some of it, and found cause to wonder at its strength both upon the
tongue, and in its Operation. But granting, Pyrophilus, that the Volatile
Remedies treated of in these Papers, may have their offensive Smell and Taste
imputed to the Fire, yet perhaps Physicians would more slowly, and more
tenderly censure the Rememedies in question for their Empyreumaticall stink, if
they did but consider, that they themselves scruple not to use (to name those
among many others) Senna and Scammony, though the former be wont to gripe the
Guts, and the latter have an Acrimony, Heat, and Mordacity so unkind to to the
Bowels, that a few grains exceeded in the Dose turns it into poison; because
the ill Qualities of these Medicines, may by proper Correctives be somewhat
mitigated, and the Good they do, does more then countervaile the
Inconveniences that attend the use of them. For the very same Considerations,
Pyrophilus, will be applicable to the excuse of those fetid Medicines, for
which we Apologize: For though the Empyreuma or Impression of the fire, for
which they are rejected, be the Quality, whose absence from them were very
desirable, yet may that Empyreuma by dextrous Preparations be in some measure
corrected (insomuch that I have known highly rectified Spirits of Urine, by
being digested for diverse months in an exquisitely stopped Glass, brought to be
of a Scent, which to me seemed scarce at all stinking, and to others even
pleasant) and the prejudice that may be justly feared from what remains, is
advantageously recompensed by the benefits accruing from the efficacy of their
more friendly Endowments. And in effect we find, that the Dogmatists themselves
are grown not to scruple the administering the Spirit of Salt, though extorted
(if it be of the best) by a much greater stress of Fire, then is requisite to
the Distillation of any of the Medicines we defend. And not only the famous
Riverius (as we have elsewhere noted) extolls the Spirit of Tartar, and Soot,
which are yet sufficiently fetid and Empyreumaticall, but several other (and
among those some of our eminent English) Physicians frequently use, and commend
the Oil of Guajacum forced through a Retort. And no less do diverse learned
Doctors esteem, and employ the Empyreumaticall Oil of Amber: Though (to note so
much by the way) That be in diverse cases far inferior to the Volatile Salt,
which (if the fire be skilfully administered) may at the same time, and by the
same Operation be obtained. This Salt, besides the Efficacy ascribed to it in
the Convulsions of Children, having been lately found by Experience to be an
excellent Medicine against the Epilepsies, even of well grown Persons, being
administered in the Dose of not above a Scruple, or half a Dram, in a due
Quantity of Peiony water, or some other proper Vehicle.

And on this occasion You may also be pleased to take notice, that foliated
Gold, is ordinarily and without Scruple employed by Physicians, not only to
cover Pills, but as a main Ingredient (though how properly I define not) of
several of their richest Cordial Compositions extant in Dispensatories; and
yet to how great a fire Gold is wont to be exposed before it be melted out of
the Oar (wherein it is usually (at least as far as we have observed) blended
with other Metals, and Minerals) and to Purify it upon the Cupell either with
Lead or Antimony: he that is unacquainted with the Operations of Mineralists,
and the Art of Refiners, will not easily imagine. And, Pyrophilus, to satisfy
You yet farther, that the strong Impression of Fire in the Medicines, does not
always make them so noxious as they are commonly reputed; let me desire you
to take notice, that there is scarce any Medicament more generally given, and
applauded, even by Methodicall Physicians then Steel, which is often
administered in Substance, made up with other Ingredients, into the Form, either
of Pills, or Electuaries. And yet we have wondered to see what great Fires, and
violent Blasts of huge Bellows moved by Water-engines, are used to melt Iron
first out of the Stone; and if it be to be farther refined into Steel (much of
that used in Physic being factitious) a new violence of the Fire is requisite:
And though after all this to make astringent Crocus Martis per se (which is
accounted one of the best preparations of it) they are wont to keep Mars (as
the Chemists speak) amidst reverberated flames, or in some glassmans Furnace
for many hours, yea sometimes for diverse days; Yet this Medicine is with more
success then Scruple daily administered by learned Physicians, in Dysenteries,
Fluxes, and other distempers where astriction is required. And it is somewhat
Strange to me, that the having been exposed to no greater a Fire then is
requisite to distill Spirit of Blood, or of Harts-ho^n, should be much urged
against those Medicines, by those that scruple not to commend, and do almost
daily and oftentimes succesfully, prescribe the lixiviat Salts of Plants, and
particularly of Wormwood, though these are not rightly made, but by the
exposing the Concretes even to the violence of an incinerating fire. And as for
the unpleasantness of the Smells of our Spirits of Blood, Hartshorn, etc:
besides that, to very many Persons there is no Odor so loathsome, as that of a
Potion. We find that the Galenists themselves scruple not in the Fits of the
Mother (which yet very rarely prove mortal) to repress (as Men are wont to
suppose) the unruly Fumes by the Smell of Castoreum, Assa foetida, and even the
Empyreumaticall Odor of the burnt feathers of Partriges: nor do they decline
to use these homely, and ungrateful Remedies to Patients of tenderest Sex, and
highest Quality. and indeed in dangerous cases I have known fair Ladies content
to th^nke it fitter to take down an ill Scented Medicine, then venture the
having their own bodies in few days reduced to worse Perfumes. And certainly
we may justly say of Health, as no less then an Emperor said of the gain
brought him in by Urin, That it Smells well from what thing soever it comes.

But, Pyrophilus, if Your Nostrils were so nice, that they must needs be
complied with, though with the hazard of impairing the Virtues of the Salts
they are offended with, I Could propose an Effectual Expedient to gratify
them; and being now invited by so pressing an Occasion, I shall not scruple to
annex something of it, and tell You, that if we may judge of the Virtues of the
Spirit and Salt of Soot (which I am wont to make without addition) by their
sensible Qualities: they must be much of kin to those of the Spirit of
Hartshorn, and of Urine; (though these be animal Substances.) And therefore
having elsewhere more particularly, and by diverse Experiments declared the
affinity between these Salts in diverse regards; it will not, I presume, be
looked upon as an unusefull or unseasonable Hint, if I give You a summary,
though but imperfect, Account of what I remember my self to have done, in
order to the freeing of the Volatile Salt of Soot, from that very offensive
Smell, which may possibly make many, even of those that need them, abominate
those Medicines, how Piercing and Noble soever, which it Blemisheth. The
Process is as follows.

Take a Quantity of well Deflegm'd Spirit of Wine proportionate to the Quantity
of Salt, whose Odor You desire to correct; into this Spirit drop as much Oil
of Rhodium, or of any other Odoriferous Chymicall Oil, as will suffice to make
the Liquor as strongly Scented as You desire it: shake the Oil, and Spirit well
together, and if they were both well made, the latter will imbibe the former,
and sometimes be thereby turned into a whitish Substance; with which if it
smell not strong enough of the Oil, You may by Agitation incorporate more Oil,
and if You judge the mixture too strong already, You may dilute it at pleasure,
by the affusion of more Spirit of Wine. This done put the Salt of Soot into a
Bolthead, or Glass Egg (according to the Quantity that You intend to sublime,)
furnished with somewhat a long Neck or Stem, and afterward pouring on
leisurely Your Odoriferous Liquor, You may with it wash down the Salt that is
wont to stick in the Neck of the Glass. After this you must very carefully stop
the Vessel with a Cork, and store of hard-wax, if you cannot conveniently,
make use of an exacter way of closing it. This Glass You must place in a Lamp
furnace, or some other, wherein You may give a very moderate heat, for that
will suffice to elevate to the neck and upper part of the Vessel the pure
white Salt of Soot, imbued (at the second time, if not at the first) with the
Scent of the Odoriferous Oil, which You employed about the Preparation.

This Experiment, Pyrophilus, may prove of that Use in Physic, that it may
deserve as well for its Nobleness, as the watchfulness, which is requisite in
him that makes it, to be illustrated by the ensuing

Observations.
1. Then it is requisite that the Spirit of Wine be very good, For that which
is not sufficiently Dephlegm'd, will not ^eadily and perfectly receive into it
self the odoriferous Oil, wherewith it is to be perfumed. Nor would every
Chemical Oil, although it were well scented, be fit for this Preparation for
diverse of them as Oil of Turpentine, and Oil of Amber will not sufficiently
mingle with Spirit of Wine, unless they be previously subtiliz'd after a
peculiar manner.

2. The Proportion betwixt the Spirit of Wine, and the Oil that it is to be
dissolved in, it is not easy to determine; for a lesser Quantity will suffice
of some Oyl's, then of other. And the Proportion of them must be varied,
according as You would have the sublimed Salt to participate more or less of
their Odor, and other Qualities.

3. Great diligence must be used in closing the top of the Glass, because of
the great fugacity, and subtilty of the Salt, whose Avolation is to be
prevented: But then much greater care is to be had, that the Heat be not too
stoong, but as equal as may be, and much inferior to the Moderate heat of an
ordinary Chymicall Balneum. For it is scarce Credible how easily this unruly
Salt will be excited either to make an escape at the mouth of the Glass, or to
break it in pieces. And I remember among such other Accidents which have
befallen us in the Preparation of this Odoriferous Salt, that having once set
some of it to sublime from a perfumed Chymicall Oil, though though we
administered so gentle a heat, that we thought the Vessel out of all danger of
being broken, or found open: Yet in a short time the fugitive Salt did with a
great noise blow out the Cork that was waxed to the top of the Vessel, leaving
in the bottom not a limpid Oil, but a Liquor of a red color, and a Balsamic
Consistence. But if the Glass be wide enough to allow these fumes competent
Room, and if the heat be warily administered, the Sublimation may be well
enough performed.

Of the Medicinal Qualitiy of this Aromaticall Salt, Pyrophilus, we have not
yet had opportunity to make trial, but some esteem may be made of them by
calling to mind the Virtues of the simple Salt of Soot, and considering the
Nature of the Liquors, from which in this Our Preparation it has been
Sublimed. The Principal, if not the only thing, that seems to be feared, is,
that the Salt of Soot being it self hot, and Chymicall Oils being for the
most part eminently so too, our Salt may prove unfit for Men of Hot and
Choleric Complexions, and in such distempers, as proceed from Excess of Heat.
But then it may be considered in the first place, that the Salt of Soot, being
of an extremely apertive, resolving, and Volatile Nature, and carrying up with
it in Sublimation only the more fugitive parts of the Liquor from which it is
sublimed; It is very likely that the heat produced by a Medicine, which by
reason of its fugacity would stay but a very short time in the Body, will not
be so lasting as that of ordinary Sudorificks, which are nevertheless often
administered with good Success, even in hot Diseases.

Secondly, That there are diverse Bodies and Distempers, wherein Remedies may be
the more proper, for their being somewhat hot, and Experience shows, that in
Dropsies (to mention now no other Diseases) these Volatile Saline Remedies,
that set the Blood a whirling and powerfully promote its Circulation, may prove
very availeable.

Thirdly, The Heat that may be feared upon the use of our Salt, may be either
prevented, or at least moderated by the seasonable use of such cooling
Remedies, as may be no Enemies to the Operation of this Salt, and yet no
friends to the Distemper, against which it is administered;

And Lastly, Supposing that the inconveniences proceeding from this Heat were
not to be altogether avoided, yet the advantageous efficacy of so powerful and
searching a Remedy, may very much outweigh that Inconvenience; And therefore
Riverius, as we formerly told You, commends the Spirit of Soot (though that
seem at least as hot as the Salt) in Pleurisies; and in the same hot sickness,
we have, as we elsewhere relate, successfully administered the Spirit of
Hartshorn, whose Qualities are very near of kin to those of Salt of Soot.
Other instances of this Nature You may meet with dispersed in other passages of
my Chemical Papers, to which I must add, that upon the Consideration above
mentioned, the Methodists themselves make no d^fficulty, in Pills and other
Medicines, to use the Chemical Oil, either of Cloves, or of Nutmegs, or even of
Cinnamon. And some of our eminentest English Doctors, as I lately noted, have
not scrupled of late Years, to use the strong and fetid Chemical Oils of Amber
and of Guajacum (and the latter of these in large Doses) whereas in our
Preparation, only the finest and most Aromatic parts of the Oils, seem to be
associated with the fuliginous Salt, since the Oil remaining after the
Sublimation, has been observed to be thick and ropy almost like a Syrrup.

But whether or no this Aromatic Salt be a safe Medicine in all Hot Bodies and
Diseases, it seems very probable, that it will prove a very powerful Remedy in
those Distempers for which it it proper. For first, whereas Spagyrists have
with much study, but without much success, endeavored to emak Oils capable of
being mixed with other Liquors, by depriving them of their oleaginous form, in
which Helmont himself complains that they are offensive; we have by our
Preparation their finest parts associated with the penetrant and volatile Salt:
by whose assistance they are not only fit to communicate their Virtues to
Liquors, but assisted to penetrate exceedingly; and perchance also, thereby to
obtain such an access to the innermost parts of the Body, as is seldom
allowed to Vegetable Medicines. Secondly, We may have by this Preparation one
of the most noble and volatile Salts of the World, not only freed from its
stink, but imbued with the Odor, and perhaps diverse of the Virtues of what
Chemical Oils we please. And since these Chemical Oils are by Chemists and
Naturalists thought to contain the most noble and active parts of the
Vegetables whence they have been destill'd; And since also the Salt of Soot
sublimed from them, carries up with it the finest parts of these Oils, why may
it not be hoped, that no small number of distinct Remedies may be afforded us
by this single Experiment? These Remedies too may be the more acceptable both
to Physicians and Patients, because they have not in them any thing that is
Mineral, and notwithstanding their great Penetrancy and Efficacy have in them
nothing of Corrosive, as many of the Saline Remedies prescribed by Physicians
in their Dispensatories. And thirdly, That the Salt of Soot thus sublimed may
be also enriched with the Sulphur or Balsamic part of the Spirit of Wine,
which was employed about its Preparation, may appear probable enough to him,
that shall examine, by his taste and otherwise, such rectified Spirit of Wine as
has had a sufficient quantity of Volatile Salts sublimed from it. And how
Balsamical a substance is diffused through pure Spirit of Wine, may be guessed
at by the great change which is made in the Caustic Salt of Tartar, when it is
so dulcified as to make that Excellent Medicine, which Helmont extolls against
inward Ulcers, and calls Balsamus Samech; which if one had the abstruse Art of
so preparing the Salt and Liquor, as to fit them for Conjunction, might be made
only by destilling very frequently pure Spirit of Wine from very fine Salt of
Tartar. For by this means the fixed Salt, retaining the Sulphurous Salt or
Balsamic parts of the Spirit of Wine, (as may appear by the Aquosity of the
Liquor that comes over the Helm in this Preparation) is thereby so deprived of
its caustic taste, that when it will rob no more Spirit of Wine, but suffer it
to be drawn off a strong as it was poured on, it will easily in a moist place
run per deliquium, into a liquor not of a Caustic, but Balsamic (and as it
seemed to us a pleasant) Taste.

And whereas, Pyrophilus, we have complained of the Difficulty we have met
with, to manage the unruly Salt of Soot, and keep it from breaking Prison, we
must, to make this Experiment be more practicable and useful, advertise You,
that You may, if You please, instead of Salt of Soot Aromatize that of
Hartshorn, or man's Blood. And I might add, that a very ingenious Friend of
Ours Dr N. N. has lately Practiced yet a more easy and preferable way of
preparing Medicines of this Nature: But though I have partly tried his Method,
and found it to succeed well enough; yet since I had it but by communication
from him, and that he makes a considerable Advantage of it, I must forbear
imparting it to You, 'till I shall have obtained his Consent to disclose it.

I know not, Pyrophilus, whether I shall need to add, That of these fetid
Remedies, which are Volatile, and somewhat Sulphurous, as I chose to mention
to You but a few, to comply with my present have, which would not allow me to
insist on many; so in what I have delivered concerning these few, I have set
down Particulars the more fully and explicitly, because I find the Doctrine of
Volatile Salts (though in my poor judgment worthy of a serious Enquiry)
perfunctorily, and indistinctly enough handled by the Chemical Writers I have
yet met with, which made me the willinger to contribute the few Observations I
could readily find of those I have had opportunity to make about them, toward
the Illustration of so important a Subject, of which having elsewhere spoken in
relation to Physiologie (as these fugitive Bodies belong to the Commonwealth of
Salts) I thought it might not be unacceptable to You, if I also considered them
a while in relation to Physic, and presented You with some hints concerning
their Medical Uses.

[To the 166 th Page, where the Author promises a Declaration, how he would
have his Praises of Medicines understood.]
ANd now, Pyrophilus, having finished what I thought fit to add (at present)
in the past APPENDIX; I should likewise put at end to the present Exercise of
your Patience, but that this being my first Treatise written to You concerning
Medical Matters, and not being likely to be the last which you will meet with
among the Papers designed You, I think it requisite, and not unseasonable to
declare to you here once for all, with what Eyes I desire you should look upon
what I have written, and shall write to you concerning matters of that Nature:
And first, I must advertise You that I am not so much a Mounteback as to
recommend to you the Remedies I mention as certain Cures in the Cases wherein
they are proper. For he must have been extraordinarily happy, or very much
unacquainted with the Practice of Physic, that has not found, that even those
Medicines which are most celebrated by the best Authors, both Galenical and
Chemical, do sometimes prove ineffectual as well as often prosperous, and the
Remedy prescribed by the same Physician to twenty Patients sick of the same
Disease, has more then once been Observed, though it have succeeded in
nineteen, to fail in the twentieth. And indeed the Causes of Diseases, the
Constitution of Patients, and the Complications of Distempers are so very
various, intricate, and obscure, that it is extremely difficult even for the
most knowing and experienced Physician to make an accurate, and constant
Experiment in the Therapeutical part of Physic; and consequently such
Experiments are much less to be expected from Me, whose Condition as well
Disabilities forbid me to make the Practice of Physic my business, and allow
me only to administer it occasionally, either to my own particular
Acquaintance, or to such poor people as are not able to gratify Physicians, or
such as I meet with where there are not any: And thereby I am reduced to learn
the Virtues of diverse of the Remedies I have prepared by very few or none of my
own immediate Trials, but the Relation of Physicians, who do me the Favor to
administer them for me. And therefore, though I ende^vour to put them into the
hands of faithful, as well as ingenious men. Yet not being allowed to be my
self a constant eyewitness of the Effects they produce, I must here for all
these reasons solemnly profess to you, that as I do not set down Medicinal
Experiments, with the same positivenesse that I do Physiological ones, so I do
not intend to venture the repute of being a faithful Relator of Experiments,
upon the success of any Medicinal Receipt or Process.

Yet in the next place I must tell You, that You would perhaps do Me but right,
to think not only that the Chemical preparations of Remedies are, if you
understand them aright, heartily set down, though the Virtues ascribed to them
do not constantly upon all Trials display themselves; but that I have not
rashly and inconsiderately, or upon uncertain Rumors recorded the virtues of
particular Remedies, which may be good, though they be not infallible. It being
sufficient to make a Medicine deserve the Title of Good, that it be often (in
some degree at least) succesful, though now and then it prove not availeable,
especially if it be otherways so safe and innocent, that even when it proves
not prosperous, it weakens not nature, nor is otherwise noxious; And we must
nor, Pyrophilus be so timid as to suffer our seves to be persuaded, that if a
patient miscarry after the use of the Remedies, the fault must necessarily
belong to the exhibited Medicine. For oftentimes Nature will in spite of
Remedies make a Metastasis of the peccant matter, and so empair the Condition
of the patient; and much oftener before death, the Conflict of struggling
Nature, and the conquering Disease does manifest it self in horrid and dreadful
Symptoms, which some envious or ignorant Doctors (for the more learned are
wont to be more equitable, and less partial) injuriously impute to the
Chemical Remedy, given before the appearing of those Symptoms, never
considering that the like Accidents are wont to attend dangerous Diseases, and
dying persons, where Galenicals Remedies only, and no Chemical ones at all
have been administered. And that diverse of the most eminent, and M^thodical of
our Modern Physicians scruple not to use frequently both Crocus Metallorum,
Merc. Dulcis, and some other Chemical Remedies, and to impute the miscarriages
of the Patients that use them to their Diseases, though not many years, since
all the frightful Symptoms accompanying the dying persons to whom they had
been exhibited, were confidently imputed to those Medicines. To which let me
add, Pyrophilus, that oftentimes it may be very just to prize an Empirical
Remedy more then a Galenical, though the Methodist and the Empirick have each
of them by his respective Remedies, performed cures of diverse patients in the
same Disease; partly because Empirical Chemists are seldom resorted to but in
desperate cases, or till Nature be almost spent, either by the violence of the
Disease, or the unprosperous operation of the Medicines employed to remove it;
and partly, because the Methodist helps his Remedies by premising the wonted
Evacuations (by Vomit, Seige, or by Phlebotomy) by varying them according to
Emergent Circumstances, by skilfully and seasonably administering them, and by
strict rules of Diet; whereas the Empirick oftentimes uses but a single
Remedy, and usually without premising general Evacuations, exhibits it not to
the greatest Advantage in relation to time, and other circumstances, and is
much more indulgent to his patient in point of Diet: So that when an Empirick,
and a rational Physician do both in several patients Cure for instance the same
Plurisie, the Disease may be very often judged to have been removed in one of
the Patients chiefly by the Physician, and in the other by the Remedy.

In the third place, Pyrophilus, I must advertise You, that though I mention
more Chemical remedies then Galenical, yet it is not out of any partial
fondness of the former, and much less from any undervaluation of the latter,
but partly, because Chemical processes being wont to be more unfaithfully, or
obscurely set down by Authors then Galenical Receipts, I thought it might save
You some labor to receive from me a frequenter account of those, then these;
and partly, because in many Chemical preparations, diverse considerable Changes
being to be wrought upon the Concretes to be prepared by them, there is
oftentime so much of Philosophy to be learned by such Processes, that the
success of them may prove instructive to you, though it should acquaint you
with their Truth only, as they are Chemical preparations, and not as they are
Medicinal Receipts. But otherwise I love to look upon both Chemical and
Galenical Remedies, with an impartial eye, and think that neither the former
ought to be despised for the latter, nor the latter for the former; for as
Chemical Remedies have commonly the advantages of being more durable, less
clogging by their quantity, and less nauseated by Patients; so Galenical
Remedies have when they are of equal Efficacy, the Advantages of being more
cheap, (at least quantity for quantity) more procurable, and sooner prepared.
And such is the variety of Cases arising from the variety of Constitutions and
Distempers, that in some of them the former sort of Remedies may be more
proper; and in others, the latter may seem requisite; and in some also both
sorts may alternately be so useful, that neither of them can well be spared.

In the fourth place, Pyrophilus, let me advertise You, that diverse Chemical
Remedies, and some Specificks also which are not Chemical, have seemed upon
trial less effectual then indeed they are, because they have been tried by
such Physicians as weaken their Efficacy by not administering them as they
should. For some Physicians will never exhibit a Chemical Remedy, till the
Patients strength has been almost tired, if not quite spent with the
unprosperous use of diverse other clogging and debilitating Medicines. Others
are so diffident of Chemical Remedies that they never dare to exhibit them in
a full Dose, nor by themselves, but will blend a small quantity of a Chemical
Medicine or a Specific with other Ingredients, which either constitute with it
a Medicine of new qualities resulting from that mixture, or at least much clog
or enervate the activity and virtue of the Chemical or Specific Ingredients:
by which, even in so inconsiderable a Dose, these distrustful Doctors d^re yet
require that great matters should be performed. Of which injurious way of
administering the Remedies I recommend to you Pyrophilus, I do not causelessly
desire you to beware; as I may hereafter have occasion to show you by
particular instances of the Reasonableness as well of this Advertisement as of
the others which I either have given You, or shall give you in this and other
Papers. And another sort of Physicians there is who are of so despondent and
rather partial an Humor, that if a Chemical Remedy or a Specific do not
presently perform the hop'd-for Cure, though they find that even upon their
disadvantageous manner of administering it, it does good; yet they will quickly
desist from the Use of it: And because it does not do Wonders, they will not
scruple to affirm that they have tried it and found it do nothing; whereas they
are wont to continue their own Courses of Physic without discouragement,
though it be usually some weeks before the Patient find any good by them, and
oftentimes (as numbers of the printed Observations of Physicians as well as
daily Experience testify) the patient is by the tedious Course of Physic he
has gone through very little bettered, if not much impaired. Which I speak,
Pyrophilus, not with an Intention to disparage Physicians in general, the most
learned and ingenious of them being free enough from the Partiality I here take
notice of, but to keep good Remedies from being disparaged by the envious or
unskilful trials of bad Administers: And though indeed some Chemists are so
vainglorious or unwary, as to promise that the Operation of their Remedies
should be as well sudden, as effectual; yet if the Medicines themselves be
found availeable, although not swiftly so, that flownesse ought to make us but
condemn the Boastings of the man, not reject the use of the Remedies.

And in the last place, Pyrophilus, I must Advertise you, not to expect that
every one of the Remedies I commend should be Physic and Physician too; I
mean, that it should of it self suffice to perform the Cures of those Diseases
against which it is commended. For Medicines are but Instruments in the hand of
the Physician, and though they be never so well edged and tempered require a
skilful hand to manage them; and therefore I cannot but admire and disapprove
their boldness that venture upon the Practice of Physic, wherein it is so
dangerous to commit Errors, barely upon the confidence of having good
Receipts. For though by Conversation with eminent Physicians I have found the
learnedest of them to disagree so much about the Nature and causes of Diseases,
that I dare not deny but that he may prosperously practice Physic that either
ignores or dissents from the received Doctrines of the Schools concerning the
causes of Diseases, and some other Pathological particulars; yet I cannot but
dislike their boldness who venture to give active Physic, either in intricate
or acute Diseases without at least a Mediocrity of knowledge in Anatomy, and so
much knowledge of the History of Diseases, as may suffice to inform them in a
competent measure what are the usual Symptoms of such a Disease, what course
nature is wont to take in dealing with the peccant matter, and what discernable
alterations in the Patients Body do commonly forerun, and thereby foretell, a
Crisis, or otherwise the good or bad event of the Disease. To all which is to
be added some tolerable measure of Knowledge, not only of the Materia Medica,
and the chief ways of compounding several ingredients into Medicines of
several Forms and Consistencies, as circumstances may require; but also of the
orderly and seasonable administration of the helps affordable by them. These
particulars, Pyrophilus, might easily be enlarged on, but having neither the
leisure nor design to handle them commonplace-like, I shall only give you this
account of my requiring in the Professed Practiser of Physic some knowledge
both of the Materia medica and the Method of compounding and administering
Remedies, that (excepting perhaps the Arcana majora as Chemists call them) even
the best Medicines by being unseasonably or preposterously administered,
especially in acute Diseases where Nature's motions are to be diligently
watched, and seconded, may do a patient as much harm as the orderly and skilful
administration of them can do him good. And that he that has nothing but one
good receipt for a Distemper, and knows not how to vary it by adding,
omitting, or substituting other parts of the Materia Medica, as urgent occasion
shall require, may oftentimes find himself reduced either to suffer his Patient
to languish helpless, or to venture by curing him of one Disease to cast him
into another. For sometimes the Patients constitution makes the Medicine
prescribed by the Receipt unfit to be administered; and sometimes too, the
Disease for which the Receipt is proper, is in the Patient complicated with
some other Distemper which may be as much increased by the Specific, as the
other Disease may be lessned. I know for instance some eminent men that are
wont to Cure very stubborn Venereal distempers, by a Chemical preparation
(which some of themselves have been pleased to disclose to me) of the Indian
Plants, Sarsaparilla, Guaiacum, etc. But if these men met with Patients, such
as those which Eustachius Rudius mentions himself to have often met with, who
upon the use of the least quantity of Guaiacum, though corrected with cold
ingredients, were wont to be presently affected with such sharpness of Urine,
and Inflammation of the parts, to which Urine ^elates, as hazarded their lives;
they would be reduced, as well as our Author confesses himself to have been,
to have recourse to Mercurial or other Remedies. To which we may add, that the
use of Sarsaparilla, and Guajacum is generally forbidden by the warier sort of
Physicians, in those Patients, whose Venerial Distempers are complicated with
heat or Inflammation of the Kidneys or Livers. And sometimes also it happens,
that the very outward form of the Medicine prescribed by the Receipt is not
fit, or perhaps possible to be administered. For not to mention that diverse
Patients can retain no purgative Physic exhibited in the form of a Potion; and
some others are as apt to Vomit up whatever is given them in the form of Pills,
not to insist on this I say, I shall content my self to relate to You a
memorable Case that happened a while since to a Physician of my acquaintance. He
was called to a lusty young Woman, who upon an accidental but violent Cold was
suddenly taken with such a Constriction of the Parts inservient to Speech and
Deglutition, as made her altogether unable either to speak or swallow any thing
at all; and having thus continued some days in spite of Glysters or other
Remedies prescribed by a very Learned Physician, and in spite of Endeavors to
excite Vomiting, by making Her hold emetick things in her Mouth; the poor Woman
was in great danger (when my acquaintance came to her) of perishing for hunger:
what in this case could be expected from the best Remedies that must
necessarily be taken in at the Mouth? Wherefore the Physician finding her yet
strong enough, and without Fever, and yet her case almost desperate, did as
judiciously as luckily prescribe a Glyster, wherein to ordinary Ingredients
were added (as himself a very few days after told me) about four ounces of the
Infusion of Crocus Metallorum, with an advise that it should be kept in as long
as possibly She could, and by this Medicine. Nature being sufficiently
irritated, there quickly followed upon it some violent Vomitings, and upon them
a liberty both of Swallowing and Speaking. [And since this a young Gentleman
and Fellow-traveller of mine, had the Organs of deglutition so strangely
weakened without any manifest cause, that though he were able to make me a
Visit, and acquaint me with his Case, yet he was very apprehensive, he should
in a very few Days be starved, and being unable to swallow Remedies, had
quickly perished in despite of the Arcana Majora themselves, had he been
master but of such of them as (like those wont to be magnified by Chemists)
must be taken into the Body; if a very happy Physician to whom I directed him,
had not by a very Efficacious and Specific Medicine externally to be applied,
seasonably rescued him from so unusual and desperate a Case.] But, Pyrophilus,
as I would not upon the score of good Receipts have the Physicians skill
despised, or thought useless; so I wish that the Physicians skill may not make
him despise good Receipts; For we have often seen (especially in outward
affections) not only Empericks and Surgeons, but even Ladies and old Wives,
with a lucky composition prescribed by a Receipt, perform more constant and
easy Cures of the particular Distemper, for which that Receipt is proper, then
even Learned Physicians by their extemporary, though pompous and Artificial
Prescriptions. And the illustrious Lord Verulam (one of the most judicious
Naturalists that our Age can boast, De Augment. Scient. Lib. 4. cap. 2.
) thinks fit to take notice of it as a Deficiency that Receipts by long
Experience approved, are not more closely, and as he speaks religiously adhered
to, but altered upon every light occasion; And in the same Chapter to answer
the Principal, as well as the most obvious Objection in this Matter, That,
says He, any man induced by some Specious Reason should be of opinion, that it
is the part of a Learned Physician (respecting the Complexions of Patients,
their Age, the season of the Year, Custom, and the like) rather to accommodate
his Medicines as Occasions suggests, then to insist upon some certain
Prescripts is a deceivable Assertion, and which attributes too little to
Experience, too much to Judgment. And a little above He goes much farther then
we pretend to do, for speaking of the Neglect of the use of particular
Receipts, which, as He speaks, by a kind of propriety, respect the Cure of
particular Diseases, He adds, (severely enough,) That the Physit^ans have
frustrated and taken away the fruit of Traditions, and approved Experience by
their Magistralities, in adding and taking out, and changing Ingredients of
Receipts at their pleasure, and almost after the manner of Apothecaries,
putting in Quid pro quo, commanding so presumptuously over the Medicine, as the
Medicine can no longer command the Disease. Thus far our Judicious Author:
But I will rather choose to express to You my sense on This whole Subject of
Receipts, Consil. 322.
in the Words of that Experienced Physician to three Emperors, Johannes Crato:
De morbi Natura (says He) causa, locoque affecto Medicus diligenter cogitet,
atque in eo plus quam in certis medicamentorum mirificis formis situm putet:
Medicinam tamen expertam cum ratione adhibitam plus valere quam ea quae
interdum subito a Doctissimo etiam Medico magna ratione exhibita excogitatur,
non dubito: Atque hac in part Rationales etiam Medicos Empeiricis cedere
debere de sententia Hippocratis statuo. Only I must add by way of
Explanation, That this Sentence is to be understood to express my sense, when
the Medicines used are not very extraordinary, but such as Crato employed, and
has left us in his Writings: for there may possibly be such effectual
Specificks, and such powerful and commanding Remedies, that the Efficacy of the
Medicine may (at least in some particular Diseases) excuse and repair much want
of skill in the Prescriber.

If the Testimony of Helmont concerning the Arcana of Paracelsus be
considerable, even in a Tract (where either out of Emulation or Judgment,
Helmont. in. Arcan. Paracels. page 787.
he endeavors somewhat do depreciate both them and their Author) much greater
things might be boldly affirmed of some Arcana; for Fateor Lubens, (says he,
speaking of Paracelsus) Me ex ejus scriptis profecisse multum, illumque
potuisse, per Remedia ad unitatis Symbolum adsendentia, sanare Lepram, Asthma,
Tabem, Paralysin, Epilepsiam, Calculum, Hydropem, Podagram, Cancrum, atque
ejusmodi vulgo incurabiles morbos: attamen Paracelsum fuisse ignarum radicis
vitae longae, tam ex ejus scriptis and medicaminibus quam ex Obitu collegi,
etc. And in the same Tract just before He comes to enumerate Paracelsus's
Arcana, Concedo, says he, Universales aliquot Medicinas, Helmont. in Arcan.
Paracels. page in 790.
quae sub unisono Naturae long gratissimo, insensibiliter post se vinctum
educunt hostem, cum egregia Organorum depuratione, Concedo pariter appropriatas
aliquot quo universalis amplitudinem in specificis morborum directionibus
amulantur. And among those Arcana themselves that is ranck'd but in the second
place, of which he gives this Characters: Sequitur dein Mercurius Vitae, Stibii
proles integri, quae omnem morbi nervum penitus absorbet.

And because another Arcanum does not so powerfully renovate, as that last
mentioned, and two more; He allows to those three others the precedencies of
that whereof He yet says: Quarto loco est Mercurius Diaphoreticus, melle
dulcior and ad ignem fixus, solis Horizontis omnes proprietates habet: perficit
enim quicquid Medicus and Chirurgus possint optare sanendo. But because, that
any Medicines should be qualified to deserve such superlative Encomiums, may
seem a thing fitter to be wished then credited, I would not dissuade You till
the Chemists Cures have made good their Masters brags, to be altogether of our
Authors Mind, who somewhere professes: Se morbum non dinguere, si Remediis
(sure he speaks of such Remedies as he thought he had) sit summa bonitas. But
yet you may perchance ascribe much more even to Remedies far inferior to the
Arcana Majora, in the cases wherein they are most proper, then many are willing
to believe. Insomuch that I have sometimes observed with wonder, that an
Excellent Person (whom I need not name to You) cures the Rickets generally in
Children of several Ages and Complexions without having hitherto failed (as she
professes) in any one, by prescribing no other Remedy then the single use of
the above described Colcotharine Flowers, which I presented Her; and which a
couple of Physicians also, to whom I recommended them, tell Me, They have tried
in the same Disease with the like success, as this Lady has hitherto met with.
And I remember that eminently Learned and experienced Physician Dr G. Boat, (of
whose skill both your Excellent Mother and You have had good Proof) solemnly
assured me, as I elsewhere also note, That he knew a Physician who constantly
cured within two or three Fits all Agues, whether recent or radicated, in
Persons of all Ages, Sexes, and Complexions, indiscriminately with one single
outward Application to the Patients Wrists; but that this Envious Doctor would
never part with it to our Friend, or any else, no not upon his Deathbed: only
Dr Boat discovered, That Spiders or something coming from them were main
Ingredients of his Pericarpia.

And indeed there are certain Preparations and Compositions of Remedies so
lucky, and whose Success does so much exceed Expectation, and the Efficacy of
common Compositions; that the same Physician, whose they are, may upon several
Occasions prescribe an Hundred others, each of which he may think as rational
as any of those, which nevertheless shall be all of them much inferior
thereunto. And therefore I wonder not that the most Learned of the Methodists
themselves have much valued and celebrated some peculiar Processes and
Receipts, as here amongst us (to mention no others) the Famous Sr Theodore
Mayerne, was wont almost in all Obstructions, Cachexies, and Hydropicall
Distempers to magnify and use that peculiar Salt of Steel of his, which he was
pleased to call Anima hepatis.

And to these Domestic Instances (which I might easily accumulate) of the
esteem eminent Physicians have made of Receipts, I might add very many
Foreign ones. Nay Galen himself, who has so copiously treated of the Materia
medica, and the Composition of Medicaments, though he were sufficiently expert
at drawing up Receipts, does yet in his Book De Compositione Medicamentorum,
and elsewhere transcribe, and sometimes commend (and mention his having used)
diverse of the Compositions of Auncienter Physicians, and especially magnifies
Andromachus His Treacle.

I might, Pyroph: here mind You, That we see that Chemistry, as Incomplete as
it yet is, has been able so much to improve the preparations of Remedies, as to
afford us some, which are so Innocent as well as Efficacious, that in the
Diseases they principally respect, they require not, as of Necessity, near so
much of Theorical skill, as others do in the Administer; I might likewise take
notice, That Experience also teaches, especially by what we see performed by
the Spaa, and some other Mineral Waters, that one Medicine may be so richly
endowed, as to be more Effectual against several differing Diseases, then even
the better sort of other Remedies against any one particular Disease.

I might further represent as some thing that makes yet more to my present
purpose, that though every Body can advise his sick Friends to an Air that is
famously healthful, if there be any within a convenient Distance from them; Yet
there are some Aires so eminently good, and that not upon the Account of any
one Predominant Quality that makes them opposite to a Disease springing from
its contrary, but from a hidden Temperature, or certain friendly Effluvia, that
they alone often cure Variety of Diseases in Persons of differing Ages and
Complexions: as Navigators observe in the Isle of St Helen where the Spaniards
and some other Europaeans in their passage to the Indies, often leave without
Physicians great numbers of Sick, whom they find for the most part recovered at
their return. And that sometimes even the acutest Diseases may by the Sanative
Steams that enrich the Air be cured almost in a trice is assured by those that
have lived in grand Cairo, who have affirmed to me, what the Learned Prosper
Alpinus, who so long practiced Physic there, assures Us, That upon Nilus's
beginning to over flow, though in the Heat of Summer, there ensues a sudden
Recovery of those multitudes of Persons of differing Ages, Temperatures, Sexes,
etc. which there happen at that time to ly Sick of the Plague. These things I
say, Pyrophilus, and more I might add, to what You may find dispersed here and
there in the ESSAYS which this Paper accompanies toward the inferring that we
should not hastily conclude it Impossible that there May be found such
Medicines as may be more then particular and Specific Remedies without
requiring the Giver be a great physician. But to draw at length to a
Conclusion, I shall rather Sum up my present thoughts of this Matter Thus.

Ordinary Receipts without an Ordinary Measure of skill in Physic are not
rashly to be relied on, especially in Acute Diseases; where by giving Medicines
otherwise innocent enough, to loose the opportunities of administering proper
ones may be v^ry prejudicial, and where sometimes the several seasons of the
Disease do require such differing Remedies if they be but Ordinary ones, that a
Medicine proper enough for the Disease at one season of it may do Mischief at
another: But if indeed there be Noble and Extraordinary Arcana, that work
rather by strengthening and restoring Nature, and Resolving, or otherwise
destroying the peccant Matter they find any where in the Body, then by
irritating and weakening Nature or putting Her as it were to a troublesome
Plunge; the use of such Remedies may deserve to be a little otherwise
considered, as that which may not Ordinarily (for I say not Ever) require more
Instruction then may be afforded to Persons not Indiscreet by such Directions
and Cautions as may be Divulged, or otherwise Communicated, together with the
Remedies themselves: As we sometimes see that by the help of such Instructions
unlearned Persons and even old Wives do with some one Sovereign Plaster,
Balsam, or other outward Remedy, Cure many and various Tumors, Ulcers, and
other Sores in Persons of differing Sexes, Ages, and Complexions. And because
You will easily grant that this Example does far less accomodate our present
purpose then does the Case it self, as I just now put it, I hope You will allow
me to represent further, That at least it seems not so Rational to judge of all
the Remedies that Art improving Nature can afford us by those that are hitherto
in Use either among Methodists or Vulgar Chemists, but rather to think that the
Nobleness of Remedies will be advanced according as the Art of preparing them
shall be promoted; and that it it is not so safe and easy, positively to
determine the Efficacy of the former, otherwise then in Proportion to the
Discoveries we have attained to in the Latter.

The End of the APPENDIX.
The CITATIONS English't.
AD Page 6. In Corpore etc. But I dare not try those things upon Humane Body,
which have not been before tried upon former Experiences, For the End of such
rash Experiments may be the ruin of all Lives.

Ad Page 9. Naturalium etc. This is the Course of Naturalists and Physicians
who prosecute their Art Philosophically, The Naturalist ends where Medicine
begins, and Medicine begins where the Naturalist ends.

Ad Page 11. Sunt enim etc. The parts of Humane Body are unknown, and therefore
we ought to consider them by the parts of other Animals to which they are like.

Ad page 19. Hoc in etc. This I have more then once Observed in Lizards which I
kept in my own House. For my Children being at play, when with a Rod they had
struck off the Lizards Tails I saw them within a day or two come out to Feed,
and their Tails then by little and little still increasing and growing bigger.

Ad page 73. Neque etc. Nor may we be ignorant that in acute Diseases the Notes
of Life or Death are more fallacious.

Ad page 75. Quidam etc. One who before he fell into the French Pox was blind
of a Cataract in one of his Eyes, by being anointed with Quicksilver, was
recovered, not only from the chief Disease, but (which was most strange) from
his Cataract. Nor is it irrational that Cataracts should be dissolved such
anointing; when Experience teaches, That hard Tumors clogged together of
pituitous Matter are powerfully dissolved by Mercurial Inunctions.

Ad page 78. Ejusque etc. And they urge many Instances of it even to my
admiration.

Ibid. Ajunt etc. Yet they say that the Seed of the Calchoos, ground and taken
in any proper Water does dissolve the stone into a very Dirt, which being
voided does harden again into a stony substance. I saw a Young Man to whom
(upon my knowledge) this accident befell. When he was tormented with the Stone
in the Bladder, which I understood both by the Lithotomist who felt it, and by
the Symptoms which he suffered. I sent him to a Fountain, which takes its name
from St Peter when he had staid there two Months he returned Free from the
Stone, and brought home with him all the Dirt which he had voided by degrees,
in a Paper, coagulated as it were into fragments of Stone.

Ad page 85. Hic etc. He loathes nothing that stinks, or is otherwise
unpleasant, He has been often seen to chew and swallow Glass, Stones, Wood,
Bones, the Feet of Hares, and other Animals, together with the Hair, Linen and
Woollen cloth, Fishes and other Animals alive, Nay, even Metals, and Dishes,
and Globes of Tin. Besides, which he devours Sewet, and Tallow Candels, the
Shells of Cockles, and the Dungs of Animals, especially of Oxen, even Hot,
as soon as it is voided. He drinks the Urin of others mixed with wine or Beer: He
eats Hay, Straw, Stubble, and lately he swallowed down two living Mice, which
for half an Hour continued biteing at the bottom of his Stomach; and to be
short, Whatsoever is offered him by any Noble Persons, it goes down with him
without more ado upon the smallest reward, insomuch that within a few Days he
has promised to eat a whole Calfe Raw, together with the Skin and Hair; Among
diverse others I my self am a Witness of the Truth of these etc.

Ad page 86. Causam etc. To find in the Carcas the cause of this Vocacity will
be questionless very difficult: Some one perchance would refer it to that
which Columbus observed in the Carcass of Lazarus the Glasse-eater, and
resolve that the fourth conjugation of Nerves which nature ordained for
tasting, come neither to the Palate nor the Tongue: But so there would only be
rendered the cause of his want of Taste, and not why he should be able to take
such uncouth things without offense to his Stomach and digest them, which
without doubt ought to be the particular and singular constitution of his
Stomach and Guts, which yet may not appear to the Eye by the Effects.

Ad page 91. De Laudano etc. Of his Laudanum (that Name he gave to little
Pills, which in the extremity of Diseases he administered as a most Divine
Medicine allwaies giving them in an odd Number) he scrupled not to affirm that
by that Medicine he could put life into those who were as good as Dead; and
that while I was with him he made good in some Experiments.

Ad page 94. Oportet ubi etc. Where a Medicine answers not we ought not so much
to esteem the Author as the Patient, and to try somewhat farther and farther.

Ad Page 97. Idem fit etc. The same is made of Mandioca, Potato's, Turkish
Mullet, Rice, and other things which being chewed by old Women, and Spit
together with much Spittle, This Liquor is strait put up into Vessels, and
there kept until it ferments and cast down a Sediment.

Ad page 103. Hoc est etc. This Birchwater has a sweet Sharpness and very
pleasant Taste, it allaies Thirst, and the dryness of the Entrails; It tempers
the Heat of the Blood; It opens Obstructions and drives out the Stone.

Ad page 111. Conficiunt etc. They make Drink of that Mulli rubbing it gently
in their hands in Hot-Water, until they have rubbed out all the Sweetness;
they strain that Water, and keep it three or four Days, until it settle, and
then it becomes a very clear Drink: The same Water boiled turns into good Honey.
-- Of this Fruit boiled with Water according to different Manners is made Wine,
or good Drink, or Vinegar, or Honey.

Ad page 112. Porro. Then by cutting the Shoot with a Razorblade made of a
Flint, there runs out of the Cut a certain Liquor in such a quantity that
(which is wonderful) out of one single Plant, sometimes Fifty or more Arobae
run out: From which Liquor there is made Wine, Vinegar, Honey, and Sugar. For
the Liquor Sweet of it self, is by being boiled made much sweeter and thicker,
so that it is at length kernes into Honey.

Ad 113. Semel etc. If once in a Month one eat or Drink to excess, the Day
following, if he be weighed (though he has suffered no sensible Evacuation) Yet
then he will weigh lighter then is Usual. A constant Diet wants the help of
those that once or twice in a Month do exceed: For the Expulsive Faculty being
oppressed by too great Repletion stirr's up so much of perspiration, as
without the Staticks no one would believe.

Ad page 123. In urbe etc. In the City St James's that is in the Province of
Chyle, certain Captive Indians cut off the Calves of their Legs, and for hunger
eat them, and (which is strange) applying the leaves of a certain Plant to
their Wounds immediately they stanch the Blood.

Add page 124. Memini etc. I remember that the Limbs of Soldiers wounded with
G^nshot, to have been cut off by the advice of our European Surgeons, both
Dutch and Portugal; those Barbarous people by recent juices Gums and Balsams
to have freed them from Knife and Cauteryes and happily cured them. I also am
an Eye witness, that which the juice of Tobacco alone they have cured Wounds
given over by our Surgeons.

Add page 131. Experimentis etc. It is approved by many Experiments, that its
Virtues are excellent against the Plague, Malignant Fevers, the bitings of
Venomous Creatures, the Diarrhaea and other Fluxes.

Add page 135. Nam Venena noluit etc. He made not Venom to be our Poison, for
neither made he Death nor any Deletery Medicament upon the Earth, but so, that
by a slight industry and endeavor of our own they might be turned into great
pledges of his love, for the Use of Men against the cruelty of Diseases which
were in process of time to arise. For in those Vemomes is the help that more
benign and familiar simples cannot yield, and those most frightful Poisons are
yet preserved in Nature for the more great and Heroic uses of Physicians.

Add page 136: That the Lapis Cancrorum resolved into the form of its first
Milk affords an Antidote against the violence of many Vegetables that are
infamous for their being over laxative.

Add page 150. Mill etc. Our Court has tried the Efficacy of this Salt in a
thousand Experiments in the Diseases of Melancholy, in all Fevers, continuous
and intermittent, in the Stone, Scurvy etc. Nay more we have observed more then
once that it has procured sleep, especially in persons Melancholy, The Dose
is from one, to two Scruples, we use diverse pounds of it in a Year.

Add page 150, 151. Caeterum quantum etc. But for the exceeding and portentous
Virtues of the Bezar-stone, I have found by a thousand trials that they are not
so very great.

Ib. Nil porro etc. I speak no more of these Stones, least I should seem by my
Commendation of their Virtues to provoke Lithotomists to make dissections at
any rate. This I have most certainly Experienced, That the Stone found in Man's
bladder does well provoke Urine and Sweat. And particularly in the time of that
Plague, which in the Years 1624 and 1625 miserably vexed Ours, and all other
the Cities of Holland, for want of the Bezar-stone, I remember, I prescribed
this and found it, (let me tell You) a more great and excellent Sudorifick.

Add page 159. Credo etc. I believe Simples in their own simplicity are
sufficient for the Curing of all Diseases.

Add page 19. Quod etc. But if You come not to that Arcanum of Pyrotechny,
learn at least to make the Salt of Tartar Volatile, that by means of it You may
perfect Your Solutions. Which though it leave those things which it dissolveth
equally Homogeneous, being digested in Us; Yet it borrows some of their
Virtues which it carries along with it self to overcome Diseases.

Add page 199. Dicam etc. I will speak it for their sakes, who are ingenious
that the Spirit of Salt of Tartar, if it dissolveth Unicorns Horn, Silver,
Quicksilver, Crabbes Eyes, or other like Simples, it will Cure not only
Fevers but other Diseases in great abundance.

Ib. Mirum etc. It is a wonder what the very Salt of Tartar alone being made
Volatile will perform, for it cleanses the Veins of all the feculencies and
the causers of Contumacious Obstructions, and does disperse the congregated
Matter of Apostems. Of this Spirit of the Salt (and not of the Oil) is that
saying of Paracelsus true. That whether this Medicine cannot reach, there is
scarce any other more powerful that shall reach it.

Ad page 201. Ars etc. Art is Long, Life is short. But where the End is by
gift, there Art is short, and Man's Life long, if it be compared to Art.
Therefore Hippocrates had reason to make the complaint, for it even happened to
his followers according to his Words. The Art of Medicine consists in
Philosophy, Astronomy, Chemistry, and Physics, and therefore it may truly be
said that the Art is long. For there is much time required, thoroughly to learn
and search these four Pillars of Medicine.

Ad page 202. Est enim etc. For this Art is conjectural, and not only
Conjecture, but Experience it self does not allwaies answer.

Ib. (...) etc. Experience is Uncertain, and Fallacious Judgment is difficult
to be made.

Ib. Hoc modo etc. And this was the fashion of Medicine in the beginning, that
it had no Theory, only Experience, that such a thing was Laxative, such a
thing Astringent: But how, or why they were so that was not found out, and
therefore one was healed another perish't: but now etc.

Ib. Per rationem etc. By Reason it is not easy in a Disease to give Judgment,
but is as difficult as any thing imaginable.

Ib. Neque, etc. For if the truth were easy to be found, so many and so
excellent men as have made it their business to find it, had never been divided
into so many Sects and Opinions.

Ad page 203. Non titulus etc. It is not a Title, nor Eloquence Nor Skill in the
tongues, nor the Reading of many books (though these are Ornaments) which are
to be considered in a Physician, but a prime knowledge of Matters and Mysteryes
which alone may stand in the steed of all the rest; It is the part of a
Rhetorician to speak eloquently, to be able to persuade and to draw the Judge to
his own party. It is the part of a Physician to know the several sorts of
Diseases, their Causes and Symptoms, and then which skill and industry to
apply Medicines and to make Cures of them all, according to their several
Natures and Fashions.

Add page 207. Imo etc. Nay, I saw diverse, as it was in an instant, redeemed
from death who had been poisoned by the eating of Venomous Mushrooms and other
unwholesome things, only by drinking a Recent Infusion of the Root Jaborand,
whilst my self and other of Galens Disciples blush't to see the ineffectual
endeavors of all our Alexipharmaca, Treacles and other Antidotes: So that
afterward I suffered my self to be joined in Consultation with those barbarous
Colleagues, not so much to be arbiters of the condition of our men by their
Pulse, as to give their assistance and Council in the forementioned way ( viz.)
the prescribing of proper Medicines.

Ad page 208. Hujus etc. The Virtue of this Stone is much above that of any
other gems, for it stops the Flux of Blood in any part. -- When the Women
perceive a fit of the Mother coming upon them, by applying this Stone they are
immediately eased, and if they allwaies wear it, they are never troubled with
those Fits more. Of this they make faith, by many Instances.

Ib. Vidimus etc. We have seen some that were troubled with the Flux of the
Haemorrhoides who found Remedy by wearing Rings made of that Stone continually
on their Fingers, and the Monthly Flux is stayed by the same way.

Ad page 209. Praegnantibus etc. This Stone is not proper for those who are
with Child, for it is so sure to cause Abortion that the Women of Malaica told
me, that if at any time their Monthly Evacuations were obstructed, that if
they only carried this Stone in their hands they found Remedy thereby.

Ad page 210. Hoc loco etc. In this place I cannot but relate the admirable
Virtues of our Electrum which I have observed with my own Eyes, and therefore
can attest with a good conscience. For we saw Rings of it which he that wore
neither felt Cramp, no Palsy, nor other pain. He was subject to no Fits of
Apoplexy, nor Epilepsy, insomuch that if one of these Rings were put upon the
Ring Finger of a person actually in any vehement Fit of the Falling sickness,
the Fit would immediately assuage, and the person as soon come to himself.

Ad 225. In the City Posto where I lived certain Years, a certain Indian cured
all sorts of Diseases by the juice of one Plant alone, wherewith he anointed
the Limbs and any other part particularly affected, and then covering them warm
with Blankets provoked Sweat. The Sweat that came from the parts so dawbed was
mere Blood which he wiped off with Linen Clothes, and so he proceeded until he
thought they had Sweat enough. In the mean time he gave them Diet that was most
Nourishing. With this Remedy many desperate Diseases were cured, and the sick
person upon the Use of this Physic improved, so as to appear younger and
lustier after it. But we could never prevail, neither by Money, nor entreaty,
nor foul means upon him to show us the Plant.

Ad page 227. Mira etc. Wonderful things are daily found out in Physic to the
Confirmation of the Operation of the Learned Naturalist Petrus Servius's
Weapon-Salve. For the assured us that a piece of Cloth dipped in the Blood, and
put under hot Ashes stops the Monthly Flux, the Experiment having been often
proved. And my Master Petrus Castellus affirms that He found by Experience,
that the Haemorrhoids if they were touched with the tuberous Root of
Chondrilla, did dry away if the Chondrilla dried, and did Run to Corruption if
the Chondrilla was corrupted. And therefore after such, touching of the
Hemorrhoids the Chondrilla was usually put to dry in the Chymny.

Ad page 229. Podagra etc. The Gout is strangly eased if Puppies lie with the
Person that has the Gout, for they contract the Disease so as not to be able
to go, but the Patient thereby finds Ease.

Ad page 236. Primo, etc. At the first, Physic was accounted part of
Philosophy, so that the Cure of Diseases, and the Contemplation of Nature, did
both arise under the same Authors. Those being most set upon Medical Enquiries,
which had made their Bodies infirm by disquieting thoughtfulness and nocturnal
Watchings.

Ad page 204. Est, etc. Besides it is altogether drying, and therefore I should
not despair that it, being hung about Childrens Necks, might cure the
Falling Sickness in them. I truly saw a Lad, that sometimes would be eight
whole Months free from the Falling Sickness, and then, when by chance this
fell from off his Neck, he became immediately surprised with a Fit; and again,
hanging another Root in its place, he would continue well: Therefore, for
Experiment sake, I thought good to take it again from his Neck, which when I
had done, and found that the Lad fell into his former Convulsions, we took a
great piece of a green Root, and hung it about his Neck, and from that time He
continued well and felt no more Convulsions. It was therefore most probable,
either that certain parts did exhale from the Root, and were drawn into the
Body by Inspiration, which did so work upon the affected parts; or that the
ambient Air was continually changed and altered by the Root: For after this
manner the Succus Cyrenaicus cures the Phlegmone upon the Uvula; so Catarrhs
and other Rheums are dried up by Melanthium, if it be tied up warm in fine
Linen, and the hot fume of it be drawn up into the Nostrils by Inspiration.
Nay, if you strangle a Viper with diverse sorts of Threeds, and especially with
the Sea Purple, and then you tie those Threeds about the Neck of your Patient,
you shall cure the swelling of the Almonds of the Ears, and all other swellings
in the Neck.

Ad page 257. Pestis Cayri, etc. The Plague at Grand Cair, and in all parts of
Egypt, is wont to invade the Inhabitants from the beginning of the Month
September until June: For in all these Months, from September unto June, the
Plague from other Nations is brought thither, and is wont to infect that
Nation: But in the Month of June, of what nature and how great soever the
Pestilence be, when the Sun first enters Cancer, it is immediately removed;
which thing many (and that not without reason) take to be a particular Mercy of
God. But (what is more admirable) all Household Stuff, however infected with the
Contagion of the Disease, at that time shows no effect of any Contagion, so
that then the whole Nation passes into a most secure and healthy condition,
from amorbid and dangerous: And then those Diseases, which are called by the
Greeks Sporadici, begin to appear, which in no part of the World are seen to be
rise together with the Plague.

Ibid. Hac, etc. These things are first observed about that time. From which, I
think, and perchance not without reason, the cause of the extinction of the
Plague, and the change of the state from Morbid to Wholesome does depend; For
no other of the conservative Causes, which are wont to be called by Physicians,
Res non Naturales, appears then, besides the Air; to which we may refer this
change from Disease to Healthiness, and therefore we must refer this change to
the change of the Air.

Ad page 259. The Inhabitants do strange things, both in preserving Health and
curing Diseases, by Friction and Unction, using the first in cold and
Chronical, the latter in acute Diseases. And Strangers who arrive there, are,
as they ought, willing to imitate their ways of Physic, and by Rules of Art to
preside and moderate these ways of Empirical Healing.

Ib. Cholera Sicca is Cured by the same Remedies, especially if their Horny
Cupping-glasse be applied to the Region of the Liver, of which I must attest
the same thing that Galen does of Cupping-glasses; which he affirmed to Work as
Miraculously as if their Operation had depended on Enchantment.

Ad page 271. Neque etc. Nor does he say that a Physician needs nothing of
Counsel or Deliberation, or that an irrational Man may profess this Art. But
that those Conjectures of hidden things are nothing to the purpose. Because it
matters not what causes the Disease but what removes it.

Ib. Interim etc. In the mean time the Brasilian Botanists make all sorts of
Medicines of Simples they find every where in the Woods: which they make with
so great Sagacity, and apply them both internally, and externally, especially
to Diseases that Spring from Venom that a man may more securely give himself
over to their hands then to our unskilful Physicians, who brag much of Secrets
they have learned in private, and for the knowledge of these will be called
Rationals in Physic.

Ad page 272. Fortassis, etc. Perchance some Sciolist in Physic may affirm
that these things may not be used by reason of the Narcotick and Stupefactive
property. But these pretenses are as vain in effect as specious at first sight:
for besides that the hot temper of this Country requires it; It is sure, that
without these Remedies there can be no Cure. Add that here we prepare Opium so
well that you may give it to an Infant. And truly, if in Hot Diseases we had no
Opiats we should in effect find that the use of all other Medicaments would
prove altogether vain and fruitless.

Ad page 287. Si. medicinam etc. Such was the Origin of Physic, by the
Recovery of some and the Death of others it first made distinction between
things Soverain to heal, and things which were Improper, and Deadly. And thus
the Remedies being found out, Men began to dispute of the Reasons of them. Nor
was the Art of Medicine found out by the light of Reason, but Medicines being
found, the Reason began to be enquired into.

Ib. Ubi res etc. Where the Matter is certain, if it be against the common
Opinion, the Reason must be sought, and not the Matter of fact scrupled.

Ad page 297. Paucissimos etc. You will find very few of those who dwell at the
Spaa who are troubled with the Headache, Stone, Obstructions of the Kidneys,
Liver, Spleen, or Mesariaick Veins, none at all who were troubled with the
Jaundice, Dropsy, Gout, Itch, or Falling sickness.

Ib. Inter caetera etc. Among other Qualities it moves the Monthly Evacuation
as has been proved by a thousand trials. And yet it stops the immoderate Flux
of them more happily then any other Medicine.

Ad page 299, Rerum etc. The Contemplation of Nature, though it makes not a
^hysitian, yet it fits him to learn Physic.

FINIS.
The INDEX to the Second Part.
The Second Part Of the Usefulness of Natural Philosophy.
SECT. I. Of its Usefulness to PHYSIC.
ESSAY I. Containing some Particulars tending to show the Usefulness of Natural
Philosophy to the Physiological part of Physic.
The advantage of the Knowledge of Nature toward the increasing the Power of
Man, and its Use as to Health of the Body and Goods of Fortune. page 3 That in
Man's Knowledge of the Nature of Creatures consists his Empire over them. 4 That
the Discovery of America is owed to the Knowledge of the Lo^d stones Polarity. 5
That the Martial affairs all over the World were altered by the Knowledge of the
Nature of Brimstone and Saltpeter. ib How prejudicial the mistake of that
Aphorism (that if teeming Women be let blood they will miscarry) has been to
Femal Patients. 6 The interest of this Knowledge to the Happiness and Life ^f
Man. 7 The enumeration of those Arts to which this Knowledge is profitable. ib.
The Method or way intended for the ensuing Discourse. 8 The Division of Physic
into five parts. 9 How the Physiological part of Physic is advantaged by the
Knowledge of Natural Philosophy. ib. That the Anatomical Doctrine of Man's body
rec^ives light from Experiments made on other Creatures. ib. Proved by diverse
Instances, as of the finding the L^cteals and Lymphae-ducts first in Bruit
Bodies. 10 The Experiment of taking out the Spleen in Dogs. ib. The same thing
done by Fioravanti in a Woman. 11 The Respiration of Frogs diverse Hours,
sometimes Days, under water, without suffocation. ib. What use Aristotle and
Galen made of the Dissections of Bruits. 11, 12 The Anatomy of Man counted now
in Muscovy for inhumane, and the use of Skeletons for Witchcraft. 12 The Use of
the comparison of the parts of Humane Body with those of Beasts. ib.
Illustrated by diverse particular Observations. 13 Diverse Motions and Actions of
Frogs after their Hearts were cut out. 14 Observations of the motion of a
Chicken's Heart after the Head and other parts were cut off. 14 Of the Vivacity
of dissected Vipers, 16. and Tortoises. 17 Whether there be a necessity of the
unceasing influence of the Brain to Sense and Motion. 17 That the
Silkworm-butterfly is capable of Procreation after the loss of its Head. 17
That the Redness of the Blood is not to be ascribed to the Liver proved by the
inspection of the Liver of Chickens unhatcht. 18 That the loss of a Limb in all
Animals is not irreparable. ib. That notwithstanding the great Solution and
Digestion of Meat in the Stomachs of Fishes no sensible Acidity is found there.
19 Experiments concerning the Solution of Meats, and their change of Colors by
acid Menstruums. 20 Ways of Artificial Drying and preservation of Plants, and
Insects, 22. and more bulky Bodies. 23 Particularly the Schemes of diverse parts
of Humane Body. 24 Of the preservation of an Embryo diverse Years by Embalming
it with Oil of Spike. 25 Instances of men in the American Mountains killed, and
afterward preserved from putrefaction only by the VVind. ib. Of the use of
Spirit of Wine for the preservation of Bodies from putrefaction. 26 That the
Examination of the Juices of Humane Bodies by the Art of Chemistry may
illustrate their Use and Nature. 27 That the Actions which are common to Men
with other Animals being performed Mechanically, the Skill of Mechanics must
be of Use to Physiology^ 28
ESSAY II. Offering some Particulars relating to the Pathological Part of
Physic.
That the Naturalists Knowledge may assist the Physician to discover the Nature
and Causes of Diseases. 29. Proved by general Reason. 30 By particular
Instance of the Cause of the Stone in the Kidneys. 31 The cause of that Disease
illustrated by the Petrifaction of VVood, Cheese, Moss, Water, etc. 32 The
Origin of Helmont's Offa alba, and Paracelsus his Duelech by the mixture of
Spirit of Wine, and Spirit of Urine, and example of the Generation of the
Stone. 33 That a terrestrious Substance may lurk undiscerned in limpid Liquors.
34 The Use of Chemistry in explaining the Nature of, and aberrations in, our
Digestions. 35 proved by a Catalogue of considerable Observations. 36 The Salt
and Sulphur have more influence in the causation of Diseases then the first
Qualities of Heat, Cold, etc. 37 Observations mad upon the Liquor that distends
the Abdomen in the Dropsy. 38 Observations on the Calculus Humanus. 39 Of the
changes that may reasonably be thought to happen to our aliments within the
Body. 43. Illustrated by the Example of Juices out of the Body. 42, 43
Difference between vulgar and true Chemistry. 44 The Use of the Knowledge of
Fermentation. 44 Of Periodical Effervences in the Blood without Fermentation.
44, 45 Of the use of Zoology to the Knowledge of Diseases. 46 Helmont's Error
refuted, that the Stone is a Disease peculiar to Man. 47 That the Venom of
Vipers or Adders consists chiefly in the Rage and Fury wherewith they bite, and
not in any part of the Body that has at all times a mortal property. 57 A
certain Cure for the Biting of Vipers. 59 Of external Application of Poisons
and letting them into the Veins of Beasts. 60, 61 Postcript.
Experiments of conveying Liquid Poisons immediately into the Mass of Blood.
62, 63, 64, 65

ESSAY III. Containing some Particulars relating to the Semiotical Part of
Physic.
That the Improvement of the Therapeutical would alter the Prognostics in the
Semeiotical part of Physic. 66. An Instance to that purpose in the Peruvian
Bark. 67, 68 and in Riverius's Febrisugum, and a New Cure of the Kings Evil.
69 That though no Disease should be incurable, yet every Disease is not curable
in every Patient. 70 That the Hope of doing greater Cures then ordinary, has
engaged Artists to make profitable Trials. 71 Examples of some unexpected and
strange Cures. 72, 73 Examples of the Cures of Cancers. 74 An Example of a Cure
of one that was born with a Cataract in the Eye. 75. and other Examples of
Cataracts strangely cured. ib. Examples of the Cure of the Dropsy and Gout.
76, 77 Examples of the Cure of the Stone. 78. The use of Persicaria for that
Cure. 79. Instances in other Medicines for the same Disease. 80. The Use and
Success of Millepedes. 81. The Argument concerning the Incurableness of ^he
Stone answered. 82. That there may be a Liquor able to dissolve the Stone that
may not be corrosive to any other part. 83, 84 Examples of those who could
digest Metals and Glass. 85, 86, 87 The Descriptions of a Menstruum prepared
from common Bread, able to draw Tinctures from precious Stones, Minerals, etc.
88 Helmont's Arguments from the Providence of God censured. 90 The Argument
that Paracelsus outlived not the 47th. Year of his Age answered. 90 The
efficacy of Paracelsus his Laudanum. 91 Butler's great Remedies. 92, 93, 94
ESSAY IV. Presenting some things relating to the Hygieinal Part of Physic.
That the Knowledge of Fermentation is useful to make our Drincks wholesome for
Aliment. 95 How much Simples may be altered by Preparation, exemplified by the
Indians, making Cassavy out of the poisonous Plant Mandioca. 96. Odd unhandsome
ways of their making Drinck from the same Root. ib. Of making Drink from sorts
of course Bread. 97 The Drinks in use in China. 98 Of Cherry-wine. ib. Of
Excellent Ciders. 99 Of Hydromel. ib. Of Sugar Wines. 100 Of other Brafilian
and Barbada VVines. 100 The way to make Wine of Raisons. 101 Of Wines from the
dropping or Weeping of wounded Vegetables. ib. Of the Tears of the Walnut-tree.
102 The Use of the Tears of Birch, (with some other Ingredients) for the
Stone. 102 The ways to preserve these Liquors. 103 The use of the Tears of
Birch in hot distempers of the Liver, and hot Catarrhs. 103 The use of Daucus
Ale, and proportion of the Seed to the Liquor. 104 Of The or Te. ib. Of Animal
Drinks. 105 The use of Brandy-Wine in hot Climates. 105 The use of Natural
Philosophy to meliorate Meats. 106 Of preserving Biscuit from putrefaction. 107
Of preserving Fruits. ib. Of preserving Meats roasted for long Voyages. 108 Of
preserving Raw meats. 109 Of salting Neats tongues with Saltpeter. ib. Of
preserving Flesh in spirit of Wine. ib. Of conserving by Sugar, and making
Sugar of other Concretes besides the Cane. 110, 111, 112 That the Naturalist
may find out new ways to investigate the wholsomness or insalubrity of
Aliments, proved by Instances out of Sanctorius his Medicina Statica. 113 The
difference in transpiration betwixt the times after ordinary Diet, and after
Excess, tried by the weighing of Man's body. 114 Difference in the weight of
Waters. ib. That Chemical Experiments may discover other qualities in Waters.
115 That the Naturalist may discover the qualities of particular Airs. 116
ESSAY V. Proposing some Particulars, wherein Natural Philosophy may be useful
to the Therapeutical part of Physic.
The Introduction. 117, 118 That the Naturalist may invent Medicines Chymically
prepared more pleasant then the ordinary Galenical Ones. 119 An Instance in
Resin of Jalap, Mineral waters, and the Author's Pil: Lunares. 120 That the
Naturalist may find out inward Medicines able to do Chirurgical Cures, proved
by diverse Instances. 121, 122 Sr. W. Rawleigh's Cordial. 123 What great use the
Indians make of the Juice of Tobacco. 124 Chap. II.
That the Search of Nature by Chemistry in particular discovers the Qualities
of Medicines. 124, etc. Of the Nitro-tartareous Salt in some Vegetables. 126
Difference in Operation between Acid and Alcalizate Salts. ib. Of Ink made by
the Decoction of diverse astringent Plants with a little Vitrol. 127 Of some
Metalline Precipitations. ib. That Sulphurous Salts turn the expressed Juices
of Vegetables into a Green color. 1^8 Of the Destillation of the Calculus
H^manus and of the Concretions that are called Lapides Cancrorum. 128 The
changes in Animal Substances made by Fermentation only in Urine. 129 Of the
mixture of Sp. of Salt with digested Urine. 129
Chap. III.
That this search of Nature adds much to the Materia Medica. 130. by employing
Bodies hitherto not employed. ib. Of Remedies newly prepared out of Zinck. ib.
The Cure of the Dropsy by the Pil: Lunares. ib. Of the use of diverse Medical
Earths. 131. Instances of Gold, and diverse Menstruums drawn out of them. 132 Of
Medicines out of Arsenick. 133. and out of Bismutum. 134 Of the correction of
Poisonous Medicines. 134, 135 The Preparation of Asarum turns it from being
Emetick to be notably Diureticall. 136 Instances in some of the secret
Menstruums. ib. That the Preparation of Asarum is only the Boiling it in common
water. 137. That the boiling it in Wine alters not its violence. ib. That the
Emetick and Cathartick properties of Antimony are destroyed by Calcination with
Saltpeter, and Mercury sublimate may be deprived of its Corrosivenesse by bare
resublimations with fresh Mercury. 137
Chap. IV.
A strange correction of the Flowers of Antimony. 138 That the Naturalist may
assist the Physician to make his Cures less chargeable. ib. Inconveniences of
stuffing Receipts with a multitude of Ingredients. 139, 140, 141, 142, 143,
144. That Acid, and Alcalizate Salts being mixed grow thereby more fixed, and
yield in Balneo but but a Phlegm. ^45. The same is observed of the Mixture of
Spirit Urin (by it self highly Volatile) and Spirit of Salt. ib.
Chap. V.
That the Naturalist discovers the Mis-application and Use of Gems, and diverse
other costly Ingredients. 145, 146. A difference between the fixednesse of a
Gem, and of Glass of Antimony. ib. Concerning Autum Potabile 147, 148. Examples
of great Medicines drawn from unpromising Bodies. 149 The D. of Holstein's
Panacea duplicata is made of the vulgarly despised Caput Mortuum of Aquafortis.
ib. Flores Colcotharini are made of the Caput Mortuum of Vitriol. 150 A
Comparison between the Bezar's Stone and the Stone cut out of Man's Bladder. ib.
Medicines out of Soot. 151 The use of Horse dung. 152 An Arcanum of Ivy
Berries. ib. Medicines out of Man's Vrin. 153 Medicines out of Blood. 154 The
great Effects of Millepedes in the Stone. ib. In Suffusions of the Eyes. 155.
And real Cataracts. 156. In sore Breasts and Fistulas ib.
Chap. VI.
That the Naturalist discovers how much of the cost and labor in making many
Chemical Remedies may be spared. 157 A Comparison of Chemical Remedies with
Galenical ones in point of Cheapnesse. 158 Of the use and commendation of
Simples even by the most able Chemists. ib. Powder of Pearlmore Operative then
Magistery. 159. So crude Hartshorn then Magistery. 160 An excellent Simple
Medicine to stanch Blood. ib. Another like Medicine for spitting and vomiting
of Blood. 161 That many times Chemists by their tedious and injudicious
preparations alter the Medicine and make it worse. 162 So the dissolving the
Salts of Vegetables in Aquafortis to make them pure and Chrystalline alters
their virtues, and makes them inflammable as Saltpeter. 162, 163 The
Preparation and virtues of Ens Veneris. 164, 165 The Preparation and virtues of
the Balsamum Sulphuris Crassum. 166, 167 The Preparation and virtues of Essence
of Hartshorn. 168, 169
Chap. VII.
That Mechanics and other Experimental Learning may teach how to lessen the
charge of Cures by making more convenient furnaces demonstrated in diverse
particulars. 170, 171, 172, 173, 174 Glasse-stopples fittest for corrosive
Liquors. 173, 174 That inflammable saline Sulphurous spirits may be drawn from
other substances cheaper then Wine. 175 Instances in diverse particulars how the
Naturalist may find cheaper ways of Heating the Chemists Furnaces. 176 Of
charring Coals, so that while it charres it gives an intense heat fit to melt
or calcine Minerals. 177 Of Charring Peat. ib. Of Digestion and Distillations
without Fire. 178, 179 Ways of Distilling spirit of Urine. 180. Of Distilling
it with Lime without Fermentation. ib That so distilled it does not coagulate
spirit of Wine as in the Usual Distillation. ib. Of the power of good
Menstruums in facilitating Distillation. 181 That the calcination of Gold is
facilitated by Amalgamation with Mercury. 182 The power of Verdigreas distilled
in drawing Tinctures of Glass of Antimony etc. ib. That the Naturalist may find
out ways to preserve Medicines longer, and better then is usual. 183 Of fuming
Liquors with Sulphur: ib. And adding a little of the white Coagulum made of the
pure spirits of Wine and Urin. ib. That the most principal way of lessening the
charge of Cures would be the finding out New and more effectual Remedies. 184
An History of a radicated Epilepsie that was cured by the Powder of Misselto of
the Oak. 185
Chap. VIII.
Other proofs that the Naturalists skill may improve the Pharmaceutical
preparation of simples. 186 Of the best ways to correct Opium. 187 Of the best
way of correcting Mercurius vitae. 188 An Excellent Medicine made of those
churlish Minerals Quicksilver and Antimony. ib. Ways to take away the Vomitive
faculty of Antimonial Glass. 189, 190 A New and excellent way to get the Primum
Ens, or Essence of some Vegetables. 191 The influence of these Prima Entia to
cause renovation or rejuvenescence. 192, 193 Of Helmonts Via Media of Elixir
Prop^ietatis. ^94. And the perfuming it by cohobations with Musk and Amber. ib.
A Commendation of Helmont's Medicines. 195 Of the power of Chemistry. 196 Of
the power of Noble Menstruums particularly. 196, ^97 The power of Sal-Taltari
Volatized. 198 Of the possibility of Volatizing it 199 That there may be other
Menstruums besides such as are Acid, Urinous, or Alcalizate. 200 How these
severally disarm and destroy one another, and that what an Acid Menstruum
dissolves an Vrinous or Alcalizate does precipitate. ib. Of a Menstruum unlike
to all these. ib.
Chap. IX.
That Chemistry it self (much more Physiology) is capable of affording a New
and better Methodus Medendi. 201, 202, 203 Instances, to prove that the unusual
efficacies of New Remedies may alter and make the method of Curing more
compendious. 204. In the King's Evil. ib. In Plurisies. 205. In the Rickets. ib.
Chap. X.
That great Cures may be done by outward Applications. 207 Of the efficacy of
Lapis Nephriticus and diverse other Appensa. 208, 209 The Cures of the Dropsy
and Schyrrhus Lienis by the external application of Spunges dipped in Lime water.
210 Of strange Cures performed near Rome in the Serpentine Grotta. ib. Of the
Operations of Suphur Cantharides and Quicksilver, and Tobacco externally
applied. 211 Instances in diverse Medicines which have differing effects
inwardly given, and outwardly applied. 212, 213 That preparation may much
improve Simples which are outwardly applied. ib. Instances in diverse
preparations of Gold. ib. An Ointment made of Aurum fulminans for the
Haemorrhoides and Veneral Ulcers. ib. The Cure of a Person esteemed bewitched by
an appended Mineral. 214 Of the power of Jasper to stanch Blood. 215 The
Incontinentia Urinae Cured by the powder of a Toad burnt alive and hung about
the neck. 216 Effects ascribed to Witchcraft cured Per appensa. 217 Paracelsus
cured Quartan's by a Plaster. 218 Diseases Cured by Frights. 219 Physic now
in China in a good condition, without Phlebotomy, Potions, or Issues. 2^0 Where
practitioners of Physic are illiterate, there Specificks may be best met with.
221 The usefulness of the knowledge of the Medicines of Barbarous Nations. 221,
222, 223 A Comparison of this Empirick part of Physic with the Rational. 224
Chap. XI.
Of other Extraordinary Medicines which work by Magnetisme, Transplantation
etc. 225 The Cure of an Ulcer in the Bladder by the Sympathetick Powder. 226
The effects of the Weapon-salve and other Magnetical Remedies. 227 228
Observations of the Transplantation of Diseases. 229, 230, 231 The sometimes
not succeeding of Magnetical Medicines no sufficient cause to abandon their
Use. 232 Chap. XII.
Instances of diverse Cures upon Bruits, and how these are appliable to men.
233, 234, 235

Chap. XIII.
That the handling of Physical Matters was anciently thought to belong to the
Naturalist. 236 That the rejecting Specificks, because they make no visible
Evacuation is irrational. 237 That great changes may be made only by displacing
without any Evacuation of the parts. 238 The making of Vinegers is an Instance
of this truth, especially in the Indies. ib. Instances in Sura and the Juice of
Mandioca. 239 In the Effects of Thunder and Earthquakes. ib. Diverse Instances
to prove that invisible Corpuscles may pass from Amulets, and cause great
alterations in the Juices of a Man's Body. 240 Galens Example of Peiony-Root
etc. 240, 241, 242 Of Purging by the Odor of Potions. 243 Of the Purging and
Vomiting Quality of the Air of the Mountain Pariacaca. 243.244 The power of
Steams seen in the Infectious Effluvia. 244 Of alterations made by the Passions
of the mind. 245
Chap. XIV.
Diverse Instances of the power of Imagination. 246 An Instance of the Hair of
the Head changed in Color upon a sudden Fear. 247 How the Authors discourse
concerning the power of Effluvia ought to be understood. 248 That the
particular State of disposition of the Engine of humane Body is considerable as
to the effects of these Impressions. 249, 250, 251, 252 The effects of the Moss
growing on Humane skill in stanching Blood 253 Burnt Feathers, or the Smoke of
Tobacco remove, Hysterical fits. ib. Cures of Dysenteries by Fumesi 254. And by
sitting on a hot Anvil. ib. Cures of the Colic by Clysters of the Smoke of
Tobacco. ib. Of other Cures done by Smoke. 255 Of the sudden ceasing of the
Plague at Grand Cayro in June. 256, 257
Chap. XV.
That Humane Body may be altered by such Motions as Act in a Gross, and merely
Mechanical manner proved by diverse Instances. 258 259 The Instance of the Cure
of the biting of the Tarantula by Music particularly modified. 260, 261
Chap. XVI.
Diverse instances of the (...), or Peculiar aversion of particular persons from
particular things, and of the commotions made in the Body thereby. 262, 263
That since the Body receives such alterations from such unlikely things there
is no just arguing against Specificks, because they operate not by any Obvious
Quality. 264 Of the Operations of Poisons, and Antidotes. 265, 266, 267 What is
to be done when the Specific seems likely to increase the Disease. 268
Chap. XVIII.
A Disquisition concerning the Ordinary Method of Physic. 268, 269, 270, 271
Instances of some Medicines condemned for Noxious which yet have proved Useful.
272 Of the Use of Guajacum for Consumptions and Mercury for Palsies. 273 That
there are diverse Concretes as to sense similar, whose different parts have
contrary Qualities, as Rhubarb, and Oil Olive. 274 Of improbable Cures, viz. of
a Plurisy by a Laudanum Opiatum. 275 Of curing Coughs and Consumptions by
Saline Medicines. 276 Of the Curing Phtisical Consumptions by the Acid Smoke of
Sulphur: 277 The Use of the Livers and Galls of Eeles in expediting the hard
labor of Women. 278 The unlikely Cure of Venom by Oil of Scorpions. ib. And
of Fluxes by fresh butter melted. 279
Chap. XIX.
That it is very hard to give an intelligible Explication of the Operation of
Elective and other common Medicaments which are not Specific. 280, 281 That
Poisons do respect particular parts, and therefore Medicines may do it. 282
General Explications of the manmer, how these Operations of Specificks may
proceed. ^83, 284 That Vinegar will Operate on the shell and not upon the other
parts of the Egg with like instances of specific operations. 285 That Physic
as it began by Experience so it must be enlarged and rectified by the new
discoveries of Experience. 286, 287 That the Operations of the Antimonial Cup,
Glass of Antimony and Crocus Metallorum would not have been credited in Ancient
times. 288 Diverse other instances alike incredible. 289, 290, 291 A strange
Cure of blindness by a Mercurial powder. 292
Chap. XX.
Of Universal Medicines. 293 That the same matter may cause diverse Diseases.
294 And the same Medicine cure them 295 An Instance in the Waters of the Spaa.
296, 297 Of the reason and design of the Authors discourse concerning the
Methodus medendi, and his descending to other particulars which may be thought
improper for Him. 298, 299, 300, 301, 302 That this Employment is better then
the more fashionable of destructive valor. 303 That the Angels charitable
employment at Bethesda is more desirable then his who destroyed in one night
18000 fighting- men. 304

An APPENDIX to the First Section of the Second Part.
Advertisements touching the following Appendix. 307, 308, 309 To the 80 Page.
The Irish Lithotomists Receipt, for the Stone in the Bladder. 310
To the 120 Page. [Where the Virtues of the Pilulae Lunares are touched at.] 311
The Preparation of the Pilulae Lunares. 312, 313, 314 The Dose and use of these
Pills 315
To the 123 Page. (Where mention is made of the Cure of one concluded to have a
Gangrene, by an inward Medicine.) 316 Sr Walter Rawleighs Cordial, after Sr R.
K. his way: (set dowm Verbatim as the Author received it.) 317 How to make the
Tincture of Coral for this Cordial. 318 [ To the 123 Page; Where a Receipt that
cured Fistula's is mentioned.] A Water for a Fistula, and all manner of
VVounds, and swellings, or old Ulcers, Cankers, Tetters, Boils, or Scabbs in
any place, or Green Wounds. 319, 320
To the 158 Page. Where Soot is mentioned. 321 Hartmans preparation of Spirit
and Oil of Soot. 322 The Author Directions concerning preparations from Soot.
323
To the 153 Page. Of the use of the Preparations of Urine. 324, 325
To the 154 Page. Of the Preparations of Man's Blood. 326, 327 Obstrvations
touching the manner of drawing the Volatile Salts and Spirits of Blood and
other substances belonging to the Animal Kingdom. 328, 329, 330, 331, 332,
333, 334 How to draw Tinctures, as of Sulphur etc. with the Saline Spirits. 335
[ To the 164, 165, etc. where Ens Veneris is treated of.] 336. How the Author
first happened upon the Preparation of Ens Veneris. 337 The Process used by the
Author for the making Ens Veneris. 338 Diverse Particular Animadversions
concerning these Preparations. 339, 340, 341, 342, 343, 344 The Dose and use of
Ens Veneris. 345
[ To the 166, 167, 168, 169, and 170 Page. 346 Of Hartshorn. ib. Three ways
of distilling Hartshorn. 347, 348, 349 Animadversions on some preparations of
Hartshorn of Glauber and Hartman. 350 A fourth way of preparation of
Hartshorn used by the Author. 351, 352 Of the Use and effects of Spirit and
Salt of Hartshorn and the Dose of it. 353 Q Whether in the Distillation of
Hartshorn the Salt dispose it self into the Figure of the Horn. 354, 355 That
Bucks-horns may be substituted for Stags-horns. 356 How to keep the Spirit and
Salt of Hartshorn. ib. 357 Of the Spirit of Sal-Armoniack and diverse attempts
and ways of preparing it. 358, 359, 360, 361, 362, 363 Of Preparations of
Saline and Sulphurous Fetid Liquors. 364 The way of making the common Balsam
or Ruby of Sulphur. 365 To Volatize the Balsam of Sulphur. ib. 366 Penotus his
preparation of a Sulphurous Balsam with the Authors Advertisements upon it.
367 Of an Excellent Balsam of Sulphur made only with Oyl-Olive. 368 The common
way of preparing it. 369, 370 Other ways of preparing this Balsam. 371, 372 A
Balsam of Antimony. 373 Of the obscure and Cryptical way of Writing of
Chemists. 374, 375 Concerning the Empyreuma of Chemical Extracts and their
offensiveness compared with the Galenical and those which are commonly ^sed by
Methodists. 377, 378, 379, 380, 381, etc. And whether the offensiveness of
diverse Chemical Medicines proceed from the violence of the Fire, or the Nature
of the Matter? ib. A Way of taking off the Fetidnesse from Spirit of Urine,
Hartshorn, etc. 382 Observations concerning this Method of taking off the
Empyrema. 383 Of the Medicinal Quality of these aromatized Salts. 384, 385,
386, 387, 388
[ To the 166, page, Where the Author promises a Declaration, how he would
have his Praises of Medicines understood.] 389, 390 Diverse Disadvantages of
Chemical and Empirical Physic in the way of usual Ministration. 391 That
Chemical processes stand more in need of clear Relations then Galenical. 392
Errors in the Time and Dose of Chemical Remedies. 393, 394 That a competent
Measure of Knowledge is absolutely necessary to a Practizer of Physic. 395,
396, 397 The L. Verulams Judgment, That approved Receipts ought not to be
altered but religiously adhered to. 39^ Crato's judgment herein, and how the
Author concurreth with that Eminent Physician. 399 Of the greater Arcana and
more Universal Medicines, the Efficacy of which may compensate the want of
skill in the Prescriber. ib. The Sum and Conclusion of the point in
controversy. 400

FINIS.
ERRATA Of the Second Part.
Page 4. lin. 28. Read has hitherto. p. 7. l. 19. God-li^e. p. 27. l. 23.
peradventure. p. 31. l. 11. Chyle. p. 32. l. 8. Embracers. p. 34. l. 18.
Saline. p. 35. l. 2. deserve. p. 36. l. 11. analyzed. l. 30. Vinegar. p. 38. l.
20. Lientery. l. 23. paracentesis p. 39. l. 20. Onion. And l. 26. from that. p.
40. l. 5. Concretes. p. 43. l. 26. self, then p. 45. l. 10. well incorporated.
p. 46. l. 19. Ancients must. p. 7^. l. 1^. oporte^. l. 17. Hippocrates. p 97.
l. 9. cum saliva. p. 150. l. 5. aliquot. p. 151. l. 1. tantas l. 7. ciere.
Quod. p. 153. l. 9. an ancient. p. 172. l. 12. temperate. p. 194. l. 17.
Elixi^. p. 200. l. penult is far. p. 202. l. 13 h^buit Medicina. p. 206. l.
ult. him, You. p. 207. l. 25. anoma^ous. p. 214. l. 24. electrum. p. 216. l.
penult. Patients. p. 227. l. 24. comprobato. p. 269. l. 23. there are diverse.
p. 270. l. antep. troublesome. p. 272. l. 21. dele non. p. 386. l. 17. make.

FINIS.

