A SERMON Preached before the SOCIETIES For Reformation in DUBLIN. Jan. 6.
1697/8.

By J. Boyse.

DVBLIN: Printed by J. B. and S. P. at the back of Dick's Coffee-House in
Skinner-Row, for Matthew Gunne at the Bible and Crown near Essex-Gate, School.

To the Societies for Reformation in Dublin.
AS this Sermon was Preached at your Request, so since you have thought the
Publication of it might be useful to promote the success of that Excellent Work
you are Engaged in, I have herein also complied with your desire. For though I am
very sensible how far so mean a discourse falls beneath the Dignity and
Importance of so great a Subject; and how little Credit or Advantage your Pious
Undertaking can derive from the recommendation of so inconsiderable a Name, yet
I have too hearty an Affection to this blessed Cause to be backward in
contributing my utmost (though but a small Mite) toward the Advancement of it.
But I greatly rejoice that there are some do espouse it, the Eminency of whose
Character and Station renders 'em capable of giving greater Reputation and
Encouragement to it. As to this Discourse, I have, upon the Review of it,
observed, That something might have been added to Vindicate the present Method
of Connecting one sort of Offenders from the Censures it is too commonly loaded
with. But having more fully offered something to that purpose in another
Discourse (viz Concerning Profane Swearing and Cursing) then the limits of my
time would allow in this Sermon, I must referr the Reader thither. For your
selves it is matter of great satisfaction and Joy to all that wish well to your
worthy Design to find the Regularity of your Methods in Executing it, so
answerable to the real Excellency of it. For I have as yet heard of no
well-grounded Complaints of any illegal stops you have taken, or of any that
can justly pretend to have suffered by any false Informations. I doubt not you
will continue the same exactness and Care in all your future proceedings; and
give none the least ground to charge you with going beyond the bounds of the
Laws of Man in your zeal to suppress the Violation of the Laws of God. And
since your Enterprise is so truly Religious and your Management of it so
unexceptionably fair, I am not without hope that this Discourse may convince
some that have hitherto contented themselves with only wishing well to it, of
their indispensable Obligation to join with you, and become more active in it
according to their capacity and opportunities of being serviceable to it. And
there is the greater need of a considerable Addition to your Numbers, because
your Zeal must not be confined to this City while this necessary Work is so
woefully and generally neglected in other parts of the Kingdom. For it will
require your utmost united interest and application to engage so many in this
Design as may be capable of setting it on foot in most of our populous Towns.
And yet till that be done, you cannot expect the Reformation will be General
and truly National; So that without this, there will be great danger lest those
Vices that seem now like a routed and flying Enemy, should again rally their
forces, and at last defeat all your hopeful attempts for the crushing of 'em.
Let then the present satisfaction of your being so highly serviceable to the
undoubted interest of your Blessed Lord; Let the view of his own bright
Example, of whom it was so justly said, That the Zeal of God's House had eaten
him up; Let the certain prospect of a future and glorious Recompense; Nay, let
the consideration of that gracious providence of God that has hitherto smiled
upon your Endeavors, and given you the comfort of beholding already so happy
Effects of 'em, reconcile you to all the continued hardship and self-denial,
the difficulties and toil of so great an Undertaking. Be not weary of
well-doing, but prosecute this glorious Work with an unshaken Resolution and
persevering Constancy, till your great End be attained, till the Interest of
Religion and Virtue triumph over that of Irreligion and Vice, and these public
Sins become as unfashionable and rare as they are detestable and pernicious.
And that the Great God whose Cause you so strenuously continue to maintain, may
unite your Hearts in the firmest bonds of mutual Love, That he may prosper your
pious Endeavors with more remarkable success here, and crown 'em hereafter
with his Heavenly Reward, is the hearty prayer of,

Your unfeigned Well wisher, J. B.

A SERMON PREACHED Before the Societies for Reformation, Jan, 6. 1697/8.
Nehemiah 13. Ver. 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22. VERSE. 15. In those Days saw
I in Judah some treading Wine Presses on the Sabbath, and bringing in Sheaves,
and lading Asses; as also Wines, Grapes and Figs, and all manner of Burdens
which they brought into Jerusalem on the Sabbath Day; and I testified against
them in the Day wherein they sold Victuals.

16. There dwelt Men of Tire also therein, which brought Fish and all manner of
Ware, and sold on the Sabbath to the Children of Judah, and in Jerusalem.

17. Then I contended with the Nobles of Judah, and said unto 'em, What Evil
Thing is this that ye do and Profane the Sabbath Day.

18. Did not your Fathers thus, and did not our God bring this Evil upon us,
and upon this City? Yet ye bring more Wrath upon Israel by Profaning the
Sabbath.

19. And it came to pass when the Gates of Jerusalem began to be Dark before
the Sabbath, I commanded that the Gates should be shut, and charged that they
should not be opened till after the Sabbath. And some of my Servants set I at
the Gates, that there should be no Burden brought in on the Sabbath Day.

20. So the Merchants and Sellers of all kind of Ware lodged without Jerusalem
once or twice.

21. Then I testified against 'em, and said unto 'em, Why lodge ye about the
Walls? If ye do so again, I will lay Hands on you: From that time forth came
they no more on the Sabbath.

22. And I commanded the Levites that they should cleanse themselves, and that
they should come and keep the Gates to Sanctify the Sabbath Day. Remember me, O
my God, concerning this also, and spare me according to the Greatness of thy
Mercy.


SInce it is the design of this Discourse to recommend to you that Noble Work of
Reforming a Licentious Age, and to Encourage and Direct your resolute
endeavors in it; I have fixed my Thoughts on this remarkable Passage, which
sets before you so illustrious a Pattern as that of Pious Nehemiah. A Pattern
on several Accounts most worthy of your Notice and Imitation. Partly in respect
of his eminent Quality and Station. For not only the Title of Tirshatha or
Governor so often given him; 2 Ezra, 63 v. 7 Neh. 65. x. 1.
but the whole History of his Transactions plainly shows, he had a considerable
Authority among these restored Captives, whom by a Commission obtained from
Artaxerxes he encouraged to Rebuild the Walls of Jerusalem. Grotius supposes he
was one of the chief Members of the great Council of their Nation. And you may
by the way Observe, how desirable a thing it is to behold Secular Honor and
Power in so happy a Conjunction with exemplary Piety and Virtue. Partly,
Because the Circumstances of this great attempt of his for Reformation bear no
inconsiderable resemblance to your own. And chiefly, Because in his Management
of this attempt, and in the Success it was Crowned with, you may Observe much
both to Guide and to Animate your Holy Zeal: You may both discern the true
Characters of the excellent Spirit and Temper of a Pious Reformer, and the
happy issues in reference to the Public and to himself, that were the Result
of his Religious Undertaking. So that my Text, without offering the least
violence to it, will of it self suggest to you the most suitable and
instructive thoughts for this present Occasion.

I shall not now stay to take notice of those many other generous and pious
Designs which this Great and Good man not only undertook, but happily executed
in the face of the most formidable difficulties, and violent Opposition. I
shall only Observe, That having joined with the rest of the Princes the Levites
and Priests in solemnly Renewing and Sealing their Covenant with God, he
particularly applied himself to the concerns of his House, restoring the
Offices of the Priests and Levites in the Temple, and appointing Treasurers to
distribute what the Law of Moses required the other Tribes to contribute
toward their liberal Support. See 9, 10, 11 and 12. Chapter
But because the bare setting up God's public Worship will signify little to
promote the great design of practical Religion, if the stated Seasons he has
appointed for it be alienated from that Sacred to a common Use. Therefore this
excellent Reformer seeing the Sabbath of God (that Day of Sacred Rest, set
apart for the Contemplation of his Works and Word, and for the solemn Exercises
of his Public Worship 2 Genesis 2, 3, 4 Luke 16.13 Acts 5.14.
) thus openly profaned by the generality of the People; he begins and
prosecutes this pious attempt of Rescuing it from so notorious Pollution, and
of Restoring the Religious Observance of it.

I shall not now stay to Paraphrase the Text, both because it needs little
Explication, and because what may be any way requisite will occur in
prosecuting those Observations I shall make on this remarkable Passage for your
present Instruction and Use. And I shall among many, that might be made, select
the following ones.

I. We may from the matters of Fact mentioned in this Historical Passage,
Observe, That Profaneness and Licentiousness do usually soon come to a great
height, even among a People professing the True Religion, when they are
countenanc't and strengthened by the Example of those that are of the highest
Rank and Figure.

You know nothing was more directly contrary to the Law of Moses than the doing
any servile Work on their Sabbath. The fourth Precept of the Decalogue was most
express to this purpose; Six Days shall thou Labor and do all thy Work, but
the Seventh Day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God, in it thou shall not do any
Work, Thou, nor thy Son, nor thy Daughter, thy Manservant; nor thy
Maidservant, nor thy Cattle, nor the Stranger that is within thy Gates, etc.
Even the Strangers were forbid to do any servile Work on the Sabbath, least
their Example should ensnare the Jews in the guilt of Profaning it. And indeed
in this point the Law of God enjoined no more on the Jews, than what the Light
of Nature it self did dictate to the Heathens; Viz. That that part of Time
which was Devoted to the public Worship of the Deity, should not be employed
in any thing that is inconsistent with it, or a real hindrance to it. Insomuch
as Macrob. Saturn. lib. 1. c. 16.

Serve. Honor. in Virg. Georg. 1.

Fest. v. Religios.


Macrobius, Servius, Festus and others tell us, The Heathens themselves thought
any servile Works, (that were not of pure necessity) a Pollution of those Days
that were Consecrated to their Gods. So that the Practices here mentioned in
the Text, of treading Wine Presses, bringing in Sheaves, etc. selling Fish, and
all manner of Ware, were most gross and palpable Violations of the Fourth
Commandment, and even against the Morality of it. For sad experience
sufficiently tells us, how soon all the impressions of Religion upon the minds
of a People are generally lost and defaced, where either they seldom attend the
Public Worship of God at all, or where they are at Liberty to rush immediately
from their Public Devotions to their Secular Affairs or sensual Pastimes. It Is
indeed no Wonder the Men of Tire who disowned the God of Israel should make no
scruple of Profaning his Sabbath. But that these restored Captives (so newly
come out of those Calamities, that this among other sins had brought upon 'em
(...) 18.
) should be so generally involved in this heinous Guilt, seems more strange and
unaccountable. But the wonder will cease when we consider, That our depraved
Nature has a strong Aversion to the serious Exercises of true Piety, and for
want of a spiritualized Appetite to relish a true delight in 'em, is prone to
resent any long continuance of 'em as an unsufferable Weariness: 1 Mal. 13.
That these irreligious Inclinations in this People were the more deeply
rivetted from the Conjunction of their worldly Interest and Gain. 8 Amos 5. v.
They were too zealous Votaries of Mammon, to spare so much time for God, and
were far more intent upon their Traffic than their Devotions. But that which
seems chiefly to have hardened 'em in this instance of Profaneness, was the
Example of their Nobles themselves. v. 17.
And no wonder the Body of this People should by their Avarice as well as
Irreligion, be drawn so deep into this Guilt; when those that should have
restrained this Impiety in others, by their Authority, did rather Encourage,
and as it were, warrant it by their own Practice.

Now all the Reflection I shall make on this Observation, is only to suggest to
you, That we need the less wonder, to meet with so great Difficulties in our
attempts to Reform the Vices of the Age, when we not only consider the
agreeableness of 'em to the propensities of our vitiated Nature, but the
general countenance they have had, even from too many of highest Rank and
Authority. Alas; it is too evident a Truth to be now contested, That during the
two late Reigns, a Torrent of Profaneness and Irreligion, Immorality and
Lewdness, came in upon these Lands with an irresistible Violence. These Vices
having once gained the Ascendant in a dissolute Court, soon came into Fashion
and Repute. Swearing and Lewdness past for modish Accomplishments; and to spend
at least one part of the Lord's Day in Drinking and Gameing, was so far from
being thought a Crime, that the strict and religious Observance of it, was
rather ridiculed as a scrupulous preciseness; Nay, I had almost said Branded,
as a piece of Jewish Superstition. The very Air of Reverence and Seriousness in
Public Devotion, was laughed out of Countenance, and no Man thought himself
qualified to set up for a Wit, without a stock of Profaneness. And the
Contagion of these Vices having diffused it self among a great part of our
Nobility and Gentry; their Example did not only powerfully Recommend, but even
seem to Authorize 'em among their Dependents and Inferiors. So that the
pernicious Infection did from the tainted Head and Crown, soon spread it self
to the remotest Parts of our Body-Politick. And no wonder that these Sins came
to so dreadful a height, when they Reigned so long uncontrolled. For how indeed
could we expect that these Crimes should have been punished, when those that
should have executed the Laws against 'em were usually the chief Transgressors
of 'em. Since then these Vices are so suited to our Native Corruption, since
they have been so rivetted by long continued Custom, since they have been so
universally diffused, and so long Triumph't without any check or opposition; we
must look for almost as desperate Resistance in all our attempts against 'em,
as he that would stem a violent Stream, or raise up a Digue to set new bounds
to the swelling Sea. It Is true indeed, we have no reason to look upon the
difficulty as insuperable (as I shall more fully show anon): But I am sure we
have no reason to grow remiss in our Attempts from any vain hope of so great a
Work being easily effected. Our Conquest over the Vices of the Age, like that
over a veterane and resolute Enemy, must be gained step by step, not without a
tedious struggle and conflict. We must therefore lay our account for long and
perverse Opposition.

II. We may from the Argument which Pious Nehemiah insists on, in his Reproof
to the Nobles of Judah observe, That when Profaneness and Immorality become
National, (by being Universal and Vncontroll'd) They usually bring the heavy
Judgments of God upon the Place and People, where they so notoriously abound.

Thus Nehemiah reminds these restored Captives, That this among other National
Sins had brought on their Fathers the dismal Calamities of a Destructive War,
and a long and miserable Exile, and upon their Capital City it is deplorable
Desolation and Ruins. What evil thing is this (says he, verse. 17, 18.) that ye
do, and Profane the Sabbath Day, did not your Fathers thus? and did not our
God bring all this Evil upon us, and upon this City? Yet ye bring more Wrath
upon Israel, by Profaneing the Sabbath. Nor is this the only Sin that is said
in the Holy Scriptures to draw down public Judgments. For among other Sins for
which a Land is said to mourn, and every one that dwells therein to languish,
Swearing leads the Van, and Adultery brings up the Rear. IV. Hos. 2, 3. See to
the like purpose the words of the Prophet Jeremiah XXIII. chapter 10. v. And you
may observe, that when God by the same Prophet had charged the Jews with
turning their external Plenty, into fuel to their brutish Lusts, with
committing Adultery, and assembling themselves by Troops in the Harlot's
Houses; he adds, How shall I pardon thee for this? shall I not visit for these
things, says the Lord, shall I not be avenged on such a Nation as this? v.
Jer. 7, 8, 9. verse. And what is said concerning these particular Vices, is
equally applicable to all other instances of heinous Impiety and Immorality,
when they become National, i. e. when they are generally committed, and that
openly and insolently without any restraint and check from public Authority:
When all Ranks are involved in the guilt of 'em, even Rulers too, by practicing
'em themselves, and conniving at 'em in others.

There is indeed very much in the natural tendency of Irreligion and Wickedness
when they rise to a great height, to sink a Nation into Contempt and Misery.
The Vices of a People often drain their Treasures into the hands of
Foreigners, who being more frugal, enrich themselves at the expense of their
Luxury and Intemperance. And a long course of unrestrained Lewdness, so
emasculates the Spirits of a Nation, and debauches 'em into that effeminacy and
softness, that makes 'em an easy Prey to every powerful Invader. Besides, there
is so inseparable a Connection between Piety toward God, and Justice and Truth
and Charity toward Men, that when once the Bonds of Religion are cast off,
those other Cements of humane Society are easily dissolved. And where those are
once dissolved, a People need not the Sword of a Foreign Enemy to destroy 'em;
their own Lusts will soon bring 'em into a State of War, and make 'em turn
their hostile Swords against one another; They will bite and devour till they
are consumed one of another. 5 Gal. 15.


But, besides the natural tendency of such National Sins, The Punishment of 'em
is much more ascertained by the Justice of God.

And therefore the Psalmist speaks of it, as the usual Method of his
Providence, To turn a fruitful Land into Barrenness, for the Wickedness of them
that dwell therein; 107 Psalm. 34 verse. And the Prophet Jeremy delivers it as
the Stated Rule of his Government, with respect to these collective Bodies of
Men; At what instant I shall speak concerning a Nation, and concerning a
Kingdom, to build and to plant it; If it do evil in my sight, that it obey not
my voice, then will I repent of the good wherewith I said, I would benefit 'em.
18. Jer. 9, 10. It Is true indeed, these public Judgments are executed on some
Nations sooner, and in a lesser degree, as Warnings to 'em; On others they are
executed much later, and in a more terrible manner, when by filling up the
measure of their guilt, they are ripened for destructive Vengeance. But where
such National guilt is persisted in, Divine wrath will sooner or later come
either in monitory or in desolating Judgments. And the reasonableness hereof is
obvious. For (as has been often observed) tho particular Persons are capable of
future Rewards and Punishments, which are therefore most usually deferred to
another Life; Yet Public Societies, as such are not. They will all be
disbanded before the Great Day of final Retribution; and therefore, if they be
Rewarded and Punished at all, as Communities or Collective Bodies, (as it is
highly congruous to the Wisdom and Justice of the Divine Government that they
should) it must be in this Life. And accordingly they usually are, either
Prosperous or Miserable, as either Piety and Virtue, or Irreligion and Vice,
abound in 'em, and meet with public Countenance and Encouragement.

On this Observation, I shall only make the following Reflections.

I. We may hence see the apparent Necessity of our vigorous Attempts, to
suppress Profaneness and Immorality, in Order to the Prevention of National
Judgments.

We have already found by sad Experience, That our public Sins, (and I think
we may justly add, those in particular, which we are now desirous to give some
check to; Viz. Our Profanation of God's Holy Name and Day, and our Lewdness and
Impurity) had a deep hand in those Calamities that so lately befell this
Kingdom, and almost laid it entirely wast.

It was these Sins so polluted our Land, as to cause it to cast out so many of
it is defiled Protestant Inhabitants. It was these that brought our Holy
Religion, as well as all our civil Interests on the very brink of imminent
Destruction, so that, had not the Mercy of God prevented our Fears, as well as
our Deserts, our Iniquities had proved our entire Ruin. We need not therefore
go as far back as the Age of our Fathers, for such awful Examples of Divine
Justice; We yet feel the severe effects of it, and bear upon us some visible
Scars of those deep Wounds that our Sins have given us. And truly, the Great
God has by our present Deliverance only given us a Merciful Reprieve, and put
us upon a New Trial, whether we will become a Reformed, (i. e. a Religious, a
Just, and a sober) People. So that from the success of our present endeavors
to remove this heinous Guilt from the Nation, we may take the truest Measures,
whether our present Tranquillity and Peace shall be Prolonged, or whether we
are Reserved for more terrible Destruction. If these Pious Attempts Prosper, We
may hope a Gracious God will continue his true Religion among us, when the
Honor of it is rescued from that open Contempt that the Profaneness of the Age
had cast upon it, and especially, when the genuine Spirit of true Devotion is
so sensibly revived in it, even among those of the Rising Generation. We may
hope he will restore, nay, increase our external Prosperity, when it is no
longer generally abused to Pamper and Feed our Brutish Lusts. Whereas, if
these Attempts decline and fail; if Magistrates do not encourage the Execution
of the excellent Laws that are made, or you grow negligent of your Duty, in
order to the Convicting and Punishing Offenders; if these Vices shall at last
Triumph over this feeble opposition, and still Return upon us with the same
unrestrained Violence as before; We may all tremble to think how dismal an Omen
this will be, of some unforeseen, but desolating stroke of Vengeance that is
coming upon us.

2. I would hence expostulate a little with the Profane and Lewd Sinners of the
Age, in the like Language as Nehemiah did with the Nobles of Judah, What Evil
Thing is this that ye do? Will you still express your Wretched Contempt of God,
and of his solemn Worship, by profaning that holy day that is consecrated to
it? Will you still dare by your insolent Oaths to affront and tear his glorious
and sacred Name? Will you still by your odious Curses (a worse Dialect then
that of Hell) trifle with his tremendous Justice, and set it at open defiance?
8 Luke 28.
Will you still by sottish Excesses, and by the hateful Impurity of abominable
Lusts defile the Land? Will you yet bring more Wrath upon our Israel? Have we
not already sufficiently smarted under the severity of God's righteous
Judgments? Will you still increase the large Score of public Guilt, and add
more fuel to kindle anew the consuming Flames of his terrible Anger? Is this
all the Return you make to the admirable Mercy of God, in rescuing you from
your late Dangers and Fears, to become more bold and secure in the contempt of
his Authority, and open violation of his Laws? Has he delivered you, that you
might more freely commit all these Abominations? 7 Jer. 10. v.
Has he given you this desirable Peace on Earth, that you might more
presumptuously renew your desperate War against Heaven? O deceive not your
selves. Mistake not this prolonged Patience of God for a License to offend him,
with greater hope of Impunity. For his Justice, that is armed with Almighty
Power, will not always be outdar'd by the provocations of hardened and insolent
Sinners; but if you go on to incense him with so desperate a Presumption, he
can make your Plagues as wonderful as your Crimes are aggravated, and punish
you as you have Sinned, with a high Hand, and an out stretched Arm.

3. I would hence apply my self to those of you, that are engaged in this great
Design of Public Reformation. And you may here learn some of the excellent
Principles that you should be Acted by in the prosecution of it; Viz. A deep
Veneration for the Laws of the Great God; a profound Reverence of his Sovereign
Authority; an awful dread of his vindictive Justice, and a deep concern to
avert the terrible Effects of it from this sinful Land. I know indeed, The
Prosane and Licentious Sinners of the Age, are ready in their Blindness and
Passion, to call you as Ahab did the Prophet, the Troublers of Israel. But you
may justly reply as he did, It Is they that trouble our Israel, by forsaking the
Commandments of God, and thereby incensing his Indignation against us. 1 Kings
18. chapter 17 verse. It Is they are the Zimri's whose vile Impurities threaten us
with new Plagues from the Hand of Heaven. O then, Let your belief of God's
dismal Threatenings, and earnest desire to prevent the Execution of 'em,
powerfully excite you to imitate the Noble Zeal of pious Phineas; (I mean no
farther then by promoting in your Station the Execution of our just Laws) and
that with the same end in your Eye; Viz. To turn away the Wrath of God, that he
may not Consume us in his Jealousy; (See 25 Numb.) And if one Act of such
Religious Zeal in Phineas could arrest the avenging Hand of God, and stop a
consuming Plague; if Jerusalem had been Pardoned and Spared, if a Man could
have been found in it that Executed Judgment; (see 5 Jer. 1. v.) What may we
not expect from your united and ardent Zeal for the Honor of God! Let it then
quicken your resolute Attempts, to dam up this strong current of Impiety and
Wickedness, to consider, That you are thereby endeavoring to stop the torrent
of those desolating Judgments, that would soon overflow us, if the floodgates
of Sin were set as open as before. So that, you are at once doing the highest
Service to the Public Interest, as well as to the Glory of God.

III We may from this passage farther Observe, Though the suppression of National
Sins be principally the Work of the Civil Magistrate; yet all should concur in
it, that are capable of being regularly serviceable in promoting it.

I speak here of the suppressing of Wickedness by the coercive Power of the
Sword. (For it is that my Text leads me to consider.) It Is into the Hands of the
Civil Magistrate that the Sword of Justice is put by the Sovereign Majesty of
Heaven. He is thereby constituted the Guardian of both Tables of the Law, and
is therefore obliged to promote the Observance, and to restrain the open
violation of its excellent Precepts. He is the Minister of God, appointed by
him as a Revenger to execute Wrath upon Evildoers 13 Romans 3, 4. And indeed, if
he do not so manage his Power, as to render it a Terror to all such, by
restraining their public and enormous Vices, he so far bears the Sword in
vain, by not answering the great End for which he is entrusted with it. And
it is the Magistrate's Authority must give Vigor and Force to all regular
Attempts this way; and it is their Zeal and Resolution must put Life into 'em.
And accordingly, You see in my Text, it was Nehemiah the Governor that here
set this excellent Work of Reformation on foot. 'Twas he rebuk't the Nobles of
Judah, for encouraging this Profanation of the Sabbath. 'Twas he commanded the
Gates to be shut; and by his threatening of just Severity, put a stop to that
shameful Traffic, by which that Sacred day was Polluted.

But since the effectual suppression of Profaneness and Wickedness, though
warranted by the Magistrate's Authority, does necessarily require many Hands to
concur in it; I therefore add, That all should be ready to join in so excellent
a Design, so far as their regular Endeavors in their Station can be
Serviceable to promote it. Thus this pious Reformer orders the Gates of
Jerusalem to be shut, he sets his Servants there to stop any burden from
entering into 'em. And because the People would probably pay a greater reverence
to the Levites, he orders them to keep the Gates, that they might reprove the
People for their profanation of the Sabbath, and urge 'em to the Sanctification
of it. Thus were all proper hands set at Work to carry on so necessary and
Religious a Design.

On this Observation, I shall only make the two following Reflections.

1. We may hence see matter of great thankfulness to God, and of Encouragement
in this excellent Work, That our Magistrates, to whom it principally belongs,
are so far engaged in it.

What reason have we to bless and adore the divine Majesty, that he has incited
and directed those that are entrusted with the legistative Authority, to enact
so excellent Laws against the profanation of his holy Name and Day; That he has
filled so many inferior Magistrates with Zeal for the Execution of 'em. But
above all, how should our hearts be cheered, and our hands strengthened, by
that public Declaration which our gracious Sovereign has so lately made, That
he esteems it as one of the greatest Advantages of the Peace, that he shall now
have leisure, as for other important Affairs, so particularly for this, of
effectually discouraging Profaneness and Immorality. O may the King of Kings
confirm these Pious purposes in his Royal Heart, and inspire him with suitable
Resolution and Courage in the happy Execution of 'em! May the Restoration of
the Honor and the vital Power, as well as the Preservation of the External
Profession of the True Religion among us, be the principal Glory of his Reign!
May his eminent Conquest over the Vices of the Age (the most Dangerous and
deadly of all our Enemies) add a New and Brighter Luster to his Crown! While
others stain their Government by such unwarrantable acts of blind Zeal, as the
extinguishing the Light of Divine Truth; may his become truly Illustrious by
such commendable instances of regular Zeal, as the suppressing the
unquestionably Evil, and pernicious Works of Darkness! May our Public
Reformation most eminently begin where our Corruption did before, at our Court,
and amongst our Nobility and Gentry; that there may be a happy Conjunction of
Great Examples with Just Authority, to put Irreligion and Wickedness (if
possible) out of countenance, and to retrieve the declining Reputation and
Interest of true Piety and Holiness!

Nay, We should not in our Thankfulness to God, overlook the wonderful efficacy
of his Grace, in exciting the Zeal of so many private Christians to concur in
this excellent Work, though under the greatest Discouragements. And especially,
when we consider, how deeply the contagion of Impiety and Lewdness had infected
our Youth; What a surprising Mercy is it to behold so many of them, so
resolutely engaging in this Religious Design.

To Observe such a Spirit of warm Devotion spreading it self among those of the
Rising Age; to see them prefer the strict Exercises of serious Piety, before
the folly of Plays and the Riot of Taverns; to see them, not only to renounce
those Lusts themselves, which their Age has usually the strongest propensity
to, but to contribute their utmost Endeavors to suppress 'em in others; to
behold them so declared Enemies of Irreligion and Vice, and so vigorous
Abettors and commendable Patterns of Godliness and Sobriety; this is so
mavelous an instance of Divine Grace; It Is so astonishing and reviving a
Sight, that we cannot but look upon it, as a happy Prognostic of future good,
and from thence conceive Great and Glorious hopes concerning the ensuing Age.

2. We should hence be all of us excited to do our utmost toward the advancing
this excellent Design, according to our capacity and opportunities of promoting
it.

Those concerned in the framing of our Laws, have already done their part. Nay,
they have laid a considerable Obligation on Inferior Magistrates to do their
part also, by subjecting those to Penalties that neglect their Duty. But yet it
were much to be wished, that all our Justices of the Peace would imitate the
Activity and Zeal, which some of 'em in this City have (to their perpetual and
deserved Honor) set 'em so Noble a Pattern of. I mean, That they would animate
and encourage the Zeal of honest Informers, and do their utmost, by their
prudent management of this Affair, to Cover and Protect 'em from the Notice and
Malice of those enraged Offenders, whose Reformation they truly seek.
Constables should also perform their part with Integrity and Diligence, with
Courage and Resolution. They should not be accessory to these Vices, by their
connivance at, or partial Lenity to Offenders. Nay, all that can contribute to
the success of this great Undertaking, by giving Informations against Vice,
should also faithfully do their part. And indeed, it is chiefly on private
Persons now, that the main stress of this important Work is devolved. For it is
on your Resolution and Industry to convict Offenders, that the Execution of
these good Laws, and the happy effects we hope thereby, almost entirely depend.
For without continued Convictions, these Vices will still go Unpunisht. And
consequently, the profane and proffligate Sinners of the Age, will still
persist in their Wickedness, with as secure contempt of the Sword of Justice in
the Hand of the Magistrate, as hitherto, of that in the hand of God. Whereas
the more active your Societies combined for this excellent purpose are, and the
more the Numbers of Informers do increase, the Iess hope of Impunity can such
Offenders entertain; and the happier prospect we shall have of that desired
success, which will both answer the End of these Laws, and therein the Wishes
and Hopes of all Good Men. Let none of us then, think our selves excused from
any Service we are capable of, in so just and so glorious a Cause. Let it be
rather our laudable Ambition to have some hand (according to the advantages our
several Stations give us) in carrying on so Great and so Good a Work.

IV. We may from this passage farther Observe, Though those that are engaged in
this excellent Design of Public Reformation, may be but few, and may have
great Opposition to encounter; yet this should not deter 'em from the vigorous
prosecution of it.

We may evidently infer this from the Circumstances that Nehemiah was here
involved in, and from his own Resolute Practice under 'em. If he had only
considered the Obstacles he was like to meet with, he had never begun an
attempt that promis't so little success. The instance of Profaneness which he
set himself against, was universally spread; he had all those Foreigners upon
his hands, whose Trade and Gain he entrench't upon. He had the profane Humor
of the People, fortified by their wordly Interest, to bear down. Nay, which was
more formidable, he had the Nobles themselves to contend with, and was
necessitated to carry this Point over their warm Opposition. And yet you see,
all these Difficulties, did rather whet and inflame, than abate and cool his
Pious Zeal. He expostulates with the Nobles, he opposes his Authority to
popular Discontent, and threatens the Foreigners that occasioned this
Profaneness by their avarice, with just Severity. He applies himself with
undaunted Resolution and unwearied Diligence, to remove every Rub out of the
way, and to encounter and master every Difficulty that he met with: He thought
the Glory of God, the Honor of his Law, and the Public Good, too deeply
concerned, to be so easily affrighted or disheartened from his Duty.

Let me then propose this admirable Example of his to your Imitation, who are
engaged in the like Religious Undertaking. I need not tell you, That though we
have so excellent Laws enacted, for the suppression of Profaneness and Vice,
how few there are that appear zealous and active for the Execution of 'em. The
Numbers of those that are engaged in the prosecution of this Glorious Design,
do as yet, bear but little proportion to the Number of Offenders, and to the
due extent of the Work it self. Nor need I tell you, what Discouragements you
lie under; and what a Train of terrifying Difficulties you have yet to
encounter. Difficulties so Great, especially in reference to other parts of the
Kingdom, that some who have been urged to make such attempts in the Country,
have insisted on this as their chief Objection, That they had no prospect of
succeeding in 'em. The Number of Offenders being so great, and so few others,
having either any Inclination or Courage to convict 'em. And even in this City,
when we consider, how few of those that are most capable do encourage the
Design. How great the Malignity and Rage of convicted Offenders is, and what
hazard all that are active in this Cause run, of exposing themselves to their
ill will and revenge; we must confess, the Work is attended with extraordinary
and formidable Hardships.

But yet after all, None of these Difficulties should Discourage us from our
Duty. Nay, they should rather reinforce than extinguish our Holy Zeal, in the
Discharge of it. We should be so far from being tempted thereby, to desert so
Glorious a Cause, that we should be rather excited to greater activity for the
advancement of it: As will appear, if we consider the following particulars.

1. Great Difficulties must be expected in prosecution of so Pious a Design.

We must look for it, That those that carry on so Dangerous an Attempt, to
subvert the Devil's Interest, will meet with warm and fierce Opposition. All
the Militia and Posse of that Infernal Kingdom will be Raised against 'em.
Satan will inspire all his Instruments and Agents (those Sons of Belial) to
unite their Policy and Power, that they may withstand and frustrate so bold an
Attempt, that so directly threatens Ruin to his Usurped Empire and Throne. As
no sooner did Lot offer a gentle Reproof to the impure Inhabitants of Sodom,
but they presently fly in his Face, with Reviling Scorn, and furious
Threatenings. 19 Genesis 9. verse. We should therefore be fore-arm'd with the
consideration hereof, and enter on this great Work, as expecting the utmost
resistance in it.

2. The Prospect of Difficulties will not exempt us from our Obligation to so
plain a Duty.

I say, To so plain a Duty. For I take it to be as certainly our Duty, to
endeavor the suppression of heinous Profaneness and Immorality, according to
the advantages and opportunities that our several Stations give us, as it is to
advance the Kingdom of God, and to promote the Honor and Observance of his
Laws. I do not see, how any can be excused from this necessary Work, that are
capable of being regularly serviceable in it. For here is now, in this our Age
and Day, a manifest Conflict, between the Kingdom of God, and that of Satan,
between the interest of Piety and Virtue, and that of Profaneness and Vice. And
can we think it consistent with our Duty, (even with our Baptismal Obligations
themselves) to stand Neuter in so important a Cause, or to suffer the Interest
of God and Holiness to Sink, and that of Irreligion and Immorality to Prevail,
through our wretched Lukewarmness and Indifferency? Is this reconcilable with
that ardent Affection to that blessed Majesty, and that entire devotedness to
his Honor and Service, that we pretend unto? Is this consistent with the
sincerity of those public Prayers for Reformation, which we have so often
offered up, to use no Endeavors to promote it, when so fair an advantage is
put into our Hands? May we not justly apply those remarkable Words of our
blessed Savior to this particular Case, which he speaks in reference to the
general opposition of the Devil's Interest to his; He that is not for me is
against me. 12 Matthew. 30. verse. Even as in case of a Foreign Invasion, That
Subject that is not for his Rightful Sovereign, is by just interpretation
against him. So in this Case, he that does not cordially and openly espouse the
Cause of God, shall be regarded and treated as a secret Enemy to it.

Now, If this be so evident and important a Duty, no Difficulties will warrant
our willful neglect of it. For when we oblige our selves to the Duties of
Christianity, we are allowed no Reserves, of only performing 'em so far as is
consistent with our Safety and Ease. Our Profession in such cases, requires the
Exercise of Fortitude and Courage, of Patience and Self-denial. It obliges us
to Sacrifice our Temporal Interest and Reputation, to the Superior Interest of
the Glory of God, and allows us not to baulk any eminent Service to him,
because we cannot perform it without considerable Toil and Hazard. No, we
should look on such Obstacles and Difficulties in our way, as rather designed
to try the sincerity and fervor of our Zeal, the strength and constancy of our
Resolutions. And therefore, the prospect of 'em, should rather inspire us with
new force and vigor. For as the pretense of a Lion in the Street, is but the
Sluggard's Excuse; so to be affrighted by every appearance of Danger, from our
undoubted; Duty, is but a suspicious Character. For, among those that are said
to have their Portion in the Infernal Lake, the Fearful and Unbelieving, (the
timorous Cowards in the Cause of God) are placed in the very Front of 'em. 21.
Rev. 8. verse.

3. Should we fail of success in this great Design, yet we have delivered our
own Souls.

The Guilt of public Profaneness and Wickedness will not lie at our door, when
we have done our utmost for the restraint of it. Nor shall our Fidelity, tho it
may want success with Men, want acceptance with God and a liberal Reward from
him.

4. We have no reason to be discouraged by the great difficulties in our way
from all hope of success.

For our success depends on his concurrence and blessing, to whose Power no
Obstacles we can meet with, are insuperable.

But this leads me to the next Observation.

V. We may from the happy issue of Nehemiah's undertaking, Observe, That the
Great God is often pleased to Crown the seemingly weak attempts of his Faithful
Servants for his Cause and Interest, with unexpected and wonderful Success.

Of this, My Text gives us a lively Instance. For though Nehemiah's single Zeal
seems to have been the only Spring of this Attempt, to recover the Religious
Observation of the Sabbath; and though he had so general and strong Opposition to
contend against; yet you see by his Vigor and Resolution, he carried the
point, and brought about the Reformation he intended. That blessed God, who had
inspired his Heart with so excellent a Design, strengthening his Hands in the
Execution of it, and bending the hearts of others to a compliance with his just
Authority, and Religious Undertaking. And no doubt, it did much facilitate the
success of his Endeavors, that the Law of God did so evidently condemn the
practice he Opposed. So that, those who had Inclination enough to so ill a
Cause, as that of Profaneness, yet were almost ashamed to appear for it; And
those who might have had an ill Eye upon his good Design, yet had scarce the
Confidence to oppose it; their own Consciences being convinced of the
Reasonableness and Equity of it.

Let us then draw abundant Encouragement to these our Religious Endeavors,
from the consideration of our being engaged in the Cause of God, and from the
prospect of his powerful Assistance and Blessing. Let us fortify our own
Resolutions, with the Argument that pious Nehemiah elsewhere uses: The God of
Heaven he will Prosper us, therefore we his Servants will Arise and Build. 2
Neh. 10. His mighty Power can make the weakest Instruments successful, to pull
down these Strongholds of Sin, and can make use of Babes to quell his most
formidable Enemies.

And truly, we have already had that Experience of the favorable Providence of
God, shining upon our Religious Undertakings of this kind, that would render us
inexcusable, should we distrust his future Aids. And to convince you hereof, I
need only set before you, the following brief account of the Societies for
Reformation, both in London and in this City. And, because the account of 'em
is intermixed with that of the Religious Societies of young Persons, I must
touch a little on both.

For the Religious Societies of young Persons in London, belonging to the
Established Church, that Pious conformable Divine, Mr. Woodward, tells us; The
first Rise of 'em was about twenty Years ago. About that time, several young
Persons being touched with a tender sense of their Souls, applied themselves to
Religious Thoughts. And, as they often accidentally met at the Houses of their
Ministers, they were by some of them, advised to meet once a week, and to apply
themselves to good Discourse. And, for the better Regulation of their Meetings,
several Orders and Rules were given 'em. In pursuance whereof, they continued
their Religious Meetings, till K. James's Reign. And though the Aspect of public
Affairs, did then discourage some, yet others of them continued their pious
Resolutions and Practices, though they took the most prudent course for
concealing their Meetings. In the beginning of this Reign, they were accused to
the Bishop of London, as tending to Schism. Upon which, they presented their
Apology, which being confirmed by the Testimony of their Ministers, gave full
Satisfaction. And having then greater encouragement, they quickly encreas't to
25 Societies, within the compass of the Bills of Mortality, besides those since
formed at Shadwell and Greenwich. And what Sense our late excellent Queen had
of these Societies, the Bishop of Salisbury acquaints us in his Memoirs of her.
She hearkened (says he) carefully after every thing that seemed to give us some
hope, that the next Generation would be better then the present, with a
particular Attention. She heard of a Spirit of Devotion and Piety that was
spreading it self among the Youth of this great City, with a true Satisfaction.
She inquired often, and much about it, and was glad to hear it went on and
prevailed, which was her hearty Wish and daily Prayer.

Now, out of these Religious Societies at London, there have been two
associated Bodies formed, who have made it their Endeavor to inform against
Profaneness and Vice, meeting weekly to carry it on, according to the legal and
prudential Rules, which some Lawyers drew up for 'em. In which work, besides
time, labor and reproach, some of 'em have run considerable hazard of their
Lives.

He tells us also, There is another eminent Society in London, consisting of
many considerable Gentlemen, and chief Citizens, who frequently meet, to
super-intend, direct, and pursue this glorious work of Reformation, consulting
the best methods to carry it on, and promoting it, by large and honorable
Contributions. By which means, several thousands of Drunkards, Swearers and
Profaners of the Lord's Day, have been brought to just Punishment.

Besides this Society, many Justices of the Peace meet weekly on this Design.

There is also, says he, an active Society for Reformation, consisting of
about Sixty Persons, most Housekeepers, in, and about the Tower-Hamlets, to
whom several Persons of the City are joined, with several Churchwardens,
Constables, and other Officers. All these, though of different Persuasions, join
against Profaneness and Debauchery. And these have put down several Markets
kept on the Lord's Day, and suppressed some hundreds of Houses of ill Fame. And by
the industry of this Society alone, about two Thousand lewd Persons have
suffered the Penalty of the Law, suitable to their Crimes.

On which account, They have had great Countenance from several Courts of
Judicature, and great Encouragement from the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen,
who have Honorably contributed toward the necessary Expenses of so great an
Undertaking.

And so far are the Persons concerned in this Great Work, from having any
prospect of Gain by it, That (he tells us) One of these Societies has in three
years past, expended above 700 l. in it.

Thus far Mr. Woodward in reference to the Societies at London.

For those Societies that have combined here, for the same excellent purposes;
They are too well known to your selves, to need my giving any particular
account of 'em. Nor is it, I suppose, either agreeable to your own desires, or
proper for the Design you are engaged in, to descend to any particular account
of your Rules, and the methods of your managing this great Affair. I shall
therefore, content my self with this general Remark, That I think you have in a
short time, gone a great way toward copying the excellent Pattern that London
has set, (a due allowance being made for your great disadvantages.)

But I must not forget to pay that just Honor, that is due to those of you,
that belong to the Established Church, That it is you, both in London and here,
that began this Pious Design, of putting the Laws against Vice in Execution.
And indeed, you had on many accounts, far greater advantages to begin it; and
particularly this considerable one, That your known Zeal for and adherence to
the Established Church, cut off from the Profane and Licentious part of the
Age, all pretense of running down this excellent Work, as if it were only the
factious Design of a Party. But since you have led the way, I hope Protestant
Dissenters will not fail to tread in your Glorious Steps, but will join both
their Hearts and their Hands with you, in thus advancing the Interest of
uncontested Piety and Virtue, on the Ruins of Irreligion and Vice. Nay, I hope
that our thus Uniting in this eminent Service to the Cause of our Common Lord
and Master, will lay some Foundation of a happy Union of our Affections. I hope
we shall hereby be more fully convinced, how much more great and valuable those
things are, wherein we are happily agreed, then those wherein we yet differ;
And that the few differences in Opinion or Practice, which yet remain, should
no way obstruct that mutual unfeigned Love, which we should always bear to all
those that Love our Lord Jesus in sincerity. We are (Blessed be God) happily
united in the main Interest of Practical Holiness, and need little more toward
perfecting our Concord, then the making the great things of Christianity, which
we all own, the only Terms of our mutual Communion. But to return from this
Digression, I shall now add, That considering your Circumstances and Numbers, I
think that the great God has as remarkably owned and succeeded your diligent
attempts for Reformation here, as he has those of our Brethren in London. For,
besides the considerable progress you have made toward suppressing Lewdness,
and restraining the open Profanation of the Lord's Day, I am well assured that
there have been near 3000 Convictions, of such as have been Guilty of Cursing
and Swearing, since the Enacting the late Law against these detestable Vices.
And indeed, the success of your Endeavors is so remarkable in reference to
this last particular, that I think it is with great Satisfaction observed, and
acknowledged by all good Men. For that vile Language of Ashdod, or rather that
abominable Dialect of Hell, that used so constantly to grate our Ears whenever
we walked the Streets, is now comparatively, but seldom heard. That horrid
Impiety, that was before so loud and insolent, has now in a great measure stopped
it is mouth. So that the Number of offenders which seemed at first so
discouraging, begins very sensibly to decrease upon our hands. And I doubt not
you will find that manyof those difficulties, which at first view seemed
insuperable, will be conquered by a steady Resolution. And truly, what we have
already gained is a considerable step. We may hope that the Habits of Vice will
be gradually broke, when the ordinary Practice of it is so much refrained. And
we may hope, that it is cursed Contagion will be in a great measure stopped, when
the instances of it are comparatively rare, seldom appearing in Public View,
and not without great hazard of Discovery and Punishment. So that, the
Licentious Sinners of the Age, will be no longer hardened by the Commonness and
the Impunity of their Crimes.

Be not then afraid (my Brethren!) of encountering all the Opposition of a
Profane and Lewd Generation. For, let me tell you, That Vice, after all it is
empty Noise, is but a Sneaking and Cowardly Thing. It Is Votaries themselves,
are generally ashamed to own so vile a Cause. Whereas, the Cause of Piety and
Virtue, which we espouse, should inspire all it is Friends and Abettors, with a
Courage answerable to the Justice and Excellency of it. What is said of the
Devil himself, may be applied in some measure to his Ignoble Vassals; Resist
him, and he will flee from you. 4 James 7. And I hope, you have too great Zeal
and Resolution for the Cause of God, to be affrighted from it, by a few
threatening Words, or daunted with every appearance of Danger. Nay, I doubt not,
the Offenders themselves, if they would speak the truth, do in their
Consciences believe, that you are acted herein with a sincere Zeal for the
Glory of God, and the Interest of Religion; since you can have no prospect of
Worldly gain by it, but have a certain prospect of great Hazard and Toil. And
whatever language their present passion may suggest, if they are ever truly
reclaimed, they will applaud your Zeal, and thank you for your Fidelity. Go on
then, boldly to attack these Goliahs, these insolent Vices of the Age, that
have so long desy'd the God of Israel, and affronted his Sacred Authority and
Laws. It Is his blessed Cause you plead, and it is his Protection and Assistance
you may expect. He can Honor the most despised Instruments, to effect the most
Glorious Purposes of his Grace and make even Mountains of Difficulties, a Plain
before Zorobabel. Let me then bespeak, both Magistrates and Ministers, and
Private Christians, in the Words of God, by the Prophet Haggai, to those
employed in rebuilding the Temple; Yet now be strong, O Zorobabel, says the
Lord, and be strong, O Josedec, the Son of Joshua the High Priest, and be
strong all ye People of the Land, and Work, for I am with you, says the Lord
of Hosts. 2 Hag. 4. verse. And may your Language in compliance with this
encouraging Exhortation, be like that of the People to Nehemiah, when he told
'em, of the good Hand of God upon him, and of the King's Words which he had
spoken to him; They said, Let us Rise up and Build, and so they strengthened
their Hands for this good Work. 2 Neh. 18. And what do we know, but that this
Work of Reformation, which is but now as a Cloud, no bigger than a Man's Hand,
may by the Divine Blessing, spread and cover the whole Land. Your exemplary
Zeal and Activity in this City, may do much to excite the like in other parts
of the Kingdom. And we may hope, That Profaneness and Immorality will not long
stand their Ground, if once, both Magistrates and Ministers, and private
Christians, heartily join their Endeavors for the suppression of it.

VI. We may from this Passage, farther Observe, That our Reflections upon our
own Zeal and Fidelity, in such self-denying Services to the Interest and Cause
of God, will be sweet and Comfortable, and give us great Encouragement to hope
for God's Gracious Acceptance and Reward.

This we may clearly infer from Nehemiah's Prayer, upon the review of this
instance of his Pious Zeal. Remember me, O my God, for this also. He had
offered the like Petition before, on the like Occasion, Remember me, O my God,
for this, and wipe not out my good Deeds that I have done for thy House, and
for the Offices thereof, v. 14.

And hence it evidently appears, That, as he could in this Undertaking appeal
to God for the sincerity of his Intentions, as well as the goodness of his
Actions. So he looked back upon 'em with inward Serenity and Peace. He had the
reviving Testimony and Euge of his own Conscience, and thereby was raised to
the comfortable Hopes of God's Gracious Approbation, and of that Glorious
Recompense, which he has promised to all them that sincerely serve him. He
therefore prays, That God would regard this solid Proof of his sincere
Affection with a favorable Eye, and as it were, place it on Record, among
other Evidences of his Integrity toward him. See the like Prayer of good
Hezekiah. 38 Is. 3.

Let us then be careful, so to discharge this part of our Duty with Integrity,
That our Reflections thereon may be thus comfortable to us. Let us take care,
That in all our Attempts for Public Reformation, we act from truly Divine
Principles; from a just hatred of Sin, and profound esteem of the Laws of God;
from an unfeigned Regard to his Honor and Interest, from a hearty Zeal for the
Public Good, and from Charitable Inclinations toward the Offenders
themselves, being much more desirous of their being Reclaimed, then of their
being Punished, and urging the Execution of the Laws no farther, then is
requisite to attain the end of 'em; Viz. The Discouragement and Restraint of
these Vices. Nay, See that your Conduct in this matter be answerable to these
excellent Principles. Let not your Zeal in any Case, Transport you beyond the
bounds of the Law, to the least prejudice of any Man's Civil Liberties and
Rights. Use your utmost caution against prosecuting so good an End, by any
Irregular or unwarrantable Means. For nothing can more effectually wound your
Design, than your giving occasion for any just complaints of this kind.

But while you are Conscious to your selves, that you act from truly Pious
Motives, and in so regular a way, I doubt not you will find the Remembrance of
your Fidelity and Diligence in this great Work, Sweet and Refreshing. For no
Services we pay to God, do usually yield us such solid Comfort in the Review,
as those wherein we most sincerely aim at his Glory, and are carried on by a
fervent Love of him, in opposition to our worldly advantage and fleshly Ease.
Such instances of self-denying Obedience, wherein we make all lower Interests
of our own, stoop to the Superior, and more valuable Interest of God, are the
most clear and satisfying Evidences of our own Sincerity. And, it is these that
Raise us to the firmest persuasion of Divine Acceptance, and to the most lively
hope of a future Reward. And sure, the Acceptance and Approbation of the great
God, will infinitely countervail the censures and reproaches of blind and
prejudic't Men; and his glorious Recompense will infinitely outweigh all that
we can possibly Suffer from their Malice or furious Revenge. They may
studiously endeavor to misrepresent your actions and designs; But as it is to
the Eyes of your great Judge, that you are chiefly concerned to approve your
selves, so you may trust so liberal a Master for a bountiful Retribution.
Whereas I fear those that have the same opportunities and advantages with you
to be serviceable in a Design, wherein the honor of God is so highly
concerned, but refuse their concurrence in it, (either because they are loath
to take any pains in it, or loath to run any hazard by it) will one day find
their Consciences charge 'em with the guilt of wretched Neutrality and
Lukewarmness in the cause of God; and the review of it will render the thoughts
of their final account less comfortable to 'em O do not then to avoid the
displeasure of Men incurr the more terrible displeasure of the Great God, nor
forfeit his heavenly reward for fear of prejudicing your temporal Interest.

VII. We may from the last Clause of Nehemiah's, Petition farther observe, That
when we are engaged in the most eminent Service to God, and perform it with the
greatest Zeal and Fidelity; Yet we should be so far from being proud thereof,
that we should rather retain a humbling sense of those sinful Defects that have
attended it, which make us stand in great need of his abundant Mercy to Pardon
and Spare us.

Thus, Though Nehemiah appeals to God, as the Witness of his Integrity, in this
important Service, and implores him to remember him for it; yet he was so far
from imagining, that he had hereby merited any thing at his hands, that on the
contrary, in the abasing sense of his own manifold failures therein, he adds
this humble Request also, and spare me according to the greatness of thy Mercy.
And indeed, so far are we in point of Strict Justice, from deserving any thing
from the great God, that it is mere Mercy in him, to accept the best of our
defiled Services, and to pardon the sinful Imperfections that cleave to 'em.
And it is for that End, we stand in such absolute need of an attoning Mediator
with him. So little reason have we, for any High and self exalting thoughts, of
our own defective Obedience, which needs the blood of Sprinkling, to cleanse
away the Stains of it.

O let us then Learn, to imitate the Humility, as well as the Zeal and Courage
of good Nehemiah. Let neither our Diligence in this excellent Work, nor our
considerable Success in it, puff us up with overweening thoughts of our
selves. For there are manifold considerations that should abase us, and hide
pride from our Eyes. If there be any difference between us and profligate
sinners themselves, we must chiefly ascribe it to the distinguishing Grace of
God, It Is He that inspires us with Zeal and Resolution for so hazardous and
difficult a Work: It Is He puts an honor upon us, by giving us the opportunity
and advantage of being employed in it. It Is He crowns our weak Endeavors with
so unexpected success. But especially we should consider that we neither
perform this nor any other part of the Work assigned us, without great weakness
and imperfection, without manifold frailties and failings, and in so faulty a
manner, as needs infinite Mercy and Goodness to forgive our defects, and much
more to accept and reward our sincerity. So that we must after our purest
Services wash our Robes and make 'em white in the blood of the Lamb, 7 Rev. 14.
After all we have done, we must say as our Lord has taught us, That we are but
unproficable Servants that have only done that which was our duty to do. 17
Luke 10 v.

And now I shall conclude this Discourse with one general Remark concerning
this eminent Reformer Nehemiah, viz. That in the whole History of his
Transactions, we may see very conspicuous characters, not only of his signal
Piety, but of his universal Probity and Goodness. His whole life seems to have
been of a piece, most upright and unblameable. He was every way a bright
Example to the Age in all pious and virtuous Conversation. And such a man was
most proper for so glorious and so difficult an Undertaking.

And herein above all I would recommend him as a Pattern to those of you that
appear so active in this necessary Work of public Reformation. For this alone
can put honor upon your worthy Enterprise, and give general success to it.
For, should you be guilty of any of those Vices your selves which you convict
others of, this would render all your pretenses to Zeal for Reformation of
manners, the object of public Contempt and Indignation. Who would not in this
case upbraid you in the Language of the Apostle, Thou that say another
should not commit Adultery, Do thou commit Adultery? Thou that make thy
boast of the Law through breaking the Law dishonourest thou God? 2 Romans 22, 23.
Nay, this is not enough, your Conversation must not only be free from these
Vices, but from all other Instances of such known, and equally heinous
Immorality and Wickedness, even such as human Laws may not take cognizance of,
to Restrain and Punish. For if you, that will not Whore or Swear, or Profane
the Lord's Day, yet will Lie or Defraud, Grind and Oppress, etc. Who will not
be ready to Reproach your forwardness to Punish those other Sins, in the
Language of our Savior, Thou Hypocrite, first cast the beam out of thine own
Eye, and then shall thou see more clearly to cast the more out of thy Brothers
Eye. 7 Matthew. 5. v. Who can forbear to say, Physician heal thy self; First
strictly reform thy own life, before thou set up for a Reformer of the Age.
The Snuffers of the Sanctuary were to be of pure Gold. And their Light should
shine brightly in all good Works, who go about to reclaim others from their
Works of Darkness. In a word, Your abounding in all the fruits of Piety and
Holiness, Justice and Charity, Humility and Meekness, Sobriety and
Heavenliness, will be the highest Credit, and the best support to the excellent
Cause you are engaged in, and most effectually silence all Reproaches against
it. And indeed, the Cause you have espoused, is so truly honorable in it self,
so eminently conducive to the Glory of God, so highly acceptable to him, and
approved by all good Men, that I doubt not you may apply to your selves for
your Encouragement in prosecuting it, what God himself speaks to the Jews, when
they began to Rebuild his Temple, From this day I will bless you. 2 Hag. 19. v.
And I am truly persuaded, that his gracious Providence will give us occasion,
from these our sincere and vigorous attempts against Irreligion and Vice, to
Date, not only the sensible Revival of the Internal Interest of true Religion,
but also the Rising Prosperity and Glory of these Kingdoms. So that, by
becoming a Reformed, we shall become a Flourishing and Happy People.

FINIS.

