TRACTS Written By the Honorable Robert Boil, CONTAINING

New EXPERIMENTS, touching the Relation betwixt Flame and Air. And about
EXPLOSIONS.

An HYDROSTATICAL Discourse occasioned by some Objections of Dr. Henry More
against some Explications of New Experiments made by the Author of these
Tracts: To which is annex't, An Hydrostatical Letter dilucidating an Experiment
about a Way of Weighing Water in Water.

New Experiments,
Of the Positive or Relative Levity of Bodies under Water. Of the Air's Spring
on Bodies under Water. About the Differing Pressure of Heavy Solids and Fluids.


LONDON, Printed for Richard Davis, Bookseller in Oxon MDCLXXII.

Advertisement to the Book-binder.
SOme of these Tracts having been misplaced in the printing, the Book-binder is
desired to take care of placing the several Tracts in the order, as they stand
in the Title Page; as also to observe, in the binding, the Advertisement given
p. 131. immediately following after the Experiments about the Relation betwixt
Air and the Flamma vitalis of Animals.

NEW Experiments, Touching the Relation betwixt Flame and Air: And particularly
betwixt AIR, and the Flamma Vitalis of Animals.

To which are annexed

Two Attempts; the one, to produce Living Creatures in Vacuo Boyliano; the
other made upon Gnats in the same Vacuum.

THE PUBLISHER TO THE READER.
IT will, it is presumed, be altogether needless to preface any thing by way of
commendation to the following Tracts; they will certainly commend themselves by
their own worth to the Intelligent and Attentive Reader, who might have seen
them sooner if the Press had not detained them longer than was expected; since,
to the Publisher's knowledge, they were ready in the Year 1671. except the
Hydrostatical Discourse and the Explication of the Author's Experiment of
Weighing Water in Water, the former of which was finished in the beginning of
this Year 1672; though the latter could not be so till near the end of the same
Year, viz. the month of February English style, because the Book of Mr. George
Sinclair's Hydrostaticks, in which it is excepted against, came not, I think,
before that time to London, I am sure not to the view of the Honorable Author.
Farewell.

NEW EXPERIMENTS Touching the Relation betwixt Flame and Air, Sent in a Letter
To the Learned Publisher of the Philosophical Transactions.
SIR,
YOu may have observed as well as I, that since the publishing of the
Experiments I sent you, touching Respiration, diverse of our Learned men have
spent both Thoughts and Discourses in inquiring and disputing, Whether there
reside in the heart of Animals, such a fine and kindled, but mild, Substance,
as they call a Vital Flame, to whose preservation, as to that of other flames,
the Air, (especially as it is taken in, and expelled again by Respiration) is
necessary. This among other considerations makes me think it seasonable (though
many avocations make it inconvenient) to complete the performance of the
Promise I made you, by adding to the Experiments about Respiration, which your
commands have already obtained of me, those scattered Notes, that I have been
able to pick up about the Relation betwixt Flame and Air: And though, I
confess, they are very much inferior in number to the Trials about Respiration;
and that in making them it was not so much my Design to complete an entire and
distinct Tract, though but a small one, of such Experiments, as to gratify my
own curiosity in the examining of a Paradox or two I had been writing about
Flame; yet the nobleness of the Question now under debate, and their pertinenoy
to it, will possibly keep them, as few as they are, from being useless. And
that also they may be the better kept from being unwelcome, I have chosen to
make my self a Relater of matters of fact, without engaging with either of the
Litigant parties in a Controversy, wherein I am the less tempted to be
partial, because I have not formerly declared my opinion about it, and at
present, I see, on either side, Persons for whom I have no small respect and
kindness.

And now, Sir, that you may not expect in the following Papers such a number
and variety of Experiments as I might perhaps be able to present you with, on
some more tractable subject; I shall briefly mention to you some of the chief
difficulties I met with in the making of these; which I do the rather, that, if
you and your ingenious friends have a mind to prosecute such Trials, you may
not be surprised with the difficulties I have met with; but provide at least
against those foreseen ones, by which you will scarce fail to be encountered.

I shall then inform you, that the ensuing experiments were rendered uneasy and
troublesome to me by this; that some of them could not be conveniently done at
all seasons of the year, nor in any season in all weathers; but must be made
not only in the day time, but in Sunshine days. You will easily ghess, that I
speak of those experiments, that are to be made by the help of a Burning-glass,
casting the reflected or refracted beams of the Sun upon the combustible matter
placed in the exhausted Receiver: For, by reason of the interposition of so
thick a Glass, whereby many of the incident beams of Light are reflected, and
others inconveniently refracted; there is ordinarily requisite a clear day, and
a competent height of the Sun above the Horizon; and sometimes also a
convenient time of the year; to bring such experiments, as we were speaking of,
to a fair Trial. Not to take notice, that in such attempts there usually
intervene circumstantial difficulties, not so easy to be foreseen: And it not
being Summer when I had occasion to make the following Experiments, I could
make but very few with the Sunbeams; besides that there are diverse others
which are not that way to be made so conveniently, if at all, as by the help of
the Fire.

But though the Trials of this second sort had their conveniences, in regard
they might be made in any weather, and as well by night, as day; yet they were
not unattended with peculiar inconveniences: some of which you will easily
discern by the mention of them, that was necessary to be made in some of the
relations themselves. And, besides more particular and emergent difficulties,
there was this in general, that rendered these Experiments troublesome; that,
whether I made them in larger Receivers, or in small, or in middle-sized ones,
each of these cases had its inconveniences: For, very large Receivers, besides
that 'twas very toilsome and tedious to empty them of Air, required so much
time for the exhaustion, that too frequently, by that time the Operator had
done pumping, the included Iron, or other heated body, was grown too cold to
perform the desired effect: And if the Receiver were not considerably large,
then the red-hot Iron, or other included body that was to burn the combustible
matter, would much endanger the breaking of the overheated Glass, and not
afford room enough for some Phenomenon to be fairly exhibited in; and besides
create another difficulty, to which we found middle-sized Receivers also
obnoxious: For, several times when the Experiment required an intense heat
within the Receiver, then (especially if some casual obstacle hindered the
quick exhaustion) the heat of the ignited Iron, or some such other included
body, would so melt or soften the Cement, that fastened the Receiver to the
Engine, that, when the Glass was brought to be well exhausted, and sometimes
also before, the external air would by its pressure and fluidity squeeze or
thrust in somewhere or other the yielding Cement, and thereby cause in the
Instrument a leak, that would much incommodate us, if not reduce us to begin
the Experiment again, in so much that for some trials we were fain to provide a
Cement on purpose: the least fusible, that we used on other occasions, being
yet found too fusible on these.

Nor were those, I have already mentioned, the only difficulties and
impediments I met with in making experiments about Flame and Air; but I shall
not here trouble you with them in this place, where it may suffice for me to
have mentioned those that are of a more general nature, and are like the most
frequently to occurr.

But though I declined to name any other to you, than the foregoing
difficulties in making the following Experiments; yet I must not omit to take
notice of one that may occurr to you about judging of them. For, in those
trials that require to have an ignited Iron or any such thing included in the
Receiver, it would usually happen, that so much heat would rarifie the Air shut
up in the Mercurial Gage, and consequently enable it to depress the Mercury,
that lies under it, far beneath the mark it would have staid at upon the mere
account of so much ambient Air pumped out: This would happen, I say, before the
heated Receiver was well exhausted; so that, if one be not aware of this,
'twill be obvious, by looking on the Gage, to conclude the Receiver to be well
emptied, before it really is so. And therefore the safest way in these cases
is, to continue to pump (without trusting to the ordinary marks) till you see
that the Mercury will be no further depressed in the sealed leg of the Gage;
though otherwise, by concurring signs, one that is versed in those trials may
well enough judge when he needs to pump no longer.

But perhaps you will here demand, whether by our Engine we can competently
withdraw the Air out of a Receiver; or whether at least that may not be much
better done by the help of Quicksilver, after the manner of the Torricellian
Experiment, in regard that ponderous liquor frees the glass, it deserts, from
all the Air at once, and exactly hinders the regress of it.

In answer whereunto, I hope you do not expect, that I should contend for a
favourabler judgment of the Engine, I employ, than the Virtuosi (as well
Foreign as English) have been pleased to pass on it already: And therefore, to
tell you freely my thoughts, about the main part of the proposed Question, I
shall readily avow to you, that I think, there may be experiments (such as some
of those where the included body need be but small, and where the being
suddenly produced is chiefly desired in the effect,) wherein, by the help of
Quicksilver, the exhaustion of the Air may be dispatched with greater celerity,
and consequently make the effect be more conspicuous, than, by our ordinary way
of trying, it would be in our Engine; since the fall of the Mercury does, as
the objection intimates, produce a Vacuum (in our sense of that word) very
nimbly, whereby the Expansion of the Air is presently effected, and the Aereal
particles, harbored in the pores of any body placed in this deserted cavity,
will thereby have opportunity more suddenly to expand themselves. But, on the
other side, I might answer in general, that when I have particular occasions to
dispatch the exhaustion of the Air, I can very much hasten it, by barely
lessening, as I have several times done, the capacity of the Receiver; insomuch
that I have sometimes employed so small an one, that in half a minute, or much
less, after it was fitted on, we could considerably exhaust it, and thereby
produce Phenomenon exceeding conspicuous. And as to the Experiments of this
little Tract in particular, it may be said, that, not to mention the
troublesomness, and other inconveniences of needing to employ such an unwieldy
weight of Mercury, you will easily find, by the Phenomenon of diverse of the
ensuing trials, that most of them cannot be with any convenience, and some of
them not at all, made in the Torricellian tubes. As for the ground of the
Objection, that the Air cannot be so well drawn out by our way, as by the
subsiding of the Mercury; though you may think that very clear, yet one, that
were very jealous of the Reputation of the instrument I employ, may perhaps
reasonably enough question it. For, the Vacuum, that is produced in the
Torricellian Experiment, as it is made all at once, so it is made once for all;
and therefore if there were any Aereal particles lurking in the Mercury (as
there will be pretty store, if the quantity of that liquor be great enough to
make a considerable Vacuum; which if it be not, it will be too small for very
many of our trials;) they will remain in the deserted cavity at the top of the
Glass, and, by their expansion there, much hinder the full operation of an
ambient Vacuum upon the bodies placed in it. Befides that almost all such
bodies, if they be dry, will be so incongruous to Mercury (which scarce sticks
to any consistent bodies but metals,) that probably there will be no small
number of aereal corpuscles intercepted between the Mercury and those surfaces,
to which it does not closely adhere: which aerie corpuscles, when the subsiding
Mercury deserts them, will be left to increase the number of those, that, (as
we were saying) will emerge from the Mercury; from which, as also from the
pores of the included bodies, will perhaps arise diverse new ones from time to
time for a pretty while after. And in case the Vacuum be made by a Cylinder of
two or three and thirty foot of water, (as for some experiments, that have been
tried in France and Italy, has been done) the emersion of bubles may last a
long time, as may be gathered from some observations of mine elsewhere related.

On the contrary, in our Engine, though when the Receivers are not very small,
they are more slowly emptied; yet in recompense, we may continue the pumping
out of the Air as long, and renew it in the same Experiment as often as we
think fit: So that, if we perceive, that, after the first exhaustion of the
Glass, there happen any aereal particles to extricate themselves successively
out of the included body, we can, by resuming the Pump from time to time,
whenever need requires, free the Vacuum from these also; which, in some cases,
I have found to be longer and more copiously emitted by the included bodies,
than any thing but jealous trials could have convinced me of. And to confirm
what I have been saying by something Historical, I shall add; That though the
excellent Florentine Academians are thought to have prosecuted the Experiments
about the Vacuum made with Mercury the furthest of any; yet some eminent
members of that Illustrious Society were pleased to confess to me, that they
never were able by the help of Mercury, to bring a Glass-buble, sealed up with
Air in it, to burst of it self by the withdrawing of the external Air; which
yet I have often done with the Engine I employ, and convinced them, that I
could do so by doing it in their presence.

You will, perhaps, think it somewhat strange, to find, that I set down some of
the following Narratives in such a way, as does not express me sollicitous to
ascribe and vindicate to the Air so absolute and equal a necessity to the
production and conservation of all Flames, as diverse Learned men have concluded
from my former Experiments. But I, that am content to be kind to the Air, but
not partial, shall not scruple to declare to you, that, as much as some may
think me beholden to the Air for any discoveries of it self, it may have
vouchsafed me; yet, I think, a natural, as well as a civil Historian, does, in
his accounts of matters of fact, owe more to Truth than to Gratitude it self.
And though, wherever the Air can challenge a clear, or at least a probable
interest in a Phenomenon, I am not only disposed, but glad to do it right; yet
I would not easily assert to it a larger Jurisdiction than I find Nature to
have assigned it; especially since (without partiality) that, I presume, may be
shown to be very large and considerable, and perhaps to reach to many things,
wherewith men seem not to have yet taken notice that it has any thing to do at
all.

What has been hitherto said, will not, I hope, seem impertinent or useless,
whenever you shall fall upon the actual making of such Experiments as you are
about to read. But I fear, that to add any thing more, (which were not
difficult for me to do to the preliminary part of this small Tract) would make
it too disproportionate to the historical; From which I shall therefore no
longer detain you.

THE FIRST TITLE.

OF THE DIFFICULTY OF PRODVCING FLAME WITHOUT AIR.

THE FIRST TITLE. Of the Difficulty of Producing FLAME without AIR.
EXPERIMENT I. A way of kindling Brimstone in vacuo Boyliano unsuccessfully
tried.
WE took a small earthen melting Pot, of an almost Cylindrical figure, and well
glazed (when it was first baked) by the heat; and into this we put a small
cylinder of Iron of about an inch in thickness, and half as much more in
Diameter, made red hot in the fire; and having hastily pumped out the Air, to
prevent the breaking of the Glass; when this vessel seemed to be well emptied,
we let down, by a turning key, a piece of Paper, wherein was put a convenient
quantity of flower of Brimstone, under which the iron had been carefully
placed; so that, being let down, it might fall upon the heated metal, which as
soon as it came to do, that vehement heat did, as we expected, presently
destroy the contiguous paper; whence the included Sulphur fell immediately upon
the iron, whose upper part was a little concave, that it might contain the
flowers when melted. But all the heat of the iron, though it made the Paper and
Sulphur smoke, would not actually kindle either of them that we could perceive.

EXPER. II. An ineffectual attempt to kindle Sulphur in our Vacuum another way.
ANother way I thought of to examine the inflammability of Sulphur without Air;
which, though it may prove somewhat hazardous to put it in practice, I resolved
to try, and did so after the following manner:

Into a Glass-buble of a convenient size, and furnished with a neck fit for our
purpose, we put a little flower of Brimstone (as likely to be more pure and
inflammable than common Sulphur;) and having exhausted the Glass, and secured
it against the return of the Air, we laid it upon burning coals, where it did
not take fire, but rise all to the opposite part of the glass, in the form of a
fine powder; and that part being turned downward and laid on coals, the
Brimstone, without kindling, rose again in the form of an expanded substance,
which (being removed from the fire) was, for the most part, transparent, not
unlike a yellow varnish.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THough these unsuccessful attempts to kindle Sulphur in our exhausted
Receivers, were made more discouraging by some more, that were made another
way; yet judging that last way to be rational enough, we persisted somewhat
obstinately in our endeavors, and conjecturing that there might be some
unperceived difference between Minerals, that do all of them pass, and are sold
for common Sulphur, I made trial, according to the way hereafter to be
mentioned, with another parcel of brimstone, which differed not so much from
the former, as to make it worth while to set down a description of it, that
probably would not be useful.

But in this place, it may suffice to have given a general intimation of the
possibility of the thing. The proof of it you will meet with under the third
Title, when I come to tell you what use I endeavored to make of our
sulphurous Flames.

EXPER. III. Showing the efficacy of Air in the production of Flame, without
any actually flaming or burning body.
HAving hitherto examined by the presence of the Air, what interest it has in
kindling of Flame; it will not be impertinent to add an Experiment or two, that
we tried to show the same interest of the Air by the effects of its admission
into our Vacuum. For I thought, it might reasonably be supposed, that if such
dispositions were introduced into a body, as that there should not appear any
thing wanting to turn it into Flame but the presence of the Air, an actual
accension of that body might be produced by the admitted Air, without the
intervention of any actual Flame, or Fire, or even heated substance; the
warrantableness of which supposition may be judged by the two following
Experiments.

When we had made the Experiment, ere long to be related in its due place,
(viz. Title II. Exper. the 2d) to examine the presumption we had, that even
when the Iron was not hot enough to keep the melted Brimstone in such a heat,
as was requisite to make it burn without Air, or with very little, it would yet
be hot enough to kindle the Sulphur, if the Air had access to it: To examine
this (I say) we made two or three several Trials, and found by them, that if
some little while after the flame was extinguished, the Receiver were removed,
the Sulphur would presently take fire again, and flame as vigorously as before.
But I thought it might without absurdity be doubted, whether or no the agency
of the Air in the production of the flame might not be somewhat less than these
trials would persuade; because that, by taking off the Receiver, the Sulphur
was not only exposed to fresh Air, but also advantaged with a free scope for
the avolation of those fumes, which in a close Vessel might be presumed to have
been unfriendly to the Flame.

How far this doubt may, and how far it should, be admitted, we may be assisted
to discern by the subjoyned experiment, though made in great part for another
purpose; which you will perceive by the beginning of the Memorial I made of it,
that runs thus.

EXPER. IV. A differing Experiment to the same purpose with the former.
HAving a mind to try, at how great a degree of rarefaction of the Air it was
possible to make Sulphur flame by the assistance of an adventitious heat, we
caused such an experiment as the above mentioned to be reiterated, and the
pumping to be continued for some time after the flame of the melted flowers of
Brimstone appeared to be quite extinguished, and the Receiver was judged by
those that managed the Pump (and that upon probable signs) to be very well
exhausted. Then, without stirring the Receiver, we let in at the stop-cock very
warily a little Air, upon which we could perceive, though not a constant flame,
yet diverse little flashes, as it were, which disclosed themselves by their blew
color to be sulphurous flames; and yet the Air that had sufficed to re-kindle
the Sulphur, was so little, that two exsuctions more drew it out again, and
quite deprived us of the mentioned flashes. And when a little Air was
cautiously let in again at the stopcock, the like flashes began again to
appear, which upon two exuctions more did again quite vanish, though, upon the
letting in a little fresh Air the third time, they did once more reappear.

Whether and how far such experiments as these may conduce to explicate what is
related of Fires suddenly appearing in long undisclosed Vaults or Caves to
those that first broke into them, I may perchance elsewhere consider; but shall
not here inquire, especially being not yet fully satisfied of the truth of the
matter of fact.

EXPER. V. About an endeavor to fire Gunpowder in vacuo with the Sunbeams.
Whatever has been hitherto delivered, will not, I presume, make it
unreasonable to enquire, whether, what interest soever the Air appears to have
in the production of those flames that are to last for some time, there may not
easily be produced a momentany flame or flash without any assistance from the
Air. Wherefore I employed some endeavors to discover, whether there were the
same need of Air to the going off of Gunpowder, as to the inflammation of other
bodies. And though my first attempt of this nature being unprosperous, it was
concluded by the Learned of the bystanders, that I should never be able to
make a successful one to kindle Gunpowder in an exhausted Receiver; yet this
did not hinder me from prosecuting a design, for whose feasibility I
considered, that it might be alleged a priori (as they use to speak) that
Brimstone, which is one of the ingredients of Gunpowder, appears by several
trials to be sometimes capable of accension in our Vacuum, and therefore
probably may kindle the rest. But how far the firing of Powder, without the
help of Air, is possible, will be best judged by the experiments you will meet
with under the third Title: And how far it is more difficult to be kindled in
our exhausted Receivers, than in the open air (which is an inquiry proper for
this place) may be guessed by the subjoined trial; which, though it were made
many years since (in the year 1660.) before we had devised the Mercurial Gage,
to examine how well the Receiver was exhausted, I shall yet afford it a room in
this place, because 'twas made in Summer by the help of a Burning-glass, which
I could not employ to purpose in the winter-season, wherein the two following
Trials were made.

To give you then some account of that part of the Experiment, which concerns
our present inquiry, I will subjoyn a transcript of what I find registered about
it; which is to this purpose, and almost in these words: That, having
conveniently placed three or four grains of Gunpowder in the cavity of our
Receiver, and having carefully drawn out the Air, we cast the Sunbeams, united
by a good Burning-glass, upon the powder, and kept them there a pretty while to
little purpose; till at length the Powder, instead of taking fire, smoking
only, and melting like a metal; those Spectators, that were of another opinion
than I was yet convinced of, would have me leave off. The further event of such
trials more fully prosecuted you will find under the third Title: All that will
be pertinent to be here added being, that the newly recited experiment was not
the single one, we made about that time, that discovered a great indisposition
even in Gunpowder to be fired in our Vacuum.

EXPER. VI. An attempt to fire Gunpowder in vacuo, by means of a hot Iron.
WE took (by weight) what we judged a convenient quantity of Gunpowder, that
was extraordinarily strong and well made, and having in our Receiver, that was
capable of holding about 16 pound of water, placed the formerly mentioned Iron
first heated red-hot, when the Air appeared by the Mercurial Gage to have been
diligently pumped out, we let down, by help of the turning Key, a small piece
of thin Paper, wherein the Powder had been put, till we saw it reached the
plate, by whose heat we hoped the Paper would be destroyed, and the Powder made
to go off. But though both the one and the other had been purposely well dried
near the fire, before they were put into the Receiver; the desired explosion of
the Powder did not ensue. Yet there appeared upon the iron-plate a pretty broad
blew flame, like that of brimstone (whence 'twas judged to be the Sulphurous
ingredient of the Gunpowder that was kindled) which lasted so very long as we
could not but wonder at it. But at length the Powder not going off, and the
still decaying heat of the iron forbidding us to wait any longer, we thought
fit to take off the Receiver, and found (as we expected) that the Paper
contiguous to the Iron, was, in part, destroyed by its heat; but most of the
grains of the Powder seemed not altered, and were found disposed enough to be
fired, notwithstanding the consumption of the brimstone, that had burned away.

APPENDIX.
TO confirm the foregoing Experiment, by showing how great a disposition to
take fire there may be in Gunpowder, that yet would not do so without Air, I
shall subjoyn this observation:

Having reiterated the newly mentioned Experiment after the like manner, and
with the same Receiver, and Iron-plate, as formerly, we did not find any
explosion to be made for so long a time, that, thinking it in vain to wait any
farther, we let in the Air, which might perhaps, by help of the remaining heat
of the iron, procure the operation we at first desired. The event was; that
after nothing had insued for a good while, and we scarce thought, that such a
thing would happen; the Powder suddenly went off with a great flash, and so
shook the Receiver that was yet standing on the Engine, as to endanger the
throwing of it down. Which circumstance I mention, to give you a caution that
may prove useful, in case you try in close vessels experiments with Gunpowder;
since if they be not warily managed, they may sometimes (as I have had occasion
to observe) prove dangerous enough; which will be the better discerned, if I
add, that the Powder, that had this operation on a Receiver (large enough to
contain two Gallons of liquor) was weighed before it was put in, and amounted
but to one grain, (though a greater quantity might perhaps have been well
enough ventured upon, if it had been but common Gunpowder.)

EXPER. VII. Reciting another way, whereby the firing of Gunpowder in vacuo
Boyliano was attempted.
TO diversifie our ways of examining the indisposedness of Gunpowder to be
fired in our Vacuum, we thought fit to add to the foregoing Trials that which
follows:

Into a pretty large and strong Glass-buble, we put a few small corns of
Gunpowder, and having carefully exhausted it, and secured it against the return
of the Air, we put it upon a pretty quantity of Live-coals superficially
covered with Ashes: By whose heat the sulphurous ingredient of the Powder was
in part kindled, and burned blew for a pretty while, and with a flame
considerably great (in proportion to the Powder;) upon whose ceasing, the
Powder, which, when all was done, did not take fire, appeared to have sent up,
besides the flame, a pretty deal of sulphurous sublimate, that stuck to the
upper part of the Glass, and being held against a Candle, we caused to be
brought in, (for the Experiment had been purposely made in a dark place) it
exhibited diverse vivid colors like those of the Rainbow.

EXPER. VIII. About a trial made to fire Gunpowder in our Vacuum by the help of
Sparks.
THough, in the fourteenth of the long since published Physico-Mechanical
Experiments, there is recited a trial made about kindling of Gunpowder with a
Pistol; yet I shall not forbear to subjoyn the ensuing account, partly because
the Receiver we then employed, being about four times, if I mis-remember not,
as big as that we last made use of, 'twas very difficult to exhaust the one so
well as the other; and partly because we wanted some accommodations, with which
we since furnished our selves, and (having not then devised the Mercurial Gage
we employed in the making this last Experiment) we could not then judge so
well, as we since could, of the degrees to which the Receiver was emptied. And
therefore, when in the Relation of that fourteenth trial there is mention made
of one attempt that did succeed, among diverse that did not; there is toward
the close an intimation given, That in spite of the great Rarefaction that had
been made in the Air, there might yet be some little portion of it remaining in
the Receiver. I proceed then to the promised Relation, which I find thus set
down:

To prosecute the design of the foregoing Experiment by a way somewhat
differing from those hitherto mentioned; we made, though not without
difficulty, the ensuing trial; one of whose scopes you will find intimated at
the close of the Relation.

We took a small and very short Pistol, and having well fastened it with
strings to a great weight, that was placed upon the iron-plate of our Engine,
we drew up the cock, and prim'd the pan with dry Powder; then over both the
weight and Pistol we whelmed a Receiver, capable of containing two Gallons of
liquor, and having carefully cemented it on, we caused the Air to be diligently
pumped out; having before put in a Mercurial Gage to help us to discern when it
was exhausted. Lastly, ordering the Pump to be plied in the mean while, for
fear some Air should steal in, before the trial was completed, we did, by the
motion of the turning key, shorten a string that was tied both to it and the
trigger of the Pistol, by which means we did as much as we could toward the
firing of the powder in the pan; but though the pan were made to fly open, yet
the powder did not go off: whereupon letting in the Air, and cocking the Pistol
again without taking it off the weight it was tied to before, we drew out a
little Air, to be sure that the Receiver was closely cemented on, (which care
we took in reference to another Experiment;) and then letting in the Air at the
top of the Receiver, and stopping it in with the turning key, we did, by the
help of that key, draw aside the trigger again; whereupon, though there had
been no new Powder put into the Pan, nor any left in it, but only some little
that remained after the late trial; yet that little readily took fire and
flashed in the pan; which made it the more probable, that in the former trial
sparks of fire had been struck out by the collision of the Flint and Steel:
which was the more credible, because in an other trial, made the same hour in
the same exhausted Receiver, two of the assistants plainly saw a spark or two
fly out upon the falling of the Cock, though I, that chanced to stand in an
inconvenient place, did not then perceive it. But afterward, having caused the
Experiment for my fuller satisfaction to be repeated, I freed my self from need
of trusting others eyes: So that it appears, that, notwithstanding the great
indisposition of Gunpowder it self to be reduced into flame in our Vacuum; yet
even solid matter is not incapable of being ignited there, if it be put into a
motion sufficiently vehement.

If this Experiment had not been so very troublesome to make, I should have
been invited to reiterate it, because a not contemptible scruple may be
prevented, if the trial can be made to succeed, in regard that the going off of
the whole Gunpowder, by the falling of a spark or two only upon two or three of
its grains, would argue, that the accension of the rest was made by the
propagation of flame from the kindled grains to the rest; so small a portion of
ignited and suddenly vanishing matter, as is to be found in a spark or two,
being not likely to be able in so very short a time to impart a Vehement, or so
much as a Sensible, heat, to the whole aggregate of grains, or at least a great
part of them, as the focus of a Burning-glass, held long enough upon them to
make them melt, may well be supposed to do.

EXPER. IX. Two ways of making Aurum fulminans go off in our exhausted Receiver.
BEcause it is wont to be supposed (how justly I here dispute not,) that Aurum
Fulminans, as the Chemists call it, is much of the nature of Gunpowder, though
by vast odds stronger than it; I thought it not unfit to make trial, whether it
could be made to go off in our exhausted Receiver; and accordingly, about the
time that the other Experiment of firing Gunpowder by the Sunbeams was made,
we also made trial of this; and that, as I remember, in the same Receiver, and
with the same Burning-glass. The event was; that, though the Air had been
pumped out, the concentrated beams of the Sun made the Aurum fulminans go off,
and violently scatter about the cavity of the Receiver a yellowish dust or
powder, which other trials in the free Air made us look upon as particles of
the Gold, that was the main ingredient of this odd composition.

This Experiment we reiterated a good while after in another place, and with
other vessels, and yet with the like success.

But in regard these trials being made by the united Sunbeams, 'twas
unavoidable that our eyes would be beforehand affected with the vivid
impressions of so glaring a light; it seemed not safe to determine, by the bare
going off, or shattering of the Aurum fulminans, whether or no it afforded any
flame or light upon its explosion: For, as we could not be sure of the
affirmative, because our eyes could not discern any momentany flame or flash;
so it seemed not safe to conclude the negative: since, though there had been
such a flame, yet, if it had not been strong, it would not have been sensible
to our eyes, whilst preaffected by a powerful Light. Wherefore we resolved to
make this trial in the night with an Iron heated, but not candent, (that its
light might not eclipse that which the powder might afford;) and having, after
the manner already often recited, exhausted a pretty large Receiver, and let
down by a string half a quarter of a grain (by weight) of good Aurum fulminans
of our own preparing, loosely tied in a little piece of thin paper, (which
paper, former trials to another purpose kept us from fearing that no hotter an
iron, than ours then was, would kindle,) we found, as we expected, that after
the powder had lain long enough upon the iron to be thoroughly heated, it went
off all together, and, as the bystanders affirmed, with a flash: but my face
being accidentally turned to remove a Light that I feared might disturb us, I
could not see the flash my self, and therefore caused the Experiment to be made
once more, to ground my narrative upon my own observation: which quickly
assured me, that the Luminous flash, produced upon the explosion, was not only
sensible, but considerable.

THE SECOND TITLE.

OF THE DIFFICULTY OF PRESERVING FLAME WITHOUT AIR.

Of the Difficulty of Preserving Flame without Air.
SInce it is generally, and in most cases justly, esteemed to be more easy to
preserve Flame in a body that is already actually kindled, than to produce it
there at first; we thought fit to try, whether at least bodies already burning
might not be kept in that state without the concurrence of Air. And though in
some of our formerly published Physico-Mechanical experiments it happened, that
actual Flame would scarce last a minute or two in our large Pneumatical
Receiver; yet because it seemed not improbable, that Mineral bodies once
kindled might afford a vigorous and very durable flame; we thought fit to
devise and make the following trials: Whence probably we might receive some new
informations about the Diversities, and some other Phenomenon of Flame, and the
various degrees, wherein the Air is necessary or helpful to them.

EXPER. I. Reciting an attempt to preserve the flame of Brimstone without Air.
WE put upon a thick metalline place a convenient quantity of flowers of
Sulphur; and having kindled them in the Air, we nimbly conveyed them into a
Receiver, and made haste to pump out some of the included Air, partly for other
reasons, and partly that the cavity of the Receiver might be the sooner freed
from smoke, which would, if plentiful, both injure the flame, and hinder our
sight. As soon as the Pump began to be plied, or presently after, the flame
appeared to be sensibly decayed, and continued to be lessened at every
exsuction of the Air; and in effect, it expired before the Air was quite drawn
out. Nor did it, upon the early removal of the Receiver, do any more than
afford, for a very little while, somewhat more of smoke in the open Air, than
it appeared to do before.

The reiteration of this Experiment, presently after, afforded us nothing new,
worth mentioning in this place.

EXPER. II. Relating a Trial about the Duration of the flame of Sulphur in
vacuo Boyliano.
TO vary a little the foregoing Experiment, and try to save some moments of
time, which on these occasions is to be husbanded with the utmost care; having
provided a Cylinder of iron, larger than the former, that it might by its bulk,
being once heated, both contribute to the accension of the Sulphur, and to the
lasting of its flame, we made a trial, that I find registered to this effect:

We took a pretty big lump of Brimstone, and tied it to the turningkey; and
having got what else was necessary in a readiness, we caused the iron-plate to
be hastily brought red-hot from the fire, and put upon a Pedestal, that the
flame might be the more conspicuous; and, having nimbly cemented on the
Receiver, we speedily let down the suspended Brimstone till it rested upon the
redhot iron, by which being kindled, it sent up a great flame with copious
fumes, which hindered us not from plying the Pump, till we had, as we
conjectured, emptied the Receiver; which we could not do without withdrawing
together with the Air much sulphurous smoke (that was offensive enough both to
the eyes and nostrils.) But notwithstanding this pumping out of the Air, though
the flame did seem gradually to be somewhat impaired; yet it manifestly
continued burning much longer, than by the short duration of other flames in
our Receivers (when diligence is used to withdraw the Air from them) one could
have expected. And especially one time, (for the experiment was made more than
once) the flame lasted till the Receiver was judged to be well exhausted; and
some thought it did so survive the exhaustion, that it went not out so much for
want of Air, as Fuel; the Brimstone appearing, when we took off the Receiver,
either to have been consumed by the fire that fed on it, or to have casually
run off from the Iron, whose heat had kept it constantly melted.

In case you should have a mind to prosecute Experiments of the nature of this
and the precedent, it may not prove useless, if I intimate to you the following
Advertisements. 1. For the red-hot iron above mentioned we thought it not amiss
to provide, instead of the melting-pot employed in the first experiment, a
Pedestal (if I may so call it) made of a lump of dried Tobacco-pipe-clay, that
the vehement heat of the iron might neither fill the Receiver with the smoke of
what it leaned on, nor injure the Engine, if it should rest immediately upon
that: And this Pedestal should be so placed, that the iron may be as far, as
you can, from the sides of the Receiver, which else the excessive heat would
endanger.

2. To the abovementioned concave iron, that was to receive the Brimstone, we
did for some occasions cause to be fitted a thick unequal piece of iron, shaped
almost like a flattish Button; which was not to be used constantly, but upon
occasion, that, being laid red-hot over the melted Brimstone, it might increase
the heat, and keep the flame from having so broad a superficies, whereby it
would consume its fuel too fast.

3. We sometimes thought it expedient, for the clearer discerning of what
should happen in the Receiver, to make the experiment by night, and remove the
Candles when we were just about to pump, presuming that the flame would be
conspicuous enough by its own light; as indeed we found it to be, though its
Light were but dimm, considering the greatness of the flame; whose color,
though it did not quite lose its wonted blewishness, seemed yet to have
received a great and somewhat odd alteration.

4. There is one great inconvenience, scarce avoidable in this Experiment, viz.
that the fumes ascending very copiously, do quickly much darken the Receiver,
and (if the trial be long continued) line it with a kind of flower of
Brimstone, which obscures it much more (and therefore ought to be carefully
wiped away whenever the Receiver is taken off;) upon which account you will
not, I presume, wonder, if you shall find the Phenomenon of these Experiments
not always to be the very same with what you meet with in this paper: since, as
it is very possible that we may not have been able to observe things so
accurately by reason of the newly mentioned fumes and flowers; so it is not
impossible, that the difference (if there shall be any) of other men's
Observations from ours should proceed from the same cause.

Before we pass from this second Experiment, it will not be amiss to take
notice, that though the flames of Brimstone may be allowed to be somewhat more
durable than the flames of Vegetables are wont to be; yet it is not safe to
conclude, that 'twas merely upon the account of their native vigor, that the
flames above mentioned lasted so long in our Receiver.

For we seemed to observe, that there was requisite a very intense heat of the
Iron to make the Sulphur capable of flaming on it, when any considerable
proportion of Air was withdrawn. For which reason it seems expedient, according
to what I lately intimated, that the Iron, that is to keep it melted, be of a
good thickness, that it may the longer retain a competent heat; and we thought,
it contributed to the successfullest trials we made, that in them we used,
besides the concave iron, the unequal one mentioned in the second Note.

EXPER. III. Of the lasting of the flame of a Metalline substance in the same
Vacuum.
THose Sulphurs that Chemists call Metalline, being supposed by many to be of a
much more fixed nature than common Sulphur, and it being indeed probable
enough, that in them good store of very minute particles are crowded together,
I thought fit to try, whether a body, wherein a vulgar Chemist would think the
Sulphur of a metal to be the main ingredient, would afford in our Vacuum, a
more vigorous or lasting flame than that of common Sulphur. And though I will
not here trouble you with my particular scruples about the Chemists doctrine
concerning metalline Sulphurs, nor with the grounds on which I devised the
following inflammable solution of Mars, (for I do not now give it a more
determinate name) which some Chemists will not perhaps dislike; I shall here
annex the ensuing transcript of the Trial it self.

Having provided a saline Spirit, which by an uncommon way of preparation was
made exceeding sharp and piercing, we put into a vial, capable of containing
three or four ounces of water, a convenient quantity of filings of Steel, which
were not such as are commonly sold in shops to Chemists and Apothecaries,
(those being usually not free enough from rust;) but such as I had a while
before caused to be purposely filled off from a piece of good steel. This
metalline powder being moistn'd in the viol with a little of the menstruum, was
afterward drenched with more; whereupon the mixture grew very hot, and belched
up copious and stinking fumes; which whether they consisted altogether of the
vol tile sulphur of the Mars, or of metalline steams participating of a
sulphurous nature, and joined with the saline exhalations of the menstruum, is
not necessary to be here discussed. But whencesoever this stinking smoke
proceeded, so inflammable it was, that upon the approach of a lighted candle to
it, it would readily enough take fire, and burn with a bluish and somewhat
greenish flame at the mouth of the viol for a good while together; and that,
though with little light, yet with more strength than one would easily suspect.

This flaming Viol therefore we conveyed into a Receiver, which he, who used
to manage the Pump, affirmed that about six exsuctions would exhaust. And the
Receiver being well cemented on, upon the first suck the flame suddenly
appeared four or five times as great as before; which I ascribed to this, That,
upon the withdrawing of the Air, and consequently the weakening of its pressure,
great store of bubbles were produced in the menstruum, which breaking could not
but supply the neck of the Viol with store of inflammable steams, which (as we
thought) took not fire without some noise; upon the second exsuction of the Air
the flame blazed out as before, and so it likewise did upon the third
exsuction, but after that it went out; nor could we re-kindle any fire by
hastily removing the Receiver; only we found, that there remained such a
disposition in the smoke to inflammability, that holding a lighted candle to
it, a flame was quickly rekindled.

EXPER. IV. Of the Duration of the Flame of Spirit of Wine impregnated with a
metal in the Exhausted Receiver.
BEcause it may, upon grounds not improbable, be thought, that well-dephlegm'd
Spirit of Wine being a pure Ethereal liquor, which does not, like combustible
Sulphurs (whether vulgar or metalline) emit any visible smoke to stifle the
flame (into which it may in the free air be totally resolved;) if this
spirituous and thus qualified liquor could be duly associated with a metalline
body, the resulting flame might be more than ordinarily vigorous and durable; I
resolved to make an Experiment of this sort, and having by a way, that I
deliver in another paper, [in a Paradox about the Fuel of Flames] so united
highly rectified spirit of Wine with a prepared metal, that they would both
afford a conspicuously tincted Flame; we put this mixture into a small
Glass-lamp, made on purpose, and furnished with a very slender wieke, which the
mixture would not burn whilst there was liquor enough to imbibe it well; and
putting this lighted Lamp into a convenient place of a Receiver that was not
small, since it was able to contain about two gallons or sixteen pound of
water, we made have to cement on the glass to the Engine, and yet found not in
two or three several trials, that, after the Pump began to be moved, so little
a quantity of tincted flame in that capacious Glass lasted much (if at all)
more than half a minute of an hour (estimated by a minute watch.)

And, because the Receiver, we then made use of, seemed to me, by reason of its
size and some accommodations that belong to it, proper enough to be employed
about other trials, concerning the relation between Flame and Air; I thought
fit to try with the same small Lamp and liquor, what other Phenomenon of that
kind would be afforded by letting Air in and out, according to the various
exigencies of my particular aims.

But not having then, nor in some time after, the leisure and opportunity of
setting down things circumstantially, I contented my self to take those short
Notes (of the Principal things) whereof I now subjoyn the transcript.

When the flame began to decay, the turning key being now and then drawn almost
out, the tincted flame lasted once a minute and a half, and another time longer.

The turning key being taken out in the beginning, the flame lasted two minutes
or better.

A Pipe bedded in the cement at the bottom of the Glass, and having at each end
an open orifice almost of the bigness of that filled by the turning key, which
key was then removed from the top; the tincted spirit seemed to burn very
conveniently, as if the flame would have burned very long, if we would have
permitted it so to do.

The orifice at the top being stopped with the turning key, though the Pipe were
left open at the bottom, it plainly in a short time seemed much to decay and
ready to expire; whereupon I caused one to blow constantly, yet but very
gently, in at the pipe with a pair of bellows, and by this means, though we did
not keep the flame vigorous, yet we kept it alive for above four minutes; and
then observing it to be manifestly stronger than it was when we began to
refresh it with the Bellows, we ceased from blowing, and found, that though the
Glass-pipe was still left open, yet within about one minute the flame was quite
extinguished.

EXPER. V. Of the Conservation of Flame under water.
THe better to examine the necessity of Air to Flame, I thought fit not only to
make the several Trials mentioned in this Paper, whether it would live in a
medium much thinner than Air; but also to try, whether it would be able to
continue in a medium many hundred times thicker than Air, namely in Water.

I doubted not but many would think this both an easy and a needless Inquiry,
since eminent Writers, both Ancient and Modern, tell us without scruple, that
Naptha and Camphire will burn under Water; but I had never the good fortune to
be able to make them do so; and may be allowed to doubt, whether these Writers;
notwithstanding their confidence, deliver what they affirm upon Experience, not
bare Tradition. And though in celebrated Authors I have met with diverse
Receipts of making Compositions that will not only burn under water, but be
kindled by it; yet I have found those, I had occasion to consider, to be so
lamely or so darkly (and some of them I fear so falsely) set down, that by the
following composition, how slight soever it may seem, I have been able to do
more than with things they speak very promisingly of; since, though 'twill not
be kindled by water, yet being once kindled it will continue to burn under
water.

And that there might be no suspicion, that whilst the mixture continued under
water, it did only as it were vehemently ferment, or suffer a violent agitation
of its parts without having them kindled, till in their ascending they were
actually fired by the contact of the air, incumbent on the surface of the
water; To obviate this suspicion (I say) we were careful to try the Experiment,
not only in other Vessels, but in a large Glass, the transparency of whose
sides, as well as that of the contained water, would permit us to see for a
while the burning of our composition, which was sometimes with a weight
detained, and sometimes with a Forceps held, till 'twas consumed, a good way
under the surface of the Water.

The way of making the Experiment is this: We took of Gunpowder three ounces,
of well burnt Charcoal one dram, of good Sulphur or flower of Brimstone a
little less than half a dram, of choice Saltpeter near a dram and half:
Which Ingredients being well reduced to powder, and diligently mingled without
any liquor; either a large Goose-quil, whose feathery part was cut off, or a
piece of a Tobacco-pipe of two or three inches long, and well stopped at one
end, had its cavity well filled with this mixture, (instead of which, beaten
Gunpowder alone might serve, if it did not operate too violently, or waste too
soon:) For the kindling whereof, the open orifice of the Quil or Pipe was
carefully stopped with a convenient quantity of the same mixture, made up with as
little Chemical Oil or Water, as would bring it to a fit consistence. This
Wildfire was kindled in the Air, and the Quill or Pipe, together with a
weight, to which 'twas tied to keep it from ascending, was slowly let down to a
convenient depth under water, where it would continue to burn, as appeared by
the great smoke it emitted, and other signs, as it did in the air; because the
shape of the Quil or Pipe kept the dry mixture from being accessible to the
water (that would have disordered and spoiled it) at any other part than the
upper Orifice; and there the stream of kindled matter issued out with such
violence, as did incessantly beat off the neighboring water, and kept it from
entering into the cavity that contained the mixture, which therefore would
continue burning till 'twas consumed.

It Is probable, that most men will conclude from this Experiment, that Air is
not so absolutely necessary to the duration of Flame, as some other of our
Trials seem to argue; and that there ought to be a difference made between
ordinary Flames, and those that burn with an extraordinary vehemence. But my
design being, as I long since intimated, rather to relate Trials than debate
Hypotheses, I shall only add, that it may be pretended on the behalf of the
opinion that this experiment seems to disprove, that, not to mention the Air
that may lurk in the Pores of the Water, or that which may be intercepted
between the little grains of Powder whereof the mixture consists, the
Saltpeter it self may be supposed to be of such a texture, that in its very
formation the corpuscles, that compose it, may intercept store of little aereal
particles between the very minute solid ones which those Corpuscles are made up
of. And this inexistence of the Air in Nitre may be probably argued from the
great windiness of the flame that is produced upon the deflagration of Nitre.
According to this surmise, though our mixture burns under water, yet it does
not burn without air, being supplied with enough to serve the turn by the
numerous eruptions of the aereal particles of the dissipated Nitre it self.

On this occasion I remember, that in another Paper I relate, that for diverse
purposes, and among them to remove this suspicion, I successfully tried to
reproduce Nitre in Vacuo Boyliano, that there might not be any Air, or at least
any quantity worth heeding, intercepted between the convening particles, that
by their coalitions made up the nitrous Corpuscles, which in favor of the
necessity of Air to Flame may be pretended to be but so many little empty
bubbles close stopped, whose moister parts may be the fire that kindles the
nitre be exceedingly rarefied, and in that estate emulate air, and violently
burst their little prisons, and throw about the fragments of them with force,
and in numbers enough to make their aggregate appear such a flame, as is wont
to be made by unctuous and truly combustible Bodies; and yet this rarifi'd
substance, that thus shatters the nitrous particles, may really be no true and
lasting air, but only vehemently agitated vapors, which presently, upon the
cessation of the hear, return to liquor; as we see, that the vapors of an
Aeolipile, that issue out after the aereal Particles have been expelled, though
they make a great noise and a temporary wind near the hole they stream. out at,
and would perhaps, if that hole were close stopped, break the Aeolipile; yet are
not true and permanent Air, but at a small distance off the Instrument return
into water.

But though I could suggest other suspicions and conjectures about the
inclusion of Air between the particles of Saltpeter; yet I forbear to mention
them in a Writing designed to be chiefly Historical.

EXPER. VI. Relating an odd Phenomenon about the Flame of a Metal in our
Vacuum.
TO the foregoing Experiments made on purpose, I shall add a Phenomenon
afforded us by chance, and yet not unworthy to accompany the rest.

Whilst we were trying to kindle something in our exhausted Receiver, it
happened by some accident or other, that the combustible substance, that was to
be kindled, fell besides the iron, whereby our intended trial was defeated. But
whilst we were considering what was to be done on this occasion, and had not
yet let in the Air that had been pumped out, the lights also continuing yet
removed; we were surpised to see something burn like a pale bluish Flame
almost in the midst of the cavity of the Receiver, and at first suspected it to
be some illusion of the eyes; but all the bystanders perceiving it alike, and
observing that it grew very broad, we looked at it with great attention, and
found it to last much longer, than, I remember, I have seen any flame do in an
Exhausted Receiver. I should have suspected, it had proceeded from some
Brimstone, sticking, without our heeding it, to some part of the iron, which we
had formerly employed to kindle Sulphur in our Receiver, had it not been that,
besides other things, I remembered, that we had just before kept it red-hot in
the fire, and consequently must have burned away any little Brimstone, if there
were any that adhered to it: But though we much wondered, whence this our Flame
proceeded, I would not let any thing be done that might hasten its extinction;
and at length, when it expired of it self, we let in the Air, which had been
till then kept out, and perceived upon the concave part of the iron (which we
judged to be the place where the flame had appeared) a piece of melted metal,
which we concluded had been fastened to the string, that the fuel we designed
to kindle had been tied to, in order to the letting it down the more easily:
And this made us conceive, that the string happening to be burned by the
excessive heat of the iron, the piece of metal fell into the cavity of it, and,
by the same heat, the more combustible part, which the Chemists call the
Sulphur, was melted and kept on fire, and continued burning so long as we have
related. The piece of metal was judged to be Lead, but having not formerly
observed such a disposition in that metal to be inflamed, I considered it
attentively, and perceived, that 'twas some Fragment, that the Operator had
chanced to light on, of a mixture of Lead and Tin that I had (a while before,
for an Experiment not at all belonging to our present subject) caused to be
colliquated in a certain proportion. Upon whose account it seems, the mixture
of the ingredients had acquired such a new texture, as, whether by making the
bodies open one another, or by what other means soever, fitted the mass to
afford us the Phenomenon above recited. And though I made an unsuccessful
Trial with a mixture of Lead and Tin to produce such a flame upon the heated
Iron in the open Air; yet the newly related experiment may suffice to argue,
that there may be Flames of metalline Sulphurs (as the Chemists call them) that
will be at least as easily produced without the concurrence of the Air, as that
of common Sulphur, and continue to burn in our Vacuum longer than it.

THE THIRD TITLE.

Of the strangely Difficult PROPAGATION OF Actual Flame IN VACVO BOYLIANO.

THE THIRD TITLE. Of the strangely difficult Propagation of Actual Flame in
Vacuo Boyliano.
I Have more than once observed, that some bodies (whereof I make particular
mention in another Paper) though they will not be turned into Flame by very
intense heats, and those of very differing kinds, are yet very readily kindled
by an actual Flame. So that the Propagation of Flame to contiguous bodies,
that, according to the hitherto observed and unquestioned course of things,
must thereby in a moment, as it were, be actually inflamed, seems to be not
only very easy, but almost infallible: And yet, that this propagation is not
easy, or is perhaps scarce possible to be performed without the assisting
presence of the Air, may be gathered from the next following Experiments: At
whose titles though you will probably be surprised, in regard that by the two
first Experiments of the first Title of this Tract it will scarce be expected,
that Sulphur should be kindled in our Vacuum; yet I presume your wonder will
cease, when I put you in mind, that I formerly took notice to you of my having
sometimes met with such Sulphur, as would be kindled there; and 'twas, whilst
that well-disposed parcel of Sulphur lasted, that I took the opportunity of
making with the flame of it the Trials, to which I now proceed.

EXPER. I. An ineffectual attempt to make Flame kindle Spunck in an Exhausted
Receiver.
HAving placed the often mentioned Cylindrical plate of iron, first brought to
be red-hot, in a Receiver, capable of containing two Gallons of water; and
having also diligently pumped out the Air, we kindled a little Sulphur upon the
heated plate, and then a piece of dried Spunck, tied to a string, was, by the
help of a turning key, let down to the Flame; and when the Experiment was
finished, and the Spunck was taken out, we found it in diverse places not
manifestly altered so much as in color; and in those parts, that had been most
exposed to the Flame, it was turned to a substance very differing from ashes,
being black and brittle as tinder, and, like it, exceedingly disposed to be
kindled upon the touch of Fire.

EXPER. II. An unprosperous attempt to make Flame kindle Camphire without the
help of Air.
AS a farther confirmation of the difficulty of propagating Flame in our
Vacuum, we may annex the following Trials.

Into the lately mentioned Receiver we conveyed the Cylindrical plate of iron,
made use of in the former Experiment; and when the Air had been diligently
pumped out, we did, by the help of the turning key, let down upon the hot iron
a piece of such brimstone, as would, in spite of so disadvantagious a place, be
kindled with that heat. A little above this Sulphur we had tied to the same
string a piece of Camphire, that being a body exceedingly apt to take fire, if
not (as it were) to draw it, at the flame of lighted Brimstone. But our
Sulphur, melting with the heat of the iron Cylinder, dropped unluckily from the
string 'twas fastened to before, and for the most part fell off. And as soon as
it came to the ground, where it was distant from the vehement heat of the
metal, the flame expired, and that part of the Sulphur, that happened to stick
to the side of the iron, was inflamed by it: And I, that chanced to be then in
an inconvenient posture for seeing the Camphire, could not, because of the
smoke of the extinguished Brimstone, well discern what became of it. But my
Amanuensis, that happened to be on the best side of the Receiver, affirmed, he
plainly saw the Flame of the Brimstone reached the Camphire, without being able
to make it flame. Which seemed the less to be doubted of, because the Camphire
was by help of the turning Key let down low enough, and if it had afforded a
flame, the difference of Colors betwixt that and the blew flame of Sulphur
would have made it very easy for me to have distinguished them.

Another trial I would have thoroughly made to kindle one piece of Sulphur in
our Vacuum by the flame of another, tied a little lower in the same string,
that it might first touch the heated iron, and be thereby set on fire; but,
though we could find nothing that was visibly amiss in the kind of Sulphur we
then used, yet we were not able even by a reiterated trial to make it take fire
upon the iron, where nevertheless it melted and seemed a little to boil.

A third Trial was not so unsuccessful; for having in the well-exhausted
Receiver let down upon the very hot iron a match, made of a piece of Card
dipped in Brimstone, the lower extreme of it was kindled by the contact of the
hot iron. But though the sulphurated part of the match thus flamed away, yet
the remaining part, which was a mere piece of Card, was not thereby turned into
flame, nor in most places so much as sensibly scorched or black'd; though (as I
remember) the match had been purposely dried beforehand to facilitate its
inflammation.

EXPER. III. A strange Experiment upon Gunpowder, showing, that though it were
fired it self, yet would not fire the contiguous grains in Vacuo Boyliano.
THe preceding Trials may suffice to manifest the difficulty of communicating
Flame, without the help of Air, from one body to another, even when the bodies
to be kindled are of a very inflammable nature. But because there is no
propagation of Flame made in any bodies that we converse with here below, with
any thing near such Celerity as in the contiguous grains of Gunpowder; a great
heap whereof will, almost in the twinkling of an Eye, be turned into Flame by
propagation from any one small kindled grain; nothing seemed fitter to manifest
how much Flame is beholden to Air, than if such an Experiment could be made, as
might show, that, even amongst the contiguous grains of kindled Gunpowder,
Flame would not be propagated without the help of Air. How far a trial of this
nature may be made in our Engine, the following Narratives will best declare.

We took some Paper, and laying it upon some convenient part of the plate of
the Engine, we made upon it a train of dry Powder as long as the glass would
well cover; then, carefully fastening on the Receiver with good Cement, we
solicitously pumped out the Air; which done, we took a good Burning-glass, and
about noon cast the Sunbeams through it upon the train of some Gunpowder:
where, though the indisposition to accension was so great, that the powder did
not only smoke but melt without going off, and the Operator (though versed in
such Experiments) would not allow that it would signify any thing to continue
the trial any longer; yet upon my being obstinate to prosecute it, he, being
willing to follow the Experiment, rationally considered, that the Receiver, we
had been hitherto fain to use, was so opacous as to resist the entrance of many
of the beams that should have their operation upon the Powder: whereupon taking
a finer glass that was lately come in, we laid by the former, and employed
that, which, by reason of its transparency, so little weakened the beams of the
Sun, that being according to my direction held obstinately upon the same parts
of the train, they were able to fire several of them one after another. But
though the Sun could thus kindle the Powder, yet it could not make the flame
propagate, but only those parts that were melted did at length kindle and fly
away, leaving the rest unaltered, as I curiously observed, finding several
little masses of colliquated matter in several places of the train, with the
Powder unchanged in all the other parts of the same train that lay in a direct
line; besides that some of the little colliquated masses were contiguous to the
rest of the Powder, which appeared unchanged, and kindled readily, and flashed
all away as soon as I caused the Burning-glass to be applied to it in the open
Air.

EXPER. IV. Reciting another Attempt to confirm the former.
FOr further Confirmation of so odd an Experiment, I shall also add a short
account of another made with Gunpowder in our Vacuum.

To try on an occasion, that need not here be discoursed of, whether by the
help of one of those little instruments that are now used at London to examine
the strength of Powder, we could find any difference made by the absence and
presence of the Air, in the resistance of the Instrument, or the effects of the
Powder on it; we fastened it to a competently heavy and commodiously shaped
weight of Lead, and when 'twas carefully filled and prim'd with Powder, we
placed it in a Receiver of a convenient bigness, whence we pumped out the Air
after the usual manner, and perhaps with more than usual diligence. But though
at length, after the Powder had long resisted the beams of the Sun concentrated
on it by a good double unequal Burningglass, it did, as I expected, take fire at
the Touchhole, and fill the Receiver with smoke; yet this kindled Powder could
not propagate the flame to that which was in the box, how contiguous soever the
two parcels were to one another. And when the instrument was taken out into the
Air, (by which it appeared how free the Touchhole was,) as soon as ever
new-priming with the same sort of Powder was put to it, the whole very readily
went off: And when, for further satisfaction, we caused the instrument to be
new charged, and upon its taking fire only at the Touchhole in the exhausted
Receiver, we ordered new-priming to be added without so much as taking the
instrument out of the Receiver, though afterward the Receiver was closed
again, but without being exhausted of Air; the Powder, though closely shut up
in the Glass, did readily go off, as well that which was in the box or cavity
of the Powder-tryer, as that which lay on the outward part of the Instrument.
And this trial, for the main, was repeated with the like success.

EXPER. V. Briefly mentioning two differing Trials with two differing Events,
to kindle Gunpowder in our Vacuum.
YOu will easily believe, that the event of the foregoing trials seemed strange
enough to the ingenious persons, that I had desired to be present at them; and
perhaps the attentive consideration of it may well enough suggest such odd
suspicions and conjectures, as I have neither the leisure nor the boldness to
discourse of in this place.

But here I shall not dissemble my having, by a somewhat differing way, made a
couple of trials, whereof though the first may confirm the great indisposition
of Gunpowder to be kindled in our Vacuum, yet the second seems to look another
way.

The first is summarily set down in my Notes to this purpose. [A few small
corns of Gunpowder, being included in a very small buble freed from its Air,
and secured against the return of it, or any other, and then applied warily to
Coals covered with Ashes; did not go off nor burn, but afforded a little yellow
powder that seemed to be Sulphur, and sublimed to the upper part of the glass.]

The Latter's event I found in the same paper to have been thus registered.
[But two larger Bubles though strong, whereof one had the Air but in part, and
the other carefully emptied; being provided each of them with a greater
quantity of Powder (though scarce enough to promise such an effect) a while
after they were put upon quick Coals, each of them was blown in pieces with a
Report almost like that of a Musket; but, though this was done in a dark place,
yet we did not perceive, whether or no there were any real flame produced.]

The event of this Trial seems at first sight to contradict the inference, that
probably you have drawn from the foregoing Experiments. But yet it may not be
unworthy of our inquiry, whether this way of trial be as proper to give
satisfaction to the curious, as that, made with the Sunbeams, was. And I leave
it to be considered, whether or no it may not be doubted, whether the going off
of the Gunpowder was caused by a successive, though extremely swift,
propagation of real Flame, from the first kindled grains to the rest; or did
not proceed from this, That the coals acting strongly at the same time on the
whole Area or extent of the powder that was next to them, and this in the
absence of the Air, each grain was in that case, as 'twere, a little Granado,
and the heap of them being uniformly enough acted on by the fire, they were
made to go off, as to sense, all at once, as if there had been but a
contemporary Explosion made of them all together by the action of the external
fire, rather than any true Accension made by the flaming grains of the
unkindled ones. As I remember I have tried, that even in the open air one may,
with a Burning-glass dexterously employed, make some part of a little parcel of
Aurum fulminans go off, whilst the neighboring parts of the same parcel, to
which the focus does not extend with heat enough, will not be made to do so.

NEW EXPERIMENTS About the Relation betwixt AIR AND THE FLAMMA VITALIS of
Animals.

(Sent to the same Person to whom the former Papers were addressed.)

NEW EXPERIMENTS About the Relation betwixt Air, and the Flamma Vitalis of
Animals.
(Sent to the same Person to whom the former Papers were addressed.)

THe xx. Experiments hitherto set down under the three foregoing Titles, by
showing the Relation betwixt Air and Flame in general, may be serviceable to
the Inquirers into the nature of the Vital Flame in particular. But yet having
had occasion to make some trials, that more directly regard the requisiteness
of Air to the Flamma Vitalis or Vital Principle of Animals; I shall now present
you by themselves as many as I could light on, without being solicitous that
they should be quite differing from each other; because in so new and nice a
subject, the affinity that may be found between some, either in regard of the
subjects exposed to trial, or in the manner of making it, may be useful, if not
necessary, to confirm things by the resemblance of Events, or make us proceed
cautiously and distinctly in pronouncing upon cases where the success was not
uniform.

EXPER. I. Where in the Durations of the Life of an Animal, and of the Flame of
Spirit of Wine, included together in a close Vessel, were compared.
WE took some highly rectified Spirit of Wine, and put about a spoonful of it
into a small Glass-lamp, conveniently shaped and purposely blown with a very
small orifice, at which we put in a little Cotton-wieke, which was but very
slender.

We also provided a tall Glass-Receiver, which was in length 18 inches, and
contained above twenty pints of water. This Receiver, which was open at both
ends, was at the upper orifice (which was not wide) covered with a Brass-plate,
fastened on very close with good cement, for uses whose mention belongs not to
this place; and for the lower orifice, which was far the widest, we had
provided a Brass-plate furnished with a competent quantity of the cement we
employed to keep the Air out of the Pneumatical Engine; by means of which plate
and cement we could sufficiently close the lower orifice (though a wide one) of
our Receiver, and hinder the Air from getting in at it.

These things being thus prepared, we took the small Glass-lamp above
mentioned, and having lighted it, we placed both it and a small Bird (which was
a Green-finch) upon the Brassplate, and in a trice fastened it to the lower
orifice of the Receiver, and then watched the event; which was, that within two
minutes (as near as we could estimate by a good minutewatch) the flame, after
having several times almost quite disappeared, was utterly extinguished; but
the Bird, though for a while he seemed to close his eyes as though he were
sick, appeared lively enough at the end of the third minute; at which time,
being unwilling to wait any longer by reason of some avocations, I caused him
to be taken out.

After he had for a pretty while, by being kept in the free Air, recovered and
refreshed himself, the former trial was repeated again, and at the end of the
second minute the flame of the Lamp went out; but the Bird seemed not to be
endangered by being kept there a while longer.

After this, we put in together with the same Bird two lighted Lamps at once, (
viz. the former and another like it) whose flames, according to expectation,
lasted not one whole minute before they went out together. But the Bird
appeared not to have been harmed, after having been kept five or six times as
long before we took off the Receiver.

In the tall Receiver abovementioned we included a Mouse, with a lighted Lamp
filled with the Spirit of Wine; but before the Experiment was near finished,
the Mouse, being at liberty within the Glass, made a shift to blow out the
flame; which being revived without taking out either the Lamp or the Animal,
the Spirit of Wine burned about a minute longer, during which time the Mouse
appeared not to be grown sick, no more than it did afterward, when for some
minutes, after the extinction of the flame, he had been kept in the same close
and infected Air.

Afterward we placed the same Mouse in another Receiver, which seemed to be by
a third part less capacious than the former, and in it we also fixed a piece of
slender Waxcandle, such as is wont to be made up in Rolls, (and employed to
light Tobacco.) This Candle continued burning in this new Receiver but for one
minute, during which time it emitted store of smoke; but this not hindering the
Animal to appear lively enough, even after we had kept him much longer in that
infected Air, the same Candle without being taken out was lighted again, but
burned not so long as before; yet it sufficed to darken the Receiver, and
therefore probably much to clog the included Air, in which nevertheless the
Mouse being kept, by our guess, eight or ten minutes longer, he appeared,
neither when he was taken out, nor a while before, to have received any
considerable harm by his detention there.

EXPER. II. Of the Duration of the Life of a Bird compared with the lasting of
a burning Candle and Coal in our Vacuum.
WE took a Green-finch and a piece of Candle of twelve to the pound, and
included them in a (...) capp'd Receiver, capable of (...) about two Gallons or
sixteen pound of water, which was very carefully cemented on to the Pump, that
no Air might get in or out. In this Glass we suffered the Candle to burn till
the flame expired, (which it did, in more than one Trial, within two minutes or
somewhat less;) at which time the Bird seemed to be in no danger of sudden
death; and, though kept a while longer in that clogged and smoaky Air, appeared
to be well enough when the Receiver was removed. Afterward, we put the same
Bird into the Receiver with a piece of a small wax Taper, whose flame though it
lasted longer than the other, yet the Bird outlived it; and 'twas judged he
would have done so, though the Flame had been much more durable. After this, we
included the same Bird with the first-mention'd Candle in the Receiver, which
we had caused to be often blown into with a pair of Bellows, to drive out the
smoke and infected Air; and then beginning to pump out the Air, we found, that
the Flame began more quickly to decay, and the Bird to be much more discomposed
than in the former Experiments; but still the Animal ou^lived the Flame, though
not without Convulsive motions. The Experiment we repeated with a piece of the
forementioned Taper, and the same Bird, which, though cast into threatening
symptoms upon the gradual withdrawing of the Air, outlived not only the Flame,
but the smoke too that issued from the kindled Wieck; which circumstance was
also observed in the preceding Trial.

Lastly, having freed the Receiver from smoke, and supplied it with fresh air,
we put in with the same Bird a piece of Charcoal of about two inches in length,
and half an inch in breadth, which had been, just before 'twas put in, well
blown with a pair of Bellows, that it might be freed from ashes, and thoroughly
kindled; and made haste to pump out the air. This diligence was continued not
only till none of the fire could be discerned by any of the Bystanders, but
till, in our estimation, (which the event justified) it was irrecoverable by
the admission of the outward air; which at its coming in found the Bird very
sick indeed, but yet capable of a very quick Recovery. And this Experiment was,
with the same Animal and Coal re-kindled, tried over again with the same
success.

Whether this survival of Animals, not only to a flame that emits store of
fuliginous steams, as in this trial; but to that which is made of so pure a
fuel as Spirit of Wine, that affords not such steams (as in the former
experiment;) Whether, I say, this survival proceed from this, That the Common
flame and the Vital flame are maintained by distinct substances or parts of the
Air; or that common Flame making a great waste of the Aereal substance, they
both need to keep them alive, cannot so easily as the other find matter to prey
upon, and so expires, whilst there yet remains enough to keep alive the more
temperate Vital flame; or that both these causes, and perhaps some other,
concur to the Phenomenon, I leave to be considered.

EXPER. III. Of what happened to the Light of Glo-worms in the Exhausted
Receiver.
FOr the sake of those Learned men, that have thought the Light of Glo-worms
and other shining insects to be a kind of effulsion of the Biolychnium, or
vital Flame, that nature has made more Luminous in these little Animals than in
others; and which a very eminent Physician of the College of London affirms to
have felt in a warm climate more than sensibly hot; I shall subjoyn on this
occasion some trials made on Glo-worms, which else should be referred to those
Experiments of mine about the Relation betwixt Air and Light, that you were
formerly pleased to publish.

We took two Glo-worms, that shone vividly enough, especially one of them,
whose Light appeared strong and tincted as if it had been transmitted through a
blew Glass: These we laid upon a little plate, which we included in a small
Receiver of finer glass than ordinary, that we might the better see what would
happen: And having for the same purpose removed the Candles, that no other
Light might obscure that of the Insects, we waited in the dark till that was
conspicuous, and then ordered the Air to be begun to be pumped out; and, as we
expected, upon the very first exsuction there began to be a very manifest
diminution of the Light, which grew dimmer and dimmer, as the Air was more and
more withdrawn, till at length it quite disappeared, though there were young
Eyes among the assistants. This darkness having been suffered to continue a
long while in the Receiver, we let in the Air again, whose presence (as we
looked for) restored at least as much Light as its absence had deprived us of.
This experiment was repeated with one more of those insects; and the event was,
that they all three gradually lost their Light by the Exhaustion of the
Receiver, and regained it (with some increase, as was judged) by the return of
the Air. And in this Experiment we let in the Air by degrees, and with an
interval or two, to observe, as we did, that, as the diminution of Light was
greater and greater when the Air was more and more withdrawn, so the returning
splendour was gradually increased as we pleased to let in more and more Air upon
the worms.

EXPER. IV. Containing a variation and improvement of the foregoing Trial.
BUt here I foresaw, it might be suspected, that the disappearing of the Light
in our Exhausted Receiver did not so much proceed from any real, though but
temporary, extinction or eclipse of it, as from this, that the Glo-worms
having, as I have often observed, a power of drawing the luminous part into the
opacous part of their body, they might, finding themselves prejudiced by the
withdrawing of the Air, hide their Light from our Eyes, without losing it, till
being again refreshed by the return of the Air, they might be invited to
protrude it again into the transparent part of their tails. This scruple
seeming grounded upon the nature of the thing, I thought it worth while to
remove it by the help of another observation, that I long since made and have
mentioned elsewhere about Glo-worms. Which is this, that, if they be killed
whi^t they are shining, their luminous matter may continue to shine for a good
while after it is taken out of their bodies; and accordingly having put some of
that, we took out of the forementioned insects, upon a little paper, and
included it in the Receiver we employed, the Candles being removed, we
perceived it to shine vividly enough before the Pump was set on work, and
afterward to grow dimmer and dimmer, as the Air was more and more drawn out,
till at length it quite vanished; and it re-appear'd immediately upon the Air's
return. This experiment was reiterated twice more with the same success for the
main. But we took notice, that the luminous matter, after the Air was let in,
seemed to us not only to have regained its former degree of Light, but sensibly
increased it, (as it once happened also in the Experiment made on the living
worms;) which whether it was caused by any real change made by the recess and
access of the Air in the matter it self, or by the greater accustomance of our
Eyes to the darkness of the place, I dispute not; and shall only add this
Phenomenon of one of our trials, that having a mind to see, whether a very
little proportion of returning Air would not su^fice ^^^^store some little
Light to the d^^^^pearing matter; it was (...) strange to observe, that so
(...) a quantity of Air, as was (...) fore the Light was revived, (...) nough
to make it become p^a^^ly (...)sible though but dimm: In (...) state it
continued, till we thought ^it to let in more Air upon it. (Farther trials I
could not make (...) these Glo-worms, having received them but that night out
of the Country, and being the next morning to begin a journey.)

EXPER. V. Wherein the former Inquiry is farther prosecuted.
AFter the lately mentioned Trials we made with the Gloworms, having procured
two or three other of those insects, whereof one was judged to be as large as
three ordinary ones, we found, when we had brought them out of the Country to
London, that this great worm was dead, as far as we were able to judge, and
finding him to retain a considerable degree of luminousness in the under part
of his tail, we put him into the small Receiver formerly mentioned, to try,
whether, after the death of the animal, the shining matter would retain its
former properties; but at the first time the Air was pumped out after the usual
manner, the light was not only not abolished, but continued vivid enough, and
so it did, when the Air being let in and again withdrawn, the trial was made a
second time. But being unwilling to abandon the Experiment till we tried it yet
further, I caused the Receiver to be exhausted yet once or twice more, and at
length I perceived, that the Light began to diminish, as the Air was withdrawn;
and last of all it so disppear'd that the bystanders could not see it, whereas
upon the readmission of the Air the Light shone vividly as before, if not more
bright. This Experiment was reiterated with the like success, and in both these
times the like happened to the Light of the dead one and of a living one that
we included with it, to be able to compare them together; though there were
this disparity betwixt them, that the luminous part of the dead worm was much
larger than that of the living, and the Light of the later appeared of a very
greenish blew, whereas that of the former seemed to be of a white yellow.

EXPER. VI. Made to examine whether Animals be heavier dead than alive.
It Is a received Tradition, that bodies when dead are much heavier than the
same were when alive; the matter of fact being taken for granted, some will
perhaps ascribe the change to the utter inability of a dead body any way to
assist those that endeavor to remove it. But, according to the general
opinion, this difference proceeds from the total extinction or recess of the
spirits vital and animal, which being supposed to be not only agil but light,
lessened the weight of the body they enlivened; and Flame being conceived to be
the lightest among bodies here below, it is not improbable that some will
ascribe the Phenomenon to the levity of the Flame, which by being diffused
through the body of an Animal, and vivifying it, deserves the name of Vital.
But I would not advise any to rely on this conceit, till they are duly
satisfied of the truth of the matter of fact, which because I have not yet
found that any has endeavored to try, I shall on this occasion give you the
following transcript of one of my Notes about Statical Experiments.

A Mouse weighing about three drachms and a half, being put in one of the
scales of a very nice balance, was counterpois'd together with a string that
was tied about his neck like a noose, and after a while by drawing the ends of
it was there strangled. As soon as we judged him quite dead, we weighed him
again, and though nothing was seen to fall from him; yet, contrary to the
received Tradition, that Bodies are much heavier dead than alive, we found the
weight to have lost about 7/16 of a grain; which probably proceeded from the
avolation of diverse subtle particles upon his violent and convulsive struglings
with death. But this was no more than an Experiment of this kind, made some
years ago, induced me to expect and foretell.

Afterward in a larger Balance, but a very good one, purposely made for nice
Experiments, we took a very young Catlin, of between 10. and 11. ounces in
weight, and caused him to be strangled on the same scale, wherein he had been
put. But he could not be dispatched so soon as an ordinary full grown animal;
so that by that time he was quite dead, we found him not only not to be grown
heavier but lighter by four grains; which did not much surprise us, having
elsewhere noted the life of so very young Creatures of that kind not to be
easily destroyed for want of Respiration. And I remember, that, for trials
sake, another Catlin of the same Litter with this I have mentioned, being
included in a Receiver, wherein another Animal of that size might probably have
been dispatched in two or three minutes, by the pumping out of Air, was kept
there somewhat above a quarter of an hour before he appeared to be quite dead.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THese two following Attempts falling into the hands of the Author after the
preceding Experiments were printed, it was thought fit to annex them here for
the affinity of the subject.

Place this after Page 130.

An ATTEMPT To produce Living Creatures in Vacuo Boyliano.
IN reference to the Opinion of those Naturalists, that hold the Seeds of
Living Creatures to be animated, and especially to the Hypothesis of those
Learned men that assert the Flamma Vitalis lately mentioned; it may be an
inquiry of moment, Whether or no in the Seminal Principles, or Rudiments of
Animals, the manifest operations of Life may be excited without the concurrence
of the Air, whose interest in the production and conservation of Flame may be
gathered from the foregoing Experiments. For, it seems likely to prove no
inconsiderable discovery in reference to the lately mentioned Hypothesis, if it
be found, that the Principle of Life in Seminal rudiments needs, as well as
other Flames, the concurrence of the Air to actuate it.

I thought fit therefore, notwithstanding the great and almost insupeperable
difficulties, which 'twas easy enough for me to foresee I should meet with, to
attempt the hatching of Eggs in our Vacuum; but though I made some unsuccessful
trials of this kind in order to a discovery about Respiration, (not here to
speak of the attempts I made about the animation of putrid matter,) yet leaving
the mention of them to its proper place, I shall only take notice in this what
directly concerns the present inquiry. Considering then that pregnant females
cannot be made to live and bring forth young in our exhausted Receiver, and
that the Eggs of Birds and such greater animals do in this colder climate of
ours require to be hatched by the incubation of the females (or other Birds;) I
thought the fittest subjects, I could both make choice of and procure for the
designed Experiments, would be the Eggs of Silkworms: For, having many years
since tried several things about those Insects, and among others found, that
their Eggs would be hatched, not only by the heat of ones body, though that be
the usual way, but by the warmth of the Sun even here in England, if they be
kept till the Spring be far enough advanced: Remembering this (I say) I got a
good number of Silkworms Eggs; and having caused three conveniently shaped,
but very small, Receivers, to be purposely made, that differed very little (and
that accidentally) either in size or figure, we conveyed into each of them,
together with a small stock of Mulberry-leaves, such a number of Eggs as we
thought sufficient to make one morally secure, that at least some of them were
prolifick; this done, we carefully exhausted one of them, and secured it
against the return of the Air; the two others we left full of Air: But having
left in one, a little hole for the Air to come in and get out at, we stopped the
other so close, as to hinder all intercourse between the included Air and the
External. All things being thus pnepared, we exposed the Receivers to a
South-window, where they might lie quiet, and where I either came, or sent to
look on them from time to time; the spring being then so far advanced, that I
supposed the heat of the Sun would be of it self sufficient to hatch them in no
long time.

As to the success of this trial, my not being able to find any register of the
particular Phenomenon that occurred, keeps me from venturing to relate it very
circumstantially; but this I remember in general, that both I and others took
notice, that in the unexhausted Receivers there were diverse Eggs hatched into
little Insects that perforated their shells, and crept out of them; though
afterward for want of change of Food, or Air, or both, few or none of them
proved long-lived. But though the Eggs in these Receivers began to afford us
little animals in a few days; yet the Eggs in the exhausted Receiver did not,
in many more, afford us any. And though I will not venture to say how long
precisely we kept them in the same window, after some of the abovementioned
Eggs were hatched; yet (if I much mistake not) 'twas (from first to last) about
three or four times as long; and I remember, we kept them till it was thought
to no purpose to wait any longer, and agreed in imputing the not hatching of
the Eggs by the so long continued action of the Sun to the absence of the Air.

What other Phenomenon occurred to us in making this Experiment, and another
not unprosperous one upon the Eggs of Flies, you may expect, when I can light
on my Notes about them, or have my memory refreshed by those that assisted at
the making of them.

An ATTEMPT Made upon Gnats in our Vacuum.
I Elsewhere mention that it has been observed, by a couple of our Virtuosi
(whom I there name,) and several times by Me, that (here in England) multitudes
of Gnats are generated of little animals that live, for a part of the Summer,
like Fishes in the water; and considering, that by these a very unusual passage
is made from Swimming to Flying animals, I thought them very fit subjects,
whereon to make the following Experiment.

[Partly to try whether at least an animal already living and moving in our
Vacuum may be able to attain the perfection due to it according to the course
of Nature; and partly to examine, whether, in case he should attain it, at
least the lighter sort of winged Insects may be able to fly in that place; and
partly to discover, whether an animal, that had long lived in our Vacuum,
would, when turned to a Fly, be able to continue alive without a Respiration,
he had never been accustomed to, in its pristine form or state; we took diverse
of those little swimming Creatures, which, in Autumn, especially toward the
end of it, are wont to be turned into Gnats, and having put a convenient number
of them together in a fit quantity of Rainwater, wherein they had been found
and kept, into a small Receiver, the Air was pumpt out, and the vessel secured
against its return, and then set aside in a place, where I could observe, that
the day after some of these little animals were yet alive and swimming to and
fro, not without minute bubles adhering to them; but at the end of a day or two
after that, I could not perceive any of them to survive their dead Companions,
nor did any of them recover, when fresh Air was let in upon them. But though
this Experiment were the best I was then able to make, yet I resolved, if God
should vouchsafe me life and health, to repeat it the ensuing Autumn; that,
wherein it was made, proving so cold and unseasonable, that a number of these
little Creatures, put up with water into another small Receiver, died all
within a few days, though none of the Air was exhausted; and several, that I
kept in an ordinary Glass, that was diverse times unstop'd to give them fresh
air, did yet perish at no ordinary rate. And I confess (as unkind as this
trouble of mine may seem to the Air;) that the failing of this and some other
Experiments of producing Animals in our exhausted Receivers was the more
unwelcome to me, because I had and have still a great desire to see, if it be
possible, what would happen to Animals, which had been produced in a place free
from the pressure of the Atmosphere, as if they had been born in Epicurus's
imaginary intermundane spaces, upon their coming to be suddenly surrounded with
our heavy Air, and having their tenderly framed bodies exposed to its immediate
pressure.

NEW EXPERIMENTS ABOUT Explosions.

(Annexed by way of Appendix to the former Papers.)

NEW EXPERIMENTS ABOUT EXPLOSIONS.
(Annexed by way of Appendix to the former Papers.)

FOr as much as some of the Learned men, that are the grand Assertors of the
Flamma Vitalis (whose opinion occasioned my presenting you the foregoing
Experiments,) do also with the justly famous Doctor Willis explicate many of
the motions of Animals, especially those performed in the Muscles, by the
Explosions made of certain juices or fluid substances of the Body, when they
come to mingle with each other: And for as much also as I do not remember, I
have heard the Maintainers of this Hypothesis insist on other instances in
favor of it, than the going off of Gunpowder; which being not a liquor but a
consistent and brittle body, and requiring for its explosion either Actual
Fire, or a far intenser heat than can be supposed natural in Men and other
Animals; I was induced to suspect, they were not yet provided with better
Examples; and therefore I presume, it will be looked upon as a thing neither
useless, nor altogether impertinent, if, without offering to determine any
thing about the truth of the opinion, I supply the embracers of it with two or
three examples of Explosions made by the bare mingling of liquors; which I
shall borrow from the elsewhere mentioned Notes, that I drew up some years
ago, in order to the improvement of some parts of Physic.

EXPER. I. Of an Explosion made with the Spirits of Nitre and Wine.
WE took Spirit of Nitre, so strong, that the fumes made the upper part of the
Glass, it was kept in, always reddish, and having put but one ounce of it into
a bolthead with a long neck, capable to contain, as we guessed, twelve or
sixteen times as much, we caused an equal weight of Alkhool (or highly
rectified Spirit of Wine) to be taken, and a little of it being put to the
Spirit of Nitre, it presently made so strong and quick an expansion or
explosion, that some of it flew out of the Glass and hit against the cieling of
the room, (where I saw the mark of it,) and falling upon his face that held the
Glass, made him think (as he told me) that fire had fallen upon it, and made
him run down the stairs like a mad man to quench the heat at the Pump.
Wherefore bidding the Laborant proceed more warily, I ordered him to put into
the Bolt-head but part of a spoonful of Spirit of Wine at a time; and yet at
each of a pretty many affusions, that I stayed to see the effect of, there
would be a great noise, as of an ebuilition, though no store of froth produced,
and accompanied with so great a heat that I could not hold the Glass in my
hand; and immediately there would issue out a copious and red smoke; to which
when I caused a little Candle to be held, though at near half a foot distance
from the top of the bolthead, it would presently take fire, and burn at the top
of the bolt-head like a flame at the upper end of a Candle, till I caused it to
be blown out, that fresh Spirit of Wine might be poured in; which when it was
all mingled with the other liquor, the heat and conflict caused.

Diverse other Phenomenon relating to this Experiment (by which I intended to
make out more things than one,) belong not to our present subject, and are
already set down in other Papers. But yet 'twill be pertinent to show in this
place, that the noise and ebullition produced in this mixture is not
unaccompanied with a briskly Expansive or an Explosive motion. To make then an
Experiment to this purpose, and yet avoid the danger whereto the making of it
unwarily might expose both the vessels and us; we put an ounce of such strong
Spirit of Nitre, as is above mentioned, into a moderately large bolt-head
furnished with a proportionable stem, over the orifice of which we strongly
tied the neck of a thin Bladder, out of which most part of the Air had been
expressed, and into which we had conveyed a small Viol, with a little highly
rectified Spirit of Wine: Then this Viol, that before was closed with a cork,
being unstopp'd without untying or taking off the Bladder, a small quantity, by
guess not a quarter of a spoonful, of the Alcohol of Wine was made to run down
into the Spirit of Nitre, where it presently produced a great heat and
commotion, and blew up the Bladder as far as it would well stretch, filling
also the stem and cavity of the Glass with very red sumes, which presently
after forced their way into the open Air, in which they continued for a good
while to ascend in the form of an Orange-colour'd smoke.

EXPER. II. Of an Explosion made with Oil of Vitriol and Oil of Turpentine.
IF I had at hand the Papers you have diverse times heard me speak of about
Heat, I could give you the particulars of some Trials about Explosion, that
perhaps you would think more pertinent than despicable; but for want of those
Papers I must content my self to tell you in general: That I remember, that I
have more than once taken strong Oil of Vitriol and common Oil of Turpentine,
and warily mixed them in a certain proportion by shaking them very well
together; and that thereupon insued (what I had reason to look for) so furious
an agitation of the minute parts of the mixture, and so vehement or sudden
Expansion or Explosion, as did not only seem strange to the Spectators, but
would have proved dangerous too, if I had not taken care beforehand, that the
Trials should be made in a place where there was room enough, and that even the
Operator, that shook the vessel, should stand at a convenient distance from the
mixture.

EXPER. III. About an Explosion made by two Bodies actually Cold.
I Remember not, that I found the Assertors of Explosions in Animals to have
taken notice of a difficulty, which to me seems not uneasy to be observed, and
yet very worthy to be cleared. For it is known, that Fishes, and those
especially of the vaster sort, can move and act in the waters with a
stupendous force; and yet it is affirmed by those that pretend to know it,
that the Blood of most Fishes is still actually cold: And I remember, I found
the blood even of those I dissected alive, to be so. From whence most men would
argue, that even in the vast Sea Monsters, there can be made no Explosions,
these being still effected by or accompanied with an intense degree of heat.

'Twere incongruous to my design, to examine this difficulty as it directly
regards the Explosions, said to be made in Animals: But speaking of Explosions
in general, perhaps I might do the favorers of vital ones (if I may so term
them) no unacceptable piece of service, by experimentally showing, that it is
not impossible, though it seem very unlikely, that Explosions should be made
upon the mixture of bodies, which, whilst they seem to put one another into a
state of Effervescence, are really cold, nay colder than before their being
mingled. Of these odd kind of mixtures, I remember I have in another About the
Preduction or Extrication of Air.
paper set down some Trials that I made to other purposes, as well with two
liquors as with a liquor and a solid body; which later sort I there mention my
having made by an improvement of an experiment of the excellent Florentine
Virtuosi. And among those Trials I find one, whose pertinency to the matter in
hand invites me to annex as much of it as is proper in this place.

There were put two ounces of powdered Sal Ammoniac into a pretty large
Glass-tube Hermetically sealed at one end; into the same a slender Glass-pipe,
furnished with two ounces of Oil of Vitriol, was so put, that, when we pleased,
we could make the liquor run out into the larger Tube, which, after these
things were done, was closed exactly, so that nothing might get in or out. My
design was, that this instrument should be so warily inverted, that the
Operator might get out of the way, and the Oil of Vitriol, falling slowly upon
the Sal Ammoniac, should, without producing any heat, produce an explosion not
dangerous to the Bystanders. But whilst I was withdrawn to a neighboring
place to write a Letter, the Operator not staying for particular directions,
rashly inverted the instrument without taking care to get away: whence it
happened, that as soon as ever the contained liquor, being too plentifully
poured out, came to work on the Sal Ammoniac, wherewith it is wont to produce
cold, there was so surprising and vehement an Expansion or Explosion made, that
with a great noise, (which, as the Laborant affirmed, much exceeded the report
of a Pistol,) the Glasses were broken into a multitude of pieces, many of which
I saw presently after, and a pretty deal of the mixture was thrown up with
violence against the Operators Doublet and his Hat, which it struck, off, and
his face; especially about his eyes, where immediately were produced extremely
painful tumors, which might also have been very dangerous, had I not come
timely in, and (to add that upon the by) made him forthwith dissolve some
Saccharum Saturni in fair water, and with a soft sponge keep it constantly
moistened by very frequently renewed applications of the Liquor: By Gods
blessing upon which means, within an hour or two, the pain, that had been so
raging, was taken away, and the fretting Oil of Vitriol was kept from so much
as breaking the skin of the Tumors that it had made.

The first part of the Relation of this trial might have been omitted, or at
least shortened, unless I had designed to communicate unto you a way of doing
what I do not know to have been attempted by others, namely to put bodies
together when and by what degrees one pleases, after the Glass that contains
them has been Hermetically sealed up; which Mechanical contrivance, especially
as it may be varied, may be, as I have tried, usefully applied to more purposes
than 'twere proper here to take notice of.

But to conclude with a word or two touching the foregoing Experiment; I shall
only add, That another time we made a like trial a safer way, by tying a
Bladder so to the top of a Bolt-head, into which we had beforehand put the Sal
Ammoniac, that, by warily moving the Bladder, whence the Air had been
expressed, we could make some of the Sal Ammoniac, we had lodged in its folds,
to fall upon the liquor, with which it presently made an Explosive mixture,
that quickly blew up the Bladder.

But these, Sir, are bare Conjectures, left to be, after a farther discussion,
(if you think them worthy of it) determined by You, to whom as these Papers are
addressed, so they are also submitted by the Writer of them,

Who is Sir Your most, etc.

AN HYDROSTATICAL Discourse Occasioned by The Objections of the Learned Dr.
Henry More, AGAINST Some Explications of New Experiments made by Mr. Boil;

AND Now published by way of PREFACE to the Three ensuing Tracts.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THis Hydrostatical Discourse (distinguished by small letters for the
Signature) is to be placed immediately before the Title, New Experiments of the
Positive and Relative Levity of Bodies under Water.

TO The Reader.
WHen I determined to write this Polemical Discourse, I did not forget, that
when I first ventured some of my trisles abroad into the world, my friends
obtained from me a promise that, after I should have answered, the two first
that should expressly write against me (which happened to be the Learned Linus
and Mr. Hobbs,) to show that I was not altogether unacquainted with a way of
defending Truths, I would afterward write no Book in answer to any, that
should come forth against mine; for, not only my friends, but I, thought it
enough for a person that never was a Gown-man, to communicate freely his
thoughts and Experiments to the Curious, without despairing, that those things,
that should be evidently true, would be able to make their own way, and such as
were very probable would meet with Patrons and Defenders, in so inquisitive an
age as ours. And indeed I do not find, that either upon the account of my
Writings, or Ingenious men's opinion of them, I have had much cause to repent
the keeping of my promise, notwithstanding the Writings, that have impugn'd
some of mine, but without much prejudice, that I know of, either to the
proposed Truths, or the Proposer of them. And therefore I should not at all
have entered upon a defense of what is attaqued of mine by the Learned Doctor
More, if I had not supposed, that it would not require a Book, but might be
dispatched in a Preface: For, having by me some little Tracts, that should,
though the Doctor had never engaged me, have been imparted to the Public, and
observing, that the new Experiments contained in one or other of them, would
(...) an easy application be brought to co^^^^^ my formerly delivered
explications of other Phenomenon, and enervate the Doctors Objections against
them, I thought I might without long troubling the Reader, or my self, defend
what I looked upon as Truth, by answering some incidental passages of the
Doctors discourse, and referring the Reader, for the main points in
Controversy between us, to those Experiments of the following Tracts, which
clearly contain the grounds of deciding them. But yet this Consideration would
not perhaps have engaged me to write the following Preface, if the Objections I
was to answer had not been, by a Person of so much Fame, proposed, with so much
confidence; and though with very great Civility to me, yet with such endeavors
to make my Opinions appear not only untrue, but irrational and absurd, that I
feared his discourse, if unanswered, might pass for unanswerable, especially
among those Learned men, who, not being versed in Hydrostaticks, would be apt
to take his Authority and his Confidence for cogent Arguments; and who (not
observing how liberal some men are of titles to the Arguments that please them)
would make a scruple of thinking, that what is with great solemnity delivered
for a Demonstration in a Book of Metaphysics, can be other than a Metaphysical
Demonstration. The Care therefore, that what I judge to be true, should not be
made to pass for Absurd, which is a degree beyond what is merely Erroneous, by
being so severely handled by a person of Doctor More's fame and Learning,
induced me to begin the following Paper, which should have been shorter than
now it is, but that I was persuaded to lengthen it beyond what was either
necessary or designed, that I might, by the addition of some few thoughts and
Experiments on the occasions that were suggested to me, endeavor to clear up
and confirm some Hydrostatical Truths, that, I fear, are but by very few either
assented to, or perhaps so much as understood, and so might make the Reader
amends for the trouble I was forced to give him in a Dispute which I
apprehended he might otherwise think himself but little concerned in. And he
will, I hope, easily discern, that I have no mind to burden him in my Preface
with things not pertinent to the scope of it, if he take notice, that both for
his sake and the Learned Doctors, (whose Civility I would not leave unanswered)
I have restrained my self to the Defensive part, forbearing to attaque any
thing in his Enchiridium Metaphysicum, save the two Chapters wherein I was
particularly invaded.

But though I have declined the delivering my Opinion of the Doctors Book; yet
I dare not forbear owning my not being satisfied with that part of his Preface,
which falls foul upon Monsieur des Carts and his Philosophy. For though I have
often wished, that Learned Gentleman had ascribed to the Divine Author of
Nature a more particular and immediate efficiency and guidance in contriving
the parts of the Universal Matter into that great Engine we call the World; and
though I am still of Opinion, that he might have ascribed more than he has to
the Supreme Cause in the first Origin and Production of things Corporeal,
without the least injury to Truth, and without much, if any, prejudice to his
own Philosophy; and though not confining my self to any Sect, I do not profess
my self to be of the Cartesian: yet I cannot but have too much value for so
great a wit as the founder of it, and too good an opinion of his sincerity in
asserting the existence of a Deity, to approve so severe a Censure as the
Doctor is pleased to give of him. For I have long thought, that in Tenets about
Religion, though it be very just to charge the ill consequences of men's
opinions upon the Opinions themselves; yet it is not just, or at least not
charitable, to charge such Consequences upon the Persons, if we have no
pregnant cause to think, they discern them, though they disclaim them. And
since men have usually the fondness of Fathers for the Offspring of their own
Brains, I see not, why Cartesius himself may not have overlooked the bad
inferences, that may be drawn from his Principles, (if indeed they afford any
such,) since diverse Learned and not a few pious persons, and professed Divines
of differing Churches, have so little perceived, that the things objected are
consequent to such Principles, that they not only absolve them as harmless, but
extol them as friendly and advantageous to natural Religion. And I see not, why
so great and radiant a Truth, as that of the Existence of a God, that has been
acknowledged by so many mere Philosophers, might not as well impress it self on
so capable an intellect as that of Monsieur des Carts, or that so piercing a
wit may not really believe he had found out new Mediums to demonstrate it by.
And since the Learned Gassendus, though an Ecclesiastic, had been able as well
safely as largely to publish the irreligious Philosophy of Epicurus himself; it
seems not likely, that so dextrous a wit as that of Monsieur des Carts, could
not have proposed his notions about the Mechanical Philosophy, without taking
so mean a course to shelter himself from danger, as in the most important
points that can fall under man's consideration to labor with great skill and
industry to deceive abundance of ingenious men, many of which appeared to be
Lovers of Truth, and diverse of them Lovers of Him also. And I am the more
averse from so harsh an opinion of a Gentleman, whose way of writing, even in
his private Letters, tempts me very little to it, because I cannot think him an
Atheist and an Hypocrite, without thinking him (what Doctor More has too much
celebrated him) to call him a weak head, and almost as bad a Philosopher as a
Man. For as far as I understand his Principles, some of the most important
points of his Philosophy (which if it were needful I could name) are inter
woven with the Truth of the Existence of a God, or do at least suppose it, and
are not demonstrable without it. But I must not prevent the Cartesians, who,
now he cannot do it for himself, I doubt not will Apologize for their Master;
though looking upon him as a great Benefactor to, though not the first founder
of the Mechanical Philosophy, I could not consent by a total silence, upon such
an occasion, to become any way accessory to the blemishing of his Memory.

AN HYDROSTATICAL DISCOURSE Occasioned by the Objections of the Learned Dr.
Henry More, against some Explications of New Experiments made by Mr. Boil; and
now published by way of PREFACE to the Three ensuing Tracts.
SIR,
UPon the Advertisement you gave me yesternight, that I was particularly
concerned in the Learned Doctor More's Enchiridium Metaphysicum, I this day
turned over the leaves of one, which I have freshly received from the Reverend
Author himself: And being assisted by the series of the Titles, I quickly
lighted on that part of the Book, whose subject made me expect to find my self
questioned there, as I presently found I was. For though that civil Adversary
is pleased to omit my name, and, the farther to disguise it; imploys instead of
it a great and unmerited Encomium; yet by the Book he cites, and the
Experiments against which he argues, it is very easily discoverable, that his
objections are meant against me, who see yet no cause at all to be scrupulous
to own my Name, and the Doctrine delivered in the passages he is pleased to
oppose.

I doubt not but you will presently desire to know, what I think of this much
expected work; but when I have told you, that I have gained time to peruse only
(and that but cursorily) the 12th. and 13th. Chapters, you will, I question
not, excuse a person that does exceedingly want health, and yet wants not
almost continual avocations; if I now content my self to give you my thoughts
of that part of the newly mentioned Chapters, which properly relates to me; I
say, that part of the Chapters, because there are others wherein I need not
interess my self. For to omit other Paragraphs, the Doctor has in the former
part of the 12th Chapter thought fit to separate from my explication of the
Phenomenon in question betwixt us, that of the Learned Henricus Regius; and the
later part of the same Chapter he imploys in an ingenious dispute against those
that would have the Aerial Particles act with perception and design, Sect. 16,
17.
and (as he speaks) pro re nata, which Opinion you will easily believe I
neither was of, nor am like to adopt.

It remains then, that setting aside those discourses of the 12th Chapter,
wherein it is needless that I should make my self a party; I proceed to
consider those Paragraphs, which will be easily guessed to be levelled at my
Explications, and by which I must confess, I cannot at all be yet convinced of
their being false ones. But in doing this, I shall not only in compliance with
my present haste, but also to express my respect to the Learned Doctor, forbear
to say any more, than what I shall judge requisite to answer the Objections,
that directly concern my own Explications, without meddling, by way of
Retaliation, with his Hypotheses or Opinions, or endeavoring to set any
passages of his Writings at variance among themselves, or to take those little
advantages, which are usually sought for by Disputants.

I shall not trouble you, nor tire my self with any Schemes, since the Doctor
has taken the pains to insert those that are necessary for his purpose in his
Book, and I have not my own at hand. Wherefore, not doubting that you have by
you those Books of mine he refers to, and supposing that you will, whilst you
are reading, have also his Book with the inserted Schemes before your eyes, I
shall not spend time on any further Preamble, but immediately enter upon the
consideration of the Objections I am to answer.

THE FIRST SECTION.
CHAP. I.
THe first Explication of mine, that the Learned Doctor animadverts upon in his
12th Chapter, is, that which I give in the 33th of my Physico-Mechanical
Experiments, touching the Spring and Weight of the Air; where I relate, that
the Sucker in the Air-Pump of our Engine, having been forcibly depressed to the
lower part of the Brass Cylinder, which yet was carefully closed at the top, so
that the cavity of the Cylinder was empty of Air; this Sucker, I say, would in
this case appear spontaneously to remount toward the top of the Cylinder,
though it were clogged with a hundred pound weight to hinder its ascent. Which
Phenomenon I ascribed to this, that the Sucker being, by the withdrawing of
the Air in the Cylinder, freed from the wonted force of the springy Air that
endeavored to depress the internal part of it, was not enabled by the
appendant weight to resist the pressure of an Atmospherical Cylinder equal in
diameter to it, which, pressing against its lower or external surface,
endeavored to impel it up.

Now the Doctor having in the two first Paragraphs made a Description of my
Engine, (which I shall now pass over) does in the third teach us, that the
Corporeal cause, if there be any, of the ascent of the Sucker, must be, either
in the Sucker it self, or in the almost exhausted cavity of the Cylinder, or
lastly in the external Air: Which premised, he does in the same third Section,
and in the fourth, endeavor to prove at large, that the cause is to be derived
neither from the one, nor from the other of the two first. And therefore I,
that maintain neither of the Opinions he disputes against, shall leave those
Paragraphs of his untouched. Nor shall I meddle with the fifth, sixth, and
seventh, where he argues against the explications of some, that would solve the
Phenomenon upon some Cartesian grounds, and as well amply as particularly
against the solution that he supposes would be given of it congruously to his
own Sentiments by the Learned Regius. These Discourses, I say, of the Doctors I
leave untouched; because it is at length in the eighth Paragraph, that he
impugnes that solution of the Phenomenon, which he ascribes to me, whose
Opinion he first delivers, though not just in the terms I would express it my
self; yet I dare say very sincerely, and so near my sense, that I shall
forthwith pass from the eighth Section to the beginning of the ninth, where he
begins to propose his Objections, which he is pleased to usher in with a
complement to me, that I should be very vain if I looked upon as any thing more
than a Complement.

To his first Objection, proposed in these words, 139.
Primo enim, si haec solutio vere mechanica sit, quae tandem Causa vere
mechanica assignari potest gravitationis singularum particularum, totiusque
atmosphaerae in suis locis? Nam quod materiam subtilem attinet, etc. I answer,
that I did not in that Book intend to write a whole Systeme, or so much as the
Elements of Natural Philosophy; but having sufficiently proved, that the Air,
we live in, is not devoid of weight, and is endowed with an Elastical Power or
springiness, I endeavored by those two Principles to explain the Phenomenon
exhibited in our Engine, and particularly that now under debate, without
recourse to a Fuga Vacui, or the Anima Mundi, or any such unphysical Principle.
And since such kind of Explications have been of late generally called
Mechanical, in respect of their being grounded upon the Laws of the Mechanics;
I, that do not use to contend about Names, suffer them quietly to be so: And to
entitle my now examined Explication to be Mechanical, as far as I pretend, and
in the usual sense of that expression, I am not obliged to treat of the cause
of Gravity in general; since many Propositions of Archimedes, Stevinus, and
those others that have written of Staticks, are confessed to be Mathematically
or Mechanically demonstrated, though those Authors do not take upon them to
assign the true cause of Gravity, but take it for granted, as a thing
universally acknowledged, that there is such a quality in the Bodies they treat
of. And if in each of the Scales of an ordinary and just Balance, a pound
weight, for instance, be put; he that shall say, that the Scales hang still in
Aequilibrium, because the equal weights counterpoise one another: and in case
an ounce be put into one of the Scales, and not into the opposite; he that
shall say that the loaded Scale is depressed, because it is urged by a greater
weight than the other, will be thought to have given a Mechanical Explication
of the Aequilibrium of the Scales, and their losing it; though he cannot give a
true cause, why either of those Scales tends toward the Center of the Earth.
Since then the assigning of the true cause of Gravity is not required in the
Staticks themselves, though one of the principal and most known of the
Mechanical Disciplines; Why may not other Propositions and Accounts, that
suppose Gravity in the Air, (nay prove it, though not a priori) be looked on as
Mechanical?

CHAP. II.
THe next thing the Doctor opposes to my Explication, is a resolute Denial,
that there is any such Gravitation, as I pretend, of Bodies, or their
Particles, in their proper places. But because, for the proof of his negation,
he refers us to the next Chapter, we shall hereafter have a fitter place than
this to consider it in.

Thirdly, he tells us, we may justly doubt of the equal diffusion of the
Springy power, or the Pressure of the Air every way. In what sense, in some
cases, I admit of a small inaequality between the pressure of Fluids against
differing parts of a surrounded body, I have See the Hydrostatical Paradoxes,
esp. cially Parad. 7.
elsewhere declared, and need not here discourse of; since in the case before
us, and in the like, that Pressure is inconsiderable enough to be safely
neglected. And whereas our Author thus argues, p. 139.
Semota vi Elastica, particulae tamen Atmosphaerae deorfum tenderent. Est
igitur depressio quaedam deorsum praeter vim Elasticam ipsi superaddita; sursum
non item sed elastica sola, estque suppar ratio in pressionious transversis and
obliquis. I presume, he did not sufficiently consider our Hypothesis and the
nature of the pressure of Fluid Bodies that have weight: For Water, to which no
Springiness is ascribed, as there is to Air, but which acts by its weight and
fluidity, is able upon the score of those Qualities to buoy up great Ships,
that the ebbing Tide often leaves upon the strand.

And whereas the Learned Examiner proposes a fourth Objection in these terms,
p. 139.
Quibus omnibus addas, difficile esse intellectu, si unius Cylindri
Atmosphaerae pondus aequalis diametri cum Embolo reflectione in fundum Emboli
derivetur, cur non quinque alii Cylindri Aeris qui circumstant Embolum in ejus
fundum eodem modo simul agere possunt, ita ut vis sursum impellens Embolum
sextuplo major sit quam hactenus ab bujus opinionis fautoribus existim ita est.
Quod si sit, tunc certe, siquo artificio fieri possit ut unius solius Cylindri
actio in Embolum admitteretur, re iquorum quinque exclusa, and pari tamen
facilitate Embolus ascenderet, manifestum indicium esset, ne unum quidem
Cylindrum Atsmosphaerae agere in fundum Emboli, sed totam Hypothesin,
ingeniosam tantummodo esse fictionem. I presume, Hydrostaticians will think,
this might have been spared. For they will tell him, that there can no more of
a fluid press directly upward against the Cylindrical Orifice of a Body
immersed in that fluid, than a Cylinder of that fluid of the same diameter with
the Orifice (the lateral pressures bearing against the lateral parts of the
Cylinder.) And therefore if you invert, for instance, a Pipe open at both ends,
and filled to a certain height with Oil, into common water; the Oil that is
kept up by the pressure of the water upwards, will keep at the same height as
to sense, whether the Vessel that contains the Water be broad or narrow,
provided it be somewhat larger than the Orifice of the Pipe.

And now, to invalidate yet further the precedent Objections, made by the
Doctor, I shall add, that it need not be thought incredible, that the
Atmosphere by its weight, or the Spring of the Air compressed by that weight,
should be able to raise up fourscore or a hundred pound, hanging at the Sucker:
Since I have See Continuat. of New Exper. Physico-Mechan. Exp. 48. p. 165.
manifested two or three years ago by a clear and cogent Experiment, that a
little air included in a Bladder will by its mere Spring be able to heave up a
weight of a hundred Pound, and this without the help of any rarefaction by
heat. By which Experiment may be also confirmed, what I delivered a while since
about the endeavor of the Air, that is wont to be included in our brass
Cylinder, by expanding it self to thrust away the Sucker (which, in regard of
the structure of the Pump, it can do no otherwise than downwards,) with a
depressing force, aequivalent to the pressure upwards of the Atmosphere against
the external part of the same Sucker.

CHAP. III.
BUt I shall not insist upon the foregoing Objections, because the Learned
Doctor himself tells us, that their attempts may seem to be but light
skirmishes in comparison of that which follows. Whereunto I shall therefore
apply my attention.

This grand Objection our Learned Adversary takes from the already
often-mention'd ascent of the Sucker clogged with a hundred pound weight, and
recommends by this introduction. p. 140.
Etenim ex ipsis Phaenomeni visceribus robustissimum jam contra omnem
mechanicam illius solutionem Argumentum eruo, and quod non solum contra vim
aeris elasticam supra dicto modo explicatam militat, sed etiam contra
Cartesianum illum aeris conatum nixumque, etc. Which premised, the Argument it
self is thus proposed: p. 140.
Est enim (says he) juxta hujus experimenti Phenomenon, vis illa aeris
elastica (nixusque expansorius) major multo quam quae fieri potest a rerum
natura, quamque quotidianis illis Phaenomenis congruit. Nam si nixus hic
elasticus tantam vim elasticam haberet ut plus centum pondo plumbum sursum
possit propellere, omnes profecto rerum terrestrium compages tanta violentia
comprimerentur, ut nullae, nisi quae admodum firmiter compactae sint, tantae
compressioni resistere possent, quin confringerentur, vel partium collisione
ita contererentur ut brevi tempore perirent, etc.

Though this Objection be specious enough, yet it presents me with no
difficulty, that I was not well aware of; as I presume you will easily perceive
by what you will meet with in the following Papers, especially that, which
consists of Experiments and Considerations about the differing Pressures of
Solids, Weights, and Ambient Fluids. The nature of which Pressure and its
aequality (as far as in our controversy it is needful to be supposed) will, I
hope, satisfy you of the invalidity of the proposed objections; especially
since the Doctrine it impugns, namely the Weight and Pressure of the
Atmosphere, is not a bare Hypothesis, but a truth made out by diverse
Experiments, by which even professed Opposers of it have publicly acknowledged
themselves to be convinced.

CHAP. IV.
IN the next Paragraph (which is the 11th.) the Learned Doctor adds a further
Objection, wherein he supposes, that there is laid upon a wooden Scale, of the
same diameter with the abovementioned Sucker, a lump of Butter of the same
largeness with the Scale. Whence he argues, that if our Hypothesis take place,
the Butter must be pressed against by two Cylinders of Air, the one pressing it
upwards, the other downwards, and the pressure of them both amounting to two
hundred pounds. But, says he, the Butter is not pressed at all, as appears by
this, that no serous humor is squeezed out of it toward the edges, not so
much as in those parts that lie parallel to the Horizon, whence the Conclusion
seems easy to be deduced.

But in the 12th Paragraph, the Doctor himself proposes a Solution, which he
might easily foresee I would employ to invalidate his Argument; Namely, that
the Air pressing, as well against the sides of the Butter, as against the top
and bottom, hinders the Mass from horizontally extending it self. And whereas,
by way of reply to this subterfuge, as it is called in the margent, he
subjoynes, p. 142.
Cui respondeo, quod tamen hoc nihil prohibet quo minus in omnes parts
horizontales exprimatur humor serosus and lacteus, si revera esset ulla
hujusmodi pressura elastica qualis fingitur. The Reply is easy, that the
pressure of the ambient Air, which is a fluid more subtle than Butter-milk,
will as well hinder the starting out of that liquor as of the parts of the
Butter it self: As he will easily grant, that attentively considers the nature
of the thing, and remembers how Air keeps Water from running out at the little
holes of a Gardeners Watering-pot closed at the top. What the Objector adds
about the extrusion of what he calls a subtiler Element (supposed to be
harbored in the Butter) by the pressure of the Atmosphere, in case it had any,
I think it would not be difficult to answer, if we considered, that a great and
undeniable pressure applied to water does not sensibly condense it, or deprive
it of its fluidity, because of the grossness and strength of its parts. But the
Argument being but transiently mentioned by the Author, and grounded upon a
Cartesian supposition that I never employed, I leave it to those that may think
themselves concerned (which I am not) to make a solemn answer to.

And whereas our Learned Examiner superadds, p. 142.
Quod tametsi butyri massa in disci lignei speciem reducta, cujus margo centum
vicibus area sit minor, interque duas laminas ligneas ejusdem formae ac
latitudinis posita, filis sus^ enderetur in aere tanquam in lance, ita ut
pressura aeris elastica qua ab infra, qua desuper ducentis fere vicibus
excessura sit pressionem in marginem butyri, butyrum tamen nihilo arctius
comprimetur per vim aeris elasticam, nec aliter hic afficietur quam antea: He
seems not to have sufficiently considered the Laws of the Hydrostaticks,
according to which, supposing the pressure of the Atmosphere that he rejects,
the Butter ought not to be deprived of its shape. For the pressure of the
ambient Air, being equal on all sides, if we suppose the superficies of the
Butter to be distinguished into a multitude of little equal portions, each of
these, whether they be situated Horizontally, or on the edges, can be pressed
against but by an Atmospherical Pillar equal to its Basis; and the Horizontal
portions, if I may so call them, cannot be thrust out of place, without there
be at the same time squeezed out some of the Lateral portions, which yet cannot
be so displaced, because they also are with equal force pressed (inwards) by
little aerial Pillars, whose Bases are contiguous to them, and bear against
them. Which Answer, though of it self sufficient, may be much confirmed by the
Instance, you will hereafter meet with, of a lump of Butter that kept its
irregular shape, in spite of a great and manifest pressure of the water that
surrounded it.

And this Answer may suffice to disprove, what the Doctor annexes in the
beginning of the 13th Paragraph, about the vast excess of Pressure, which the
Air exercises upon the flat and Horizontal surfaces of the abovementioned lump
of Butter, in comparison of the pressure the Marginal parts of its surface can
be exposed to. What he adds, and illustrates with a Scheme, about the hands
being assisted with the pressure of the Air, it concerns not me to answer. But
whereas among the places where the Elastical power of the Air is understood not
to reach, he reckons a Pail full of water, with a lump of butter put in it; he
supposes that, which our Hydrostaticks will by no means allow, and which is
disproved by several both of our former Experiments, and by those you will meet
with in the following Papers. By which it appears, that the pressure of the
Atmosphere is exercised, as indeed I do not see what should hinder it from
being, even upon Bodies that are quite immersed under water; and by which,
added to what has been hitherto discoursed in answer to the Learned Doctors
Objections, you will easily judge, how deservedly he shuts up the Arguments, we
have been examining, with this Conclusion. p. 143.
Adeo ut extra omnem controversiam positum videatur, quod nulla est ejusmodi
vis elastica in aere, qualem e doctis nonnulli supponunt, multoque minus tam
fortis ut centum librarum pondus superet. Quod erat Demonstrandum.

CHAP. V.
BUt this is not all the Doctor urges against me in this Chapter; for in the
14th Paragraph he seconds his former argument by another, drawn from this
Experiment of mine, That having taken two round Marbles, whose surfaces, that
were to be contiguous, were as well ground very flat as carefully polished; and
having placed them one directly upon the other, they did in a horizontal
posture so firmly cohere, without the help of any Glue, See the Hist. of
Fluidity and Firmness, p. 222. of the second E^ition.
or viscous Body, that the upper Marble being pulled up, would take up the
lower, though clogged with a weight of fourscore and odd pounds.

This Experiment, when I many years ago first published it, I referred to the
action of the Atmosphere, which pressing equally and strongly against the
surfaces of both the Marbles, except where they were contiguous, the higher
could not be drawn directly upwards from the lower (and consequently must be
followed by it) by a less force than that which was equivalent to the weight of
as great a Cylinder of the Atmosphere as leaned upon the upper Marble.

This Experiment thus explained, though it has been judged a very favorable
one to the Hypothesis on whose behalf I alleged it, does yet to the justly
famous Doctor seem a very considerable Argument against it, though for this
judgment of his he urges only this reason, That if the force, with which the
Air presses the lower Marble against the upper, be able to sustain that Marble,
though clogged with the great weight above mentioned, the same pressure of Air
would much more easily support a Plate of wood brought to a true plain, and not
loaded with any weight, if the wooden Plate were substituted to the lower
Marble, and instead of it applied to the upper.

But since the Experiment, as I proposed it, did upon trial succeed very well,
it had not been amiss if the Learned Examiner had considered it as it was
really and successfully made, and showed why the pressure of the ambient Air
was not able to hinder the separation of the Marbles: And his needless
substitution of a Wooden plate instead of the lower Marble easily suggests a
suspicion, that there may lie some fallacy, though not intended by him, in the
variation he proposes of the Experiment. And he seems to have himself had
thoughts of this kind, by taking notice, that it may be answered on our behalf,
that a Wooden Plate cannot be so exactly applied to the upper Marble, but that
there will be a little Air intercepted between it and the bottom of that stone.
And though having granted that it may be so, he employes two pages to show,
that this intermediate Air could not keep the pressure of the Atmosphere from
supporting the unclogg'd plate of wood, if it had been That pressure, which,
when there was no such intermediate Air, had sustained the lower Marble with
all the appendant weight; yet I confess his Proofs seem not to me to be
answerable to the Assurance he uses in speaking of them. His Examples taken
from Gunpowder and Wind, you will easily judge not to be very proper, where we
are not considering a force that acts by a sudden and vanishing Impetus, but a
constant and equal pressure. And as to his other Instance, which is taken from
five men that thrust against the sixth (standing with his back to a Wall) who
is but as strong as any one of them: I answer, that neither is this example
near enough of kin to our case. For each of these five men is supposed to have
an equal power of thrusting, proper to himself, and independent from all or any
of the other four. And the sixth man is likewise supposed to resist but by his
own single force, without having his power of reacting increased by the force
wherewith the others thrust against him. But in our case the thing is quite
otherwise; for supposing that some aerial particles be so placed that a solid
Body hinders them to recoil or expand themselves, we are to consider, that, as
the contiguous corpuscles of air press against them not by their own single
weight or pressure, but as they transmit the action of all the other particles
of the air which by their weight or pressure thrust them on; so the aerial
particles, contiguous to the solid Body, resist not barely by that force which
they would have if they were not compressed, but by virtue of the Springiness
they acquire upon the score of the forcible inflection they sustain from the
action of the corpuscles, that either mediately or immediately thrust against
them; and consequently, in proportion to that external force, the Elasticity of
these compressed Particles will be increased, as we see that a Bow or other
Springy body, the more it is bent by an external force, the greater power it
has to resist further compression. Upon which grounds it need to be no wonder,
that a small portion of Air, being almost included in a solid Body, and having
for some (though but very little) time been exposed to the outward air, should
be capable of resisting the pressure of as much of the whole Atmosphere, as can
come to press against it. For, this pressure of the Atmosphere being continual,
if the Springiness of the aerial particles were not now great enough to resist
that pressure, they must necessarily have been beforehand inflected or
compressed by it, till the endeavors of the one and the other were reduced to
an Aequipollency. Of which I shall give you an instance in so obvious a body as
a Bubble at the top of water: For though there be but a little Air included in
a very thin and transparent film of water; yet this little air is so well able
to resist the weight of all the Atmosphere that can come to bear against it,
that all the pressure of it is not able to make the film shrink, or become
wrinkled; which it would do, if the corpuscles of the Internal air were not
reduced to a Springiness, which makes its power of resisting equal to the
endeavor of the External Atmosphere to compress it. And to let you see, that
we may well conceive such a Springiness of the air included in the Bubbles, I
have elsewhere related, how by barely withdrawing the pressure of the ambient
air from Glass-Bubbles hermetically sealed with air in them not compressed
beyond its usual state, the Spring of the Internal air would make the Bubbles
fly in pieces: And this will happen to stronger Glasses than Bubbles, as you
will find in one of the former Experiments See the Tract about the Pressure of
the Airs Spring on bodies under water.
. And if we would illustrate what we are debating of by an Example; it should
not be by considering, as the Doctor does, the endeavor of five men against
the sixth that has his back to the Wall; but that of five Bladders full of
air, pil'd up, and resting upon a sixth. For in this case, whatever force or
power of pressing we suppose in the incumbent Bladders, they all bear jointly
upon the lower, which continuing at a stand, must thereby be so compressed as
to be able to resist their joint endeavors, as it is manifest; because
otherwise it would not continue in that state, but be farther compressed; which
is against the supposition.

This Notion about Pressure and Resistance I have the more particularly
deduced, because I found many modern Naturalists, and even Hydrostaticians
themselves to be great strangers to it. For which reason I shall add, that I
have evinced it by purposely devised Experiments in the Continuation of the
Physico-Mechanical Experiments Exper. 25. and elsewhere.
about the Air. Were it not for this, I should perhaps have spared my self the
labor of setting down these thoughts as not necessary to the solution of the
Doctors Objections. For he admits a Layer, or (as he aptly speaks) an Area of
Aerial Particles to be interposed between the upper Marble and the Wooden
Plate; and therefore the flatness and stiffness of those two Bodies must keep
them from an immediate contact as well at the edges as by the help of the same
Area they do elsewhere; and consequently that interposed Air may communicate
with the ambient Air. From whence the Laws of the Hydrostaticks (which I have
elsewhere shown) will allow me to conclude, that the weight of the Atmosphere
endeavors to depress the upper surface of the wooden Plate; and so what the
Examiner urges of the inconsiderable resistance, that the few Aerial Particles
interposed between the flat Bodies can make to the great pressure of the Column
of Air that thrusts the Wooden against the Marble Plate, would not conclude,
though our former answer could not have been made; since the resistance, made
by the interposed Aerial Particles to the pressure upwards of the Atmosphere,
is not in our present supposition made by those Particles alone, but by the
weight of the lateral and superior part of the Atmosphere exercised by the
intervention of these Particles. Which being so, what the Learned Doctor adds,
that the weight of the wooden Plate it self is here of no consideration, must
needs be a mistake. For the two equal Atmospherical Pressures, the one against
the upper surface of the wooden Plate, and the other against the lower,
countervailing and consequently frustrating the endeavor of each other, the
gravity of the wood it self will suffice to make it fall, as well as if it were
pressed against by neither of them. And from this Discourse you will easily
judge, whether the Doctor had reason to say as he does, p. 146.
Quam ab omni ratione (igitur) absonum est, ut superficies illa sive area
aerearum particularum, quae insinuant se laminam ligneam inter and marmor,
solidam columnam hujusmodi particularum, vi elastica sursum enitentium, contra
laminam ligneam obnitendo vincat, ipsamque laminam in terram deturbet.

CHAP. VI.
WHat he adds in the sixteenth number against those that fancy the Aerial
Particles to be endowed with Perception, and to act with Design pro re nata,
does not at all concern me; and what he adds in the next Paragraph, wherewith
he concludes his twelfth Chapter, I shall altogether pass by, as far as it
concerns the extravagant conceit he opposes. But because at the close of the
Paragraph, he makes an Inference, which comprises our Opinion also; since he
concludes, that the Experiment by him alleged, p. 150.
Certissimum est indicium, particulas Aerias nec cum consilio nec sine consilio
inferius marmor sustinere nec suffulcire: It will not be amiss to show, that
our Opinion is undeservedly included in the Inference; which I shall do by
briefly solving the Phenomenon the Doctor lays so much weight on. For if we
conceive with him, that the two flat Marbles formerly mentioned be suspended,
and that to the lower of them a flat wooden plate of the same shape and extent
be applied; I see no cause to wonder, why the two Marbles should stick
together, and not the lower of them to the wooden plate. For, as I lately
noted, there being an Area or Bed of Aerial Particles interposed betwixt the
Marble and the Wood, the weight of the Atmosphere, exercised by the
intervention of those Aerial Corpuscles, ought to be aequipollent to the
pressure of the Atmospherical Cylinder, that bears against the lower surface of
the Plate; which consequently by its own weight must drop down: whereas there
being no such Layer of Aerial Particles interposed betwixt the two Marbles, the
pressure of the ambient Atmosphere, which touches them every where, save where
their polished surfaces are contiguous, must keep them strongly coherent.

I presume I need not mind you, that hitherto I have discoursed upon
supposition, that the Doctor experimentally knows, what he delivers concerning
the Non-adhesion of an exactly smooth wooden Plate to a Marble one: And upon
his concession, that, because of the want of sufficient congruity between the
surfaces of two Bodies, there is a bed of Aerial Corpuscles interposed between
them. But now I think, it will not be unfit to take notice to you, that though,
to illustrate on this occasion a subject that is generally so little
understood, as the exercise of Pression among fluid Bodies, I have answered my
Learned Adversaries Objections, as if I had nothing more to say for my
Explication of the Suspension of coherent Marbles, than what I many years since
delivered in the little Tract by him cited; yet I have since abundantly
confirmed that Explication by the 50th of the Experiments published in my
Continuation; which if the Doctor had been pleased to read, perhaps he would
have received the same satisfaction that other Learned men have done: since
there I experimentally show, that the undermost Marble without the accustomed
Clog, would, upon the bare withdrawing of the sustaining air, drop off from the
upper. And whereas the two Marbles in our Vacuum would not cohere; as soon as
the formerly excluded Air was let in upon them, it did by its supervening
pressure make them stick together very strongly.

THE SECOND SECTION.
CHAP. I.
I Proceed now to the second of those two Chapters, that I am interess'd to
consider, in which the Learned Examiner is pleased to attaque three or four of
my Hydrostatical Opinions and Explications; in the defense whereof, I hope, I
shall be the less put to exercise your Patience, because the Learned Doctor
himself is pleased to grant me almost as much as I need desire concerning the
Truth of the Hypothesis, whereon my Paradoxes and Explications are founded. For
whereas the main thing I supposed in my Hydrostatical Papers, is, that in
water, though stagnant, the superior parts do actually, though not always
prevalently, gravitate upon the inferior, or (if you will) press upon them even
when they do not sensibly depress them; the Doctor in diverse places allows this
Hypothesis to be consonant to the Principles of the Mechanical Philosophy; and
accordingly having showed, that in a suspended tub of water the whole liquor
gravitates upon the bottom of the tub; He subjoyns, P. 161.
Jam vero cum tota haec aqua constet ex particulis aqueis non compactis vel
concretis, sed solutis a se invicem, impossible est ut omnes fundum situlae
premant, nisi infima quaeque ab omnibus superioribus prematur, quemadmodum
clare demonstravimus in secunda sectione hujus capitis; nempe, si nullae causae
nisi pure Mechanicae (quales sunt Motus localis, Magnitudo, Figura, etc.) in
edendo hoc Phaenomeno se intermiscent.

And elsewhere in the same Chapter he speaks thus of the gravitation of liquors
(toward the close of the second Paragraph.) p. 152.
Necesse utique est, ut parts singulae gravitent, cum totius sit gravitatio,
si non sit aliquid immateriale Principium in rerum natura, etc. And adds, at
the beginning of the next Number; Atque sane huic externi motus Hypothesi, and
gravitationis Elementorum in propriis locis inde necessario emergentis, apprime
consonum est primum illud Experimentum, quod Scriptor profert in Paradoxis suis
Hydrostaticis.

And now, Sir, I presume you do not much wonder, if I think these concessions
reach the main thing I pretend to. For though I do as freely and heartily, as
the Doctor himself, (who, I dare say, does it very sincerely,) admit or rather
assert an Incorporeal Being that made and governs the world; yet all that I
have endeavored to do in the Explication of what happens among Inanimate
Bodies, is to show, that, supposing the World to have been at first made and to
be continually preserved by Gods divine Power and Wisdom; and supposing his
General concourse to the maintenance of the Laws he has established in it, the
Phenomenon, I strive to explicate, may be solved Mechanically, that is, by the
Mechanical affections of Matter, without recourse to Natures abhorrence of a
Vacuum, to Substantial Forms, or to other Incorporeal Creatures. And therefore,
if I have shown, that the Phenomenon, I have endeavored to account for, are
explicable by the motion, bigness, gravity, shape, and other Mechanical
affections of the small parts of liquors, I have done what I pretended; which
was not to prove, that no Angel, or other immaterial Creature could interpose
in these cases; For concerning such Agents, all that I need say, is, that in
the cases proposed we have no need to recurr to them. And this, being agreeable
to the generally owned rule about Hypotheses, that Entia non sunt multiplicanda
absque Necessitate, has been by almost all the modern Philosophers of different
Sects thought a sufficient reason to reject the agency of Intelligences, after
Aristotle and so many Learned men, both Mathematicians and others, had for many
ages believed them the Movers of the Celestial Orbs.

CHAP. II.
But you will tell me, that the Doctors Concessions will not avail me, since he
urges against the Gravitation of the Elements in their proper places, which
(gravitation) he would have to be suspended by his Incorporeal Principle, an
Experiment, which he says is most manifestly repugnant to our Hypothesis. He
conceives then, that in a tub or pail full of water with a perfectly
Cylindrical cavity, whose Diameter is of sixty two parts, there is violently
kept at the bottom, by the help of a stick, a round Plate of wood, whose
Diameter amounts but to sixty one of those parts; and that, as soon as ever the
stick is removed, the wooden plate will emerge to the top and float. Quod
(says he) prorsus impossible esset, si omnes parts aquae ab (FG) ad (HJ) non
solum junctim fundum vasis, sed singulae singulas in eadem serie subjectas actu
premetent. To which assertion he immediately subjoyns this Argument to prove it
by; p. 155.
Cum Diameter laminae ligneae (H M) parts 61. habeat aequales, Diameter vasis
(HI) habeat 62, manifestum est, quod superficies fundi vasis ad superficiem
laminae se habet ut 3844. ad 3721; quorum differentia est 123. Itaque rotundum
intervallum inter latera vasis and marginem laminae ligneae habet se ad aream
laminae ut 123. ad 3721, hoc est, area laminae ligneae excedit aream dicti
intervalli plusquam triginta vicibus. Ac proinde aqua incumbens ligneae laminae
excedit magnitudine aquam incumbentem dicto intervallo inter marginem laminae
and later a vasis plus quam triginta vicibus, pondusque sive pressio hujus,
alterius pondus pressionemque vincit plusquam triginta vicibus. Adeo ut
impossible sit, ut aqua incumbens praedicto intervallo ita premat aquam ipsi
subjectam, ut hujus vi sublevetur lamina, quam vis tricies major deprimit. Quod
(says he, by way of inference) aeque absonum atque absurdum Phenomenon esset,
etc.

How little this Ratiocination agrees with the Experiments I have formerly told
you of, about the cases wherein Light bodies will be detained under water, or
emerge to the top of it, you will easily perceive, if you compare the one with
the other, which you may quickly do, if you please to compare the Doctors
discourse with the following Narratives of those Trials See the Tract of the
Positive or Relative Levity of Bodies under water. Exp. 1. etc.
, to which alone I might therefore refer you. But yet in the mean time, you
may, if you think fit, consider a little, whether the Argument, whereon the
Doctor lays so much stress, be any more than a Paralogism.

First then, since according to his computation the Area of the interval
between the sides of the Vessel and the edges of the round boards, is 123 of
such parts, whereof the Area of the board amounts to 3721; it is evident, that
there must be room enough for the water to pass between the sides of the vessel
and the edges of the board, which is supposed on all hands to be of some wood
lighter in specie than water, since else it would not emerge upon the
withdrawing of the stick.

Next, this Board or wooden Plate is not here intimated or supposed to be (and
indeed in practice can scarce be) made exactly congruous to the bottom of the
Vessel; and consequently the water may get in between them; for which cause
it is necessary to keep the wooden Plate forcibly down with a stick, which else
were needless. And consequently this interposed water will communicate with the
laterally superior water in the Vessel, which superior water may, according to
the Laws Hydrostatical, by the intervention of the interposed, exercise its
pressure upwards against the lower surface of the wooden Plate.

Thirdly, the Doctors Scheme allows and assists us to conceive, (which we may
do however,) an imaginary Plane of water to be parallel to the bottom of the
Vessel, and to pass along the bottom of the Board; so that, of the water that
lies between this Plane and the bottom of the Vessel, one part is covered by
the wooden Plate; and the other, between the edges of that and the sides of
the tub, is covered with the incumbent water only.

CHAP. III.
THese things being premised, I thus argue: It Is manifested by Hydrostaticians
after Archimedes, that in water, those parts that are most pressed, will thrust
out of place those that are less pressed: which both agrees with the common
apprehensions of men, and might, if it were needful, be confirmed by
Experiments. It Is also evident, that that part of the abovementioned imaginary
Plane, that is covered by the wooden Plate, must be pressed by a less weight
than the other part of the same Plane; because the wood being bulk for bulk
lighter than water, the aggregate of the wood and water incumbent on the
covered part of the same Plane must be lighter in specie, than the water alone
that is incumbent on the uncovered part of the same Plane; and consequently
this uncovered part being more pressed than the other part of the Plane, the
heavier must displace the lighter, which it cannot do but by thrusting up the
board, as it does, when the external force that kept it down is removed. And,
to add this upon the by, this greater pressure against the bottom than against
the top of bodies immersed in water specifically heavier than they, is a true
reason of their emersion, as I have elsewhere shown. So that there happens no
more in this case than what usually happens in the ascension of bodies in
liquors specifically heavier than themselves, on the account of the newly
mentioned difference of Pressure. And it is with an (express or supposed)
exception of such a difference, which in many other cases may be safely
neglected, that (which I desire you to take notice of,) in most places of this
discourse I speak of the Pressure of ambient Fluids on immersed Solids as
uniform or every way equal.

It Is true, that according to the Doctors supputation, if the solid Cylinder,
consisting of the wooden Plate, and all the water directly incumbent on it,
were put into an ordinary balance, it would there many times outweigh the
hollow Cylinder of water alone that leans upon the uncovered part of the
imaginary Plane. And that is it that seems to have deceived the Learned Doctor.
But there are diverse Hydrostatical Cases, wherein the Phenomenon depends not
so much upon the absolute weight of the compared Bodies, as upon their
respective and their specific Gravity; on whose account it is, that a small
Pible, for instance, that weighs not a quarter of an Ounce, will readily sink
to the bottom of the river, on whose surface a log of wood of a hundred pound
in weight will float. It Is a Rule in Hydrostaticks, that when two portions of
water or any other Homogeneous liquor press against each other, the prevalency
will go, not according to the absolute weight, but the perpendicular height of
those Portions. And accordingly we find, that if a slender pipe of glass, being
filled with water, have its lower orifice unstop'd at the bottom of a vessel of
water, which contains much more of that liquor than the pipe; yet if this last
named water were, for instance, two foot high, and that in the Vessel but one,
the water in the pipe will readily subside, till it come almost to a level with
the external water, though it cannot do so without raising the whole mass of
water that stagnated in the vessel.

And now I shall subjoin an Experiment, which, though at first it may seem
slight, and was made in lesser glasses and quantitys than I would have employed
if I could have procured better Accommodations, has the advantage of requiring
no curious instruments, and yet I hope will serve for an ocular proof of the
fallaciousness of that reasoning the Doctor is so strangely confident of.

We took an open mouthed glass, such as some call Jarrs, and Ladys often use to
keep sweet meats in, which was three inches and a half or better in Diameter,
and somewhat less in depth; and had the figure of its cavity Cylindrical
enough. Into this having put some water to cover the protuberance, wont to be
at the bottom of such glasses, we took a convenient quantity of Beeswax, and
having just melted it, we poured it cautiously into the glass, warmed
beforehand to prevent its cracking, till it reached to a convenient height.
This vessel and the contained liquors we set aside to cool, in expectation,
that when the heat, that had dilated the wax, was gone, it would shrink from
the glass, and consequently leave a little interval every where between the
concave superficies of the vessel, and unequal of the hardened wax; which
accordingly came to pass, and saved me the labor of getting the wax shaped for
my purpose with tools; which might have been done but not without trouble and
less exactness. And now 'twas easy for me to try the experiment I designed;
for, pouring in warily some water between the glass and the wax, so that it
filled all the interval, left between those two bodies both at the bottom and
the sides, the wax was made presently to float, being visibly lifted up from
the bottom, and its upper part appearing a little above the level of the water,
which was no more than I did, and had reason to expect, according to the true
Principles of Hydrostaticks. For water being somewhat, though but little,
heavier, in specie, than wax, and that which was poured into the bottom and
stagnated there, being pressed by the collateral water, every way interposed
between the concave part of the Glass and the unequal of the Wax (so that this
collateral liquor answered what I lately called a hollow Cylinder of water in
the Doctors Experiment) that part of the stagnant water, that was leaned upon
by the wax, being less pressed than the other part of the same stagnant water
was by the water incumbent on it; this latter must displace the former, which
it could not do but by raising up the wax that leaned upon it. And yet this
collateral water was so far from being heavier than the wax its pressure
impelled up, that both the collateral, and the stagnant water all together,
being weighed in good scales, amounted to little above a quarter of the weight
of the wax, which happened by reason of the narrowness of the Vessel, which, if
it had been wide enough, I doubt not but the experiment would have succeeded,
though the wax had outweigh'd the collateral water ten times more than in our
experiment it did. But that the solid body exceeded almost four times the
weight, not only of the collateral but the stagnant liquor too, does
sufficiently overthrow the Doctors ratiocination. Whose fallaciousness will yet
further appear by two other improvements, among others, which I made of one
Experiment.

For I. though we poured in more and more water, as long as the Vessel would
contain any, the Cylinder of wax was but lifted higher and higher from the
bottom of the glass, but did not appear raised more than at the first, above
the upper surface of the water; which argues, that 'twas not at all the
Quantity of the inferior water, which was continually increased, but the
pressure of the collateral water, which continued still at the same height in
reference to that wax, that caused the elevation of the body.

And II. to manifest yet more clearly the Doctors mistake, I devised the
following trial. We took a round plate of Lead about the thickness of a
shilling, and having made it stick fast to the bottom of the Cylinder of wax,
to make this body sink the more directly, we placed one after another upon the
upper part of the wax diverse grain weights (first wetted to keep them from
floating) till we had put on enough to make the wax subside to the bottom: For
the facilitating whereof we had pared off its edges; by this means, the glass
having been at first almost filled with water, there swam about an inch or
better of that liquor above the upper surface of the wax. And lastly, we took
off by degrees the grain weights that we had put on, till we saw the wax,
notwithstanding the adhering Lead, rise, by degrees, to the top of the water,
above which some part of it was visibly extant.

From this experiment I thus argue: It Is manifest, that, according to the
Doctors supposition, here was incumbent upon the wax a Cylinder of an inch in
height and of the same Diameter or breadth with the round surface of the wax,
whereas upon the removing part of the water, that lay at the bottom when the
wax began to rise, there was incumbent no greater weight than that of the
collateral water, and as much of the superior and stagnant, as was directly
imcumbent upon that collateral water (and would have deserved the same name, if
we had supposed the unequal surface of the wax to have been continued upwards as
high as the glass reached.) But now, whereas, according to the Doctors
ratiocination, this Cylinder of water incumbent on the wax, being an inch deep,
and a good deal above three inches broad, must press the wax with a greater
weight by several times, than that which the lateral and hollow Cylinder of
this stagnant water could have upon the rest of the collateral water; yet the
height of this aggregate of collateral waters being the same with that of the
wax and the water swimming upon it, the difference of the pressure was so
small, that barely taking off a weight of four or five grains, the wax would,
notwithstanding the pressure of the water incumbent on it, be impelled up and
made to float: And by the like weight, put again upon it, it would be made to
sink, and by another removal of such a weight, (for I purposely reiterated the
trial more than once,) it would, though slowly, reascend. And these Phenomenon
do so much depend upon a Mechanical aequipollence of pressure, that even four
grains would not have been necessary to make the wax rise or sink, if it had
not been for some little accidental impediments, that are easily met with in
such narrow glasses; for otherwise in a larger Vessel we have made the same
Lump of Wax readily enough sink or float, by the putting in or taking off a
single grain or perhaps less.

By this you may see, that for the Regulation of Hydrostatical things, Nature
has her balance too as well as Art, and that in the balance of Nature the
Statical Laws are nicely enough observed.

You may also take notice, upon the by, how little the weight of the Cylinder
of water upon a body immersed in stagnant water is considerable, whilst there
is a pressure of collateral water to counterballance it; since in this last
trial, though the Cylinder of incumbent water did continually increase or
decrease in length, whilst the lump of Wax was sinking or emerging; yet the
same despicable weight of a grain or less, that was just able to depress it
beneath the upper surface of the water, did by its pressure or removal procure
its sinking to the very bottom, or rising again to the top, and on both
occasions with an equal slowness, bating that little acceleration of motion,
that ought to happen upon another account, and which therefore is to be
observed in the wax, during its rising as well as during its sinking.

CHAP. IV.
SOme other Phenomenon I produced, by varying the hitherto mentioned
experiment, which are very favorable to our Notions about Hydrostaticks. But,
since they do not directly concern the present Controversy, I shall in this
place only annex a couple, the former whereof affords an easy confirmation of
that Paradox, which we lay as the ground of diverse others, and the contrary
whereof is maintan'd not only by Doctor More, but by many other famous and
Learned men, namely, that in stagnant water the upper parts do actually press
the lower.

We took then a very slender pipe of glass, whose Cavity was narrower than
that of an ordinary Goosquill, that heterogeneous Liquors may not be able to
get by one another in it. This Pipe near one end was bent upwards like a
Siphon, that it might have a short leg as Parallel as the Artificer could make
it to the longer. Into this crooked Pipe we put a little oil, and then held it
perpendicularly in a somewhat deep and wide-mouthed Glass filled partly with
Water and partly with a Lump of Wax, of the bigness and shape of that already
mentioned; that so the pressure of the incumbent Water upon the open orifice of
the shorter Leg, might impel the oil into the longer Leg, somewhat above the
surface of the water in the Vessel; which 'twas convenient should be done, that
we might the better see the motions of the Oil, and which we knew must be done
by the course we took; both because Oil is lighter in specie than Water, and
consequently required not an equal height of Water to counterballance it; and
because in very slender Pipes, Water is wont to ascend a little above the Level
of the External Water, whereinto they are immersed. The Pipe being, as was
said, held upright, 'twas easy to take notice by a mark, fixed on the outside,
to what height the Oil reached in it.

Now if we conceive a Horizontal Plane, Parallel to the bottom of the Vessel,
to pass by the Basis of the floating Wax, it is evident by what has been
formerly shown, that, of this Imaginary Plane, that part on which the Wax is
incumbent is as strongly pressed by the weight of the Wax, as the Lateral part
of the same Plane is by the weight of the Water incumbent on it; (otherwise
these Pressures would not be aequipollent, but the Wax would be raised:) And
consequently that part of this Plane, that is placed directly over the Orince
of the shorter Leg of the Pipe, is no more pressed, than any equal portion of
that part of the same Plane that is covered by the Wax. This Body being taken
out of the Water, the Liquor subsided a great way in the Vessel, and so did
proportionably the Oil in the longer Leg of the Pipe. And lastly, having
weighed out in a good pair of Scales as much Water, as we found the Wax to
amount to, this Liquor was, instead of the Wax, poured into that which remained
in the Glass; whereupon the Oil, in the longer leg of the Pipe, was again
impelled up (very near) to the former Mark to which it had been raised by the
Wax. Whence we may gather, that the Water newly put in, though in the Air it
weighed no more than the Wax; yet it did as much press the Water, that lay
beneath the forementioned Imaginary Plane, and consequently that, which was
directly over the shorter Leg of the Pipe, as the Wax, that had been taken out,
had done. And since we have already proved, that the Wax did confiderably press
that Plane, it ought not to be denied, that the Water also (which instead of it
was able to impell up the Oil in the Pipe) did in like manner press that Plane;
and consequently that Water may gravitate in Water, as well as a solid Body,
such as Wax is, can. And this is the first additional use I told you I would
make of our Experiment.

But, (to come now to the second) there is another Phenomenon of it, viz. the
abovementioned tenderness of Nature's Balance, whose use seems to be of no
less general concernment to the true Doctrine of the Hydrostaticks. For, by
duly considering that Phenomenon, and reasoning a while upon it, we may be
helped to rectify that plausible Mistake, which has long deluded both
Philosophers and Mathematicians, and does yet impose on most of them; namely,
that a Body does not actually gravitate when it does not descend. For we have
seen already, and shall further show by and by, that the sunken Wax and the
Brass grains that lie on it, do actually press or gravitate upon the subjacent
Water and Bottom of the Vessel on which it is incumbent; and consequently its
pressure being not surmounted by that of the Collateral Water, which is unable
to raise it, must be as great, as that of this collateral Water. Therefore,
when upon the removal of a single Grain, the Wax with its incumbent weight is
made to ascend, and that but very slowly, it is evident, that 'twas so far from
not gravitating before, because it did not actually descend, that it retained
its Gravity even whilst it ascends: As may appear not only by the slowness of
its motion upwards, proceeding from its being in Nature's Balance very little
less heavy than it need be to countervail the pressure of the Collateral Water;
but by this also, that if but a single grain be laid on it when it begins to
rise, its ascension will be checked and hindered, which could not be done by the
addition of so inconsiderable a weight, if the Wax and the adhering Metal did
not, even during their ascent, retain their former gravity, though that were
frustrated as to the act of descending, or so much as keeping their station by
the prevailing pressure of the collateral Water: So that, since, (as we found)
the Wax and adhering Metal amounted to a good deal above 4000 Grains, it did
in the Balance of Nature weigh, whilst it was ascending, not so much as a
4000th part less than it did, whilst it was actually descending.

CHAP. V.
I Should beg your pardon, Sir, for having detained you so long with my Reply
to a single Objection of the Doctors, how pompously soever proposed; but that I
thought it not amiss to do some service to the true Theory of Hydrostaticks, by
taking this occasion to present you some things that I thought not unlikely to
illustrate some parts of that Theory; though above what was necessary to answer
the Doctors Argument; to which I confess I was troubled to see so Learned a man
subjoin the following conclusion: Haec tam luculenta Demonstratio contra
Gravitationem particularum aquae inter se quamvis junctae situlae fundum
urgeant, si non sit vera atque solida, equidem nec mei ipsius nec ullius unquam
mortalis in posterum ratiociniis credam. But I hope he will not be as bad as
his word, but will be pleased to consider as well as I do for him, that a man
may be very happy in other parts of Learning and of greater moment, that has
had the misfortune to mistake in Hydrostaticks, a discipline which very few
Scholars have been at all versed in, and about which diverse of those few have
had the misfortune to err, not only in the conclusions they have drawn, but in
the very Principles they have embraced.

To the foregoing Argument the Doctor, though he declares he thinks it
needless, adds in the 5th Paragraph another, taken from the Last experiment of
my Hydrostatical Paradoxes, by which he ingenuously acknowledges, that I seem
at first sight to have demonstrated what I pretend to, about the gravitation of
the upper parts of stagnant water upon the lower. And I am sorry that I cannot
in return acknowledge, that his objection at first sight seemed to me a cogent
one: For, neither at the second nor third perusal can I clearly discern where
his Ratiocination lies, supposing it to be meant for an answer to my
experiment. And though I consulted with some Learned Members of the Royal
Society, whereof two are Mathematicians, and one his particular friend; yet
they all confessed he had not sufficiently explained himself on this occasion,
nor could they show me to what argumentation I might properly direct my reply.
Only one of the Doctors Correspondents, having seriously perused his discourse
and the annexed scheme, told me that what seemed the most probable to him, was,
that though the Doctor was too Civil to give me, in ter ninis, the Lie; yet he
did indeed deny the matter of fact to be true. Which I cannot easily think, the
Experiment having been tried both before our whole Society, and very
Critically, by its Royal Founder his Majesty himself. But, since you have your
self seen and made it more than once, I need not spend words to convince you
that the matter of fact is true.

But after I had in vain sought the Doctors meaning where I expected it,
chancing lately to cast my Eyes on another place, where I saw my Scheme
repeated, I find this passage in the Explication he endeavors to give of the
Phenomenon by his Hylarchical Principle; Cum vero tam profunde immergitur
tubus, ut obturaculum tangat Superficiem V. W, vis retractionis Aeris ita
augetur ut etiam ponderis appensi superadditam depressione^ superet. Videtur
igitur quasi quaed^m sursum-suctio Aeris in tubo contenti, and conformis ac
contemporanea aquae compulsio in obturaculum, quo tam firmiter in os valvulae
comprimitur, ibique cum appenso pondere sustentatur. What considerable interest
the supposed, but unprov'd, Retraction of the Valve or the Air it self can have
in this Phenomenon, I confess I do not discern, not being able to see, but
that the experiment would succeed when tried in vacuo, although all the
Atmosphetical Air were annihilated. But if I mistake the Doctors meaning I am
to be excused, since I do it not willingly, and his own obscurity has been
accessory to it. Nor am I very apprehensive of being unable to defend my
account of an experiment, which (as you know) has had the good fortune to
recommend the Doctrine, for the Proof whereof I devised it, to many Learned and
curious Persons, several of which were sufficiently indisposed to admit it.

And to avoid all mistakes and disputes that may arise (which I think they must
do needlessly) upon the score of the Valve employed in our Experiment, I shall
remind you of another, that I remember I have some times shown you and diverse
other Virtuosi, though I remember not whether I have mentioned it in any of my
published writings. The Sum of this trial is, that an arbitrary Quantity of
Quicksilver, being by Suction raised into a very slender glass-pipe, whose
upper Orifice is stopped with the Experimenters finger, to keep the Mercury from
falling before its time, the open end of the pipe with the Mercury in it is
thrust into a competently deep glass of water till the little Cylinder of
Mercury have, beneath the surface of the water, attained to a depth, that is at
least 14 times as great as the Mercurial Cylinder has of height. For then, the
finger being removed from the upper orifice, the glass-pipe will be open at
both ends, and there will be nothing to hinder the Quicksilver's falling down
to the bottom, but the resistance of the Cylinder of water, that is under it,
which Cylinder can resist but by virtue of the weight or pressure of the
stagnant water that is superior to it, though but collaterally placed above it:
And yet this water being by the pipe, whose upper part is higher than its
surface, and accessible only to the air, kept from pressing against the Mercury
any where but at the bottom of the Pipe, and being about a 14th part of the
weight of an equal bulk of Mercury, it is able at that depth to make the
subjacent water press upward against the Mercury, which is but a 14th part as
high as the water is deep, with a force equivalent to that of the gravity
wherewith the Mercury tends downwards. And to manifest, that this Phenomenon
depends merely upon the Aequilibrium of the two liquors; if you gently raise
the lower end of the pipe toward the surface of the water, this liquor, being
not then able to exercise such a pressure as it could at a further and greater
depth, the Mercury preponderating will, in part, (more or less, as the pipe is
more or less raised) fall out to the bottom of the glass. But if, when the
Quicksilver is at the first depth, instead of raising the pipe you thrust it
down farther under the water, the pressure of that liquor against the Mercury
increasing with its depth, will not only sustain the Mercury, but impell it up
in the pipe to a considerable distance from the lower orifice of it, and keep
it near about the same distance from the surface of the laterally superior
water. And this experiment may not only serve for the purpose, for which I here
allege it; but also, if duly considered and applied, may very much both
illustrate and confirm the Explication formerly given of the seemingly
spontaneous ascent of the clogged sucker in our exhausted Air-pump.

The last Argument, the Doctor urges against the Gravitation of water in what
they call its proper place, is deduced from what happens to the Diverse, who in
the midst of the Sea, though the salt water of that be much heavier than that
of freshwater Rivers, do not find themselves oppressed, or so much as feel
themselves harmed or compressed by the vast load of the incumbent water.

But that the Equality of the pressures of an ambient fluid will go a great
way toward the solving of this Difficulty, you will find, by the Experiments
and considerations you will meet with in the following The Author means the New
experiments of the differing pressure of heavy solids, and fluids,
Papers, to which, for that reason, I referr you. And though the Doctor in this
same Paragraph objects, Tametsi haec pressio aequalis sit, nihil tamen impedit
quo minus subtiliores parts corporis magisque fluidas exprimat and elidat. I
remember I answered that exception before, by saying, that those liquors that
he supposes should be squeezed out, cannot be so, because there is as great a
pressure against those parts at which they should issue, as against any of the
rest, if the parts that should be squeezed out be not too spirituous and
subtle, which if they be, I should gladly learn how the Doctor knows that no
such minute and spirituous particles are really expelled: especially if that be
observed, which we shall soon have occasion to relate, that a small animal,
being vehemently compressed in water, seemed a little, though but a little, to
shrink.

But that we may the more distinctly consider this grand argument, taken from
the experience of the Diverse, that is wont to be employed by the Schools and
others for the vulgar Opinion, and is now urged by the Learned Doctor to prove
His; 'twill be convenient to observe, that it does, at once, both propose a
Question, and contain an Objection, grounded upon the surmis'd insolubleness of
that Question.

And to begin with the Problem, Whence it is, that Diverse are so far from
being killed or oppressed by the weight of the incumbent water, that they are
not so much as hurt by it, nay, that they scarce feel it at all? We may take
notice, that there is in it somewhat supposed, as well as somewhat demanded.
For, in the Question it is taken for granted, that Diverse, though at never so
great a depth, feel no pressure exercised against them by the water; which is
an affirmation in point of fact, of whose truth I make some question, for the
reasons I shall ere long have occasion to mention.

But it will clear the way for what is to follow, if I here divide the noble
and difficult Problem, we are to consider, into two Questions; the first, why a
Diver should not be oppressed and crushed to death by the pressure of the
Incumbent and Ambient water. And the second, why at least he should not be made
sensibly to feel it by suffering some considerable inconvenience from it.

In answer to the first of these Questions, you will easily perceive, that
diverse things may be pertinently applied, that you will meet with in the
following Paper, to show the difference betwixt the pressure of Fluid and that
of Solid bodies. And that de facto the pressure of water may be exceeding great
without destroying an Animal quite surrounded with that liquor; I have long
since shown in another The Author points at the Appendix to the Hydrostatical
Paradoxes.
Treatise, by the experiment of a little Tadpole, which being, together with
the water it swam in, included in a bent Glass sealed at one end, the animal
was not killed or sensibly hurt, but only (according to what was lately noted
by anticipation) seemed to shrink into somewhat (and but little) lesser
dimensions.

If it be here alleged, that this Experiment makes rather against me than for
me, the Learned Doctor having made use of it with a Scheme to explain it in his
16th. Paragraph; it will be fit for me to consider his Objection. Having then
recited the matter of fact newly delivered, he adds, Quod certe fieri non
posset nisi juxte legem quartam contrusio particularum aquae contra se invicem
Principio Hylarchico inhiberetur and eluderetur. Atque hinc fit, ut quamvis
Aqua is tubo (A B C) vi trudis (G F) aliquanto facta sit condensatior, parts
tamen sic compressae ut propius ad se invicem accedant, nihilo inde inter se
fiunt comprimentiores. And then subjoining the following passage; Neque emim
sequitur ex earum contactu quod premant se invicem, quandoquidem particulae,
uti fit in duris Corporibus, in unum coalescere possunt and tamen non mutuo se
premere; (Wherein are some things that might be questioned if it were
necessary;) He thus pursues his Discourse: Cum vero hic particulae aquae si
omnino premerent se invicem, pressura in Gyrinum, columnae aqueae, ducentos vel
trecentos pedes, aeneae vero, plus viginti vel triginta pedes altae, pressionem
adaequaret, luculentum est indicium quod revera particulae se invicem non
premant. Nam plane est incredibile, columnum aeneam pro corpore quidem gyrini
latam, sed altam viginti vel triginta pedes and amplius, Gyrinoque ad
perpendiculum incumbente^n omnia viscera tam tenellae Gelatinae no^ esse
elisuram. Notwithstanding which allegation I am apt to think, you will judge
the Argument from this experiment to be more probable on my side than on the
Doctors. For there being in our case an animal, exceedingly much more tender
than a man, exposed to a pressure which he affirms is so great, that if it were
exercised on the Tadpole, it ought to squeeze out all his guts, I think I may
pretend to have given a pertinent instance, that a Diver may be at a
considerable depth under water preserved from being crushed to death by the
weight of it. And whereas the Doctor tells us, that the cause of the Incolumity
of the Tadpole is, that the pressure or contrusion of the particles of the
water against one another is hindered or frustrated by the Principium
Hylarchicum, I reply; That what I affirm is matter of Fact, and evident,
(namely, that there was a great external force duly and yet ineffectually
applied to press to Death by means of the water the animal swimming in it;) but
that this Mechanical force was suspended or made ineffectual by some invisible
and immaterial Agent, is but the Doctors Hypothesis, and a thing, which,
whether it be true or no, is at least not manifest.

Having said thus much about the first Question; I now proceed to the second,
Why Diverse though at never so great a depth complain not of the pressure of the
water, nor suffer any harm nor inconvenience by it?

And here, Sir, the Question highly meriting a particular Curiosity, I shall
not scruple in the more full enquiry, I am now entering upon, as well sometimes
to employ and enlarge particulars already mentioned in the last of the
following Papers, as oftentimes to strengthen them with new ones. And I shall
also for a while suspend my difference with the Doctor, and addressing my self
to you, who, I am sure, will allow me that water weighs in water, propose,
according to my custom, not as a Dogmatist, but as an Inquirer, some
particulars, that may tend to the Solution of a Problem, which I take to be as
difficult as noble. Not that I doubt but it must and will be explicated upon
the Mechanical Principles; but partly, because the application of them to the
Solution will not offer it self to every seeker; and partly, because we are not
yet well furnished, either with experiments made on bodies under water, or so
much as with so competent an account of the matter of fact, as I think may keep
wary men from hesitations about it. For, what is commonly reported concerning
the Diverse, is (as has above been intimated) grounded but upon their own
Relations and answers, perhaps amplified or procured by leading Questions from
persons, who are generally either slaves or ignorant men, taken from the less
sober part of the illiterate vulgar, and prepossest with the common opinion of
the non-gravitation of water in its own place; and consequently are not like to
make over-accurate observations, but prone to refer the inconvenient
alterations, they feel, to any other cause than the pressure of the water,
which they are taught to be none at all. If observations about Diving were made
by Philosophers and Mathematicians, or, at least, intelligent men, who would
mind more the bringing up out of the Sea instructive observations than
shipwrack'd goods, we should perhaps have an account of what happens to men
under water differing enough from the common reports.

You will in one of the following Papers find mention of a Learned Physician of
my acquaintance, that, upon his diving leisurely, perceived a constriction to
be made of his Thorax by the action of the surrounding Seawater.

A Spanish Prelate, that lived long in America, speaking of the deplorable
condition of those wretched Indians that were employed by their inhumane
Masters about the fishing for Pearls, gives us this account of them: See Purch.
Tom. IV. Lib. 8. p. 1587.
It is impossible that men should be able to live any long season under the
water without taking breath, the continual cold piercing them; and so they dye
commonly parbreaking of blood at the mouth, and of the bloody flux caused by
the stomach. Their hair, which are by nature cole-black, alter and become
afterward a branded russet, like to the hairs of Sea-wolves, etc.

And a General of the English in the East Indies, being by them employed on an
Embassy to the Emperor of Japan, has this passage concerning some female
Diverse that he met with in his voyage: Purch. Tom. I. Lib. 4. C. 1.
All along this coast and so up to Ozaca, we found women Diverse, that lived
with their household and family in boats upon the water, as in Holland they do
the like. These women would catch fish by Diving, which by net and line they
missed, and that in eight fathom depth. Their eyes by continually diving grew
as red as blood, whereby you may know a diving Woman from all other Women. I
know, it may be said, that these diseases may proceed from the coldness and
moisture or other qualities of the Sea; nor would I confidently reject such a
surmise: But it may also be possible, that the compression, they suffered under
water, might have at least a share in the production of these ill effects. For
how are we yet certain, that the pressure of the water against their bodies,
though it does not manifestly dislocate any solid or firm part, but only
somewhat press inwards, as in the above mentioned Tadpole the outward skin and
the fibers, (both which will easily yield a little way without being painfully
stretched,) may not, by straitning the Vessels, and otherwise inconveniently,
alter the circulation of the blood and the motion of the humors, spirits, and
other fluid parts of the body? And I am not sure, that much of the cold, that
Diverse are wont to complain of, when under water, may not be a disaffection
produced in the nervous and membranous parts, occasioned by the compression of
the ambient water, there being diverse things, and pressure among others,
besides actual cold, that will make men complain of being cold; and in our case
this sensation may be excited or assisted by the hindering of the usual
perspiration at the constipated pores of the skin. And it seems not impossible,
that one, not so ignorant and heedless as Diverse are wont to be, may refer a
new sensation, that really proceeds from pressure, to other Causes; since
Learned and Intelligent men, when prepossest (as these Common Diverse usually
are) with the vulgar opinion about the Non-gravitation of Water and Air in
their natural places, do almost always refer The reason of which experiment may
be gathered from the 4th. Chapter of the Author's long since published Defense
against Linus.
an experiment of my Engine to Suction, which is indeed the effect of the
pressure of the Ambient, (as I have In a Paradox about Suction.
elsewhere clearly shown,) and affirm, that the pulp of the finger or hand is
drawn up into a hollow Pipe, into which it is indeed thrust by the weight of
the Ambient air. But all these things I have mentioned, not as if I laid any
great weight upon each of them, but to let you see, that 'twas not altogether
without cause, that I complained of the incompetency of the History of what
Diverse feel under water; especially at great depths, where this want of
information may be more considerable: For, as far as I have yet learnt by
perusing Voyages and enquiring of Travelers of my acquaintance, the places,
where they are wont to dive for Pearl, are but moderately deep, and indeed
shallow in comparison of the great depths of the Sea; so that if we were
furnished with as many Relations of these profound places, as we have of the
others, possibly the accounts would be different enough to render doubtful or
to correct the received opinions about the conditions of Diverse at the bottom
of the Sea. For, I remember that a credible eyewitness, who, (if I mistake
not) was the Intelligent Oviedo, speaking of the Pearl-fishing on the American
Island of Cubagna, has among many other notable observations such a passage as
this; But whereas the place is very deep, a man cannot naturally rest at the
bottom by reason of the abundance of aerie substance, which is in him, as I have
oftentimes proved. For although he may by violence and force descend to the
bottom, yet are his feet lifted up again, so that he can continue no time
there. And therefore where the Sea is very deep, these Indian Fishers use to
tie two great stones about them with a coard, on each side one, by the weight
whereof they descend to the bottom, and remain there until them lists to rise
again, at which time they unloose the stones and rise up at their pleasure.

And now to come closer to the explication of our difficult Problem; there yet
occurrs to me nothing more likely in order to it, than what I have already
mentioned in the Paper you will meet with about the Differing pressures, etc.
And therefore it shall here suffice me to enlarge, and by further
Considerations and Experiments confirm, what is there more summarily
discoursed; namely, That the Phenomenon may depend (chiefly) upon these two
things, the uniform pressure of the fluid Ambient, and the robust texture of a
humane body exposed to this Pressure.

In one of the following. New Experiments about the differing Pressure of heavy
Solids and Fluids.
Papers, you will find examples of the great pressure that may be sustained
unharm'd by such frail bodies as Eggs and thin Glasses, that one would expect
should be broken in pieces thereby, provided the pressure be exercised by the
intervention of an Ambient liquor; as water. And by the account elsewhere
referred to, of the Tadpole, it seems highly probable, that even that tender
animal, when it seemed by some small diminution of the bulk to be every way a
little compressed inwards, was put to no considerable (or perhaps to any
sensible) pain or inconvenience, since it seemed to swim without any irregular
motions, which would in likelihood have insued, if it had been much harmed or
incommodated. Which example, with those formerly pointed at, may teach us, that
there may be a vast difference betwixt the resistance that a body can make when
compressed immediately by Solid bodies, and when in the compression every way
ambient Fluids intervene. Which you will the less admire, if you consider, that
by reason of the grossness, hardness, or rigidness of visible Solid bodies the
pressure can never be made every where so equally as by the parts of Liquors,
whose smalness, which renders them singly invisible, fits them to accommodate
themselves far more closely and conveniently to all the superficial parts of
the body immersed in them, and to have the force of the compressing body more
uniformly distributed to them. But because the Instances referred to, are taken
from bodies surrounded with water, I will take two or three about the
resistance of bodies to violently compressed Air; partly, because those made in
our Engine are wont to be performed with Air (not condensed, but) rarefied or
expanded beyond its usual consistence; and partly, because it will not be
denied, that the corpuscles of Air may be really comprest or thrust against one
another, since it is clear, that they may be crowded into far less room, than
they possessed before, and bear so strongly against the Glasses that imprison
them, as not seldom, if too much compressed, to burst them in pieces.

Consider then, that among bodies not fluid the Swims of smaller fishes are
likely to be judged none of the most able to resist compression, since they
consist of bladders so thin and delicate, that a piece of fine Venice-Paper is
very thick in comparison, and that they contain nothing in them but soft Air
not-compress'd by any outward force. I caused one of these bladders of above an
inch in length and proportionably great, to be taken out of a Roach, and
anointed it with Oil to keep it supple, and preserve it from being pierced or
softened by the water; and having by a weight of Lead, fastend to the neck of
it, let it down to the bottom of a hollow Cylindrical tube, sealed at one end,
and made purposely large, and about 56 inches long, for some Hydrostatical
Experiments; we could not perceive, that by the weight of all the incumbent
water it was manifestly compressed, or that it did discover the least wrinkle
or other depression of the very thin membrane, though stuffed but with Air. And
this trial was made more than once with the same sucess; and yet, that this
proceeded rather from the robustness of the bladder, that was able to resist
the weight of a taller pillar of water, than from the Non-gravitation of water
in the upper part of the tube on that in the lower, we showed, by presently
letting down such a Mercurial-Gage as is described, and often mentioned in the
Continuation of our New Experiments. For letting down this by a string to the
bottom of a tube, the weight of the incumbent water forced up some of the
Mercury out of the open leg of the Siphon into the sealed one, and consequently
compressed the air included there, which though it were not very much, yet it
was very manifest. For the uncompress'd Air being 3 inches and in length, we
judged it at the bottom of the tube about by the intrusion of the Mercury that
was impelled up; and to satisfy my self and others, that, if the incumbent
water had been heavy enough, it would have visibly depressed the bladder in
spite of any Principium Hylarchicum, since I could not have a tube long enough,
the bladder was sunk into a Chrystal-Glass that had a long and Cylindrical
neck, and was so well stuffed with a stopple that was Cylindrical too, that
'twas very difficult for any thing to get out betwixt it and the orifice of the
Glass; then, a competent Quantity of air being left above the water, the
stopple was warily and by degrees thrust down, and so, lessening the capacity
of the Glass, compressed the air that was next it, and, by the intervention of
that, the water that was under it. And though there did not upon a slight
compression of the outward air appear any sensible operation upon the bladder,
that was at the bottom of the water; yet, upon a farther intrusion of the
stopple the pressure being increased, the immersed bladder discovered not only
one but two considerably deep wrinkles, which presently disappeared upon the
drawing up of the stopple. Upon whose being thrust in again, depressions were
again to be seen on the Swim. And we having been careful to conveigh into the
same Glass such a Mercurial Gage as has been lately spoken of, we estimated by
the condensation of the air in the sealed leg of that Gage, that the bladder
had been exposed to a pressure, that might be equivalent to that of a pillar of
about 40 foot of water.

This I hope will lessen the wonder, that Bodies of so firm a texture as those
of lusty men, should support the pressure of the water at such depths, as
Diverse are wont to stay at; since we see, what resistance can be made by so
exceeding thin and delicate a membrane stuffed only with air, in comparison of
the strong membrans and fibers of a man, stuffed besides Air with more firm
parts. I will not here urge, that great weights may be sustained in the Air by
such tendons (or cords of fibers,) and by other fibers, as it were, interwoven
into membrans, in comparison of what an ordinary man would expect: But I shall
invite you to consider with me, that not only upon the account of the stable
parts of the humane Body, but of the Spirits too, it may resist very violent
pressures (and such as perhaps have not yet been considered) of a fluid Body,
not only without any manifest conrusion or dislocation of parts, but without
any sense of pain; which I suppose you will grant me, if, considering what
great effects Gusts of Wind have upon Doors, Trees, nay Masts of Ships, blowing
them down, nay breaking them; and that yet a man without being extraordinary
strong will stand against the impetuosity of such a strong Wind, and walk
directly against it by virtue of the vigor of his muscles and spirits, without
being thrown down or bruised by so violent a Current of Air as beats upon him,
but without so much as complaining that he feels any pain; and this, though the
Wind that beats against him, however it be a fluid Body, yet because it acts as
a stream, does not uniformly compress him, but invade only the forepart of his
Body. Likewise, in the lifting up heavy weights by Porters, Carriers and other
lusty men, we may see the slender tendons of the hands loaded with 100 or 150,
or perhaps a far greater number of pounds, without having their fibers so far
compressed or stretched as to make the lifters complain of pain, though
sometimes they may of difficulty. So that, (as I could, if it were needful,
confirm by other Instances) a humane Body is an Engine of a much firmer
structure than Scholars are wont to take notice of. And here let me add, that I
doubt, whether, if the structure of a man were not considerably (though not
perhaps equally) firm, he would, especially in a deep Sea, be able to bear the
pressure of the water, though not immediately applied, without pain. For (to
give you one Reason more of my not acquiescing in vulgar reports about Diving,)
having several times conversed with a man, apt enough both to enquire and
observe, who got his living by taking up Shipwrack'd goods, he answered me,
when I asked him whether he felt any peculine pressure against the Drums of his
Ears, which are membranes ^^t so well backed as those of other parts; that when
he stayed at a considerable depth, as 10 or 12 fathoms, under the surface of
the Sea, he felt a great pain in both his ears, which often put him to shifts
to lessen it; which by his manner of describing it I concluded was from the
incompetent resistance of the Air, which he acknowledged to me he found by
manifest tokens to be notably compressed by the Superior water. Which Relation
from such a person does not only confirm our explication, but likewise warrant
us to doubt, whether the Common Reports that are made concerning Diverse be fit
to be relied on, without farther Examen and observation.

In the mean time I shall add two or three Experiments more to confirm the
resistance, that Animals may make to a great pressure, when exercised by the
mediation of a fluid Body And I the rather gave you an account of this way of
making trials, because it may be also helpful to discover the resistances of
inanimate Bodies, whose Shape and Consistence we may choose and vary (almost at
pleasure) to the pressure of (totally or in great part) ambient fluids. And if
I had been furnished with a tube wide enough, and a quantity of Mercury great
enough, I might by the way have shown you, that, whatever the Learned Doctor
More is pleased to suppose, that to Butter it self even as considerable a
pressure may be so applied as not to be able to make it yield thereunto. For on
this occasion I shall add, that I well remember, that, among other trials to
the same purpose, I caused a piece of fresh Butter, about the bigness of a
small Hen-Egg, to be brought to an irregular shape, that, if the compression
were such as many would expect, the long corners or solid angles being at least
flatted, the Butter might be reduced into a more capacious figure and less
remote from roundness. But though having put this lump of Butter into a
Bladder, almost full of fair water, we proceeded, both in the same brass
Cylinder, and much after the same manner that I employed about the Egg
mentioned in the Fourth Experiment of the Tract of the Differing pressure of
heavy Solids and Fluids; yet I found, that after the plugg had been loaded with
a weight of Lead of above 50 pound, neither I, nor the Operator, perceived, the
irregular figure of the Butter to be altered. Nor was this the only trial of
this kind I made with the like success upon Butter, though I dare not charge my
memory with the Circumstances; and therefore I shall without delay proceed to
what I was about to recite concerning the Resistance of Animals.

We took then a common Fleshslie, neither of the biggest sort of all, nor of
the least, but of a middle size, and having put it into the shorter leg of a
bent Glass, which we caused to be Hermetically sealed at the end, there was put
in as much Mercury as filled that leg and a part of the other, leaving little
more than an inch of Air between the Quicksilver and the sealed end, that
there might be room both for the Fly and the Condensation of the Air, and then
with a little Rammer, fitted for the purpose, we caused the Mercury in the open
leg to be thrust against that in the sealed leg, which thereupon did
necessarily crowd the Air near the Fly into less room; so that, by our guess,
it was condensed into about a third part of the space, which it possessed
before, and which it regained, when the Rammer was withdrawn: And though this
were done more than once, yet not only the Fly was thereby not killed, but not
so much, that appeared, as sensibly hurt, and I perceived her, whilst she was
pent up, to move her legs and to rub them one against the other, as it is usual
with that sort of Insects to do of their own accord in the free Air. Nor did I
question but that, if the Glass had not been inconveniently shaped to admit the
Rammer farther into it, the Fly would have supported a far greater Pressure.

Another Experiment to the same purpose we tried with Water instead of Mercury;
but, whereas this last named liquor could neither wet nor drown our Fly, (for
which reason I chiefly made choice of it,) the other did first wet its wings,
and soon after by a mischance drown it. But first we had an opportunity to
compress the Air into a third, if not into a fourth part of its former
dimensions, and yet the Fly continued to move diverse of her parts and
especially her legs very vigorously, as if nothing troubled her but her being,
as it were, glu'd to the inside of the Glass by part of her wetted wings. And
this I hope will keep the Resistance of Diverse to the Ambient water from
seeming incredible; since such Flies were able to resist, and (for ought
appeared) without harm or pain, the pressure of the crowded particles of the
Air; though we guessed this to have been as much compressed by the force of the
Rammer, as it would have been by a Gylinder of water of 50 or between 50 and 60
foot high. By which also we may be helped to conceive, how great a difference
there is, whether the same pressure be exercised by a solid or by a fluid Body.
For, according to our estimate, the pressure against the Body of the Fly was as
great as if a slender pillar of Marble, having the Fly for its Base, and 18 or
20 foot in height, had leaned upon the little Animal; which I presume you will
easily think was more than enough to crush her to Death.

But because, though the foregoing trials are not like to be rejected by the
skilful, yet they require a somewhat dextrous and nimble Experimenter, and
leave something to his estimate, I will subjoyn an Experiment more easy to be
made, and wherein the weight may be determined by Measure rather than
Conjecture, being made to be perpendicularly incumbent on the Fly or other
Animal. For the Experiment may be as well made on other Insects, as Worms,
though some that I had provided chanced to miscarry before they came to be used.

We took then some ordinary black Flies (such as use to haunt Butchers stalls
in warm seasons,) of a middle size, (the length of the Body and Head of one
Animal, which for trials sake we measured, being about three eights of an
inch,) and having placed one of them with the head upwards, that there was some
distance left bewixt her and the sealed end of the Glass-tube 9 or 10 inches
long; we poured in Quicksilver very slowly and cautiously, lest the force of
so heavy a body, acquired by the acceleration of its descent, should more than
the mere weight it self of the liquor oppress the Fly. To this effect stooping
the Glass very much toward the Horizon and letting the Mercury puss into the
tube through a Funnel, whose lower part was very slender, that it might come
down but by little and little, we at length got in as much Mercury as the tube
would receive, and then holding it upright, we watched, whether the Fly would
make any motions; and finding, that she did manifestly stir notwithstanding the
incumbent Mercury, we measured the height of the Mercurial pillar, reaching
from the middle of her body to the top of the liquor, and found it to be about
eight inches, and the Quicksilver being poured out, the Fly appeared to be so
lively and vigorous, that I doubted not, but if we had had a longer Glass, the
Experiment had been much more considerable. But when afterward I was able to
procure a better tube, the season of Flies being almost quite past, I could
scarce get any, and those not brisk, as they are wont to be in Summer. But
however we repeated the Experiment with one of the best we could take of the
abovementioned size, and ordering the matter so, that the Mercury incumbent on
her, (for there was some beneath her,) appeared to be of a greater height than
the formerly employed tube was of, we saw her move one or other of her little
legs diverse times, though the tube were held upright; and therefore measuring
the height of the Mercury above her, we found it to amount to 16 inches and
better, and then freeing her from this pressure, we observed, that she
immediately found her legs again, and moved up and down briskly enough; but
when she was laden with 23 or 24 inches of the same Quicksilver (though the
liquor were soon after poured out) she gave no signs of life, which I suspected
might happen, not so much from her having been oppressed by the greatness of her
weight, as from the great care of the Operator to let down the Mercury very
obliquely and warily upon her. And this I was the rather confirmed in, because
having got an other Fly of about the same bigness, though when she was at the
bottom of the Quicksilver, she seemed so comprest as not to have any motion we
could take notice of, yet, upon her being taken out of the Glass, she presently
appeared to be alive by walking about and beginning to display her wings,
though the pillar of Mercury, that had leaned upon her, amounted to above 27
inches. And I presume, the success would have been much more considerable, if
the Experiment had been tried in the Summer, when these Creatures are brisk and
lively, and not as it was in the Winter; besides that probably these little
Animals were hurt or weakened by the violence that would scarce fail to be used
in catching them, and putting them into such a place and posture in the Glass
as was required; the actual coldness of the Quicksilver perhaps also making
them somewhat torpid, whilst it touched them so many ways. And it must not be
here omitted, that a Fly, that seemed but about half so big as one of those
hitherto mentioned, being well placed, with some Mercury under it, in a
Glass-pipe held upright, sustained a Mercurial pillar of somewhat above 25
inches; and though she was not observed to move under so great a weight, yet
when once it was taken off, she did not appear hurt, much less crushed to Death
by it, and probably would have escaped under a much greater weight, if the
tube, which was too large, had not already employed all the stock of Mercury we
then had at hand. But I do presume, that what we did try will be available to
our purpose, since we see clearly, that so small an Animal as a Fly may survive
so great a pressure, and that she could not only live, but was able to move
such long and slender Bodies as her legs, when she was pressed against by
above 16 inches of Mercury, and (consequently) by a weight equivalent to a
pillar of water of above 18 foot and a half, which being above 590 times her
own length, and (according to the estimate our measure suggested) many times
more her own height; so that a Diver, 6 foot tall, (which is somewhat more than
an ordinary man's stature,) to have as many times his height of water above him,
as our Fly might have had and yet have moved under it, must dive (at least in
fresh water,) to near a hundred fathom, which is a far greater depth (perhaps
by 5 or 6 times) than, for ought I could learn by inquiry, the Diverse either
for Coral or Pearl are wont to descend.

And now, Sir, having tendered you the likeliest conjectures that occurred to
me about the solution of this difficult Problem; I shall return to Doctor More,
and consider the objection, he frames from the supposed insolubleness of it.
And on this occasion I shall have two or three things to represent to you.

The first is, that there would be much more weight in what he objects, if our
Assertion of the gravitation of water in water were, like the Principium
Hylarchicum, a mere Hypothesis advanced, without any clear positive proof,
whereas our Doctrine is not only elsewhere directly proved, by particular
Experiments, but by the very controverted one of the Tadpole; to elude whose
force so Ingenious a person is fain to fly to a Principle, that, (to say here
no more,) is not Physical. And from this first of the things I lately mentioned
I shall hasten to the second, because it will require to be longer insisted on.

I shall then further represent that whatever power he is pleased to suppose at
the bottom of the Sea to suspend the impression of the incumbent Water, I
think, that supposition ought to give place, if not to our former
Ratiocinations, yet to experience it self, which shows there really is a great
pressure exercised by the Water at the bottom of the Sea. I remember, that a
friend of the Learned Sir R. M.
Doctors and mine, who is so eminent a Virtuoso as to have been often President
of the Royal Society, related a while since to me, that a Mathematical friend
of his, whom he named, having had an opportunity to try an Experiment, I have
in vain endeavored to get tried for me, had the Curiosity to let down in a
deep Sea a Pewter-bottle with weight enough to sink it, that he might try,
whether any sweet Water would strain in at the orifice or any other part; but
when he had pulled it up again, he was much surpised to find the sides of his
Pewter-bottle very much compressed, and, as 'twere, squeezed inward by the
Water. I also not long since inquired of an observing Acquaintance of mine,
that has a considerable estate in America, whether he had not tried to cool his
drink, when he sailed through the Torrid Zone, by letting down the bottles to a
great depth into the Sea, and, if he did, in what Condition he found them when
they were drawn up again. To which he answered, that he had several times
employed that Expedient for the Refrigeration of his Drinks, but was at first
amazed to find the Corks, with which the strong stone-bottles had been well
stopped before, so forcibly and so far thrust in, that they could scarce have
been so violently beaten in with a Hammer, and 'twas scarce possible to get
them out. And an other Ingenious Person, that practices Physic in the Indies,
having the like Question put to him, answered me, that he had some while since
had the Curiosity to try in a very deep part of the Sea, whether any fresh
Water would strain into Stone-bottles through a thick Cork strongly stopped in,
and having let it down with a convenient weight to 100 fathom, was much
disappointed, when he drew it up, by finding that the pressure of the Water at
so vast a depth had quite thrust down the Cork into the Cavity of the bottle
(which else perhaps would have been crushed to pieces;) an effect which he
would scarce have expected from the strokes of a Mallet. And if to all this it
be objected, that 'twas not the pressure, but the coldness of the Water that
did the recited feats by condensing the included Air, and obliging Nature to do
the rest for fear of a Vacuum; I will not lanch into the Controversy, whether
Nature do any thing ob fugam Vacui, but only answer, that I cannot find by the
Relations of the Diverse or otherwise, that it is ever so cold at the bottom of
the Sea, as it is frequently above ground in Winter, when great Fishes are
commonly said to return to the deep parts of the Sea for warmth, and yet in the
sharpest Winters I never observed Corks to be driven in by the cold of the
Ambient; nay, I purposely tried with a Frigorifick mixture, that very intense
degrees of cold, such as would quickly freez many Liquors, would not occasion
the breaking of thin bubbles of Glass purposely blown at the flame of a Lamp
and hermetically sealed.

And to show ad oculum (as they speak) that Water may press more and more, as
it grows deeper, against the stopple of a Bottle, though the Vessel be
inverted, I will subjoyn this Experiment. Because we have no Water hereabouts
that is near deep enough to force in a Cork, as the Seawater did in the above
recited trials, I thought of a way of so closing the Glass-vessel, as that the
stopple should keep asunder the Air in the Vessel and the outward Water, and
hinder all immediate intercourse between them, and also make some resistance
against the pressure of the external Water, and yet be capable of freely moving
up and down, and so be a good Succedaneum to a solid stopple. Taking then a
Glass-Vial, furnished with a (somewhat long) Cylindrical neck, whose Cavity was
large in proportion to the rest of the Vessel, we put into it as much
Quicksilver as would in the neck make a short Mercurial Pillar of between half
an inch and an inch; then, a piece of very fine Bladder, dipped in Oil, was so
tied over the orifice of the Glass, that no Mercury could fall down or get out,
nor Water get in at the orifice, and yet the Bladder, by reason of its great
limberness, might be easily thrust up toward the Cavity of the Vial, or
depressed by the weight of the Mercury. This little instrument, first furnished
with a weight of Lead to sink it, being inverted, the Mercury descended into
the neck, and closed the orifice as exactly as a stopple, and yet with its
lower part depressed the Bladder beneath the Horizontal Plane, that might be
conceived to pass by the orifice; then the Glass, being a while kept in the
Water, (that the included Air might be brought to the Temperature of the
surrounding Liquor,) and by a string let further down into the same
Glass-vessel filled to about two foot in height, the pressure of the Liquor
against the orifice of the Vial did by degrees drive up the Bladder and the
Mercurial stopple into the cavity of the Neck, as was manifest by the ascension
of the Quicksilver; and when the instrument was leisurely drawn up again, the
weight of this Mercury made it subside and plump up the Bladder again as
before. An Experiment akin to this, and therefore fit to confirm it, I have
delivered in another See the Paradox about Suction.
Discourse.

And here I shall subjoyn what very opportunely occurred to me since the
writing of the last page. Meeting casually with an Ingenious Mechanician, (whom
you will find I have In the Tract of the Differing Pressure of heavy Solids and
Fluids.
elsewhere mentioned) that devised a suit of clothes and other accommodations,
(wherein I once saw him let down into the Water,) by whose help and that of a
boat he could (and did) continue there a great while at a considerable depth
under water, and there work; I asked him afresh (to obtain fuller informations
than formerly) whether he felt not the pressure of the water against his breast
and belly, to which he answered me (more circumstantially than he had before)
that when he was about 4 or 5 yards under water, though but in the River
Thames, his breast and abdomen was so comprest, that there being hardly room
enough left for the free motion of his Lungs he could scarce fetch his breath,
and was necessitated to make them draw him quickly up, and that (among his
later trials to improve his Engine) having for remedy hereof, caused a kind of
Armor for the Chest and back to be made of Copper, though the stiffness of the
Metal defended him from receiving any mischief in those parts, yet in the
others, where only the Leather, though strong, was interposed, when he came to
the depth of about six fathom, though in fresh water, he found a great pressure
against his legs and arms and all the other parts against which the water was
able to thrust the Leathern suit inwards. And this pressure being found by him,
as he told me, pretty equal (against all the exposed parts, for from the other,
which were more yielding and obnoxious, the Armor kept it off,) he received no
Mischief from it, not yet much Incommodity (and some he might expect from the
stiffness and unequal yielding of the Leather;) so that he could stay under
water, though not still at so great a depth, about 2 hours or longer. And upon
the whole matter he answered me, that he was well satisfied by his trials, that
the ambient water endeavored to press him and his Diving suit every way
inwards. Whether the coldness of the water had any interest in this
Phenomenon, I particularly enquired of the Engineer; but he replied, that by
reasion of the tightness of his Diving suit or instrument, the warm steams of
his body that were pent in, and other concurring circumstances kept him from
feeling any cold, and made him sometimes feel a greater Heat than he wished. He
has promised me before it be very long to make for me a trial or two that I
propounded to him, from whose success, if he can but reduce them to Experiment,
I hope to be able to present you a farther Confirmation of our Hypothesis. In
the mean time, the things already recited, together with the preceding
Experiments, may well suffice for our present purpose. For, by what has been
said it appears, that Water does actually press against bodies, whether
specifically lighter or heavier than it self, placed under water, and that this
pressure increases with the height of the water above the immersed Bodies. And
this being so, it is not more necessary for me than for men of other Opinions
to give a clear reason why Diverse can resist so great a pressure of the
incumbent water. And the pressure of the water in our recited Experiment having
manifest effects upon Inanimate bodies, which are not capable of prepossessions
or giving us partial informations, will have much more weight with unprojudiced
persons, than the suspicious and sometimes disagreeing accounts of ignorant
Diverse, whom prejudicate opinions may much sway, and whose very sensations, as
those of other vulgar men, may be influenced by Predispositions and so many
other Circumstances, that they may easily give occasion to mistakes. I know,
that Learned men, that never were conversant in Hydrostaticks, are wont to
think it very difficult, if not impossible, to conceive, how so weak a thing,
as they fancy an Animal to be, should avoid the being oppressed or so much as
harmed by so great a weight of Water. But they that shall attentively consider
what has been offered toward the removal of this difficulty, and remember, how
little they would have believed, that there is so great a difference, as we
have by the Tadpole, the Fly and other instances, shown there really is between
the pressure of Solid and of Fluid bodies, will, I presume, be apt to think it
fit, that, if for want of a sufficient History of matters of fact any scruple
remain about the Solution we have offered from the nature of the Uniform
pressure of Fluids, and the Firm structure of the Humane body; we should, to
remove those remaining scruples also, rather range about for other Physical
helps to solve more completely the Problem, about such a thing as Compression,
which is an action purely Corporeal and Mechanical, than for want of a ready
and complete Solution to fly to the immediate interposition of an immaterial
and intelligent yet Created Agent, to explain clearly whose manner of working
would be a much more difficult Task, than the solution of the Phenomenon
without it.

And now, Sir, having presented to you the Reflections I thought requisite to
write upon the Learned Doctors discourses against my Hypothesis and
Explications, relating to the gravitation and pressure of Fluids, I have little
more to trouble you with in this Paper. For, though in the latter part of the
13th. Chapter the Doctor is pleased to spend diverse pages in the Explication of
diverse of my Hydrostatical Phenomenon by the Agency of that incorporeal
Director, that he calls Principium Hylarchicum; yet since these Explications of
his are rather attempts to accommodate the Phenomenon to the Hypothesis, than
objections directly levelled against my Solutions, I shall altogether forbear
to examine them; the main thing that I intended in this Paper, according to
what I told you at the beginning, being to show, that the Arguments urged
against the Mechanical solutions of the Experiments by me recited, do not
evince any of them to be erroneous. And I have neither the design nor the
leisure solicitously to examine the Doctors Hylarchical Principle. Of which I
shall only say, that though he tells us, it is Page 175.
paratum ad movendum quoquoversum materiam pro data occasion; yet since he
also tells us, Page 167.
Quod particulae molis corporeae sive stabilis sive fluidae a Principio
Hylarchico in unam aliquam partem omnes junctim urgeri possunt and premi,
quamvis singulae singulas in nullam partem premant, quodque pro magnitudine
molis major minorve totius fit pressio; and that the force by which it
endeavors to keep the Elements in their true and natural Consistence, though
it be very great, is not invincible Page 167.
: I see no need we have to fly to it, since such Mechanical Affections of
matter, as the Spring and Weight of the Air, the Gravity and Fluidity of the
water and other Liquors, may suffice to produce and account for the Phenomenon
without recourse to an Incorporeal Creature, which it is like the Peripateticks
and diverse other Philosophers may think less qualified for the Province
assigned it, than their fuga Vacui, whereto they ascribe an Unlimited power to
execute its Functions. I leave it therefore to you, Sir, to judge which of the
two ways, of explicating an Hydrostatical Phenomenon, the Learned Doctors, or
that which I have made use of, relishes most of the Naturalist. And I shall
only tell you, that if I had been with those Jesuits, that are said to have
presented the first watch to the King of China, who took it to be a living
Creature, I should have thought I had fairly accounted for it, if, by the
shape, size, motion, etc. of the Spring-wheels, balance and other parts of the
watch I had shown, that an Engine of such a structure would necessarily mark
the hours, though I could not have brought an argument to convince the
Chinese-Monarch, that it was not endowed with Life. From which comparison you
will easily gather, that what I have thought my self concerned to do in this
place, was not to demonstrate in general, that there can be no such thing as
the Learned Doctors Principium Hylarchicum, but only to intimate, that, whether
there be or not, our Hydrostaticks do not need it. Nor do I think it necessary
to the Doctors grand and laudable design, (wherein I heartily wish him much
success) of proving the existence of an Incorporeal substance. For as I think,
Truth ought to be pleaded for only by Truth; so I take that, which the Doctor
contends for, to be evincible in the rightest way of proceeding by a person of
far less learning than He, without introducing any precarious Principle;
especially experience having shown, that the generality of Heathen Philosophers
were convinced of the being of a divine Architect of the World, by the
contemplation of so vast and admirably contrived a Fabric, wherein yet taking
no notice of an immaterial Principium Hylarchicum, they believed things to be
managed in a mere Physical way according to the General Laws settled among
things Corporeal, acting upon one another. And after this I have nothing more
to say, but that I would not have any thing that I have said misconstrued to
the Learned Doctors prejudice. For it is nor necessary, that a great Scholar
should be a good Hydrostatician. And a few hallucinations about a subject, to
which the greatest Clerks have been generally such strangers, may warrant us to
dissent from his opinion, without obliging us to be enemies to his Reputation.
And therefore if you have found any thing in this Paper inconsistent with a
just tenderness of that, you have not only my consent, but my desire to alter
it, as an Expression, that does not well comply with my Intentions of not
appearing any farther his Adversary in our Debate, than the desire of showing
my self a Friend to the Truth I was to defend, should exact of,

SIR, Your, etc.

An Hydrostatical LETTER, Written Feb. 13. 167 2^/3;.

Containing a Dilucidation of an Experiment of the Honorable Author of these
Tracts about a Way of Weighing Water in Water, upon the occasion of some
Exceptions made to it by Mr. George Sinclaer. In his Hydrostaticks, printed at
Edenburg 1672. p. 146. ss.


TO THE READER.
WHen this Discourse was just finishing in the Press, there came to the
Publisher's hands a dilucidation of an Experiment of the Honorable Author of
these Tracts, about a Contrivance of his for Estimating the Weight of Water in
Water, formerly published in Numb. 50. of the Philosoph. Transactions, and by
the following Discourse cleared from the exceptions to be met with in Mr.
George Sinclair's Book, entitled The Hydrostaticks, etc. printed at Edenburg,
1672. Which Dilucidation, because of the Affinity of the subject, was thought
fit to be here annexed.

An Hydrostatical LETTER, Written Feb. 13. 1672/3.
Containing a Dilucidation of an Experiment of the Honorable Author of these
Tracts about a Way of Weighing Water in Water, upon the occasion of some
Exceptions made to it by Mr. George Sinclair. In his Hydrostaticks, printed at
Edenburg 1672. p. 146. ss.

SIR,
CAlling this night in Paul's Churchyard for the Ingenious Mr. Rays Travels,
that you yesterday commended to me, I was also shown a New Treatise, that I
never saw before, of a Learned Gentleman, and hastily running over the Index,
found an Experiment of mine declared Insufficient; and though, being hindered
to make have home, it be so late, that far from having time to peruse the book
it self, (which I tell you, that you may not now expect any Character of it
from me,) I have been scarce able to read over, more than once, what directly
concerns me in it; yet I shall adventure to say something about it this night,
for fear I should not, in so busy a time as this, be allowed to do it to
morrow.

Whereas then the Learned Objector having recited my experiment about weighing
Water in Water, as you were pleased to publish it in a book enriched with so
many better things, the Numb. 50.
Philosophical Transactions, begins his animadversion with saying that herein
is a great mistake. I shall not in that much oppose him: For possibly the
Dispute between us is not much more than verbal. And because my Experiment
coming abroad by it self, and supposing things that I had formerly proved, and
published, but which were not expressly referred to in it, I wonder not that my
meaning should not by all Readers be fully understood. And therefore, to
explain my self on this occasion, give me leave both to repeat my Opinion, and
to show you, on what occasion and how far I designed to confirm it by this
Experiment. My opinion then was, and still is, that as water is a heavy fluid,
so it does retain its Gravitation and power of pressing; by which I mean a
tendency downwards (whatever the cause of that gravity be,) whether it have
under it a body either specifically heavier or lighter than it self or
equiponderant to it. For I see not what should destroy or abolish this Gravity,
though many things may hinder some effects of it. And therefore I suppose, that
Water retains its Gravity not only in Air but in Water too, and in heavier
liquors, and consequently, by virtue of this, the liquor presses upon them; but
if a surrounding fluid have, upon the score of its specific Gravity, an equal
or a stronger tendency downwards than water, it will, by virtue of that, be
able to impel up this liquor or to keep it from actually descending: so that a
portion of water, supposed to be included in a Vessel of the same specific
weight with water, this portion, I say, placed in a greater Quantity of the
same water will neither rise nor fall, as I have elsewhere shown; but yet it
retains its Gravity there, only this Gravity is kept from making it actually
descend by the contrary action of the other water, whose specific Gravity is
supposed equal; as when a just balance is loaded with a pound weight in each
of its scales, though neither of the weights actually descend, being hindered
by its counterpoise, yet each retains its whole weight, and with it presses the
scale it leans upon; so that our lately mentioned included portion of water
does really press the subjacent water, though it does not actually depress it,
or, (as perhaps a School-man would phrase it) does gravitate on it but not
pregravitate. Nor do I think, that the only way of judging, whether a body
gravitates, is to observe, whether it actually descends, since in many cases
its Gravity may be proved by the Resistance it makes to heavy bodies, which, if
it were not one, would raise it: As may be declared by what I just now noted
about equal weights in a balance: And for want of this distinction I have
known even learned men, treating of Hydrostatical things, mistake both me and
the Question.

The next thing I had to tell you, is, that the Adversaries, I had to deal with
both in Print and in Discourse, denied, that in (standing) Water, the upper
parts did press or gravitate upon the lower; and though they could not but
grant, that the whole weight of the Water did gravitate upon the bottom of the
Vessel; yet they would have the parts of it to do so action communi (as they
speak) and fancied I know not what power of Nature to keep the homogeneous
portions of Water, as well as other Elements, from pressing one another, when
it is in its proper place. Against this Opinion, (which I presume my Learned
Adversary and I agree in opposing,) it was alleged, besides other things,
which I found many, otherwise good, Scholars were not fitted to understand,
That if a Glass-vial or bottle, well stopped, were deeply immersed under water,
it would strongly tend upwards; but if it were dexterously unstop'd, when 'twas
thus immersed, so as the water could get in, abstracting from or allowing for
the weight of the Glass it self, 'twould by the water, that crowds in and
thrusts out the Air, be made strongly to tend downwards and continue sunk. But
this not satisfying, because 'twas pretended, that the reason of the empty
bottles emerging when stopped was the positive Levity of the Air it was filled
with, and the sinking of it, when unstopt, was from the recess of the same Air,
that by the intruding Water was driven with large bubbles out of the bottle; I
thought this evasion might be obviated by contriving an Experiment, wherein the
Water should be plentifully and suddenly admitted into the Glass, and yet no
Air expelled out of it, (which Circumstance I therefore took notice of, where I
say, no bubble of Air appeared to emerge or escape through the water,) so that,
if then the Glass that was kept up before should fall to the bottom with a
gravitation amounting to a considerable weight in respect of its capacity, the
sinking of it could not by them be ascribed, as before, to the recess of the
Air, endowed, as they suppose, with positive Levity, but to the weight of the
admitted Water, which, when thus weighed, would be environed with Water of the
same kind: And to show, that this admitted Water might have a considerable
weight notwithstanding the place it was in, I employed a pair of scales after
the manner that is recited in the Experiment.

By what I have been discoursing, you may conceive, that, however my
expressions disagree with those of my Adversary, the distance of our opinions
is not so wide as at first sight it seems. For he allows as well as I, that the
superior parts of Water do by their Gravity, (for I know not on what other
score they can do it,) press the inferior. But this he would not have amount
to this expression, that water weighs or gravitates in water; whereas I scruple
not to cloth my sense in that expression, because I think, water does always
exercise its gravity, though it does not always pregravitate or actually
descend, being often (as I noted above) either impelled up by an opposite and
prepollent weight, or hindered from descending by the Resistance of other water
that counterpoises it: so that, if he thinks, that in my Experiment I meant to
propose a method of making Water descend in Water, and weigh it in that Liquor
with a pair of scales, just as if I would weigh in the same Water a piece of
Lead or a portion of Mercury, which are bodies much heavier in specie than
Water, either he mistakes my intention, or I did not sufficiently declare it.
But that which I designed to show, and, for ought I can yet see, have shown,
was, that by the help of an ordinary balance, it may be made appear, that
Water admitted into the Glass-bubble, I employed, did make the Glass-bubble
weigh so much heavier than it did before that Liquor entered into it; and that
this new weight, that was manifested by the balance, was not due, as my
Adversary supposed, to such a recess of the Air as I mentioned a while ago.

And now, Sir, It will be proper to take notice of some passages in the
Objectors Discourse, in order to dilucidate the subject of it. Whereas he says
(page the 149. and 150.) Take a piece of wood, that is lighter in specie than
Water, and add weight to it by degrees, till it become of the same weight with
Water; knit it with a string to a balance, and weigh it in Water, and you will
find the whole weight supported by the water. I answer, that this does not at
all overthrow my opinion, but agrees very well with it. For, suppose, the
weight you add to the light wood be Lead, it cannot be said, that the Metal
loses its native ponderosity whilst it rests in the Water; and the reason, why
it descends not, is, that it and the wood, it is joined to, are hindered by the
counterpoise of the Collateral Water, which by its pressure would raise the
surface of the Water, whereon the floating or swimming body leans, if it were
not hindered by the weight of these incumbent Solids: And this Resistance of
theirs to the endeavor upwards of the Water, being exercised only upon the
account of their Gravity, shows that they do in my sense gravitate (though not
pregravitate.)

Again, if you please to consider the case, put by the Objector (page the 151.)
and cast your eyes upon his Scheme, which, (supposing you to have his book) I
shall for brevities sake make use of at present; you will find him thus argue.
Vid. page 151.
Now, I say, it is six ounces of the weight (B) that makes this alteration, and
turns the scales: For, if 12 ounces sink the Glass below the Water, when it is
full of Air and no Water in it, then surely six are sufficient to sink it when
it is half full. And the reason is, because there is a less potentia or force
in 6 inches of Air by the one half to counterpoise a weight of 12 ounces, than
in 12 inches of Air. Therefore this Air being reduced from 12 inches to six, it
must take only 6 ounces to sink it.

To which I answer, that I know not yet, what, on this occasion, he means by a
potentia or force in 6 inches of Air to counterpoise a weight of 12 ounces. For
by the term counterpoise, where the Question is about Weighing, one would think
he speaks of Weight; and yet Air, according to the vulgar Opinion, is
positively light; according to us; though it have a gravity, yet in our case
that must amount to so little, that what Air the bubble needed to fill it,
could not weigh at most above 4 or 5 grains, which therefore might safely be
neglected. But, according to my opinion, the reason of the Phenomenon is clear
enough without meddling with the Potentia of the Air. For, if we conceive a
horizontal Plane to divide the Water mentally, and pass by the bottom of the
suspended bubble; before the little stem be taken off, there is a far greater
pressure upon the other parts of that Plane than upon that which lies under the
bubble, in regard they are pressed by the weight of the Collateral Water (A, L,
G, D, M, C,) whereas the other is pressed only by the weight of a body very much
lighter than its equal bulk of water: so that, to keep the bubble from being
forcibly buoyed up, there was requisite 18 ounces of Lead that make up the
Plummet (B) to detain it under Water, and keep the beam of the balance
Horizontal; that when access is given (at C) to the neighboring Water, it is
by the weight of the collaterally superior Water impelled into the cavity of
the bubble, where the Air, being much rarefied before, could not resist its
ingress, and thereupon 6 ounces of Water getting in, that part of the imaginary
Plane, on which the bubble was incumbent, is pressed by a greater weight than
formerly by 6 ounces, and consequently there needs the like weight in the
opposite scale of the balance, to reduce the scale to an Aequilibrium. And if
we suppose, with our Author, the Glass to be completely full of Water, and the
counterpoise in the scale (O) to need 6 ounces more to make a new Aequipondium,
the account of the Phenomenon will be the same, as, if you attentively
consider it, you will clearly perceive. And the reason, why the additional
weight of 6 ounces is required, will be, that the upper half of the bubble,
that before contained less than three or four grains weight of the Air, being
now filled with Water, amounted to six ounces more of Water than formerly, and
so the counterpoise in the opposite scale (O) will need the weight of six
ounces to make a new Aequipondium.

Congruously to this explication when the Examiner says, page 132.
Now I inquire whether these 18 ounces are the Aequipondium of the Water within
the Glass or of the weight of the Lead (B)? It Is impossible they can
counterpoise both, seeing the Water is now 12, and B 18. It must then either be
the counterballance of the Water or the counterballance of the Lead. It cannot
be the first, because 12 cannot be in Aequipondio with 18; it must then be in
the second: Or if these 18 ounces in the scale (O) be the counterpoise of the
Water within the Glass, I inquire what sustains the weight of the Lead (B)? The
weight of it cannot be sustained by the Water, because it is a body naturally
heavier than Water; it must therefore be sustained by the balance. I answer,
that this specious objection seems (for it is somewhat obscurely worded) to be
founded upon a mistake of my meaning in the Question. However, as to the
Phenomenon it self; according to my sense the 18 ounces in the scale (O) are
the counterpoise of the 18 ounces that hang from the opposite and aequidistant
Scale and make up the Leaden Plummet (B,) (which answer I see not how our
Author prevents.) But then you will ask, what counterpoises the Water in the
bubble, which alone weighs 12 ounces? I answer, that it is the gravitation of
the collateral Water, which presses the other parts of the lately mentioned
imaginary Plane, as much as the Water in the bubble, the weight of the Glass
being here not reckoned by either of us; and the Water incumbent on the bubble
does press that part of the Plane on which they lean; so that there being in
all 30 ounces to be sustained, the 18 of the Plummet and the 12 contained in
the Glass, the Lead that hangs in the Water is counterpoised by 18 ounces in
the scale, and the Water in the bubble by the pressure of the Collateral Water.

But you will say, that it appears not, that the included Water presses at all,
since it does not at all descend. To which I answer, that as long as the Water
was getting into the Cavity of the bubble, so long it did manifestly gravitate
upon the subjacent Plane, and actually descend, raising the counterpoise in the
scale: But when, by adding more weight to that counterpoise, things are brought
to a new Aequilibrium, there is no reason why the gravitation of the Water
should again change the now regained Aequipondium. Suppose in the two scales of
a balance there were placed two equally capacious and equiponderant Vials,
whereof one is quite full and the other almost full; it is evident, that the
full Vessel will keep the scale it leaned upon deprest, and, if you gently pour
in as much Water into the unfill'd as the filled has more than it, the scale,
that was formerly kept raised, will be now deprest, till the beam be brought to
be horizontal; to which posture when it is once brought, the Aequilibrium will
continue: And yet it will not be said, that though the added Water, whilst it
was filling the Glass, deprest the scale it belonged to, yet it lost its
weight, or, which in my sense is all one, did not gravitate upon the Scale,
when the balance was come to an Aequilibrium, because then this Water did no
longer depress it. And how much the Water in our bubble does, notwithstanding
its immersion, gravitate, would be visible, if by supposition it were all
annihilated, and no other suffered to supply its room. For, then the subjacent
part of the imaginary Plane being much less pressed than immediately before, the
weight of the collaterally superior Water would strongly impell up the
bubble, if it were not kept in its place by a proportionable addition of weight
to the Plummet. Nor should it seem a strange thing that I should say, that the
30 ounces, lately mentioned, should be counterballanced partly by the weight in
the opposite Scale, and partly by the Water that fills the immersed bubble,
since this notion may be warranted even by the common practice of weighing
heavy Solids Hydrostatically. For if you would, for instance, weigh a lump of
Copper of 9 pound in common Water, the Metal, hanging by a Horse-hair under
Water, will need, according to my elsewhere mentioned Experiments, either just
or near about 8 pound in the opposite Scale to keep the balance horizontal, so
that the whole 9 pound, that the lump weighed in the Air, is counterpoised
partly by the 8 pound newly mentioned in the opposite Scale, and partly by the
weight, or resistance following from weight, of as much of the Water as the
Copper fills the room of; which, as experience shows, is one pound: And if we
should conceive Water in a Vessel adiaphorous as to Gravity and Levity to be
substituted in the place of the Metalline lump, it would weigh as much as the
ninth part of the Copper-lump weighed in the Air, and the same counterpoise of
eight pound would maintain the Aequilibrium.

What the Learned Objector has at the close of his Discourse about the natural
and artificial balance, could not without prolixity, and is not here necessary
to be dwelt upon; especially since you will see, in what I suppose you have now
received from the Press, in answer to the Ingenious Doctor More, what is to be
said on that Subject according to my Hypothesis. Wherefore though my Learned
Adversary does in the 152. page conclude, That Water cannot weigh in Water, and
asserts, that the Pressure of Water is one thing, and Water to Weigh in
Water is another; yet, as I said at first, I conceive much of our Difference
may be verbal; and in my sense, when Water presses subjacent Water, because
it does so upon the score of its gravity, it gravitates in Water, though it
does not pregravitate, that is, actually descend. And since it is in the sense
of this last expression, that our Author, if I mistake him not, speaks of
weighing in Water, his conclusion, that Water cannot weigh in Water, does
not contradict me, who affirm not that Water does so weigh in Water. Whether
we shall agree in all other points of Hydrostaticks, you will easily believe
that I cannot yet tell, though by the expression he is pleased to use (in the
146. page) to usher in his Objection with, it is probable we may. And as to the
now dispatched debate, if I have employed some words in another sense than he,
I presume he is so equitable as to consider, that I did not write of these
things after having seen this book of his, but some years before, and have
since found those expressions justified by the use, that eminent VVriters have
thought fit to make of them. And however I am glad, that he has given me this
opportunity of clearing my Experiment, and declaring by examples as well as
words the opinion it relates to; especially, if it seems to others that I
omitted to express my self so fully; my design being, as I formerly told you,
to convince such Adversaries, as I then had met with, by showing, that the
above-recited Phenomenon of the Emersion and Sinking of a Glass-Vial, depended
upon the Gravity of the Water, and not upon the positive Levity of the Air.

FINIS.
NEW EXPERIMENTS Of the Positive or Relative LEVITY of BODIES Under Water.

NEW EXPERIMENTS Of the Positive or Relative Levity of Bodies under Water.
It Is obvious, even to the Vulgar as well as to Philosophers, that if Wood,
Wax, or another body that is lighter in specie than water, and naturally floats
upon it, be detained under water, it will upon removal of that force emerge to
the top. And this it does so readily, and, as it seems spontaneously, that not
only the Peripatetick Schools, but the generality of Philosophers both ancient
and modern, do as well as the Vulgar ascribe this ascension of lighter bodies
in water to an internal principle, which they therefore call Positive Levity.

But this Principle was not always so universally received among Philosophers,
as in later ages it proved to be, Democritus and several of the Ancients both
Atomists and others, admitting no absolute but only a relative or respective
Levity, which opinion some of the Moderns have ingeniously attempted to revive.

But because whatever wit they may have employed in arguing; yet the Schools
seem to have the advantage in point of Experience, the obvious instances, given
by the Peripateticks, having neither been solved by real and practical
variations of the same instances, nor counterballanc'd by new Experiments of a
contrary tendency; the importance and difficulty of the subject invited me to
attempt, when I was upon Hydrostatical trials, whether I could experimentally
show, that whatever becomes of the general Question about Positive Levity, we
need not admit it for the true and adaequate cause of the emersion of Wood and
such lighter bodies, let go under water.

EXPER. I.
THe instance that is wont to be urged to prove the Positive Levity of Wood in
Water, seems to me to have been too perfunctorily made to be safely acquiesced
in. For even as it is proposed with advantage by a learned foreign
Mathematician, I cannot think it accurate enough to determine the present
Controversy: for I will readily allow him to suppose, that in case a flat
board, as for instance a Trencher, have its broad surface kept by a man's hand
or other competent force upon the Horizontal bottom of a Tub full of water, if
the hand or other body that detained it be removed, it will ordinarily happen
that the Trencher will hastily ascend to the surface of the water. But I do not
perceive, that a decisive Experiment of this kind is easy (not to say,
possible) to be made with such materials. For the wood, whereof both the
Trencher and the bottom of the Barrel consist, are supposed to be lighter in
specie than Water; and to be so, they must be of a porous and not very close
texture. To which agrees very well, that the solider woods, as Lignum Vitae,
Brasil, etc. whose texture is more close and compact, will not float on water
but sink in it: And therefore, if there be not much more care used, than I have
yet heard that any Experimenter has employed, to bring the surfaces of the
Trencher and the bottom of the Barrel to a true flatness and as much smoothness
as they can be brought to, I shall not think the trial so accurately made as it
might be; not to say, which I suspect, that though it be mentally, yet it is
scarce practically possible to bring such porous bodies as those of the lighter
woods to be fit for such a contact as might be necessary to make the trial
accurately. And in case that were actually done, I should be kept from
expecting with my adversaries the emersion of the Trencher, by the Experiment
by and by to be recited, and by the true reason of it.

I think then that the cause, why in ordinary instances, Wood, Wax, and other
bodies specifically lighter than water, being let go at the bottom of a vessel
full of that liquor, emerge to the top, is chiefly, that there is no such
exquisite congruity and contact between the lowermost superficies of the Wood,
and the upper surface of the bottom of the Vessel, but that the lateral parts
of the Water, being impelled by the weight of the parts of the same liquor
incumbent on them, are made to insinuate and get between the lower parts of the
Wood and the bottom of the Vessel, and so lift or thrust upwards the Wood,
which bulk for bulk is less heavy than the Water that extrudes it.

That this is the reason of the Emersion or ascension of bodies, lighter in
specie than the fluids they swim in, is most consonant to the Laws of See the
Hydrostatical Paradoxes.
Hydrostaticks, as I have elsewhere shown. But whereas the whole force of the
argument of those I dispute with, consists in a supposition, that, because the
Trencher (formerly spoken of) is placed upon the bottom of the Barrel, no water
can come between to buoy it up, whence they conclude it must ascend by an
internal and positive principle of Levity, I thought fit to make the Experiment
after another, and, if I mistake not, a better manner.

We took then two round plates of Black Marble shaped like Cheeses, which had
those superficies, that were to be clapped together, ground very flat and
polished very carefully, that the stones being laid one upon the other might
touch in as many of the superficial parts, as the workman could bring them to
do; that, whilst they were in that position, the uppermost being taken up, the
other would stick to it, and ascend with it. And to keep out the water the
better, the internal surfaces were, before they were put together, lightly, and
but very lightly, oiled, which did not hinder them from most easily sliding
along one another, either forward or backwards, or to the right, or to the
left, as long as the contiguous surfaces were kept Horizontal.

These things being done, a blown Bladder of a moderate size was fastened to the
upper marble, and both of them were let down to the bottom of a tub of water,
where, by the help of an easy contrivance, the lower marble was kept level to
the Horizon. And now the Patrons of Positive Levity would have concluded, that
the bladder, being a body, granted to be by vast odds lighter than wood, and
being in an unnatural place beneath the surface of the water, should of its own
accord and with impetuosity emerge; but I expected a contrary event, because
the bladder being tied to the upper marble, so that both of them might in our
case be considered as one body, the water could not impel them up, in regard
that the close contact of the surfaces of the two marbles kept the water from
being able to insinuate it self between them, and consequently from getting
underneath the upper marble, and pressing against the lower superficies of it.
And to show that this was the reason of the bladders not emerging, I caused one
of the bystanders to thrust his arm down to the bottom of the tub, and with
his hand to make part of the oiled surface of the upper marble slide off, on
any side, from that of the lower, which, by reason of the smoothness and
slipperiness of the surfaces, he found most easy to do. But the contact still
continuing according to a greater part of the surfaces than was requisite, I
bid him yet slide, but by slow degrees, more and more of the upper marbles from
the lower, till at length, when, according to his guess, the marbles touched
but in one half of their surfaces, the endeavor of the water to extrude the
bladder full of Air being stronger than the resistance, which the contact but
of part of the surfaces of the stones was able to make, they were suddenly
dis-joyn'd, and the bladder was by the extruding water impetuously, as it were,
shot up, not only to the top of the water, but a good way beyond it.

With these Marbles we made several other Experiments of this kind, most
commonly letting down the Marbles both together; but once or twice at least
placing the upper Marble under water upon the lowermost already fixed to the
bottom of the barrel.

That 'twas not the weight of the upper Marble, nor want of Lightness, whether
positive or relative, of the Air included in the bladder, that kept it from
ascending, was plain, not only by the newly mentioned impetuous emersion of it,
upon the dis-joyning of the Marbles, but by this, that the Bladder would lift
up from the lower parts of the water, not only the upper stone when it touched
not the other, but a weight of seven or eight pound hanging at it.

And that a Fuga Vacui was not an adequate cause of the cohesion of the Marbles
in our Experiment, may be argued from this, that whether or no nature do any
thing at any time out of abhorrence of a Vacuum (which may be much disputed;)
yet in our case this abhorrency could not be well pleaded by its Assertors,
since many of them hold it to be unlimited, and the more modest, to be at least
capable of lifting up prodigious weights; whereas in our Experiment the Levity
of a Bladder, that could not raise ten pound weight, was sufficient to disjoyn
the marbles when they yet touched one another according to half their surfaces.

EXPER. II.
TO show now whether it is not rather the Gravity and Pressure of the Water, or
other ambient fluid, than the Positive Levity of a body lighter in specie than
it, that makes the immersed body ascend to the surface of the liquor, I devised
this Experiment:

We took a bladder out of which a great part of the included Air had been
expressed, and tying the neck of it very close, that none of the remaining Air
might get out, we fastened to it a considerable weight of some very ponderous
body, as Lead or Iron. By the help of this we sunk the bladder to the bottom of
a wide mouthed glass, full of water, that the surface of the liquor might be a
good deal higher than the upper part of the bladder: This wide mouthed glass we
included in a great Receiver (whose orifice must be very large to be able to
admit such a vessel;) which I caused to be carefully cemented on to the Engine.
The main scope of this Experiment was to show, that though the Air, included in
the bladder, was very far from being able by its absolute levity to lift up so
great a weight as the bladder was clogged with, yet the same Air, continually
included in the bladder, would, by its mere expansion, without any new external
heat, acquire a power of ascending in spite of that weight; which ascension
therefore must be attributed to the water, which according to the Laws
Hydrostatical ought (caeterisparibus) to resist or buoy up more potently those
immersed bodies, that being lighter in specie, than it, possess the greatest
place in it, and hinder the more water from acquiring its due situation: as we
see, that among hollow spheres of glass and metal, equally thick and well
stopped, there is a much heavier weight requisite to sink a large one than a
small one. For the prosecution of this trial we began to pump the Air out of
the great Receiver; and its pressure upon the surface of the water being
thereby more and more lessened, (according to what we elsewhere more fully
declare,) the spring of the included Air began by degrees to distend the sides
of the bladder, till at length that vessel of Air swelling every way took up so
much more room in the water than it did before, that the water was able to lift
the bladder and the annexed weight to the top, and detain it there, till we
thought fit to let in again some of the excluded Air, which forcing that in the
bladder to shrink in its dimensions, the weight was presently able to sink it
to the bottom.

And here it may be noted, that if, instead of hanging so great a weight at the
neck of the bladder, we fastened but a moderately heavy piece of Lead, such as
would only serve to sink the bladder, and keep it at the bottom of the water,
so that the aggregate of the Bladder, Air, and Metal, was but a little heavier
than a bulk of water equal to them: Then upon the first suck or operation of
the Pump, which could withdraw but a small part of the Air in the Receiver, the
Air in the bladder suddenly expanding it self, would forthwith be impetuously
extruded by the water, though after some reciprocations it would float in its
due position, till upon the return of a little outward air (sometimes as little
as we could conveniently let in) it would immediately subside.

But this is not so necessary to be insisted on, as it is to take notice, that I
foresaw it may be objected, that the ascension of the weight was not effected
by the pressure of the water, but by this, that Rarity and Levity being
Qualities exceedingly of kinn, the great Rarefaction of the Air might
proportionably increase the Levity of it, and consequently enable it to perform
much greater things than it could do before.

I will not here dispute, whether, generally speaking, a body rarefied without
heat, would, in Vacuo, or in a fluid not heavier in specie than the body when
rarefied, merely by such a greater distance of its parts as may suffice to
entitle it to rarefaction, become really heavier or lighter than before. I will
not (I say) discuss this question here, where it may serve my turn to satisfy
the recited objection by the following Experiment.

EXPER. III.
ABout the neck of a conveniently shaped Viol capable to hold some few ounces
of water, I caused to be carefully tied the neck of a small Bladder, whence the
Air had been diligently expressed, so that the Bladder, being very limber of it
self, and probably made more so, as well as more impervious to Air and Water,
by the fine Oil we had caused it to be rubbed with, lay upon the orifice of the
Viol like a skin clapped together with many folds and wrinkles.

This done, we let down the Viol into a conveniently shaped Vessel full of
water, and the Viol, being poysed beforehand for that purpose, sunk
perpendicularly in the liquor, till the neck of the Glass was partly above and
partly beneath the surface of the water: Then covering the external Glass with
a large Receiver, we caused the Air to be pumped out, and as the pressure of
that was gradually withdrawn, the Air in the floating Viol did little by little
expand it self into the Bladder, and unfolded the winkles of it, till at length
it became full blown without altering the erected posture of the Glass it
leaned upon. But this great expansion, being made above the Water, and
consequently in a medium not heavier than the included Air, gave that highly
rarefied Air no such increase of Levity, as enabled us to perceive, that it
made so much as the neck of the Glass arise higher in the Water than it did
before. Nor did we take notice, that the return of the Air into the Receiver,
by reducing the Air in the Bladder to its former unrarify'd estate, made the
Glass sink deeper than before. But when the Experiment was tried with the same
Glass and Bladder at the bottom of the Water, then, upon the pumping out the
Air, the Bladder being dilated under water was after a while carried up to the
top, and took up with it about eight or ten ounces, that had been, to clog it,
fastened to the bottom of the Viol.

NEW EXPERIMENTS About the PRESSURE of the AIR'S SPRING On Bodies under Water.

NEW EXPERIMENTS About the Pressure of the Air's Spring on Bodies under Water.
I Do not think it were difficult for an intelligent peruser of our
Physico-Mechanical Experiments, to find there diverse Phenomenon, whence it may
be deduced, that Bodies under water, though kept by that liquor from the
immediate contact of the Air, may yet be exposed to its pressure (whether the
Air act as having a Weight or as a Spring.) But because not only the Vulgar,
but Philosophers have been so long and generally possessed with an opinion,
that a fluid so little heavy as the Air, cannot by its weight act upon a
liquor, that is, like water, bulk for bulk a thousand times heavier than it:
And because also it seems yet more strange, that a little Air, perhaps not
amounting to a scruple or dram in weight, should in its ordinary state of
Laxity act considerably upon Bodies, which, being covered with water, seem by
the interposition of that liquor to be fenced from the incumbent Air; it may be
worth while to add three or four Hydrostatical Experiments, to confirm a Truth
that very few are yet acquainted with; and add to the proofs, already given of
the power of the Spring of the Air, some of the operations we have discovered
it to have upon Bodies placed under water.

There are two sorts of Trials, that I shall employ to show, that a small
quantity of enclosed Air may by its pressure (which in our cases must depend
upon its Spring) have a considerable operation upon bodies under water,
notwithstanding the interposition of that liquor.

For, this pressure we speak of, may be manifested, in the first place by what
it directly and positively operates upon bodies covered with water: And in the
next place, by the things that regularly ensue upon the removal of the enclosed
Air, or the weakening of its Spring.

EXPER. I.
TO begin with the former way of showing the pressure of the Air, I thought it
sufficient, in regard of the Trials to be referred to the second way, to make
the following Experiment.

We took a square Glass-Viol, guessed to be capable of holding between half a
pint and a pint of water; the neck of this we luted on carefully and strongly
(for else it would have been buoyed up) over the orifice of the small pipe, at
which the Air passes in our Engine out of the Receiver into the Pump: Then
whelming over this glass a great Receiver, we luted it strongly to the Engine
(that it might as well keep in the Water as keep out the Air) and at the top
poured in as much water as sufficed to inviron the internal Receiver (if I may
so call it) and cover it to a pretty height. This done, we exactly closed with
a turning key the hol^ in the great Receiver, at which the water had been
poured in, that no air might get in or out that way. And lastly we began to
pump out the Air contained in the internal Receiver; to the end that that Air,
which by the abovementioned pipe had Communication with the External Air,
might no longer by its pressure assist the glass to resist the pressure, which
the incumbent and enclosed Air; by virtue of its Spring, constantly exercises
upon the subjacent water, and by its intervention upon the sides and bottom of
the internal Receiver.

And as we expected not, that this glass by its own single force should resist
the pressure of the Air enclosed in the upper part of the great Receiver
notwithstanding the interposition of the water; so the event fully justified
our conjecture: For at the first exuction, which could not be supposed to have
well emptied the internal glass, this vessel was, by the pressure of the
superior Air upon the circumstant water, broken into I know not how many
pieces. And the same Experiment, though with a little slower success, was
repeated with a stronger internal glass.

EXPER. II.
I Proceed now to the second way of manifesting the pressure of enclosed Air
upon Bodies under water, which is by showing the Phenomenon, exhibited by those
Bodies upon the removal or lessening of that pressure.

Having squeezed out of a moderately sized Bladder the greatest part of its
Air, we tied the neck of it very close, and then fastening to it a competent
weight, we placed it at the bottom of the tallest and largest glass we could
cover with our great Receiver, that so, though the incumbent Air were pumped
out, none of the Water might be pumped out with it, but still retain the same
height above the Bladder. Having then poured upon the Bladder as much Water as
would swim a great way above the upper part of it, we covered this glass of
Water with a great Receiver, which being carefully cemented on to the Engine,
the Pump was set a-work, and as the Air, which by its Spring pressed upon the
surface of the included Water, was by degrees pumped out, so the Air that was
imprisoned in the Bladder, did gradually expand it self at the bottom of the
Water, as if no such liquor had interposed between them otherwise than by its
weight, upon whose account it must be allowed to give some little impediment to
the expansion of the Bladder in proportion to the height it had above it.

The Event of our Experiment was such as was expected, namely that the immersed
Bladder was at length full blown, by the dilatation of the Air, enclosed in it;
and by its intumescence made a considerable part of the Water run over by the
sides of the glass, that before contained it all. And when access was given
again to the external Air, the internal being compressed, the Bladder was
presently reduced to its wrinkled state.

EXPER. III.
WE took a small but fine Bladder, whose neck was strongly tied up, when it
was, by guess, about half full of Air: This we put into a short brass Cylinder,
the lower of whose bases was closed with a Brass-plate, and the other left
open; this open orifice we afterward stopped, but not exactly, with a
Cylindrical plugg, that was somewhat less wide than it, and was by a rim at the
top hindered from reaching too deep into the cavity of the Cylinder, that it
might not do mischief to the Bladder that lay there beneath it; upon this plugg
we placed an almost Conically shaped weight of Lead, and this pile of several
things being so placed upon our Engine, that we could cover it with a great
Receiver, we carefully cemented on this vessel, and at the top of it poured in
so much water as would serve to fill the vacant part of the brass Cylinder, and
the cavity of the Engine to such a height, that it covered all the leaden
we^ght, which was several inches high, except a rim which was fastened to the
top of it for the convenienter removing of it.

All this being done the Pump was set a-work, and long before we had exhausted
the Air of the Receiver, that which was enclosed in the lank bladder had by
degrees displayed so vigorous a spring, that it had heaved up the weight that
lay upon it to a notable height, and kept it there till the Air was let in from
without to assist its being depressed by the leaden weight, which amounted to
no less than about 28. pound.

EXPER. IV.
THere remained yet one trial to be made, which in case it should succeed,
seemed likely to appear as great an evidence of the force of the Air's Spring
upon bodies under water, as could be reasonably desired of us; it having been
looked upon by many Virtuosi as the considerablest instance of the force of the
Air's Spring even when no water intervened in the trial.

To satisfy therefore our curiosity, we took a copper Vessel of a Cylindrical
shape, and a considerable height; into this, being first almost filled with
water, we put a square Glass-Vial capable by guess to hold nine or ten ounces
of water, and exactly stopped with a cork and a close Cement; this Vial by a
competent weight was detained at the bottom of the water, from whose upper
surface it was considerably distant: then the Copper Vessel being placed upon
the Engine, and included in a great Receiver well cemented on, the Air was by
degrees pumped out, but before it was quite exhausted, the Glass at the bottom
of the water was, by the spring of the Air included in it, burst into many
pieces, not without great noise, and a kind of smoke or mist that appeared
above the surface of the water.

Another Glass of the same sort had been broken after the same manner in
another Vessel; but having afforded us no particular Phenomenon, I barely
mention it, to show that we made more than one trial of this kind.

The consequence that will naturally result from the three last Experiments, is
this, that since barely upon the withdrawing of the pressure of the included
Air (which was perhaps but very little in quantity,) the Air residing in the
immersed bodies, did, by virtue of its Spring, expand it self so forcibly as we
have recited, and perform notable things, the Air above the Water must have
exercised a very powerful pressure upon the surface of it, since, (setting
aside the weight of the water, of small moment in our trials,) it must have
been at least aequivalent to (and probably much exceeded) that force of the
immersed Air, whose exercise it was able totally to hinder.

And from hence it may be easily deduced, that the weight of the Atmosphere
acts upon bodies under water, notwithstanding that the interposed liquor is by
vast odds heavier in specie than Air; for, we have just now proved the pressure
of enclosed Air, (which consists in its Spring,) upon bodies under water; and
it is manifest, that the strength of the Spring of this inferior Air, we make
our trials with, is caused by the weight of the superior Air, which bends and
compresses those little Aereal springy particles, whereof our Air consists; so
that the weight of the Atmosphere being aequivalent to the Spring of the
inferior Air, (for else it could not compress it as much as it does,) must
lean upon the surface of the subjacent water, with a force aequivalent to the
spring of that part of it that is contiguous to the water.

This Experiment brings into my mind another that I once made, which though not
properly Hydrostatical, yet relating to positive Levity, may perhaps be not
uselesly added on this occasion; wherefore I shall here subjoyn a transcript of
the Phenomenon, that belongs to our present purpose, as it is registered soon
after the Experiment was made.

[To examine by a visible Experiment the common doctrine, that a portion of
Air, by being much dilated, rarefied or expanded, does acquire a new and
proportionable degree of Positive Levity, I devised to put in practice the
following way:

We took a Bladder of a moderate size, that was very fine and limber, that it
might be the lighter and more easily distended. The most part of the Air being
squeezed out of the Bladder, the neck of it was tied up very close, that no air
might get out of it, nor any (external) get into it. This limber Bladder was
hung at one of the Scales of a Balance, whose Beam had been purposely made
more than ordinarily short, that the instrument, (which yet was ticklish
enough) might be suspended, and capable of playing in the cavity of a great
Receiver, into which we conveyed it, having first carefully counterpoysed the
Bladder with a metalline weight put into the opposite scale.

This done, the Air was pumped out, and as that was withdrawn, the Bladder was
more and more expanded by the Spring of the internal Air, till at length, when
the Receiver was well exhausted, it appeared to be quite full. Notwithstanding
which great dilatation of the included Air, it did not appear by the depression
of the opposite scale, to be grown manifestly lighter than it was at first. And
the Bladder seemed also to retain the same weight, after it had, by the Air
that was let into the Receiver, been compressed into its former wrinkled state.]

NEW EXPERIMENTS About the Differing PRESSURE Of Heavy SOLIDS and FLUIDS.

NEW EXPERIMENTS About the differing Pressure of Heavy Solids and Fluids.
SInce not only in vulgar Spectators of Physico-Mechanical Experiments, but
even among some Learned men it has proved a great impediment to men's freely
acquiescing in the doctrine founded on those Phenomenon, that if the Atmosphere
could really exercise so great a pressure as we ascribe to it, it would
unavoidably oppress and crush all the bodies exposed to it, and consequently
neither other Animals, nor Men would be able to move under so great a load, or
subsist in spite of so forcible a compression.

This I readily grant to be a plausible Objection, but I suppose the force of
it will be taken away by the following considerations put together.

And first, the power of pressing, that we ascribe to the Air, is not a thing
deduced, as too many other consequences in Physic are, from doubtful
suppositions or bare Hypotheses, but from real and sensible Experiments. And
therefore since we have clear and positive proofs of the Pressure of the Air,
though we could not explain how Men and other Animals are not destroyed by it;
yet we ought rather to acknowledge our ignorance in a doubtful problem, than
deny what experience manifests to be a Truth: As is generally practiced in
treating of the Attractive and other powers of the Loadstone, which are freely
acknowledged even by those that confess themselves unable to explicate them;
though, if experience did not satisfy us of them, they were liable to diverse
more considerable objections, than any that is urged against the Pressure of
the Air.

Secondly, but though it be not absolutely necessary that we should answer the
above-recited Objection otherwise, than by thus declaring that the Spring of
the Air is not to be rejected for it; yet we will endeavor very much to lessen
it, if not quite remove the difficulty, before we put an end to the discourse.

I consider then thirdly, that they that urge the lately mentioned Objection
against the great Pressure of the Air, seem not to be aware, that we were
conceived and born in places exposed to the pressure of the Atmosphere, and
therefore how great soever that pressure appear to be, it ought not to crush us
now, since when we were but embryos or newborn Babes, and consequently very
much more weak and tender than we now are, we were able to resist it, and not
only live, but grow in all dimensions in spite of it.

If there were any place about the Moon, or some other of the Celestial Globes,
that some Learned men fancy to be inhabited, that has no Atmosphere, or
equivalent Fluid about it, and where yet men could be generated anew, if one
of those men should be supposed to be transported thence, and set down upon our
Earth, there might be made an Experiment fitted for our controversy. In the
mean time I doubt, that since Nature is not observed to make things
superfluously strong, such a humane body being not made to resist any weight or
pressure of Air, would be of so tender and compressible a make, that it would
easily be crushed inwards by our Atmospherical pressure. And though we cannot
give an instance of this kind, yet we make trials somewhat Analogous to it in
our Pneumatical Engine. For when we place water in our Receiver, and pump out
the Air that was above it, there will be generated a multitude of bubles, some
of which, when the Air is carefully withdrawn, will be of a strange and scarce
credible bigness; these bubles being generated where the Air cannot press upon
them, these dimensions are so natural to them, that if the Receiver be supposed
not to leak, nor other unfriendly accidents to intervene, they would (for ought
we know) last a good while; since I have elsewhere shown, that the Spring of
highly dilated Air did continue for many months, and a bladder would for no
less time continue blown and filled in our Vacuum by a little Air that was left
in it, when the ambient air began to be withdrawn from it. And yet the large
bubles above mentioned, when once the outward air is suffered to come in upon
them, are thereby so violently compressed, that in a trice they shrink into
dimensions, too small to keep them so much as visible; and if I could have
succeeded in my Attempt of producing such living Bodies as I endeavored (but
did not expect) in our Vacuum, I suppose the success would have confirmed what
I have been saying.

Fourthly; but you will tell me, that so great a weight and pressure, as I
assign the Atmosphere, must needs make a man feel pain, and, if not otherwise
dislocate some of the parts, must at least press the whole body inward.

But first, being accustomed to the pressure from our very birth, and even
before it, so early and long an accustomance hinders us from taking notice of
it; those pressures only being sensible to us, that are made so by some
additional cause, which by making a new impression excites us to take notice of
it. So we are not sensible of the weight of the cloths we are accustomed to
wear; and so a healthy man is not sensible of the heat in his heart because
it is constant there, and the sentient parts of the heart have been still used
to it, whereas that heat oftentimes has been very considerable; and when in
living dissections a man puts his finger into the heart of an Animal, which
probably has a fainter, or at least no stronger degree of heat than a humane
heart, he will feel in his fingers, accustomed to the Air, a manifest degree of
heat, if they be but in their usual temper. 2. I have elsewhere proved by
Experiments, that a cubick inch of Air, for instance, has as strong a spring as
suffices to enable it to resist the weight of the whole Atmosphere, as far as
it is exposed thereunto; for else it would be more compressed than de facto it
is. And 3. I have also shown, that a very little portion of Air, though it will
much sooner loose its spring by expansion than a greater, yet 'twill resist
further compression as much as a greater. And 4. I have also shown, that in the
pores of the parts of Animals, whether fluid or consistent, as in their Blood,
Galls, Urines, Hearts, Livers, etc. there are included a multitude of Aereal
corpuscles, as may appear by the numerous bubles afforded by such Liquors, and
the swelling or expansion of the consistent parts in our exhausted Receiver. 5.
To this we may add, that, besides the Bones, whose solidity is not questioned,
a much greater part of the humane body than is wont to be imagined, does really
consist of Membranes and Fibers, and the coalitions and contextures of these;
and that these substances are by the Providence of the most wise Author of
Things made of a much closer and stronger Texture, than those, that have not
tried, will be apt to think; as I could make probable by the great force that
Bladders will endure, and the very great weight that Tendons of no great
thickness will lift up or sustain, and by other things that I shall not now
insist on. Lastly, There is a far greater difference, than men are wont to
suspect, between the effects of the Pressures made upon Bodies by incumbent or
otherwise applied solid weights, and those that they suffer from heavy but
every way ambient fluids; as will appear by the Experiments to be mentioned by
and by.

From the particulars contained in these considerations, we may be assisted to
show, why it is not necessary, that the pressure of the Atmosphere, though as
great as we suppose it, should oppress and crush the bodies of men that live
under it: for, the solidity of the bones and the strong Texture of the
membranes and fibers, and the spring of the Aereal particles, that abound in
the softer as well as in the fluid parts of bodies, is equivalent to the
pressure of as much of the Atmosphere, as can exercise its pressure against
them, and makes the frame of a humane body so firm, that it may well resist the
pressure of the outward Air, without having any part violently dislocated,
whilst the external pressure is exercised but by the Air, which being but an
invironing fluid, presses it equally (as to sense) on every side. And because
our bodies have been produced in the Atmosphere, and from our very birth
exposed, without intermission, to the pressure of it; our continual
accustomance to this pressure, and the firmness of their structure, keep us
from being sensible of the weight or pressure. And that it was not impertinent
for me to mention the firmness of the frame of our bodies on this occasion, I
shall manifest by an instance, that will upon another account also be proper
for this place.

We know, that multitudes of men have had occasion to pass over high mountains;
and, besides that I have been my self upon the Alps and Apennines, I have
enquired of Travelers, that have visited the Asian and American Mountains, and
some that have been upon the top of the Pick of Tenerif it self: But though
diverse of them took notice of a great difference in the Air at the top and
bottom as to some other Quality, as coldness and thinness; yet I never met
with; nor heard of any, that took notice of a difference as to the Weight of
Air he sustained, or that complained, that when he was come down to the foot of
the Mountain, he felt any greater compression from the Air than at the top. And
yet the Experiments made as well by others as by our selves, sufficiently
witness, than on more elevated parts of the Earth, which have a less height of
the Atmosphere incumbent on them, the weight and pressure of the Air is not so
great as below. And on very high Mountains, it is not unlikely that this
difference may be very considerable, since, when the Torricellian Experiment
was made near Clermont in France, upon the Puy de Domme, (which is none of the
highest mountains in the world, being found by the ingenious makers of that
observation to be but about 500 Fathoms,) they found the difference of the
Mercury at the top and bottom to amount to about three inches: And
consequently, if the trial had been made with Water instead of Quicksilver, the
difference would have been about three foot and a half in the perpendicular
height of the Water. And it is very probable, that in much higher Mountains, the
difference of the Mercurial Cylinders height at the top and bottom may be much
greater; and at the bottom of some very deep Well or Mineral groove, which may
without improbability be supposed to be placed at or near the foot of one of
these Mountains, if we conceive the Baroscope to be let down, the variation of
the height of the Mercurial Cylinder may be yet much more considerable; and yet
we find not that the diggers in the deepest Mines, in mountainous Countries,
are sensible of being leaned on or compressed by any unusual weight. But not
here to build on any thing but matter of fact, it appears by the newly named
observation, that, when a man was at the bottom of the hill, he had as much
greater weight of Air leaning upon his head than he had at the top, as was
equal to the height of an imaginary vessel full of water, which having his head
for basis, were three foot and a half high: which is so considerable a weight,
as could not but have been, not only sensible, but very troublesome and uneasy
to support. And what has been said of the gravity of a pail of water, that
leaned on his head, may be proportionably applied to his Shoulders, Arms, etc.

Whence I think I may infer, that the reason, why such a weight was not felt by
the man it compressed, was not, that the Air, that pressed him, was not
considerable, but that the pressure was exercised after the uniform manner of
fluid Bodies.

And this may suffice to show that there is no necessity that the compression
of the Atmosphere should make it impossible to live in it. But because it is
observed, that those that dive to great depths under water, are not oppressed
by the great weight of the incumbent water, and the cause of this strange
Phenomenon is not so easy to be assigned, and therefore has been made one of
the two grand arguments, whereon the non-gravitation of water in water, and air
in air has been, and still remains, founded: I shall here offer something ex
abundanti toward the solution of that noble and difficult Problem.

And first, that what is observed by the Diverse, does not evince that water
does not weigh in water, I have elsewhere See the Hydrostatical Paradoxes.
proved by such reasons and Experiments as had the good fortune to convince
eminently learned men, that were sufficiently prepossessed with the vulgar
opinion: And in the same Treatise I have given a clear account, why a Bucket
full of water is not felt considerably heavy, whilst it is under water, in
comparison of what it is whilst it is drawn up into the Air; which is the other
Phenomenon that I freshly intimated the common Opinion to be founded on.

Next, I do not think it strange, that that follows not which it is objected
should follow from our Hypothesis; namely, that a Diver should be violently
depressed to the bottom of the water, by the weight of so great a Pillar of the
Sea as is placed perpendicularly over his body. For if we imagine a plane so to
cut the Seawater, as to pass by the Diverse body; then as that part of the
plane, on which his body leans, will be pressed by It, together with the water
that is perpendicularly incumbent on it; so all the other parts of the same
plane will be pressed by equally tall Pillars of water perpendicularly
incumbent on them; and consequently, if the man's body were just equiponderant
to an equal bulk of water, it and the water that leans on it would be sustained
by the pressure of the collateral water incumbent on the other parts of the
same plane (as may be easily understood by what I have elsewhere said. See
Appendices to the Hydrost. Paradox.
) And therefore there is no reason, why the Diverse bodies should be more
forcibly depressed than its depression is resisted. It Is true, that this body
will sink, but that is because it is not only, as we lately supposed it,
aequiponderant to an equal bulk of water, but heavier than that. But then,
since the Water by its gravity and resistance takes off as much of the weight
of the Diverse body, whilst that is immersed, as a quantity of water equal to it
would weigh in the Air, the subsiding of the humane body by its own weight
ought to be but slow, because that being not in specie much heavier than water,
it can sink but by virtue of the surplusage of weight that it has above water.
And in effect, I have been informed by Swimmers, that in the Sea, whose water
by reason of the Saltness is specifically heavier than the common water, they
could hardly dive when they had a mind; the salt water did so much support
them. And having, because I had no conveniences to make trials upon the parts
of humane bodies, examined the weight of parts of other Animals in Air and
Water, I found the overplus of the weight of the animal substances above an
equal bulk of water to be but very small. And this may suffice to take off the
wonder, why, though water be admitted to gravitate in water, yet Diverse are not
depressed by that which leans upon them; the endeavor, they use to keep
themselves from sinking by striking the resisting water with their arms and
legs, easily compensating their weak tendency downwards, which the small
surplusage of gravity abovementioned gives them.

But it seems to me far more difficult to render a reason, why those that are a
hundred foot beneath the surface of the Sea, are not crushed inwards,
especially in their chests and abdomens, or at least so compressed as to endure
a very great pain.

To clear up or lessen this difficulty, I have two things to offer.

1. I confess, that I am not entirely satisfied about the matter of fact; for I
do not yet know, whether it fares alike with the Diverse at all depths under
water: for, according to the answers I obtained from persons that had been one
of them at the Coral-fishing in the Streights, and the other at the
Pearl-fishing near Manar, I do not find that the Diverse are wont to descend to
the greatest depths of the Sea, which if they did perhaps they would find a
notable difference.

And in small, or but moderate depths, those that dive without Engines usually
make such haste, or are so confounded, or have their minds so intent upon their
work, that they take not notice of such lesser alterations, as else they might
observe, especially they being persons void of curiosity and skill to make such
observations. Which I the rather mention, because having met with a Learned
Physician, that living by the Seaside in a hot climate, delighted himself much
in diving; and inquiring of him whether he felt no compression, when he passed
out of the Air into the Water, he answered me, that when he dived nimbly as
others use to do, he took not notice of it, but when he let himself sink
leisurely into the water, he was sensible of an unusual pressure against his
thorax, which he several times observed.

A man that gets his living by fetching up goods out of wracked Ships,
complained to me, that if with his diving Bell he went very deep into the Sea,
and made some stay there, he found himself much incommodated; which though he
imputed to the coldness of the water, yet by the symptoms he related I was
inclined to suspect, that the pressure of it upon the Genus Nervosum might have
an interest in the troublesome effect. And I have been assured by an eminent
Virtuoso of my acquaintance, that he was lately informed by a person, whose
profession it is to fetch up things from the bottom of the Sea by the help of a
diving Bell, that several times when he descended to a great depth under the
surface of the water, he was so compressed by it, that the blood was squeezed
out at his Nose and Eyes; which Relation seems to favor our conjecture, and
would much more confirm it, if I were sure, that the effect was no way caused
by some fermentation or other commotion in the blood it self, occasioned by the
great density or other alterations of the Air he breathed in and out, or by
some other operation of the ambient Medium distinguishable from the compression
of the water, though perhaps conjoined with it.

And on this occasion I remember, that questioning an Ingeneer, who had made
use of an Engine to go under water, quite differing from the Diving-bell; he
answered me, that when he came to a considerable depth, he found the pressure
so great against the Leathern case, wherein he descended, and by that means
against his belly and thorax, that he feared it would have spoiled him, which
forced him to make haste up again. But this observation, to have much built
upon it, should be further inquired into.

These things, and not these only, make me wish, that what is felt by those
that dive to great depths, and stay at them, might be more heedfully observed
by intelligent men, that being fully informed what is true in point of fact, we
may the better and more cheerfully indagate the reasons.

In the mean while, taking things as they are thought to appear, I shall
propose two things toward the solution of our difficulty; namely the Firmness
of the structure of a humane body, and the Uniformity of the pressure made by
fluids.

Of the first of these I shall add but little to what has been already said,
where I spoke of the resistance made by our bodies to the compression of the
Atmosphere; only shall here take notice, that whereas the Membranes are very
thin parts, and therefore seem unfit to make any great resistance; we have
tried, that if a piece of fine Bladder were fastened to the orifice of a
Brass-pipe of about an inch in Diameter, we could not by drawing the Air from
beneath it, make the weight of the Atmosphere break the bladder, though the
weight were perhaps aequivalent to an erected Cylinder of water, of the
wideness of the orifice and about 30. foot high, and we^e indeed such, that
diverse men, that laid their hands on the orifice when the Air was pumped out
from beneath, complained, that they were not able to lift off their hands again
till some of the Air was readmitted.

But the main thing, I shall propose toward the solving of the difficulty we
are considering, is the Uniformity wherewith fluid bodies press upon the solid
ones that are placed in them. And because I remember not to have met with
Experiments purposely made to show, how this sort of pressure is more easy to
be resisted than that of solids against solids, I shall subjoyn the following
trials.

EXPER. I.
IN the short Cylinder of Brass abovementioned we put a fine Bladder tied so
close at the neck, that none of the Air (whereof it was about half full) could
probably get out. Which we did, to the end that the Hen-Egge, we were to bed in
it, might lie soft, and have its sides almost covered with the limber and
flaccid Bladder and contained Air: This done, we covered the remaining part of
the Egg with another Bladder, that nothing that was hard might come to bear
immediately upon the shell: then we put the wooden plugg into the Cylinder and
a weight upon the plugg, which is to be done very slowly and warily, lest the
quick descent of the weight should make the plugg break the Egg it leans on.
Lastly, the Cylinder thus fitted, being covered with a large Receiver, and the
Air being drawn out, that air, which was tied up in the Bladders, by degrees
expanded it self so strongly, as to lift up the plugg and the incumbent weight
to a pretty height, and keep it there till the external Air was readmitted.

Now since 'twill be readily granted, and appears by diverse Experiments
elsewhere related, that the Air in such cases expands it self vigorously every
way, it appears by the recited trial, that it pressed against the Egg with the
same force, that it pressed proportionably against the bottom of the Plugg, and
that force was more than sufficient to lift up the weight, which (together with
the Plugg) amounted to about thirty pound, and yet the Egg being taken out
appeared perfectly whole and no way harmed; whereas upon the same Egg (if I
mistake not) or at least another of the same kind, laying warily a while after
small weights one upon another, the Egg was crushed to pieces by about four
pound weight. This Experiment, though it seemed considerable to those that saw
it, and may prevent an objection, for which reason I here mention it; yet will
appear in no way strange to them that consider, that the weight of the
Atmosphere, which the Egg supported, before it was put into the Cylinder, was
more than aequivalent to such a pressure of the Air, as may suffice to lift up
the plugg: Wherefore I thought fit to make further trials of a differing nature.

EXP. II.
We took a Glass-buble of about an inch and half in Diameter, which we caused
to be blown at the flame of a Lamp, that it might be far more thin and easy to
break, than the thinnest Vials that are wont to be blown in the Glasser's
Furnaces. This Buble we included between Bladders, as we did the Egg in the
former Experiment; and then having warily put the plugg into the Cylinder, so
as it might press upon the Bladder that environed the Glass, we leisurely put
the weights upon the Plugg, till they together with the Plugg amounted to 30.
pound or more, which being removed, the Plugg was taken out, and the
Glass-buble, though it were extraordinarily thin, (perhaps no thinner than fine
white Paper) was taken out whole.

EXP. III.
But lest the great resistance of so thin a Glass (which yet was not
Hermetically sealed) should be ascribed to the Sphaericalness of its figure, we
employed, instead of it, the shell of an Egg, whence by a hole, made at one end
of it, the Yolk and White had been taken out. This empty and imperfectly closed
shell we handled as we did the Glass-buble in the former Experiment; and,
notwithstanding the great leaden weight, that leaned by the intervention of the
plugg upon the soft body, that environed it, It was taken out, not only
uncrushed together, but, for ought we could perceive, without the least crack.

EXP. IV.
And to show, that what we observed about the nature of the compression of
fluid bodies will hold as well in Water as Air, though it seemed difficult to
make the trial with the accommodations we then had, we thought upon the
following Expedient.

Into a limber Bladder, almost full of water, we put a Hen-Egg, and tying the
neck very strait, that nothing might get in or out, we so placed the Bladder in
the Brass-Cylinder, that the Egg might not be immediately touched by any thing
that was hard; then putting the Plugg into the Cylinder, we warily and
leisurely heaped upon it flat-bottom'd weights of Lead conveniently shaped,
till they amounted (if both I and another misremember not) to about 75 pound;
notwithstanding all which the Egg was taken out sound and uncrack'd, and
probably might have supported a much greater pressure, if we had been furnished
with more weights of a commodious figure to heap upon it.

If we compare with this what was noted at the close of the first Experiment,
about the breaking of an Egg with four pound weight, when no fluid body was
interposed, it will be obvious to conclude, how great a difference there is
between the resistance that a body may make to the pressure of solid bodies,
that bear hard against some parts and not against others; and its resistance to
others that compress it uniformly or in all places alike. For though it be
denied, and that, I think, upon very insufficient grounds, that bodies under
water are pressed by the incumbent water, because, as it is pretended, the
Elements gravitate not in their proper place; yet this objection cannot be
pretended to take place in our last Experiment, where the main thing that
leaned upon the water, which surrounded the Egg, being not a Pillar of
Homogeneous water, but a great and solid weight of Lead, the included Egg must
by the intervention of the water have been compressed. Nor were Eggs the only
bodies we endeavored to crush after this manner, the trial having been also
made upon a substance more soft and of a very irregular shape.

To apply this now to Diverse, when they are at a moderate depth under water; it
seems not improbable, that the structure of their bodies should be robust
enough not to be violated by the pressure of the incumbent and otherwise
ambient water. For we have seen by the former Experiments, and especially by
the last recited, that a body, easy to be broken inwards by an incumbent solid
weight, will remain entire and unaltered in point of figure, under a very much
greater weight that compresses it after the manner of an ambient fluid. And
though it would seem to many, that even in our supposition the Thorax, being,
as they think it, a kind of empty space in the body, the ribs and muscles ought
by the weight of the water to be crushed into the great cavity intercepted
between them; yet it is to be considered on the other side, that the Air
contained in the chest, especially when its Spring is increased by those
accidental causes, that may take place when men are deep under water,
particularly the praeternatural heat, which the want of the usual respiration
is apt to produce, will very much help the chest to resist the pressure, as
they will easily grant, that have tried the resistance, that Air makes, to be
considerably compressed under water, the difficulty of farther compressing it
still increasing, as in Springs it ought to do, the more it is compressed. And
I further observe, that the structure of the Thorax is much more firm than men
are wont to suppose; as appears by the very great solid weights, that some men
do, for gain, or to show their strength, suffer to be laid on their breasts,
without receiving any mischief thereby. And if I should admit, that at great
depths, the water had some little compressive operation upon the chest; yet
that can be no other than the pressing the parts a little inwards, and that the
structure of the Thorax it self, fitted by nature for constriction and
dilatation (as may appear in vehement takings in and blowings out of the Air)
may admit with small inconvenience. To which purpose I recall to mind, what I
lately mentioned concerning the Physician, that found his Thorax somewhat
compressed when he leisurely dived; as also what I have In the Append. to
Hydrost. Paradox.
elsewhere delivered concerning a Tad-pole, which swimming in water that was
strongly compressed, by an external force, seemed thorough the Glass, that
contained the water, to be somewhat lessened in bulk, and yet not killed, nor
sensibly crushed notwithstanding its great tenderness. And if there were parts
of a human body, that were of a Texture too weak and too disproportionate to
the rest, I think it possible, that this compression inwards might be great
enough to be very sensible to the Diverse. For having purposely inquired of a
certain man, whose trade 'twas to fetch up goods out of Ships cast away, by the
help of a diving instrument, he told me, that when he was at a considerable
depth under water, as about ten or twelve Fathoms, he found, suitably to my
conjecture, so great a pressure against the drums or thin membranes of his
Ears, which were not sufficiently counterpress'd from within, as put him to a
great deal of pain, till he had found some contrivances to lessen the
inconvenience. Nor was this man the only Diver that has complained of this
troublesome pressure, which seems to argue, that, at least at great depths
under water, the firmness of the structure of a man's body does concur with the
uniformity of the fluids pressure, to keep him from being hurt by the incumbent
and otherwise ambient water.

But I shall now say no more of the Problem obout Diverse, since (besides that
the matter of fact is not yet in my opinion accurately enough stated and
determined,) the true solution of it is not necessary to give a reason, why the
weight of the Air, a fluid so much ligh^er than water, should not oppress nor
crush the bodies of Animals; though what has been already said about the
resistance of bodies under water, may serve very much to confirm the reasons I
proposed, why we that live in the Atmosphere are not (sensibly) compressed,
much less oppressed by its weight.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
THe Reader is desired to take notice, that of this Tract concerning the
Differing Pressure of heavy Solids and Fluids, there have been lost, by the
carelessness of the Printer, Eleven written pages, which he under his hand had
acknowledged to have received; and with the contents of which (many of them
being Quantities, and other circumstances of Experiments, formerly made,) the
Author cannot now charge his memory.


