A Discovery of Divine Mysteries: OR THE NATURE and EFFICACY OF THE Soul of
Man, Considered in all its Faculties, Operations and Divine Perfections; and
how it governs in Divine and Secular Affairs of Life.

In Three Parts. I. Of the Preference due to the Soul above the Body, by Reason
of its Spiritual and Immortal Nature; and how it operates on Things in Heaven
and Earth. II. How the Soul of Man moves and operates in Religious Duties and
Moral Actions, whether toward God, toward our selves, or toward Man: And of
our Duty of Gospel Self-denial; which results from the manner how our Souls
operate in our Bodies, under the visible Empire of God. III. Concerning our
Duties of Time and Eternity, of the present Life and of the Life to come, of
the present World and of the World to come, which results from the manner how
our Souls ought to be out of our Bodies first of all, and then in our
Spiritualized Bodies after the Universal Resurrection.


With many other Curious Matters: Being a Complete Body of Divine and Moral
Philosophy.

By C. B. D. D. Fellow of the Royal Society.

LONDON: Printed for Eben. Tracy, at the Three Bibles on London Bridge, 1700.

TO THE READER.
THOUGH the World be full of Discourses, Treatises, and Essays of Morality, yet
we have believed it might not be unnecessary, to Expose these New Essays to the
Public View; Either because one cannot enough propose to Mankind their Duties;
or else because the greatest part of those Essays, Treatises and Discourses
which have appeared already, and of which some have so justly pleased the
Relish of the Age, are (if well regarded) no more than only Paintings and
Descriptions, or at best but Incitements, not Convictions and Establishments of
Duties: For they suppose that the Principles of Religion, Morality, and Duties,
are settled and acknowledged; they presuppose them, but they prove them not;
they persuade them to those who already do believe them; but if there be some
who do not believe them, (as there are too too many who doubt thereof, or at
least, who are not sufficiently persuaded of them) they do neither persuade nor
convince Them in the least.

We believe that we have Discovered the precious and inestimable Treasure of an
entire Conviction of Religion and Morality, in the Incultivated and Neglected
Field of the Natural Knowledge of our Souls, and the no less precious Treasure
of that Knowledge of our Souls in the Attention and Reflection upon every ones
Proper and Indubitable Sentiment; and we have believed that we ought to render
the Discovery Public.

This is what we have done. And though in all this Essay (which is indeed no
other than a mere Essay, because it is only an Idea which we rough-draw, and an
Overture which we make, but do not fully accomplish by Unfolding and Pressing
on in a particular and complete Delineation, all our Duties and all their
Circumstances) there needs nothing more, Than that every one should apply his
proper Sentiment, and the clear Idea's which he finds in Himself, by Attention
and Reflection upon this Indubitable Sentiment which he has in Himself;
Nevertheless, because there are few Persons who are accustomed to Reflect and
Reason upon Matters so remote from their Senses, and the Carnal Relish of Human
Passions which stir up Attention in Reading the greatest part of other Books;
we foresaw that this Essay might appear too strong to some Spirits, who can
only digest Matters that are very easy, who are not accustomed to mount up to
the Principles of Things, who Rely upon the Credit of Authors, and who are not
at all Curious to see what we propose to them in First Notions and Clear Idea's.

But besides that we believed that an Age so Enlightened as Ours is, would
require an Instruction as strong, and that there are Spirits who would
willingly be thus Fundamentally Instructed, and that it would be convenient to
Impress this Relish upon others, to the end that they may be raised up to a
more Perfect Knowledge of God and themselves; We do also hope that the meanest
Capacities may here learn how to Know their Souls, and by their Souls their
Duties.

S. Paul would have all the Faithful apply themselves to Augment and Increase
Light and Knowledge in themselves; And if there be any Knowledge which is
useful and necessary to be Increased and brought to Perfection, it is without
doubt The Knowledge of our Soul, which is the most Essential Science which we
have to acquire, and the true Science of God and of Salvation, as the Divine
Apostle speaks; since we can Know nothing Fundamentally, neither of our
Heavenly and Eternal Hope, nor of our Present State upon Earth, nor of our
Essential Relation with the Eternal Nature and Essence, (from whence proceed
all our Duties) but in Proportion as the Knowledge of our Soul Increases.

We see very Exact and very Religious Observers of Duties, who oftentimes Know
not why they perform them; and though they do not do amiss in being so, yet they
would do much better in Being, and Knowing why they are so; because, whatsoever
a Man is Knowingly, and by the Conviction of Reason, he is much more solidly so
for himself, and much more profitably so for others.

We have believed that we ought to give a Complete Science and Knowledge of the
Soul, to the end that all the World might thereby Instruct themselves in their
Duties, either for a particular Edification, or for the Instruction and
Edification of others: And we are persuaded that all those, who will give
themselves the pains of Reading with some Attention, and of adding to that
Reading some little Reflection upon themselves, to Remark what we Observe of
the Natural and Universal Sentiments of all Mankind, (which is the perpetual
Light of this Treatise) will find that we have rendered this Matter (otherwise
so obscure and difficult of it self) most Intelligible, and Proportioned to the
Capacity of the whole World.

THE CONTENTS.
PART I.
OF the Preference due to the Soul above the Body, from the Reason of its
Spiritual and Immortal Nature. Page 1. Chap. 1. The Curiosity which we ought to
have how to know our Souls. ibid. The Dignity of our Souls. 6 The Perception
and Certainty which all of us have of our Souls. 8
Chap. 2. That our Souls undoubtedly are Spiritual Natures, and altogether
distinct from Bodies, upon the account of their Intelligent Nature. 11 Why and
how we conceive of God and Angels as Spirits. 12 This is the common Doctrine of
the Schools. 14
Chap. 3. The manner of our conceiving that Knowledge which is in Beasts,
causes a Confusion which must necessarily be rectified. 16 Four different
Opinions, which make four different Degrees of Knowledge in Beasts. 19
Chap. 4. A general Discussion of the Opinion which gives to Beasts a Knowledge
like to ours. 21 Chap. 5. Whether Beasts have a true Reason, like to ours. 25
Chap. 6. Whether Beasts have any Reasoning inferior to Reason. 33 Chap. 7.
Whether Beasts have any sort of Knowledge like to ours. 37 Chap. 8. What
Judgment soever is made of Beasts, our Souls are undoubtedly Spiritual, by
reason of their Knowing Nature. 43 Chap. 9. The double, immense, and infinite
Ground of Knowledge that is in our Souls, is a new and certain Proof of their
Spiritual Nature. 56 Chap. 10. That Libertines cannot maintain this monstrous
Opinion, That the Soul of Man is Corporeal. 59 Chap. 11. That our Souls are
undoubtedly Immortal, by reason of their Knowing Nature. 67 Chap. 12. That our
Souls are undoubtedly Spiritual, by reason of the Principle and Ground of
Liberty which we find in them. 75 Animals have not the Liberty of their
Motions. 76 Our Liberty of Thinking is a certain Character of the Nature and
Spiritual Essence in our Souls. 81 The Empire of our Desires is another certain
Proof of the Spirituality of our Souls. 83
Chap. 13. We have an indubitable Certainty of the Immortal Condition of our
Souls, by the Desires and Instincts of Immortality and Eternity which we have.
87 Chap. 14. Of the Spiritual and Immortal Nature of our Souls, drawn from the
Ground of Conscience. 95 That Conscience is not in the Soul of Man an Effect of
Education, or of some Opinion with which it was imprinted and prepossessed in
the Infancy. 98
Chap. 15. That our Souls are indubitably Immortal, by a Certainty that the
Sentiment of the Conscience gives us thereof. 104 Chap. 16. That it is easy
not only to give our selves a Conviction of the Spiritual Nature of our Souls,
but to give a neat Idea of them. 112 That every one feels and perceives his
Soul; and that although he be ignorant, it is only because he knows not that he
knows it. 116
Chap. 17. Some Essential Reflections, to Rstablish the Order of the Preference
of the Soul above that of the Body. 119 That all the good and ill Fortune are
in our Souls, 120 That the Soul has Pleasures and Pains independently of the
Body. 121 The Essential Difference of the Pleasures and the Pains which the
Soul has by reason of the Body; and of the Pleasures and the Pains which She
has independently of the Body. ibid. That the Pleasures and the Pains which
the Soul has not but upon the account of the Body, are only as it were to show
the Pleasures and the Pains of Eternity. 123 That Virtue is the proper and true
Good of the Soul, and Vices its Evils, 124 That the Passions are the Fevers of
the Soul. 126 That the Soul has Essentially in her Disorders the Apprehension
of a Superior Justice, which wounds her. 128
Chap. 18. That all these Knowledges are so many Lights and Principles of
Morality and Duty. 130 The Order of Duties between our Souls and our Bodies. 132

PART II.
OF our Duties of Religion and of Morality, whether toward God, whether
toward our Selves, whether toward Man, and of our Duty of all Gospel
Self-denial; which result from the manner how our Souls Are and Operate in our
Bodies under the Visible Empire of God. Page 141 Chap. 1. How we may with
Assurance know the manner how our Souls are in our Bodies. ibid. Chap. 2.
General Experiences of a Power Superior to our Souls and to our Bodies, which
Acts in our Souls and in our Bodies. 146 The first Experience that we have,
That God Acts upon us as a Sovereign Ruler, after the manner wherein our Souls
Are in our Bodies. ibid. The Second Experience of the same Empire in the
Sovereign Domination with which our Souls are sent into our Bodies without
Consulting them. 147 A Third Experience of the same thing in Diseases, over
which our Soul has no Empire. 148 A Fourth Experience of the same in Pleasure
and Pain. ib. A Fifth Experience of the same in the Idea's which we receive. 150
Chap. 3. Experiences of the Power which Governs Nature, and which comes to the
Assistance of our Souls in a moment. 153 Another Experience of the same from
the diversity of delectable and painful Sentiments. 155 A Third Experience,
That God Acts as an Universal Cause, in the manner that he Acts upon our Souls
and upon our Bodies. 156
Chap. 4. False Idea's which we must avoid by the Light of these Experiences,
and first, That of Believing that our Souls are united to our Bodies by any
Sympathy, Proportion, or Inclination. 158 That the Soul is not as Corporeal
Forms, though it be the Form of a Man. 160 The difference between a Soul and an
Angel. ibid. The Opinion of the Ancient Fathers upon all that has been said
concerning the Disproportion betwixt Souls and Bodies. 161
Chap. 5. That the Body cannot in any manner Act upon the Soul, to Illuminate
or Affect it Physically and Immediately, by it self. 164 That our own Bodies
cannot Act Physically and Immediately by themselves upon our Souls, whose
Spirituality renders them inaccessible to all sorts of Impressions of bodies.
167 That the Body does not cause in the Soul either Pleasure or Pain. 168
Bodies do not only not cause the Sentiments and Idea's in the Soul, but they do
not so much as determine the Soul Physically to make them. 170 That the Souls
of themselves do not make the Idea's or Images of Bodies. 171

(...) pressing an Ardor as we have to know all things out of our selves, so
much Coldness have we for that excellent Curiosity of knowing our selves: It is
the only Map and the only History, the only Intrigue and the only Matter, which
we take no care at all to understand.

The Dignity of our Souls.
Yet in the mean time we have a Soul, not only Spiritual, and of a Nature
altogether different from the Body, and more excellent than all we can conceive
that is Material and Corporeal; but also Immortal and Celestial, imprinted with
a thousand Characters of a lively Resemblance of the Supreme Nature and
Essence, and destined to an Eternity, and a happy Immortality, in an eternal
Union and an Everlasting Society of Delights and Joys with God.

Moses has taken care to give us the History and Genealogy of it. For, says
he, He that in the Beginning created the Heaven and the Earth, formed out of
the Common Matter of the Universe the Beasts of the Field, the Birds of the
Air, the Fishes of the Sea, by the sole construction of their Members and
Corporeal Organs, which he directed to those particular Ends which he had
proposed to himself for a general End of his Workmanship: By means of which, he
made them capable of those admirable and different Instincts and Movements that
we see in them, which is that only Life that Experience makes us see, and
Reason suffers us to acknowledge to be in Beasts: By the sole construction or
organization of their Bodies, That a most pure and a most subtle Fire, formed
from the most pure and most agitated part of their Blood, moved and animated
suddenly; They became, says the Holy Historian, Living Creatures. But when he
came to Man, to whom he gave the place of Master and King of the visible World,
the Common Matter which sufficed to make the other Living Creatures, was not at
all sufficient for the making of Man; Man cannot be made like Beasts, by a sole
Construction and Organization of his Body; for the Body being framed, it would
not have been for all that a Man, it would have been a Beast as Brutish as the
rest, if God had not sought out a Soul for it in His own Heart, and in His own
Essence: There needed nothing but a well-placing of Matter, and an altogether
Earthly Structure of Organs animated by a Blood a little set on fire, to cause
a Body to eat and walk, and to make it a living Creature, like the rest: But to
make a Man, who, far above the Life of Beasts, has a Life of Knowledge,
Understanding, and Reason; who has that Empire over himself which we call
Liberty, and that Natural Rightness which we call Conscience, there was a
necessity of searching for the Principle of this excellent Life out of all the
Extent of Matter and the Region of Bodies, and the Creator could find it no
where but in Himself. For this is what that Expression of the Holy Writer
means, And he breathed into him the breath of life. He grafted upon this
Material and Terrestrial Structure, which of it self could have no other than
the Life of Beasts, which had been given to the Common Matter of the World in
Animals, a lively Image, and an admirable Resemblance of his Eternal Essence:
And from the Conjunction of this Terrestrial Structure, and this Celestial and
Divine Nature which he poured into it, Man became Man after His Image, and was
raised up in the middle of the World, as a Living Statue, to be reverenced by
all the Universe.

The Perception and Certainty which all of us have of our Souls.
This is the History and Genealogy which Moses gives us of our Soul; in which
he appears no less a Philosopher, than a Prophet: And although he should never
have given it us, we should not have forborne to climb up to that Source or
Origin of our Nobility, by the inward Experience and Certainty which we all of
us have of our selves; since there is no body that does not feel and perceive
in himself this Celestial and Divine Part added and ingrafted upon this
Terrestrial Matter, with a thousand Characters and a thousand Attributes
undoubtedly Celestial and Divine. For who is there that does not perceive in
himself a Principle of Knowledge without Bounds, which gives a kind of
Immensity to his Soul? Who is there that does not perceive in himself a
Principle and a Ground of an Empire over himself, and over the visible World,
in the Foundation of his Liberty, which raises up a Man into a kind of
Equality, or at least a Resemblance of Sovereignty with God? Who does not
perceive in himself a Ground of Justice, or Love of Order, of Virtue and Duty,
which makes him like to the Eternal Justice, from whence flows all the Order,
all the Beauty of the World, both Moral and Natural? Who does not perceive in
himself a Ground of Conscience, whereby every one is punished or rewarded upon
the spot, according as he has done well or ill; in which Man bears in himself
a lively Image of that Supreme Justice which continually judges the Universe,
and which will one day solemnly manifest its Judgment by a manifest Recompense
of the Good, and an awful Punishment of the Wicked?

Men have essentially this Perception, and this Experience of themselves: Some
have it more clear and lively, others more confused, stupid, and dead, if I may
so say, according as they have more or less Attention or Reflection upon
themselves; but it is certain that they all of them have it. It is apparent,
that the ancient Philosophers, and the ancient Poets who were themselves the
Philosophers of their time, had not at all read the Book of Genesis, when they
made our Souls to descend from Heaven, and confounded them with the Supreme
Nature, and said, that they were a Portion of It more particularly applied to
animate our Bodies, than the rest of the Universe. It is not any Tradition that
has given Men these Ideas; it is the natural perception, and inward experience
and certainty which the Soul essentially has of it self: And if Men were not
diverted and carried away on the one side by their Passions, and on the other
side overruled to that degree as they are, by the Empire exercised over them
by the Imagination, which dulls and obscures them so, as has been said; there
would be no need of writing Books, to let them know the Nobility and Dignity,
the Imaterial Nature and the Spiritual and Immortal Quality of their Souls:
Every one would be his own Master, and his own Book to himself. But seeing that
the Passions on one side take from us the Attention and Reflection upon our
selves, and that the Imagination, on the other side, presents us with Corporeal
Images as soon as we apply our selves to conceive things Spiritual and
Immaterial, it is necessary to awaken and help this natural Sentiment, and to
support the feeble and weak Effort of the Understanding and Reason, to unmingle
our Soul from that Confusion with the Body which the Imagination causes: For
that purpose we must begin to own its Spiritual and Immortal Nature, of which
it can accumulate a thousand Proofs; but, not to weary the Spirit by too much
Speculation, we will close it up in Three only, drawn from one triple
indubitable Sentiment, which every one has, and upon which every one may
easily reflect: For every one finds in himself a Principle of Knowledge, a
Principle of Liberty, and a Principle of Conscience, or Love of Order and
Justice: And these are the three evident Convictions of the Spiritual and
Immortal Nature of our Souls, which sparkle within us. Let us treat of them in
order, and explain them one after another.

CHAP. II.
That our Souls undoubtedly are Spiritual Natures, and altogether distinct from
Bodies, upon the account of their Intelligent Nature.
IF we should follow the Light of our natural Ideas, there would be no need
here of any Effort of Reason, or any Train of Discourse; for the natural Idea
which we have of a Spirit, or a Spiritual Nature, is no other than an Idea of
an Intelligent Nature, such as we find and perceive in us by that intimate and
inseparable Experience which we have of our selves. For we must observe, and,
which admits of no difficulty, that as we do not know Bodies but by the
Experience which we have of them, so we know not Spirits but by that Spirit
which we have in our selves, and by that Idea which we have of our Soul, which
we know not but under the Idea of a knowing Substance, which we experiment and
perceive in us to be capable of diverse Matters of knowing, perceiving, and
willing, of loving, of hating, of being afflicted and rejoicing, of having Pain
and Pleasure, and, in fine, to be generally susceptible of an infinite number
of diverse Modifications, of which it has an essential Certainty, as often as
it makes them in it self, or suffers or receives them from any thing else.

As we have no Idea nor Experience of any sort of true Knowledge but that of
our own, so we have naturally no Certainty, nor near or immediate Idea, but of
our own Spirit: And though we form to our selves an Idea of some Spirit without
us, and of some Intelligent Nature, it is only grounded upon that Idea which we
have of our selves, or of that Intelligent Nature which, as I have said, we
find and prove to be in us; for we know neither God nor Angel, but by an Idea
which we draw and which we form and build upon that Idea which we have of our
selves.

Why and how we conceive of God and Angels as Spirits.
The Idea which we have of an Angel, is no other than an Idea of an Intelligent
Nature, such as is in us, but separated and disengaged from the Servitude and
Union of Bodies, and by consequence enfranchiz'd from the Imperfections and
Miseries tied to their Dependence, such as we find in our selves.

The Idea which we have of God is in like manner no other than an Idea of an
Intelligent Nature, such as is in us, but exempt from all the Imperfections
which are in us. It is an Idea of a Nature Intelligent, and existing by it
self, with a Power, Wisdom, and Sanctity or Infinite Justice; whereas we
conceive of our selves just as we are, under an Idea of a Created Intelligent
Nature, Imperfect, Defective, and Dependent in a thousand manners; but this
difference does not at all hinder, but that this Great and August Idea of the
Supreme Spirit may be apprehended under the Idea of that Intelligent Nature
which we find and prove in our selves. We do not know that God knows otherwise
than we, were it not that he must of necessity know by Himself essentially all
things, without a Cloud, without Obscurity, without Uncertainty, and all at one
View: Whereas we only know successively, and dependently of a Superior Power,
which gives us Ideas and Perceptions as he pleases.

As we know no other Spirit than God, Angel, and Man; and as we conceive
neither God, nor Angel, nor Man as Spirits, but under an Idea of a Knowing
Nature, and knowing with that kind of Knowledge which we find in us; it
follows, That the Idea under which we conceive a Spiritual Nature, is the Idea
of that Knowing Nature which is in us. And indeed it is impossible to have any
clear and positive Idea of a Spirit, which has not for its Basis and
Foundation either Knowledge, or a Knowing Faculty; for all other Definitions
and Notions which are given of a Spiritual Substance, have nothing Positive,
but consist in Negations.

This is the common Doctrine of the Schools.
Thomas Aquinas and the Scholiasts do commonly teach, That we know neither God
nor Angels, but after the manner I have been speaking of: For this is what they
would say, when they teach, That we do not know either God or Angels, but, as
they term it, per alienam speciem; that we know them not but by a borrowed and
copied Idea; that we have no proper, original, and immediate Idea of them; for
these are their Expressions: And though we had not these Authorities, the
Experience which we all of us have of the manner how we form to our selves the
Notion and Idea of God and Angels, by Reasoning, and by Abstractions, and by
Precision or separation of the Imperfection which we know to be in us, would
not permit us to doubt, but that the sole Idea and the sole Notion which we
have of a Spiritual Nature, is the Notion or Idea of an Intelligent Nature.

We know by an indubitable Experience, that there are in the World two sorts of
Natures, a Knowing Nature, and a Nature not knowing. And, to distinguish these
two Natures, of which we find in our selves Ideas and Notions altogether
distinct, by our Apprehension and Experience not to be doubted of, we have
given to the one the Name of Spiritual Nature, and to the other the Name of
Corporeal Nature. Here you see the Truth of the Matter. So if we would follow
the Ideas and the Pure Lights of Nature, which are always Infallible, there
would be no need here of making any Effort of Reasoning, to manifest the
Spiritual Nature of our Souls, which we so surely find to be Intelligent: But
by the misfortune of a deadly Prejudice, generally established by a precipitate
and an inconsiderate Judgment from our Infancy, whereby is formed an almost
universal Error, which has taken place of Truth, we have so confounded,
obscured, and involved this lively and pure Light of Nature, and of the Idea of
Body and Spirit, or of Spiritual and Corporeal Nature, as it is absolutely
necessary to stop here, in order to regulate that Confusion which has been
cast upon these Ideas.

CHAP. III.
The manner of our conceiving that Knowledge which is in Beasts, causes a
Confusion which must necessarily be rectified.
WE understand already, that it is the Judgment which we have made of Beasts
(when upon the appearance of some exterior Movements like ours, and of some
Vital and Natural Functions, we have judged that they had Knowledge like us)
which has caused that Confusion which we are now about to rectify.

I am no way desirous to change the Language of Men; I will never say that Fire
is not hot, nor that Beasts do not know after their fashion; provided Men do
not confound their manner of Knowing with ours. That Beasts know, I grant; and
let People talk as much of it as they will, provided they allow that they have
no Idea of that Knowledge which they give them. Beasts, without doubt, know
after their manner, since they fly from and pursue Objects as they are
agreeable or disagreeable to them: And it would be a very sad thing, and
contrary to the current Style of the Language of Men, if we should not permit
that to be called Knowledge in the best sense. Let not then any one believe
that I will here make any Innovation in the Language of Men, or at all proceed
in the Method of that New Philosophy which changes all Ideas and common
Expressions into Paradoxes and Riddles. Let Animals know, with all my Heart,
after their manner, which is to fly from, or to pursue, (without knowing for
all that what they do, by an Instinct altogether blind in respect to them, but
most clear in respect of the Workman which gave it them, and who conducts them)
the things which are good or ill for them; and to be thereby capable of a
thousand several Movements, occasioned by the different Impressions which come
to them from without, and from the diverse Fermentations which arise in them
from the Mass of Blood and the Humors which are within them. But if we look
upon Beasts to be entirely Corporeal, as Moses would have us to conceive; if we
conceive them as having Material Souls, as the Scripture makes us to conceive,
telling us so constantly, that their Soul is their Blood, and that all that is
in them was formed of the common Matter of the Universe: Yet let us take care
how we apply to their Movements, which are totally Corporeal, the Idea of that
Knowledge which we find in Us: Let Us not conceive that they know in any manner
like Us.

We must take notice of what I say, Like us: For that is the Knowledge which is
in question here, and which I will not grant them, because the Rule of wise and
infallible Judgments, by which we ought always to guide our Reason, cannot
permit me. If by knowing like us, Men meant no other than that they receive, as
we do, a Corporeal Impression, by the Eyes, by the Pallat, by the Ears, and by
the other Organs of the Senses, which passes even to their very Brain, and
there determines the very Movements of Flight and Pursuit, without any other
Knowledge or Perception like ours; there would be no difficulty at all to let
it pass for granted, that they know as we do. For it is certain, that the Light
which reflects from the Body of a Man, upon the Eyes of a Beast, is engraven
and imprinted there just as it is in us; that Sounds strike their Nerves, and
the Tympanum in their Ears; that Scents tickle their Olfactory Nerve, like as
they do ours; and that from thence follow the Movements of Flight and Pursuit:
And if Men would have it, that this is to know like us, which is infinitely far
from it, for there is not that Knowledge which makes our distinction, since
there is nothing in That which in us we call Knowledge, I would not insist upon
opposing this manner of speaking. But, by the greatest Misfortune in the World,
Men do not mean so, when they say, that Beasts know like us.

There are some People so stupid as to conceive, that Beasts have Perceptions
and Representations of Objects in themselves, just as we have; that they have a
Certainty of themselves, and true Ideas of things, by which they act and guide
themselves. It is so that we judged in our Infancy, according to the more rash
and senseless Judgment of the World: And it is this Judgment which I believe
ought to be destroyed and subverted.

Four different Opinions, which make four different Degrees of Knowledge in
Beasts.
At that time when we judged that Beasts knew like us, this false and rash
Judgment was divided, and as it were spread into four different Opinions. The
one believed that Beasts were animated by the Souls of Men, which going out of
their Bodies, passed into those of Beasts; That the Souls of great Captains and
valiant Men, made Lions and other courageous Animals; That the Souls of the
Voluptuous, made Swine and Bears; The Souls of Crafty Men, Foxes: And that the
Quality of every Soul, made the Quality of the Beast into the Body of which it
entered; which is the ancient Metempsychosis or Transmigration of Souls, of
which the fantastical Imagination is known to all the World. There were others
who believed that Beasts were not animated after that fashion, by the proper
Souls of Men, but only by Souls like those of Men, but less noble and less
perfect; but endu'd, however, with true Reason, although inferior to that of Men.
There were others who not being willing that Beasts should have that Species of
Reason which without dispute we have, will have them to have a true Reasoning
or Ground of Knowledge, perfect enough to go on from one Knowledge to another,
and to clear up themselves by the Progress of their Knowledges and Reflections;
which is what some have likewise called Reason. We have seen not long ago this
Opinion set forth with a fair show of Words, and supported with extreme heat
and obstinacy, by the late Monsieur de la Chamber, who at first dash has given
Reason to Animals, though he believed their Souls were Corporeal, and not like
ours. Lastly, There are others who not being able to endure that Beasts should
have either Human Souls, or Souls like to those of Men, nor that they should
have that Species of Reasoning inferior to our Reasoning, which Monsieur de la
Chamber has given them; have confined themselves to a pure Knowledge of simple
Perception of Objects purely Corporeal, and will have it, that Beasts have only
This simple Perception without Discourse and Reasoning, and even without a
proper Judgment, or Act of Judging, which is that Act by which we compare our
Ideas one with the other, and know their Relation, or their Contrarieties and
Oppositions.

We see here, as it were, the four Propensities, and four different Courses,
which the rash and senseless Judgment of our Infancy has taken, by the which
we have judged that Beasts have Knowledge like us. It has formed these four
different Opinions, of which there is not one that is not infinitely rash,
false, full of Contradictions and Repugnancies.

We may discuss and examine this Judgment two several ways: First of all, by
taking it in general, and abstractedly from the different Opinions into which
it is divided; and then by regarding it in particular, in every one of those
Opinions, one after another.

CHAP. IV.
A general Discussion of the Opinion which gives to Beasts a Knowledge like to
ours.
TO take it in general, in the Abstract, and without descending into the
diversity of Opinions into which Men thereupon have divided themselves, it is
sure, that this Judgment by the which we have decided that Beasts have
Knowledge like us (which we have been pleased to divine, for we have not any
Experience of such a Knowledge that is in them, nor any Conviction of Reason)
has been a precipitate, inconsiderate, and senseless Judgment: it has been
made without following or without consulting Reason, and that immutable Rule of
Wisdom and natural Logic, which prescribes to us, never to judge beyond the
Light of our Reason, and to receive nothing into our Spirit but that which
enters there by a clear and certain Evidence. We have not only not followed
this Rule, out of which there is no Judgment but what is rash, precipitous, and
senseless, although it may sometimes happen to be true; but we have entertained
this Judgment, and given this Decision, without examining whether it had any
solid Foundation.

We have formed this Judgment upon the Movements which we see Beasts make, and
we have not considered neither, that there are such like Movements in Plants
and Metals, who have their Sympathies and Antipathies, which cause them to
pursue and fly, to approach and withdraw themselves, as if they truly knew,
loved, and hated; nor that there is not any need of Knowledge to do any of
these things; since we every day see no less admirable Movements most certainly
directed to their Ends, in the Workmanship of Men, where we see playing a
thousand secret and imperceptible Springs, which make them walk, speak, fly,
eat, and every thing else that is most mavelous in Animals; which is what
Aristotle has said clearly in his seventh Chapter of his Book of the Movements
of Animals, saying, That as Machins which we call Automata, when they are moved
after a certain manner, do presently make their Movements by the force of
Springs wound up; so Animals are moved, having Bones and Nerves, as so many
Instruments disposed by the Industry of Nature, which causes in them, what
pieces of Wood and Iron with their Springs cause in Machins. Nor, that it is
not Knowledge which causes these Motions even in us. For it is certain, that
Knowledge neither causes nor directs even our voluntary Movements, since none
of us knows how he moves his Feet, his Hands, his Tongue and all the Members of
his Body; but only he knows that he moves them when he will, if the Organ be
fitly disposed, and that Knowledge does not at all accompany even those Motions
which are purely Natural; for our Blood circulates from one Ventricle of the
Heart into the other, going out of the one by the Arteries, and returning into
the other by the Veins, without our having any Knowledge or Sentiment of them.
The Digestion, the Distribution of Chyle, the Separation of Humors in the
Spleen, in the Brain, in the Liver, all vital and natural Actions, are made
after the same manner.

This Judgment therefore has been precipitous and inconsiderate, and will be
always so, so long as it shall subsist without having other Principles or
Foundations. But it has not only been inconsiderate and rash, but also
senseless, and full of Contradiction and Contrariety, in that it has judged
that Beasts have Knowledge like us, without judging at the same time, that they
have a Principle of Spiritual Knowledge like us; for it is a Contradiction to
suppose Beasts to have a true Knowledge like us, and not to have it Spiritual
as ours is. For either the Act of Knowing is Spiritual in us, or it is not; and
if it is Spiritual, how can it be the same in Beasts, which we believe to be
wholly Material and Corporeal? There never was so visible a Contradiction as to
maintain, That the Act of Knowing is Spiritual, and yet for all that, that it
is in a Subject wholly Corporeal and Material, in which there can be nothing
that is Spiritual.

When the Question was to be decided to our advantage, we judged that Knowledge
was essentially Spiritual, to do our selves Honor; and afterward, when we came
to decide it about Beasts, which we have judged to have Knowledge as well as
we, (for we have not applied to them any other Idea of Knowledge, than that
which we have of our own proper Knowledge; for how could we apply any other to
them, since it is manifest we have no other, as has been observed more than
once?) we have forgotten what we had at first decided, That Knowledge was
essentially Spiritual; and having at first conceived it as such, we have
suddenly degraded it, to make it Corporeal in Beasts. We have believed that
Butterflies, Catterpillars, Flies, and Hand-worms ought to be raised to the
Honor of Knowing as we do; but being ashamed to give them a Spiritual
Knowledge, and a Soul like ours, we have been forced to say, that their
Knowledge was Corporeal, although like to ours; in which there are two
Contradictions; one, in saying, that a Corporeal thing can be like a thing that
is Spiritual; the other, That a thing which at first has been conceived to be
essentially Spiritual, should afterward be found to be Corporeal.

CHAP. V.
Whether Beasts have a true Reason, like to ours.
BUT if the Judgment which we have made of Beasts is so insupportable in the
Abstract and the generality of it, it is yet much more in the particular
Opinions into which it is divided; for there is not any one of them, which is
not either evidently false, or evidently repugnant, and full of
Incompatibilities.

Not to say any thing of the fantastical Dream of the Transmigration of Souls,
of which the System is more reasonable, than that which making the Souls of
Beasts totally Corporeal, gives them nevertheless a true Knowledge like ours:
And to let you see that the Chiefest amongst the Philosophers have very well
comprehended, that a Knowing Nature is essentially Spiritual; let us say
nothing of it, but only that besides its other Repugnancies, Incompatibilities,
and Absurdities, and the rashness and precipitation of Judgment which is common
to it with the other Three; it contains the Incompatibility and the Defect of
not being able to furnish Human Souls enough to animate all Living Creatures;
for it is certain, that there are many more Ants and Flies only, than there are
Men.

Let us dwell a little longer upon the Opinion of those who give to Beasts a
true Reason, and Souls like to ours. They believe they are well grounded in
this Opinion, because it is certain that Animals perform Acts of Reason: For
who will gainsay that the Foresight of the Ant, that the good Intelligence of
the Bees, that a thousand and a thousand admirable Effects of Instinct, which
guide Animals, of which the Books and Discourses of Men are full, are not Acts
of a true Wisdom and Reason? It is likewise certain, that if Beasts did all
these things by a true Knowledge, which enlightened, directed, and conducted
them, it would be impossible to take from them the advantage of a true Reason,
and of having by consequence a Soul like ours. But being we are far from having
any certainty that it is by a true Knowledge, like to ours, that the Instincts
of Beasts do operate; which cannot be had but by an Experience, which is
absolutely impossible; because one must have been a Brute, to know that which
is done in Brutes: we have therefore indubitable certainty, that it is not by
Knowledge that Beasts perform these mavelous effects which we have
acknowledged to be the Acts of Reason; and we must decide, without hesitation,
that there is no true Reason in Beasts.

The first Prejudice, and the first Certainty which we have, that the Acts of
Reason which appear in Beasts are not Acts of their proper Reason, but of an
exterior Reason which guides them; and that this Reason and this Wisdom which
guides them, is a Wisdom and a Reason more excellent and more certain than that
of Man; for there is no likelihood that there should be in Ants and Bees more
Light and more Wisdom than in Man; and they should have a great deal more,
without doubt, if it were by Light and true Wisdom that they did all which they
do. Let us see a little the Industry, Capacity, and Knowledge of all Birds, who
make their Nests at a certain time, a little before they lay their Eggs. Let us
look upon the Foresight of the Ant, who heaps up its Provision for the Winter:
Let us behold the Agreement and good Order, and all the Policy of that little
Monarchical State of the Bees: Let us see all that is spoken of Fishes, of
Fowls, and all sorts of Animals, in natural Histories wherein are written their
Habilities and their Industry.

There needs only a little Review of it, by a slight Application, to all that
we have read or heard say of it, to see clearly, that if they did these things
by Knowledge, by Light, and by Reason, they would have, without comparison,
more Light of Knowledge and of Reason than we. If the Ant, for example, bites
off by Light and Reason the Ends of the Corn, which she lays up for her Winters
Provision; If the Swallow, in like manner, makes his Nest by Light and by
Reason; who can doubt but that this Light and this Reason is more clear and
more excellent than that of Man? For we must take notice, that if this be
Light, the Ant has this Light perfect and complete so soon as she is formed,
and the Swallow as soon as she is hatched; and they both of them have it
without study, and without pain; and they have it by an admirable fecundity,
and by a mavelous facility of Ingeny; they need no Master, they instruct
themselves: For I do not believe that any Man will think, that these Sciences
are given by Tradition from Father to Son, or that they tell them this Secret
in their Ear as soon as they come into the World. Long usage among us brings
the Works of our Arts to perfection; but There, All is complete and perfect at
the first time; for the Swallow knows as well how to build her Nest the first
Year, as the tenth; and the Ant knows as well to bite off the Ends of the Corn
which she lays up for Winter the first Year. The Light, therefore, and the
Reason of Animals would be more perfect than that of Man, if the Instinct which
causes them to do those Acts of Reason which they do, were true Light and true
Reason. And as there is no likelihood to give to Beasts that advantage of
Reason, we may say, That it is a true Certainty, that the Reason which operates
in Beasts is not in them; but that it is, as Thomas Aquinas after all the
Ancient Fathers says, the Sovereign and Eternal Reason of the Supreme Workman,
who preserves his Works, and conducts them to those Ends for which he has
created them, by secret Springs which he has placed in them, which are
diversely determined, according to Accidents, to make a thousand sorts of
different Movements, according to their different Business and Occasion.

From the Fly to the Elephant, as there is nothing in these Bodies so
marvellously wrought, ordained, or disposed, but what the Wisdom of the Creator
has ordained and disposed; so there is not any thing in their Movements which
That Wisdom does not move and direct. The Clock-maker knows very well how to
make his Clock go, and to make it strike; to mark out the Hours, as if It knew
them, without giving it either Knowledge or Reason for it. The Pilot knows well
how to take Wind and Tide, and to make the Ship avoid the Rocks and Sand, as if
It truly saw them, without giving it, for all that, Light to guide it. And the
Heavenly Workman has known, says Thomas Aquinas, after the same manner how to
give blind Instinct to Beasts, which guides them as if they had true Wisdom. It
is effectively true Wisdom, but the Wisdom of the Creator, not theirs. It is
nothing but a frenetick Fury of that outrageous and frantic Atheism, which
will not acknowledge any Order in the Universe, for fear of acknowledging a
Principle of it, which makes Men maintain, That Beasts do by chance that which
they do, and that they are not guided by an Immense and Infinite Wisdom, which
operates in them throughout all the World after the same fashion. It is
indubitable, that there is a Wisdom which shines in their Guidance; and that
this Wisdom is Infinite and Immense, since it acts and operates through All, at
the same time. And inasmuch as it is certain, that this Wisdom appears, shines,
and operates in them; so much it is certain, that it is not of them and in
them, because it is too perfect, too clear, too vast, and too immense to be in
them.

But here is another Certainty, That Reason which operates within Beasts, is
not in them and from them, and does not any way enlighten and instruct them, in
guiding them. This must pass for certain, That Instinct is not of any other
nature in Beasts than in Men; and we see, that the Instincts by which Nature
guides our Animal and Natural Actions, does no ways enlighten or instruct us;
for that which we do by Instinct, we do, without knowing how, or why we do it.
We open, for example, the Mouth as soon as we are born, to take the Breasts of
our Mothers or our Nurses, and we know not why or how we do it; we balance our
selves when we stumble, and fling our Bodies on the other side, to make an
Equilibrium, and to find out the Line of Direction, and yet we know not what
this Equilibrium or Line of Direction is, nor why we seek for it. There are a
hundred other things which we do by Instinct, and never know What we do, nor
Why or How we do them, when we act by Instinct. And who does not see, if it be
so, that there is no means of granting Beasts Instincts to enlighten them,
since they do not enlighten us our selves, who are otherwise undisputably
capable of being enlightened by Reason.

But that which compleats our Conviction, that the Reason which guides Beasts
is not their proper Reason, nor a Light which is in them to enlighten and
instruct them in their Guidance, is, That it is certain, That their Reason
never guides them, but that it is a Superior Reason which always guides them;
and that this Reason which guides them, is a Reason which guides them always
necessarily, and after the same Fashion. The Reason that is in an Intelligent
Nature (at least in a finite, imperfect, and limited Intelligent Nature) is a
Light which does not always act after the same fashion; it is not determined to
one sort of Matter, and to one Object only; it can enlighten all sorts of
Matter more or less; it guides him in whom it is, and is it self guided in its
turn.

Moreover, whosoever has Reason has Light, of it self Infinite and Universal,
by the which he is able to guide himself in all sorts of Matters, good or ill,
according as his Reason is more or less short, and according as he uses it with
Prudence and Precaution. Reason is not Reason for one Matter only; it is Reason
for all. Now it is certain, that the Reason of Beasts has not any of these
Characters; theirs is an Act of Reason which flows and springs from the Eternal
Wisdom, and which is determined to one End precisely; theirs is not a Ground
and Principle of Reason, which is in them, and which is of them, for them to
make use of for every thing that pleases them. There might be a hundred and a
hundred Reflections added one upon another, to prove with an uncontrollable
Evidence, that Beasts have not a true Reason which enlightens and instructs
them (at least that we are able to know) although there is a Sovereign Reason
which guides them; but we must remember, that we touch this Matter only by the
by; and this pretended Reason of Beasts being evidently destroyed by all the
Reflections we have been making, we must pass to the third Opinion, touching
the true and proper Knowledge of Beasts, which is that Opinion which gives them
Reasoning, although it denies them the Ground of Reason, and the advantage of a
Spiritual and Immaterial Soul like ours.

CHAP. VI.
Whether Beasts have any Reasoning inferior to Reason.
WE have already sufficiently distinguished Reasoning from Reason, to the end
that we may conceive the difference of this Third Opinion. Reason speaks the
ground of Justice and Conscience in the Heart, as well as a ground of Light and
Wisdom in the Spirit, to love Order and Duty, as well as to know it; and it is
from thence that arises that crowd of Reflections which we have suppressed: By
which it is clear, and ought to be manifest, that there cannot be true Reason
in Beasts, because there is not in them a true love of Order, and a Sentiment
of Duty, which are inseparable from Reason: For we dare not maintain, that it
is by any Sentiments of Duty that Dogs love and follow their Masters, any
otherwise than by Instinct, or by the necessary effect of the Mechanic
Disposition of the Springs which serve to move them. It would be a fine love of
Order and Duty in Dogs, if what they do were through a love of Duty, and by
Reason loving those who give them Bread and caress them, and make much of their
Sire and their Dam, and him who in such important Occasions have saved their
Lives, as it is related in some Histories. We say very well, That it is by
Nature that Dogs love their Masters; and this Nature is nothing but the
Impression more or less strong, which the Caresses that are made them, or the
Food that is given them, makes upon their tender Brains, and the Determination
more or less strong which continues of them, and which carry them toward those
Persons, when the Corporeal Image by its presence is revived.

But let us come again to the Third Opinion, which taking away Reason from
Beasts, gives them Reasoning, which is the simple Faculty of extending
Knowledge by Consequences and Reflections which are made and drawn from things
already known. And we say, that this Perfection, or Faculty of Knowing, ought
not to be allowed to Beasts, because nothing ought to be granted them but what
an evident and certain Conviction lets us know to be in them. We must not envy
the Advantages by which they are able to approach us, for we must not envy the
Works of God that perfection, which he may have been willing to give them; If I
cannot allow Reasoning to Beasts, it is not through Melancholy or malicious Envy,
which moves me to be base, and lessen them, nor by a Pride which carries me to
elevate our selves at their costs; but by these two Reasons, and these two
Motives, which draw me on, and entirely convince me. The one is, That we cannot
attribute Reasoning to them, without having acknowledged before a true and
perfect Knowledge in them; which I do not see that they which attribute
Reasoning to them, would have us to acknowledge in them. The other, which
appears to me clear and evident, That if Beasts did Reason truly, we must of
necessity grant them not only Reasoning, but the very Foundation of Reasoning
also, which we have been depriving them of, and of Souls entirely like to ours,
which is what Faith does not permit us to think.

I confess, that if Beasts did what they do by a proper and true Knowledge, it
were impossible to deny them the honor of Reasoning: For if Dogs Hunt by a true
Knowledge, and not by a simple blind Instinct, which pushes them on toward
their Prey, it is certain and evident that they Reason truly, when they way-lay
a Hare, or when they set a Partridge. It is the same thing with Cats, Foxes,
and all other Animals, of which such admirable Industries are related: If all
those things which are said of them are done by Knowledge, beside that we see
that they Reflect, that they Compare, that they propose an End, that they choose
Means for it, that they Weigh, that they Deliberate, which are all of them acts
of pure Reasoning: We see moreover, that they enlarge and perfectionate their
Knowledge, and that by several Consequences and Reflections which they draw
from things already known, they make to themselves a true Knowledge, acquired
by the long exercise and long usage of making attention upon Subjects which are
the results of their Knowledge, and which is perfect Reasoning; but as the
Opinion or Judgment which gives Reasoning to Beasts, supposes that they have a
true Knowledge, which they place for a Basis or for a Foundation of all their
pretended Reasoning, and that it is no ways certain that Beasts do that which
they do, which is admirable and surprising, by Knowledge, since they may do it
by Instinct, which is that Reason, and that Wisdom of the Creator which
operates in them, according to Thomas Aquinas, and all the ancient Fathers, and
which guides and governs them, without Englightning them, in no wise letting
them know that which it causes them to do, nor why it makes them do it: It is
certain that this Judgment and this Opinion, which gives Reasoning to Beasts,
is rash and insupportable.

And it is yet more so by this Second Reason, That if Beasts did by a true
Reasoning that which they do, it would be impossible to deny them the true
Ground of Reason. For if Dogs, for Example, Hunt by a true Reasoning, it
follows necessarily, that they must love their Master by a true Reason, because
it follows that they love him by Knowledge, and by a sensibility of Duty, which
is the most perfect Ground of Reason; It is by Reasoning that they follow their
Master; It is by true Reason that they are ashamed, when being at a Fault they
see themselves reproved: If what they do is Reasoning, their shame, their
confusion, their fear at the presence of their Master, are true acts of
Conscience; because we have as much reason to judge that these here are acts of
a Sentiment of Duty, as we have reason to decide their Movements regulated and
directed to an End, are the effects and acts of Knowledge. There remains only
to examine the Fourth and Last Opinion, which that Judgment which we have made
in our Infancy has produced.

CHAP. VII.
Whether Beasts have any sort of Knowledge like to ours.
THis is the Opinion of those who retrench themselves within the simple
Perception of Objects: for well seeing that it is rashness to give to Beasts
Reason and Reasoning also, and much more to place in them Human Souls, and not
being able to defeat the prevalence which rules over them by a long accustomed
Empire, which took its beginning and its root in their Infancy, they say, That
indeed Beasts do neither Reason, nor have any manner of Reason; but that they
know by simple Perception, by which they represent and paint in themselves
Objects, in proportion as they strike their exterior Senses, just as we
perceive them, and we our selves represent them to others. This Opinion is yet
less tolerable than all the rest; it is more rash, and has less foundation; it
implies more Contrarieties and Contradictions; because there is nothing more
unreasonable, more contradictory, and more confused, than to imagine that
Beasts do a thousand acts of Reason without Reason: And there is nothing more
contrary than this Judgment to That Reason and natural Logic which God has
given us to conduct us, than to give to Beasts the advantage of that kind of
Knowledge which they give them, without going on farther to give them Reason,
which is nothing else than even that very Knowledge which they give them. For
Reason is nothing else but that sort of Knowledge which instructs and guides by
an assured Intuition. This natural Logic teaches us, That we ought to
acknowledge nothing but that which enters into our Spirits, as it were by a
lively force of clearness and evidence, which is the mark of Truth, for which
Nature has placed in us Intelligence and Knowledge. This Rule is, without
doubt, good and certain, and it is no less certain, That we see nothing in
Beasts which obliges us to own that there is in them a true Knowledge and
perception of Objects, such as we have by that intimate Certainty which the
presence or revival of their Species causes in us. We cannot prove that Beasts
are truly and interiourly enlightened and made certain and knowing of the
presence of Objects, as we are; we divine it, we presume it, we conjecture it,
but we prove it not, nor know we how to prove it: for how should we prove it?
since we have not any certain Experience of it, and we can only allege Signs
altogether equivocal of this their Knowledge, and of their real Certainty like
ours, which is the thing in question.

It is customary to say, That Beasts pursue and fly Objects, according as they
are either agreeable or contrary to them, just as we do; That they cry and
bemone themselves just as we do; That they have their Sadnesses and their
Melancholies, their Gaieties and their Joys, their Fears and their Courages,
just as we have; This is what we have been accustomed to say, and what is full
of weakness, and of a lightness and rashness of Judging, unbecoming judicious
and rational Persons; since there is not any of these things which necessarily
marks out in Beasts a Principle of Certainty and of Light, of interior
Knowledge and of real Sensibility like to that which is in us. There are things
which Beasts avoid, and there are things which they pursue, we are agreed about
this; but this is not a certain mark of a true Knowledge. There are Plants and
Metals which shun one another, and pursue one another, without any Knowledge;
we see them search after one another, embrace one another, entwine and fasten
to one another, or withdraw from one another, as if they had a true knowledge
of the Sympathick Qualities which unite them, or of the Antipathick Qualities
which divide them; and although it be a manner of Speaking common enough to say,
That the Loadstone knows Iron, and that Plants know and discern the Juices
which are agreeable or disagreeable to them; we do not believe for all that,
that the Loadstone has a true Knowledge and a true Perception; it is only an
equivocal and metaphorical Knowledge. To cry and whine are in like manner
equivocal Signs of Grief: for the Organ-pipe will whine like a little Infant,
it will cry like a Man that suffers the most exquisite Pains, and yet we will
not say for all that, that it has any real Pain. To skip and leap are likewise
equivocal Signs of Joy, as well as to laugh and sing; for we see that Monkies
do all That, in whom we are sure there are not any of these Sentiments, of
which they let us see the Movements.

It is an indisputable Maxim of Physic and good Sense, That we must never
place in Nature an useless Principle, and without an Effect to which it is
necessary. It would, for Example, be ridiculous to be willing to put a Soul
endu'd with a true Knowledge, either into a Clock or a Windmill to make them
go, since all their Movements may be made without any such Principle of
Knowledge to direct or determine their Movements. And without doubt it is no
less ridiculous, to put into Animals a Principle of Knowledge and true
Sentiment like unto ours, and a true Light to instruct them, if there be no
need of such a Principle to make them do every thing which they do: Now so it
is, that there does not any thing appear in Beasts that is a necessary and
inseparable Effect of such a Knowledge, of such a Sentiment, of such a
Principle; since there is nothing that Beasts do, which may not be easily
explained mechanically, as we say, or which requires that there should be a
true and proper Principle of Knowledge in Them.

Besides, Knowledge is not only not necessary to produce those Movements which
we admire in Beasts, and for the which alone we have given it them; but it is
certain, that if Beasts had it, it would be of no use to them, to direct or to
cause them to make those Movements; for we may not presume that Knowledge can
do more in Beasts than in Men: And it is certain, that Knowledge is not only
not the next and immediate Principle of the Movements which are common to us
with Beasts, but that it neither aids nor assists them in any thing: For, as it
has been hereupon observed, Knowledge does not cause in us either our natural
or vital Movements, nor our voluntary Movements, which are commonly called
Animal Movements. It is not Knowledge that directs or determins the Motion of
our Heart, the Pulsation of our Arteries, the Circulation of our Blood, etc. It
is not likewise Knowledge that determins the Nerves and the Muscles, that moves
our Feet or our Hands, our Tongues or our Eyelids. It is not Knowledge that
directs them; we do not know what are the Nerves and Muscles which serve to
these Motions; so that Knowledge does not only not cause in us our Movements,
but it does not so much as assist them; and if Knowledge neither causes nor
assists our Movements, it is clear, that we must not presume that it ought to
be in Beasts to cause their Movements.

It is therefore a pure Capriciousness which places a true Knowledge in Beasts,
other than that improper and equivocal Knowledge which common Speech gives even
to Plants and Metals. It is not only a Capriciousness, but it is a manifest
Contradiction, when we give to Beasts this simple Knowledge of Perception,
without Reasoning, and without Reason: For it is certain, that if that which we
see in Beasts be a certain Mark and Proof of the least Degree of Proper and
True Knowledge, it is no less an invincible Argument of their true Reasoning,
and of true Reason, as may be easily comprehended by all that has been said
hereupon: For if it is by Knowledge that Animals follow and execute their
Instincts, there is no Reason to limit their Knowledge to a simple Perception:
They see much more than simple Objects only; they see what Relation simple
Objects have with them; they know their own Businesses, and foresee them; they
know their Diseases, and they cure them by Specific Purgatives, which they pick
out and discern a thousand times more surely than Physicians do: They perceive
and know their Duty, and that God ought to punish and reward them according as
they have well or ill discharged their Duty.

CHAP. VIII.
What Judgment soever is made of Beasts, our Souls are undoubtedly Spiritual,
by reason of their Knowing Nature.
I Am sure, if we do reflect deliberately upon all that has been already said
against the Judgment of our Infancy, by which we have given a true and proper
Knowledge to Beasts, like to that which we experience in us, we shall see, that
This Judgment has been, and is the most rash and most unmaintainable in the
World: And that also these equivocal Signs of Knowledge which we see in Beasts,
in the resemblance of their exterior Movements with ours, ought in no manner to
suspend the Conviction of the Spiritual Nature of our Soul, which results from
the Distinction of the Ideas which we naturally have of a Knowing Nature, and
of a Corporeal or of an Unknowing Nature, under which Shadow we conceive
Animals to be entirely Material and Corporeal, as well in their Souls as in
their Bodies

I am entirely persuaded, that we have not any reason to give to Beasts any
Knowledge like to ours: For, for what reason should we give it them? Let us not
say of them any thing which we do not know: Let us say, with all my Heart, that
they have admirable Instincts, which the Infinite Wisdom guides, since it is an
Immense Wisdom which operates at the same time in them as in the whole
Universe, and which operates by sure and infallible Means: Let us say, That
this Wisdom Operates in them, but not that it Is in them: Let us say, That they
know blindly, like Plants and Metals, those Objects which Nature would have
them fly from or pursue: Let us say, That they keep and observe the Tract which
Education and Discipline has imprinted on them, to make them perform those
Movements which Men have learnt them; from whence it comes to pass, that they
perform them as often as these same Tracts come to be awakened or revived in
them: Let us say all that we see clearly of them; but, not to go beyond our
Light, do not let us say any thing but what we see with an entire Evidence: Let
us make an infinite difference betwixt that which the easiness of Conjecturing
and the rashness of Judging makes the ignorant Vulgar presume, and between that
which the Evidence of our proper Sentiment causes us to acknowledge of our own
selves: Let us not heed Visions and Chimerical Imaginations; and let us not
reason but upon certain and infallible Experiences: Let us say, to our great
satisfaction, That the Example of true Knowledge, and of that Certainty of our
selves which we experience so undoubtedly in us, is the proper Distinction of
our Nature in the visible World, in the which it is certain, there is none but
Man alone that undoubtedly bears this Character of the Divine Resemblance.

Let us not doubt of this Advantage; but though others should doubt of it, we
should not for all that doubt of the Advantage of our Spiritual Nature, because
it is certain, that a Knowing Nature, such as we experience in us, is
essentially a Spiritual Nature, so far, that if others be so obstinate as to
place a like Knowledge in Beasts, they must necessarily acknowledge in them a
Spiritual Nature. For it is certain, that That Knowledge which we experience in
us, and whereupon we have conceived the Idea and the Notion of a Spiritual
Nature, as distinct from a Corporeal one, is effectively a thing Spiritual,
wholly distinct from all that is called Body, and from all that can be
conceived as Body. And this is it which we go about to establish, and to prove
invincibly to all those who are willing to give attention.

What Judgment soever Men may make of Beasts of which we will take no further
notice in this Writing, our Souls are undoubtedly Spiritual and Immortal, by
reason of the advantage of Knowledge, which makes as it were the first Ground
and the first Basis of their Nature, and at the same time the first Conviction
of their Quality, Spiritual and Immortal Condition, because, to know truly and
properly after the manner that we know, (which is the only thing of which we
have the Idea and the Certainty, for we have no Idea of any sort of Knowledge
but of that which we experience and find in us) is a thing undoubtedly and
essentially Spiritual. And to the end that we may not doubt of it, we need only
to examine and to comprehend what it is to know as we know; and we must always
remember, that we know of no other Knowledge than our own, of which we have the
Idea, either of Certainty or of Experience; for though we say commonly, that
Beasts have Knowledge, none of us has any Certainty or Experience of it, by
which one may form any Idea of their pretended Knowledge.

To know then as we know, is to have in ones self a lively and intimate
Certainty, which penetrates and enlightens him that has it, either by a simple
Perception, as in the sensation which we have of Heat and Cold, of Sweet and
Bitter, of Pleasure and of Pain; or by Idea or clear and distinct
Representation, as in the Acts of Seeing and Imagining, and of conceiving his
Intellection, by the which we have in us clear and lively Images of the things
which we see, which we imagine, and which we conceive; from whence we may be
able to draw Reasonings and Consequences for an extension of our Light, and to
instruct us of the Relations, Proprieties, and Incompatibilities of things, and
to form to us (together with the Rules of our Duties) a thousand Sorts of
different Arts and Sciences. See here what it is to know as we know; and it is
easy to conceive thereby what this Knowing Nature is, which we find to be in
Us. This Knowing Nature is a Nature which has a Certainty from it self, and of
that which is done in it self; whereas the Unknowing Nature which we perceive
in that part of us which we call Body, neither has nor can ever have the
Certainty and Perception, Sentiment or Idea, either of it self, or of any thing
else, either within it or without it. Of such a Nature are, for Example,
Marble, Gold, Diamond, Wood, Plaster, Wax, and generally all Bodies, which can
never have the Perception and Certainty either of their own Existence, or of
the Impressions which are made upon them by the Seal or the Saw, the Chizel or
the Crucible, the Hammer or the Mallet.

A Looking-glass may serve for a very sensible Example to give a lively and
neat Idea of the difference of Natures that are Knowing, and of Natures
Not-knowing: For the Looking-glass receives in it the Image of the Body which
is opposed to it, and which is placed before it; for this Image which is
received in the Looking-glass (for it must needs be received there, since we
see it there, and since it reflects it upon the Eyes of all those who regard
it) gives no certainty at all of the Sentiment and Idea of it self to the
Glass: The Looking-glass has the Impression of this Image, as Wax has the
Impression of the Seal; but the Looking-glass neither feels nor perceives this
Image which is imprinted on it, any more than the Wax does the Seal; and in
that lies the Character of all Material things, and all Corporeal Natures: As
Knowing things have essentially an Idea or an intimate certainty and Experience
of themselves, and of what is done in them; so Unknowing and Corporeal Natures,
on the contrary, essentially never have them.

This is that which we call to Know, and to be a Knowing Nature as we are; and
nothing is clear and certain in the World, if a Knowing Nature (taken in this
sense) be not a Spiritual Nature, and which can have nothing that is Corporeal,
and is necessarily distinct from all Body. Nothing is clear, if this is not;
for besides that the Act of Knowing is undoubtedly Spiritual and Immaterial, it
being impossible to conceive it under a Corporeal Form, because it has neither
Figure, Bulk, nor Color; and an Act essentially Spiritual cannot proceed but
from a Principle purely Spiritual. It is impossible for one to frame to himself
another Idea or another Notion of a Spiritual Nature, than that of a Nature
that is Knowing, or that has for its Ground and Basis the Faculty or Virtue of
Knowing. It is impossible to have a Notion of a Spiritual Nature, that does not
include Knowledge in it, or which has it not for its Basis and Foundation. And
when we have conceived a Knowing Nature, we have essentially conceived a Nature
that is Spiritual. Let one take away, and cut off all that one will; let one
despoil a Nature of all other Attributes, and of all other Notions; yet if we
conceive it to be Knowing, we have conceived it to be a Spirit. And let a Man
assemble all that he pleases, and accumulate as many Notions as he is able to
conceive or imagine; yet unless he places a Knowledge there, he will never
conceive a Spirit, which is an evident conviction, that an Idea of a Spiritual
Nature is no other than an Idea of a Knowing Nature; that is to say, That a
Spiritual Nature and a Knowing Nature are but one and the same thing.

It is effectually but one and the same thing, as Corporeal Nature, and Nature
extended or capable of Extension, are but one and the same: For it is a certain
Rule, Where the Notions and the Idea's are the same, the Things must be the
same also. Corporeal Nature (for Example) and Nature extended or capable of
extension, are the same thing; because when we conceive Corporeal Nature, we
conceive a Nature which is the Basis of Length, Breadth, and Thickness, and by
consequence susceptible of Figure, Color, and Motion: Now so it is, that it is
entirely after the same manner with a Nature Knowing, such as it is in Us,
which is that only of which we have the Idea, and with a Spiritual and an
Immaterial Nature; the Names are different, but the Notions and Idea's are the
same. When I conceive the Knowing Nature that is in Us, I conceive a Nature
which has a Certainty of it self, and of that which is done in it, either by a
lively and distinct Idea, or by a Sentiment confused, though inward and
penetrating. And when I conceive a Spiritual Nature, I find nothing real and
positive in my Idea, but the same thing; that is, a Nature whose Property it is
to be able to have an Idea or Certainty of it self, and of that which shall be
done in it: For when I conceive a spiritual Nature, and that I examine my
Conception and my Idea, to see what they contain, I find nothing positive and
effective precisely, but that. I defy even all the Men of the World to give me
another Idea of a spiritual Nature, which expresses something that is positive
and real; for it is of an Idea and Notion positive, not of an Idea of negation,
(by which some define a Spirit) which I am speaking of here: for to conceive of
things by Negations, is not to conceive what they are, but what they are not;
and to conceive a Spirit, for Example, as some do, by Negation, and exclusion
of Visibility and Extension, this is not to conceive a Spirit, but to conceive
that a Spirit excludes Extension from its Nature, and to comprehend not what it
is, but what it is not, to wit, that it is not a Body. I speak therefore of a
positive Notion, and I say that it is is impossible to give of it, or conceive
of it any other, by which a Man may define and conceive a Spirit, than thus of
that Knowing Nature which we find, and which we know to be in us.

A Spiritual and a Knowing Nature then are but one and the same thing, and the
Knowing and the Corporeal are undoubtedly two things: for as we acknowledge
that a Man is not a Lion, that a Triangle is not a Square, that White is not
Black, that Bitter is different from Sweet, and Heat from Cold, because we
experiment that the Idea's and the Notions of them are altogether different and
diverse; so we must by this infallible Rule acknowledge, that the Knowing Part
in Us, is not at all the Corporeal part, because White is not more sensibly
distinct from Black by its Idea, than the Knowing Nature which we find and
perceive so undoubtedly in Us, is distinct from Corporeal Nature; since it is
certain that there is nothing of that which we know of Corporeal Nature, in
that Intelligent or Knowing Nature which we perceive in us, and nothing of that
Intelligent Nature in the Corporeal Nature, but the common Notion of Nature, as
the common Notion of Color is found in White and in Black. But if the
distinction of our Knowing Nature and of our Corporeal Nature, be so well
settled by the diversity of their Idea's, it is no less by that of their
Proprieties and Effects; for nothing of that which Corporeal Nature does, can
be done by an Intelligent Nature, or by Knowledge: For Example; A Knowing Nature
or Knowledge cannot Immediately and Formally, as they say, by it self alone,
neither heat, nor moisten, nor dry, nor exclude Bodies by Impenetrability; nor,
in a word, perform many of those Effects proper to Extent or Corporeal Nature.
And on the contrary, Corporeal Nature on its part can never (what Perfections
soever one may fancy to happen to it by the Almighty Power of the Creator) be
so much as conceived and imagined as capable of Self-perception, of Reflecting,
of Reasoning, of Loving, of Hating, of Desiring: For who can conceive, for
Example, that Marble can be raised up to the perfection of being sensible of
the Strokes of the Mallet and Chizel, as we perceive otherwise that which
wounds us, that which hurts us, with a proper and true Sentiment of inward
Pain? Who can imagine that Gold can be capable of having in the Crucible a
Sentiment of Burning, like to that which we have when we burn our selves? We
must say the same thing of Properties; for nothing of that which agrees with
our Knowing part, can be agreeable to our Corporeal part; and nothing of that
which is found in the Corporeal, can be seen in the Knowing. For Example; It is
impossible to give a Figure, Shape, and Bulk to a Thought; The Act of
Reasoning, of Loving, of Hating, of Deliberating, can never have either Bulk or
Figure, Parts or Color: And on the contrary, no Body can ever have the Agility
of Thought, its Vastness, its Light; and no Body can have the Idea or
Perception of it self, or form in it self the Images of all those things which
compose the visible World, or the least thing which it contains; and it follows
evidently from all this, That nothing is clear and certain in the Light of
Nature, if this be not, That the Intelligent Nature which is in us, is of a
nature altogether distinct and diverse from Corporeal Nature; and being so, I
do not see that there can be any difficulty to say, That the Knowing Nature
that is in us, is essentially Spiritual: for what can that be but Spiritual
which is not Corporeal? In the main there is no great matter for the Name,
provided that the Thing be indubitable; for what signifies it at the bottom,
whether our Soul has, or has not the Name of Spiritual, provided that we do
acknowledge that it is of a Nature altogether distinct from Body, and
infinitely more Excellent than any thing that there can be had of Body, and
which it will always have, though we would deny it the Name of Spiritual: But
because this Name is affected and determined by the constant usage of the
Language of Men, to Immaterial Natures, and distinct from Body, it is
indubitable, that the Knowing Nature ought to be called Spiritual. The word
Spiritual Nature is a Galimophry, which signifies nothing, if it does not
signify that Knowing Nature, of which we have the Idea and the Experience in
our selves. There is nothing real and positive in the World which answers to
that word, but a Knowing Nature, such as is in Us.

It is to express a Knowing Nature, that the Name of a Spiritual Nature was
invented, as the Name of Triangle has been made to express a Figure that has
three Corners; That of a City to express a certain number of Houses, disposed
into Streets, and shut up within the compass of Walls, under the same Laws and
Policy; That of Animal, to signify that which has a natural and interior
Principle of Motion and Growth; That of Body, that which is susceptible of
Extent and Division. The Name of Spirit and Spiritual Nature, has been made
and invented to express this sort of Knowing Nature; and Men have never given
the Na^^ of Spiritual Nature, but to things which they have conceived under the
Idea of a Nature Knowing after that manner.

We have already observed, that Men have not conceived either God or Angels,
but under the Idea of Knowing Natures; and it is certain, that it is for that
Reason that we conceive them as Natures more Spiritual, that we conceive them
endowed with a greater perfection of Knowledge: For we conceive God more
Spiritual than an Angel or than Man, because we conceive Him as the Sovereign
and Eternal Source of Knowledge, who has Essentially the Idea of all things
possible, through that Eternal and Substantial Thought, which the Scripture
calls his Word, by the which declaring all that He is, and all that he can, and
the manner how he can, and ought to do all things, He is to himself first of
all his Model and his Notional Wisdom, as they say, and Exemplar; and then his
Verue, and his infinite Efficacy and Omnipotency, by which every thing that
does know, knows; every thing lives, that has life; every thing that has
motion, is moved; and every thing that has a Being does exist. And as this
Idea includes not only more Knowledge, but a Knowledge infinitely more
efficacious and more excellent than that of Man or Angel, we do therefore
conceive This Spiritual Nature to be much more Spiritual.

Thus it is out of doubt, that the Knowing Nature that is in us, is essentially
a Spiritual Nature, and ought to bear that Name; from whence it follows, That
as long as we have a certainty that our Soul is a Knowing Nature so long we
have an assurance that our Soul is a Spiritual Nature, distinct from Body. And
this is not here a thing which We divine, as They do who place a true and
proper Knowledge in Beasts: This is the chief certainty which we have, this of
the Knowing Nature of our Souls. We may doubt by an Hyperbolical and
Metaphysical Doubt, whether we have a real Body; because, speaking absolutely,
God is able, having only regard to the Efficacy and Power with which he can act
in us, to give us what Idea's and Sentiments he pleases; God is able to give us
the Idea's, and even the Sentiments of a Body, (although there were not any Body
in the World) just as we have them now; so as it may come to pass in Dreams, to
believe that we have things which have not any reality: But we cannot at all
doubt whether there be in us a Part or Nature Knowing, because we find that our
Soul has essentially the perception and the certainty of her self, in her
Existence, and in the Idea's which the Supreme Power, who rules over her upon
the occasion of her Body, clears up, and in the Modifications whereby that
Power affects her.

CHAP. IX.
The double, immense, and infinite Ground of Knowledge that is in our Souls, is
a new and certain Proof of their Spiritual Nature.
THE simple Notion of this Intelligent Nature which we find in us, without more
unfolding it, and leaving it in that first general Idea which it gives,
elevates our Souls above all Corporeal Natures, and makes them essentially
Spiritual; but if we unfold a little the general Notion, to consider it a
little nearer, in every thing it contains and includes, it will give us a
Conviction of the Spiritual Quality, and Immortal Conditions of our Souls,
altogether new and more sensible; for we do not only find and perceive that we
have that Certainty of our selves which makes the Foundation, or as it were the
first Basis of our Knowing Nature, but we have, besides, by the most undoubted
Opinion of the World, a double infinite Foundation of Knowledge; for, without
speaking of our active Faculty of Knowing or Thinking, which is that Ground of
Knowledge by which we Reflect and Reason, we have in our passive Faculty of
Knowing, a double Infinite Ground of Knowledge; one Infinite Ground of the
passive Faculty, to be enlightened with Ideas and Lights altogether new; and
another Infinite Ground to be affected and penetrated with new Sentiments,
which is that sort of Knowledge by which we have an intimate Sentiment of
Pleasure and Pain, and generally of all the Modifications wherewith God can
affect us, as Sweet and Bitter, White and Black, Heat and Cold, and the other
Sensations which we know, and a thousand others which God can cause in us,
which we do not know.

We have in the Ground of our Knowledge this double immense Capacity of
Knowledge; one immense Capacity of receiving Ideas and Lights which God may be
pleased to give us; for there is nothing which God may be pleased to give us an
Idea and a Light of, but we have essentially the Certainty, the Perception, the
lively and animated Image of, so soon as it shall please him to give us the
knowledge of it. We have not of our selves the Idea and Light of any thing; for
God essentially is the Light of all Spirits, and the Living Source of Knowledge
and Understanding, upon whom depends all Knowing Natures, for every thing that
they can know out of themselves. We have no Idea of any particular thing, but
in the proportion that he gives it us; but as poor as we are, and void of Ideas
and Lights by our selves, so rich are we by this Ground of the Infinite
Capacity of our Knowing Nature, which is an immense Capacity, and without
Limits, of passive Illumination, ora Faculty of receiving all the Ideas and all
the Lights of God.

The same thing may be said of Sentiment, as of Ideas and Light: As we cannot
illustrate nor form by our selves the Idea of any thing out of Us, so we cannot
cause in Us any of these Sentiments, or these agreeable or disagreeable
Modifications, accompanied with Pain or Pleasure, which we see occasioned in
Us, without Us, by that so ruling and so absolute Power which prevents our
Deliberation, and which without hearing our Desires, makes Us rejoice or
afflicts Us by those different Sensations of which we have the Experience every
moment. We make not these Sentiments in Us, we perceive them, not to say we
suffer them; we have not any of them of our selves; this is a second Emptiness,
or a second Indigence which is in Us. But this Emptiness bears the Character of
Infinite Grandeur, because it is accompanied with an Immense Capacity of
Sentiment; for we are capable by this second Ground of Knowledge of a thousand
and a thousand sorts of diverse Pleasures, without Bounds or Limits; and of a
thousand and a thousand sorts of Pains always new, which God can cause to come
out of the Treasure of his Goodness or his Wrath. This is what we experience in
Us with an indubitable certainty, and which does not permit Us to doubt of the
Spirituality of that Knowing Nature which we call our Soul, because there is
There a double Character of Spirituality, which sensibly elevates our Souls
above all Corporeal Natures.

CHAP. X.
That Libertines cannot maintain this monstrous Opinion, That the Soul of Man
is Corporeal.
LIbertines may indeed suppress the Name of Spiritual Nature, and the Name of
Soul, to say that there is nothing in them but Body and Matter; for we cannot
force People to call things by their Names: but they cannot but acknowledge in
Themselves That Knowing Nature which we call our Soul. They may say, when they
reflect not on what they say, That it is their Body that knows; for one cannot
oblige People that are obstinate in confounding the Names of things, to speak
exactly, and properly to distinguish them; they may (yes without doubt when
they do not reflect on it) maintain; That it is their Body that knows; but it
is certain, that they can never reflect on it, but they find there cannot be a
greater Incompatibility than what they say, and that there is in them a Nature
or a Part that Knows, and a Nature that does not Know; and that the Nature
which Knows is altogether distinct and diverse from that which does not Know:
They conceive, in spite of themselves, that they have two Parts, and two
Natures in them, one that knows, and one that does not know; and if they call
that Nature and Part which Knows Body, how would they, I pray, call that Part
and that Nature which does not know, and which is incapable of knowing?

The little Reflection and Attention which they make upon Matters in their
Opinion of so little consequence, makes them confound and reverse all things;
they confound and reverse the most clear and most distinct Ideas of Nature, if
one surprises them without letting them perceive that one will draw
Consequences against their Libertinsm, and that one demands of them whether an
Idea of Knowing Nature be not altogether distinct in their Spirit from the Idea
of Corporeal Nature, they will say, Yes: But if one goes on further to make
them see their Spiritual Nature, whose Ideas do wound and condemn their
Disorder, they say rashly and stupidly, That it is their Body that knows; though
one sees Impiety and Libertinism pitifully destroying and defeating it self, as
often as one obliges it to Reasoning and Reflecting upon it self.

Thanks to that Light which it has pleased God in these latter Times to spread
over Philosophy, which he has purged from the Relics of Paganism, none dare
any more say, that Body knows: We have seen Systems ridiculous, and equally
full of Ignorance and Presumption, reigning in some Schools, where they parted
Knowledge between the Soul and the Body. Some would have, that in all
Sensations there are two, one which is truly Spiritual in the Soul, and the
other (of which nevertheless never any Man had the Experience; for they
supposed it and divined it by mere Capriciousness and Fancy) which is purely
Corporeal in the Body. Others pretended, that all Sensation was purely
Corporeal, and that there was in us no other Spiritual Knowledges than those of
Universal Notions, and of Objects purely Intelligible and Spiritual.

These Chimerical Imaginations are fallen of themselves: We have shown, that
there is not in Man two Principles of Knowledge, nor two sorts of Sensation: We
have shown, that there is nothing precisely but the same Soul which reasons and
speculates the most abstracted Objects, and which at the same time is sensible
of Heat and Cold, Bitter and Sweet: We have shown, that nothing is more
contradictory and chimerical, than to maintain, That the Perception of Heat and
Cold, of Sweet and Bitter, of White and Black, and generally of every thing
which Men call Sensible Qualities, is a corporeal Act in the Soul; and that the
Act of Speculating Intelligible Objects and Universal Notions is a Spiritual
Act; there being nothing more monstrous than to conceive in a Subject
undoubtedly Spiritual, this Medley of Spiritual and Corporeal Acts. We have
shown, that all Knowledge does belong to the Soul, and that the Body is
incapable of having any Certainty, or any Idea, either of it self, or of that
which is done in it.

These are no more Philosophers which we have to combat withal upon this
Subject; these are none but Atheists and Libertines, Fools and Brute Beasts,
who cannot maintain the Combat, because, as has been said, they are disarmed
by themselves, and forced to confess, that nothing is more impossible than to
conceive, That a Body Thinks, Reasons, Deliberates, and Reflects. There cannot
be in effect a Paradox more enormous, there cannot be a greater Contradiction,
there cannot be a Thought more monstrous, than to say, That a Body Knows. It is
as if one should say, that a Thought is Green or Yellow, that the Act of
Reasoning is Cold or Hot, that an Abstraction of Metaphysical Speculation is
Square or Eightcorner'd; as if one should make Birds to fly in the Sea, and
Elephants in the Air; as if one should place Ice in the Fire, and the Sweetness
of Sugar or Honey in Wormwood or Gall. This is to unnature things; this is to
mingle, subvert, and confound every thing; this is to bring Heaven and Earth
together; this is to embroil all the Universe; this is to destroy all neat
Ideas; this is to take away and abolish the Distinction of Things; this is to
re-plunge the World into its first Chaos, and into the first Darkness which
covered it, before the Light which enlightens it had made visible the
Distinction and Diversity of its Parts.

We need not wonder that Libertines are willing to confound the Ideas of Body
and Spirit. It is the Genius of that frenetick Fury of Libertinism and
Debauchery which carries them on, not to be able to suffer the Light which
manifests these Disorders. They represent to us in History furious Men,
beginning by extinguishing Flambeaus, by shunning the Day and the Light, as it
were to conceal the horror of their Rage and Fury under the horror of Night and
Darkness; but these by their good will would destroy the Light of Distinction
of a Part that knows, and a Part that does not know: Thanks to the most
constant and to the most indubitable of all Experiences, we feel it, we touch
it, we see it; they cannot make us doubt but that there is in Us a thing that
Knows, and a thing that does not Know; and since We have seen that That which
Knows is of a Spiritual Nature, it is impossible for Us to doubt, but that we
have in us a Part that is Spiritual.

This Spiritual Part is our Soul; for it is this Knowing Part that we call the
Soul. We do not only perceive that it is distinct from the Body, but we
perceive that it has an Infinite Nobleness above the Body. It has not any
Bulk, nor any Extension; it is a Being wholly Indivisible, and yet in the mean
time it contains and embraces the whole Universe. It is a Nature Singular,
Determined, and Individual; and it is all the Natures Heaven, Earth, the Sea,
Trees, Birds, all that is seen in the World, by a lively Expression which it
makes of them in it self, or which it receives. Intelligendo fit Omnia. All
things are made by Understanding.

This is very much, that this Knowing Part which we experience in Us, has by
this Perfection of its Knowing Faculty that Species of Immensity by which we
see it lodge as it were in its Bosom the Heavens, the Earth, and the Seas, and
to contain all the Universe, and that admirable Power and Efficacy of
transforming it self into all sorts of Natures, and of becoming every thing it
knows and conceives, by the lively and animated Expression which it makes
thereof in it self: But its Grandeur is not shut up in that alone; its Nobility
appears yet more in its immense and infinite Capacity of Reasoning, and extends
its Knowledge and its Light upon all sorts of Objects, and all sorts of Truths.
For whether it be that it is its essential Property as a Spiritual and
Reasonable Nature, and the Act of Reason to see into things, whereby is made
known to it all the Relations which they have, and which Truth does; or whether
it is God, who over and above the Idea which He gives of things, causes it
moreover to see the Relation of them in the Eternal Idea which he has of them,
I will not go about to decide here. God sees nothing but what the Soul of Man
may see, if it pleases him to enlighten it; and when he has once enlightened
it, it can go of it self by its Faculty of Reasoning, to a thousand and a
thousand new Truths, which it discovers by its proper Speculation; It
Contemplates the Eternal Order, and reads in that Uncreated Light, all the
Rules of Duties; It sees all the Proportions and Disproportions of things, it
has no limits to its Knowledge; It can know God, and can plunge it self into
the Abyss of his Perfections and his Mysteries; it can even enjoy all his
Delights, and with him partake of his Felicity.

We find that it is sensible of a thousand Pleasures, even in this Estate of
Trial and Combat, where it is kept in this Valley of Tears, and this Earthly
Inheritance of Thorns; It is susceptible of a thousand sorts of agreeable
Sentiments, even in its present Estate, by the which it is penetrated and
filled with true and ineffable Felicity. We must not believe that this
Sensibility, or this Capacity of feeling Pleasure, is limited to those
Pleasures only which we experience at present. As its Knowledge by Idea's and
by Lights, is not bounded and limited to the Idea's which it has at present,
since it is certain that we may be enlightened with a thousand sorts of new
Idea's which now we have not; so its Knowledge, or the Faculty of Knowing by
Perception, is in the same manner infinite and without bounds. This which at
present gives us by the occasion of the Body, a thousand several agreeable
Sentiments, with which we feel our selves so sweetly penetrated, will be able
always to give us new ones and greater, during all Eternity. These at present
are Tastes of Felicity, which we are made to feel and taste, which ought to
make us comprehend by these Foretastes, what kind of Pleasure we may taste in
Eternity, if we live in such a manner as may render us worthy of having our
Fidelity recompensed. Our Soul is something that is great, noble, and
admirable, by the Ideas which it is capable of receiving; and it is yet more
great and more noble, if you will, by the Pleasure and Felicity which it is
capable of having. God, who has the Treasures of Knowledge and Wisdom, has
infinite Riches of Goodness, and Oceans of Felicities and of Pleasures; and our
Soul, which is capable of receiving all the Idea's which God contains in the
Treasures of his Knowledge and Wisdom, can also taste all the Pleasures which
he contains in the Riches of his Goodness.

Such is the nature of our Souls, they are not only undoubtedly Spiritual by
their Intelligent Nature, but they are in some manner infinite in Dignity and
in Nobleness, they are admirable Copies and Images of the Supreme Nature, they
carry a thousand Characters of his Grandeur and their Celestial Origin; and
that which augments and enhances all this Merit is, that they are undoubtedly
as Immortal and Eternal, as Spiritual.

CHAP. XI.
That our Souls are undoubtedly Immortal, by reason of their Knowing Nature.
YES, as undoubtedly Immortal and Eternal; because being Natures altogether
distinct, and altogether different from Body, and all Corporeal Nature, it is
impossible that Death, which only cuts and makes this havoc upon Bodies,
should have any Prey upon them, or give them the least Stroke. If God, who has
drawn them out of his Heart, will not employ his Almighty Power to annihilate
and destroy them, in that moment that Death breaks the Structure and Harmony of
Body, which will appear hereafter that he cannot be willing to do; there is no
(...)

It is thus that Diseases and Old Age causes us to die; and the violent
Accidents of Fire and Sword, or Falls and Ruins do the same. It is the Body
that Diseases, Old Age, and violent Accidents, do all attack, it is its
Structure that they break and ruin: for they do not touch the very Ground and
Matter of the Body; Death does not touch the Substance of the Body and its
Matter, it only touches the Disposition of its Organs, it is That only that it
destroys. It Is true, that when the Brain can no longer serve to the Universal
Cause, and to the Eternal Wisdom and Power which holds our Souls united to the
Bodies, for an Occasional and Determinate Cause to determine it, to give us
Idea's and Perceptions of other Bodies which are round about Ours, and which
act upon them, which is properly the Chain and Knot which holds our Souls
united to our Bodies, then It retires our Souls from our Bodies, and they cease
to Be in our Bodies. We commonly conceive that our Bodies die, because our
Souls do retire themselves; but this is to conceive things very ill: It is not
that our Bodies die, because our Souls retire themselves; but on the contrary,
our Souls retire themselve because our Bodies die, because the Structure that
rendered them fit to serve for a Lodging to our Souls, comes to be broken and
destroyed. Death is nothing precisely, but this ruining of the Harmony of the
Body, which obliges God to withdraw the Soul: And who does not see that it
being so, Death is so far from being able to destroy the Soul, that it cannot
do any thing unto it? It cannot so much as cause the least alteration in it;
all that it does precisely to it, is to take from it its Union with the Body;
it disunites the two Parts, but it does not destroy nor annihilate any of them;
the Body remains Body, every Part remains in its Nature, the Body remains
ruined, and the Soul returns separated.

Death can do nothing unto our Souls, which are not a Material Structure; it
destroys the Souls of Beasts, because their Soul results from the Organization
and Harmony of a Material Structure, and from a certain degree of Heat, and
quickness in their Blood, which keeping their Members disposed, and their
Nerves well extended, keeps them at the same time disposed to receive the
Impressions of exterior Bodies, which act upon them, and to move themselves in
a thousand manners, according as He has destined them, who has ordained and
directed to his Ends their particular Structure. But Death can do nothing to
our Souls, which are evidently natures wholly Immaterial and Spiritual, in
which there is neither Structure nor Harmony of Parts. Diseases cannot at all
attack our Souls, they have no Blood nor Humors to be enflamed and set afire:
Old Age cannot make them die, because they know not what it is to grow old:
Fire and Sword cannot kill them, as Jesus Christ has said; they have no Parts
that the Sword can divide, or that Fire can consume or dry up.

Let us say something boldly; Though Death should be able to prey upon our
Souls as it does upon our Bodies, it would not cease to be certain that Death
could not in the least annihilate them; for it cannot annihilate even our
Bodies, which are given as a Prey to it, and upon which it exercises all its
cruelties and rigor. Do not our Bodies remain Bodies after our Death? they
change indeed the Name and Form, but they subsist in the Ground of their
Corporeal Nature. Does not their Matter remain always? What is there in the
World more constant, and what greater and stronger Argument would you have of
the Immortality and Eternity of our Souls? Would you have the Corporeal Part to
be Eternal, That Nature so base and so vile, and This Nature, so noble, so
admirable, so divine, which we have made you acknowledge to be in you, would
you have this to have an end, and to return into nothing? That Death should not
be able to annihilate the Body which is given it to destroy, and yet that it
should annihilate our Souls, upon which it neither has nor can make any Prey?

Nothing is so certain and so evident in the World as this is, That all the
Bodies of the Universe, and all created Powers, cannot destroy a Spiritual
Nature, nor so much as endamage and alter it. That only Power which made our
Souls out of nothing, can make them thither to return again; and we are assured
by the infallible Prejudgment of his Wisdom, that this Sovereign Power neither
ought or can ever be willing to employ his Infinite Power upon such an Essay,
or to make such a Trial of it: He that created the Souls, could absolutely
annihilate them if he would; but he cannot be willing to it but for some
Benefit either of his Glory, or of the common Good of the Universe, or of some
singular Advantage of the Perfection of some one of his Creatures, of which he
would do himself Honor. And it is impossible for him to find any such Utility
by annihilating our Souls, who necessarily acknowledge his Sovereignty over
them so long as they endure: For every Intelligent Nature has Essentially some
Sentiment of its Dependence, and is capable of doing Honor to God in a thousand
manners, whether it be in serving to his Justice, and in paying Homage to his
Power, or in honoring his Mercy, and in serving as a Manifestation of his
Wisdom and other Divine Perfections. Experience lets us see, that God
annihilates nothing even of Corporeal Nature, since all the Matter which he
created in the Beginning to frame the World, subsists wholly entire, without
the loseing of one single Atom of it; and the Scripture teaches us, that though
Heaven and Earth must pass away, it must not be to return into Nothing, but to
re-take a Beauty altogether new, after the Conflagration of the Last Day.

But though we could conceive that God should annihilate all the visible World,
it would not be possible to conceive that he would be willing to annihilate the
least of Souls, because that though one could conceive some Benefit in
annihilating the World, he could never have any by annihilating the Soul, which
Being no more, can no more do Honor to God in any manner; and which Being, does
essentially do him Honor, by the Perception which it has of him, by the Idea
which it gives of him, and by the essential Relation which It has to Him, as
to Its Principle, Its End, and Its Center. This is sufficient, without doubt,
to make us acknowledge with the uttermost Evidence the Spiritual and Immortal
Nature of our Souls, by reason of their Knowing Nature, which is the only thing
we have hitherto considered in them: But because we can increase this Certainty
and this Conviction of the Spiritual Nature and Quality of our Souls, and of
their Immortal and Eternal Condition, by the consideration of a second sensible
and admirable Advantage which we all of us see and experience in them, we must
here give a little attention; I speak of the Ground and of the Principle of
Liberty which we all of us find in our selves, and I say, That This is a
further indubitable Proof and Conviction to Us of the Spiritual Nature and
Quality of our Souls.

CHAP. XII.
That our Souls are undoubtedly Spiritual, by reason of the Principle and
Ground of Liberty which we find in Them.
AS We Experience in Us a Ground and Principle of Knowledge, which alone has
hitherto made Us Know the Spiritual Nature of our Souls, we do there likewise
Experience with the same Certainty a Mavelous Empire which we Exercise over
our Selves, and which we call Liberty or Free Will, by the which we dispose of
the Motions of our Bodies, the Desires of our Hearts, and the Thoughts of our
Spirit. The Experience of this Triple Ground of Liberty or Empire over Our
Selves, is General in all Mankind.

For although we do not all of Us Experience it in the same Degree; yet there is
no body who does not Experience it in some Degree or other. We all of us find
that we have a free and voluntary Empire over the Motions of our Body, either
to Cause them, or to Suspend them, by a mere Empire. We all of us find in the
very same manner, that we have the power of turning away our Love and our
Pursuit from Objects that do most attract Us. And we find, in fine, that we
have the power of applying or suspending our Reasoning, as we please. And it is
certain, that this Triple Principle of Liberty, which frames in Us a most
singular and most remarkable Distinction of our Nature, is an evident and an
indubitable Character of Spirituality in our Souls.

Animals have not the Liberty of their Motions.
Animals in truth move diversely, (and are not like Machines which Men make,
which for the most part move after a certain fashion) they turn to the Right
and Left, they Advance and Retire, they move all manner of ways. But all these
diverse Motions are either determined by the manifest and sensible Impression
of some External Principle, as when Sheep are attracted by the Verdure, the Ox
pricked on by the Goad, or provoked by the secret Course of the Blood and
Spirits, which without any external Impression determine a thousand different
Motions, as the Skipping of fresh and pampered Horses and other Animals, when a
sudden Gayety makes them make a thousand different Leapings.

Those Persons also who, by that Rashness of Judging which we have so justly
condemned, do believe that Beasts have a true Knowledge like to Ours, by which
they Act and Move, do confess that they have not any sort of Liberty of their
Movements, that they have not any Empire to make them or to suspend them as
they please: They confess, that they are always carried on by an invincible
Necessity which draws them. In effect, we see that they always follow either
the Exterior Determination of present Objects, of which the Strongest always
carries them, as when the Dog being violently attracted by Bread or Meat, is
beaten back by the Stick, the Species or Image of which passing through the Eyes,
is engraved in the Retina, and is carried by the Optic Nerve as far as the
Brain, and to the Root of the Nerves and Muscles, where It determins a Motion
quite contrary to that which the Meat produced; or else the Interior
Determination of the Fermentations and Boiling of their Blood and Humors, as
when they go a Rutting, or when they go to seek and pick out Juyces, Plants, or
Metals, which Nature has prepared for them as Remedies against their Diseases.

St. Augustine observes, That this is the Reason why the Creator has in such
manner ordained in the greatest part of Animals, Passions which serve to the
Conservation of their Species, that they do not rise up in them but by certain
orderly Intervals, and in certain Seasons only; because not having any command
over themselves, to check, to moderate, and to govern in any fashion the
Movements which accompany them, they would not be able to serve for the Uses to
which they were destined, if these Passions had been in them at all times as
they are in Man.

Animals then have not any Command over their Body, to determine or suspend it,
or to check its Motions; but We, We undoubtedly have this Empire, not indeed in
regard of Motions purely Natural and Vital; for our Stomach does not hearken to
Us at all, either to make or not to make Digestion; our Blood circulates
whether we will or no; our Heart has its twofold Motion of Systole and
Diastole, or of Dilation and Contraction; our Arteries in like manner have
their Pulsations, which we can neither advance nor retard: But in respect to
the Motions which Men call Animal, we have so absolute a Command of them, that
they are made, suspended, or checked, for that sole Reason precisely, Because
we will; which it may be is a thing the most admirable either in Us, or in all
Nature; for we do not know that there needs any thing else than to Will and to
Desire, to cause our Muscles and our Nerves to carry the dull Mass of our
Bodies either to the Right or the Left, forwards or backwards, above or below,
and all manner of ways.

We must needs see with what Volubility, what Agility, and with what Quickness
we move our Tongues, our Feet, and our Hands: And all this is done without our
knowing how, by mere Empire, as has been said hereupon. When we have studied
Anatomy and Physic, we know that they are the Muscles and the Nerves which
serve to these Motions; but before we had ever known that we had Nerves and
Muscles, we spoke, we danced, we leaped, all one; and since we have acquired
this Knowledge, we neither speak nor walk the better for it, nor do we make
e're the more use of it to make our Movements; once more I say, it is purely an
Empire which our Will exercises upon that Portion of the Common Matter of the
World, out of which the Creator has formed us the Place of our Trial, and our
Prison.

Now I say, That this Empire or Command is an evident Mark of the Spirituality
in our Souls, first, because it is already a Mark of a Nature Spiritual, and
Superior to all that there is of Body, and to all that there can be had of
Material in the World, to have the Power of Willing; because to Will is an Act
no less essentially Spiritual than to Know; for all that is Corporeal may be
conceived under some Corporeal Image; and it is impossible to conceive either
the Act or the Faculty of Willing under any Form or Image Corporeal or Material.

In the second place, To Will, and especially to Will, and to have the Power of
Willing, as we experience in Us, is a farther Mark of a Spiritual Nature,
because there is in this Ground of Liberty, by the which we find that we have
the Power of Willing and Desiring, something Infinite and Immense; for Our Will
and our Desires have no Limits, our Faculty and our Liberty of Willing is truly
Infinite; whether it be because there is not any thing but what we can Desire
and Will; whether it be because we effectively carry continually in the Bosom
of this Liberty an Infinity of Desires and Wills; or lastly, whether it be
because we can always conceive new Ones; and it is plainly apparent, no
Corporeal Nature can be capable of such a Character of Immensity.

In the third place, This Power and this Empire which we have of removing our
Body by Command and by Will only, is an evident Character of a Nature
Spiritual, and Superior to Body, for two Reasons; by the Reason that to Command
is a Character and an Act of Superiority; and as so, the Nature that commands,
is Superior to that which obeys; from whence it follows, That the Soul, which
commands, is of a Nature Superior to Body, which obeys; and by the Reason that
this so Efficacious a manner of Empire and Authority, is a lively Image of the
Sovereignty of God, which cannot be within a Corporeal Nature.

St. Augustine had well penetrated into this Reason, when he said, That by it we
carry sensibly in Us a lively Resemblance of the Supreme Sovereignty and of the
Infinite Power with which He created the World: In effect, by this Empire which
we exercise over our Bodies, we have in our selves the lively Idea of it, and
altogether resembling it, in that kind of Almightiness with which we make our
selves obeyed by the Members of our Bodies. God said, Let the Earth come out of
Nothing, and it came out by that alone, that it was said to it, Come out. He
said, Let the Light be made, and there was Light, by the infinite Efficacy of
that Sovereign Will. And we our selves say, Let the Tongue speak, Let the Foot
advance, Let the Hand be lifted up, etc. and so by the incomprehensible
efficacy of this Command, the Tongue speaks, the Foot advances, and the Hand is
lifted up.

We do not seek here whether this Efficacy, or this Force comes Effectively
from ourselves, for this is not a place for such a re-search: But though it
should not come from us, the Empire which we exercise with that Virtue and that
Efficacy which is undoubtedly in us, is a Character incontestably Spiritual,
and not only Spiritual, but Divine. It is impossible to conceive, that a Body
can have such an Empire, and this Empire marks essentially the Nature in which
it resides, with an admirable Tract of resemblance of the Supreme Power.

Our liberty of Thinking is a certain Character of the Nature and Spiritual
Essence in our Souls.
If this Empire which we exercise over our Bodies, be so certain a Conviction
to us of the Spiritual Nature and Quality of our Souls, of their Celestial
Dignity, and their Divine Quality; what will it be if we consider the two other
sorts of Empire and Liberty which we exercise over our selves? If we find the
Empire over the Motions of our Body to be so fine, how much more fine shall we
find that of the Thoughts, of our Spirit, and the Desires of our Heart? We have
the power to extend perpetually our Knowledges without any limits, and to an
Infinity, by Reflection, by Speculation of Principles, by Reasoning and by
Consequences.

Nothing can give bounds to our Thoughts, and nothing can stop their Knowledge.
If we endeavor to extend them by the bright Light of Reasoning and Reflection,
we have before us a vast and an infinite Field of Truth; and though we have of
our selves but one Spark of Light, which is that which we call the Ground of
our Reason, to wit, that Light which makes us acknowledge and acquiesce to the
Truth, that is to say, to the Relations and Conveniences, or to the Oppositions
and Contrarieties of things, with this Spark we shall be able by Attention and
Reflection to run through all this vast Field, and acquire to our selves, if I
may be permitted to say so, as it were the property and possession of all
Truth; We shall be able to lift up ourselves above the Heavens, to know the
Order, the Structure, the Harmony, and the Periodick Motions of them; We shall
be able to measure the height and the extension of them; We shall be able to
reduce the Motions of them to their Principles; We shall be able to see how the
Lightning, the Rainbow, the Thunder, and the other Meteors in the Air are
formed; We shall be able to penetrate into the Bowels of the Earth, to see the
diversity of Metals and Minerals there formed, and to see how it sustains it
self in the midst of Air, without being supported but by its proper Center; We
shall be able to enter into the vast Ocean of the proper Nature of God; We
shall be able (when he pleases to reveal them to us) to know the adorable
Mysteries. Nothing can give bounds to our Curiosity nor to our Knowledge.

And this, without doubt, is a certain and infallible Character of a Spiritual
Nature: for Bodies are essentially Finite as well as Blind; and an infinite
Light wherewith a Nature is enlightened, or may be enlightened, is in It an
indubitable Character of a Nature not only Spiritual, but truly Celestial and
Divine. But above all, this Empire which we have over our Hearts, is an
Argument and a sensible Conviction to us, of the Spiritual Nature of our Souls.

The Empire of our Desires is another certain Proof of the Spirituality of our
Souls.
It is a constant Experience, That neither Plants nor Metals, nor Beasts (in
whom we place Desire, or to say better, to whom we give the Name of Desires, to
their violent Sympathies and Antipathies, which carry them diversely to embrace
or to shun one another) have either the power to command their Desires, to
suspend them, to pass them by, or to check them. The Loadstone seeks the Pole
with a Desire the most vehement one can frame an Idea of; it carries it self
toward it with an indefatigable Motion; and yet who ever saw that the
Loadstone exercised over it self that Empire of stopping or checking this
Motion? Beasts have all of them their Instincts and their rapid Motions toward
certain Objects, to which Men also give the Name of Desires; and yet we have
never seen an Animal that could command his Instinct or his Desires. We easily
check the Motion which carries the Horse to the Mare by Barriers, but never did
a Horse thereupon command his Desires. We easily stop the hungry Dog, who runs
eagerly to his Food, and so turn him away from it, but he himself does never
check the Motion of his Hunger. Animals follow their Instincts and their
Desires, like Metals and Plants, by an invincible Necessity which trains them
on. As the Mill goes as long as it has Water or Wind, and a Clock as longs as
it has Line and Weight, so Animals go as far as their Instincts drive them;
and they have no more power to check themselves in their pretended Desires,
than Clocks and Mills in their Motions.

But we, we experience in Us an Empire, a Sensible Superiority over own
Desires; we curb them, we turn them by, we resist them, we cast them off, and
we confront them and command them with a real Authority. It is true, that this
Liberty is extremely enfeebled in the greatest part of us, by natural
Corruption, by evil Education, by wicked Imagination, by the Custom and Habit
of Vice, by our want of Attention and Application to our selves. We see well
enough, that the power of checking our Passions has been in our Nature as it
were absolute and despotick, and that it has at present lost something;
because we have need of Dexterity and Industry to resist them, and because we
have not always force enough to suppress them at their first onset: But this
Disorder of our Nature does not hinder, but that we are sensible of its
Nobility, and its true Empire over its proper Desires.

And though there were only almost dead Sparks of Liberty, which are in the most
corrupted, and and in those that are most governed by their Vices, and though
there were no Wise Men to whom it made its Power visible as it does, there
would yet be enough of that deadned Spark of slavish and captive Liberty, to
acknowledge in it the advantage of our Spiritual Nature; because it is certain
that this Empire of our Soul over its Desires, is an evident and an indubitable
Character of a Spiritual Nature.

St. Augustine says, That the only Contrariety of our Desires, is an assured
Argument of the Spirituality of our Souls; because that in fine, says he, there
would not be in us a combat of Desires, if we were not composed of two Parts;
of a Corporeal one, by reason of which we have Corporeal Desires; and of a
Spiritual one, which causes us to have Desires quite opposite. But it is not so
much from this opposition of our Desires, as from the Empire that we exercise
over them, that I will here draw the Conviction of this Advantage and of this
Excellency of our Soul.

This Empire makes us evidently see two things. The one, That we are thereby
imprinted with the lively Resemblance of that Wisdom and Sovereign Liberty of
the Eternal Nature and Essence, which the Grecian Fathers commonly expressed by
that particular Name which their Language only furnishes to express the being
Sovereignly Masters of our selves. The other, That we have an Order essentially
in our Nature, from whence is formed that light and that force of Reason which
makes us condemn our Desires that are contrary to our Duty. And these two
things make us undoubtedly see the Nature and the Spiritual Quality of our
Souls, because it is impossible that this double Resemblance of the Supreme
Nature, which is a Sovereign Spirit, should be found in a Corporeal Nature.

CHAP. XIII.
We have an indubitable Certainty of the Immortal Condition of our Souls, by
the Desires and Instincts of Immortality and Eternity which we have.
THERE might be a great many Reflections added here, to that which has been
just now said, concerning the Empire of our Reason over our Heart, and over our
Desires, to draw from thence convincing Arguments of the Indubitable Spiritual
Quality of our Souls; but because I am unwilling to tire the Readers Patience,
in holding him too long upon this Speculation, I choose rather to suppress them,
and to remark the Certainty of the Immortal Quality and Condition of our Souls,
which we shall be able to find by seriously reflecting upon it, in that Ground
of Liberty or Will which we experience in Us, and by which I am going to let
you see, that we have a certain and an indubitable Conviction of our Spiritual
and Immortal Nature.

The Desires of Immortality which our Soul resents in it self, and which arise
from the Ground of Will, which I have called Liberty, are an assured Proof and
an indubitable Argument of its Effective Eternity, and by consequence of its
Immortality; for without dispute there is in our Nature an Idea and a Desire of
Eternity, which has its Principle in Nature's self, and precedes all our
Reasonings and all our Reflections, and which Acts and Operates in Us before we
have received any Instruction from other Men.

Before Men do Reason and Reflect, without Study and without Instruction, by
the movement of Nature through all the Habitable Earth, they do not only find and
perceive in themselves a confused Idea of Eternity, and a Desire of
Immortality; but they distinctly conceive a New and an Immortal Life after this
here, in the which they either hope or fear something for themselves, and for
their Neighbors and Friends, and into which they carry even their Desires and
their Thoughts of Vengeance against their Enemies. They do not only thus
conceive a new and Immortal Life for their Souls, from whence issued, in all
Nations, whether Civilized or Barbarous, the Religious Rites concerning the
Dead, with Expiations, Lustrations, and Sacrifices; but they perceive by
Intervals their Hearts pushed on thither by redoubled Desires, and Sighs so
vehement, that the present Life is a Burden to them, and they would, if it
were in their power, shorten it, and hasten its End.

Some Men, naturally Courageous and Magnanimous, until the Celestial Light of
the true Religion had instructed them, and made them see that they ought to
wait till God withdraws them from the present Trial, have been found so
transported and so inflamed with the Desire and Love of this new and Immortal
Life, that they have not had patience to wait the Course of Nature, to let it
bring them thither; but they have violently launched out of it, like furious
Madmen. And one cannot say, that this was the Effect of Education, or of some
Opinion and Human Invention, with which the Infancy of Men is and has been
prepossessed; for besides that Education neither can be nor has been the same
every where, and that no Human Invention or Opinion has ever been able to
establish it self into an universal Prepossession, how happy soever it has
been; this Pretension is contrary to the Evidence and Notoriety of the most
constant Experience of the World, which is, That independently of Education,
and before all sort of Instruction, this Idea of Eternity, and this Desire of
Immortality was found, and is always found in Nature, of the same Date, if I
may so say, as the Sentiment of the Divinity.

And as there the Character of that which is called Instinct or natural
Inspiration is, and that nothing from elsewhere is more assured in the World,
than this Maxim and this constant Truth, That natural Instinct is never False,
that it has always a Real Object, and that it never deceives; for this is a
Reflection which is too Essential to omit here, or not to repeat it again, That
the Instinct of Nature is never False; as appears in all the Instincts of
Animals themselves, of which there is not one single one that is False; since
it is not at all a Fault, that it makes them to fly from or pursue the things
which it inspires them to fly from or pursue; nor can it ever be a Fault;
because Instinct is an Inspiration and a Determination of Nature, and by
consequence of that Truth and of that Infallible and Eternal Wisdom which is
the Author of Nature, which can never inspire or give to Men false Desires, nor
determine in Beasts Motions useless and deceitful. It follows, That this new
and Immortal Life of our Souls, of which Nature gives us so indubitable an
Instinct, must be the most True and the most Real thing of the World.

My Hope and my Certainty are built upon an hundred other immovable Foundations
of Natural Conviction, and Celestial Revelation; but though there was only this
certain Experience of Natural Instinct, which cannot be disputed, since this
Idea and this Desire of this new and Immortal Life has indisputably its
Principle in Nature, and cannot come from an universal Error that Education
might cause in all Men, and that it is certain that these are not the
Reasonings of Philosophers, who have invented this so Religious an Opinion, as
that Ancient speaks, but it is all pure Nature that gives it; I shall not, for
my part, be less persuaded of this Immortal Life of our Souls after the short
Passage of this Life, than of the present Life; because, in fine, I find the
Instinct of it in my first and most natural Sentiments, and because I can never
believe that Nature (which does not deceive our Senses when she carries them
toward their Objects) does deceive our Hearts and our Desires, when she gives
them the clear and lively Instinct of an Immortal Life for our Souls after this
Life.

St. Augustine has observed, That that which we call Instinct and Nature, in
Corporeal Natures and in Spiritual Natures, is God himself: The Instinct, says
he, which operates in Men and in Animals, is God himself. And he has very good
Reason to speak after that manner, because that Instinct in Corporeal Nature
are those extraordinary Motions which it makes from time to time, as if it had
Knowledge, Reason, and Foresight, although it cannot have either Foresight, or
Reason, or Knowledge. And Instinct in Intellectual Nature are the Desires and
the Ideas which it finds in it self, without acquiring them by the Senses, or
by Reasoning and Reflection: And as it is from God immediately that these
Motions in the One, and these Ideas and Desires in the Other do proceed; so it
is with Reason that this Holy Doctor says, That the Instinct which operates in
Men and in Animals is God himself; which has likewise been very well observed
by Thomas Aquinas. So that Instinct is Infallible as God himself; and if by
Instinct it is that we know the Life to come, it is indubitable and certain by
this Victorious Reason, That Instinct never deceives, as it may easily be seen
in Corporeal Nature.

For, as St. Augustine very solidly further observes, we cannot convince the
Instinct of Deceitfulness and Error in any part even of Corporeal Nature, in
which it might be able to deceive in things of no moment. Let us Regard it;
Does it, for example, deceive the Heart, when it makes him run, after he is
wounded, to the Herb that heals him? Does it deceive the Ant, when it makes her
fit and furnish her Magazens to purpose? Does it deceive the Lamb, whin it
makes it fly the Wolf? or the Chickens, or other Birds, when it makes them shun
the Kite? It is apparent, it never deceives; and if by Instinct it is that we
know the Life to come, the Life to come must needs be indubitable.

There is no Instinct in Nature, if the Natural Idea which all Nations have had
of the Life to come, in all Times and in all Places of the World, be not most
certain and most indubitable. There is no Man, says St. Chrysostom very well,
who has not this Natural Idea of the Life to come, because there is no Man who
independently of all Reflection, and of all Education, does not Fear or Hope
something (according as he is either Good or Wicked) in that Dream-like dark
Time to come, in the which the present Life is lost to our Eyes. This Idea,
says Lactantius, of a Life to come, must needs be a Natural Idea, since Men,
who see themselves generally die, have never been able to believe themselves
entirely mortal; were they possessed with what sort of Opinion or Religion
soever, were they Greeks or were they Jews, were they Romans or were they
Barbarians, were they Heathens or were they Christians, they have never been
able to believe themselves entirely Mortals, they have always believed or
revered their Deaths, which has been the true beginning of Idolatry; they have
always feared or hoped for something after Death, which they could never as
much as have thought of, if the Idea of a Life to come had not been Natural.

It is so Natural, that nothing is able to efface it out of Nature; neither
Error of Opinion, nor Corruption nor Education, nor any sort of Prepossession,
not even then when there was a positive System of Libertinism made, to say,
That the Life to come is nothing but a Chimera and an Illusion. For, as
Tertullian observes, these Atheists themselves, and these Libertines, who have
destroyed the Divinity and the Life to come in their Heart and in their Spirit,
do find in themselves this Natural Idea, and feel and see the Instinct of It
operate; since it is certain, that as often as they find themselves oppressed
under a greater force, they have no other Consolation than to think, that they
shall be comforted and revenged by a Superior Power in the other Life.

(...)

which he conceives to be his Duty, until some Interest or some Passion rises
up which opposes it; and there is no Man who does not more or less resent the
Satisfaction of having done his Duty, and the Pain of having failed in it, so
long as Nature is Master of it self, and has not at all been corrupted by the
Habit and Corruption of Vice, which hardens it at last, and renders it
insensible.

There is not a Perception or Sentiment so well marked in Nature as that is;
from thence we have seen that there arise in Men two diverse Grounds equally
admirable, a Ground of Virtue, and a Ground of Joys and Felicity, which bear a
thousand Characters of a Nature not only Immaterial and Spiritual, but
incontestably Celestial and Divine. It is from this natural Ground of
Conscience, supported by Grace, that we have seen, and do yet see to issue
Faithfulness, Integrity, Constancy, Magnanimity, Justice, Continence, Courage,
Shunning of Pleasures, Patience in Labors, Victory over all the Passions, The
effective accomplishment, and the inflexible and unsurmountable love of all
Duties, Invincible to all Interests, and to all the Charms of Concupiscence,
and Inexpugnable to the victorious force of the most delicate Temptations.

There is, to say truth, little of such Virtue in the World, because there are
very few who do not suffer their Conscience to be subjugated to, and stifled by
Concupiscence; but these are two indubitable Experiences, That the Seeds and
the Births, the Inclinations and the Principles of it are, together with the
Idea and the Light of it in all Peoples Hearts, and that there are some People
in whom all these Virtues are real, and mounted to a Sovereign degree of an
invincible and constant love of Duty. Libertines would make us believe, That
Virtue is but a vain Name, and a fine Phantome, with which the Imaginations of
Men flatter and please themselves, but that it never had any Reality in the
Hearts and in the Lives of Men. This Idea favors their Libertinism, and they
would willingly establish it, to save them the shame and the reproach of their
Disorders, which would appear to them excusable, if Duties were nothing but
Chimera's, and Virtues but such Phantomes; but they cannot make good that
Pretension, the World has always had True Virtues in its greatest Corruption,
and False and counterfeit Virtues have born witness to the Idea which is of
them in Nature, which has marked them with so sensible a Mark of Spirituality,
and with so August and bright a Character of Divinity. Few Men have improved
the Seeds of Conscience so far as to the perfection of all Virtues, and all
Duties; but there never was any Man, who has not found in himself the
Principles and the Seeds of Virtues and Duties.

To which we must add the second Ground of Joys and Felicities, which have
always accompanied the former; for never did Man follow and practice Virtue,
but he found in it a Ground of pure Joys, and unalterable and uncorruptible
Felicities; as on the contrary, never did any Man violate Conscience and Duty,
but he found a Ground of Misery and Calamity in his own Heart, which was his
Judge and his Executioner, and in his own Irregularity, which was his first
Torment. The Nero's and the Domitians were not able neither with their Arms and
Sovereign Power, under which they made the whole Universe tremble, neither with
their obstinate determination to Evil, neither with their hardening and
abandoning themselves to Crimes, to guard and defend themselves from the
penetrating force of that Just and Imperious Power, which wounds impure and
disorderly Souls with a thousand invisible Arrows, from whence springs a mortal
Sadness, and a mortal Pain.

That Conscience is not in the Soul of Man an Effect of Education, or of some
Opinion with which it was imprinted and prepossessed in the Infancy.
There are some, who, to deliver themselves from the pain which their
Conscience gives them, and to abandon themselves to Disorder with more liberty
and impunity, would persuade themselves, that all That which we call
Conscience, is nothing but the Effects of certain Opinions, with which our
Infancy has been prepossessed, and imprinted upon by the Authority, and by the
Empire which our Education has exercised over us: But there is nothing in the
World so foolish, so rash, and so insupportable; for Conscience is, without
dispute, before Education, and is also independent of it for the Ground of its
Idea, and of its Instinct of Good and Evil. It is true, that Education may
prepossess the natural Ground of Conscience with some Opinions, and Opinions
very false, which Superstition does, and the Character which is called
Scrupulous; but the Errors with which this natural Ground of Conscience may
have been prepossessed, do only invincibly prove the Ground of Conscience: For,
as Teriullian says, if there was not in Nature an Idea of Good and Evil, it
were impossible that one should err and deceive ones self, by the evil
application of that Idea: If there was not an Idea of Good and Evil, one should
never deceive himself by acknowledging for Good that which is Evil, and for
Evil that which is Good, or that which is Indifferent; all would have appeared
Indifferent, and above all, there would neither have been Certain Idea of Good
and Evil, of which all Men are agreed, how different soever their Education may
be, and how opposite soever their Preposessions were, nor it would not be
impossible to imprint what Idea one would of Good and Evil.

For if Conscience was not a thing natural in Man, if Man had not a natural
Idea, and a natural love of Duty, one might then make Men thereupon believe all
that one would, one might make them believe that Injustice, Ingratitude, and
Treachery, are things commendable and estimable; and yet notwithstanding,
nothing is more impossble: For as one can never make a Man believe that a
Square has but three Corners, and that Two and Two make Five; so one can never
make him believe that Ingratitude is an Ornament to the Nature of Man, that
Injustice merits a Reward, that Treachery is a Virtue, an honest and
commendable Quality; and on the contrary, that Justice, Fidelity, and
Gratitude, are things condemnable and wicked. Men make Laws according to their
Fancy, they establish them by Caprice and by Authority, they make themselves
obeyed by the fear of Punishments, when they have the Power in their Hands; but
it is remarkable, That Men who make Laws, and can make themselves be obeyed,
cannot make themselves believe, but that when they only make unjust and
tyrannical Laws, People only pay an exterior Obedience to their Commands, but
the Heart and Spirit cries out and demands Justice from Him whom all Men
naturally feel over their Heads, as a Protector of Justice, and an Avenger of
Oppression and unjust Authority.

We receive unjust Laws, but we do not believe them just for all that. But as
to the natural Laws of Duty and Conscience, all Men receive them and believe
them by an invincible determination of a superior Light, which equally
persuades them alike. And this is the infallible Character of natural Idea and
Light; for there is none but the natural Light that convinces us with that
invincible force.

Conscience is then in us undoubtedly natural: And as certain as it is an
essential Companion of our Nature, and a Propriety inseparable from our Soul,
from whence arise in us by the help of Grace, all Moral and Christian Virtues;
so certain it is that our Souls are Spiritual Natures, because it is impossible
to conceive, that a Corporeal Nature can be the Subject of Magnanimity, of
Justice, of Fidelity, of Continence, and of Truth; and that a Corporeal Nature
can have either the Light of Order and of Duty, or the Inclination or the
Determination of Duty, or the Pleasure of the performance, and the Pain of the
violation of Duty. Duty, Order, Justice, have no Bodies, they are things
totally Spiritual and Intelligible; how then can a Body, or a Corporeal Nature,
have the Idea or the Sentiment of them?

Moreover this Light of Order and Duty which enlightens us, and which pierces
us, and which we feel ingrafted, and as it were poured into our Soul, is not
the Idea or the Rule of one single Duty, it is the Idea and the Rule of all our
Actions, and by consequence, of a thousand sorts of Duties; so this is further
a Certainty, and an infallible Character of its Spirituality: For how can a
Material and Corporeal thing be the Rule of so many diverse Actions, and so
many different Duties? The only Name of Ruling Human Actions imports
essentially the Idea of Spirituality: For with all my heart, let a Man make a
Rule, a Square, and a Compass of Gold, of Steel, and of what Matter he will, to
measure out a Building, or the Compartments of a Garden or of a Walk; but how
can one conceive a Corporeal Rule, let it be made of what Matter soever we can
imagine, which can be proper to compass and put into order, and set to rights
Human Actions?

The Rule is then indubitably Spiritual; and if this Rule is Spiritual, if this
Idea of Duty, which enlightens us, cannot be Corporeal, our Soul, who is the
Subject wherein it resides, cannot but be a Spiritual Nature, because it is as
impossible to conceive that a thing Spiritual can be within a Material Subject;
as that a Material thing can be within a Spiritual Subject. It is infallible,
That every thing that does Spiritual Acts, is Spiritual; and that every thing
that is the Basis and the Subject of Spiritual Proprieties and Faculties, is
all of it likewise Spiritual; because it is impossible that a Corporeal
Principle should produce Spiritual Acts, and that a Material Subject should be
the Seat of a Spiritual Attribute, or of an Immaterial Perfection.

And this is it which ought to put a full end to the Conviction which we have
of our Spiritual and Immortal Nature in our principal Part, which we call our
Soul; since it is certain our Soul is not only the Principle of a thousand
sorts of Spiritual Acts, (for every thing that is called Willing, Thinking,
Reflecting, Judging, is essentially a Spiritual Act, because it is impossible
to conceive either Knowledge, or Will, or Desire and the Act of Willing, under
a Corporeal Image) but the Subject of a thousand Perfections, all Immaterial
and Spiritual, if it were not but the Conscience alone, which assisted by
Grace, is in us the living Source and the Seat of Justice, of Fidelity, of
Gratitude, of Friendship, of Constancy, of Magnanimity, of Truth, of
Uprightness, of Incorruptibility, of an hundred sorts of Moral Virtues, and of
an hundred sorts of Christian Virtues more Excellent than the Moral ones, of
Humility, of Continence, of Despising, Misprising the World, of continual Union
with God, of the Ardor of Eternity, of Mortification and of Self-denial, of an
hundred such like Dispositions, all Celestial and all Divine, which can have
neither for Principle, nor for Subject, a Nature that is Corporeal.

CHAP. XV.
That our Souls are indubitably Immortal, by a Certainty that the Sentiment of
the Conscience gives us thereof.
SUCH is the Certainty which we have by the Sentiment of Conscience of our
Spiritual Nature, and this so indelible Sentiment of Conscience which we all of
us naturally have, is not only an indubitable Argument and Assurance of the
Spiritual Nature of our Souls, but it gives us also more sensibly, if we will,
unstaggering Certainty of our Immortal Condition; because it gives us
Essentially by way of Instinct, the Sentiment of a Justice which ought to be
exercised over them by an Eternal Power, after the going out of this Life,
which Essentially imports the Idea of a new and an Everlasting Life, of which
an Eternal Principle of Order and Justice ought to determine the manner
according as we shall be found to have done well or ill, and according as we
shall be found worthy of Punishment or Recompense in the Balance of the
Supreme Justice and Holiness.

We have already observed, That the Instincts of Nature are never false, and
that they have always some real Object; and if there were nothing else but that
alone, we would not doubt but that there is for our Souls a new and an
Everlasting Life after this Present Life, since the Instinct that C^^science
has in our Souls of that Justice which ought to be exercised upon them after
Death, is the most clear and the most indubitable Instinct that is in all
Nature: But independently of that Infallibility of the Instinct, the Idea of
the Supreme Being which we find in Us by the Sentiment of Conscience, with a
Resentiment so lively and so penetrating, and at the same time so certain and
so ineffaceable, under the Idea of an Eternal and Sovereign Justice, which
ought to punish the Ill, and recompense the Good, does infer so necessarily
that of an Eternal Power, infinitely clear and vigilant, which watches over the
Lives of Men, to observe the Good and the Evil of them; that seeing, as we see,
that it does not punish nor recompense in this Life all the Goods and all the
Ills, it is impossible for us to suspend our Belief, but that it ought to
exercise after Death its Punishments and Rewards in the so Incorruptible and
Immortal Grounds of our Souls, which, as we have seen, cannot be destroyed by
Death, which does not act but upon Bodies. It is an ancient Reasoning of the
Holy Fathers, and even of the profane Philosophers, That God punishing here
sensibly some few of the Crimes of Men, and not punishing them all, there need
be another Life where he finishes the Justice which he begins here. And this
Reasoning carries the most sensible Conviction in the World, since we see so
visibly the Hand of God to extend it self upon the Wicked, which is, according
to St. Augustine, that which the Kingly Prophet calls the Lightnings of the
Supreme Justice, which fore-run the Clap of Thunder, Apparuerunt fulgura ejus
orbi terrae, vidit and commota est terra; His Lightnings appeared to the Globe
of the Earth, the Earth saw and it was moved. But though we had never seen such
miraculous Examples of the Heavenly Justice upon the Wicked, we should see
enough to be convinced of the Immortal Conditions of our Souls, from the so
indubitable Sentiment that Conscience gives us of an Eternal Uprightness and
Holinevs, which ought to recompense us, or to punish us; because there must be
nothing certain in the World, if this be not, That this natural Sentiment and
this clear Idea of the Supreme Justice and Holiness, cannot Deceive us. Reason,
and all that is called Light and Certainty, whether Natural or Supernatural,
must needs be nothing but Illusion and Chimera, if Good and Evil can remain
without Reward and Punishment, because God must needs be only a Wisdom and
Sanctity indolent and insensible of the Order and Disorder of the World, with
the Conduct of which he is charged, if he ought not at last signally to
evidence his Justice; and if Natural Reason and Light is any thing, as he
cannot be a disarmed and an useless Power, so he is not assuredly a Sleepy
Wisdom, and an Indolent and Idle Sanctity.

He cannot leave either Virtue without a Reward, or Vice without Punishment;
and though he neither punishes Crimes, nor rewards Virtue in this Life, it
follows necessarily, that this Sentiment and this Idea which Conscience gives
us of a Justice, which prepares a Reward for Virtue, and a Punishment for
Crimes in another Life, is an Idea most true, and which has a real and most
effective Object; and that there is a new Life for our Souls after the present
Life, wherein they receive the Price of their Virtues, and the Recompense of
the Fidelity and the Constancy of their Trial; and the pain of their
unfaithful, dissolute Prevarications, through which they abandon the Interest
of God and his Service, for the little and trifling Interest of the false and
frenetick Pleasures of their Passions.

With all these Certainties, and all these Convictions, we ought to see more
sensibly the Future Life, into the which our Souls enter in going out of the
Body, than we do the Present Life; for it glitters and shines more lively in
the midst of us, than the Sun shines or glitters in the midst of the World: But
we must take care that we do not apprehend it after the same manner. We are
commonly full of Incredulity of the World to come, and of the Immortal
Condition of our Souls; it is the just Punishment of our Disorders, and the
natural Effect of our Exorbitant Desires. Though God should not concern himself,
and though He should not spread over his Darknesses (He that makes the Day and
Night of Grace, as well as the Light and Darkness of Nature) over our Criminal
Desires, to blind the Carnal Souls, who forgetting the Advantage of their
Spiritual and Immortal Nature, plunge themselves wholly into sensual and
earthly Pleasures; our own exorbitant Desires are Veils thick enough to rob us
of that Light, how resplendent soever it may be: The Incredulity of the Life to
come, and of the Immortal Condition of our Souls, cannot be in Us but by these
two Principles.

If it is so common, it is because the inward Eye is so troubled and obscured
by the disorder of carnal and terrestrial Passions, and that this natural
Blindness of Passions is augmented by a Veil of Darkness that God puts upon
impure and terrestrial Hearts. I know not how Libertines apprehend it; but if
they would, in the lucid Intervals of their Reasoning, never so little reflect
upon themselves, and upon the Light which they smother, it is sure, that it is
impossible but that they must conceive that their Libertinism and their
Incredulity is not only an Estate of Obscurity and natural Blindness, but an
Effect of the Hand of God which is upon them.

This is effectually the Effect of the utmost Disorder of the Spirit, and of
the uttermost abandonment of God; for how should one be ignorant of the Life to
come, and of the Immortal Condition of our Souls, if one had had either any
spark of Natural Light, of good Sense and Reason, or any Ray of Grace or
Celestial Illumination? Let the Libertines speak, and let them tell us upon
what they found their Impious and Sacrilegious System? upon what Principle and
upon what Reason they believe that their Souls die with their Bodies? Let them
speak; they would be in a great deal of Pain to do it; for this furious and
frenetic Judgment, by which they bloody their Hands with the Parricide of their
Souls, (if one may be allowed to say so) has not any Foundation, nor any
Principle. There are some to whom the Immortality of the Soul is not
incredible, but because they cannot, as they say, comprehend what the Soul will
be when it shall be no longer in the Body; but these themselves here do no ways
conceive how their Soul is in the Body; and People who do not doubt but that
their Soul is, and that it is the thing of the World which has so much
effective Reality, although they do not know how it is, do doubt that their Soul
can be any thing out of the Body, under pretext that they do not conceive how
it will be then. There are some who stupifie themselves on set purpose to
judge, that their Soul is no more any thing after this Life, not by any Reason
that they have to form this Judgment, but because that the fear of finding at
their going out of this Life an Implacable Judge, who they well see ought to
punish their Licentiousness and Disorder, if there remains any thing of them
after their Death, makes them desire that there should remain nothing of them,
and makes them prefer the horror of the Nothingness of this sad and vast
Darkness, to the Beauty and Light of that Immortal and Resplendent Life of Joys
and Felicities which Reason and Religion equally discover to us, at the end of
the short Career of this Life. There are, in fine, some who make the same
Judgment, without knowing why they make it; they judge without Reason, and
without Principle, contrary to all Reason, and all Principles. I say, against
all Lights, all Reasons, and all Principles; for I would fain have them tell us
how they conceive God, and how they conceive themselves, if they do not
conceive in themselves this Nature and this Immortal Part, of which we have
given the Conviction? How they conceive the Knowing and the Intellectual Nature
which they find in them, and the Corporeal Nature with which they see
themselves environed? I would fain have them tell us from whence they believe
comes the Order, the Structure, the Arrangement, and the so well contrived
Disposition of the visible World? What they think of those lively Resentments
of the Natural Instinct, and of Conscience? What they judge of all that Train
of Mysteries and Miracles which makes the Body of that which we call the Holy
History, or the History of Religion? O God! what shame and Confusion ought we
to have in our selves, to feel so great a disorder in the Spirit? And how ought
one fear to see himself abandoned of God to this Disorder, which is a frightful
Anticipation of the Utter Darkness of Hell? On the contrary, what Consolation
the Wise and Regular Spirits, who study in themselves the Knowledge of the
Soul, what Consolation ought they to have, since they so undoubtedly
acknowledge in themselves their Spiritual Nature and Immortal Condition, upon
so many diverse Principles? St. Paul said, that there are two things upon which
is built the Certainty and the Hope of our happy Immortality, if we are
faithful to God; but he will pardon me, there are a hundred Principles in our
selves, and a hundred Foundations out of our selves, of it: Every thing gives a
Testimony of our Life to come, and of the Immortal Condition of our Souls.
Sense and Reason, Nature and Grace, the Ancient Law and the New Law, Jesus
Christ and Moses, God and Devil, Body and Spirit, Concupiscence and Conscience,
our Ideas and our Desires, our Fears and our Hopes, all things, when we know
how to use them, and to reflect upon them.

CHAP. XVI.
That it is easy not only to give our selves a Conviction of the Spiritual
Nature of our Souls, but to give a neat Idea of them.
WE have (as we have seen) in our indubitable Sentimment, a certain Conviction
of the Spiritual Nature, and of the Immortal Condition of our Soul; so it lies
only on our part to have a lively and neat Idea of it, and to make it to us an
inexhaustible Ground of Comfort, and an admirable Principle, and clear Light of
Morality, I say it lies only on our part; for without entering into the
Question, Whether we can have so just and so exact an Idea of our Soul, as to
deduce from thence all its Proprieties, and all its Attributes, as we deduce
from an Idea of extended Matter every thing that can happen to it, and agree
with it; because I will remove from this Writing every thing that carries any
Air of Contest, and of the useless Spirit of Curiosity; I believe it my Duty to
undeceive here those who say, that they cannot comprehend a Soul, or form a
Notion or Idea of it, they believe that it is the most difficult thing in the
World; and at this rate almost all Men judge. But what is there more ordinary
than for Men to err and deceive themselves, and to be infinitely strangers to
Attention and Reflection upon themselves, which alone is able to conduct us to
a neat and distinct Knowledge of our selves: It is difficult for them who never
deliberately and seriously reflect upon themselves, to conceive the Soul
separately, to distinguish it from the Body, and to consult the Idea of the
Spiritual Nature, and the Corporeal Nature, which we find all neat and all
distinct in that interior Ground of Reason and Light, which so infallibly and
so surely enlightens us, as often as we re-enter a little profoundly into our
selves, to consult and study it. But there is at the bottom no true difficulty
to conceive our Souls, and to make our selves a neat and distinct Notion of
them; if we would but give our selves the trouble of commanding a serious
Attention and Reflection upon our selves, to apply our selves separately to
distinguish what we conceive therein as Body, and what we conceive therein as
Spirit; and to learn the two manners of conceiving things which are effectively
in us, to wit, the manner of conceiving by Imagination, and the manner of
conceiving by pure Intellection or Conception.

Two things are the occasion that we do not know our Souls, that we have not at
all a clear and distinct Idea of them. The one is, That we do not apply our
selves thereto. The other is, That though we do apply our selves thereto, we do
not at all conceive the two manners of Conceiving which are in us; we do not
conceive at all, that there is a manner of Conceiving by pure Intellect and
Spiritual Notion; we will, as has been before observed, conceive our Soul by
Imagination, we will give it a certain Figure, a certain Shape, a certain
Color, and a Form entirely Corporeal; for as this manner of Conceiving by
Imagination is most easy, and as it is made in us, even almost without us; and
as it gives us no trouble at all, whereas we must have a great deal to conceive
things by pure Intellection,; we so strongly accustom our selves to it, that we
come to persuade our selves that there is nothing real but what we conceive
after that sort; yet in the mean time there is nothing more certain than this
double manner of Conceiving, and than the two kinds of Beings of Natures and of
Objects, which are the Matter and the Subject upon which this double Knowledge,
or this double manner of Conceiving exercises it self.

It was one part of the Error of the Manichees, not to believe any thing real
but what was Corporeal: But there are undoubtedly things which are no ways
Corporeal, which are, if we will, more real than Corporeal ones; for our Acts,
for Example, of Imagining, of Willing, and of Reasoning, are the thing of the
World, which we can the least look upon as a thing chimerical and not real.
Nothing is more real than our Acts and our Faculties of Thinking; for what is
there that we can have a greater certainty of? who does not know, who does not
perceive that he Thinks, that he Imagines, that he Reflects, that he Reasons,
and that he Desires? and who can ever conceive any of these things under a
Corporeal Image and Form? God also is without doubt, something of real Good;
for who can doubt that that Principle of Order, of Being, and of Intelligence,
which has given Being and Order to the visible World, has an Effective
Reality? And yet in the mean time we cannot conceive him under any Corporeal
Form; and we conceive on the contrary, that he Subsists without being connexed
to any Basis, or Terrestrial or Corporeal Mass.

There are therefore two Orders of things, and by relation to these two Orders,
there are two manners of conceiving things: We know and we conceive things
Corporeal, under a Corporeal Image, with a certain Bulk, a certain Figure, and
a certain Color, and this is called To Imagine; And we conceive things
Spiritual and Intelligible without any Corporeal Form, and this is called To
know by pure Notion and by pure Intellection: As we conceive, for Example, the
Thought, or the Act of Knowing or Thinking, God, Angels, Universal Notions, and
all the Idea's of Duties.

These two manners of Conceiving are incontestable by the Experience of all
Men; and that which occasions the difficulty which a Man commonly has of
knowing his Soul, is because it cannot be known but by Intellection, and
because even then, when a Man will give himself the time, and take the pains to
reenter into himself, and to suspend the Pleasure of abandoning the Soul to
Sense and Imagination, instead of supporting (as has been said already) the
Intellect, he immediately puts himself into a desire of conceiving the Soul,
which is an Object altogether Spiritual, under a Corporeal Image and Form, and
that by Imagination: The Question is to conceive it by Inte^ection, and he will
at any rate Imagine it; it is a Spirit, and he will make it a Body.

St. Augustine makes this Confession of himself, That he was a long time
abandoned to this Empire of Imagination, which filled him full of darkness; he
could not conceive his Soul but as a Wind, an Air, and a subtle Fire: But when
he had made a more serious Reflection upon himself, he said that he saw how
grossly he deceived himself, in conceiving that his Soul was a Wind, an Air, and
a Fire, since it was evident that his Soul was none of all that, because it was
impossible but that that which conconceived the Air, the Wind, the Fire, and
all things, should be something more than those things which it conceived, and
that it was nothing of all that, but that it was that which conceived all those
things.

That every one feels and perceives his Soul; and that although he be ignorant,
it is only because he knows not that he knows it.
St. Augustine made himself an Idea and a Notion of his Soul by that Reflection,
and thenceforwards he cut off and suspended all the Acts and all the Exercises
of the Imagination, when he would Reason concerning God, concerning Angels, and
concerning Humanc Souls. See, here we have found a good Guide and a good
Master, let us follow his Principles and his Examples; He attained to have the
most perfect Idea of the Soul that one can possibly have of it, and we shall
attain it likewise with him; he has learnt us to know our Soul with the
greatest ease in the World: Let us reflect like him upon our selves, and upon
our proper Faculty of Imagining, of Seeing, of Perceiving, and when we shall
have well Reflected, we shall find that we have not need of making any Effort
for to know our Souls, that we have nothing to do but to cut off all the
Corporeal Images which can present themselves to us, and to shut up our selves
into that which we perceive of our selves, which is, that we have in us
something that Perceives, that Knows, that Reasons, that Loves, that Hates,
etc. And when we have well settled and fixed our Thoughts thereon, we shall say
that we have found our Soul, that we hold it, that we touch it, that we see it.

For effectively there is That which is our Soul, there is no Man who may not
know it, and who cannot frame a Notion and an Idea of it; because there is no
Man who does not perceive it, and who by the reflection upon his own Sentiment,
cannot frame a clear Idea and Notion of it; but we do not at all perceive that
we know it, because we Imagine, which is another thing; we go to see for the
Idea or Notion of it out of our selves, we run over all Nature, and a thousand
Countries that lie perdue out of Nature, a thousand chimerical Imaginations to
find an Idea and a Notion of the Soul which can content the Imagination; we
seek afar off for that which is at hand, we search after that which we Have,
and we seek out of our selves for that which we have in the first and most
interior Sentiment which we have of our selves; we are like him, who having
heard speak of the Sun, and not at all knowing that it was That so beautiful
and so luminous Body, which lightens and which warms all the visible World,
that bore that Name, inquired of every body for the Sun, and searched for it
every where. We know necessarily what the Soul is, we perceive it, but till we
have reflected on it, we do not know that we know it: If we had nothing to do
but to reflect, we should then have this clear and distinct Idea of our Soul,
That our Soul is that which we Experience makes us Perceive, makes us See,
makes us to Love and to Hate; which makes us have Pleasure and Pain, and all
the Certitude which we have of our selves, and of the things which are out of
us: From whence we form this Notion, That our Soul is a Knowing Nature and
Substance, and indubitably distinct from the Body, Mistress of its Thoughts and
Desires, and sensible of Order and Duty, by which we are capable and
susceptible of Idea's and Sentiments without bounds and without end, according
as the Supreme Nature which rules over us with so sensible and so evident an
Empire, will please to give us them; and though there were in our Nature but this
single Character of our Dependence, of which all our Sentiments and all our
Knowledges carry the Idea to our Understanding, it would be impossible to be
ignorant, and not to acknowledge that we are under the Hand of a Master, who
can make us Sovereignly happy or unhappy when he pleases.

CHAP. XVII.
Some Essential Reflections, to Establish the Order of the Preference of the
Soul above that of the Body.
THIS is the just Idea and Notion of our Soul, in the which we must cull out
and separate Eight or Nine Things, which mark it out by August and altogether
Illustrious Characters, and which are so many Principles and Lights of
Morality, by the which we ought to Establish the Order of our Duties in
relation to our Souls and our Bodies, which is the First Part of this Idea and
of this Moral Essay which we have proposed to give you.

That all the good and ill Fortune are in our Souls.
We must first of all observe in that Notion which we have made of our Soul, by
our reflection upon our Sentiment, and upon the inward and indubitable
Experience that we have of our selves, That the Soul is in Us Our Principal
Part, the Ground both of our Being, and to apprehend it aright, all our Being;
since the Ground of our Being ought not to be apprehended only in relation to
the most noble Part, but to That which causes in Us the good or ill Fortune:
For to Be is not estimable, but in relation to Happiness, of which it is the
Basis; and so long as it is indubitable, that that Part by which and in which
we can and we ought to be Essentially either happy or unhappy, is not only our
Principal Part, but the whole true Ground of our Being, so long it is clear and
certain, that our Soul is all the true Ground of our Being; because we find,
that it is in the Soul that all our Sentiments Essentially are, that is to say,
Joys and Pleasures on the one part, and Pains and Griefs on the other, and by
consequence Happiness or Unhappiness; for it is the Soul which alone has
Essentially the Certainty and Sentiment of All that we perceive; and if the
Soul has Pleasure, she takes no care at all of the Body; in what Estate soever
it may be, she is content, and when she is content, we are contented also.

That the Soul has Pleasures and Pains independently of the Body.
We must observe, in the second place, That the Soul, in which alone is
Pleasure and Joy, Grief and Sadness or Pain, has two sorts of Pleasures, and
two sorts of Pains: Pleasures which she has in her self and by her self, as
are those of Duty and of Conscience; and Pleasures which she has and which she
receives from without, upon the occasion of the Body, by that Power and Empire
of Nature which rules over us: And Pains, on the other Hand, which she has in
her self, such as are the invisible Wounds of secret Fears, and of Mortal
Sadness, with which God pierces her through when He pleases, and those of the
Disorder and Irregularity of her Desires and of her Passions; and Pains which
she has and which she receives from without, upon the occasion of the Body.

The Essential Difference of the Pleasures and the Pains which the Soul has by
reason of the Body; and of the Pleasures and the Pains which She has
independently of the Body.
Thirdly, We must observe in the Third place, That the Pleasures and the Pains
which the Soul has by her self, and of her self independently of the
Disposition of the Body, by the Order, by the Duty, by the Virtue, and by the
Impression of Grace, and of the Celestial and Eternal Hope; or by the
Irregularity, and Disorder, and Fear of Celestial Judgments, have this
Advantage above the Pleasures and the Pains which the Soul has only upon the
occasion of the Body, That the Pleasures and the Pains which the Soul has as
ubjected to and occasioned by the Body, do never go so near to the bottom of
the Heart and Soul, as to render it entirely happy or unhappy, because that
together with the Pleasures of the Body the Soul may have Pains, which may make
it insensible of those Pleasures; and with the Pains of the Body the Soul may
have Pleasures which may render it invulnerable and insensible of the Pains of
the Body.

For it is a constant Experience, That the proper Pleasures of the Soul do Heal
and take away all the Griefs and all the Pains of the Body; and that the proper
Pains of the Soul do dull and blunt likewise the edge of all the Pleasures of
the Body: In such a manner, that the Soul, being sick in her Conscience, can
never be cured by any Pleasures or any Delights of the Body, which can only
suspend and lessen for some short Intervals the Attention of the Soul, to her
proper Ills and her interior Wounds; and that the Soul, void of solid Goods,
can never be filled and satisfied by any Goods or by any Pleasures of the Body;
and, on the contrary, the Soul, being very sound in her Conscience, and being
very quiet in the Testimony which she has in her self, can never be disturbed
in her Happiness by the Pains and Contradictions of the Body. She can suffer
Poverty and Disease, but She cannot lose her Satisfaction and her Happiness;
She is contented in her self, and the Ills of the Body cannot reach that
inaccessible Place of the Heart, where She rejoices in her self, in Order and
Duty on one part, and on the other in a firm and sure expectation of
Consolation and Recompense, which she waits for from above.

That the Pleasures and the Pains which the Soul has not but upon the account
of the Body, are only as it were to show the Pleasures and the Pains of
Eternity.
Fourthly, We must observe in the fourth place, That Pleasures and Pains, be
they those which are immediately in the Soul, or be they those which are not in
Her but upon the Bodies account, are only in her for to show (if I may so say)
the Pleasures and Pains which ought to be the Recompense or the Punishment of
Virtue or of Vice, and which ought to give us the Manner of the New Estate into
which we are going through this present Life, of which we have so indubitable a
Certitude, by a thousand Assurances, and by the sole Instinct of Nature, as we
have observed already, since it gives Us an Idea which cannot be false, and a
Desire which cannot deceive; and so Our Souls have essentially in the Grounds
of their Spiritual Nature an Infinite Ground of Happiness, and an Infinite
Ground of Misery, which the Pains and the Joys of this Life are only for to
give us an Idea of. For it is certain, that the Power which we find rules over
Us, both by Pleasure and by Pain, being, as it is, essentially Just, and
obliged to Reward or Punish Us according to our Deserts, ought necessarily to
Recompense Us, by a thousand sorts of unspeakable Joys and unimaginable
Pleasures, and to punish us after this Life, by a thousand sorts of Pains and
Dolors, in like manner. So that indeed We carry in our Souls a Ground of
Immense and Infinite Happiness or Misery, of which the Alternative and the
Manner is decided and determined by Vice and by Virtue; and we are as much
assured that this Immortal and Eternal Life, which we are to begin after having
finished This here, will be filled with unspeakable Joys and Pleasures,
infinitely more touching and piercing than these which we taste at present; as
we are, that we have at present Transitory Joys and Pleasures.

That Virtue is the proper and true Good of the Soul, and Vices its Evils.
Fifthly, In the fifth place, we must observe, That All that We call Good and
Evil, (to wit) the Good and the Evil which are only so upon the account of the
Body, are only false Goods and false Evils. The Pleasures of Sense, for
Example, are only false Goods and Pleasures, because they promise to make the
Heart happy; they make a Show of a certain Felicity which they display to our
hungry Hearts, and in stead of that Felicity which they promise, and of which
they have given so false and so deceitful a show, they leave the Soul very
unhappy, by leaving it empty and hungry on the one part, and on the other part
wounded, murdered, and embloodied (if I may so say) with a thousand mortal
Scars. The Ills of the Body are after the same manner, they are false Evils,
because they have the Appearance of rendering the Soul unhappy, but they cannot
do it, since under all Bodily Evils the Soul can be happy by or through her own
proper Goods. Now Virtue is the only Good of the Soul, and Vice its only Evil;
for the Pleasure and the Pain which she Now has cannot bear the Name either of
Good or Ill, to speak exactly, but the Resemblance only of Good or Evil. The
Painful passing away of Time, is a Resemblance of a true Evil, which is an
Eternal Ill; and the Pleasant passing away of Time, is the Resemblance of a
true Good, which is the Sovereign and Unspeakable Pleasure of Eternity. Virtue
has not only the Resemblance of Good, but it Is Good of or by it self; for
besides the making a Man happy and contented, it makes him Good, Commendable,
Estimable, and worthy of the Love and of the Esteem of God the Source of all
Felicity, who knows no other Good than Virtue; for God does neither esteem nor
allow those things for Goods which We call Goods, Places of great Trust,
Honors, Reputation, Riches, Credit: He looks upon these things as they are, as
Dirt and Dung, and as an Object of Abomination to his Divine Eyes: Virtue only
merits his Complacencies, and obtains them; and Virtue only adorns our Souls,
and possesses the Place of Riches, of Nobility, of Beauty, and of Agreement.

That the Passions are the Fevers of the Soul.
Sixthly, In the sixth place, we may observe, That the Passions are to our
Souls (how agreeable soever they may seem to be) the same that Fevers and
Diseases are to our Bodies: For they are the Excess of Sensual Love, contrary
to that All-spiritual and All-reasonable Love of Order and Duty, which turns
away the Soul from her natural Motion toward her Sovereign Good, and drives
her on toward false and seeming Goods; as a Fever is an Heat against Nature,
contrary to that Natural Ground of Living Heat which entertains Briskness and
Motion united in the Blood. Those Desires which our Souls conceive by Occasion
of the Body and Sensual Good (which is Its proper Good) are real Fevers and
real Frensies in the Soul: And if, when she is at quiet, she would reflect well
upon it, she would find the same by an indubitable Sentiment, forasmuch as she
would find that these Heats and Emotions of the Passions turn her out of the
Way and End of Sovereign Good and of Reason, and throw her aside into
Precipices and Abysses, wherein she not only wanders and loses her self, but
she wounds, murders, and Embloodies her self (if I may say so) by a thousand
deep Scars, from whence spring a thousand Remorses, like black and livid Blood,
which empoyson all her Joys, and corrupt all her Pleasures.

Seventhly, We may observe, in the seventh place, That Our Soul has
Essentially a certain Sentiment of her Limitation and Dependence on the one
part, and on the other, of a Superior and Overruling Power, on which she
depends; for our Souls do Naturally and Essentially feel in themselves
Religious Duties: They are, as Tertullian says, Naturally Christians, because
besides their feeling in themselves their Weakness and Imperfection, which
makes them sensible of their Dependence, they feel besides above them that
Eternal and Immense Power which Holy Job felt, as it were an exceeding great
Weight upon his Head, under which his whole Being trembled, bent, and was of no
force, as well as that of the most sublime Intelligences, sub quo curvantur qui
portant orbem, under which they stoop who bear the World.

That the Soul has Essentially in her Disorders the Apprehension of a Superior
Justice, which wounds her.
Eighthly, In the eighth place, we may observe, That the Soul, which feels God
so Essentially by her first Sentiment, and who so necessarily discovers him in
Her, and in all things that she sees out of her self, (for, as Tertullian
says, God discovers himself to Us by all that is in Us, and all that is
without Us) does feel especially in her Disorder that Eternal Sanctity which
wounds her and threatens her, and which she feels again on the other part, when
she is in Order, and in the place of her Duty, comforting and sustaining her
through Hope; and although she should not feel it by this kind of Sentiment of
Conscience, the most penetrating that can be, she would necessarily feel it by
the Sentiment of Reason, which essentially feels a Principle of Order in the
World, to which all Created and Emanated Reasons are subjected, and to which
they must give an Account of the Violations of Order which they do commit, from
whence is formed an indefaceable Sentiment of God as an Avenger of Order, in
the Intellectual Part, and in the Understanding, even after the Passions and
the Habits of Vice have defaced that of the Heart, which is That which is more
commonly expressed by the name of Conscience, or of Sensibility of Order and
Duty.

We must observe, Ninthly, That in the Ground of the Natural Capacity of our
Souls, besides that immense Capacity of Pleasure or Felicity, and in like
manner that immense Capacity of Grief and Calamity, which we have acknowledged
in Us, Our Souls have moreover an Insatiability of Desires and Pleasures, which
comes to them like all the rest, from the Ground of their Spiritual Nature, by
the which they make, as it were, in an Instant and Moment, a Digestion (if I
may be permitted to say so) of all that they can get and possess here below of
Goods and Things that are agreeable, and do as soon conceive a new Hunger, and
new Appetites. Every One experiences in himself this Insatiable Hunger and
Thirst of his Soul, with a lively and pressing Pricking, which pushes her on
without ceasing toward some Better thing, and a vehement and rapid Motion,
which carries her on after a kind of confused Idea of Contentment and Felicity,
which she perpetually believes she can overtake, and, as it were, be joined
with; and which she can never be joined with or overtake Effectively, but by
the hope of a Future Life, which Grounds and Establishes the Testimony of
Conscience, and an unspeakable Consolation of Heavenly Grace and Impression,
which is not known to all the World, but which is known to all those who having
understood the Price of their Soul, their Spiritual Nature, and Immortal
Condition, have applied themselves to Cultivate it.

CHAP. XVIII.
That all these Knowledges are so many Lights and Principles of Morality and
Duty.
EVery One will find all these things in his own proper Sentiment, and in the
Notion of the Spiritual Nature of his Soul, if he gives himself never so little
trouble to reflect upon it, and unfold it, and That should not only complete in
Us the Conviction of her Spirituality, (seeing that it is impossible to
conceive in a Substance Corporeal and Material, so many Attributes, so many
Advantages, and so many Characters so undoubtedly Spiritual) but it should
moreover kindle in Us a thousand glittering Days of clear and indubitable
Duties, from whence we should draw That part of Morality which is the Order of
Duties and Obligations between our Souls and our Bodies, which we have proposed
as the First thing in the Idea and Essay which we give of it.

All the Order of our Duties between our Souls and our Bodies, springs from
that Notion of the Spiritual and Immortal Nature of our Souls, and of the
Advantages which follow and accompany it; for it appears by that Notion, and by
every thing which we have been discovering of her Followers and her Companions,
and as it were Appanages, That they have an Incomparable Essence and Dignity,
and in some manner Infinite, a lively Resemblance of the Supreme Nature; a
Richness, a Nobleness, a Ground or a Capacity of Felicity and Virtue, Immense
and without Bounds, which lies upon our part to replenish with a real Light,
Virtue and Felicity; by the which we may from that time be Sovereignly happy in
our selves, in expecting that the Supreme and Eternal Nature, the Living and
Eternal Source of Duties and their Rewards, will in Recompense of the Fidelity
of our Trial, make us partakers of all Joy and Felicity.

It appears that St. Augustine had reason to say, That our Souls do immediately
touch God, That God only is above their Spiritual and Immortal Nature, and that
every thing that is not either an increated Nature, or a Spiritual Nature like
them, is Essentially below them. It appears that God had reason to Reclaim
them, (if I may so say) and to pursue them in their wandering, to bring them
back to himself in the manner that he has done; that he had reason to follow
them even into the Flesh, and into this visible World, where they were so
visibly gone astray and lost, as having been sent thither to fight for him, and
to render themselves worthy to obtain the Crown of Reward. It appears that they
could not be Redeemed at a Price too dear; It appears that they make up all our
Being, and that our Bodies are only the Matter of the Victories and Combats,
and that he was pleased to join our Souls to them, to Try them, and to
Recompense and Crown them. It appears that our Souls are All, and that our
Bodies are Nothing, and by consequence, that the Goods and Ills of our Souls
are our true Goods and our true Ills; and that the Goods and Ills of the Body,
are only false and seeming Goods and Evils. And from hence who does not see,
that there follows an evident and sensible Order, by which we ought to guide
our selves in relation to our Souls and to our Bodies, quite contrary to that
we follow, which makes our Lives to be a Confusion and Disorder, full of Horror?

The Order of Duties between our Souls and our Bodies.
It follows from this Knowledge which we have of the Spiritual and Immortal
Nature of our Souls, That by how much we ought to love, esteem, cultivate and
preserve our Souls, by so much we ought to despise, disregard, and, in some
sense, hate our Bodies: It follows, That we ought to quite alter or change all
our Conduct, and to turn on the Souls side all the Impressions, and all the
Sensibility which we have for the Body: It follows, That we ought to correct
and change all our Idea's, and all our Maxims, all the Body, and all the Method
of our Lives, the End, the Object, and the Motive of all our Actions, the Bent,
the Course, and the Motion of all our Inclinations, and the general and
particular View of all our Designs, and to make in our selves a World
altogether New, (if it may be allowed to say so) in putting the Soul in the
place which the Body now occupies, and the Body in that of the Souls. All these
Consequences have a clear and immediate Evidence: For from hence follows
clearly,

I. The Order of the Esteem which we ought to have of our Souls, and of the
Esteem which we ought to have of our Bodies.

II. The Order between the Pleasures of the Soul, and between the Pleasures of
the Body, which are those that the Soul has by the Bodies Occasion; for, as
has been said, and shall be more fully Explained, the Body has neither
Pleasures nor Pains, but we call Pleasures of the Body those which the Soul
has by the Occasion of the Body.

III. The Order between the Riches of the Soul, which are Virtue, Grace,
Religious Exercises, or the Works of Piety, Charity, and Justice, together with
the precious Treasure of the Testimony of Conscience, and Eternal Hope; and
between the Riches of the Body, which are the Succors and Commodities, for the
Necessities, the Businesses, the Eases, and the Agreements of the Body, for the
short time of the Voyage and Journey of Eternity.

IV. The Order between the Care of the Body, and between the Care and
Cultivation of the Soul, whether in Relation to Men, and the Civil Life, for
Policy, Ability and Capacity, and the Sciences; or whether in Relation to God,
to a Christian Life, and to Hope Everlasting.

V. The Order between the Health of the Soul, which is free and sound Reason
and Conscience, exempt from Vice and Passions; and between the Health of the
Body.

VI. The Order between the Beauty of the Body and the Beauty of the Soul, which
is a Noble and Generous Inclination, Uprightness, and Love of Duty, together
with the glorious Brightness of Virtue, and as it were, the Color of Grace.

VII. The Order between the Sensibility of the Soul, whether for the Goods or
the Ills of the Soul; and between the Sensibility of the Bdoy.

All this flows and follows clearly from what has been just now made clear and
established concerning the Spiritual and Immortal Nature of the Soul; and this
would be a fair Field of Morality to any Man that would exactly and regularly
pursue and explain all the aforementioned Particulars; but what has been said
is but an Essay, and an Idea, which we give you, we shall not enlarge upon it
here; we shall only say, That the Foundation of all our Duties, is to
comprehend well the Difference of the Price and the Value of the Soul, and the
Price and Value of the Body; for if this Difference be once well understood,
and well dived into, all the rest will follow and appear of its self: And to
penetrate well into this Difference, we need only first of all to compare what
the Soul is in it self, by the Difference of the Spiritual and Immortal Nature
of it; and what the Body is, by its proper Difference of its Perishable and
Mortal Matter: And in the Second place, we ought to compare what the one and
the other are by their Attributes and their Accidents, or by such things to
which the one and the other do serve for a Basis, Foundation and Support. Let
us not say any thing of the Foundation of the Body, of that Filth and
Corruption, nor of the Foundation of the Soul, of that Nature so Celestial and
so Divine, whereof every one can sufficiently form to himself an Idea by what
has been said already; but let us cast an Eye upon the Attributes and
Accidents of the one and of the other. What then are the Accidents and the
Attributes? what are the Goods and the Advantages which the Body supports and
sustains, or which it is capable to receive and sustain? It does sustain
Transitory Riches; It does sustain I know not what Illusion of Beauty and
Charms of the Eyes and the Senses for a time; It does sustain I know not what
Pleasures, which always leave the Soul after they are past, troubled and
wounded on one part, and on the other confused and ashamed of it self; It
sustains I know not what Phantomes of Grandeur and of Temporal Felicity, which
for a moment surpriseth the Spectators, and Those that enjoy them, and which at
an instant disappear, not leaving any Character or Footstep of them, but only
by the Regrets and the Despairs of the Privation and of the Despoiling, whereby
the Soul remains, as it were, dismantled and torn in pieces.

And on the contrary, what Goods, and what Advantages does not the Soul sustain
and import in it self? What Goods and what Advantages cannot she sustain and
receive? O the rich and precious Basis! o the rich and precious Foundation! o
the Noble and August Grounds of Riches, of Beauties, of Lights, and of
Felicities! Men esteem these Material and Corporeal Riches, but what are they
in comparison of the Riches wherewith the Soul may be enriched? Men esteem the
Beauty of the Body, which though it cover from the Eyes of Men the Filth and
stinking Exhalations, and the future Food for Worms, does yet discover to the
Eyes of God a monstrous Deformity, from which he turns his Face, and the
Infection and the Corruption of a Vanity, of a Pride, and Self-Idolatry which
lies hid in our Souls; from whence arises that noisome Exhalation whereof St.
Augustine speaks, which ascends and mounts up even to God: But what is all this
superficial painted Gaiety, and this Illusion of the Eyes, to the Price of the
Essential Beauty of Virtue and of Grace? Men esteem the Felicity of the Body;
but what signifies all this vain Structure, which like the Statue of the
Babylonian King's Dream, has no other Basis than a little Earth and Clay, upon
which the Stone of the Sepulcher was to fall and to demolish, and if it may be
permitted to say so, to shatter it into a thousand pieces; what signifies this
Chimaera to the Price of a solid and an Eternal Reality, of an Immortal
Felicity, and of an Eternal Grandeur for the Soul to make use of, as a Basis to
rest it self upon.

Bodies, with all that they sustain, will tumble down into their Ruins, and
return into the Confusion of the common Chaos: The Souls see all these Ruins
fall by their sides, and all these Vicissitudes, with all their Ages, pass away
under their Feet: And upon these Grounds, or, as St. Paul says, upon this
Foundation of Eternity, the Souls are capable of being reinvested with all the
Puissance, with all the Grandeur, and with all the Felicity of God, and to be
transformed, (as St. August. says) as it were, into so many little Divinities.
O then the Grandeur and Nobleness! o the inestimable Price and Merit of the
Soul! And of which the Divine Redeemer has Divinely said, That it avails a
Man nothing to gain the whole World, if he lose his own Soul!

In Effect, the Soul being saved, All is saved, and the Soul being lost, All is
lost; After the Soul is lost, there remains nothing but an Eternal Foundation
of Misery, a lamentable Foundation of being deprived of all Good, and of being
replenished with all Misery, a vast and an infinite Capacity of Grief; a Basis
of an Immortal Nature and Substance, which does not subsist, but to be an
Eternal Basis, an Immortal Ground, and a lamentable Principle of Evils and
Despairs. Men lose, and Men sacrifice the Soul for the Body; But besides That,
in losing the Soul, they also necessarily lose the Body; for suppose they could
save the Body, what can it give us in Recompense for the loss of the Soul,
which is the Ground and the Basis of our Happiness? Let the Bodies speak for
themselves, and let them tell us the Pleasures which they can give us in their
Dark Regions, after they have made a shipwreck of our Souls? But perhaps our
Souls, having once been lost, may be Redeemed again; but who does not know that
with Pain God Redeemed them once? O the inestimable Price! o the
Incomprehensible Merit of our Souls! which nothing can Redeem from the
Everlasting Curse, after they shall have been once delivered to it.

From thence easily flows all that Order or Preference which we have said is
due to the Soul; but as much as the Necessity and the Obligation of this Duty,
and of this Order of Preference, is evident and incontestable, so much it is
despised, violated, and subverted: For who is there that does Justice to his
Soul? or, to say better, Who is there who does not in a thousand manners every
day degrade and dishonor her? Who does not preserve the Body on all Occasions?
We fear the least Incommodity of the Body, but we apprehend not the greatest
and the most deadly Diseases of the Soul; We fear the Ugliness and the
Deformity of the Body, though it be never so little, but we have no horror for
the monstrous Disgraces of the Soul. How many Women do we see, who cannot
endure themselves, if they have their Breath tainted or hot, though never so
little, whose Souls are all afire by the Heats of a thousand sorts of Earthly
and Carnal Concupiscence? We fear and shun Poverty for the Bodies sake, we
esteem nothing so much as its Riches; but we give our selves no trouble either
for the Poverty or the Riches of the Soul. How many Christian Ladies do we see,
who very often appear to be Devout, and believe themselves to Be so, who would
not that there should be the least Corner of their Houses which was not
properly Furnished and Adorned, who yet have their Souls all naked and
despoiled of all Grace and Virtue; They cause their Walls and their Thresholds
to be Gilded, but they never labor to Enrich and Deck their Souls with the
Beautiful and Divine Colors of Humility, Patience, Self-denial, and Christian
Mortification. The Soul is undervalu'd and forgotten in general, they sacrifice
it every moment to the Body; and this Order of Preference, which is so lawfully
due, cannot be more subverted; But this is not a place to go on with the
Invective, let us pass unto other Duties.

The end of the First Part.
A MORAL ESSAY Upon the Soul of Man.
PART II. Of our Duties of Religion and of Morality, whether toward God,
whether toward our Selves, whether toward Man, and of our Duty of all
Gospel-Self-denial; which result from the manner how our Souls Are and Operate
in our Bodies under the Visible Empire of God.
CHAP. I.
How we may with Assurance know the manner how our Souls Are in our Bodies.
AFTER having acknowledged, That there is in Us a Nature indubitably Spiritual
and Immortal, which we call Our Soul, and which we find to be a Knowing, Free,
and Reasonable Nature, knowing and loving Order and Duty, and in whom we may be
illuminated by the Idea's of all particular Natures, and by the Light of all
universal Notions, and rendered happy or unhappy by the inward Sentiment or
Perception of a thousand sorts of piercing Modifications, with which we may be
affected by the Power and Efficacy of the Supreme Nature, which Rules over Us.
The first Thought then that presents it self to our Understanding, is, That we
are Compounded of a Spiritual, Celestial, Divine, and Immortal Nature; and of a
Corporeal, Material, and Terrestrial Nature: and as this Thought immediately
causes to arise in Us a Curiosity of desiring to know, how these Natures, so
opposite, can assemble and meet together, how they can join together, how these
Celestial Natures Are in the Terrestrial Habitation of our Bodies, and how they
Operate there; so this is what now presents it self to be cleared up, to the
end that the Knowledge which we shall acquire of it, may serve as a Foundation
and Principle to the Morality of our Duties of Love, of Religion, of Fear, and
Thanksgiving toward God, of Temperance toward our selves, and of Charity, of
Fidelity, and of Justice toward all others; and also that of our Duties of
Self-denial, of Mortification, and of Crucifying our Flesh and our Senses,
according to the Divine Precept and Rule of the Gospel, without which we cannot
any ways acquit our selves of our Duties.

That we may arrive to a sure Knowledge of the manner how our Souls Are and
Operate in our Bodies, which is what we are now in search after, we must
observe the Method which we have prescribed us, (viz.) To follow always the two
great Lights of our clear Notions on one part; and of our proper Sentiment on
the other: by the which we may be able infallibly to Increase and to Ascertain
our Knowledge. Reason, with which the Nature of Man is enriched, is that
Natural Faculty which we have of Perceiving what Men call True or False, and of
enlarging, by that Discernment, our Knowledge and our Certainty, by the
Exercise and the Application of that Faculty, upon Matters which lie before us,
and of which we may have any Experience, or any certain Knowledge. We may be
able to Reason about all Matters in which we can have, or catch (if it may be
permitted to say so) one only clear Idea, and one certain Knowledge; and in
Reasoning on we may be able, by little and little, most certainly to know them
all entirely, and at the bottom; because that clear Idea, and that certain
Knowledge which the Evidence of Principles, and the Experience of the thing
usually gives, is as a bright Light, by which we may be able to illuminate all
the Matter which That has enlightened, and made us to see, though but one single
Point of (and if I may so say) one single indivisible Feature; for there is not
any Matter which has not, as it were, a hundred Faces, and a hundred Features,
a hundred Umbrages, and a hundred different Appearances, which are only seen
successively and one after another, but yet which are infallibly seen, when
with a bright Light of a deliberate and serious Reflection we have but patience
to turn our selves round about, to take a view of it on all Sides, in all its
Reverses, and in all its Shapes and different Appearances. At first Men knew
but one Propriety of Extension or of Quantity and of Matter, and some few
Proportions of Numbers, and from thence they drew all the admirable Knowledges
of Geometry and of Algebra, all that belongs to the Mathematics, and all the
Theory and Practice of those mavelous Arts and Sciences, which serve to so
many Advantages and so many Beauties in the World.

It is the admirable fruitfulness of Human Reason thus to extend, increase and
multiply its Light, and from a little Sparkle to make a great Day, and as it
were an Immense Brightness: She has no need but of one little Glimpse, but of
one single Principle, but of one clear Notion, and but of one assured
Experience in every sort of Matters, to be able afterward to enlighten and
illuminate all Extension. She is like him, who required but one fixed Point out
of the Earth, or without the World, to remove Them; she requires but one single
known and cleared Point in her Matter, to know it all by little and little with
Assurance.

And as we have already acquired this certain Knowledge of our Soul, That She
is indubitably a Nature and a Substance Spiritual and Immortal, which has
nothing of Corporeal; so it is easy for us with this bright Light, and with a
perpetual Attention, by reflecting upon our own proper Sentiment, and upon the
Experience which we have of our selves, to come to an entire Illustration of
the manner how our Souls Are and Operate in our Bodies, which is That which we
are enquiring after, to give a solid Foundation to this Moral Edifice which we
are building up: It is to That which we must apply our selves, and never forget
the Rule we have prescribed us, Of never losing sight of the clear Notion of
the Spiritual Nature of our Souls, and the Light of our own Experience. Let us
see then, after having taken these Outworks, contrary to the thoughts of those
who might look upon my Enterprise of Illustrating the manner how our Souls Are
in our Bodies, as Rash and Presumptuous, and perhaps, as Visionary and
Chymerical; Let us see, I say, what our indubitable Sentiment teaches us
concerning the manner how our Souls Are and Operate in our Bodies.

CHAP. II.
General Experiences of a Power Superior to our Souls and to our Bodies, which
Acts in our Souls and in our Bodies.
WE may reduce all that it teaches us to two general Heads. It teaches us, That
our Souls are ruled over and commanded, and at the same time served and obeyed
in our Bodies, by a Power Infinite, which equally causes these two Functions
toward them, of serving them with a Sovereign Regularity, and a Sovereign
Exactness; and of Ruling over them with an Invincible Empire.

I. The First Experience that we have, That God Acts upon us as a Sovereign
Ruler, after the manner wherein our Souls are in our Bodies.
We find First, by the most certain Sentiment that we can have, That our Souls
have not the Liberty and the Power to separate themselves from their Bodies.
The Body is a Vestment wholly Exterior, with which they are Invested, and a
Vestment which they find often incommodious; because that besides that it is
only a Vestment which is wholly a Stranger to them, They Resent also by a
Superior and an Invincible Force all the Evils which happen to it in spite of
them: And as there often happens some, by reason of diverse Disorderings which
the Universal Motion of Nature, and the particular Motion of the Matter which
Composeth it, causes in it; so it cannot be, but that this Vestment of
Material and Corruptible Flesh must oftentimes become a trouble to them. It is
often incommodious, and we would often Divest it; yet in the mean time we find
that we are no-wise Masters of it, but that we must carry it along in spite of
Us, until That secret and invisible Power, which has Clothed us with it
without Consulting us, shall Disrobe us, and take it off from us, without
taking our Advice, and without regarding our Desires.

II. The Second Experience of the same Empire in the Sovereign Domination with
which our Souls are sent into our Bodies without Consulting them.
We find in the Second place, That our Souls have not at all the Choice of the
Bodies wherein they inhabit, but that they are sent in thither by that Power
which we see Governs Nature, and which we call GOD, without any regard for our
Inclinations or for our Appetites; for we choose neither the Form, the Shape,
the Structure and the Composition and Constitution of our Bodies, nor the
Matter out of which they are Formed, nor any of the Accidents which determine
the Diversities and the Differences of them. If our Souls might choose
themselves Bodies, there would be none Crooked, Deformed, Ill-shap'd, Unsound,
or Ill-constituted in any manner; they would all be Beautiful, all Healthful,
all Strong, and of a Rich and Gentile Shape and Carriage. Nothing is more
indubitable than the Sentiment that we have, That we choose neither our Bodies,
nor the Time and Place of our Birth, but that it is a greater Force, an
Absolute and Sovereign Power, which sends us into such a Body, in such a Time
and in such a Place as best pleases him.

III. A Third Experience of the same thing in Diseases, over which our Soul
has no Empire.
We find in the Third place, That our Souls, which are not at all Mistresses of
the Choice and of the Quality of their Bodies, are not likewise Mistresses
neither of the Disposition which is agreeable to them, nor of the Indisposition
which incommodes them. They are neither Mistresses of Health nor Sickness:
Health and Sickness are in Us by an Invincible and an Almighty Empire of
Nature; Fevers, Apoplexies, Collicks, and Dysenteries, neither ask our Leaves
to attack us, nor our Agreement to march off.

IV. A Fourth Experience of the same in Pleasure and Pain.
We find in the Fourth place, That Pleasure and Pain are after the same manner
in Us by that Invicible Force of the Power which Rules over Us together with
all Nature; for we find that we cannot hinder either the one or the other, or
suspend or turn aside the lively and penetrating Impression of them, so often
as certain Objects work in Us, or as there are Motions caused in Us in the
Material part of Us, which we call our Body. We may easily enough sometimes
turn away and suspend the Action of other Bodies upon Ours, and stop its proper
Motions; but the Action and Impression being once made, it is impossible to
suspend or turn away either the Pleasure or the Pain, so long as the Power
which Guides Nature, and which Rules over us, affixeth them to it. Does the
violent Heat of a Fever burn our Bodies? our Souls have not at all the Power to
suspend in themselves the burning and afflicting Pain and Sentiment. Do the
delicious Juices of our Viands water the Tongue and Palate in their Porous and
Spongy Substance, if I may be permitted to say so? Do agreeable Odors strike
the Nerves destined to carry them to the Brain? Is the inward Organ of the
Hearing shaken by the Air melodiously beaten with an harmonious Symphony? Light
and Day, have they retraced Colors in the Retina in the bottom of our Eyes,
and together with the Figures of Bodies, the Spectacle of the Visible World? It
is then impossible that the Soul should suspend the Pleasures of that charming
Spectacle of the Visible World, of that Symphony, of those Odors, and of those
delicious Tastes.

V. A Fifth Experience of the same in the Idea's which we receive.
We find in the Fifth place, That our Souls do, by a like Empire, receive the
Idea's of all particular Bodies, and of all Their Impressions upon Us; for it
is indubitable that it is the Empire of Nature, or to say better, of Him who
governs Nature, that determines, and that makes in Us all those Images of the
things which we have from the Occasion of their Impressions upon our Inward and
Outward Senses. We do not make properly those Images by the Active Faculty of
our Soul, we receive them only by her Passive Faculty. This is what every one
does Experience; for we do, when we please, all that we do, by the Active
Faculty of the Soul, which is essentially free: We Reflect, we Reason, we
Compare things as we please, and when we please; because these here are the
Acts of the Active Faculty of the Soul: But we do not see after the same manner
the Sun or the Moon when we please; we remember well enough that we have seen
them, we recall an Idea of Remembrance thereof, which obeys us at the very same
time and moment, when we will; but That lively Image, and That animated
Representation which we have of them by their Presence, and by their Impression
upon our Senses; it is certain that That does not depend upon our Active
Faculty, it is certain that we cannot cause it of our selves, but that we must
Receive it. I employ and summon in here, for This, the indubitable Sentiment of
every Man, by which it is seen, that we receive the Idea's and the Images of
all the particular Bodies which Compose the World, by a sensible and visible
Empire and Dominion, which Acts and Operates in our Souls in proportion as
these Bodies Act and Operate upon our Material and Exterior Senses. We
Experiment, That the lively and animated Images of the things which we receive
from the Occasion of the Impression which is made in our Bodies, and carried
into our Brains, are entirely as Pleasure and Pain, and as the Sentiments of
Heat and Cold, of Bitter and Sweet, and such like, which it is indubitably
certain we receive, and do not cause in Us.

VI.
We find in the Sixth place, That by the same Invincible Empire we love Good
and Pleasure, or Happiness and Contentments in general; from whence comes
(besides the love of Order and Duty, which we look upon as a Good by it self,
and as a necessary means to arrive to the Sovereign Good which we know, by a
secret Instinct, and a certain confused Idea of Nature, ought to be the
Recompense of the love of Order, and of the Real and Effective Order of our
Lives and Actions) the love of Pleasure and of sensible Good, which is, The
Pleasure which we have from the Occasion of our Bodies. This Experience is also
indubitable; for no Man can hinder himself from loving Good and Pleasure; and
every one that reflects upon it, will find and perceive it in himself; a Man
will find that he is able to deprive himself of one Pleasure when he is in view
of another, but he will never find his Heart without the love of Pleasure. It
is an Empire of Nature, or to say better, of the Master of Nature, which we can
no ways resist. Our Souls are indubitably pushed on continually by a greater
Force toward Pleasure; and from thence is formed in Us that Propensity toward
Good; but, which carrying us toward sensible Good, is become, by Sin, the
Matter and living Source of a thousand Passions which Rule over us.

We love our Bodies, and the Pleasures which we have from their Occasion, by an
Invincible Empire, although we see that this Love is oftentimes, in many of its
Acts, quite contrary to our Duty, and to the Order of the Supreme Will, and of
Reason. The Body enticeth us by our Concupiscence, against our Conscience, and
against our Reason; and Nature has equally placed in Us Concupiscence and
Conscience, Passion and Reason.

You see here Six Remarkable Experiences, which I have been observing
concerning the Empire and Dominion which our Souls suffer in our Bodies on the
part of the Author of Nature, to which we might add others; but since these
here are sufficient to give us a great and clear sight, and to prepare us to
understand the manner how our Souls are in our Bodies, and thereby our Duties
of Dependence and of Religion, of Fear, and of Love toward God, and our
Obligations of Justice and of Charity toward Mankind, and of Temperance
toward our selves; therefore I will let the others alone without using them,
and so pass on to let you observe, That as the Author of Nature Commands us,
and Rules over us indubitably in all these manners in our Bodies, so He Serves
us also and Obeys us, and (if I may be permitted to say so) we Command Him in
our Turn, and we are Obeyed with an exact Regularity.

CHAP. III.
Experiences of the Power which Governs Nature, and which comes to the
Assistance of our Souls in a moment.
I.
WE find First, That when we Move our Bodies, we do no more, precisely, than to
Will them to Move; for we do not feel that there goes any kind of thing from
Us, but the Desire to Move our selves, and the Act of the Determinative Faculty
of the Will, by the which we give a Command to the Body to Move it self; and
because we know too well from other things, our Dependence, our Weakness, and
our limited Power, to be able to believe that we have a Power to Operate any
thing out of Us by our Will alone; since That is the Character of an Infinite
Power, as we have already said. Upon this indubitable Experience which we have,
that doing nothing but to Will our selves to Move, we do Move our selves
nevertheless effectively; we therefore conclude, that there must be an
Assisting Power which moves our Bodies in the moment that we would have it: And
as this Power is Immense and Infinite, since It Operates through all in the
same time, moving all the Bodies of Men when they will; and that It is also
indubitably Enlightened, Wise, and Unchangeable, since It does not move them but
in the instant that we Will, and by the inviolable Rule of a certain
Disposition in our Nerves and in our Members; from whence it comes to pass,
That those that have the Palsy, cannot move themselves though they would: We
conclude therefore, that this can be nothing but the Power of the Author of
Nature; from whence we infer, That the Author of Nature intermeddles between
our Souls and our Bodies, and that He takes Part and Interest in their Union,
and in the manner how these Natures and these Spiritual Substances Are in the
Terrestrial and Mortal Habitations of our Bodies.

II. Another Experience of the same from the diversity of delectable and
painful Sentiments.
We find in the Second place, under this new Consideration, That this same
Enlightened, Immense and Immutable Power, does continually serve our Souls in
our Bodies, for to advertise them in an instant, of every thing that is done in
them, and to advertise them of it to their Advantage too.

For so soon as there is any Impression, or any Alteration made or caused
within the Body, which of it self tends to the dissolution and destruction of
it, or even but to the encumbrance and hindrance of its Functions; so soon the
Soul is in an instant advertised thereof by a sad and painful Sentiment, which
she finds her self suddenly transpierc'd with, as with a sharp pointed
Instrument, which she finds her self attacked with, without knowing whereby or
how it entered: And on the contrary, if there be any Motion made in her Body,
which tends of it self either to its good Disposition, or to the Conservation
of a Humane Species, the Soul soon, in a moment, finds her self penetrated and
tickled with an agreeable Sentiment, which we call Pleasure and Delight,
without knowing in like manner either how or where it entered. It is likewise in
the same manner with indifferent Impressions, which do neither good nor hurt to
the Body; the Soul is in like manner in an instant advertised by this
Illuminating, Immense and Immutable Power, but not by the Sentiment of Pleasure
or of Pain; (which would be false, if instead of Impressions indifferent to the
Body, She should give Sentiments which might affectionate and determine it to
Love or to Hate) But Sentiments indifferent, such as are White, Black, Dry and
Moist; and Images and Idea's indifferent also, which leave the Soul the liberty
of approaching or withdrawing it self from those Objects, upon whose Occasion
she has them. I call this Power Immense, because It Operates through all at
the same time within both Poles, and in the two Hemispheres. I call it
Illuminating, because it neither gives salsly nor unseasonably, neither Idea's
nor Sentiments; And I call it Immutable, because it does not give them but by
inviolable and immutable Rules, from which it never swerves.

III. A Third Experience, That God Acts as an Universal Cause, in the manner
that he Acts upon our Souls and upon our Bodies.
We find in the Third place, That this Power which Acts in Us as well to Obey
and Serve us, as to Rule over us, Acts not between our Souls and our Bodies,
(between whom it Acts without ceasing, as appears by all these Experiences
which we have already remarked) as a Particular and a Free Cause, but as an
Universal and Necessary Cause, because we experience that it Acts not from the
occasion of the same Immutable Laws, by which it has resolved to entertain a
Commerce between the Soul and the Body; and that this Power Acts exactly and in
an Instant, as often as these Immutable Laws require it, be the Consequence of
it Good or Evil.

This Experience is Indubitable; for the Power which Acts in Us, does not cease
to determine in our Souls the agreeable Pleasures and Resentments, which by its
Immutable Laws ought to accompany the Motions which are profitable either to
the good Disposition of the Body, or to the Conservation of the Species, although
the Disorder of unbridled Concupiscences should follow thereupon, which so
often ruin both Soul and Body, and it is after the same manner with all the
other agreeable Sentiments which this Power causes in us.

This Power regards not the Good or the Evil which may happen thereupon for
particular Interests, but only the general Good of its Universal Ends, for the
guidance of the Universe. Nothing is more Indubitable; and all these so certain
and so sure Experiences, joined to the infallible Knowledge which we have
already acquired of the particular Nature of our Souls, will make us Easily
comprehend how our Souls Are in our Bodies, and how they Operate there.

CHAP. IV.
False Idea's which we must avoid by the Light of these Experiences, and first,
That of Believing that our Souls are united to our Bodies by any Sympathy,
Proportion, or Inclination.
WE ought above all things to cut off (by this double Light of these
Indubitable Experiences, and of the Knowledge which we have already acquired of
the Spiritual Nature of our Souls) all the Idea's which we shall find to have
been evidently contrary to them; and we shall find however a many such that are
very common.

We find First, That our Souls are not at all United to our Bodies (as most Men
do conceive) by any Inclination, or by any Sympathy which is betwixt them,
because such an Idea is contrary to the Spiritual Nature of our Souls, as it is
taken in it self. This common Idea, That our Soul has a certain Proportion
with our Bodies, which is turned into a Sympathy and a violent Inclination,
whereby It is disposed to unite it self to the Body, and by the same Reason,
according to the Opinion of some, It is effectively thereby united to the Body,
is a false Imagination, which had its Rise from that Idea and that constant
Truth, That the Soul is the True Form of the Humane Body as Humane, according
to the Definition of the Council of Vienna, as it is effectively so by the
Determination of the Creator, who created it to be united to the Body; for
under pretense That it is truly the proper Form of a Man or of an Humane Body,
since it makes the substantial and specific difference of that Compositum of
Body and Spirit, which we call Man, just as Material Forms are in Material
Compounds, and are that which make the Essential difference, and that which
does constitute and determine the Species of them; They went about to Conceive
it, as if by its own Nature, before the Determination of the Creator, it had
been an Imperfect and Incomplete Substance, as a Man may say by Analogy to
Material Forms, having essentially Need of the Body, to exercise its Faculties
and its Functions. If the Question had been but of the Souls of Beasts, This
Idea had been Just, because the Soul of a Beast, which is that last Perfection
of the Structure, and of the Organization of the Body, designed to move it self
and to nourish it self by a natural and interior Principle, which Aristotle
has very well expressed by his famous Definition, Actus primus Corporis
Organici Potentia vitam habentis, is not effectively a Form, but wholly
Material, whose Nature is essentially imperfect and insufficient to Exist, and
to Operate by it self, as Thomas Aquinas teaches us.

That the Soul is not as Corporeal Forms, though it be the Form of a Man.
But speaking of the Soul of Man, of this new Nature joined to the perfect
Organization of the Structure of the Body, which Aristotle himself says comes
from without, as Moses has tanght us, we ought to cut off every Idea, and
every Resemblance of a Corporeal Form, and of a Substance by consequence
Imperfect, or as a Man may say Incomplete in it self, which might have need of
a Chief Head, and by its Nature, of the Assistance and of the Company of the
Body, or which might have an Inclination by which she should desire and search
after the Body.

The difference between a Soul and an Angel.
One conceives, but very ill, the difference of an Angel and the Soul of Man by
this Idea, That an Angel is a perfect Substance in it self and by it self; That
the Soul of Man is Essentially an Imperfect Spiritual Substance, which has an
Essential Relation to the Body, an Essential Inclination for the Body, an
Essential Proportion with the Body. All these Conceptions and Idea's are
repugnant to the Spiritual Nature of the Soul; because no Spirit can ever have
any Relation to, or Dependence upon the Body, neither any Proportion with the
Body, or any Inclination for the Body, but by the free and voluntary
Disposition of Him who equally Governs Spiritual and Corporeal Natures. Let it
be taken for granted, that the Soul of Man by the Empire of the Creator, should
be rendered dependent upon the Body, that it should be destined to suffer a
Probation in the Body, to see by what means it would render it self worthy of
Eternity; Let her have Pleasures upon the account of the Body; Let her
henceforwards please her self in the Body, after she is once united to it; But
that she should of her own accord, of her own Nature, and that antecedently, as
they say, by her proper and essential Inclination, by her Nature and by her
Essence; that she should (I say) require a Body, that she should desire a Body,
that she should have any Proportion or any Sympathy with the Body, is the most
unreasonable Thought that ever was, or could ever enter into the Mind of Man;
since besides that it is so far from the Soul to have need of the Body, or to
have an Inclination of it self for the Body, its Spiritual Nature convinces us,
that it cannot choose but have a strangeness for the Body, which essentially
bounds, limits and keeps back its Knowledge, and renders it a dependent Slave.

The Opinion of the Ancient Fathers upon all that has been said concerning the
Disproportion betwixt Souls and Bodies.
This is what we see in its Spiritual Nature, and the Scripture and the Fathers
do give us entirely the same Idea's. So far is the Scripture from proposing the
Body an Assistant to the Soul, and as a supervening Perfection, that on the
contrary it proposes it to us as our Prison and as our Chain, and as our
Captivity and our Fetters: And the Ancient Doctors until the Ninth Age, spoke
of this Matter agreeable to the Scripture. An Angel and Man, says S. Gregory
of Nice, S. Gregory of Naziance, and S. Augustine, differ without doubt; for an
Angel is a Spirit, which God makes trial of out of the Body, and whose Thoughts
and Affections he has not subjected to the Dispositions of a Body; and Man is
a Spirit which God makes trial of in the Body, to which he subjects it before
he crowns it with Eternity; But the Soul of Man, if God had not disposed of it
after that manner, would have had no need of a Body.

So far were the Ancient Doctors from conceiving our Souls as to have any need
of Bodies, or as having of themselves that ardent Desire of being united to the
Body, which somewould fain have attributed to them, that they on the contrary
have believed that which Experirience makes us see and perceive so clearly,
That the Union of Souls with Bodies is a hard and a difficult Empire, which God
does Exercise over them, and which, if he should not sweeten the rigor and the
difficulty of it, by the Pleasures of agreeable Sentiments, which he has
annexed to the Acts and Operations of Souls in Bodies, it would be for them not
a Trial, but a Hell. They carry the Matter much further; for they maintain,
That if God should not, nor ought to Spiritualize Bodies, that is to say, to
take away from Souls the Dependence which their present State gives them upon
Bodies, he would not raise them up again; because he would not put the Just
Souls, whose approved Fidelity deserved to be Crowned, into Bodies which should
constrain them, and which enslave their Thoughts, which is what Spiritualized
Bodies cannot bear, because the Spiritualization of Bodies will consist in this
precisely, That they should no longer exercise an Empire over the Souls, and
that they should be no longer a Charge, an Obstacle, and an Encumbrance to them.

Even in the present State of Union, which requires that the Souls should by
the Empire of the Creator, have an Affection for the Conservation of the Body,
and by consequence that they should Love the Body, because it is, as it were, a
Charm by which they are blinded, to sweeten the pain and the rigor of their
Prison. The Just and Holy Souls know well, that they are Captives and
Prisoners; they groan with S. Paul under the weight of their Fetters and their
Chains, and sigh with him for a deliverance from their Bodies.

Let us cut off then these gross and Material Idea's, by the which we conceive
our Souls, as having this base Inclination of desiring, of their own accord, so
improper a Match by an Union with the Body; do not let us degrade them after
that manner, nor let us conceive in them any other Relation to Body, or any
other Inclination for Body, but that which the Almighty Empire of the Creator
gives them, who being willing to have the Pleasure of receiving a free, and a
voluntary Service, and the Honor of a Worship from them (in seeing them combat
for Order and Duty, for his Eternal Law and for his Love, against the diverse
Inclinations which they have in their State of Union, upon the occasion of this
Terrestrial Nature) sends them for a Trial into the Body, to the end that he
might have an occasion to Crown their Fidelity and their Combats.

CHAP. V.
That the Body cannot in any manner Act upon the Soul, to Illuminate or Affect
it Physically and Immediately, by it self.
AFter having cut off that common Idea of the Vulgar Opinion, of the
Inclination which the Soul of it self has for the Body; we must also remove
that Belief, That the Body can in any manner Act upon the Soul by any Physical
Action, be it from Immediation of Substance, be it from an Efflux of their
Parts, or Species, or Images, as it is vulgarly conceived; We ought, I say, to
banish this Imagination, and this Chimerical Vision; for if we consult the Idea
which we have of Corporeal Nature, we shall see, That Body and Matter can never
Act, be it by themselves immediately, or be it by Parts derived from them, or
by Species or Images reflected from them, but in Driving, but in Dividing and
diversely Figuring, as they themselves cannot but be Moved, diversely Driven,
Figured, Situated and Divided.

For it is impossible to conceive in Bodies any other Active Faculty, or any
other Passive Faculty: And as the Nature of the Soul is a Spiritual and
Immaterial Nature, in which there is not any Part or any Extension, we shall
evidently and clearly see, that nothing of all That can have place in her; We
shall see, That not being capable of being either Touched nor Driner, Divided
nor Figured, or in any other manner, that can be Modifi'd by the Action of
Bodies; Nothing is more Chimerical or more ridiculous, than to conceive that
there is any Physical Actions of Bodies upon Souls, and by consequence that it
is impossible that our Bodies, or any others, should produce and determine
Immediately and Physically, by themselves, the Idea's and Sentiments which we
have upon their occasion.

This is what ought to be seriously observed, to undeceive us of that common
Opinion and Prepossession, That it is the Juice of the Meat which we eat, which
determines, causes and produces Physically and Immediately in our Souls, the
Pleasure of Tasting; That it is the Smell, or subtle Exhalations and
Evaporations of odoriferous Bodies, which produce Physically in Them the
Pleasure of the Smelling; That they are the Pulsations of the Air melodiously
beaten, upon that distended Skin at the Entry of the Ear, which we call the
Tympanum, which produce in us Physically and Immediately by themselves the
Pleasure of Harmonious Sounds; That they are the Beams of Light reflected from
all the Points of Objects, which being carried by the Optic Nerve even to the
Center of the Brain, do either Physically produce there the Representation of
the Objects which the Soul has upon that occasion, or determine, at least
Physically, the Soul to make it self Images of Objects, wholly Spiritual and
wholly Immaterial, which she receives, and which she has in her self, by their
presence.

Therein lies the vulgar Opinion, and the common Prejudice of believing, That
External Bodies, by the Impression which they make upon our Bodies, do either
produce Effects in us, or determine us Physically by their Interposition, to
frame to our selves the Sentiments and Idea's which we have upon their
occasion. But this common Opinion is indubitably a common Error, combated
equally by the Sentiment which every one has of a Superior and Exterior Force,
which sends, and detains the Soul in the Body, and which Acts perpetually in
them upon the occasion of the Body; And by the Notion of a Spiritual Nature,
which does not at all admit that we should conceive any Action, or any Physical
activity of Bodies upon Spirits, and by consequence, neither of ours, nor any
other Bodies, upon our Souls.

That our own Bodies cannot Act Physically and Immediately by themselves upon
our Souls, whose Spirituality renders them inaccessible to all sorts of
Impressions of Bodies.
There are some who, not carrying far enough the clear Light of the Notion of a
Spiritual Nature, do conceive well, That separated Bodies, say they, cannot Act
Physically upon the Souls, but it is not after the same manner with Bodies,
which are united to them; Separated Bodies can do nothing to the Souls, (say
they) they cannot determine in the Souls any Sentiment, nor any Idea; But the
Body united to the Soul does acquire by that Union a near Disposition, whereby
it is enabled to Act Immediately and Physically upon the Soul, and to determine
all its Idea's and Modifications, which it has from the occasion of other
Bodies which surround it. This is the common Fancy of the Schools, which indeed
is but a most false and a most repugnant Imagination, full of Contradiction and
Incompatibility; for besides that the Union that is betwixt the Body and the
Soul, is but the Act of the Creator, as I shall Explain it hereafter; so that
Union does not at all change the Nature or Essence of the Body, nor the Nature
or Essence of the Soul: The Body united to the Soul, remains still a Body; and
the Soul united to the Body, retains still its former Being of a Soul, and by
consequence, of a Nature wholly Spiritual, to which no Body can be united, and
upon which no Body can have a Physical Action; because Bodies are not united
but by a continuity of Parts, neither do they Act but by Impelling, Dividing or
Figuring diversely, which cannot be done upon Spiritual Natures, who cannot be
subject to any of these Corporeal Passions, and to whom the Body can never
approach, by reason of the distance of an infinite Disproportion, which keeps
them asunder.

That the Body does not cause in the Soul either Pleasure or Pain.
We must banish all those gross Imaginations, by which Men conceive that our
Bodies Act Immediately and Physically, in any manner whatsoever, upon our
Souls; be it for the illuminating them, or for the producing in them either
Pleasure or Pain: That cannot be for two Reasons; for the general Reason, That
Bodies can never be united to Spirits, and Act Physically upon them; and for a
particular Reason, That if they could have any Action upon them, they could not
have one so Superior and so Excellent; For to cause Pain or Pleasure, or
generally any Modification in the Soul, by which she is so intimately affected,
and as it were, altered and penetrated in her Substance, is an Act of
Superiority and Dominion; This is an Act of a Superior Nature, which keeps the
Body under it, and subjected to it: It is clear, That the Body cannot at all be
Superior to the Soul, especially to cause in it either Pleasure or Pain, which
are not only the Acts of a Superior Nature, but the Acts of a Nature Supreme,
in whom is Essentially this Sovereign Dominion over all created Natures, to
cause in them either Happiness or Unhappiness, and by consequence the Pleasure
and the Pain which makes up this Happiness or Unhappiness.

Moreover, Pain and Pleasure, and generally every Modification of the Soul is
Essentially a Spiritual Act or Passion. This is essentially a Vital Act of the
Soul, which is undoubtedly Spiritual; for every Act of the Soul is of the same
Nature with the Soul, every Act of the Soul being Immanent, as the Schoolmen
say, and by consequence received within the Soul; and it is not possible to
conceive that any thing should be received within the Soul, which is not
Spiritual. Therefore there is nothing more incompatible, than to conceive that
the Body can produce any thing that is Spiritual.

I could here make use of the Authority of all the ancient Doctors, who have
held, That God alone can Exercise upon created Spirits, that Physical Action by
which they are Modifi'd in themselves, and by which they receive those
Sentiments or Idea's whereof they are not at all Masters, which is that which
is called Agere per illapsum. But that that we may better support this Tract
rather upon the Experience of our own proper Sentiment, and upon the clear
Notions and Idea's which we can attain to by Reasoning, than upon any
Authority, we will not, if you please, have any regard to an Authority so great
and so worthy of Deference and Respect.

Let us say no more of it then, but let us see if we can conceive, That our
Bodies by the Impressions which they receive from without, or which come to
them from their own proper Spirits, and from their own proper Humors, can by
their Physical Action affect our Souls, or determine them to cause to
themselves either Pleasure or Pain, or the Images which they have of things by
reason of Corporeal Impressions.

Bodies do not only not cause the Sentiments and Idea's in the Soul, but they
do not so much as determine the Soul Physically to make them.
This is another vulgar Imagination and Opinion, That if the Body does not
cause in Us these Sentiments and these Idea's, at least it does determine the
Soul to make them. But we ought also to cut off this Imagination and this Idea,
for many Reasons: First of all, for the Pleasure and the Pain; because, besides
that it is always impossible to conceive in the Body a Physical Action upon the
Soul, since a Body cannot Act but by Stirring, Dividing, Figuring and Removing;
and that the Soul can neither be Stirred, Figured, nor Divided, nor Corporeally
affected in any manner. It is also incompatible to conceive, That the Soul can
cause to it self, and in it self, either Pleasure or Pain, for that moreover
that the one and the other are things which are above it, it is certain that
Pleasure and Pain are things which we receive, and which make in Us this
invincible Power of Nature, which we have so often taken notice of, to be no
other than the Author and Master of Nature; and to say, That the Soul causes
in it self either Pleasure or Pain, a Man may as well say, That she causes the
Health and Sickness, the Beauty or Deformity of the Body.

That the Souls of themselves do not make the Idea's or Images of Bodies.
It is after the same manner with the particular Idea's of things which she
receives by reason of the diverse Modifications and Configurations of the Brain,
caused by the Impressions of Exterior Bodies, as with Pleasure and with Pain;
for whatsoever Affection we can conceive the Soul to have by the Impression of
the Idea received into the Brain, it is impossible to conceive it Imprinted by
her self, with that lively and animated Image which she has in her self. This
living and animated Image which she has in her self, is like a Seal which has
made an Impression upon her: She suffers and receives more than she acts, and
whatever Advertisement is conceived there from the presence of the Object, it
is impossible to conceive that she should make the Pourtraicture which she has
thereof in her self.

To tell me that There is the King, is nothing at all if I am blind; to give me
the means of representing to my self the Figure of him there needs a great deal
more than the single Advertisement of the presence of the Object. Though then we
should conceive that the Soul should be Stirred, Advertised and Determined by
the Physical Action of the Body, which is incompatible with the Spiritual
Nature of the Soul, it is certain that we cannot conceive for all that, that
the Soul can make to it self the Images of things as she has them; it is an
Impression wholly Immaterial and wholly Spiritual, which she receives by her
Passive Faculty: And as Wax which has a Capacity of receiving the Impression
of the Seal, has not for all that the Power of imprinting it upon it self, or
to make in it self that Figure which it receives thereof; the Soul also, which
in this respect has nothing above the Wax, but that its Knowing Nature gives
it essentially an inward Certainty and Experience of every thing which is made
in her self, can well receive those Images of things wherewith she finds her
self Imprinted, but she cannot make them her self.

This Doctrine is the common Doctrine of the Schools, when they speak of Angels.
All the Schoolmen do hold, That Angels cannot make to themselves the
particular Idea's of things, and that they ought to receive from God the
Species of the things which they know, without which they would remain
eternally without the Idea of any thing out of themselves, but only with an
inseparable Sentiment of themselves, and with a Light of Reason, by which
Reasoning upon their Dependency whereof they essentially have the Sentiment,
they know the Supreme Being by an abstractive Knowledge and Idea.

To the end that the Angels might see the visible World, it was needful That
God should imprint in them the Idea, which is that we call a Species in
relation to Angels, and in relation to separated Souls; for a Species and an
Idea are the same thing in respect of Spirits. God alone, who is a Knowing
Being by himself, as he is an Existent Being by himself, God alone has
Essentially of himself and by himself, his Eternal and Subsistent Idea, by
which he knows, and can distinctly see all things possible, Present and to
Come. The created Spirits, who are not Thinking Beings by themselves, much less
Spirits Knowing by themselves and in themselves the things which are Exterior
to them, have need to receive the Idea's of particular things, to the end they
may have a Knowledge of them. If they had by themselves the Idea of one sole
particular thing out of themselves, there would not be any Idea which they
might not have; for what a Man by Himself has, all That he can always have.
God has all Perfection, because he has it by Himself; and the Soul of Man
would have been ignorant of nothing, and would have had the Idea's of all
things, if she had had the Power by her self to form an Idea of the least thing.

CHAP. VI.
How a Corporeal Impression received into the Sense, passes into the Soul.
THE Soul then has no Power of giving to it self neither the Idea nor
Knowledge, nor Sentiment of any particular thing, and she cannot receive them
of any body; but it is the Author of Nature, and of our Particular Being,
rather than of the rest of Nature; the Life of every thing that lives, and the
Light of every thing that is enlightened, who gives us all the Sentiments, and
all the Idea's which we have from the occasion of our particular Bodies, and of
others which environ us. And to clear this Point so obscure and so difficult,
and at the same time so important and so necessary, in order to make us
comprehend our dependence upon God, it is necessary that I should Observe, That
all the World agree, and ought necessarily to agree about two things upon this
Subject.

Propositions Essential and Certain.
The One, That we do not know, nor see, nor seel any Bodies which environ us,
but by reason of the Impression which they make, either Immediately by
themselves upon our Bodies and upon our Senses, or Mediately (if I may be
permitted to say so) by their thin and subtle Particles, or by their Species,
or the Images which they send us from them by the Light which results from all
the Points of their Superficies which regard us; That this Impression ought to
be carried, and arrive through the Exterior Senses as far as the Brain, which
is the Seat and Organ of the Senses which we call Internal, where all the Rays
of the exterior Impression ought to be terminated; and that this Action or
Impression carried to the Brain, ought to engrave and imprint it self there, to
the end that the Soul may be advertised of the presence of the Object, and that
she may thence receive the Spiritual Image in her self.

The Other is, That this Corporeal Impression, which we otherwise call a
Corporeal Species or Phantome, which ought necessarily to precede the Act of
Knowing, which ought to come to the Soul, is not that which makes in the Soul
her Knowledge, nor even that which determines her Physically; forasmuch as that
Impression being Corporeal, it always keeps its Impossibility and its
Disproportion of being able to unite it self to the Soul, of being able to Act
upon the Soul, of being able to arrive as far as the Soul, of being able to
affect the Soul, of being able to enlighten it, or of being able to modifie it
in any manner by it self, and to render it Knowing.

These Impressions, Images or Phantomes, cannot Act but upon the Body; they are
like the Seal, which does not Act but in Figuring the Matter, and Imprinting
the Cutts of the Graver, wherewith the Seal it self is Imprinted; They can
Imprint and Engrave themselves, where they find Body and Matter; but they
cannot pass from the Region of the Body, they must necessarily acquiesce where
the Body terminates, they cannot pass within the Soul; That is another Country,
not for them, That is not the soft Substance of the Fibers of the Brain, That
is a Nature wholly Spiritual, where no Seal can Imprint it self; There is
nothing more certain.

A Point unanimously acknowledged.
All the Philosophers, both Ancient and Modern, do agree in this Principle,
That they are not the Corporeal Species, Images, or Impressions engraven in our
Brain, which render our Souls formally Knowing. Thus the Presupposition is
indubitable, and one may yet suppose it as certain and unquestionable, although
some have believed, and maintained it with much vehemence, That these Images of
Objects so engraven in the Brain, are not at all as Tables within which the
Soul sees things.

Another Presupposition that the Soul does not see the Objects in the Passages
of the Brain, or the Species, as in Pictures, and that she neither sees, nor
feels them.
This is a thing which we know by an indubitable Sentiment, That so far are
these Corporeal Images and Species from being as Tables which we bring near to
the Soul, and in which she sees things, that we do not so much as see or know
even themselves only, which gave occasion of that Expression of the Schoolmen,
Videntur ut quo non ut quod; non cognita faciunt cognoscere. We may then
presuppose, that it is not at all these Tables whereon the Soul sees the
Object; and this being presupposed, we have no more to do, than to search into
the manner how the Soul has by the occasion of these dead and Corporeal Images
and Impressions, those living and animated Idea's and Images which she has in
her self, and by which she is rendered formally and actually Knowing, having in
her self a lively Representation, or an inward Sentiment of the Objects which
render themselves present by the Material Impression which is received in the
Body.

That Men do not commonly Explain how the Passage of the Material Impressions
of Corporeal Objects, make a Passage into the Spiritual Substance of the Soul.
One may say, That here are the Limits, (or if a Man may be permitted to say
so) the Pillars of Humane Intelligence; there has appeared nothing, neither
has there been any thing in Nature more inaccessible than the Knowledge, and
the clear Notion of the manner how this Passage is made, and this Transmission
from the Corporeal into the Spiritual Region, and than the manner how the
Corporeal Impressions of the Senses, whether Interior or Exterior do become
Spiritual Idea's and Perceptions in the Soul. Men have said almost nothing
thereupon, but enormous and monstrous Contradictions: But we need not despair
of arriving at a clear Notion, and an indubitable Certainty thereof, how dark
soever this Mystery may be wrapped up, if we follow that Rule which prescribes
to us, to go always, notwithstanding the resistance of Prejudices, thither
where the Evidence and clearness of Principles and Consequences calls us and
leads us on; In following on the one part, the double shining Light of the
Experience which we have of a Superior Light and Power, which rules over us,
and which enlightens us, and of the Certainty we have made our selves of the
Spiritual Nature of our Souls; And on the other part, in following the
infallible Principle of this certain Truth, That it is God alone who
Essentially unites things Spiritual and Corporeal, and who alone can unite our
Bodies and our Souls; we shall carry a certain and an infallible Light in this
so dark and so obscure a place, and we shall come to have a clear Idea of that
which we search after.

That it is the Author and the Principle of the Union of the Soul and of the
Body, which makes the Commerce between the Soul and the Body, and by
consequence, between the Soul and the Corporeal Objects.
We find that these Corporeal Images, and these Material Impressions, do not
pass into the Soul to render it actually and formally Knowing by themselves,
for this would be a Repugnancy with a Witness, if it were only in this, because
a Corporeal thing cannot be the enlightening and illuminating Form of a
Spiritual Nature. We find that these Images, and these Corporeal Impressions,
do not quit their quality and material Essence, to change themselves by a
Chimerical and an Impossible Metamorphosis to Spirituals; We find that these
Corporeal Images are not the Tables and Glasses to which the Soul does apply
her self, and toward which she turns her self, to contemplate and see in them
the Objects which are rendered present to the Body, in drawing upon them their
Idea and Representation; We find that these Images or Corporeal Impressions,
which the Exterior Objects do engrave in our Brains, are no other thing than
the Occasional Cause of the Action by which He who unites the Body and Soul,
does Instruct Us and Enlighten Us, who in the Quality of the First Cause,
concurs Essentially with all Second Causes, and who in the Quality of an
Universal Cause, has been pleased to render in Men the Concourse of his
Illumination and the Essential Irradiation of his Life, by which He makes to
live all that lives, dependent of diverse Impressions which are brought and
received within our Brains, for to conserve his Character of Universal Cause,
in such a manner, that these Images serve to no other purpose, than to
determine the Author of Nature (who is necessarily the immediate Cause and
immediate Principle of the Union of the Soul and of the Body, and by
consequence, of our Corporeal Impressions, and of our Spiritual Faculties) to
give (as an Essential Cause of all the Light and of all the Life which is in
created Beings) the Idea's and the Sentiments of things, at that moment that
the general Course of the Universal Movement of Corporeal Matter and of Nature,
or the free and accidental Determination of some particular Cause, does make in
that Structure of Bone, of Flesh, and of Nerves, which we call Human Body, any
Impression which is carried to the Center of all that Structure, which is the
Brain. This is the Formal Act of the Power which unites the Soul to the Body,
and the Body to the Soul; This is the Active and Formal Union of the Soul to
the Body; This is It which is the immediate and necessary Principle and Cause
which makes the Commerce betwixt the Body and the Spirit; This is It which
makes the Passage to the Corporeal Species and Images, from the Corporeal to
the Spiritual Region; This is It which Spiritualizeth our Phantomes, not by a
Chimerical and Impossible Metamorphosis, but by an Infallible and an Omnipotent
Efficacy of his Action as First Cause and as Cause Universal, by which from the
occasion of diverse Impressions made in the Body, He gives to Souls the Idea's
and Sentiments, which ought to correspond and accompany them in the Intention
of the End of his Workmanship.

It would be very surprising, if this Idea should appear New to those
Understandings who know that it is an Idea so common and so necessary, To
regard God as the immediate Author, and necessary Cause of the Union of our
Souls and of our Bodies; for when it shall be known that God is the immediate
and necessary Principle and Cause of this Union, it ought not to appear strange
or new, That it is God who makes and who entertains this Commerce, which is the
essential and necessary continuance thereof, and that he continually Acts after
this manner upon our Souls, from the occasion of the Impressions of Bodies,
seeing that the Action by which he makes this Union, which ought necessarily to
be renewed, reiterated and continued every moment, cannot consist but in this
everliving Commerce between the Soul and between the Body, as shall be proved
hereafter.

In sum, all is thereby clear and easy, all of a piece, and made very plain;
Thereby we do not only ascend to the true Principle and immediate Cause of the
Union of our Souls and of our Bodies, but we clearly conceive thereby how this
Union, so incomprehensible and so admirable, is made; how it is He that is the
First Tie, and Essential Band thereof; And He is at the same time the Light and
the Life of all Spirits, as He Acts perpetually in Us, and does not less
Animate the little World, which is the Assembly of the Body and Spirit whereof
Man consists, than the Universal World, which is the Assembly of all Corporeal
Natures; Thereby does subsist our dependence upon Him in all the Acts of our
Life, as well as in the Foundation of our Being, which depends every moment
upon the continuation of that Action by which he at first Created us. Happy it
is, that the Notion which we have made of the manner whereby we know all things
which are without us, should lead us back, and unite us so intimately to the
Source of our Being, and that we cannot know how our Knowledges and Sentiments
are formed in us, without knowing likewise together with the dependence that
all our Life and all our Being has from Him, the Immensity, the Excellency,
and the Superiority of his infinite Essence above all created Beings.

The blind and ignorant Pride of Humane Understanding will not, perhaps, suffer
in some People, that we should humble it after this manner, and that we should
thus bring it back again to God; It will revolt, it may be, against the
Evidence of the things which I have been speaking of, and it will, perhaps,
choose much rather not to comprehend at all how the Corporeal Impressions of
Objects become in our Souls Spiritual Images and Sensations, than to comprehend
it after a manner which gives it so lively an Idea of its Dependence and its
Nothingness: But we must not suffer it peaceably and quietly to enjoy the
Pleasure of its affected Ignorance, of its criminal Independency; we must
convince it, not only that there is no other means of Explaining the manner how
we have, by reason of Corporeal Impressions, the Idea's and Sentiments of
things, but we must also necessarily make it acknowledge, That this perpetual
Action of the Illumination and Irradiation of God in us, as an Essential Act of
his Supreme Sovereignty over us, is the inseparable Character of our Essential
Dependence, and the necessary continuance of the Function by which he unites
the Souls to Bodies, so as Faith teaches it.

CHAP. VII.
A Proof of what has been decided, That it is God, as Author of the Union of
the Soul and Body, who gives to the Soul the Sentiments and Idea's of things,
from the occasion of Corporeal Impressions which are made upon the Material
Senses.
THIS continual Action of God in us, whereby he Acts perpetually in us in the
Quality of the First and Universal Cause, Enlightening us, and affecting us with
several Sentiments, by reason of diverse Impressions which are made either by a
Cause from within, or by a Motion from without, in our Brain, ought necessarily
to be acknowledged by two or three sorts of Proofs, and different Reasons
equally convincing.

The first Proof by the Essential Union of our Souls with God.
First of all, We have the indubitable Sentiment and Experience thereof: For if
we rereflect well upon our own Sentiment, we shall find equally two Unions in
us; an Union of our Bodies with all the visible World, and an Union of our
Souls with a Nature Knowing, Immense, Infinite, and Unchangeable, which with an
Eye always vigilant, and always attentive to all the Movements of our Brains,
penetrates us continually with a thousand lively Sentiments, and enlightens us
with a thousand Idea's upon their Occasion.

Our Bodies are undoubtedly united to all other Bodies, and by consequence, to
all the visible World; Because there is not one single Motion made about them,
which does not come to them through some one of their Parts, or through some
one of the Organs which the provident Wisdom of the Creator has disposed so
diversely to receive their different Motions. If the Sun, or any other Luminous
Body, be moved in the middle of that imperceptible Matter which it drives in
straight Lines from all sides, our Eyes receive in the instant and in the
moment, the Impression of it, by the necessary Effect of the continuation of
Motion, or of the effort of Motion which is imprinted in that Matter, because
they find themselves so disposed to let it pass through the different Humors
whereof they are composed, and to receive it in that thin and subtle Web which
is formed in the bottom of our Eyes, about the Extremities of the Optic
Nerves, and which is called the Retina. If there be a Shock of two solid Bodies
in the Air, or any vehement Fomentation of Exhalation, as it happens in
Thunder, from whence arise redoubled Trepidations in this fluid Matter, like to
those Circles which are described upon the Superficies of Water one after the
other, and one against another, this Motion comes to strike in our Bodies that
which is called the Tympanum in the Organ of Hearing. It is generally in the
same manner with all other Bodies, some of them are united to our Bodies by the
subtle Vapors which they emit from them, as are Odours; others by an
Immediation (as they say) of the Superficies of their Parts: and there is not
any one single one of them, which does not Act upon our Bodies after their
manner.

But if our Bodies are so naturally united to all other Bodies by Contiguity,
which communicates the Motion of one to the other, our Souls are yet more
sensibly united to a Superior and an overruling Nature, which imprints on them
Idea's and Sentiments as it pleases by General Wills, and universal and
immutable Laws, which it almost never departs from, but in those extraordinary
Occasions, in the which it Acts as a particular Cause, and works that which we
call a Miracle.

We cannot be ignorant or insensible of this Empire which the Author and
Master, the Sovereign and the Lord of Nature Exercises over us, for the Reasons
which have been already observed, and which S. Augustine had so well dived into,
that he said, That a reflective and an attentive Man would much rather doubt of
the Union of his Body with the visible World, to which it is tied by all its
Parts, than of that Union of his Soul with God; since the Action thereof is
never interrupted, but it is sensible and visible; for we know nothing, if we
do not know that it Acts in us, and that it Rules us either by a lively and an
involuntary Sentiment, or by the Light wherewith it penetrates us; since it is
impossible not to acknowledge God in this Principle, so Enlightening and so
Vigilant of the one Part, and on the other so Efficacious and so Commanding,
who Presides over all our Knowledges and over all our Sentiments, and who makes
them in us in spite of us, with so admirable and so illuminating a Wisdom; and
so much the better, as causing in us undoubtedly all the Pleasure and all the
Pain which we resent by the occasion of our Bodies, We see plainly, that he is
the Sovereign Arbiter as well as the Principle of Happiness and Unhappiness,
which is the most Essential Character and Attribute of that which we call
Divinity or Supreme Nature. Tho we should not have this so assured Experience
of the Union which our Souls have with God, by the continual Irradiation of his
Divine Life and Influence in us, the which agrees so well with this Idea which
Faith gives, That it is God who is the Immediate Cause of the Union of our
Souls and our Bodies (for we must observe by the way, that it would be an
Impiety to doubt of it, since not only God, according to Faith, Created our
Souls, but he Infuses them also, as they say, and unites them to our Bodies),
we could not possibly be ignorant of it, if we gave any attention to his
Supreme Sovereignty over us, and to our Essential Dependence upon Him in all
the Acts of our Life, as well as in all the Foundations of our Being, and by
consequence, in all our Knowledges.

Can the Sunbeam shine when it is separated from the Sun? And can the created
Spirit either subsist one moment, or have the least Light, or the least Spark
of Life or of Knowledge, without the Irradiations of the Supreme Being? The
Ancients said very well, when they said, That all things were full of God; That
God was the Soul of the World, the Life of every thing that Lives, and the
Being of every thing that Is and does Subsist. They had much better than Us
conceived the Supreme Nature, when they said that It was the Circumference and
Center of a Circle, That it was the Sun and its Rays; That it contained All,
and replenished All; And that its Action was the Life and the Motion of all
things. God is Effectively and Essentially applied to all the Parts of the
Universe; and that there is not one only thing, from which he withdraws
himself for one only Minute, Natural Evidence persuades us no less than the
Divine and Heavenly Authority of S. Paul, That every thing that Lives, every
thing that Moves, every thing that Is, Lives, Moves, and Is in Him, In ipso
vivimus, movemur and sumus. But though he should not continually apply himself to
all the other Parts of the Universe, yet it must needs be that he should apply
himself to Spiritual Natures, and to every thing that is called Spirit, or
Knowing and Spiritual Nature; for that also the Scriptures and the Holy Fathers
do teach us, That He is the Father, that is to say, the Lively and Essential
Source of all Light, and by consequence, of all Knowledge, the Sun of
Intelligence, and the Life of all Spirits.

Exposition of this Principle by S. Augustine.
St. Augustine by the force of this Natural Evidence Divinely said, That we are
so Essentially united to God, that we may say, we are much more in God even by
our Bodies, not only than we are in the Air, or within any other Corporeal
Space whatsoever, but than we are in our selves; because, in fine, says he, It
is certain, that God not only contains and environs our Bodies better than any
Corporeal Space, but he continually gives them their Being and their Motion, by
his Action and by his Almighty Influence, a thousand times more than the
Illumination of the Sun gives Light and Splendour to its Rays.

But this which the Holy Doctor says of our Bodies, has much greater force in
it when he says it of our Souls; for though it be true, that our Bodies are in
God, in whom all things are Essentially, it is much more so, that our Souls are
in Him, because they are tied to him by a thousand times more Dependences than
the Body, since they continually receive Life from him through all the Acts of
all their diverse Faculties, which are without number. If a Man demands, says
he, Where is the place of the Soul? That is a Question which our gross and
curious Imaginations make, who being desirous to conceive all things after a
Corporeal manner, would determine a certain Space and a certain Extent to
Souls; But it would be very well (says he) to answer them, and to say to them,
for to undeceive them of this Manichean Idea, That they are in God, that they
Live, they See, they Perceive, and they Imagine in God; for it is certain that
they do not any thing of all this, but by the Immediate and Physical Influence,
and the continual and Essential Irradiation of his Divine Life, which he
communicates to them without ceasing. And because the Life of God and of every
Spirit is to See, to Know, and to Love, it is certain, That every thing that
Thinks, every thing that Sees, every thing that Loves, and every thing that
Knows, does Think, See, Love, and Know in him and by him, by whom is every
thing that is, by whom is moved every thing that moves, and by whom lives
every thing that lives: For byreason that He is the First Being, or Principle
of Being, it must needs be, that every thing that Is, receives without ceasing
its Being from him, by a perpetual and never-interrupted Communication of this
Supreme Essence; By the reason that He is the Principle of Life, or the
Essential and Original Life, it must needs be, That every thing that lives,
receives continually a Life from Him by a like Influence, and by a like
Communication of his Life; and by consequence, That every thing that Thinks and
Knows, Thinks and Knows by Him, since to Think and Know is the Life of
Spirits.

This is the solid Metaphysick of S. Augustine, and this is also the Theology of
S. Thomas, who has so often made use of these Arguments under the Name and
Notion of a First Agent, of a First Cause, and of an Essential Principle of
Life; And this is the same common Notion of all the Doctors that ever were,
under the more consu'd Name and Idea of Concourse; because it is certain, that
this Action of God which we call his Concourse, cannot be, in relation to the
Passive Faculty by which our Soul has the Idea's and Sentiments of Corporeal
Objects, but a Vision and a Chimera, if it be not that Action by which I say,
That in the Quality of a First and Universal Cause on the one Part; and on the
other, of a Particular Cause of the Union of our Souls and Bodies, He
determines in us our Sentiments, and gives us our Idea's from the Occasion of
the Impressions which either Actions from without on the part of the Bodies
which are round about us, cause upon our Brains; or the Determination of the
Circulation of the Blood, of the Humors, and of the Spirits within us, which
oftentimes are the Occasion of the Action of the Supreme Cause, without the
intervening of any thing from without.

That this is not to have recourse to a Miracle, but to Explain what sort of
Commerce there is betwixt the Soul and the Body.
There is no need of opposing here, that This is to have recourse to Miracle,
or to make God descend from Heaven to favor our Ignorance; for this is no ways
to have recourse to Miracles, thus to reduce things to their Essential
Principle, and to their Necessary and Immediate Causes on the one Part, and on
the other Part, to the common and universal Experience of all Men, and to the
most constant Idea's of Religion, which is what we are doing here, when having
caused to be observed, that we receive the Sentiments and Idea's of particular
Bodies by the only Passive Faculty of the Soul, and by a Superior Power which
Rules over us, and which Enlightens us; and having demonstrated, that we cannot
at all be Knowing Beings by our selves, since that is the Privilege of God
alone; but that we are Essentially Knowing by an Exterior and Superior
Irradiation and Illumination, and that this Illumination and Irradiation cannot
come to us, neither from other Bodies, nor from our own, by reason of the
Impossibility that there is, that a Body can be United to a Spirit to Act upon
it, and Enlighten, or Affect and Modifie it; we say that it comes from God,
from God the Author of our Being, and the Necessary Cause and Principle of the
Union and of the Meeting together of the two different and disproportioned
Parts which Compose us. This is neither to have recourse to Miracle, nor to
call to God to descend to the help of Humane Weakness and Ignorance; but on the
contrary, this is to mount up again to the true Principle of all the particular
Idea's, and all the Sentiments which we have of Bodies, and of things
Corporeal, upon the Occasions of our Bodies; This is to reduce the confused
Idea of the Union which God makes of our Souls and Bodies, to a clear and neat
Idea; This is to acknowledge the true Principle of our Light, and to cut off
all the false Idea's by the which we have been accustomed either to make Our
Selves God, in Figuring to our selves that we have of our selves Pleasure and
Pain, and the Idea's of things; or to make Gods of all the Bodies which environ
us, in believing that They are those which Enlighten and Illuminate us, or
which at the same time make us Happy by Pleasure, and Unhappy by Pain and
Dolor. Not to be willing that we should refer to God the Action which unites
our Souls to our Bodies, is Not to be willing that we should refer to him the
Creation of Souls, and the Existence of the World; And as the Passage which the
Body makes in the Soul by Corporeal Impressions, is either the necessary
continuance, or the very Act of the Union of our Souls and of our Bodies; not
to be willing that it is God who does This Immediately, is Not to be willing
that it should be him, who by himself Immediately unites both our Bodies and
our Souls, which is a Species of Atheism.

The happy Fecundity of this Principle for Morality.
Thus we are able to felicitate our selves, and to rejoice our selves, in
having found out, (together with the clear Idea and Notion of the manner how
our Souls have their Idea's and their Sentiments upon the Occasion of the Body)
the Discovery of our Intimate Union with God, and of our perpetual Dependence
upon him, of a continual Action of him in us, of a living Source of Lights and
of Pleasures which are in him, and of a fruitful, and of an abounding Source of
the Duties of Love and Fear, of Dependence and of Gratitude, which ought to
keep us continually united to him. Let others study God in the visible World,
and Morality in the Books of the Doctors, I will for my part, neither study the
one nor the other, but in my own Soul, and in the manner whereby she perceives,
and whereby she knows every thing that she does know out of her self.

Let others make Efforts of Imagination, and prescribe to themselves a thousand
Practices for to keep themselves continually present to God; I for my part will
desire no more than my Principle, and a moderate Attention to that which passes
continually in me, never to lose the sight of God, but to have him always
present. Let other search into imperfect Reasonings for the Motives of the Love
and the Fear which they owe to God; for my part, I will only reflect upon the
Pleasures which I have in the very Acts even of the Animal Life, for to see in
God a Source of infinite Felicities, and by consequence, an immense and an
infinite Loveliness; for what should I more naturally love, than that Living
Source of Pleasure, since it is nothing but Pleasure that I love?

But this is not all; I will besides only reflect upon the Equality with which
God Enlightens every moment all Men, to conceive that he is the Father and the
common Center in whom we are all united, and in whom we ought all of us to love
one another, to honor one another, and to support one another, and to observe
Fidelity and Justice toward one another.

There are moreover, I see, in this Knowledge of my Soul, Incitements to Duty,
as well as Duties themselves. Let others seek to fright their Concupiscences by
the dreadful Paintings of Eternal Judgment; for my part, I need only a simple
View, and a moderate Reflection upon the Pains and Dolors which we resent upon
the account of our Bodies, by the efficacious Impression of that Power which
keeps our Souls united to our Bodies: For if to affectionate us to the
preservation of our Bodies, and to remove far from us the things which are
hurtful to them, it penetrates us with such lively Dolors, what will those be
wherewith it will transpierce our impure and rebellious Souls, which shall
render themselves deserving of his Anger? And what Pains must he have
established to oblige us to watch after the conservation of our Souls, since he
takes so much pains to make us watch for the preservation of these miserable
Bodies, which are only a vile and despicable Garment of the Soul? But let us
not any farther enlarge here upon these Moral Consequences, whose solid
Principles and Foundation we shall discover in its proper place; Let us
advance, and after having made clear the manner how our Souls have Idea's and
Sentiments upon the occasion of our Bodies, and after having cut off many
Idea's, and many Prepossessions full of Error, with which it was impossible to
conceive the manner how our Souls Are and Operate in our Bodies, we must now
endeavor to conceive it.

CHAP. VIII.
How our Souls Are in our Bodies.
THAT Evidence which we have of the manner how we have Sentiments and Idea's,
begins to give a Light to our Eyes, which makes us see the manner how our Souls
are in our Bodies; and we have another Light which will completely let us see
it, and as it were, touch it; and This is the Experience of the manner how we
move our Bodies.

We have a continual Experience, That our Souls have Power to move our Bodies;
for there is nothing more certain in the Sentiment which we have of our selves,
there is nothing that we experiment, and that we find so indubitably in us; but
the same Experience which we have that we move our Bodies when we please,
provided that they have on their part no Obstacle or Impediment which resist
it, makes us perceive and see, that this Power which we exercise by the precise
Empire of our Will, is not at all a Power or a Force which we have in our Soul
and in our Will.

The admirable Efficacy wherewith we see that we move our Bodies only by the
Will, which is a manner of Almightiness, and the Character by which we conceive
the Infinite Power of God, who alone made all things by his Will, ought to make
us acknowledge, that it is not by our own proper Power that we effectually
remove our Bodies by the Will only; for if we conceive that it is the sole
Efficacy of our Will which causes in us these Motions, at what instant we
please, we should attribute to our selves a kind of Almightiness, or at least
an Infinite Power; for to Act and Operate out of our selves by the Will only,
and by a pure Empire, is, as has been said, a true Character of an Infinite
Force and Virtue: And there needs nothing more to make us conceive, That it is
not at all by our own proper Virtue and Force that we move our Bodies, though it
may be by our Will,; And it is unquestionable, that the Force and Virtue which
always moves them at that instant when we please, cannot be but God himself;
for that Force and that Virtue is a Force and Virtue which is Almighty,
Immense, and at the same time always Vigilant and Attentive to Enlighten our
Desires and our Wills, to Obey him exactly: And there is none but God alone who
can have all these Characters, and all these Attributes of Force, of Immensity,
of Infinite Light or Vigilance. There is nothing more certain, and we have it
by the same unquestionable Certainty, That God, who from the Occasion of the
Impressions made by the External Objects, or by the Internal Humors upon the
Body, Acts perpetually upon our Souls, to Enlighten them, and to Affect them
with the diverse Sentiments wherewith they are Affected, Acts also perpetually
upon our Bodies, for to move them upon the Occasion of the Desires, or of the
Will of the Soul; and if it should so fall out, that from this alone should
result the Union of our Souls and our Bodies, it would be easy for us to
conceive the manner how our Souls Are in our Bodies. Let us see then if we can
make it appear, That from this double Action of God, from his Action upon the
Souls upon the Occasion of the Body, and from his Action upon the Bodies upon
the Occasion of the Souls, the Union of these two Parts of our Being does
result.

We have, if you take notice of it, cut off many false Idea's, which a Man
commonly has of the Inclinations, of the Proprieties, and of the Faculties of
our Souls, of their Proportion with the Body, and of the manner how they move
their Bodies: And that is not done without design, or to no purpose; for with
so many false Idea's, so evidently contrary to the Idea which our Interior
Sentiment gives us of our Souls, and of their Spiritual Nature, it were
impossible to conceive the manner how they Are in our Bodies, and how they
Operate there; but if we continue to follow the living Light which has
conducted us hitherto, which is the Notion of our Soul as of a Spiritual
Nature, whereof we have so intimately the Certainty, and the Experience of that
Supreme Power which Acts perpetually upon the Soul from the Occasion of the
Body, and upon the Body from the Occasion of the Desires and the Wills of the
Soul, it will be easy for us to form a just and exact Idea thereof.

That our Souls are not in our Bodies, but as they are united to our Bodies.
We commonly conceive the manner how our Souls Are in our Bodies, under the
Idea of Union; and though we have not been accustomed to say of one only of the
united Parts, that it is in the other, and that we do not speak very regularly,
when we say that the most noble and ruling Part is in the less; we must not
change the Language of Men, we must let them say that our Souls are in our
Bodies, though they are but united there, and the Body is rather contained than
containing, since the Soul is the principal Part, and that which keeps the
uppermost place in the Assembly which unites them; We must let People speak as
they please, but we must here nevertheless cut off the false Idea's which
spring up, and are formed upon the occasion of these Popular Expressions. The
Word of Union of the Soul and Body, gives occasion at first (if we do not take
heed to it) to the Imagination, of conceiving the Soul after a Corporeal
manner; for as we see none but Corporeal Unions, so we go about at first to
conceive the Soul united to the Body, as if she her self were Body: And as we
conceive the things, which we say are in others, limited by their
Circumference, and adjusted to their Extent, and to their Grandeur, we go about
also at first to conceive the Soul as shut up within the Circumference of Body;
but we must cut off all these Idea's, because they are Acts of the Imaginative
Faculty, by which we would conceive the Soul under a Corporeal Form and Image;
She who is only Intelligible, and no ways Imaginable. But that we may go surely
in the way of Truth, and of just and true Idea's of things, we must remember,
that when we speak of our Souls, we remove far from us all Corporeal Idea's.

Thus we will say that the Soul is in the Body, but we will take care not to
conceive it, for all that, as truly and properly contained in the Body; We will
say that she is united to the Body, but we will not conceive her as poured
into, and mingled with the Body, or as adjusted to its Extent by a Co-extension
and Immediation of Greatness, of Figure, or of Substance; But see here how we
ought to conceive it. Let us first of all consider what the Body is.

What the Body is.
The Body is a Portion of the common Matter of the World, united by an intimate
Contiguity to all the rest of the visible World, disposed and ranged through a
mavelous meeting together of Bones, of Nerves, of Membranes, of Cartilages,
of Arteries, of Veins, of Muscles, of Bowels and of Flesh, in a Structure full
of Harmony, whereby all the Parts are united to one common Center, which is the
Brain, wrapped up in Membranes, and distributed and divided into its diverse
Compartments proper to receive and to retain the Traces and the Impressions
which the other Bodies which environ it, make perpetually upon it, and proper
likewise to determine all the Muscles and all the Members, every one to the
Movement for the which it is destined, when they themselves come to be
determined.

That neither our Souls do come of themselves to lay hold on the Body, nor does
the Body cause the Soul to descend; but it is God who assembles them together.
There you see how I conceive the Body; And whereas we have conceived the Soul
as a Nature purely. Spiritual, capable of Perceiving, of Knowing and of
Willing; We have no more to do, than to see how this Spiritual Nature can
become united to that Terrestrial Structure. Whereupon the first thing that is
to be conceived, is, That neither the Body can lay hold on the Soul, or draw it
to it, for to subject it, and for to shut it up; Nor can the Soul on its side
neither be driven by any Inclination, to become poured upon the Body, nor
become tied there of it self, by its Choice and Good liking, as being to be so
ill matched. We must therefore comprehend before all things, that these two
Parties, and these two so far distant Natures, do neither of themselves, by
consent, and by an appointed Rendezvous, assemble, nor by Chance do they meet
together; but that it is the Infinite Power (which Governs the World, and which
would have it be adorned by the Beauty of this so rare and singular a Work)
which, as Faith teaches, and all the World conceives, brings them together,
and assembles them, and makes all the Union that is between them.

St. Augustine most solidly observes, That God makes three Functions for our
sakes, That of the Creator of the Matter of our Bodies, and of the Substance of
our Souls; That of the Author of the Structure and Organisation of our Bodies;
And lastly, That of the Principle of the Union of the two Parties, and of the
two Natures, which compose Us, Creator, Fictor, Unitor. He is as essentially
the efficient and immediate Principle of the Union of our Souls, and of our
Bodies, as he is of the Structure of the Body, and of the Creation of the Soul;
There is no other Power in the World, that can shut up this Immaterial,
Immortal and Eternal Nature, within that Terrestrial and Carnal Structure. This
is a certain Truth, we read it in our own proper Sentiments, and in the
infallible Light of the notion of the Soul and of the Body; and there is
nothing in the World more undoubtable than this Principle, That it is God that
unites our Souls to our Bodies, and I believe no Man will disagree with it; and
the Question is not Whether he does it, but How he does it.

CHAP. IX.
How God can assemble and unite the Soul and the Body.
GOD cannot without doubt, Unite these two so opposite Natures, but in such a
manner, that they may be United and Assembled; so that we must see first of
all, how a Spirit and a Body may be Assembled and United. Men fall into a
thousand Errors upon this matter, and all these Errors happen, because they
will apply the Idea, which they have of the Union of two or more Bodies, to the
Union of the Soul and Body; which is the greatest mistake in the World, and the
entire Subsersion of Reason and good Sense; for it is evident, that the Union
of a Spirit with a Spirit, cannot be conceived by the Idea of the Union of a
Body with a Body; so likewise, the Union of a Spirit with a Body, cannot be
comprehended by the Idea, which we have of the Union of two Bodies. We must
shun this defect and disorder, and give attention to this certain and
infallible Rule, That Union being a Relation of one thing to another, it
follows, that she must change the Nature and the Idea, according to the Nature
of the Things which are United; and thus to conceive an Union of a Spirit and a
Body, we must comprehend wherein and whereby these two Natures may be united.

How two Spirits may be united.
That we may well form an Idea thereof, We must first of all conceive the Union
of two Spirits; for when we shall have comprehended how two Spirits may be
united, we shall with much more ease comprehend the Union of a Bound die a
Spirit.

If we give good attention thereto, we shall find that there being nothing in a
Spiritual Nature, but Knowledge, Sentiment and Will (for there is nothing
precisely, but That which we know in Spiritual created Natures) It is
impossible to conceive the Union of two Spirits, otherwise than by the Union of
their Thoughts, of their Sentiments, and of their Wills. Things cannot be
united, but by that which is in them, and there being nothing in Spirits, but
this triple ground of the Faculty of Thinking, or of Knowing, of the Faculty of
Perceiving, which is it self a manner of the Faculty of Knowing; And lastly, Of
the faculty of Willing, and freely determining themselves: It is clear, that
two Spirits cannot be united, but by the Faculties, and by the Acts and
Faculties of Thinking, Perceiving, and of Willing.

That which makes precisely the Union of two Spirits.
But this is not enough to have found and conceived, that two Spirits cannot be
united, but by their Faculties of Thinking, of Knowing, and of Willing; we must
see also wherein the Union of the two Faculties of Thinking, and the two
Faculties of Perceiving, and of the two Faculties of Willing, may consist.
Wherein then may this Union consist? It cannot without doubt consist, but in
the mutual respective and reciprocal dependence of the Faculties and their
Acts: If we conceive that an Angel thinks necessarily, as often as another
Angel thinks, that he has a Sentiment of Pleasure and of Pain, of Joy or of
Sadness, as often as the other is sad or rejoices; That he has a motion of
love or of hatred, as often as the other loves or hates: We shall conceive
without doubt, these two Angels united, and united in an Hypostatical Union, or
in Unity of Person, and in a Substantial and Physical Union, especially if this
dependence of Thought, of Sentiment, and of Will, be of the one side mutual and
reciprocal, and on the other, not voluntary and arbitrary, but necessary and
forced, caused by a Superior Power, which leaves them not the liberty of
breaking the Band of this mutual dependence.

This mutual, and not arbitrary dependence, caused by that Empire, and that
Physical Action of a Superior Power, will so unite these two Spirits, that it
will be no longer a simple Angel, but a Compositum wholly Spiritual of two
Angels, which will make no more than one single Whole in two individual
Substances, altogether distinct: Such a mutual dependence, makes precisely all
the Physical Union that can be, betwixt two Spirits; since cutting off all
other Ideas, by that alone these two Angels will be comprehended to be united,
and not conceiving That, though we may conceive other Things between these two
Angels, It will however be impossible to conceive them United, for it is
impossible to conceive any other Thing, whereby two Spirits may be united; we
must not here imagine Embracings, Penetration, Minglings, Extensions, or
Adjustments of Magnitude or of Quantity.

Wherein the union of a Spirit, and a Body may consist.
It is in that precisely, that the Union of two Spirits can consist, and it is
easy to conceive thereupon the Idea of the Union of a Body and of a Spirit;
for if we conceive a Mutual and Reciprocal Dependence, caused by the Physical
Action of a Superior Power, between the movements of that Structure of Bone, of
Flesh, and of Nerves, which we call Humane Body; And between the Thoughts, the
Sentiments, the Wills, or desires of a Spirit; we conceive this Spirit and this
Body united, and as making no more than one single Whole, and one single
Person.

Whatsoever other Things we may fancy to our selves, we can never thereby at
all, conceive a Spirit united to a Body; but in the moment that we have
conceived that Thing only, we have conceived them United: For what is it to be
United, but to be One; but to become one and the same Whole? And who sees not,
that all This Results from the Mutual Dependence of the Operations of a Soul,
and of the Motions of the Body? Let Us not then go about to make impossible
Efforts of Imagination, for to conceive the Union of the Soul with the Body, by
a kind of a Co-extension or Local Circumscription of the Soul with the Body, by
a Kind of Mingling, of Penetration, of Confusion, and Immediation, by an
adjustment of Figure, and Magnitudes, etc. All this would be well, between Body
and Body; but concerning the Union of a Spiritual Nature, with a Corporal
Structure of Flesh, of Bones, of Muscles of Nerves; all these material Ideas
ought to be removed and banished a great way off.

God was pleased to do himself honor, by this admirable Composition of Spirit,
and of Body; and having found that it was agreeable to his Dignity of Universal
Cause, to tie together the determination of Ideas (by the which, he was willing
that we should by little and little, and successively be Enlightened) to the
diversity of Impressions, which should be made upon our Brain, by the diverse
Objects which should strike upon it; and to tie together the Determination of
diverse Sentiments (by the which he was willing, that we should be Advertised by
way of Instinct, of that which should be good or evil to our Body) to diverse
Impressions which should affect it; he has Established this mutual Relation,
That when these Impressions are received in the Body, there is so soon, and at
the same time, by his infinite Efficacy, conformable Sentiments and Ideas,
which are determined in the Soul, and on the contrary, as often as there is in
the Soul, Thoughts, and Sentiments, or Wills, that require that the Body should
be moved, if its Structure be well disposed, the Motion is by the same Efficacy
of his infinite Power, determined in the Body.

The Creator has thought fit to conserve thereby, the Dignity of the Universal
Cause, and to unite our Souls to all the Visible World, in tying Them to a
particular Body, by a Physical and Substantial Union. Our Souls lose something
thereby, even very much of their Natural Liberty, but they conserve some
Character of their Grandeur, by the Immensity, by which their Union with the
Body renders them present to all the Immensity of the Universe; since by the
contiguity of all Bodies, which compose the World, without any interruption of
vacuity, they continually receive a Thousand and a Thousand diverse Ideas, from
all its parts, in proportion as they come, (which they continually do by their
Motions, or by their Fluxes) Either to strike or to affect some one of the
Parts of our Body.

This Decision ought to pass for a Demonstration.
I will not stay here to prove that it is God the Author of Nature, or acting
as Universal Cause, who makes, and who entertains by his continual Action, this
Mutual Dependence, and this Reciprocal Relation: Since besides, that I have
already let you see clearly, That it is He alone, who can be the immediate and
efficient Principle and Cause of the Union of our Souls and of our Bodies,
because the Body can neither subject the Soul to be united to it, nor can the
Soul be willing to submit to the Body, which humbles and constrains it: I
have moreover proved very evidently, That none but God alone can give to the
Soul, the Sentiments and Ideas which she has, from the occasion of the
Impressions which are made upon the Body, by other Bodies, which environ Us,
and which Act perpetually upon Us.

This continual Action of the Author of Nature, who Enlightens Us by the Ideas,
which we receive upon the occasion of that Impression of exterior Objects, and
who affectionates Us to the Conservation of the Body, by the agreeable or
disagreeable Sentiments which he gives Us, for to make Us know by way of
Instinct, that which is profitable or hurtful to the Conservation of our
Bodies, and of Human Species; This Action I say, joined to that, by which he
Moves our Bodies, when our Thoughts and our Wills require it, is properly the
Action, by the which He unites our Bodies to our Souls, and our Souls to our
Bodies; This is the active or actual Union; This is what the Schools call the
Unitive Action of God, which joined to the immutable Decree and Will, by the
which he has determined to continue it, so long as the Structure of the Body
shall subsist, makes in the Soul and in the Body, that Estate of Union which we
call Passive and formal Union.

Against them who say that this is to have recourse to a Miracle.
And you must not come here again, to say that it is a manner very easy to
explain every thing by a Miracle, and to call God to the support of our
Ignorance; For so far it is from being contrary to Rules, to make God the
Author of our Union with the Body, That this is the first Rule of good
Reasoning, That we acknowledge the Cause and the Principle in the Effect, and
to see that God alone can unite two Natures so opposite and disproportionate,
as are Spirit and Body, as he only can Create them: Moreover, so far it is from
having recourse to Miracles, That it is on the contrary, to reduce the Thing to
all Common Laws, to say, that it is God the Author of Nature, the necessary
Principle of this Union, who, that he may conserve this Dignity of Universal
Cause, establishes in the diverse Modifications of a certain Part of the Body,
the occasional Cause of the Idea's, and of the Sentiments of the Soul, which is
the most Regular manner of Acting, The most Natural and most conformable to his
ordinary manner of Acting, and by consequence, the most contrary to Miracle,
which is not, but when God changes his ordinary manner of Acting, and departs
from his general Will.

The Action whereby God preserves the Union, is continual.
As to the rest, let us not fear that God is too much Employed, and has too
many Affairs, than continually to entertain This Union by his perpetual Action,
multiplied and diversified into so many Manners, in determining so many
Sentiments and Thoughts, or Idea's on one part in the Souls, and so many
Motions on the other part in the Bodies to the Souls liking; for this Supreme
Agent, who Animates, and who Essentially moves the Universe, who gives Life to
every Thing that Lives, Motion to every Thing that is Moved, Thought to every
Thing that Thinks, and Light to every Thing that is Enlightened, is in no wise
encumbered by so much Action: It is on the contrary, his Essence and his Nature
to Act thus continually, and to be Equally the Soul of the Corporeal, as well
as of the Intelligible World, to be equally applied to the one and to the
other; To the one for to Entertain and direct its Motions, to the other for to
Englighten all its Thoughts, and to Determine its Sentiments, or its sensible
Modifications: Pater meus usque modo operatur.

As God conserves Things by a new Creation, renewed every Instant, or to say
better, always continued, so he Entertains the Union of Souls and Bodies, by
that continual Application which he has of Acting on one part on the Souls, in
Enlightening them diversely from the occasion of Impressions, which external
Objects, or the internal Course of the Animal Spirits, make continually in our
Brains; and on the other part upon Bodies, in determining their Motions
according to the occasion of the Thoughts of the Sentiments, and of the Wills
of the Soul.

Union can be nothing else.
Let us not fear then, Let us not at all fear, that God is fatigued with so
grand an Exercise, nor that it is unworthy of him, to be thus always Employed
upon Nature, and upon his Workmanship; since it is on the contrary, not only
his Pleasure and his Glory, but the Essential Act of his Supreme Nature also;
But let Us comprehend that no other Idea can make Us conceive the Union of our
Souls with our Bodies: For let us not believe that the Body and the Soul can be
united like two Liquors, or like two Metals, which are melted one with the
other; Let us not conceive that this Union can be made like the Union of Bodies
to Bodies, which are made either by an unctuous or viscous humor, which binds
the Parts of them together, or by Nails, Pegs and Joints; Let Us not imagine
here any Thing that is material; Let Us cut off every Thing which presents it
self Corporeal to our Spirit; Let Us conceive precisely this mutual and
necessary Dependence, and having conceived thereby the Union of our Souls and
of our Bodies, We shall find that we have comprehended the manner, how our
Souls are in our Bodies. They are not there by a Local and Corporeal
Circumscription; They are not there as Liquor is in the Vessel, as the Bird is
within the Nest, or in his Cage, or as the Body is in the Air, which environs
it; They are there as God is in the World, in which we must so conceive Him, as
that we must conceive Him, says St. Augustine, much more containing than
contained; Let us remember, that tho the Nature of the Soul is a Spiritual
Nature, which does as essentially exclude Local Extention, and by consequence,
all sorts of Idea's of Local Presence, such as we commonly conceive under the
Corporeal Immages of Immediation of Proportion, and of Co-extention of
Substances, as it does essentially include the Grounds, and the Acts of the
knowing Faculty: Bodies have their proper fashion of Being within Places, and
Spirits have theirs likewise. There is nothing of likeness between the one and
the other; And from the moment that you shall conceive the manner how a Spirit
is within a Place, by any thing resembling the manner, how do you conceive that
Bodies are in their Places? Say, and hesitate not, that you deceive your
selves, since you confound the Things of the World, which are most distinct,
and by confounding Them, you subvert and destroy both Corporeal and Spiritual
Nature.

The Doctrine of Thomas Aquinas.
Thomas Aquinas says very well, that Spirits are not in Bodies, or in a
Corporeal Spirit, but in two manners; Either by the Action which they exercise
upon certain Bodies, or certain Corporeal Spaces; Or by the Action which they
suffer, and which they receive upon the Occasion of certain Bodies; which is
the manner how the Devils are in the Fire of Hell, whose Motion they determine
by the Empire of their Will, upon the Occasion where of they are penetrated
with an intimate Sentiment of Burning by the Supreme Power and Justice which
punishes them. This Idea of Thomas Aquinas is just and exact, and it is thus we
ought to conceive that our Souls are in our Bodies; They are not there but
because they have the greatest part of their Thoughts and of their Idea's, and
all their Sentiments of Pleasure and of Pain, by the Occasion of the Body; and
because that they Act upon the Body by the Action of their Will, which removes
them and moves them in the manner that has been said already.

They are no otherwise in the Body: Every thing that we shall conceive beyond
this, will be False, Contradictory, Impossible, and Chimerical; they will only
be Corporeal Images, of which there is not any one that can agree to the Soul,
and to the manner how she is in the Body: For it is with the manner how the
Soul is in the Body, as it is with the Soul it self; we cannot comprehend it,
as often as we conceive it by Imagination; what Corporeal Image soever we may
make of it, under what Material Form soever we may conceive it, it is not at
all the Soul that we do conceive. And it is the same with the manner how the
Soul is in the Body; From the moment that we imagine it, it is no more That
which we imagine it; for to imagine, is to conceive under a Corporeal Form and
Image, and it is impossible to conceive any thing Corporeal in the Soul, either
in the Foundation and Substance, or in the Accidents of it. The manner how the
Soul is in the Body, is altogether as Spiritual, as is the Substance of the
Soul. And all these Idea's which conceive the manner how the Soul is in the
Body, with any Resemblance with the manner how Bodies are in Corporeal Spaces,
are False, Chimerical, and Monstrous Idea's, because they conceive the Soul as
Corporeal.

In what part the Soul is, and whether it be in all the Body.
If it be demanded after this, In what part of the Body the Soul is, or Whether
she is in all the Body? The Question will not be difficult to resolve, because
there needs no more than to apply the Principle of Thomas Aquinas, of the
manner how Spirits are in Places; because it will make us easily to comprehend
without any Corporeal Image or Material Imagination, That all the Soul is in
all the Body, and all of it in all the Essential and Integral Parts of the
Body, as God is all in all the World, and in all the Parts of the World; not by
that Co-extension, and and Local Chimerical Presence, which gross Spirits do
imagine, but by the Intimate Presence of his Sovereign Essence, Essentially
Operating in all the World, and in all the Parts of the World. We must say the
same of the Soul, that it is in all the Body, by the Relation of its Dependence
and Activity.

But this does not hinder but that we may say, That she is more properly and
more particularly in the Brain, since it is by that Part that the Action of the
Soul upon the Body immediately commences, and that all the Action of the Body
upon the Soul terminates wholly in that Part; as it sensibly appears by that
which interrupts and suspends the Action of the Soul upon the Body, and the
Action of the Body upon the Soul: For as often as it happens, that the Action
of the Body upon the Soul is interrupted, it is because there is some
relaxation, or some obstruction in some of the Nerves, which hinders the Motion
from being continued in the Part affected of the Body as far as the Brain; and
when the Action of the Soul upon the Body is interrupted, as when the Soul
would move the Paralytick Foot, but cannot at all move it: It is likewise
because the Motion which begins always by the Brain, or by the determination of
the Nerves, which have their Origin in the Brain, or if you will, by that most
subtle Portion of the Blood, which we call Animal Spirits, cannot be continued
so far as to that diseased Part.

But after having Explained the manner how our Souls Are in our Bodies, which
gives us so lively an Idea of our Dependence upon the Supreme Being, and upon
all his Divine Attributes, we must now see how our Souls Operate in our Bodies,
and observe all the Differences of our diverse Operations, for the clearing
every thing that may have any difficulty, and require Day and Light, for the
better apprehending the Sovereign Per^^^ (...) of the Supreme Nature; (the
which Operates continually in us, and Rules over us so many ways, in all our
diverse Operations) and the Essential Subjection and Limitation of all created
Natures, which do in so many ways depend upon this Supreme Nature.

CHAP. X.
What the Soul does in the Body, and what it does not.
WE observe first of all, That there are in Us the Operations or Acts of the
Body, and the Operations or Acts of the Soul; for there are things which the
Body does in Us, and things which the Soul does in the Body.

This is a certain Rule, That the Soul does not do any thing which she does not
perceive that she does, and that she does every thing that she perceives that
she does. Thus we may say with Assurance, That our Souls do not make the
Digestion in Us, the Circulation of the Blood, the Natural and purely Animal
Respiration in Us, the Separation of the Chyle, which is the prepared Juice of
concocted and digested Victuals in the Stomach, together with the Faeces or
gross Matter which is discharged into the Bowels, the Motion of the Heart, of
the Veins and of the Arteries, the Ebullitions and Fermentations of the Blood,
and of that Matter which provokes carnal Concupiscence. It is moreover certain,
That the Souls do not make, neither the Preparation of Spirits, either Vital or
Animal, nor the Continuation of the Motion or of the Impression of External
Objects, which are carried by the Nerves, as by little well stretched Chords,
from all the Circumference of the Body to the most Integral part of the Brain,
as to the common Center of all its Structure and all its Organization, nor the
retracement of Objects which is made in the bottom of the Eye in the Retina, or
that which is made in that part of the Brain which is the Organ of that which
we call the Common and Internal Sense; It is sure that they do not make the
Relaxation of the Muscles and of the Nerves, which cause the Tympanum to be
relaxed, with all the Nerves which serve to Hearing, and the Optic Nerves
which serve to the Sight, from whence Sleep comes; That they do not cause
Fevers, the Stone, the Gout, the Cholique, the Bloody Flux, Palsies,
Obstructions, Apoplexies, and Diseases in general: Our Souls do nothing of all
this, these are the Acts of the Body, or its Alterations, and its Passions; for
although the Perception and the Sentiments of the Soul do accompany some one of
these Effects, she feels and perceives them in such a manner, that she
perceives at the same time that they go before and precede her Sentiments and
her Perception; and that being so, she does not at all Cause them; Much better
does she perceive that she has Essentially the Empire over every thing that
she does, and that she has none at all over all these things.

That our Souls do not Operate out of themselves, but by Will; and cause not in
Us neither Heat nor Digestion, nor any Corporeal Effect.
There are some who conceive our Souls as the Physical and Immediate Causes of
that Heat, for Example, which Concocts and Digests the Meat in our Stomach, and
which keeps in our Blood that degree of ardor and quickness which is necessary,
to the end that it may spread abroad the Nourishment, and maintain Motion in
all the Body; They conceive the Soul of Man as having formally the Vegetable
Faculty which nourishes, and which causes the Body to increase, by the which,
as Thomas Aquinas says, we are rather Plants than Men: And this is what they
express by that common manner of Speaking, when they say that our Souls are not
only Reasonable but Vegetable, or Vegetating. But as we ought not to conceive
or say any thing of our Souls, but that which we find included and contained in
the Idea and Notion which give us the Sentiment which we have of them, and that
this is a certain sure Rule, by which we ought to guide our Opinions and our
Judgments, Not to Judge but according to our Light, not finding at all in that
Idea of our Soul, which gives us that intimate Sentiment which we have of it,
that our Soul has any such Virtue to do it Immediately; and notwithstanding
any other Virtue and Faculty that she may have for it, we do not at all believe
that it ought to be attributed to her.

We experience in our Soul no other Power, nor no other Virtue upon Body, than
that of being able to move that Structure of Bone, of Flesh, and of Nerves,
which we call our Body, and thereby other Bodies to which we do apply it: So
likewise she has not the Power to make and determine all the Motions of the
Body; She can do nothing, and she does nothing (as has been already said) in
the Vital and Natural Motions: There are none but the Motitions which we call
Animal or Voluntary, that she can determine by her Empire. There needs no other
Proof of this here, than that which we draw from our Sentiment, which is the
only bright and clear Light which Enlightens us in the Knowledge of our Soul;
for we ought not to conceive any thing of her, but that which we Experience of
her, and that which evidently follows from that Experience: And it is certain,
that that Vegetating Faculty, and that Virtue of Heating the Meat and the
Blood, is neither found nor perceived, nor does follow from any thing that is
found and perceived, in the Soul.

But besides this Reason, there is this farther evident Conviction that is
drawn from two Principles, from a Principle of St. Augustine, which is, That the
Acting or Operating Soul is always free, as the Receiving Soul is never so: And
from the Principle of Essential Certainty which the Soul has of her self, and
of every thing that is done in her, and much more of that which is done by her,
which is that which we have acknowledged to make the Foundation or the Ground
of the Knowing Nature; For it follows from these two Principles, That if the
Soul was the Cause of the Heat of the Stomach and of the Blood, of the
Formation and of the Distribution of the Chyle, and the like, in Us, she would
have Essentially the Sentiment and the Perception of it, because she
Essentially perceives every thing that she does; And not only the Perception,
but the Empire, because she has Essentially the Empire over every thing that
she does, as Acting according to S. Augustin's Observation; that is to say,
That she can increase or diminish Heat, That she can advance or retard
Digestion, and make it as she pleases: For this is an intimate Sentiment which
we have from our selves, That we are Free in the things that we have the Power
and Virtue of doing by the Active Faculty. Our Soul perceives her Liberty in
all the things whereof she is the Cause and the Principle. There is nothing
which we certainly know, but the Soul is the Active Cause and the Principle of
it, of which she has gained the Empire either to do or not to do, as she
pleases.

We have no more to do than to reflect upon the Faculty which she has of
Thinking or of Willing, and of Determining her self, which are the two only
Active Faculties that we know in her; for the others are Passive and Receptive
Faculties, if I may so say. And we shall see, that the Soul has Essentially
the Empire as well as the Certainty of that double Faculty, and of all the Acts
which proceed therefrom; We shall see that she suspends her Thoughts and her
Reasonings, That she puts them by, That she determines and applies them to
Matters as she pleases; And we shall see that she is in the same manner
Mistress of her Will, (without the Motion that carries her toward God in
general) if she be not preoccupy'd and transported with some Passion or other.
Now the Soul has neither the Sentiment nor the Certainty of the Act and Virtue
of Healing, of Concocting, and of Digesting, nor the Empire over them; For
neither do we any ways perceive that our Soul Exercises these Functions, nor
have we Power to suspend or to advance them; if we had the Power, we should
always without doubt make a very good and laudable Digestion, and we should
always take heed of producing in our selves any excessive Heat; this would
deliver us from all the Distempers of the Bowels, and from all the ill
Consequences which follow thereupon. In my Opinion, there is nothing more
insupportable than this gross Idea, of having the Soul to be the Formal or
Physical Cause of the Heat which is in our Bodies, because that besides that
the Soul cannot be the Formal Cause of Heat, since nothing can be the Formal
Cause of Heat but that which is hot; Nor likewise can it be the Efficient or
Physical Cause, since it is impossible to conceive that a Spirit should produce
Heat, and yet we not at all know in our Souls any other Virtue of Operating out
of themselves, than that of moving the Body by Empire and by Will, as has been
said, and by them other Bodies to whom they apply themselves: It is certain
that there is nothing more ridiculous, than to imagine and to conceive our Soul
as an Enemy to her self, in refusing Heat sometimes, even to a general Decay
and Languishing of the whole Body, and at other times increasing it even to a
frightful Conflagration of the Blood and Humors, of the Bowels, and of all the
Viscera which serve to keep up the Life of the Body. This we must acknowledge
for certain and indubitable, That there are a thousand things done in Us, which
are only (if I may so say) but the Acts of of the Body and its Life.

How there is a Corporeal Act of Seeing, Hearing, and Smelling, which is alike
in Man and Beast.
This is extremely remarkable; for it follows from hence, That as there is in
Us a Material Principle of Vegetation, or a Vegetative Life, which the Soul
does not Cause; so there is likewise a certain kind of Acts, of Seeing, of
Hearing, of Tasting, of Smelling, of Touching, of Self-moving, or of
Sensibility in the Body, in which the Soul has not any part, to which she does
not influence any thing, and of which she has not so much as a Sentiment: For
when the Image reflected from the Superficies of a Body which is before us, by
the Rays of Light which result from all the Points of its Exterior Superficies,
is en graven in that subtle, thin Web, formed in the bottom of our Eye, from
the Extremities of the delicate Threads of the Optic Nerve, which makes an end
of carrying to the Brain the Material Image which it has received, the Soul so
far meddles not at all; and this Action may very well be called the Act of
Seeing, or Corporeal Vision, because it cannot be carried into the Brain, but
it must there engrave the Corporeal Image of the Object which is before us, and
it must affect it after a certain particular Fashion, which is capable to
determine a Motion either of Flight or Pursuit, without the Souls meddling with
it in any manner, as we see every day happens by the force and vehemence of
certain sudden Impressions, which make us shun or approach in spite of our
selves, and which make us either open or shut our Eyelids, or turn to, or turn
away our Face, whatsoever Determination we have to the contrary. It is in the
same manner with the Acts of Tasting, Hearing and Moving; For Odors, for
Example, being received through the Os cribriformis into the Olfactory Nerve,
do there determine a Motion which may lead on and determine another in the
Nerves and Muscles, which answer to the Olfactory Nerve, without the Souls
meddling, or taking any part therein; and the Body does then feel Odor
Corporeally, and moves it self either by withdrawing or approaching, according
as the Odor withdraws or approaches. Noise, or the Pulsation of the Air, causes
the same thing in the Organ of Hearing; The sudden noise of the Report of a
Pistol, or of a sudden Ruin, makes us fly and tremble, before the Soul
perceives it. The Body has also its proper Action of Tasting and of Touching,
which precedes that of the Soul; And this is that which makes the Sensitive
Life and Knowledge proper to Beasts: It is very truly said, That they Taste,
that they Understand, that they are Sensible, provided that in so saying we do
not at all understand that they see as we do, with any certainty either of
themselves, or of their Objects or their Acts.

Thus we may likewise place in Beasts all the Passions; for there are in Us
Corporeal Motions, which precede, and which accompany those Emotions of our
Souls which we call Passions. And as the Names of Passions may very well be
given to these Corporeal Emotions which are in our Bodies, before those of our
Souls, which are raised up upon their Occasion, it is certain that it is not
ill said, That Animals have Joys, Sorrows, Desires, etc. since they have all
the Corporeal Emotions which we have in the Resentments of Joy, of Sorrow, of
Pleasure and of Pain, with which our Soul is agitated.

Our Soul then does not either do any thing of that which in our Senses
precedes her Sensation or her Perception and Certainty, or any thing of that
which precedes in any part of the Body whatsoever, her Emotion, or her lively
Resentment in her Passions. The Soul does never any thing but what is
Spiritual, she never does any thing that is Corporeal. Every Configuration of
Body, every Emotion of Body, every Movement of Body, is the proper Act or
Passion of Body, and is never the proper Act of the Soul. We do not know in our
Soul any Faculty of Acting out of her self but by the Will; Every thing that
she does is Essentially in her, she is not capable but of those sorts of Acts
which the Schoolmen call Immanent; and as all these Acts are of the same Nature
with her, since they are Essentially received in her, so no Corporeal Act can
ever be her proper and immediate Act; A Corporeal Act may be an Act commanded
by her, but it can never be an Act done in her and by her, which is that we
call her Elicite Act; And it is easy for us by this Principle, infallibly to
discern what the Body and what the Soul do in Us.

A Rule to discern what the Body does without any Cooperation with the Soul,
and what the Soul does in the Body.
This Rule is certain, and will never deceive, That every Act by the which we
formally have an indubitable Certainty of our selves, is an Act and Operation
of the Spirit; and Every Act which does not bear in us that Certainty, but only
makes some change in the Humors or in the solid Parts of our Bodies, is an Act
and Operation of Body. And by this Rule, as to Sleep, to Digest, to have Health
or a Fever, to have the Gout or the Stone, etc. are Acts or Operations, or
Passions and Alterations of Bodies: So to Perceive Objects, to be Passionated
with any Desire, with any Fear, or with any like Emotion, to be Sensible of
Heat and Cold, White and Black, Sweet and Bitter, to Imagine, to Remember,
Judge, Doubt, Compare, Reflect, Infer, Speculate, Deliberate, to Reason, and
Conceive the abstracted and universal Notions of things, to be sensible of
Duty, to have Remorse, to determine it self to Love or Hate, etc. are
Essentially the Acts of the Soul.

That Pleasure and Pain are in the Soul, and not in the Body.
It is very important well to observe this Rule, because there are some who are
so gross, that they have not any neat and distinct Idea, that they know not in
the least how to Explain the proper Operations of the Soul, and the proper
Operations of the Body. How many are there of them likewise, who confound these
things so Essential to be distinguished? How many are there who believe (for
Example) that it is the Body that has the Pleasure of Drinking, of Eating, and
of being Warmed, and generally all the Pleasures, which are not in the Soul but
upon the account of the Body? If they had reflected, they would have seen
plainly, that these sorts of Pleasures give us an entire Certainty of our
selves, and that so they are Acts of a Knowing Nature: They will see moreover,
that they affect that part which Reasons, and which Determines it self freely
in us, which all the World conceive as Spiritual, and every one well knows it
to be the Soul; But what shall we do in this Case? It is that Curse, which
being thrown upon the Serpent, fell upon the Spirit and the Heart of Man, and
which Operates, and will Operate as well as the Benediction of Fruitfulness given
to the Earth, even to the end. Men will have always an infinite difficulty to
reflect upon themselves, and to raise themselves up to the Knowledge of their
Spiritual Nature, Super ventrem tuum Gradieris; Upon thy belly shall thou go,
etc.

If Habits, whether of Sciences or of Virtues, are in the Body or in the Soul.
There presents it self here, upon the occasion of what has been said, a
Question which it imports us to clear up and decide; which is, To know in what
part of the Soul or Body the Habits, whether of Virtue or of Science, do
reside, which ought to be a fruitful Principle of most important Moral
Consequences; For although there can be no Question made, as to the Acts of
Science and of Virtue, which are indubitably in the Soul, yet there is
nevertheless a true Question which ought to be cleared, as to the Subject of
Habits.

The Habits of Sciences and of Virtues do indubitably subsist partly in the
Body, since it is certain with regard to Sciences, that they subsist partly by
the Memory, and that the Memory depends upon the Corporeal Organ, as shall be
said more at large: And so in the same manner with respect to Virtues; It is
sure that they are not settled into Habits, but by the Faculty and the
Disposition which the Soul acquires of Practicing the Acts thereof, and of
fulfilling the Duties of them; which she does not acquire, but by a certain
profound Impression of the lively Images of Duties which deface the Images of
the difficulty of their Acts, which are commonly taken from the resistance of
the Body, or of the Inclinations which are entailed upon the Body; this is the
cause that there must necessarily be some change which happens in the Brain,
and in the Corporeal Species and Images, which determine the Thoughts and the
Affections of the Soul, as often as we establish in Us the Habit of one Virtue:
For Example, It is impossible that the Virtue and the Habit of Continence
should be established, without that the Images of Pleasure, which were engraven
in the Brain by deep Traces and Impressions, come to be as it were defaced by
new Images and new Impressions, which give to the Soul the power and the
liberty of suspending and turning away the Thoughts of Pleasure, and of
determining the Motions of the Spirits and of the Nerves, to a side opposite to
that which would cause the impure Blood and Humors to flow into those places
where Concupiscence is set on fire.

It is almost the same thing with all other Virtues, they have need that the
Imagination should be subjected to them; and as the Organ of the Imagination is
Corporeal, so there is no Virtue whose Habit does not subsist partly in the
Organ of the Imagination, for to keep it tame and submiss; So it is out of
question, that all the Habits, whether of Sciences or of Virtues, are partly in
the Body: There will be some who perhaps will maintain, that they are There
entirely; but the surest way is to say, that they are partly in the Body, and
partly in the Soul. In the Body, for the Sciences, it is the Order, the
Connection, and the Enchaining of Corporeal Species, which serve to that which
we call Memory; And for the Virtues, it is the Imagination purified, or the
Brain imprinted with Corporeal Traces and Images, which make us think more
strongly upon the Duties of Virtue, than upon Pleasures which are contrary to
it: And in the Soul it is, for the Sciences, the train of Consequences well
formed in their Principles, and the facility which Reason has there to
exercise it self, and to employ it self there: And for the Virtues, it is the
natural love of Uprightness, fortified above the Instinct of Conscience, by the
reflection and by the taste of Reason, from whence is formed in the Soul a
Disposition of force against the Pleasures which Concupiscence may oppose
against it.

How Grace Operates upon the Body.
This is a sure Decision, and may be applied to Supernatural Virtues; for
supernatural Virtues as well as Natural, have need that the Imagination should
be purified. Grace can enter immediately through the Soul, though for the most part
she immediately enters by the Imagination; but whether she enters immediately
by the Soul, or that she does not, she Acts necessarily at least by a
Counter-blow upon the Body, that is to say, upon the Organ of the Imagination;
And it is impossible that our Heart should be pure and innocent, if our
Imagination is impure and defiled, or overruled by the Images of the World, of
Vanity and of Pleasure; from whence is formed a Principle of Christian Morality
very fruitful and very remarkable, which makes us see at once the indispensible
necessity of the constant and continual Practice and Observation of all the
Gospel, as it would be easy to justify it, by an exact and particular
Examination hereof, if we had proposed here any other thing than to give
Overtures and Principles.

There needs no more to be said of it, for to have a sure Discernment of the
Acts of the Body and of the Acts of the Soul; and there is no more Question,
but to observe the proper Differences of the Operation of the Soul; Let us
follow them one after another.

CHAP. XI.
Operations depending, and Operations independing upon the Body.
WE observe Secondly in us, in the proper Operations of the Soul, Operations
which do depend upon the Body, and Operations which do not depend upon the
Body; For we Experience that there are Acts in us which we have independently
of all Disposition of the Body, as the Acts of the Will, which is the necessary
and invincible love of Good in general; but it is not after the same manner,
neither with those of the Liberty of our Heart, which is the Power that we have
to determine our selves to Love or to Hate, to Fly or Pursue freely; Nor with
those of the Conscience, which do commonly presuppose Liberty; Nor with those
of Reasoning, which do all of them alike suppose a certain Disposition of a
just Organization, and of a just Temperament in the Body, without the which we
can neither exercise our Determinative Faculty, which is called Liberty, nor
the Sensibility of Duty, which we call Conscience, nor our Active Faculty of
Thinking, which we otherwise call the Faculty of Reasoning; from whence it
happens, that Sleeping or falling into Ravings through Diseases or through Madness,
we lose the very entire, and very free usage of these Faculties: Whereas, being
Fools or Mad, Well or Ill, Sleeping or Waking, we love always alike that which
is Good in general, and would all be happy and content. There is only This
Movement of our Will, which is entirely independent of the Disposition of the
Body, all the rest do more or less depend upon it; I say, more or less, because
there are diverse Degrees of the Dependence, which the Operations of the Soul
have upon our Bodies. The Acts of Perception, of Imagination, of Reminiscency,
and of Passionating ones self, depend thereupon much more than the Act of
Understanding or of Reasoning, and the Acts of Liberty and of Conscience, which
are the Faculties we have the most independent on the Disposition of the Body.
The Acts of Perceiving, of Imagining, etc. depend much more upon the
Disposition of the Body, than these three Faculties of Intellection or Reason,
of Liberty and of Conscience; because these three Faculties do not depend upon
it but indirectly and occasionally, or accidentally, inasmuch as their Acts
cannot be exercised in all their Perfection, if the Imagination be not calm and
sedate; For the Soul has no need of a certain positive Disposition of the
Body, or of a certain Determination which should happen to her from it, for to
determine her to conceive by pure Intellection, and to be sensible of Duty, but
only of not being troubled, diverted and transported by foolish and confused
Thoughts, which she conceives through the disorder of the Organ of the
Imaginative Faculty; This ought to make us comprehend how the Passions are
pernicious, since they all of them take away the Scepter and the Empire from
Reason, to give it to the Imagination, and that they give to this Faculty,
already rebellious and impure, and unruly enough of it self, a rapid and
untameable Motion, which infinitely augments its unruliness; But to Perceive,
to Imagine, to Remember, to Passionate it self, the Soul has need of being
necessarily determined by a certain Disposition and a certain Configuration of
the Brain, which ought to precede her Act of Imagining, of Perceiving, of
Passionating, and of calling to Mind by Memory, properly so called; This has
given place to the division of the Organical Faculties, and of the Inorganical
Faculties of the Soul, for we have believed that we might call those Organical,
which do not Operate but upon the occasion, and by the determination of a
particular Disposition of the Body.

CHAP. XII.
Acts voluntary, and Acts involuntary. Grief is involuntary, Despair is not.
WE observe in Us in the third place, Operations or Acts voluntary, and
Operations and Acts involuntary; For we Experience, that there are Things which
we do with the Will and by the Will; and Things which we do not do, neither by
the Will nor with the Will; as are for Example, the Acts of all kind of Pains;
for our Soul does in such manner receive Pain, by the invincible Empire of
Nature, that is to say, of that Power which governs Nature, and which rules
over it, that she does cause it in receiving it: It is in our Soul that Grief
is made, and there is nothing made in her, to which she does not contribute and
concur, and it is in spite of her, that she concurs to cause Grief in her self.
Grief is altogether involuntary, but it is not the same with the proper and
true Passion of Despair, as some have been pleased to say, for the Despair of
the Soul which sees and perceives the Impossibilities of avoiding Evil, and of
attaining the Good which she pursues; This dejection and this discouragement,
accompanied with this profound Sadness, and with this cruel Sentiment of
Privation, is truly and properly voluntary; because the Will is that Motion, by
which our Soul is driven on invincibly toward Good, to unite it to her self,
and to be united to it; This is the love of Good in general, and we ought to
call properly voluntary, every thing that comes from this love of Good, and
from the Motion which carries and drives us toward it; as its certain that
from thence comes Despair, as well as all the other resentments of the
Appetite; for we should not be so afflicted, penetrated, and overwhelmed with
the privation of Good, if we did not love it: This is that which made St.
Augustine say, That the Eternal Despair of the Reprobates in Hell, is a true
love of the Sovereign Good.

CHAP. XIII.
Acts Free and Acts Necessary. The Empire of God over Us.
WE observe in the fourth place, Acts Free, and Acts Necessary, for I
distinguish betwixt Free Acts and Voluntary Acts; every Thing that is Free is
Voluntary, but every Thing that is Voluntary is not Free. The Will is the
necessary and invincible Motion of our Soul toward Good; This is that
necessary love, and that invincible determination which we have for Good in
general, by the which we shun Evil, and every thing that hurts and afflicts us,
and we pursue sometimes one particular Good, and then another, as they more or
less immediately concern Us. You see there precisely what the Will is, as has
been already said; and to speak exactly, nothing is Voluntary, but what is made
in Us by the determination or flowing of this Motion, or of this general love
of Good, and every thing that is done by this Motion, is truly and properly
Voluntary; From whence it comes to pass, that all the Passions are Voluntary:
But there is something more wanting to make an Action Free.

Liberty is commonly confounded with the Will, but this is only by the ignorant
Vulgar, or by those who will not give themselves the trouble to reflect upon
the diversity of the Operations of the Soul. Liberty (to say truth) is
accompanied with the Will, which is that which gives occasion to the Confusion
which men make of these two Terms; But the Will is not precisely Liberty.
Liberty is precisely that Empire which we have of being able to determine our
selves, of which we have spoken in the beginning of this Treatise; and often
times we have not that Liberty in the Acts which flow from that Charm, by the
which the Supreme Being draws Us to him under the confused Idea of Good, which
is that we call the Will. There are Acts Voluntary which are not at all Free,
though all that are Free are Voluntary; and after this Observation, we must come
to observe the difference of our Free Acts and of our Necessary Acts, for the
difference of them is Essential and Important.

All the Acts of the Passions and of the Sensations, and all those of the
Imagination and of the Memory are properly Necessary, although often Voluntary;
They are never Free immediately and in themselves: They may be Free in a manner
afar off in the Will, which being able to prevent them, and to avoid them, in
removing the Objects afar off, or in shutting their Entry into their Senses,
yet does not do it; but they can never be Free properly and formally in
themselves, because it does not at all depend upon our Liberty or upon our
Will, to be sensible or not to be sensible of Heat or Cold, Green or Gray, when
the Objects of them are applied and are present to the perceptive Faculty of
the Soul: We may easily shut our Eyes, and not let that reflective Light to
enter in from the Superficies of the Object, which Engraves it self in our
Retina; We may easily shut our Eyelids and our Ears, we may stop our Nostrils,
and not put the Meat into our Mouths; But we cannot hinder the Impression of
Light, if once it is entered into our Eyes, nor that of Odor or Savor, if they
have affected those Nerves, which are proper to carry the Impression of them to
the Brain; We must necessarily have a living and penetrating Sense thereof; The
perception and certainty of an intimate and of an animated Experience which
affects Us, and penetrates Us to the bottom of our Soul, and which some express
very well, by the term of a lively and intimate modification of the Soul.

There is in Nature a Power which handles Us at its pleasure, and which Rules
over Us with an invincible Efficacy; it enters into the perceptive and
appetitive Faculty of our Soul, as it were vi and armis: It makes in Us,
without Us, and in spite of Us, a thousand Idea's, a thousand Sentiments, a
thousand Passions, and a thousand different Resentments: It is not only not in
our power, to cause in Us Heat or Cold, White or Black, the Idea of a Man, or
the Idea of a Lion; But it is not then in our power to shut the entry to these
Sentiments or to these Idea's; so long as the exterior Organs of our Senses are
open to the Corporeal Impressions of the Objects, which environ Us, we cannot
either suspend Pleasure or Pain, or any other Sentiments, or any of the Idea's
which we have upon the occasion of exterior Bodies, which Act upon Ours; Nor
can we make that that which causes Pain, should produce pleasure in Us, or what
gives Us the Sentiment of Green, should give Us that of Yellow; We cannot at
all change the qualiity of our Sentiments nor of our Idea's: There is nothing
Free in Us in that respect, all is Necessary, all is Forced, all comes from an
Empire, and from a Power invincible and inflexible.

God has been pleased to imprint in Us the Sentiment of his Likeness, by the
Liberty which he has given Us; But he has been pleased to give Us and imprint
in Us also continually the Sentiment of our Subjection and Dependence; He has
been pleased to make Us see his Sovereign Empire and his Infinite Power, with
the Character of his Immensity expanded through All, and through All operating by
that perpetual Empire, which he exercises at the same time in all the parts of
the World, in making the same Idea's, the same Sentiments, and the same
Passions continually to enter into the Souls of Men, at such time as the same
Impressions are made in their Brains, either by the external Actions of
Objects, or by the fortuitous Course, or the irregular Motion of the Blood, of
the Spirit, and of the Humors. If we should seriously reflect upon these two
sorts of Operations, of Acts Free, and of Acts Necessary, which we experience
in Us; as it will be impossible for Us not to know our Spiritual Nature, so it
will be impossible for Us to be ignorant of our Dependence, and we should have
the heart as well penetrated with Religious Sentiments, with which we ought to
be penetrated toward God, as the Spirit instructed or enlightened with the
clear and indubitable Idea of our Spiritual Nature, and of the Essential Union
which she has with God.

CHAP. XIV.
Acts of Conscience, Acts of Concupiscence, Acts of Reason, Acts of Passion.
WE observe in Us in the fifth place, Acts of Conscience, and Acts of
Concupiscence, Acts of Reason, and Acts of Passion; for I am not willing to
separate things which do so much resemble one another. Conscience is that
sensibility of Duty, which we have explained and described elsewhere. Reason
says and includes more than Conscience, for Reason is that Ground of the
Superior Light, which does not only Regulate Duties, but the Conduit also of
all sorts of Affairs. Conscience imports Reason, every Act of Conscience is an
Act of Reason; but every Act of Reason is not an Act of Conscience.
Concupiscence and Passion are almost like Reason and Conscience, Every Act of
Passion is an Act of Concupiscence, but every Act of Concupiscence is not an
Act of Passion.

Concupiscence is the Will enticed to the side of Sensible Objects; It is the
love of Good in general, essentially imprinted in Man, and grounded in the
Essence of the Soul, turned out of the way by the Empire of Sense, to the side
of Sensible Good. The Soul loving Good in general, and Spiritual and Rational
Good in particular, conserves the Name of the Will, and is otherwise called the
Rational Appetite; and this same Soul loving Sensible Good, is called
Concupiscence, or the Sensitive and Material Appetite, which is in us an
Universal Ground of all sorts of Evil Desires, and Evil Inclinations, and the
true Matter of that which we call Passions. This love of Sensible Good, is
called simple Concupiscence, when it is not extraordinarily overheated, and
set on Fire by the lively Impression of some Object, which is that which makes
it turn into Passion. It is simple Concupiscence, when the Brain is not
Imprinted with any Corporeal Image, that presents to the Soul the lively Idea
of some Part, or of some kind of sensible Good. It is Passion, when the
Impression of any Object has caused to spring up in the Soul, a more lively
and more touching Idea than usually, of what kind soever it may be of sensible
Good: This Corporeal Image retraced in the Brain, with Tracks better marked,
and more deep does dilate the Vessels, which make the commerce betwixt the
Heart and the Brain; it spreads its Rays thro'-out all the Body, it diffuses
there a Blood more fired, and it causes an Universal Motion, with a thousand
different Characters, according to the diversity of the Passion.

This Ground of Sensibility for sensible Good, This Ground of the Appetitive
Faculty, This Ground of Love of Good in General, turned into sensible Love, is
the Ground of all the Passions of Ambition, of Avarice, of the love of
Pleasures, of tender Friendship, and not only of the Passions, but of all their
Acts, and of all their diverse Estates, of their Joys and of their Sorrows, of
their Hope, and of their Fears, of every Sentiment of the Soul that is called
Passion.

The Soul is subjected to this misery, by the General Law of her Union with the
Body, to have necessarily a love for every thing that is presented to her,
under the Idea of a sensible Good, or of the Good of the Body, and capable of
causing her to have agreeable Sentiments; This is the General Law of the Union,
and of the punishment of God, since sin, which has diminished to the Soul, the
Empire which she had over the Body, has augmented the Effect of the General
Law of the Union. Concupiscence is natural, and essential to Man, so far as to
a certain Degree: And it is in this Sense that St. Agustin says, That the love
of sensible Good might have been to Man in his State of Innocence, or (if you
please) of pure Nature; but that Degree of Concupiscence, in which we are born
Children of Wrath, which is a domineering Concupiscence, cannot be in Man but
by the punishment of his Revolt, which makes it just that he should find, and
resent in himself by the Revolt from his Sensible Love, against his Reason and
his Conscience, the disorder of his Revolt against God.

It is by the Law of the Union of the Soul with the Body, that the Soul sees
her Love of Good in General, turn to the side of Sensible Good; That she
conceives the most lively Sparkles of it, as often as any disposition makes the
Blood and the Spirits to flow more lively through all the Body, upon the occasion
of some Sensible Good, which has been Marked in the Brain with most profound
Tracks: But it is by the punishment of sin, that the Soul has not command
enough over the Fibers, to hinder them from conceiving too much Motion; or to
stop the vehement Course of the Blood and Spirits, which give to the
Imagination that so Tyrannical force, which it exercises over Reason.

Men distinguish the ground of Love into concupiscible and irascible Appetite;
But this is but one and the same Appetite, which is diversely moved and
determined by Goods conceived as easy, and by Goods conceived as hard to be
acquired; that is to say, that the Soul does otherwise pursue after Goods where
she sees not any difficulty, and otherwise those Goods in which she sees
difficulty, the which excite in her bold and courageous Motions, from whence
comes the Passions of Boldness or Courage, of Hope and Expectation.

A fruitful Overture of Morality.
You see here generally what Concupiscence is and its Passions. It might be
useful to descend into the particulars of all the diverse Motions, and of all
the diverse Acts, whether of Concupiscence, or of Passions, and to explain how
we Love and how we Hate, how we Attend, and how we Desire, how we Rejoice, and
how we are Sad, how we are raised up by Courage, and how we are depressed by
Fear and Despair; but it suffices to say in general for the end of the Design
of this Essay, That the Soul suffers these diverse Agitations, according to the
Images of Sensible Good, which are diversely Engraved in our Brain, and in those
Parts of it, where is the Seat and the Organ of that which we call the Internal
Sense, or Common Sense and Imagination; three Names to signify one and the
same thing: This ought to make Us comprehend how we ought to watch over our
selves, for to keep our Imaginations pure, by the usage of Mortification, by
the frequent Suspension from the commerce of the World, and by the practice of
Retirement, of holy Reading, and of Meditation; And how we ought to fear the
deadly Poisons of Pleasure, which add by their usage a new Concupiscence,
besides that of Nature, and that of the Punishment, and the Curse of God.

Acts of Conscience.
You see here once more, what Concupiscence is in Us, and the Passions. We do
too much experience their Acts, and we cannot likewise but perceive in us Acts
of Conscience, and of Reason, contrary to those of Concupiscence, and of
Passion: Concupiscence or the Sensitive and Material Appetite, never Reigns so
in us, but that the Rational Appetite does in some measure oppose its
Dominations.

The Love of Good in general, does not so suffer it self to be carried away to
the side of Sensible Good, but that there remains some Activity and some force
in it, to drive the Soul to the side of Spiritual and Rational Good: Conscience
and Reason shine always a little in the midst of the greatest darknesses of
disorder and corruption: Spiritual and Rational, Celestial and Eternal Good,
make an Interview one with the other, and the Soul always remains sensible of
it; She takes pleasure in it, as St. Paul says, Then even when she is enticed
away by Sensible Love. The Law of the Spirit does always a little contradict
that of the Flesh; This is an Eternal Combat, and from thence came the Acts of
Conscience, and of Reason, which are always seen in Us sensibly, as well as
those of Concupiscence and of Passion, to serve for a witness to God, and for
the Justifications of his Judgments.

CHAP. XV.
Confused Idea's or Sentiments, and clear and distinct Idea's or Notions.
WE observe in Us in the sixth place, The Acts of a confused Idea, or of pure
Sentiment, without any distinct Image of the Object which determines them, and
Acts of distinct Idea's: For there are Things which we do not know but by a
Sentiment, or an Idea confused; and there are some who speak thus, and give the
Name of a confused Idea to Acts of pure Sentiment; and we must give leave to
every one to speak as he pleases, and accommodate our selves to the relish of
all the World, when it does not embroil or confound any thing, as this here.
There are Things then which we do not know but after this manner, and such are
all the Sensible Qualities of Bodies; for we know not either Light or Savor,
nor Odor, Sound or Color, at least by the Acts by which we perceive them, but
by pure Sentiment, without any neat Idea.

We are able well enough to attain by reasoning, to Form in us a neat and
distinct Idea of all those Things on the Parts of the Objects, which determine
in us the lively Sentiment thereof, which Sentiment penetrates and affects us
intimately at their presence. For Example, We are well able to convince our
selves by many Reflections, that it is nothing but Light, according as it is
diversely reflected and modified, which causes the Sentiments of the diversity
of Color which we have; We may convince our selves, that as it is nothing but
the division of the Flesh and the Fibers, that is, the immediate Object of Pain
when a Thorn pricks us, so it is nothing also, but a gentle Titillation of the
Tongue and Palate, that is the immediate Object of the Sentiment of Savor: But
the Idea which we make to our selves by our Reasoning and by our Reflection, is
quite another thing; so is that which gives us the Impression of the Object, by
the Act which we call Sentiment. It is certain, that our Sensations do not by
themselves give us the Idea of any of their Objects. We perceive, White, Black,
Light, Heat, Cold, Bitter, Sweet, without knowing what White is, or Black,
Light, Heat, Cold, Bitter or Sweet; but only that we perceive them after such
and such a manner, which we are not able to make others comprehend, who never
perceived them.

On the contrary we have Acts of a near Idea, and of a clear and distinct
Image, by the which we are able to make those comprehend that which we know and
perceive, who never did perceive any thing of the like. For this is the
difference of Knowledges by Idea, and of Knowledges by Sentiment. Strive, for
Example, To make a Man who never felt Pain, to comprehend what Pain is. We may
say the same of Pleasure, of White, of Black, of Green, of Yellow, of Sweet, of
Bitter, of Heat and Cold; You shall Reason to all Eternity before you shall be
ever able to make that confused Idea, which you have of those things after your
Sentiments, to pass into the Spirit of any Man, though of the most easy and
most ready Conception; but for the Things which we know by clear Idea, as all
those Things which we imagine, or which we conceive by pure Intellection, so
soon as we have conceived the Idea of them, we are able to Communicate them to
others, and Instruct them of it. For Example, We have seen a Square or
Triangle, a Man, a Beast, a House; because it is by neat and distinct Idea's
that we have seen these things, we are able to describe them, to Paint them, to
make them be comprehended as we have conceived them, either by Imagination or
by Intellection.

This is therefore a most remarkable difference of our Operations, That we have
Knowledges by Idea, either of Imagination, or of Intellection; and Knowledges
by pure Sentiment or confused Idea. Upon which there is this to be observed,
That these last are indubitably the Modification of the Soul, which she
receives from Him who exercises in her that Empire of which we have so often
spoken, by the which she is Advertised of that which is good for, or hurtful to
the conservation of the Body, by pure Instinct, without being properly
instructed or enlightened from the Nature and the Essence of the Things, upon
whose occasion she receives them. He that keeps the Souls united to Bodies,
could have been able to dispose of the Soul for the conservation of the Body;
if he had been contented, for Example, to give them by Idea the distinct
Knowledge of the disranging of the Fibers, which is caused by that excessive
Action of Heat, which is called Burning; and yet the Souls would have been far
from being that way disposed to be affectionated for the conservation of the
Body; they would rather often times have made use of that Knowledge, to suffer
It to be destroyed, and to deliver themselves from their Servitude, if there
had not been a Pain, that is to say, an afflicting Modification in the Soul,
annexed to that Alteration, and that disranging of the Conjunction, and of the
legimitate Situation of the Fibers, which compose the Flesh and the Nerves.

This here is the Secret and the Mystery of confused Operations and Knowledges,
or of pure Sentiments; This is the Ligament of the Soul and the Body; The
Secret which the Creator has found to associate the two Natures: The Soul
would never have been willing to apply the Body to the Act of Eating, if the
Sensible Modification of Pleasure, which God gives the Soul upon the occasion
of Eating, had not been annexed to the Titillation of the Fibers of the Tongue
and of the Palate, which is caused by Salts and the Juices of Meats, which
insinuate themselves therein, and moisten them.

It has pleased him, who has thought fit to keep us in this Trial of Body, to
sweeten to us the Prison of it, and it is by these Sensible Modifications he
principally does it. There are a hundred kinds of them, and there 's no doubt
but God can multiply them yet more, if he pleases, as well those that are
delightful, as those that are afflicting and dolorous; and it is certain, that
though we have them not now, but upon the occasion of the Body, yet they are
independent of the Body; and God can send them into Souls separated from the
Body, and into the Angels, if he pleases; although we do not know that he causes
it in the Angels, but when he punishes the Rebellious ones in Hell, who are
effectively burnt, not by an Action of Fire, which alters their Substances, for
that is impossible, but by the Almighty Action of God, who upon the occasion of
material Fire destined to Act upon the Bodies of Men, does imprint upon them
that Pain which we resent upon the occasion of Fire, and which we call the Pain
of Burning.

Moreover, these Modifications of the Soul, which render it certain of the good
or ill Qualities of the Body, not instructed, knowing, nor enlightened from
their Composition, are diverse in the Sentiments which they give of themselves;
but all alike and all the same in the Genus and Species of Modification; in as
much as there are certain Passions of the Soul, which intimately affect,
penetrate, and modifie it. These have all of them this in common, that they
have indeed an Object out of the Soul; but that this Object is only an Object
of Determination or of Occasion, not an Object of Representation, which they
express and represent; for the Heat and the Cold that we feel, have not as we
have already said, any thing like them (as far as we conceive) out of us; And
that Modification wherewith we are intimately affected, when we say we are Hot
or Cold, is no ways the Image and Representation of that which is in the Organ,
affected by the external Object, or in the external Object it self; This is not
an Idea, this is a pure Sentiment: This is not a Representation which the Soul
makes to it self, but a certain Modification or Passion, so determined as that
she is affected against her Will, that she has it: And we must say the same
thing of Green and of Yellow, of Bitter and of Sweet, as of Hot and Cold; There
is indeed something far out of the Soul, which otherwise affects the Retina or
the Organ of Sight in that which is called Green, than in that which is called
Yellow; But the Sentiment of Green and of Yellow, have not any thing which
represents that which is in the Object, upon the occasion whereof we have it;
There is no Likeness betwixt the Green wholly Spiritual, which I have in Me by
my Sentiment, and that material Green which is out of Me in the Object called
Green.

CHAP. XVI.
Acts of Imagination, and Acts of Intellection, Libertinism and Heresy.
WE have in the seventh place, Knowledges of Imagination, and Knowledges of
Intellection, of which it has been so often spoken of; but we must not fail to
observe the difference of them, because that one of the fruitful Principles of
our Errors, is to confound Objects Imaginable with Objects Intelligible, or to
apply the Imagination, where we ought to make use only of the Intellection; and
to make use of the Intellection where we ought to employ the Imagination. To
desire to know by Imagination that which cannot be known but by Intellection,
is the Principle of the Essential Errors of Libertinism, of Impiety and of
Irreligion; For thereby it is that there are some who are ignorant of God, of
Spirits, of the Immortality and Spirituality of the Soul, of Eternity, of
Paradise; because not at all distinguishing the Intellection from the
Imagination, and not being able to believe things of which they cannot form to
themselves the Idea, they fancy that they cannot have an Idea but of things
which they can Imagine or conceive with a Corporeal Image, which represents
some Bigness or Figure; They believe that Figure and Extension are the
Essential Attributes of things Real; so that not being able to form to
themselves any Corporeal Image of God, of Spirits, of Spiritual Souls, of
Paradise and of Eternity, they fall into the Unhappiness of Libertinism and
Incredulity; whereas if they gave attention, that there are things purely
Intelligible, which cannot be the Object of the Imagination, as not being able
to be conceived under any Bulk, and any Figure or Corporeal or Material Form,
but what ought to be conceived by pure Intellection, they will conceive the
Idea of all those things, at least a feeble and imperfect one.

And if this be the Principle of the Essential Errors against Religion, To
desire to know all by Imagination; To desire to Explain and to know by
Intellection the Visible and Corporeal Nature, is a Principle of the Errors of
Philosophy, which reduces the Explication of Corporeal Nature to idle and
abstracted Terms of Forms and of Qualities, without descending to a more
particular Examination of the Composition of Bodies, which we call Mixed, which
are made of the Assembly of the Elements: For as not being willing to
comprehend and know things Spiritual, but by the Imagination, we must of
necessity be ignorant of them, so not being willing to Explain Corporeal
things, but by Idea's Intelligible, we leave them eternally in those empty and
abstracted Terms, which give not any particular and distinct Idea of them.

It is of Importance therefore to Remark this Division of our Knowledges of
Intellection, and of our Knowledges of Imagination. The Difference is, That the
One depends altogether upon the Body; that is to say, The Knowledge by
Imagination, which is not in Us but from the occasion of a certain Disposition
of the Brain, and of a certain Retracement of the Corporeal Images of the
Objects which we Imagine; And the other, that is to say, The Intellection does
not depend thereupon, but inasmuch as it takes occasion from Objects known by
Imagination, to exercise it self even upon Bodies, which, as much Bodies as
they are, do not cease to be Intelligible, there being this Difference between
things Imaginable and things Intelligible, That the Imaginable are Imaginable
and Intelligible at the same time; but the Intelligible cannot in any manner be
Imagined. Thus as to the rest, we call the Acts of the Imagination Corporeal
Knowledges: And though that there is this Difference between Knowledges by
Imagination and Knowledges by Intellection, that That which we Imagine is
represented under a certain Figure, and a certain Bulk or Bigness, and with
certain other Corporeal Proprieties; and that which is known by pure
Intellection is represented and known without any thing of the like; We must
not for all that go about to fancy, That to Imagine is a Corporeal Act in the
Soul: To say truth, to Imagine does presuppose some Retracement of a Corporeal
Image in the Brain; but the Act of Imagination in it self is wholly Spiritual,
although it represents things after a Corporeal manner, and with a Corporeal
Form. This is not only evident by the Reason above related, That every thing
which is in the Soul is Essentially Spiritual, every Modification of the Soul,
and every Vital Act, being by reason of the Immanence Essentially Spiritual;
But moreover, because it is evident, that the Act of Imagining, though it
represent Essentially a Figure and a Bulk, yet has neither Figure nor Bigness;
And so far are the Images which the Souls make or receive in Imagining, from
having any Figure or any Bigness, or occupying any Space, that thousands of
them may meet together at the same time in one Soul without justling one
another, and without constraining or incommoding one another, which they could
not do if they were Corporeal; for Bodies justle, incommode, and drive away one
another. St. Augustine did with reason admire, that the Heavens, the Earth, and
the Sea, should be Lodged together at the same time in his Head; and he drew
from thence this just Consequence, That of necessity these Images, by which our
Soul Figures to it self the Extent of these vast Bodies, can be no ways
Corporeal, nor can they have in them any Extension, and that they are no less
Spiritual than the Soul in which they are engraven, because it is certain that
they penetrate one another, and agree together; whereas if they were Corporeal,
they would knock against one another, and drive one another out, and could not
be Lodged together at the same time in the same place.

CHAP. XVII.
Acts of Sensation and, Acts of Imagination, Folly, Frenzy, Visions.
WE have in the Eighth place Acts of pure Sensation, which come from the
Determination of present Objects; and Acts of pure Imagination, which come and
are in us out of the present Objects, as are the Imaginations of Dreams, of
confused Thoughts, Ravings of sick Persons, Folly and Frenzy, and all that
which we call Visions, whether those which are only Illusions of the Internal
Sense, or those which are sometimes given from God, or by Demons or good
Angels.

What pure Sensation is.
The Knowledges which we have of present Objects, by their immediate
Impression, are called Sensations; These Knowledges are not in us but from the
occasion of the Impression which is made immediately by the Objects upon our
External Organs, by which it is communicated to the Brain by the continuation
of Motion which follows the Nerves, the which from all the Extremities of the
Body terminate in the Brain. This Motion carried to the Brain, does engrave
there a certain Corporeal Image of the Object; and that moment that this
Corporeal Image is engraven in the Brain, He who holds the Soul united to the
Body, gives to the Soul an Intelligible Idea of it, with a lively and
penetrating Resentment, and an intimate Certainty of this Image; the which is
sometimes accompanied with a confused Sentiment either of Pleasure or of Pain,
of Bitter or of Sweet, of Heat or of Cold, etc. And sometimes it is only a
simple Certainty of the presence of the Object, and a pure Image which
represents it.

Sympathy and Antipathy.
When the Sensation by which one Man does see and understand another, is made
with a confused Sentiment of Pleasure, and with a certain Agreement which
carries a Desire of being united to him, and which makes a Man pleased with
him, That is called Sympathy; And when on the contrary this Sensation is made
with a confused Sentiment of disagreement and strangeness, That is called
Antipathy. You see there the general Idea of Sensation, which are the
Knowledges that we have by the Determination of present Objects.

As for those Acts that are in us without any Determination of present Objects,
such as are the Acts of Dreams, and the other above expressed, they are all of
them the Acts of the Imagination, which are never in us but by the occasion of
a certain Disposition of our Brain, which remains from the Impression of past
Objects, or which is determined by the Course of the Spirits and of the Humors,
as in Folly or Frenzy; or by some Exterior or Superior Cause, as in the
Visions and in the Illusions of the Imagination, caused by good Angels or by
Demons.

Dreams, Folly, Frenzy, and the diversity of Temperaments and of Genius's.
It is easy to comprehend thereby Dreams, Folly, Ravings, Frenzy, the
Illusions of the Imagination, and Visions. If the Brain comes to be dried to a
certain degree, and the Blood has received a Motion a little more agitated
than ordinary, and which is not required in a good Constitution and Disposition
of the Organ of the Internal Sense, which we call Common Sense, it must
necessarily be, that the Impression of former Objects which remains still
there, and which are there again retrac'd de novo, should be embroiled,
confounded and mingled in a thousand confused and precipitous manners,
according to the confusion and precipitation of the Motion of the Blood and
Animal Spirits on the one part, and on the other of the Fibers of that part of
the Brain which is the Organ of the Internal Sense; and from thence comes
necesssarily that kind of Folly which consists in a disorder, and a fantastic
confusion of Thoughts, without dependence, without order, and without
connection; For that which we call Good Sense and Judgment, is nothing but the
Power and the Faculty which the Soul has, to order and regulate our Thoughts,
to suspend and stay them, that she may consider and maintain their connection
and dependence; And she loses this Faculty and this Power, when the Motion of
the Blood, of the Humors, and of the Animal Spirits, or of the Fibers of the
Brain, to which are annexed the Species of things, that is to say, the
Impressions which remain of the Objects, is disordered and embroiled in such
sort, that the natural order and connection of these Species cannot be observed
and kept, but are confusedly and tumultuously excited and stirred up by a
tumultuous and irregular agitation of the Organ in which they reside.

There are diverse sorts of Follies; there are the Furious and the Peaceable,
there are the Rejoicing and the Melancholy, and there are general ones, and
particular ones, which are fastened to one single Object: And all these
diversities do proceed from the diverse manner whereby the Brain is disordered;
and it would be easy to Explain them particularly, if there was occasion. It
is sufficiento say, that in what manner soever Folly subsists, it is the
greatest Humiliation of our Nature, and that which gives us the best Prospect
of the Misery of the Servitude of our Souls, in the present Estate of Union
with the Body; since they lose by Folly the Empire and the Liberty of their
Thoughts, being forced to follow the fantasticalness, the perplexity, the
disorder and the confusion of the irregular Motion of the Brain, either too
much dried and burnt up by Choler and Melancholy, or too much overflowed, or
too much moistened by Phlegm, without being able either to suspend or stop them,
or to hasten or advance them. This lets us see the Limitation even of our
Spiritual Nature, which is Finite even in the most Divine Perfection that she
possesses; for this disorder of the loss of the Empire and of the Liberty of
Thoughts happens in Man, because he does not possess as God does, an Infinite
Liberty, that is to say, an Infinite Empire, but only a Finite Liberty or a
Finite Empire over himself; For it is this which makes, that God, as the
Universal Cause, does not respect this Liberty of Man, but determines in his
Soul Thoughts conformable to the Agitations of his Brain, which is the
Occasional Cause by which he is determined in this Quality of Universal Cause,
to give Thoughts and Idea's to the Soul: God concurs with Fools as he does with
Natural Causes, for the making of Monsters; he follows the Motion of the Brain
as a Necessary Cause.

Raving does not differ from Folly, but by the Intervals which it has, and
because it is only an Accident, and a transient Symptom of a Fever, which too
strongly agitates the Brain. Frenzy is but a violent Raving, and both the one
and the other let us see, that there must be a Superior Power, who with an
absolute Empire Determines our Thoughts from the Occasion of the Motions of our
Brain, and Confirms by a sensible Argument, all that we have said concerning
the Union of our Souls with our Bodies, and concerning the continual Action by
which we believe that God Determines our Thoughts and our Sentiments, from the
Occasion of diverse Impressions which are made on our Bodies, either by External
Objects, or by the Fermentation of their proper Humors. If we reflect seriously
upon it, we shall see, that it is not at all possible to think, that the Soul
in these States of Folly and Frenzy should make in her self her Thoughts; We
shall be persuaded that she receives them from that Superior Power which unites
her to the Body, and which Acting as an Universal Cause, has no regard to the
incongruity of these Thoughts, as it has no regard to the incongruity of
Monsters, in the Motions which it gives to the common Matter of the Universe,
by its inviolable and infallible Laws, but makes the Fortune of the Disorder,
and of the Disranging of the Harmony of the Body, to follow and run upon the
Soul, not ceasing to determine her Thoughts according to the Occasion which
that part gives her thereof, and that common Center of the Organizanization
which it has established for the occasional Cause of its Essential Concourse,
or of the Action by which it Enlightens us. God Determines the Thoughts in
Madmen and in Fools, by the immutable Laws which he has Established in the
Union of Bodies with Souls; which is, To give Idea's upon the Occasion of the
Corporeal retracement of Objects which are made in the Brain, without having
regard either to the Order or to confusion of the Thoughts.

Visions.
The Illusions of the Imagination, by which Men believe they see by Intervals,
Things which in effect they do not see, are a kind of short and transient
Folly; and they are made by a deep and lively retracement of some particular
Species, which so occupy the Organ of the internal Sense, that the other
Species there remain as it were all of them defaced; from whence it happens,
that the Imagination of it is livelily determined: And as this is the effect of
lively and strong Imaginations, to represent Things absent as if they were just
present, and as if they actually struck the Senses; so it happens from thence,
that Men do believe they see that which they do not see, because they judge
that the Image that they have of it, is determined by the presence of the
Object, not minding that it comes from the Imagination only; and thus it is
that there are a thousand sorts of Illusions, and vain and chymerical Visions
in certain Spirits, which we call feeble or weak; though indeed they are too
strong, because that these sorts of Illusions proceed not but from an excessive
force of the Imagination, the which is a true and real weakness of Reason;
since the Imagination is never excessively strong, but Reason is thereby as
much weak, because the Power of Reason is to rule over the Imagination, to
redress, to correct it, to suspend its Operations, and to consider it nearly,
to see wherein it exceeds: The supernatural Visions which come from God, are
when God as a particular Cause makes a miraculous and supernatural Impression
in the Imagination, that is to say, which does not at all come from the
necessary consequences of the Course of the natural Motion of the Blood, of the
Humors, and of the Spirits; and those which come from good and evil Angels, are
made by the Natural Empire that Angels have over Bodies, by virtue whereof,
they stir up Images in the Brain, which determine God as an Universal Cause, by
the Law of the Union of the Soul with the Body, to give Idea's and Thoughts, of
which the Corporeal Images are the occasional Cause; for be it what it will, an
Angel or a Devil, which retrace a certain Object in our Brain, God gives us
necessarily the Idea of it by that immutable Law of Union which we have often
explained, which is no other but the confused Idea which Philosophers commonly
express by the Term of Concourse, which they conceive as the Universal
Influence, and perpetual and necessary Action of the Creator, acting as an
Universal Cause, and animating by his Intimate Cooperation, and by the most
efficacious influence of his Life and of his Power the whole Universe, reduced
to a clear and distinct Idea, under the name of the Action, by which God makes
and entertains the Union of the Souls with Bodies.

The diversity of Temperaments, and of Genius's.
After which, there remains nothing more to be said upon the occasion of this
difference of the Operation of the Soul, unless that it is thereby easy to
comprehend, that all the diversity which is observed betwixt one Man and
another, does not come but from the diversity of the Temperament, and from the
material Structure and Harmony of the Body, and from the greater or lesser
Disposition, whereby the Objects which strike the Senses, are lively
represented to the passive or to the active Faculty of the Thinking Soul; for
if one is Choleric, and the other Phlegmatic, it does not at all happen,
because the Soul of one is more lively and more sensible than the Soul of
another; but because the same things do more hurt the Brain of the one, and
less hurt the Brain of the other; and it is in the same manner with the
advantage of the Understanding, of the Judgment, and of the Memory, and of the
other Natural Qualities: But let us go on and see further, what other
Operations our Souls make in our Bodies.

CHAP. XVIII.
Acts of Spiritual Reminiscency, and Acts of Corporeal Memory.
WE observe in the ninth place, Acts of Reminiscency or of Remembrance
Spiritual, and to speak properly Inorganical, and Acts of Corporeal Memory, or
of Mechanic Memory, if we may be admitted to say so; for if you observe, you
will find that beyond or above that Organical Mechanic Memory, which determins
(in the same order, and in the same connection that it has received them) the
Species and the Motions of the Fibers of the Spirit, from whence are formed the
Motions of the Muscles of the Throat and of the Tongue, which make us recite or
sing truly, an Air without dreaming of it, or those of the Feet, which make us
dance a Current or a Ballet; There is another Species of Memory, by which we
conserve the most abstracted Idea's of Sciences, in all the order and all the
Arangement that Demonstrations make of them; for though Corporeal and Mechanic
Memory serves to these Sciences, for conservation of these Kinds of Terms which
serve thereto, yet it is undubitable that there are a thousand sorts of
Knowledges wholly intellectual, which we have acquired by Speculation and
Reasoning, the remembrance of which remains with us, which does no way depend
upon that Organ of the Corporeal Memory, which goes like a Wheel, or like a
Clock, so long as it has Line and Weights; for though this Corporeal Memory is
lost, this Spiritual Reminiscency remains; and so far is Reminiscency or
Spiritual Memory from being weakened by Time and Old Age, that she is always
growing more perfect; for we see that abstracted and speculative Sciences are
perfectioned more and more, though the Memory diminishes in speculative Men.

There might be a thousand Reflections made upon this double Memory, for the
Corporeal on the one side operating, as she does sensibly by Spirits, without
the determination of the Soul; and often times without her participation, from
whence proceed a thousand mavelous Effects, as to observe the Order, and the
Dependence of Tones and of Pauses, or Cadences in Singing or in Dancing, and to
repeat thousands of Words in the Order that we have learned them, may serve for
a sensible Demonstration of the inutility of the Principle of a Knowledge like
to ours, which we so imprudently give to Beasts; Since it is certain that
Memory makes us Sing and Dance without our dreaming of it; And on the other
side, Reminiscency and the Faculty (wholly Spiritual of the Soul) of
Remembrance, make us see in our Souls their Spiritual Quality and Nature, by
the Immensity of its Idea's, of its Principles, and of its Consequences, and by
the enchaining of the one with the other, which she Treasures up in her self.

CHAP. XIX.
Acts of Spiritual Resentment, and Acts of Corporeal Passion. The difference of
Pleasure and Joy, of Grief and Sadness.
WE observe in us in the tenth place, Acts of Spiritual Passion, and Acts of
Corporeal Passion; for we have not only Pleasures and Pains, but we have Joys
and Sorrows; Things altogether different. Pain and Pleasure are Sensations,
these are Modifications and confused Sentiments of the Soul, which affect it
and penetrate it, without Enlightening it; but in respect to the conduct of the
Body, by Relation to which, they instruct it, teaching it to apprehend what is
good and what is ill for the Body, by way of Instinct. A Joy and Sadness are
Passions, or Acts and Resentments of the Appetite of that Love which we have
said, caries us toward Good, and do flow from the Idea o^ the Opinion which we
have of it.

The difference of Pain and Sadness.
Pain is very different from Sadness, not only in the Sentiment which the one
and the other gives us, but also in the manner whereby the one and the other
enter into our Souls. Pain is made in us, without us; it enters indeed by our
Senses, but it is not us who open the Gate of our Soul to it, we are very
willing to keep it shut; it makes way, it enters, it penetrates it in spite of
us, and independently of our Reflections, even to the bottom of our Soul: On
the contrary, we open the Gate to Sadness, it enters by our Thought and by our
Reflection; and it is after the same manner, with Pleasure and Joy as it is
with Pain and Sadness; Pleasure is a Sentiment like Pain which is made in us,
without us, independent of our Thought and of our Reflection; and Joy on the
contrary, enters by the Gate of our Thought, and of our Knowledge or Reflection.

Joys Corporeal, and Corporeal Sadnesses.
And as Pain and Sadness, Pleasure and Joy, are diverse Operations in us; so
there is likewise in us a great difference of Joys and Sadnesses; we have two
sorts of them, which we may call Corporeal, and we have some which we may call,
and which we have always called Spiritual; both the one and the other are
Passions of the Soul, for they are the Acts of the Appetitive Faculty, which we
otherwise call the Will; not by way of free Determination and deliberate Act,
but by way of Resentment and Emotion, and this is properly called Passion. We
have Corporeal Joys and Sadnesses, not that the Body can have any resentment of
Joy or Sadness, for it cannot have them in any manner; but because we have them
upon the occasion of the Body, or by the Principle of the Sensible or Corporeal
Appetite, which is the love of Sensible Good. Corporeal Joys and Sadnesses do
arise in Us these two ways; either because the violent Passion of love for some
Sensible Good, has a happy or unhappy Success, from whence Joy and Sadness
spring up by a necessary Resentment, or because the Humors of the Body (of
which there are some Earthy and Melancholy ones, which lock up the Fibers of
the Brain and Heart, and thereby give occasion to sad Thoughts, Conditions, and
Dispositions; and some that are sweet and gay, which dilate the Heart, the
Spleen and the Brain, and make the Blood and Spirits flow easily through every
part, and thereby occasion agreeable and joyful Thoughts) do determine the
Disposition of the Brain, and the rest of the Body to be the occasion of the
Reflections and Motions of Joy and Sadness.

Spiritual Joys, and Sadnesses.
We have on the contrary, Spiritual Joys and Sadnesses, which are the true
Passions or true Resentments of the Rational or Spiritual Appetite; for although
they are formed with much more Deliberation and Reflection than Corporeal Joy
and Sadness; they are truly Spiritual Passions, because the Resentment that
forms them, is not an Act of the active or determinative Faculty of the Soul,
but of that kind of Power and passive Faculy, from whence spring up all the
Resentments of the Appetite.

Natural and Supernatural Joy and Sadness.
Spiritual Joy is sometimes a Joy purely Rational, and which comes from the
Knowledge of the sweetness of Repose, of the good Order of Affairs, and of the
Society and Fidelity of Friends; and sometimes it is a Celestial and Divine
Joy, as is that Joy which the Conscience and the Sentiments of Grace gives, and
of Eternal Hopes, which St. Paul calls the Peace of God, and the Joy of the
Holy Ghost, or in the Holy Ghost.

Penitence.
We must say the same thing of Sadness; for there is also a Spiritual Sadness,
which does not at all reach up to God, but which regards nothing but the
Natural State; and there is a Holy and Supernatural Sadness, which is caused by
Penitence, that lively Sentiment, and that lively and penetrating Resentment of
the unworthiness of Sin, from whence flow those Sacred Tears which render the
Soul so pure and so fair before God, for they are like a vehement Fire, which
consumes in us all the Matter and all the Impurity of Sin. But let Us generally
remark the difference of our Natural and of our Supernatural Operations.

CHAP. XX.
Acts Natural, or Natural Operations; and Acts Supernatural, or Operations of
Grace.
THERE is in the eleventh place, a most essential and most important Division
and Difference to be observed, of which the Experience is constant and
indubitable from our Operations and Acts, which ought not here to be forgotten;
to wit, the Distinction and the Difference of our Natural Acts, or our Natural
Operations, and of our Supernatural Acts, or our Supernatural Operations: For
there is incontestably in Us in all our Faculties, besides their Natural Acts,
Operations Supernatural, which make an Impression there of that almighty
Virtue, and of that invisible Force from above, which we commonly call Grace.

This Eternal and Sovereign Power which Rules over us, and which Acts
continually in us (enlightening us by all the Idea's, and all the Images which
we have of things, and penetrating us with a thousand diverse Sentiments,
sometimes of Pleasure, and sometimes of Pain) is called Nature, when by reason
of the communication of Motions, and of the Corporeal Impressions which arrive
as far as the Brain, it Acts in us by the general Wills, and the immutable Laws
of its Natural Providence, which have no other end but the beauty and the
conservation of the visible World; But when by other views and for other
respects, when for the final Building of its Eternal Temple, when for the
formation of its Eternal Court, if we may be permitted to say so, when for the
accomplishment of the favorable Decrees of its Predestination, freely made for
the Consummation of its Elect, which is the Object of a Providence, entailed
and combined in a thousand manners upon the former; when in this View it
Operates in Us for to correct the Corruption, or to aid the weakness and
insufficiency of Nature for our Sanctification; it changes its Name, and is
called Grace.

Thus there is in us Nature and Grace, or the Operations of Nature, and the
Operations of Grace; and Grace is almost no less visible than Nature.

The Libertines, those Foolish and Rash, and at the same time Gross and Carnal
Spirits, who judge of every thing by their Senses, under pretense that Grace is
neither to be seen nor to be felt, though it is felt inwardly as sensibly as
the most Corporeal Objects, and though it has by the inward Sentiment an
indubitable Evidence, I say, the Gross and Carnal Libertines will affirm, That
all that we say of Grace, is nothing but a Dream and a Chimera, because they
pretend that Grace is a Fancy, which has no other Reality than that which the
Fanatical Imagination of some superstitious and sick Spirits has given it. But
the Judgment and Decision of such People ought not at all to put us to a stand;
but on the contrary, it rather makes for the Truth, and effective Reality of
Grace, that it should be called in Question by these Fanatic Enemies of all
Truth.

Grace makes it self appear at all times in the World, and especially since the
accomplishment of the Mystery of God in the Flesh, encompassed with a Light and
a Brightness, so evident, that we may as well doubt whether there be a World,
as to doubt there has been brought in by Christianity a New Light of the
Mysteries and Precepts of Morality and Divine Truths; We may also as soon doubt
of that which is called Nature, as of that which is called Grace, or of a
Supernatural Principle, which (contrary to the impure and corrupt Inclinations
of Nature, always inclined toward the Earth) does turn and elevate our Hearts
and our Spirits toward God, toward Eternity, and toward Heaven, and makes us
find ineffable Tastes and unspeakable Delights in Humiliation and Sufferings,
and in the greatest Abnegation, and the greatest Crucifixion of the Senses.
Christianity is Established in the World by a Force and a Virtue indubitably
Heavenly and Divine, which Operates more Miracles in the Spirit, and in the
Hearts of Men, than in the Corporeal Nature, whereof she appears so highly and
so indubitably a Mistress; since she has changed the Laws of it in all its
Parts as she pleased, with an Empire, the most Absolute that ever was. This
Force and this Verture so unquestionably Heavenly and Divine, which has raised
the Dead, and imprinted the Marks of its Sovereign Power, and Omnipotent Empire
upon all Visible and Corporeal Nature, has Acted and Operated with the same
Power and the same Empire, upon the Hearts and upon the Spirits, and it
continues to Act and to Operate after the same manner: And as its Operation is
called a Miracle, when it Acts and Operates extraordinarily upon Corporeal
Nature; so it is called Grace, when it Acts and Operates upon our Souls, for
our Sanctification and our Salvation.

Grace then is incontestably something that is as Real as Nature; and there are
in us by consequence, most real Operations of Grace, which is of Importance to
observe and to distinguish well, and to keep unmixt by the inward and
indubitable Sentiment which we have of it. Grace Operates in Us in such manner,
that what it Operates in Us, is our Operation, and our Operation is its.

It Operates in Us sometimes by way of Light or Illumination, and sometimes by
way of anticipating or preventing Pleasure and Delectation; and it Operates
after this sort in two manners, by transient Acts, and by permanent and settled
Habits. Transient Irradiations, whether they be by Illumination, or by
Celestial Delectation, which we commonly express by the Name of Inspirations,
are that which we call Actual Grace; and those permanent and habitual
Dispositions of holy and righteous Inclinations and Affections, which keep the
Soul turned toward God, tied to Duty and to Virtue, and determined to the
Observation of the Divine Law, are that which we call Habitual Grace or Divine
Charity. For that which we call Habitual Grace, has nothing in it that is
Physical beyond Divine Charity, or that happy Situation and Disposition of the
Heart, which regards and loves God and Duty as the Sovereign Good, with a firm
and inconcussible determination of the Will, from which nothing can draw it,
until Human Liberty coming to be too loose, does so diminish the Heavenly
Impression, so that Temptation is able to prevail; that is it which makes the
sad Falls of the Just.

There are some who conceive that this Heavenly Impression is not so much for
the producing of Actions, Holy and Just in themselves, as for the producing
them of a certain Fashion whereof they have not, and of which they do not give
any distinct Idea; They believe that it is Essential to our Actions, that they
are made by a Supernatural Principle, to the end that they may be agreeable to
God, and worthy of that Eternal Recompense, which St. Paul calls the Crown of
Justice. But that is altogether a pure Illusion of certain School men, who
conceived it after that manner. Grace is necessary for the Foundation of Holy
and Just Actions themselves, and not only for some Circumstance whereof they
might stand in need, to make them worthy.

This would be mere Pelagianism, and most Gross to believe, That we can without
the inward Delectation of Grace, preserve Continence, pardon our Enemies, and
love God above all things, by an Effective Love and Efficacy, which withdraws
our Heart from the World, and from our Selves, and ties it to that Eternal and
Sovereign Beauty. it is Grace which draws us from Time, from the World, and
from our Selves, and makes us taste God and Eternity. It is Grace which causes
Us to do all the Good which we do; for all that we do without Grace is poisoned
and corrupted by some secret return of Self-love, which is that Venomous Root
whereof St. Austin so often speaks, which Poisons all that it touches, and even
all that it comes near.

How Grace is Efficacious.
It is demanded whether Grace be Efficacious by its self, or whether it be only
by the free Determination and Cooperation of Human Will? But besides, that
this may not perhaps be a place to decide Qustions of this Nature, There is
nothing perhaps but an Equivocation in all the Disputes which Christians can
have amongst themselves thereupon. For since there are two certain Truths
amongst Christians, that Grace of it self is Victorious over the impure
Delectation of Concupiscence, whereof it invincibly suspends the Charm, by the
Heavenly and Inward Taste which it gives Us of God, of our Duty, and of Eternal
Happiness; and that at the same time it regards our Liberty, or at least it
does not restrain it, leaving Us to our own Choice to Cooperate with it or
not: It seems that amongst Christians, it ought necessarily to be acknowledged,
that in one Sense, Grace is Efficacious and Victorious by it self, and that in
another it is not so: It is Efficacious by it self against inordinate Desires,
but not against our Liberty; for it invincibly suspends the Charm of
Concupiscence, but it does not at all invincibly engage our Cooperation so
often as it Opein Us. I say, so often, because it is of that we are
Discoursing: But for certain Occasions, there is no doubt but Grace does engage
Us.

CHAP. XXI.
Seven or Eight Differences of our Acts of Intellection. And how God Acts
perpetually in Us, in the two Capital Faculties of our Soul.
WE observe in the twelfth place, Seven or Eight notable Differences of diverse
Acts of pure Intellection; for we have of them in the first place, Notions
which are Applicable to a thousand diverse Subjects, as are all those Idea's
which we call in the Schools Abstracted or Universal, by which we conceive
Essences and Universal Natures, without any individual Difference; as for
Example, The Idea of a Circle, of a Square, of a Triangle, the Idea of a Man,
of an Angel, of a Lion, of a Stone in general; and on the contrary, We have
such as are singular and individual Idea's, which cannot be applied but to one
certain determined Object, which they Represent or Conceive. We have in the
second place, Such as are directly in View, and others that are in View by
Reflection, by which we come again upon our simple View, and compare the one
with the other, for to observe their Diversities and their Singularities. We
have in the third place, A simple Conception or Representation of Objects,
which we call simple Apprehension; and we have the Judgment and the Comparison
thereof, by which we decide the Relations and the Agreements of Things, their
Equality, their Identity, their Disproportions, etc. We have in the fourth
place, Aquiescence and decisive Judgment, by way of Affirmation, or by way of
Negation; and a Doubt or Suspension, and Ballancing of the Decision in the
Obscurity of Things, or in the Equality of Reasons, which is called to Doubt.
We have in the fifth place, Simple Speculation of Objects, without any Motion
of the Spirits, to go further: And an Effort and Agitation of the Thought, to
extend Knowledge, and to pass on from that which we knew, to that we do not as
yet know, which is that proper Species of Reasoning, which brings into the
World all the Arts and Sciences.

In Relation to all these different Acts of the Intellection, there is this to
be observed, That it is not but by pure Accident, considering the State of
Union with the Body, that they depend upon the Disposition of the Body; for
they do'nt depend upon a Configuration, Determination, or a particular
Disposition of the Brain, or of any other Part or Humor of the Body, as the
Acts of Imagining, of Remembering, of Passion, and of Perceiving by proper
Sensation; but in what Estate soever the Body is, provided that the too
vehement Motions of the Spirits, and of the Fibers of the Brain, leaves the
Soul her Liberty of Thinking, The Soul exercises all these diverse Acts, upon
all Objects which can be presented to it. Secondly, We ought to observe, that
all those Acts are the proper Acts of the Active Faculty of the Soul, and by
consequence, Acts Free in their Nature, which are not necessary or constrained,
but by Accident, and by particular Rencounters; for whether God gives them for
Recompense of their Hope, or the Attention of their Spirit, as some conceive;
Or whether the Spirit makes them it self, by the Light which it has once
received from God, to discover the Essences of Things, in separating that which
is Essentially agreeable to them, from those which they have not but by
Accident, and as it were Accessorily, as well as the Proportions and Relations
of Equality, or Inequality, which are in them, as others have more willingly
conceived it: It is hour, always true to say, That the Soul forms these Idea's
and these Notions: Since it is certain, that she forms them at least by her
Attention, that is to say, that she renders her self Attentive by her self, and
by her own proper Choice and Determination; from whence there comes to her
afterward, these Idea's, and these Notions, as has been said already.

That God Acts perpetually in Us, in our Perceptive Faculty, and in our
Appetitive Faculty.
After this particular Account, I do not see that one could wish for any thing
more, to be fully instructed of the manner how our Souls Are, and Operate in
our Bodies; unless it be that there is this general Reflection, to spread over
all that has been said, That it is God who is indubitably our Light and our
Life, who Operates in Us, in all these diverse Acts of our Perceptive Faculty,
and of our Appetitive Faculty, in the same manner, that he perpetually Acts in
our Spirits and in our Hearts; in our Spirits by the Act of his continual
Illumination, and in our Hearts by that of his insurmountable and invincible
Attraction; for that which we call in Us the Heart and the Will, or the
Appetitive Faculty, is but a vehement and an invincible Desire, by which God
draws us to himself, under the confused Idea of Good, of Pleasure, and of
Happiness, which are not to be found but in him: And as all the Acts of the
Perceptive Faculty, are but only different Modifications of his Eternal
Illumination, which Operate in Us in an hundred diverse manners; So all these
diverse Acts of our Appetitive Faculty, all these diverse Resentments of our
Passions, are but the diverse Modifications of that Desire, and of that Motion,
of that Attraction, and of that Ardor so enflamed with Pleasure, and with
Sovereign Good, by which he perpetually draws us to himself, which is the
Principle of that Insatiability of Desires, and of that perpetual Emptiness of
Heart, which nothing can satisfy and fill, till it be filled by Himself; Him
of whom St. Paul has so well said, That a time will come, and that He shall be
All in All. Erit Deus Omnia in Omnibus.

It is in God that we See and Perceive, all that we See and Perceive; And it is
in God that we Love and we Desire, all that we Love, and all that we Desire; It
is from God that we receive all our Light, and it is in God that all the
Motions of our Heart do center. We know not at all that it is He that searches
us, but it is He who is the true Object, and the true End of all our Pursuits,
as He is the Principle and the Mover of them: It is He that drives us on, and
who Stimulates Us in all our Desires; and it is He who is the Center and Term
of all our Desires.

Our Poor Soul goes groping through all the Bodies, which environs it,
searching for a Pleasure and Contentment, which should satisfy it; and it is
God who is that Sovereign Pleasure, which makes the Soul thus search after it.
Our Soul regards God, by all its Being, and by all its Motion, and God regards
the Soul, as it were, by all the Rays of his Infinite Essence; She holds fast
to God on every side, if we may be permitted to say so; and God ties Himself to
her by a thousand Regards of his Puissance of His Bounty, and of His intimate
and continual Influence. We cannot separate our Souls from God, nor God from
our Souls; We can know nothing clear of them, but as far as we see and know God
wholly united, and wholly applied to her; and that we do not see them all
turned toward God, either to receive from Him their Light, or to dart
themselves toward him, to the end, they may find in Him their Satisfaction and
their Joy, their Contentment and their Sovereign Felicity: The Body does a
little interpose betwixt them, but this is it which completely gives us
Knowledge of our State upon Earth.

CHAP. XXII.
Man upon Earth, and the visible Point wherein He ought to regard himself, for
to comprehend His State, and his Duties of this present Life.
OUR Souls being the chiefest part of Us, as we have seen, that are in Relation
to God; Our Bodies are given to them for a Trial, and for a Matter to Exercise
themselves upon: Our Souls are Essentially United to God, and God removes them
as it were from Him for a time, placing them, and keeping them in the Bodies,
to see if they can pierce the Vail of them, and break through the Wall to go to
Him, by their Free and Voluntary Union, which He would have them add to their
Essential Union: The Bodies which he gives them, as it were a Burden, and for a
House upon the Rode of Eternity, are the only thing that can stop them, and
make them to wander, and be lost in that Course: The Bodies which are to God in
the Quality of the immediate Cause of the Union of Soul and Body; the occasion
of the determination of Idea's and Sentiments, which He gives to the Souls, are
to the Souls the perpetual occasion of their Ruin, and the obstacle of their
Free and Voluntary Union with God. Man is thereby a Composition of Body and of
Soul, which holds to God both by the one and by the other, and to Men through God
chiefly, who unites us all in Himself, one to the other, as in the common
Center and Principle of our Being, and of our Life; and afterward, by the
Body, which unites all of us again, the one to the other, by a thousand
Relations, either of Duties or of Businesses, into a Natural Society first of
all, and then into a Politic Society.

Such is Man, or to say better, such is the Soul in the Body; she is there
equally a Tenant to the Visible World by the Body, and to the Intelligible
World by her Self; a Tenant to God Essentially by her Self, and accessorily and
accidentally, as it were to all the Visible World by the Body, and even to
created Intelligences, to whom is committed some Intendance or some Direction
over the Visible World, who are able to Act upon her, in Acting upon the Body.
She is there a Tenant for God, as it were in a Enclosed Field and Amphitheater
of the Body, against the Flesh and the Senses, and against all the Visible
World, etc. Even against that Rebellious part of the Invisible World, against
those unhappy Spirits, who have been permitted to tempt, and to try by their
Assaults the Fidelity of Souls, destined to fill up the places, that their
Rebellion had left empty, in the Heavenly and Eternal Court.

There you see Man in his present State; there you see the best of Prospects,
in which he ought to be regarded, for to know well his State in the Body, and
in the present Life, from whence do arise all his Duties; whether those which
ought to Regulate us, in Relation to God and our Selves, or those which ought
to put us into Order, in Relation to other Men, during the Course of this
Mortal and Transitory Life.

There is nothing that Men do so ill comprehend and conceive as Life; I speak
here according to common usage, which calls the present Life simply Life,
though it be only the Shadow of the True Life which is to come, as shall be
said in its proper place. We conceive the present Life, as if it were all the
Life of Man, and as if we were not in the Body, and in the present World, but
for Ambition, and for Vanity and Pleasure, to See and to be Seen, to enjoy the
present Good, and to make to our selves a Felicity wholly Corporeal, in the
vain Honors and the vain Pleasures of this World; Man blinded by Self-love, and
by his Pride, looks upon himself in his Body, to be in the midst of this
Visible World, as it were the Center of himself, and of all things: He makes to
himself an Idea of Independency, in Relation to every thing that is above him
or about him: He believes there is nothing, but what is owing to him and his
Passions, and he believes all is reducible to him, and that there is nothing
but what ought to serve his Desires and his Pleasures. He knows not any Duty;
He believes himself wholly Free, and wholly Master of himself, Se Liberum natum
putat, says the Divine Writer, and he believes it too! But to undeceive
himself, he need only reflect upon what has been Explained and Cleared, of the
manner how our Souls are in our Bodies; for so far is He from finding himself
Free, and Disfranchised of Duties, and of being Independent and Master of
himself; That he will find himself charged with all the Parts of Duty
accountable to God, to Himself, and to all Mankind, to the Future Life, and to
the World to come; He will understand that That which he calls Life, is but a
Trial or a Proof; That Time is for Eternity, and the present World for the
World to come; That all his Being is Essentially Relative to the Supreme Being;
That he owes all to God; That he owes a thousand things to himself, contrary to
his most lively Inclinations, and that he owes no less to all Mankind: Instead
of his Imaginary Independence, he will see in himself nothing but Dependence
and Servitude. And so far will he be from finding himself in the Body, and in
the Visible World, as it were in that Garden of Pleasure, which he Figures to
himself (as the Scripture says) into which he is only sent to gather the
agreeable Flowers and Fruits, he will find himself there as it were in an
Enclosed Field, or an Amphitheater, where he has nothing to do but to struggle
and to combat; but let us see from thence how the Particulars of our Duties do
arise.

CHAP. XXIII.
How the Conviction of all our Duties, and especially of our Duties toward
God, does arise from thence.
ALL our Duties do arise from the Relation which we have with God; from the
Alliance which we have with Mankind, whether it be by the Soul or by the Body,
or by God himself; and from the Engagements which the Soul has for the Body,
and the Body for the Soul: for Duty is Essentially an Order of Relation and
Respect, of one thing to another, and the manner how our Souls Are, and Operate
in our Bodies, does discover to Us all the Engagements of Order, of Respect,
and of Relation, which our Souls have toward our Bodies, and our Bodies
toward our Souls; and which we have Essentially with God, whether it be in the
Soul or in the Body, and accidentally with Mankind; whether those which we
generally have with all Mankind, or those which we particularly have with some
one or other amongst them, partly by the Body, and partly by the Soul.

Our Duties toward God.
We have as many Relations to God, as he has Regards in his Divine Attributes
and Eternal Essence, which have Relation to Us; and as there is nothing in that
Eternal and Sovereign Essence or Being, which does not regard Us, either in
respect of His Superiority, Power and Authority, or by the Rays of Charms, of
Attractions Amability and Loveliness, or by the Chains and Bands of Dependence,
or by the Terrors and the Threatenings of his Vengance; So we may say, that
there is not one single Perfection in God, from which there does not arise a
thousand Duties in Relation to Us. There is not one single Point, says St.
Agustin else where, within the little Circumference of our Being, upon which
there does not fall a Million, as it were, of Lines, from all the Points (if I
may so say) of this vast and immense Circumference of the Supreme Nature; and
there is not one of these Lines, or of these Relations of Dependence, of
Respect, and of Union, but what makes in us as many Duties.

All our Being is owing to God, and it is owing to Him under a thousand and a
thousand Regards; and though it would be much more easy to count the Hairs of
our Heads, and the Sands of the Sea, than to count the Number of the Essential
Obligations wherein we are bound to him; yet, methinks, we may reduce them to
these Four General Heads; To the Duties of Fear, To the Duties of Affiance, To
the Duties of Dependence, and To the Duty of Love, whether it be of Union and
of Holy Concupiscence, or of Preference, or of pure Complacency and entire
Resignation: And if we would reflect well upon the manner How God Acts and
Operates continually in Us by an Omnipotent and Infinite Action, by which he
makes and entertains the Union of our Souls and of our Bodies, we shall find,
That it discovers to Us, and makes Us see more sensibly than any thing else,
the Love, the Fear, the Affiance, and all the Sentiment of Dependence which we
owe him.

The Fear of God.
We ought to fear him, as he who can render our Souls irreparably unhappy,
according to the Word of the Wisdom Incarnate, Fear not, says he, those who
threaten to kill your Bodies, but fear him who is able to deliver up your Souls
to despair, and plunge them into everlasting fire. You see here the first Duty;
The first, not in Dignity, or by the order of Excellency and of Rank, says St.
Augustine, but the first in relation to our interessed Sensibility; since it is
thereby that it commonly begins to be touched. And can this Duty be more lively
drawn near us, and placed before our Eyes, than by an Action so efficacious and
so Sovereign, by an Empire so Almighty and so Invincible, by which God causes
in us the dolorous and affecting Sentiment of all kinds of Pains, of
Incommodity and Diseases, the Idea's whereof may be always present, either by
our own Pains, or by those of other Men. Men strive to make terrible Pictures
of Gods Vengeances, to establish and imprint the fear of them; but, as I have
observed, there is no need of making such Efforts, when one has once conceived
the manner how our Souls have Pain and Grief in our Body; we have nothing to do
but to remember that God will wound and strike after another manner the Impure
and Reprobated Souls, delivered up his to Wrath and to his Eternal Vengeance,
than he now wounds us by to make us sensible and concerned for the conservation
of our Bodies.

Of Hell.
I found once a Libertine, who told me he could not comprehend that Hell should
be such as they said it was. I did no more than ask him If he had never had a
Fever, the Cholique, or the Toothache, which might have very much disturbed
him, and if he had never had them, if he had ever seen any body in those
torments. The Libertine answered, That he himself had had but too much
Experience of them. Alas, said I to him, do you but imagine now an Eternal Fit
of a burning Fever, or the Cholique, or the Rage of a desperate Toothache, and
you have conceived what Hell is; Do not you apprehend, That the Power which at
present makes in us these so sad Conditions, can make them eternally in our
Souls, if they have rendered themselves worthy of his Wrath; And there needed
no more to that Spirit, who till then was most disordered, and the greatest
Libertine, perhaps, that ever was, to make him conceive Hell: He confessed it,
and believed it so well, that he quitted not only Debaucheries, but the World;
He afterward made an edifying Repentance, which was known to a great many.

The Scripture teaches us, that all the Evil, the Pains and the Calamities in
the World, which at present do afflict Mankind, all the Terrors and Dreads
which affright them, are no other but Lightnings which come out beforehand from
the Cloud of Gods Wrath, and from the Shadows of the Manifestations of his
Vengeance; The sharpest Pain, the Sword, the Fire, the Plague, Diseases,
general and particular Calamities, are not in the World, says the Wise Man,
but to serve for an Idea and a Demonstration of the Justice and the Wrath which
God ought signally to manifest upon Sinners, Ad vindictam creata sunt.

Hell is nothing but the fixed and settled Wrath of God upon Sinners; and it is
impossible to doubt but that it ought to settle upon them, since they persist
even to the Death in the obstinacy of their Revolt and their Irregularity,
because he cannot abandon eternally his Creatures to the liberty and obstinacy
of their Licentiousness and of their Revolt: How much then ought we to fear him
for that Wrath that can make in us Wounds so deep and so cruel, and at the same
time so irremediable and so incurable, when he shall Act by a true Spirit of
Wrath and Vengeance; Seeing that now he Acts only by Goodness and Bounty, or by
the Spirit of his well-doing Inclination, that he does not hurt us but to heal
us, yet he gives us such dolorous and such sensible Wounds! Oh God of
Vengeances, how heavily will you lay your Hand upon us, and how will your Wrath
strike and wound us, since your Goodness and your Mercy wounds us with Pains so
lively and so penetrating!

The Duty of Religion.
We ought then, without doubt, to fear this so terrible a Power. But if we
ought thus to fear it, because it has a delicate Grandeur, which is hurt by
our Revolt, and a formidable Anger and Wrath, which ought severely to punish
our Disorders; we ought no less also to apprehend our Dependence: And the
lively and penetrating manner whereby this Supreme Nature makes us perpetually
to feel its Empire over the double part of our Being, Acting in our Souls and
in our Bodies continually, carries it into our Heart, and puts upon our Head,
as it were an immense Weight, as Job felt, under the which our whole Being must
be perpetually incurvated and debased with Respect and with Dependence; as are
in the Divine Word, those Sublime and Immortal Intelligences, which bend not at
all under the Weight of the Universe which they bear, yet do notwithstanding
bend and prostrate themselves perpetually under his Throne, debased in
themselves in their Dependence and in their Nothingness.

Of Faith or Affiance in God.
We don't commonly conceive, That Affiance is a Duty for which we are
accountable to God, though it is one of the most Essential Homages that we owe
him; It is the most Essential Act of the Supreme Worship which we owe to his
Sovereign Bounty and to his Sovereign Puissance; We do never sufficiently
acknowledge these two Attributes, but by our full and entire Affiance, which is
the most Essential Part of that which in the Divine Word is called Faith; for
it is not the Acquiescence of our Spirit in things Revealed, which is that
which is most agreeable to God in Faith. It is Affiance which gives the
greatest Value and the greatest Merit to our Faith: And in Effect, it is not so
great a Wonder that we believe That God does not deceive us in that which he
says; but to attend without Wavering, and with a full and entire Assurance, all
that which we hope from him with Affiance; This is that excellent Faith which
is the Soul of that Christian Prayer, of which the Divine Redeemer has given a
Lesson to the World, and not to Hesitate at all, because he does not do every
thing that we will; This is that Faith which removes Mountains, that the Divine
Redeemer would have us have in our Hearts; Therein is an excellent and
exquisite Worship; There is the Sovereign Homage paid to the Sovereign Power
and to the Sovereign Goodness: And this is a Worship which God requires of us,
and which he will receive from our Hearts, and of which he cannot be frustrated
without resenting it, and without being extremely offended thereby. He says to
our unbelieving Hearts, to our uncertain and doubting Hearts, that which our
Savior said to S. Peter, Modicae Fidei quare dubitasti? and he says it to them
with an extreme Indignation and an extreme Sentiment; because, as he would have
us do every thing that we desire to do, with a chaste and pure Affiance; so he
wills that we should desire it with a lively and ardent Faith, animated with
Affiance and a full Assurance as much as is possible.

The Duty of Affiance is indubitable, and nothing can make us so well apprehend
it, and at the same time persuade us, than the perpetual Miracle by which, and
with which we have seen, that God Operates in our Bodies according to the
Desires of our Souls: I say, the Miracle, not that that Action (by which God
transports and moves our Members and our Bodies, where we will in the moment
that our Souls desire) ought to be regarded as a true and proper Miracle; since
we do not at all call that a Miracle, which is made in consequence of the Laws
of Nature, or the General Will of God: But because there is nothing more Divine
in all the Miracles that can be, than that Regularity whereby the Desires of
our Wills are followed by the Effective Motion of our Members and of our whole
Body, at such time as they are not hindered by any Relation, or by any
Obstruction of the Nerves, or by any Dislocation or Fracture of the Bones, we
may say that this is a perpetual Miracle of Nature, which perpetually Preaches
to us this Divine Affiance of that Evangelical Faith, of which one single
Spark, like a Grain of Mustard Seed, is able to remove Mountains: For as this
Eternal Power, by the Effect and the Engagement of his General Will, by which
he makes and entertains the Union of Souls and Bodies, applies himself to move
and transport our Bodies as we will, according to the Laws and the Rules of
that Union, which he has resolved never to depart from, to Act as an Universal
Cause, as it seems fit to his Greatness, and worthy of his Sovereign and
Infinite Wisdom. So when we unite our selves to him by an entire and perfect
Affiance, we unite our selves to his Almightiness, and we make him sure to do
every thing that we expect from him without Doubt and without Uncertainty
according to the Sacred Oracles of the Gospel. And thus it is that the Saints
under the New Law, and the Prophets under the Old Law, have disposed of the
Heavenly Almightiness to make it do Wonders and Miracles (the Historical Fact
of which, is the most established, and the most incontestable thing in the
World) almost as we do make use of the Members of our Bodies, and the things
whereof we have the most free disposition. Our Affiance, which strictly and
intimately unites us by its lively Faith to the Eternal Goodness and Power,
renders them, as it were, in some manner united and dependent upon us. This
Eternal Goodness, and this Eternal Power, have so great an Inclination to
communicate and expand themselves, that they only wait for our lively Faith, or
our Affiance, to put themselves into our Hands, as it were, and to be obedient
to our Desires.

The love of Holy Concupiscence for God.
But it is above all the Duty of Love, whether it be of Complacency and
Preference, or of Union and Holy Concupiscence, which springs and flows
sensibly from the Knowledge we have been acquiring, of the Sovereign Source of
Beauty and of Felicities, which that Eternal Essence contains, to which we so
certainly see that we are able to aspire, and to drink eternally of it; since
at this very hour, wherein he does nothing but make us Combat, and keep us in
Trial and in Exercise, to see if we render our selves worthy of being Rewarded;
He makes us feel so indubitably the Pleasures, and the Delights which he
contains; and He discovers to us so many Charms, and so many Beauties, in his
Sovereign Nature.

Brutish Men remove themselves far from God by Pleasure; and Pleasure is a
Rivulet that flows from that pure and eternal Source, by which our Heart ought
naturally to mount up again to God. The present Pleasure which wholly,
essentially and immediately comes from God, ought to bring us back again to
him. God does not give it us, but to draw to himself our Hearts, to which he
has not given Motion but for Pleasure; He has not given us Love but for Good
and Pleasure; and he makes us see that the Source of Good and Pleasure is in
Him.

There are some who conceive the Love of Union (or of this Holy Concupiscence,
which I here speak of, and whereupon I Establish Duty) as a Disorder and
Irregularity of Self-love, which Reverses the Order of the Essential Relation,
which all Creatures ought to have to God; but this is not rightly to comprehend
the Free and Voluntary Relation, by which we ought to relate our selves to God.
We do not only relate our selves to God by the Confession of our Dependence,
and of His Supereminent Excellence over us, by which we do acknowledge, that we
deserve to be Annihilated by him; We do no less relate our selves to him, by
that which we do from the Source of Pleasure and Happiness, which we
acknowledge in Him only. It is no less agreeable for him, to be the Source of
Happiness and of Pleasure, which is as it were the Accomplishment, the
Perfection, and the Crowning of our Being, than to be the Source and the
Principle of the Foundation of our Being. The Love of Union, or of this Sacred
Thirst, which I call Holy Concupiscence, does no less Honor to God, than the
Love of the most pure, and the most disinteressed Complacency.

God is not so much God by any other way, (if we may be permitted to say so)
than in being the only and essential Source, and necessary Principle of
Happiness and of Pleasure. St. Austin says, That Felicity is in God, the
Summit of his Divinity, because his Infinite Felicity is that which is most
Divine and most Eminent in Him; and we may say, That the Advantage of
containing and shutting up in Himself Felicity and Pleasure, is, (if we may be
permitted to enhance upon the Expression of St. Augustine) the Act and the
Summit of that very Summit of his Divinity.

This Love then of Union and of Holy Concupiscence, is not only not Evil and
Imperfect, but it is positively Infinitely Perfect, and the greatest Honor that
can be rendered to the Supreme Being; and all the Motions of our Heart ought to
be continual and uninterupted Acts thereof. Our Heart and our Will in general,
is not, as has been said, but the Love of Good and of Pleasure: And as it is
God who is the Good and the Pleasure, or at least, the Source and the Principle
of Pleasure; since it is He only that causes it, and since it is in Him and by
Him, that we ought only to Hope for our Sovereign Pleasure; All the Pantings of
our Heart, and all its Agitations for Pleasure, ought to be turned and directed
toward Him; Our Heart ought continually to regard nothing but Him, and to
search after nothing but Him; All its Motion ought to Center in Him: This
Torrent or this River ought to have this perpetual Course, it ought to Flow in
this Channel, and it ought not to suffer one single Rill, or one drop of its
Waters to be lost; Its Course and its Motion ought never to stand still, or be
turned aside, or diverted from that Bound and Center, or go never so little out
of its Channel. Our Heart does never turn aside from God, who is its Bound and
its Center, but it wanders; and it never wanders from God, but it Revolts, and
commits an extreme Out rage upon Him. In Loving God thus, we are able to Love
every thing that we are pleased to Love; as St. Augustine says, Because that in
loving him after this manner, whatsoever we shall Love, it will be Him that we
shall principally Love; it will be Him that we shall Love with a Final and
Central Love; if I may be permitted to say so with the Holy Fathers; but not
loving God after this manner, We cannot love any thing without a Fault, without
Impiety, and without Sacrilege; to any other Objects whatsoever, that our Love
is tied, without him, and out of him, it is a Profanation of the most Sacred
Thing of the World; Since it is the Profanation of the invincible and
insurmountable Motion of Attraction, by which God draws us to himself under the
confused Idea of Good; which he would have us to render distinct and neat, in
acknowledging that it is He alone that is the Good, whereby our necessary and
invincible Love of Good, is rendered a free and a deserving Love; because this
Sovereign Being is so Good, that He is willing to make it deserving, for our
applying our selves to distinguish that He alone is the Good; that it is He
alone who gives us Pleasure, and can make in us Contentment: And since we have
made the distinction, let us not be deceived by false Idea's of false Goods,
which the rash Judgments of our Passions, and of our Senses, propose to us, and
make us place amongst their Objects.

The Love of Complacency.
And it is not only this Love of this Holy Concupiscence, which we owe to God.
We owe him also an infinite Love of Complacency, wholly disinteressed, and
wholly pure: We ought to Love this Eternal and Sovereign Beauty, for its own
sake; and if we Reflect upon the manner how she discovers her self to Us, in
the manner whereby she Acts continually in our Souls, as has been Explained;
We shall see, that as it is God that we Love by that confused Motion of our
Heart, by which we Love, and search after Pleasure; so it is only Him likewise
that we Love by the Natural Love, that we have for Order, for Truth, and for
Justice, and generally for all Duty; for it is God who is this Order, this
Truth, and this Justice, which we Love, when (as wholly Irregular as we are) we
Love Order and Duty in spite of our selves; and when we hate and condemn the
disorder and violation of Duty which we commit, This Truth, this Justice, and
this Order, which makes it self thus to be beloved by all Spirits, and all
Hearts, in all parts of the World, is nothing else but God himself: This is the
Sovereign Beauty of Nature, and of the Supreme Essence, the Lively and Eternal
Source of Order, of Equity, and of Duty; the Eternal and Substantial Truth,
which not discovering it self but by Rays, as it were escaping out, and all
obscured by the Clouds of our inordinate Desires, through which, these pass even
to our Eyes, makes this Sovereign Adoration of Love from all Hearts, to be
rendered to it. That Beauty which we have in Virtue and in Duty, is nothing else
but the weak Glimmerings of the ineffable Beauty, and Charm of the Supreme
Being: Every thing that we Love, whether it be in the Abstracted Idea of our
Duties, or in the real Charms of the Creatures, is nothing but the Splendour and
the Rays; or to say better, The Shadow of that Charm of Sovereign Beauty and
Perfection, which gloriously Shines in the Supreme Nature.

Nature commences equally in us the Love of Complacency, and the Love of Union,
or of Holy Concupiscence, which all Created Spirits owe to God: As it is God
whom we Love necessarily under the confused Idea of Happiness, of Contentment,
and of Pleasure; so it is him whom we Love invincibly under the Idea's, and
under the Names of Truth, of Justice, of Beauty, of Virtue, of Duty or of
Equity; for that Truth, that Justice, that Beauty, and that Equity, that
All-Intelligible, and All-Invisible Light of Truth, of Equity, and of Duty,
which Shines in all places of the World; that makes it self be Seen, Loved and
Adored, invincibly by all Hearts, in all Ages, and in all People Civilized and
Barbarous, cannot choose but be at least the Glimmering of an Eternal and an
Infinite Light, wholly Intelligible, and wholly Invisible, which subsists
Eternally, and Essentially by it self; and makes a part, and one even of the
Principal Grounds of that Sovereign Nature and Perfection, which we call the
Supreme Nature and Being: And as we perceive that this Glimmering, and these
Glances of this Original Beauty, is so amicable by it self, that as corrupt as
we are, we cannot hinder our selves from Loving it; so it is easy for us to
comprehend, That this Sovereign Nature (from which it flows, together with that
Almighty Charm, whereof we resent so strong, and so invincible an Empire
continually) deserves well our Complacency, and to be Loved only and
Sovereignly for it self.

Thus it is, That in Reflecting upon the manner how the Eternal Beauty gives a
glimpse of it self to our Souls, through the Bodies which obscure it, and which
are as it were Vails, and Walls, betwixt the Souls and it; We are able, and we
ought, to lift up our selves above all Corporeal and sensible Beauties, and
Images, for to despise them, and to mount up to the Eternal Beauty, to Adore
and to Love it only.

But if all our Duties toward God, spring so Naturally from these Idea's,
which the knowledge of our Souls gives us of Him; those which we owe to our
selves, and which we owe to other Men, do no less flow from thence.

CHAP. XXIV.
Duties toward our Selves, and toward other Men; and first of Temperance, and
of the Crime of Incontinence.
YOU see there how all our Religious Duties toward God, do spring and flow
from that fruitful Principle of the Visible Empire with which God; who holds
our Souls in our Bodies, Acts perpetually in them. Let us see now how those for
which we are indebted to our selves, do thence arise and spring likewise.

We have included them all a long while ago, under the Term and Name of
Temperance; and Temperance includes all in Effect: It means every thing that we
owe to our selves, whether for the Body, or for the Soul; and who sees not,
that it springs from what has been said, concerning the Assembly of the Soul
and the Body, That God for such Noble Ends, condemns all Dissoluteness which
dishonors and degrades both the one and the other. There are some who are hard
to be convinced of the Disorder, and of the Crime of certain Incontiniences;
But let them conceive well the Design of God in the Union, which He makes of
Souls and Bodies; and in the End of the Instincts and Motions of Pleasure,
which He gives for the Propagation of the Human Species, and they will see that
not only this Pleasure has in its Intention, an Essential Relation of one Sex
to another (this will make them conceive the horrors of those Monstrous
Impurities which the Civil and Politic Laws do no less condemn, than Religion
and Nature;) but that it ought likewise so necessarily to be Enclosed within
the Sacred Bed, and Holy Society of Marriage, That from the moment it breaks
off, and goes out from thence, it becomes Criminal and Sacrilegious. If we did
well comprehend, That it is God that raises up the Bodies to an Honor of
Alliance with the Souls, and that he does it to make them serve for a Trial,
and for a Matter, to their Triumph, and to their Recompense; We should not only
clearly conceive the Disorder of all kinds of Inconveniences, and of all
Intemperances, of which there is not any one, but which in defiling our Bodies,
violates the most Holy, and the most Religious of all Consecrations: But we
should livelily conceive that Obligation of the Sanctification of Souls and
Bodies, which St. Paul Preaches continually, and which he requires to be so
perfect, that St. Gregory had reason to say, That it goes as far, as to impose
upon us the Obligation of Spiritualizing our Bodies, almost as much in this
Life, as they ought to be in the other. It is the same thing with the Duties,
for which we are accountable one to another; they spring all of them from the
same Principle, and from the same Knowledge; Let us but say a word or two of
them in general.

There are two sorts of Duties from Man to Man, there are general ones and
particular ones; The general, are those which bind us equally to all Men; The
particular ones, are those which are limited and determined to Particulars; We
are accountable to all Men for Justice, for Charity, for Civility, and for good
Behavior, for a certain Honor due to the Impression of the Divine Resemblance,
and to the Regards of Natural Equality; And we owe Friendship to our Friends,
Piety to our Parents, Acknowledgments to our Masters, Obedience to our
Superiors: And all these Duties flow with an indubitable Clearness and
Evidence, from the Knowledge which we have acquired, of the manner how our
Souls are in our Bodies, essentially united to God by themselves, and
accidentally by their Bodies to all the Visible World, and to all the Bodies of
Civil and Natural Society.

As to Common Duties, it cannot be, but that we seeing into the manner how our
Souls are in our Bodies wholly united equally in God, wholly animated with one
and the same Influence, with Divine Life, marked with one and the same
Resemblance with him, and equally impelled by the same Love of Duty: It cannot
be, I say, But that we must be obliged to Love, and to accomplish all the
extents of Juslice, of Truth, of Charity, and of Civility, or of mutual and
reciprocal Respect toward all Men, who under all the Differences of unequal
Conditions and Fortunes, do conserve the Honor of Natural Equality, and the
Divine Resemblance.

The Duty of Blood, and of Alliances.
And as to particular Duties, whether they be those which immediately proceed
from our Bodies, as those of Piety which makes the Alliance betwixt Parents and
Children, Husbands and Wives, Brothers and Neighbors; or those which proceed
immediately from the Soul, as the Acknowledgment which obliges us to our
Benefactors, and the Obedience which submits us to our Superiors, as having the
Sovereignty, and the Character of Gods Authority; They do all of them equally
spring from the same Knowledge; because in Regard of the Relations, which we
have one to another by the Body, it is indubitable, That (the Bodies entering as
they do into the Order of Providence, by which God prepares us to the Order of
Eternity, by the present Trial of Time); He Wills that we should follow all the
Duties which occur to us from their Occasion; And He Wills by consequence, That
we should be more entirely United to those, from whom we hold our Bodies, or
who hold their Bodies from Us.

The Bodies are the Knot, and the Ligament of our Union with the Visible World,
as has been said; and they are there by the Knot and the Ligament of Natural
and Civil Society; and as the one and the other does not subsist, but by the
particular Societies of Families and of Alliances which compose them; For as
Rivulets form Rivers, and Rivers the Ocean, the particular Societies of
Families began to form Towns and Buroughs, and those Towns and Buroughs which
proceed from thence, do form States and Commonwealths, whereof is made the
Universal Society which is Governed by the Common Law, which is called Jus
Gentium, or The Law of Nations, besides the particular Laws of every Country
and of every State. So it cannot be that particular Societies, who are the
Basis and the Foundation of all the Civil and Political World, should not have
their Laws, their Policy and Equity, as well as the Universal Society, and by
consequence, their Duties; to which it is necessary we should be obliged in
proportion to the diverse Degrees of Relation which it gives us one to another.
From whence arises the Duties of Citizen to Citizen, of Brother to Brother, of
Neighbor to Neighbor, of a Son to his Father, of a Servant to his Master, and
of a Master to his Servant.

The Crime of Superstition.
There are some People (and it is a Disorder very common and very much spread
abroad) who make no account of these Duties; and they are for the most part
People that are otherwise nice and scrupulous concerning the Commendable, but
not Essential Practices of certain Popular Institutions or Devotions; They
would believe themselves very guilty, if they should have omitted or violated
them; and yet they do not at all believe that they hurt their Consciences, in
violating or omitting the Duties of Friendship, of Fidelity, of Charity, of
Proximity, of Paternal Piety, and of those other Natural Duties, which arise in
us from these Relations which have been Explained. And yet in the mean time
there is no Religion without an Effective Accomplishment of all these Duties,
which have all of them their Principle and their Source in God; We cannot
worship God in Spirit and in Truth, as he would have us worship him, if we do
not love and embrace in him all those Obligations; And the pretended Religion
of these false Worshippers, is nothing but Superstition and Illusion, equally
vain and criminal.

I say Superstition; for Superstition is not only, as some conceive, the
worshipping of false Divinities; the false worshipping of the true Divinity is
no less a Superstition, than the worshipping of false Divinities; and all that
pretended Piety which despises the least of Natural Duties, and which does not
prefer them to those Devotions, Practices, Customs, and Humane Institutions,
howsoever authorized and approved of by the Church, is a real Superstition; For
it is so far from being Piety and Religion, that it is Irreligion and
Sacrilege; It is a sort of Impiety which belongs to the Species of Idolatry,
and the Species of Blasphemy; because it is Superstition, and Superstition is a
Species of Idolatry, and a Species of Blasphemy; since to conceive of God
Idea's which dishonor him, is the most express, and the most criminal Species
of that which we call Blasphemy: And those who think to please God by a false
Worship, as they do, who omitting their Natural and Essential Duties, think to
please him by Accessory Duties, do incontestably commit that outrage of
Blasphemy: It is not the True God, the Principle of all Natural Duty, which
they adore; it is, as that Ancient has said, a ridiculous Idol which they
offer up Incense to; It is a Fantastical Divinity which they have forged, and
which they adore, with the Nonsensical and Impertinent Conceits which they
offer him.

It would be of great Importance, seriously to reflect upon this Principle,
because the World is full of Superstition and of Superstitious Men: The Spirit
of Man is so feeble, and so little enlightened of its true Duty, he knows God so
little, and he knows himself so little, that he makes a thousand false Idea's:
And on the other side, his Self-love is so industrious and so apt to deceive
him, that it makes him believe all that it pleases, to maintain it self in the
quiet possession of that tyrannical Empire, which withdraws him from the
obedience which he owes to God. We violate the Foundation of Religion, whose
Duties would so much incommode our Self-love; and we are so blind, that we
think to cover and deface all the Crime and all the Irregularity of this
Essential Irreligion, by these Accessory Worships and Observations. This is the
Disorder for which the Prophets in their Time did reprove false Worshippers;
This is it for which the Divine Redeemer blamed the Scribes and Pharisees; This
is it for which we may blame our Age as much as any other.

But if there be Irregularity and Disorder in Superstitious Worship, there is
no less in Accusing and Condemning for Superstition, the innocent Worship which
true Faith and sincere Piety may animate in Us; and it is worth while to make
some Reflections thereupon.

The Disorder of being Scandalized at Indifferent Worship.
Such is the Disorder and Crime of Superstition. But we must here observe upon
this Occasion, That as it is a real sort of Impiety, to desire to honor God by
vain Worship, which cannot please him, since it is to attribute to him a liking
of that which is unworthy of him, and, as that Ancient said, to make him Weak,
Ridiculous, and Fantastical: So it is also a pitiful Weakness (and almost no
less condemnable, because it is so full of Pride and Presumption) which cannot
suffer that a pure and sincere Faith should annex to the Indifferent and
External Worship, an outward Demonstration of Inward Piety and Religion; Which
is that which has always made amongst the truly Faithful, that Body of Public
Ceremonies and Particular Devotions, which the Church has never Condemned,
which Charity has always well Interpreted, and which Piety has Practiced, and
has never looked upon as Evil, because she has only looked upon them as
Accessories.

These are two Excesses almost equally condemnable, To Will that God should be
contented with Superstitious Worship, and Not to be willing to suffer others to
annex the External Demonstration of their sincere Faith, and of their Internal
Religion, to Indifferent Worships, especially when they go so far as to Judge
and Condemn them as Superstitious and Idolatrous, and to break the Charity and
the Band of Unity, as the Phanaticks of these later Times have done; Under the
Pretext of avoiding Superstition, they fell into Presumption, and into a
Presumption no less Impious and Sacrilegious, than the most condemnable
Superstition. S. Paul would that in things Indifferent, Every one should abound
(says he) in his own Sense, that he should follow his particular Relish, and
should condemn no man. S. Paul would have it, and this is the Reason; for why
should we Judge that which of it self is not condemnable, and which being
Indifferent, may be animated with a true Piety, as those do, who are so much
offended at the Placing of the Communion Table, at Bells, Organs, and the
Surplice, and at the diverse Ceremonies which the Church suffers or authorizes;
Let them but make a serious Reflection upon this Principle, and they will have,
perhaps, as much horror of their Sacrilegious and rash Presumption, which they
pronounce against the Church, as of the Superstition which they hitherto
believed they saw in Her.

Obedience due to Powers, and to the Church.
But let us pass on to new Duties; for if there are Duties which do arise from
the Obligation which we have one to another by the Body, inasmuch as the Body
is the Knot and the Band of our Union with the Material and Visible World; then
it is impossible but that Duties also should proceed from it, inasmuch as it
unites us into a Political Society, and renders us Members either of a
Monarchy, or of a Republic. Thus if God (by some particular Providence, or by
a Concatenation or Engagement of the natural Events which result from the
Universal Motion by which he Governs Nature and Politic Society, as Universal
Cause) has caused the Sovereignty of his Authority to fall into the Hands of
some one of the Members of the common Society, under what Name or Form soever
he Exercises it, it is certain that our Obedience is due unto him as unto God,
so long as he Acts by virtue of that Character and that Sovereignty; And we
cannot know that which our Souls owe to God, but we must at the same time
acknowledge that which is owing to all those who bear any Character of
Authority and Superiority derived from Him; Such are Kings, Judges,
Magistrates, Officers of War, and Pastors of the Church, who with the
Sovereignty of the Grace of Redemption, which they have to Administer to
others, have that likewise of Power and Authority from God Incarnate, for the
Direction and Discipline of the External Order of his Visible Monarchy, which
is what we call the Church, and for the Conservation of the Unity of Worship,
and of the Purity of the Sacraments and of Doctrine, the want of which is the
occasion of Schisms and Heresies.

The Duty of Christian Unity, and the Crime of Schisms and Heresies.
There are some People, who are otherwise of great Justness and great Exactness
of Reasoning, and of clear Idea's and quick Notions, who do not for all that
comprehend the Crime of Schism and Heresy. They believe, That retaining that
which they call the Foundation of Faith and Salvation, which is to Worship and
acknowledge Jesus Christ as Mediator and Redeemer, by whom only Men and Angels
themselves can please God, Every one may make a Religion to himself, and follow
it according to his own Conscience, and give, as well as he understands, his
Sense of the Divine Mysteries and of the Divine Word; This is the Occasion that
amongst such it is not material, as to the Fundamentals, what Society they
adhere to amongst Christians, and that they account as nothing That which we
call Schism and Heresy; But besides that it cannot be in vain, that the Divine
Word so much condemns Schisms and Heresies, though we should not know the Crime
and Disorder of them, we need but only reflect upon that Sovereign Unity of the
Sovereign Power which Presides over the Union of our Souls and Bodies, for to
see and comprehend it clearly.

This Sovereign Uniformity, this Unity of Conduct, of Rules, and immutable
Laws, whereby this Infinite Power which holds our Souls united to our Bodies,
Acts upon our Bodies, and in all the Souls in all the Parts of the World after
the same manner, is a sensible Proof and Conviction of its Sovereign Unity; And
it is impossible to have an Idea of this Sovereign Unity, without thereby
seeing the Crime of all that which we call Schism and Heresy.

But let us proceed, and see how it follows from all that has been said of the
manner how God Acts in our Souls upon the Occasion of our Bodies, as a
Necessary and Universal Cause, with a Clearness and Evidence so sensible, That
we cannot firmly acquit our selves of any of our Duties, but by the constant
and regular Practice of that Christian Self-denial, which makes the whole
Foundation of the Gospel, by which we ought to watch without ceasing, to
fortify in us Conscience and Natural Right, by weakening our Concupiscences.

CHAP. XXV.
The Necessity of Gospel Self-denial, Established and Justified by the same
Principles.
GOD, who Acts (as has been said) as Universal Cause in the Dependence which
he entertains between the Soul and the Body, does give, as it were in spite of
himself, to our Souls, by the inviolable Law of the Union of the Soul and the
Body, agreeable Pleasures and Sentiments, which fortify Concupiscence, as
often as he is thereto determined in consequence of an immutable Decree of his
General Will, by the Disposition of the Body; And as these Occasions do
continually present themselves, if we do not watch to turn them away, so
Concupiscence is augmented continually thereby; And as this fatal Concupiscence
is Essentially contrary to our Duties, because it is Essentially a Revolt
against Order, against the Law, and the Eternal Righteousness; Non est legi Dei
subjecta, (says St. Paul) nec enim potest: So from thence it comes to pass,
that if we are not perpetually attentive to decline the Occasions of these
Pleasures which entertain and augment Concupiscence or sensible Love, it
increases and raises it self to that degree, that Righteousness, Reason and
Conscience are wholly stifled, and all the Natural and Civil Duties so
enfeebled and weakened, that they are not able to support themselves against any
Temptation that has the least strength in it.

If God had not given us the Power, and a Command to moderate and correct our
Concupiscence, by this continual Vigilance of Self-denial, possibly we might be
in some manner excusable in our opposition to Justice, to Charity, to Truth, to
the Respect of natural Equality, and to all other general and particular
Obligations of our Reasonable Nature.

The necessity that there is that He should affectionate Us to the Conversation
of the Body, produces not only this sensible Love, which we call Concupiscence,
but an inevitable necessity that he should perpetually augment it by this
Action of Universal Cause; but he has given us the Grace, and the Precept of
Sel-denial, through his All-foreseeing and Fatherly Goodness; For in that instant
wherein as Universal Cause he is obliged to entertain and augment Concupisence
in us, if we do not watch to avoid in us the Occasions which determine him to
give us sensible Pleasures; He does not only give us the Power to avoid those
Occasions, by the Empire which he gives us over the Liberty of our Thoughts and
our Motions; But as a Particular Cause, he came in Person to bring us the Law,
the Example, and the Grace of Self-denial; and he does not cease to call to us,
and press us by the clear and loud voice of his Gospel, that we should
continually stand upon our guard, and never slacken our care to cut off all
these Occasions.

Every Pleasure is pure and innocent in it self, and only criminal by its
Circumstances.
It would be very ill to understand Christian Morality and the Gospel, to
regard it as a malignant Inclination and a Jealousy which God has of us, to
grudge us our little Pleasure, and our Natural Satisfaction. God does not at
all hate Pleasures, neither is he capable of grudging us them. There is not one
Pleasure which does not immediately derive it self from him, and which he does
not cause, and by consequence, which he does not love, and which he would not
willingly that we should taste of: his Design is to nourish us eternally with
Joy and Pleasure, as he does not live himself but with Joy and Pleasure, with
that Divine and Heavenly Food; and yet he spreads abroad a thousand Pleasures
in the mean time, upon all the Acts of our Natural Life, whether it be to make
them serve to sweeten, as has been said, the Pain of our State of Trial, or
else to give us, as it were, some Earnest, or Taste beforehand, of the
Sovereign Felicity, which he contains in his Supreme Essence, and wherewith he
will abundantly fill us in his happy Eternity; for the present Pleasures enter
in the general Idea which St. Paul gives us of the present World, as of a
Shadow, a Figure, and a kind of Prospect of the World to come; they are given
us as Shadows and Figures, as an Earnest and a Foretaste, as Drops and
Particles of that Ocean of Pleasure, which the World to come prepares for us;
And God can neither hate them in themselves, nor envy them us, nor hinder us
from them in respect of themselves.

He does not do it in Effect; neither does he prohibit or condemn any of them,
as the Church has decided against those Heretics, who destroy and condemn
Marriage. It is never the Pleasure in it self, and for it self, which God
concondemns and prohibits, and which renders us Impure and Criminal: On the
contrary, every Pleasure is most proper of it self to purify us, because it is
most proper to unite Us to God, as to its lively Source, and the Source also of
all Purity. It is never the Pleasure which causes the Sin, and which disorders
or corrupts the Heart of Man by it self; It is the Reinversement, and the
Violation of the Order of Pleasure, which causes the Impurity, the Disorder,
and the Crime of that Thing in the World, which is the most amiable, and the
most pure in it self.

God does not deny Us any Pleasure for the Pleasure's sake; but he has
enclosed this Rivulet and this Current within its Banks and its Channel; He
has prescribed certain Bounds and certain Circumstances to it, beyond which he
will not have it pass. God as a Particular Cause, by the Regards of his
Paternal Providence over us, is obliged to prescribe certain Circumstances, and
certain Conditions, to the Pleasures which he makes in us as Universal Cause:
He has been obliged to enclose the Sea within a Bank, that it might not
overflow the whole Earth; and he has been forced to Limit in us the Desire of
Pleasures which he is obliged to give us upon the Occasion of the Body, within
Barriers and Ramparts; to the End that our Concupiscence should be Bounded, and
that it should not injure his Rights, nor trouble the good Order of the
Universe, nor settle it self under the Shade of Bodily Pleasures, and so forget
the Pleasures to come by too great a Relish of the present Pleasures.

The Necessity of Gospel-Self-denial and Mortification.
You see here what is the Reason we are debarred from Pleasures, and that all
Pleasures of the Body are dangerous, and require in us a continual Vigilance
and Attention to remove or moderate them. This is the Principle of that
Self-denial and of that Self-hatred which the Gospel so strictly commands us.
Our Concupiscences have need to be restrained, to the end that our Soul may
preserve its Liberty and its Purity, its Empire and its Reason, together with
our Obedience and Subjection to God and his Duties; and if we do not soon
prevent them by continually weakening them in the beginning, it is impossible
but that they will subdue and stifle in us all our Duties. It belongs only to
us to render Concupiscence weak, and our Duties strong and stable, by the
constant Practice of Self-denial. With this constant Exercise of Self-denial,
and Opposition to the Inclination of Pleasure, we shall acquit our selves of
all our Duties; for Self-love being tamed thereby, and easily suppressed, gives
free leave for all the Virtues to issue out of the Natural Foundations of
Conscience, and out of the Supernatural Principle of Grace. Without this
Exercise and Usage of Self-denial we cannot clearly acquit our selves of any
Duty; We may from time to time, and by Intervals, perform some Acts of them,
when they are easy, and assisted by some Interest or Passion, but we can never
constantly accomplish them.

There is no Heart Pure and Innocent without Gospel Self-denial.
God Incarnate calls his Gospel, The Salt of the World; and it is by this Law
of Self-denial that it is effectively so. It is this Mystical and Spiritual
Salt, which hinders the Corruption of our Hearts and our Duties; By the
Practice of Self-denial these Duties subsist and continue Incorruptible in the
Hearts of Men, without which they degenerate into an universal Corruption; And
that is the Reason that there is so little Honesty, Virtue, and Love of Duty in
the World, and in this Part of the World especially, from whence Gospel
Self-denial is banished by express Profession; Every one can play his Part in
it; One may find a Color for the Corruption of his Heart, an Appearance and a
Masque of Honesty, and sometimes also of Piety and Superficial Religion; but
there is never any Truth or Fidelity, Amity or Equity, and much less Piety and
Effective Religion. Under this Superficies and this apparent Color, They have
their Hearts estranged from all Duties, being opposite to all their
Obligations, void of all Virtues, and subdued by all Vices; They can here
deceive themselves, they may believe of them what they will, and flatter
themselves with Friendship, Truth and Equity; but God sees them in the Light of
his Eternal Truth, full of a secret Opposition to Charity and Justice, full of
themselves, and enslaved by their Passion of Pleasure and Self-love.

These Acts do not always proceed from this Foundation of Corruption, because
the Occasions thereof are not continual; but the Foundation of Corruption is
always established in the Heart, it does not fail to express and manifest it
self in these Rencounters and Occurrences. There is nothing then more constant
and more certain than this Maxim, That without Gospel Self-denial there cannot
be in the Hearts of Men, either any solid Religion toward God, or any true
Honesty toward Men; And this Rule so Established by the constant Experience of
the World, follows necessarily from the Principles whereby our Souls are in our
Bodies.

But let us pass to our Third Part, and let us see How our Souls ought to Be
out of the Body, to draw from thence the last Part of Morality, which ought to
Regulate the Order of our Duties betwixt the present and future Life, between
Time and Eternity, and between the present World and the World to come.

The End of the Second Part.
A MORAL ESSAY Upon the Soul of Man.
PART III. Concerning our Duties of Time and Eternity, of the Present Life, and
of the Life to come; of the Present World, and of the World to come; which
Result from the manner how our Souls ought to be out of our Bodies, first of
all; and then in our Spiritualized Bodies, after the Universal Resurrection.
CHAP. I.
An Objection against the Design of this Third Part, to be Answered; which is,
to believe that it is impossible to know, how our Souls are to be out of our
Bodies.
SINCE we are accustomed to limit our Knowledges by our Senses; and that we do
not only follow with an extreme Propensity, the Facilily of Imagining, whose
Acts we Exercise, without doing any Violence to our selves; But besides, we
make but very little use of the Faculty of Reasoning, or of serving our selves
with the Lights already acquired, to enlighten the Matters, which we have not
as yet dived into: I have Reason to believe that many will Censure my
Undertaking of Rashness, to go about to speak of a thing so impenetrable, in
their Opinion so remote, and so hid from our Sights; as is the manner how our
Souls Are, and how they Operate out of our Bodies.

Perhaps there are those who will tell me, as it is said in the Book of Job,
Nunquid ingressus es portas mortis, aut ostia tenebrosa vidisti? But I hope
that all reasonable Persons will find, that my Curiosity is lawful: and that I
have Reason to Communicate it to all the World, in desiring that every one may
know how our Souls are out of our Bodies; and that all those who are willing to
give themselves the trouble of being Attentive, to use their Reason, will Judge
that my Enterprise is not Rash.

It is true, that we conceive nothing out of the Circumference, and beyond the
Activity of our Senses, and of our Imagination; and by consequence, out of our
Bodies, but an Immensity of Darkness; and that it is impossible, but that it
should appear Rash, to attempt to carry a Light into it: But if we remember
that Reason has Rays, and a Light, to which nothing can give Bounds; which is
that which St. Paul means, when he says that the Spirit, that is to say, the
Spiritual Nature pierces, penetrates, and enlightens all things: If we consider
the advantage, which Reason and the proper Intelligence of our Spiritual Nature
gives us, of being able surely to Enlarge our Knowledges, by the infallible
Consequences which we draw from things we have already known, for those which
we do not know as yet; We shall find that there is nothing more Natural, and
less Rash, than to endeavor to decide by the clear Idea which we have of our
Soul, and by the Notion, no less clear, which we have of the Supreme Nature;
which alone, is able to be the Cause of the diverse Conditions of the Soul, of
the Estate wherein it ought to place our Souls, after they shall have finished
their Trial in the Body; and that this Eternal Justice, shall have fixed upon
them his Anger or his Love, according as they shall have rendered themselves
worthy, by their Obedience and Fidelity, or by the obstinacy of their Disorder
and Revolt.

This double Notion, which we have so clear and so distinct, of God, and of our
Spiritual Nature, joined to that which we have of our present State, as of a
State where our Obedience and Fidelity are put to a Trial, and where the
Eternal Justice has his Eyes open, to see our Combat with the Flesh, and with
our Senses; We form a sure Light, by which we are able to enter and march
safely into that obscurity, and those darknesses; And since we have a Taper in
our hands, lighted by those Idea's, so clear, and so certain of the Knowledges,
which we have already acquired; why then should we not carry it into that dark
and unknown Country, which is of so great Importance to us, to discover and
know? Since we have Wind and Sails enough to carry us over to this New World,
why then should not we go thither to make a Map of it? Since our Reason may be
illuminated above the Darkness of the Night of our Senses, and of our
Imagination, why should not we illuminate the Blind, who being once Enlightened,
will no more resist the Light of Divine and Heavenly Revelation, which they
often esteem (when they are not Enlightened by Reason) but as a Fable, and a
Fiction? Then let us not fear to attempt this Discovery, and Explain how our
Souls are to be out of the Body, since we are able to speak of it with some
certainty.

The certainty of a New Estate, of a New and Immortal Life for our Souls, after
this Present Life.
We are able to speak most certain, and make as St. John did, a Description,
and a Topography of this World to come, and of this Heavenly Jerusalem. We do
not only know by the evident Conviction of the Spiritual Nature of our Souls,
That they are not at all destroyed, and annihilated by Death, which is not an
advantage to the Spiritual Nature, because there is nothing, even in the most
Corporeal Nature (which is most Frail, most Perishable, and most subject to
Corruption, and the most liable to Death) that Perishes entirely; But we know
with the same Certainty, That the Soul subsists with all its Foundation of
Life, which we see it has, which is the advantage, and essential Distinction
of the Spiritual Nature: For there is this Difference between a Spiritual or
Knowing Nature, and a Nature Corporeal, That the Corporeal Nature may be
deprived of Life, but not of its Being, for its Life is distinct from its Being
in the Body; for the Life of the Body is but a Motion, which it has there by
its Structure, its Organization, and its inward and natural Composition, which
it may lose, and does every day lose, without losing the Foundation of its
Being; And in preserving all the Basis of its material Substance, which always
remains and subsists, notwithstanding any Change which may happen to it in its
Structure, and its outward and sensible Form: But in Knowing or Spiritual
Nature, the Life and Being, are but one and the same thing; Since Knowledge and
Sensibility, or the Acts of the Appetitive Faculty, which are the Basis, and
the Foundation of their Being, are also essentially the Foundation of their
Life: For (in Spiritual Nature) to Live, is, not to Eat, Walk or to be Moved;
but to Know, to Perceive, to Will, to have Joy and Sadness, Pain and Pleasure.

Those of the Heathen Philosophers (who had some Glimmering of a true Idea of
the Spiritual Nature, but not under the Name of Spiritual Nature, but only of a
Knowing Nature) did so well perceive, That the Knowing Nature was Essentially
Living, that we see they all of them Established thereupon the Certainty of the
Immortality of Man's Soul; because indeed, say they, This Matter whereof the
Soul of Man is formed, is a Matter essentially Knowing, and by consequence
Living; if it is Air or Fire, it is not only an Air and a Fire that is most
subtle, but an Air and a Fire of a singular Nature, an Air and a Fire
essentially Knowing, and by consequence Living: Thus, though the Souls of Men
should be this Air, and this material Fire, say they, as some do imagine; yet
for all that, they would not cease to be Immortal, because they would be always
Essentially Living.

We see this System in all the Books of the Ancient Philosophers; and we see at
the same time, That this Notion of the Soul, as a Nature essentially Knowing,
(whereof we have a certainty, by a Conviction so lively, and so full of
Sentiments) convinced all these Ancient Sages, not only, That Death does not
touch the Life of our Souls, not only, that it does not destroy them; But on
the contrary, That Death makes the Life of them perfect, because it breaks
their Prison, and takes away from their Thoughts and their Views, the Wall
which stops them, and the Vail which blinds them: And their Conviction was so
great thereupon, that they did not speak with less Certainty and Pleasure, of
this New and Immortal Life of our Souls after Death, than we speak to one
another of some Neighboring Provinces, or of some New Discoveries; They did no
more doubt of this New Life, than we do of Italy or of Spain: For to speak of
Canada, and the American Isles, would be too little to express the Certainty.
They did not only speak of it with Assurance, and without incertainty, They
spoke of it with Incredible Joys and Transports, They longed to arrive at the
happy end of their Voyage, They conceived ardent desires for Death.

They did more than all this, they advanced it further; And we know That in a
Famous Common Wealth of Greece, they were obliged to Prohibit and Suppress a
Book that had been Writ upon the Immortality of the Soul, because it did so
livelily Impress upon their Spirits, the Conviction of their Immortality, that
they were fearful lest it should Depopulate the Earth, and cause the Race of
Mankind to be destroyed, because they saw it had carried a great many of them,
not only to neglect the Business, and the Duties of Life, and of the Republic,
but even to hasten on their own Deaths. It is not to be questioned here,
whether this Prudence were not a little too Precautious; it is not our
business; our business is to Remark the Effect, which the Notion of a Knowing
Nature has produced, to make Men believe That their Souls subsist, and live
after their Death.

The Conviction hereof, is effectively Lively, and Sensible by that alone,
independently of all the Regards of Religion; and it is incredible, how much
Force and Evidence it receives from all the Foundations and Circumstances of
Religion, of which, this New Life which our Souls ought to have out of our
Bodies, is as it were the Point in View, and the only and perpetual Object. All
the Old, and all the New Testament, All the Law, and all the Gospel, Moses and
Jesus Christ, The Prophets and the Apostles, All the Miracles and all the
Mysteries, have no other Essential Termination and End, than this New and
Immortal Life of our Souls after our Death. Both the Old and the New Testament,
under the Names of the New World, the Future World, the Age to come, the Life
Everlasting, the Heavenly Jerusalem, do not speak almost of any thing else: And
these cannot be Fables and Fictions, for if they were nothing else but Fables,
then this Sovereign Power, which has been manifested to the World, with a
thousand Characters of Wisdom, of Holiness, of Truth, and of Goodness, by that
Miraculous Train of Prodigious Events, which make what we call the Holy
History, and the Body of Religion, must have labored for above these Six
thousand Years to deceive the Word, and to laugh at Mankind, which is the most
impossible thing in the World.

The Conviction then which is lively, and penetrating independently of
Religion, is yet much more so by Religion; The Faithful knows much better than
the Philosopher, That when this House of Clay, which he Inhabits at present,
shall fall and crumble into Dust, He shall pass out of this Melancholy and
obscure Habitation, into a New, and an Heavenly Habitation, not made with Men's
hands, into the proper Habitation, and the Eternal Palace where God himself
dwells. The Philosopher knows it, because he knows That the Souls of Men
departing from the Body, do pass into a New Life, full of Darkness or of Light,
of Happiness or of Misery, according as they have rendered themselves worthy in
their Bodies, either of the Love, or the Anger of Him who is essentially the
Life; and by consequence, the Punishment, or the Reward of all Intelligent
Natures, according as they have deserved, that He should Act in them, and
Reward or Punish them.

Socrates having already the Mortal and Deadly Draught in his Hand, spoke after
this manner: Says the Roman Orator and Philosopher, That it did not seem to
him, that they led him to Death, but that he was going to mount up to Heaven.
Cato was Transported with Joy, at the sight, and at the presence of Death. The
Wise Man, says Plutarch, goes with Pleasure out of the Darkness of the Earth,
to enjoy in Heaven an Immortal Light with the Gods. Have Courage, says this
Other, Let not Death affright Us, since after Death, we shall either be Gods,
or like Gods: Let us not fear, that our Bodies will bury our Souls under their
Ruins: When the Heavens shall fall, and Corporeal Nature shall entirely perish
and disappear; There is a necessity, that the Spirit which Animates Us, and
which is the Foundation of our Being, must subsist and remain under those
Ruins, without being hurt or endamaged by them; Such is the Conviction and
Certainty of the Philosopher.

But the Faithful is much more enflamed, and Transported with this so animated,
and so lively Certainty and Persuasion. He sees with St. Stephen, the Heavens
open over his Head, and he is taken and wrapped up thither, like St. Paul, with
unspeakable Joys and Ecstasies; He has this Certainty and this Persuasion, so
lively, and so animated, by two diverse Principles; He has it by the Impression
of Faith, and of Grace, which makes him See and Feel (if I may say so) this New
Life, without Reasoning, by way of Supernatural Inspiration and Illumination;
and He has it when he will Reflect and Reason, by an evident Conviction, which
the Reflection upon the Mysteries and Miracles of Christianity, and upon all
Religion, give him of it; for though there were none but that Historical single
Fact, of the Mystery of the Incarnation of God; the truth of which, is
incontestably Established by so many Miracles, and so many sensible
Convictions, it would be impossible to call into doubt, that New and Immortal
Life of this New State, we are speaking of; into which, our Souls must enter
when they go out of our Bodies; because it is not possible to conceive, That if
there was no other for Men but this present Life, that God would have become
Man upon the Earth, to undergo all that Train of humbling, and dolorous
Mysteries, which he has undergon; Since it is certain, That if there was no
other Life for Men, there would be no advantage neither for God nor for Men, in
those Mysteries which do no wise Regard the present Life, but only the Life to
come. God can do nothing in Vain, and in vain would He have bin Born as he was
Born, in vain would He have Lived as he did Live, in vain would He have Died as
he did Dye; if He had not been Born, if He had not Lived, and if He had not
Dyed, to Redeem Men from Eternal Death, and to give them that Happy and
Immortal Life, which the First Man had lost them. God Incarnate came not to
make this Present Life, neither more agreeable, nor more fortunate, or more
happy to Us; He came not to spread abroad Treasures and Riches, to give Honors
and great Employments, to Distribute Dignities, to give Pleasures to the
Senses, and to the Cupidinous Desires of this Present Life; St. Paul calls him,
the High Priest of Goods to come; and the Prophets, who Prophesied of Him,
called Him the Father of the Ages to come, and King of the Future World; but I
must not enlarge here any more upon this; on the contrary, I must shut it up,
and return to the Point we proposed, to Illustrate in this Third Part, which is
The manner how our Souls Are to be out of our Bodies.

CHAP. II.
What is to be Illustrated in this Third Part, concerning the Future State of
our Souls out of our Bodies; and first, whether our Souls when they go out of
our Bodies, do pass into a true Corporeal Place.
THAT which we already said, Teaches Us That our Souls Are, and Subsist out of
our Body; That they Live, and have Essential Acts and Proprieties, inseparable
from their Knowing Nature; but we do not learn from thence, How our Souls Are
out of the Body, which is however, what we have proposed to Illustrate.

To satisfy our Curiosity thereupon, we must see if there be any place, into
which our Souls do pass; We must see what they Know, and how they know it;
whether they have Joys and Pleasures, Grief and Sadness; whether they retain,
or lose the Idea's of this Life; whether they have any Reminiscence or Memory;
and whether they conserve the Habits of Arts and Sciences; what are the
Faculties, whether Perceptive, or Sensible and Appetitive, that they use,
whether they conserve Liberty, whether, etc.

To have a neat Idea, of the manner How our Souls Are out of the Body; We must
exactly Illustrate all these things: Let us begin with the place into which
they pass.

That when our Souls go out of the Body, they do not pass into a true Corporeal
Place, by a Local Transport or Passage, properly so called.
As we have acknowledged in Our Souls, a Nature wholly Spiritual, and since we
have demonstrated, that Spirits are not in places, where we conceive them to be
by a Co-extension, and a Local and Corporeal Circumscription; and that so they
have not properly any Place at all, no more than the Supreme Essence, and are
not said to be in the Places, wherein we say they Are but by a pure Relation of
Operation and Activity; as Thomas Aquinas teaches: So when we ask in what place
do the Souls pass, when they go out of the Body, and out of the Visible World,
We must take a great deal of care not to degrade our Souls, by conceiving them
as if they ought to pass into a certain New Space, and a certain Corporeal
Circumscription, by a Local Transportation or Passage, properly so called, as
if they were a Material Substance. We have said that our Souls are not in our
Bodies, by Co-extension, or by Local Circumscription, but by a pure Relation of
the Reciprocal Dependence and Activity, which is between Them and the Bodies;
and when we ask Where is it that our Souls Are, and Whither do they go, when
they go out of our Bodies? We do not look for a Corporeal Space, or a part of
the Extent which composes the World, or which is out of the World, with which
they have an agreeableness, and in which, they are shut up and contained; This
would be well enough, if they were Material and Corporeal: When we say That our
Souls go out of our Bodies, we ought not to conceive, That they cease from
being shut up in our Bodies, from Corresponding with our Bodies, from
Penetrating our Bodies, from Occupying, or filling the Space and the Extent of
our Bodies, by the Immediation of their Substances, or by the Reduplication of
their Presence, as they speak (in some Schools) Chymerically, in my Opinion;
but only that they cease from having that Relation, that they had with the Body
of a Mutual Dependence, and of a Mutual Activity; for we must Reason,
concerning the Souls going out of the Body, as concerning the Presence of the
Soul within the Body; and as we have said, That the Soul is not present with
the Body, and united to the Body, but by a Relation of Empire and Servitude,
both at the same time, which the Soul has with the Body, and the Body with the
Soul, which makes the Soul have the power of determining the Motions of the
Body; and the Servitude of receiving almost all her Knowledges, and all her
Sentiments generally by the Body, or by the Occasion of the Body; so when we
say that the Soul goes out of the Body, we ought not to conceive any thing
else, but that she ceases to have that Relation with the Body.

We must not conceive a Local Passage, a Local Motion, a Local Transportation,
properly so called, of our Souls, by a Succession of diverse Correspondencies to
diverse Corporeal Spaces; for all that is to Imagine, and not to conceive by
Intellection, which is the only manner whereby the Soul is conceived and all
that belongs to the Soul, and the manner how our Souls go out of the Body; we
must conceive precisely the End of their Empire over the Body, and the End of
their Captivity and of their Dependence upon the Body. By this only they cease
to be in the Body, that they have no longer the Power of determining its
Motions, nor the Subjection of Receiving by it, or having their Thoughts
dependently of it.

The Idea's which we commonly have thereupon, are all contradictory,
chymerical, and monstrous; they are Manichean Idea's, by which we conceive
Spirits as true Bodies: And we must always remember that which can never be too
much reiterated, against the Custom which we have, of being desirous to Imagine
every thing; That Bodies are Bodies, and Spirits Spirits; That Bodies have a
Local Dimension, a Co-Extension, and a Local Circumscription; that they have a
certain Bulk; that they do, or may fill Essentially a Space and a certain
Extension; But that Spirits have none of all that, neither Dimension, nor Bulk,
nor Space, nor Extension; they have no more Dimension, Bulk nor Extension, than
they have Color and Figure: From whence it follows, That it is not by a Local
Transportation properly so called, that our Souls go out of our Bodies; because
that is not done but by a Progress of Motion and of Correspondence to diverse
Spaces, and by a new Union which they contract with some other Body or new
Corporeal Space.

CHAP. III.
That our Souls going out of our Bodies, go not properly but into God.
WE have conceived clearly after what manner our Souls go out of our Bodies, by
that which has been said, which makes us conceive how the Physical and
Substantial Union which was between these two so disproportioned and so distant
Natures, is dissolved and broken; since the Efficacy of that Puissance which
attexes the Spirits to the Body, does suspend the Act and the Empire thereof,
and gives them no more any Relation of Dependence upon the Bodies; but we have
not learned whither they go, and we must form a just Idea of it. Our
Imagination labors, and takes a great deal of pains about it; because she
would, at what Price soever, attribute to our Souls all the Passions or
Corporeal Qualities and Proprieties; She would shut them up in a certain Space
and in a certain Dimension; She forgets what we have said, That Spiritual
Natures are not shut up in any Space or in any Place.

The Heathens Imagined Elysian Fields for the Souls that were Innocent, and an
Hell, after their fashion, for the Guilty. Those amongst Us, who imitate them,
do conceive likewise a Local Passage and Transportation after the fashion of
Bodies, into certain new Spaces, by a successive progress of Motion: But the
Idea which we have conceived of our Souls, as of a Nature wholly Spiritual,
must redress that which is too gross in these Idea's which are wholly Material;
and we must conceive, that our Souls in going out of the Body, do go
immediately, as the Scripture says, (without any Local or Corporeal Passage)
into God, who, as St. Augustine says, Is more the true Place of Spirits, than
the Sea is the Place for Fishes, and the Air the Place for Birds. The Body,
says the Wiseman, returns to the Earth from whence it was taken, and the Soul
returns to God who made it, and from whom it issued out; that is to say, It
has no more immediate Union but with God alone, which occasions us to say very
exactly, That she goes into God.

We have said, That our Souls have an Essential Union with God, in whom they
live, and to whom they are much more united, by all their Parts, and by all the
Faculties of their Being, than the Beams are united to the Sun, than a River is
united to its Spring, than the living Branch is united to its Root; We have
said, That all Knowing Created Natures do depend as immediately upon God in all
the Acts of their Life, and by consequence, in all the Acts of their Perceptive
and Appetitive Faculties, as they depend upon him for the Foundation of their
Being, as well as all other Created Natures, that is to say, That as they
cannot come out of nothing, but by the Almighty and Efficacious Action of his
Eternal Essence; so they can neither Think nor Will but by the continual Action
of his Supreme Influence; We have said, That as God is the sole Being Existing
by himself, so he is the sole Living Being, and by consequence, the sole
Thinking and Willing Being by himself; and from thence arises a Relation, and
an Essential Union of all Created Spirits with the Supreme Spirit, and of the
Supreme Spirit with the Created Spirits. All the Rivers drink of the Sea, says
that Ancient, all the Branches suck up perpetually the the Juice and the Sap of
the Root, the Beams draw perpetually their Heat and Light from the Sun, and all
Living Beings drink perpetually of that Living and Eternal Spring of Life, and
all Spirits of that Living and Eternal Source of Knowledge.

It is the Natural Estate of all Spiritual Natures, to have this immediate
Union with God; but this Supreme Spirit (being willing to do Honor to his
Almightiness, and to his Wisdom, being willing to make the Idea of all kinds of
Creatures possible to proceed from himself, and to render it Real and Effective
to make the World thereby complete and finished; and being willing to assemble
together Corporeal and Spiritual Nature in one single Whole; and being willing,
perhaps, thereby to put Pure Spirits into the Places of the Fallen Angels, and
to triumph over the Rebellious Ones, in causing himself to be Served in Bodies
by Inferior Spirits) would have it that this Immediate Union which the Created
Spirits have Essentially with Him, should be in some manner suspended and
interrupted, or at least obscured and diminished, in regard of those, whose
Fidelity and Obedience he was willing to make Trial of in the Body.

The Union of Bodies interrupts and suspends the Immediate Union of our Souls
with God.
Our Souls naturally, like other Created Spirits, ought not to have any
Dependence upon any Bodies for to have the Idea's of things; they ought only to
depend immediately upon God, and by consequence, ought only to have Union with
Him; But this Supreme Spirit having been pleased for the Reasons we have said,
for many others which we conceive, and for more yet apparently which we do not
conceive, that our Souls should have their Thoughts and their Sentiments, their
Desires and their Affections upon the Occasion of the Body, to the End that
That should be a continual Subject of Victory and of meritorious Exercise, He
has thought fit, that for a time this Immediate and Essential Union of all
Created Spirits with the Eternal Essence, should become in our Souls Mediate
(if I may be permitted to say so) and that the Essential Union of God and of
all Created Spirits, should not Operate in them but by an Accessory Union with
this Matter Organized, or disposed into a certain Structure of Bones, of Flesh
and of Nerves, which we call Human Body.

This Union of our Souls with our Bodies is not, as we have said, but this
precisely, That our Bodies (by the diverse stirrings up, the diverse
Agitations, and the diverse Configurations of the Brain, which they receive
from Bodies which environ them, or from the natural Course of the Blood, or
from their proper Humors) are the Occasion and Condition of the Determination
of the Idea's and Sentiments which the Supreme Spirit gives us; that is to say,
That the Body is the Occasional Cause which Determines the Influence of the
Essential Union which we have with God, and thereby, it is in some manner
betwixt us and God, it diminishes in some manner our Essential Union with him,
because it hinders, if I may be permitted to say so, the Immediation of him.

Without That, we could not say that our Souls were in our Bodies; they would
be immediately in God, because the Place of the Souls and of all Spirits, is
entirely their Relation of Dependence and of Activity; and our Souls in that
case would have no Relation and Dependence but upon God only. It is for that
Reason that the Scripture speaks to us of the Union of our Souls with our
Bodies, or of our present Life, not only as it were of a Wall between God and
us, but as it were of a Banishment as it were a Voyage and a Running away or
Departure, which we make from God, Peregrinamur a Domino, says St. Paul; and
this is Effectively as it were a kind of Departure from God, and by
consequence, a Banishment, a Voyage, a Running away from him, because it is a
Suspension and an Interruption of the Essential and Immediate Union which all
Spirits have necessarily with him.

Our Souls going out of the Body, are immediately united to God.
Now since our Souls entering into Bodies, do go out from God, according to the
Expressions of the Divine Word, which are exact and just when we know how to
comprehend and penetrate them; we must say likewise, That our Souls going out
of the Body, return to God and in God, as the Scripture Effectively says it;
God is on both sides the Term of the Voyage: It is from him we part in ceasing
to be united immediately to him, by reason of the Intervention of Body, through
which the Action of the Influence of his Divine Life in us does pass, and it is
to him that we return in Dying, and in going out of the Body; because our
Dependence on the Body cease by Death, and Death beating down the Wall which
was between God and us, the Union of God to us, and of us to God, becomes Pure
and Immediate. God is the Term we arrive to, as well as that from whence we
parted; we are come out of him, and we enter again into him; that is to say,
That as before our Souls are united to our Bodies, they have no Union with any
thing but with God, and by consequence they are nowhere but in God; so after
the same manner, so soon as their Union with the Body cease, they begin to be
nowhere but in God only, because they have no more Relation but with God only;
there is nothing of an Intervention, there is no more of a Partitionary
Occasion and Condition between God and the Soul, which determines or suspends
the Influence of his Divine Action in us, and by which we receive all the
Idea's, and all the Sentiments that we have.

CHAP. IV.
What this Immediate Union is which our Souls have with God, when they go out
of the Body, which makes us say that they go to God.
THUS it is that we ought to Conceive the Place where our Souls Are, after they
are gone out of the Body. We must Conceive that they Are in God, not only, as
S. Augustine says, as the World is in God; For, says he, you must Answer to
him who shall Ask you where the World is, That it is in God; since there is no
other Place out of the World, where the World can be, and since it is God alone
who penetrates and environs it by the Immensity of his Operation; but because
Spirits have no other Place than their Relation of Dependence and Activity, and
that after the going out of the Body, our Souls do no more depend either upon
any Corporeal Nature, or upon any Spiritual Nature, which ought to be the
Occasion or Condition of the Idea's with which they ought to be Enlightened, or
of the Sentiments with which they ought to be Affected, but immediately from
God only, who gives them as he pleases to them. It is God therefore who
immediately Enlightens them; it is God immediately, who, without being
Determined by any thing Exterior, Determines all the Sentiments which they
have: This is it which makes us evidently see the necessary Consequence and
Connection of the incontestable Principles which have been hitherto Established;
for we must say nothing of our Souls, nor of any Matter whatsoever, but that
which we know of it by a Certain Light; And as we have no such Light by which
we can judge, that our Souls, when they go out from the Dependence upon the
Body, ought to enter into another Servitude, and another sort of Dependence
upon any Created Nature; so we have not any Reason to Conceive any other
Relation of Dependence in our Souls, which they ought to have when they are
gone out of the Body, than that which they have Essentially with God; and by
consequence we ought to say in Terms purely Natural, That it is in God only
that our Souls Are that moment that they go out of the Body: We say it by the
only Lights of Reason, and we ought extremely to rejoice, that Philosophy is
agreed here with the Divine Word, which gives us entirely the same Idea.

This Notion of the Immediate Union of our Souls with God, Established and
Proved by Scripture.
For besides that the Scripture says we return to God and into God, it says
expressly also, That our Habitation shall not be after this Life in Houses made
with Hands, or in Corporeal Spaces; for this is what St. Paul means, when he
calls it Domum non manufactam a Deo, aeternam. He tells us, That there will
be no more Sun and Moon which we might have need of, because the Brightness of
God will Enlighten us; Civitas non eget Sole neque Luna ut luceant in ea; nam
Claritas Dei illuminabit eam; Nox non erit illic, and non egebunt lumine
lucernae, neque lumine Solis, quoniam Dominus Deus illuminabit illos. It says,
That after this Life we shall dwell with God, and God with us: Ecce
Tabernaculum Dei cum hominibus, and habitabit cum eis. It is very full of these
sorts of Expressions, and if we will reduce them to neat Idea's, we shall find,
that they mean nothing else, than what we have said, That after the going out
of our Bodies, there is no more any thing betwixt God and our Souls, to
suspend, or to diminish the Essential Union of them, or to be the Occasional
Cause of his Operation, and of his Influence in Us; but that it is only He
immediately, who determins our Thoughts, our Idea's, and all the Essential Acts
of our New Life; for this is what St. John means, when he says, That in this
New Life, and New Estate after our Death, it is God himself who shall Enlighten
Us, without our having any need, either of the Sun, or the Moon, or of any
other sort of Light, which is at present but the Occasional Cause of his
Illumination, by which we See.

How we must understand, That Holy Souls Ascend into Heaven, and Criminal Souls
Descend into Hell.
We must therefore conceive our Souls to be united immediately to God, that
moment that they go out of the Body; and we must cut off all the Idea of any
Corporeal Place, in which we might conceive them to be after the fashion of
Bodies.

For when the Scripture makes us conceive, That the Saints are carried up into
Heaven, before the Corporeal Resurrection, after which, there will be a real
Local Transportation of Bodies; it would only make us conceive, That God who
Unites these Holy Souls to Jesus Christ, and to His Glory, makes himself, and
all Heaven wherein he Reigns, to be as present to them, as the Objects which we
now see, feel, and perceive more nearly, are at present to Us. We should very
illy conceive Heaven, wherein Jesus Christ Reigns in Body and in Soul, if we
should conceive it, as including and containing God, and discovering and
manifesting Him to the Saints; we must, on the contrary, says St. Augustine,
Conceive Heaven, and Jesus Christ also to be in God, who contains All, and who
is contained of Nothing, who manifests and discovers All, and whom Nothing
neither manifests nor discovers; and Holy Souls are not in Heaven, but in as
much as they are in God, in whom, and by whom, they are united and present to
Heaven, and to Jesus Christ, by the lively and distinct Idea, which they have
of His glorious Presence, like to those Idea's, which the most present Objects
give Us, by their immediate Impression, by which they strike our Senses: For we
must not go about to imagine That they are in Heaven, by any sort of Extension,
or Corporeal Dimension, and Local Circumscription, after the manner of Bodies.

How the Souls of the Wicked are in God.
And we must Reason after the same manner, concerning the Souls of the Wicked,
They are most really in Hell; but this is, because they are in God, who fastens
them there, and unites them to the Fire of his Wrath, as He does the Souls of
the Just to Jesus Christ, and to that part of the Heavens where He Reigns:
There is indeed this great Difference, That the Immediate Union, which is
between the Souls of the Just and God, is an Union of Love, of Tenderness, and
of Favor or good Liking; and the Immediate Union, which is between God and the
Reprobated Souls, is a Union of Wrath, of Enmity, and of Implacable Vengeance.
They are in God, and God (say the Holy Fathers) is their First and True Hell;
if it may be permitted to use an Expression so strong. Not that there is not an
Hell, or a Corporeal Place, wherein the Bodies of the Wicked Are to be shut up,
after the Resurrection, and where we are to conceive their Souls before hand;
but we must say, that they are in such a Place, where God keeps the Fire of His
Wrath continually Burning; and they are there Effectively, after the manner
that Spirits are in Corporeal Places, as really as it is possible: God gives
them perpetually the Idea thereof, and by the Occasion of that Idea, he
Impresses on them a dolorous Sentiment of real Burning; that is to say, The
same Sentiment, which we have upon the Occasion of Elementary Fire, when by its
too great Activity, it Disranges, Agitates, and violently Scorches up the
Fibers of those Parts of our Bodies, upon which it Acts; and the Virtue and
Efficacy of His Power, by his Irrevocable Decree, fixes them there, and is a
Chain which no force can break, and which no length of Duration can wear out;
but it is always truly said, That it is in God (who contains Hell as well as
Heaven, as St. Augustine further says; And who unites Impure Souls to Fire
Everlasting, in the manner as has been said) that properly and chiefly the
Reprobate Souls Are, as well as the Holy Souls. They are only but Accessorily,
if I may so say, either in Heaven or in Hell, within these Material Places and
Spaces, of which, God gives them that lively Idea, which renders Them present
to them.

CHAP. VI.
Whether Jesus Christ be the Occasional Cause of these Idea's, and Sentiments
of Holy Souls, out of the Body.
THAT which we have been saying, concerning the Fire of Hell, might give
Occasion here to some to Imagine, That it is not perhaps so certain, as we would
have them believe it to be, That the Union of Souls with God, and of God with
the Souls, is Immediate from the Moment that they go out of the Body; because
They may Imagine, That as God unites Impure Souls to Hell Fire, Establishing it
as the Occasional Cause of that particular Torment, and of that That Pain of
Burning, with which he Afflicts them with; so he Establishes also an Occasional
Cause of the agreeable Idea's and Sentiments, which he gives to the Saints: And
there are some, who would willingly conceive, That the Soul of Jesus Christ,
might very well be the Occasional Cause of all the Ineffable Pleasures of Holy
Souls, so much the rather, because the Analogy of the Divine Conduct, inspires
us to acknowledge an Occasional Cause of their Joy, and their Felicity, as
there is an Occasional Cause of the Torment of the Reprobates.

But this ought not to shake a Truth, so well Established and Proved, as is
that of the Immediate Union of God with our Souls, and of our Souls with God,
from the Moment that they go out of our Body: This Union is without doubt
Immediate, and without the Intervention of any thing, and without Dependence
upon any Occasional Cause, for the Foundation and Essentiality of this New
State; For though there may be some Occasional Cause of the Accessory Pain of
Reprobated Souls, and of the Accessory Felicity of Holy Souls; yet it is
certain, That there is none at all for their Essential Pain, and their
Essential Felicity.

St. Paul speaks it expressly of Holy Souls, when he says, That God shall be all
in them; Erit Deus Omnia in Omnibus: The whole Scripture says so likewise, when
it says, We shall see God Face to Face; for these Expressions do import an
Immediate Union of God with us: Since it would not at all be to see him Face to
Face, but to see him through a Veil, if we did only receive from him Idea's and
Lights, upon the occasion of some Things that was extraneous to Him.

Let then the Adorable Humanity of Jesus Christ, be with all my heart, an
Occasional Cause of a thousand Joys, and a thousand Accessory Felicities to
Holy Souls; as St. John says it expressly enough, in the Description he makes us
of our State out of our Bodies, under the Name of the New City, or of the
Heavenly Jerusalem, where the Holy Lamb gives a thousand Pleasures. But as to
the Foundation of this New State, as to the Lights and Idea's, the Sentiments,
and the Joys which constitute it, and are the Essence of it; they depend not
upon any Occasional Cause, they come from the Immediate Union of God with the
Holy Souls, Independently of all Exterior Occasional Determination, God
penetrates them with His Glorious Light, and with the Intimate Impression of
His Beatifick Presence; and he fills them full with his Ineffable Joys and
Pleasures.

How Impure Souls are united to Hell Fire.
We need only say The same thing, in Proportion of Reprobate Souls: Let then
the Action of the Terrible Element which God makes, to be Serviceable to His
Anger, be the Occasional Cause of the Accessory Pain of the Wicked; for as the
Impurity of the Reprobate Souls, is a perpetual Object of Horror, wherewith the
Sovereign Purity of the Divine Eyes, is sensibly hurt; so it is not improbable,
That the Terrible Element, which naturally Cleanses and Purifies all things,
should be likewise Employed as an Occasional Cause to a Particular Action, by
which, the Eternal Sanctity applies it self, to make them feel the Horror of
their Impure State: But that does not at all hinder, but that for the Ground of
this unhappy State, it should be entirely Independent of all sort of an
Occasional Cause; for it is certain, That God is immediately united to the
Reprobates by his Anger, as He is immediately united by His Love, to the Just
Souls.

God is the Principal Fire which burns them, and His Anger is the Fire and
Brimstone, that Feeds their Chief and Principal Torment. We commonly conceive
very ill, That which we call The Pain of the Damned, when we conceive it as a
simple Privation, or a Partition Wall betwixt God and the Reprobated Souls:
There may well be an Eternal Wall of Separation; but there is also an Eternal
and Immediate Union: There is a Wall of Separation, betwixt Gods Goodness and
Sinners; that is, a Wall which stops all the Influences of Mercy, of Grace, and
of Glory; but it is likewise an Union, which nearly attracts all the Characters
of his Anger, and his Vengeance. God also makes himself to be felt as nearly,
and as immediately, to the Reprobates, as to the Saints: The Unhappy see God
Face to Face, but it is only his Terrible Face which they see; It is not that
Illuminating Face which Enlightens the Just, and wherein he promised to Moses,
to let him see and find All Good; It is a Face Sparkling with Thunder, which
penetrates them with Fear, and covers them with Horror and Darkness; They are
Eternally in God, as in a Rageing Sea, which dashes against them, and tosses
them, and threatens them perpetually with its Storms and Tempests.

And this is All in my Opinion, that we can desire to know, upon the Principal
Head of that which Regards the State of our Souls out of our Bodies; Let us
conceive, with all my heart, That there is, above those Heavens which we know,
a Heaven wholly Enlightened, and abounding with Joy, and overwhelmed with
Pleasures, wherein the Holy Souls are involved; And let us conceive on the
other side, a Place replenished with Flames and Darknesses, with Horror, and
all manner of Despair, which the Criminal Souls do fall into. All this is most
True, and these Places are most Real and Effective; but it is in God, in whom
the Holy Souls do find this Enlightened Heaven, and in whom the Criminal Souls,
do find these Flames, and these Darknesses, these Despairs, and these Horrors:
It is God, who by an Immediate Union of his Almighty Activity, causes in Them
this Light and these Darknesses, these Sadnesses and these Joys, these
Pleasures and these Pains, all the Paradise and all the Hell: Erit Deus Omnia
in Omnibus, it is by an Immediate Union of God with Them, and They with God,
that they are in Heaven and in Hell; Since it is by this Union, that they have
this Lively Idea thereof, which renders these Places present to them.

CHAP. VII.
That which makes the Difference, between the Present and Future State of the
Soul.
IT follows, from what has been said, That that which makes the Essential
Difference, of the manner how our Souls are in our Bodies, and of the manner
how they are out of our Bodies, is, That when they are in the Body, then they
have but Successively the Idea's, and the Knowledges of Things, from the
Occasion of different Impressions, which come and arrive to the Brain, by the
Action of other Bodies, which are round about Us; and that they have not also
the Sentiments, and the several Movements of the Appetite, but from the
Occasion of diverse Dispositions of Bodies; and when they are parted from the
Body, they receive immediately from God these Idea's, and these Sentiments,
which is requisite for the Disposition of Vice or Virtue, which we otherwise
call Merit of Demerit, in which they find themselves, when they are parted from
the Body.

Now the Body, by the diverse Impressions which it receives from other Bodies,
or by the diverse Dispositions which are raised and formed in it, by the
Ebullition of the Blood, by the Course of the Spirits, and by the diverse
Excesses or Fermentations of Humors, is the Occasional Cause of all these
Idea's, and of all the Sentiments of the Soul; because that the Supreme Being,
by which it Lives, it Perceives, Thinks and Wills, for to conserve the Dignity,
and good Order of its Greatness, in acting as Universal Cause, was pleased to
tie the Determination of these Idea's and Sentiments, to those Dispositions of
the Body, which result from the Laws of Motion, by which He moves all the
Corporeal Nature; and by which, he composes and conserves the Visible World
with an infinite Wisdom, which alone was able to produce so many Prodigious
Effects, with so much Order, and so much Harmony, from two or three Immutable
Laws, by which He moves the Matter of the Universe.

That in this New State of the Soul out of the Body, God is not determined to
Act in Them, but by a necessary and immutable Love of Order, and by their
Virtuous or Criminal Disposition.
God does not Act, but as an Universal Cause with our Souls, so long as they
are in the Body; He does but follow the Law of Motion of the common Matter of
the Visible World, which diversely affecting our Bodies, necessarily determines
him by Virtue of his Immutable Decree, to give to the Souls those Idea's and
those Sentiments, which answer the different Impressions, wherewith the Body is
affected; but when the Soul is out of the Body, God does lay aside the
Character of Universal Cause, as to this purpose; He no longer follows, in
respect of them, the Laws of the Motion of the Universe.

Souls part with the World, in parting with the Body; They have no longer any
Relation with the Body, nor by consequence, with the Visible World, from that
very instant that they have no more to do with their particular Bodies. So long
as they are in the Body, they are united to all the Visible World; because that
their Thoughts, and their Sentiments, do depend upon the Laws of the Motion,
which moves all the Matter of the World, it being that which gives them an
Essential Relation to all the Parts of it; because there is not any one of
them, which may not be an Occasion of the Determination of these Idea's and
Sentiments; but after Death, all that ceases, there is a new Order of things,
there are no more the same Laws; God afterward follows none but the Law of his
Eternal and Inflexible Justice, to Punish or to Reward the Souls, according as
they have made themselves deserving.

It is no more the Motion of the Universe, and the particular Disposition of
every ones Temperament which results from it, which determins the diversity of
our Idea's and Sentiments: It is only the Pure and Holy Disposition, or the
Impute and Criminal Disposition of our Souls, which determins the Sovereign and
Eternal Justice and Equity, to give us the Idea's and Sentiments, proper to
Reward or Punish our Irregular, or our Virtuous Disposition.

God has no longer Reason to be willing to manage, and conserve the Dignity
and Character of Universal Cause. He has no longer Reason to manage, and
conserve the Liberty of our Souls: The time of our Trial is ended; The time of
Merit is past; There is no more question, to see whether they will make
themselves worthy, that is, over. They are fixed in an Immutable State, That
is, Eternity. There is no more Vicissitudes or Diversifications, no more
Instability or Changes, no more an Alternativeness, or a Passage from Evil to
Good, and from Good to Evil; from Vice to Virtue, and from Virtue to Vice. The
Tree lies where it falls; And as the State of the Soul is fixed by this State
of Immutability, which is properly That which we call Eternity, so God fixes
himself to Love or to Hate, to Punish or to Reward; He Acts thenceforwards, as
a particular Cause, because that He immediately takes in the Ground of His
Eternal Love of Order, the determination of all these Idea's and Sentiments,
which he gives to our Souls.

That is all the Light, which we can give to our First Curiosity, concerning
the State of our Souls out of our Body; by which, we see that they are not
properly but in God, and that it is He only, who is the Cause and Occasion of
all their Idea's and Sentiments. We must now proceed, and endeavor to Know all
that belongs to this State, by clear and infallible Lights.

CHAP. VIII.
How the Just Souls See and Know God out of the Body, and how the Criminal
Souls do also See and Know Him.
TO this purpose, we would willingly Know, in the first place, What those
things Are, which the Soul Knows out of the Body; and it is easy to Resolve
it, by those Principles which we have settled: For since we have said, That
there is not at all, any other Occasional Cause of the Idea's and Sentiments of
the Soul, when it is once out of the Body, than the Irregular and Vicious
Disposition, and the Regular and Virtuous Disposition of the Soul, on one one
part; and on the other, the Necessary and Eternal Love, which God has for
Order; so it is certain, That this Sovereign Wisdom, this Essential Life of all
Intelligent Natures, dispenses his Lights and his Darknesses, by his Sovereign
Equity; and that so he Acts otherwise in the Just Souls, than in the Souls
which are Criminal and Reprobate.

As to the Just Souls, They have as it were, a true Immensity of Knowledge.
First of all, They Know God and See Him; I say, They see Him; for it is not a
simple Knowledge, Abstractively such as we have at present, that is, to See, to
Perceive, to Touch, and (if I may say so) to Taste, as the Holy Writ says; But
this is to See by a kind of Vision, which we call Intuitive, which is not at
all a simple, or bare View of Speculation, or a pure Contemplation of
Reasoning; but this is a lively, and penetrating Impression of the whole
Substance of the Divinity, which renders it self present and intimate to the
Soul, by an intimate and penetrating Sentiment; just as the Material Objects do
now render themselves present to us, by the Immediate Action, whereby they
strike upon, and advertise our Senses; This is to see God, as it were by
Sensation; This is to perceive Him Present, by a lively, and an indubitable
Experience of His Ineffable Nature, and His Beatific Vision; just as we
perceive the Presence of Things, whereof we have the most lively Idea, and the
most certain, and most indubitable Experience.

This Intuitive Knowledge, or Vision of God, is not at all the indubitable
Knowledge and Sentiment of His Existence only; but it is the clear and distinct
Knowledge and Idea, of All his Attributes in general, and of all his
Perfections in particular; it is a clear and distinct View of all the
mavelous Table, and of all the Charming Spectacle of the Beauties of this
Supreme Nature; and especially, the delicious and ineffable Sentiment of his
Goodness, and of his Love, by which he pours (if I may say so) all the Joys,
and all the Felicities of his Heart, into these Sanctified and Happy Souls.

Moreover, These Just Souls, in thus Knowing God, do at the same time, no
longer Know themselves, by that confused Sentiment, by which they at present
disentangle themselves, as it were, by main strength, and force of Reason, from
the Body; but by a clear and distinct Sentiment, and by an Idea equally neat
and lively, all Shining, and all Bright, whereby they see themselves with all
their Nobleness, and with all the Characters of Resemblance, which they have
with God; just as they now see a Picture, exposed to their View, almost like
their Corporeal Image, which the Nature of the Soul does exclude.

CHAP. IX.
How the Just Souls See and Know the Visible World, and what they Know of the
Politic and Civil World.
IT is not only God and Themselves, that they Know; They also distinctly see in
God, all the visible World, because, besides that the Scripture does in a
manner speak to us of it; It is a Knowledge, which is naturally inherent in
every created Spirit, unless God for a time suspends this Knowledge for Reasons
of his Providence, as he now does to our Souls, which he makes Trial of in the
Body; and to whom he does not give these Knowledges, as we said before, but
Successively from the Occasion of the different Impressions, made upon our
Bodies, by the diverse parts of the Visible World, which present themselves to
our Senses, one after another.

It is in Order, That Spirits being Superior to Bodies, by Reason of their
Knowing Nature, should Know Bodies; Also, when the Disposition of the present
Economy, which requires That God should not Enlighten the Souls, but
Successively, as we said before, and from the Occasion of the Immutable Laws of
the Motion of the Universe; When, I say, this present Disposition shall cease,
the Illumination of God, being no more annexed to these Vicissitude (...) of
the Universe, and of the (...) of Bodies, received in our Material Senses, will
give in an Instant at once, an Idea of all Corporeal Nature, and of all the
Visible World, in its Whole, and in its Parts; in its Immensity, or in its
Extent; in its agreeable Variety, in its Order and Symmetry to all Souls, which
have not deserved his Anger; and instead of this Light, he needs but only to
spread Darknesses upon the Criminal and Rebellious Souls.

The Scripture tells us of Holy Souls, as if they had the pleasure of walking
upon the Globes of the Heavens, and to be in the midst of the Stars, to walk
upon the Sun, and upon the Moon; and after this manner of speaking, it
accommodates it self to our gross manner of conceiving the most Spiritual
Things, under Corporeal Forms: But we need conceive by all these Expressions,
no more than what we have said, of a clear and distinct Idea of all the Visible
World, which God gives to the just Souls, they walk after their manner upon the
Arches of the Heavens, they march upon the Sun and Moon, etc. because that the
lively Idea, which they have of all the Visible World, makes all the parts
thereof present, and as it were subjected and placed under their Feet. They are
at the same time at both the Poles of the World, they fill its whole Extent,
they are in both the Hemispheres, their Horizon is not at all a limited
Horizon, which never permits us to see here but a little Portion of the
Universe; It is not bounded, but by the Bounds of Nature; We do not at present
see Bodies, but only those parts of them, which reflect the Light upon us; We
do not see the Sun, the Moon, the Stars, and the Terraqueous Globe of the Earth
and Seas, but only one side of them; but the pure Souls, immediately enlightened
by God, as they Are, They see at the same time the whole Globe of the Sun, all
the Face of the Moon, both the Hemispheres of the Earth; There is no Antipodes
to them; They see All at one View, all the fair Prospects of Nature, and all
the Beautiful Table of the Visible World: For besides, That their Knowledge is
Universal in this respect, so it is not at all Successive, but all at once. So
much for the Natural World.

What the Souls out of the Body Know, concerning the Civil and Politic World.
As to the Civil and Politic World, I confess, it will not be easy to determine
what they see of it, and what they do not see of it; because we have no
Principle so well Established thereupon, that I know, as to make us willing to
build a sure Determination upon it; We may most probably say, That God
discovers to Innocent Souls, that which regards their Family, and their
Friends; but to say, That he sets before their Eyes, a Diversified Table of
Events, Revolutions, Intrigues, and the Mannagements, and Contrivances of
Courts and States, the Successes of Wars, Negotiations and Treaties, the vast
and ambitious Designs of Great Princes, and a peculiar Account of Families, and
particular Fortunes, is a thing which I dare neither affirm, nor gainsay; for
the Scripture gives us sufficiently to understand, That there are Angels too,
amongst whom these Knowledges are partly Communicated, or it may be, wholly
given to them: But as to Souls, I do not find either in the Scripture, or in
the clear Notion which we have, either of the Soul, or of God (who enlightens
the Soul) any thing, thereupon which may Establish a solid, and an infallible
Judgment; if it be not that God makes them see something of it, which may
contribute to the satisfaction of the innocent and pure Souls. It is very
certain, That that which is of certainty therein, is, That if they do see all
these things, they undervalue them as much as we esteem them; and that all
those great Changes and Revolutions, which we attribute to Fortune, are to
their Eyes, but what the Play of Children is to ours; or to say better, The
business of Ants or of Bees; or that perpetual and impertinent Agitation, which
we see in those Flies, whom a vain and unnecessary Motion drives too and fro,
in the middle of the Air, without any purpose or advantage.

CHAP. X.
That Criminal Souls are in Darkness, and see nothing.
SUCH is the knowledge in Just Souls, in Relation to Extension; But we ought to
have sufficiently comprehended, That it ought not to be in the same manner, in
the Impure and Criminal Souls: For that Order, which requires that the Just one
should be illuminated, wills on the contrary, that the other should be filled
with Darknesses; so that instead of that Immensity of Light, and Knowledge,
which the former have, this other, will have only an Immensity of obscurity, of
Night, and of the horror of Darknesses; These will be Darknesses, that is to
say, an obscurity and privation on all sides of Kowledge and of Light. Jesus
Christ makes use of the Expression of outward Darknesses, or Darknesses
invironing, that is to say, which will encompass on every side; for it is so, I
understand these outward Darknesses, of which the Divine Redeemer speaks so
often. They will know and see God after their manner, but it will be only his
Wrath, which they will see by a kind of Intuitive Vision, in the manner as it
has been hereupon already Explained; They will see the Eternal and Essential
Light, but that Light will only serve to blind them; because it will only leave
them the Idea's of his Wrath, and of their Sins, and of all the Circumstances,
that possibly may augment their Despair.

Instead of the Beauteous Spectacle of Nature, which the Just shall have
Eternally, they will never have any, but the Idea of that dark and burning
place, which the Supreme Justice has prepared for their Bodies; and if they do
know any thing of their Family, and of their Friends, it is only to augment,
and redouble the Pain of their Regrets, of their Privation, and eternal
Desolation; Ejicite in tenebras exteriores, ibi erit fletus and stridor
dentium. The Soul of the Father, for Example, I speak of the ambitious and
covetous Soul, which loves nothing but the World and its Vanity, for himself
and his Family, will see in his Children, all that can be capable of augmenting
his Regret, and his Remorse. The Soul of a Prince, in the same manner unjust
and reprobate, will see in the State which he has quitted, that which will
increase his Pain, etc.

CHAP. XI.
The Faculties of the Souls, of which the Acts will be Exercised out of the
Body.
AFTER having seen the Matter, and the extent of the Souls Knowledges out of
the Body; We must now see what perceptive, or Knowing Faculties the Soul will
Exercise upon this Matter, and upon these Objects.

We have observed in the Soul, in its present State of Union with the Body, a
Faculty of Knowing by Sensation, a Faculty of Imagining, or of Representing
things to us by lively and distinct Images, a Faculty of Recollecting our
selves by Memory and Reminiscency, a Faculty of Conceiving by pure
Intellection, a Faculty of Reasoning, or Extending Knowledge acquired thereupon
by new Consequences, and a Faculty of Separating universal Notions of Things,
from Particular and Individual Differences, to frame thereof general Maxims and
Principles, whither they be of pure Speculation, or Moral and Practical, for
the Order of Life and Action, and for the Perfection of Arts and Sciences.

How the Souls will have Acts of Sensation without any Exterior Sense or
Corporeal Organs.
The Souls, whether they be Just or Reprobate, do Exercise all these Faculties;
for though Sensation, Imagination, and the Memory, have at present Corporeal
Organs, yet we must not say for all that, that these Faculties ought no more to
Exercise themselves out of the Body. The Corporeal Organ does now serve but for
two Purposes, To be an Occasion to the Universal Cause of the Knowledge that it
ought to give to the Soul from the presence of such or such an Object, and To
be also an Occasion to it, of giving to the Soul diverse and different Idea's
according to the diversity of Objects; and it is for that Reason that he has
Established a diversity of them.

All the Parts of the Body cannot be shaken by the Motion of the Air, which
striking upon our Ears, causes that which we call a Report or a Sound. The
Motion of the Beams of the Sun, which in striking upon our Eyes causes a sense
of the Light, cannot affect any other part than that subtle Web, which is in
the inward part of the Eye, which we call the Retina. The exterior Fibers of
the Skin, which cover the Hand and the whole Superficies of the Body, will be
sufficiently shaken by the Rencounter of a Thorn, of a Needle, of the Point of
a Sword, and of a thousand such like things, to the end that the Motion may be
carried by reason of the continuity of the Fibers and Nerves, as far as the
Brain; but neither Sounds nor Light will ever shake them enough to carry the
Impression of them to the Brain. When the Ears are well stopped, you will to
little purpose expose the whole Body to the Harmony of a melodious Symphony,
which is only the Air melodiously struck; for this Air so melodiously struck
will find no other part in the Body than the Ear only, by which it can carry
its Harmony so far as to the Brain. The Canals or the Membranes and Nerves of
the Ear, which we call the Internal Ones, are the only Gates and the only Ways,
whereby this Air so melodiously struck, can make its Impression on the Brain.
It is after the same manner with the Impression of the Sunbeams in respect of
the Eyes, of Savours in respect of the Palate and the Tongue, and of Odors in
respect of the Organ of Smelling. The Eyes being shut, it would be ridiculous
to expose the Hands and the rest of the Body to the Light, the Light cannot at
all pass its Impression to the Brain: It would be Nonsense to sequeeze the
Juice of delicate Food with the Hands, and apply it to any other part of the
Body than the Mouth only, this Juice will nowhere make that agreeable Tickling
which it makes upon the Tongue and Palate. The Universal Cause, which being
willing to advertise us of all the Impressions that all that Diversity of
different Bodies whereof the World is composed, does make upon our Bodies, has
been pleased to conserve the Character of Universal Cause, and has prepared in
our Bodies so many different Organs, and different Structures of Fibers and
Nerves, to receive the Impressions of these Exterior Bodies, which he has
foreseen would there have different Impressions: Thus it has made in our Eyes
a Structure of Skins, or of Tunicks or Coats, and of Transparent Humors, to let
the Rays of Light pass through, and an admirable Web of the Extremities of the
subtle Fibers or Filaments of the Optic Nerve, to receive and carry thereby
the Impression to the Brain; He has stretched out at the Entrance of the Ear,
a thin and subtle Membrane, just like a little Drum, to receive the Impression
of the Air that is struck, or of the diverse Concussions of it, which causes
that which we call the Report, or Sound, or Voice, etc.

These are called the Organs of different Sensations, which are necessary in
the present State, to the end that God might Conserve his Character of
Universal Cause, which he has so justly affected to Conserve in all the
Extents of his Natural Providence: But as when the Souls are out of the Body,
there is an Order altogether New, where God Acts no more as Universal Cause,
being no further obliged to be determined by an Exterior Occasion to determine
in the Souls the Idea's and Sentiments which they ought to have; so the
Faculties which are now Organical, will have even after the Universal
Resurrection, their Exercise and their Acts without any Organs. The Souls have
no need at all to Eat, for to have a thousand sorts of agreeable and delicious,
or disagreeable and loathsome Tastes, if it pleases God to give them. They will
have no need at all of Ears, nor even of Voice, of Organs, Harpsichords,
Guittars, or Violins, to cause a lively and penetrating Sentiment of a thousand
sorts of Melodies. They will have no need at all of Eyes, to have the Pleasure
of the Prospect of the Visible World. The Scripture it self will not permit us
to doubt, that the Souls have not out of the Body before the Resurrection, real
Sensations, although they have no Corporeal Organs; for to Burn is an Act of the
Sensitive Faculty, a real and a proper Sensation; and the Scripture teaches,
That the wicked Rich Man burns, and that the Souls of the Wicked are to burn
eternally in Hell.

The Imagination and Memory.
That which we have said concerning Acts of Sensation, does decide the Question
of the Faculty of Imagining and of the Acts of the Memory; for it is certain,
that though these Faculties are now Organical, yet they are but only Accidentally
so, (as they say) as well as the Faculty of Feeling; It is only in respect to
the present Order, and to the Manner of Gods Acting as Universal Cause, that
they are Organical, they are not so for any Insufficiency or Incapacity of the
Soul, which requires such Helps. Thus it is certain the Holy Souls will have an
Idea of all Corporeal Natures, and of all the Structure of the World, by Idea's
and Images altogether like those whereby we see present Corporeal Objects, or
we Imagine them when they are absent, when the Tracks which their presence had
lest behind them come to be resuscitated and renewed. We may say the same thing
of Memory, of which we may say, That God supplies the Corporeal Species by his
lively Determination, which calls back to the Souls the Idea's of things, which
the Corporeal Species would send back if they had them. It is without doubt
that Souls do recollect themselves not truly by proper Acts of Corporeal
Memory; for that is Organical, and by Mechanism, as we have said, but by lively
Idea's which God supplies and puts in the room or place of those Corporeal
Species.

How the Just Souls see in the Word of God Things past, present, and to come.
St. Augustine, and other Ancient and Modern Doctors, do say, That Sanctified
Souls do Read in the Word of God, as in a Book, Things past, Things present,
and Things to come; And this Notion is just and exact, provided that we
comprehend that this Action of Reading in the Souls, is rather an Act of the
Passive Faculty of the Soul, by which she receives the Light and the Idea's,
than of the Active Faculty by which she goes about to search, as it were, of
her own accord; for we must call to mind this double Faculty, whereof one is
the Cause of the Souls being Instructed and Enlightened from without; and the
other, That she Instructs and Enlightens her self all manner of ways from
within. This is the Principle of all Sciences; We may say that the Souls Read
in the Divine Word, Things past, present, and to come, provided we comprehend,
That it is not the Soul which goes to search the Divine Word, as we conceive
that we go to search a Book by the help of Corporeal Eyes; but that it is the
Word of God which goes to be united to the Soul, showing, uniting and
communicating it self to it, either Immediately by it self, as some conceive,
or Mediately, as we say, by an Omnipotent Action, by which it modifies and
imprints us with created Idea's drawn from the proper Substance of the Soul,
wherein it Copies out and Paints it self in proportion to that which it would
communicate of it self, as others are pleased to conceive it.

The Word of God is nothing else but that Substantial and Eternal Idea, by
which the Supreme Essence Reflects in some manner upon it self, in admiring its
Perfection and its Fullness, and forms, by that Reflection upon all which it
has found in it self, a Platform or Model of all that which it can do, and of
the manner How it ought to be done. This Eternal Idea is as it were the Source
of all Particular Idea's, and the Essential Mirror of all things; There is the
Light which Enlightens all the Conduct of God out of himself, and by which he
Enlightens us in the Body and out of the Body, by all the Idea's which he gives
us.

There is the Wisdom, which being once Incarnate by a Personal Union with a
singular Humanity to be the Light of the World, is Incarnated in some manner a
thousand and a thousand times every moment, by a Transient and Accidental Union
with all Created Spirits to be their Actual Light; This is that Eternal and
Universal Idea, from whence do spring all the particular Idea's which Enlighten
us; and it is certain, that the Souls see either in it, or by it, (for I will
not here decide this Point) all that which they see, and all that which they
know, either in their present State of Union with the Body, or in that of their
Liberty and Separation from the Body. And this lively and Eternal Idea, from
whence all the rest do arise, serves instead of Memory and Species to Souls
separated and disengaged from Body, for all that which we would that they
should Recollect.

The Acts of Intellection.
Since the Souls have out of the Body the Exercise of the Faculties of
Perceiving, of Imagining, and of Recollecting, which they do not Exercise here
but dependent upon the Body, there is no doubt but that they Exercise by a
greater Reason the Acts of the Inorganick Faculties; Thus we may say without
difficulty, That they compare one thing with another, That they conceive the
Nature of Bodies by pure Intellection, That thty form Universal Notions, That
they draw Consequences from thence, That they Extend their Knowledge of
Intellection, I say Intellection; for as to those Idea's, whether confused or
distinct, which appertain to the Passive Faculty of the Soul, whether Sensitive
or Imaginative, the Soul cannot Extend them or Augment them of her self, either
in the Body or out of the Body: She has no more as to that, than what she
receives; but as to the Knowledge of Intellection, it is certain, That the Soul
can perpetually Extend them, Increase them, and Augment them in the Body, and
out of the Body.

I do not at all doubt, but that Holy Souls have an Ineffable Pleasure in
perpetually Extending their Knowledge of Intellection, by Consequences and
Lights always New, which they draw from their Light and their Knowledge already
acquired; They always find something to discover in the Immense Spaces of
Truth; They always find something to be Enlightened of the Perfection of the
Supreme Essence, which they always see All-entire and All exposed to their
Eyes, and which they never know so perfectly, but that there always remains
something to be known and discovered; It is a Sea, of which they can never
sound the Bottom, and in which they always make a Progress; They always Drink
of this Eternal and lively Spring and they are always Thirsty; They Drain from
thence every moment by a full and entire Knowledge of the Intuitive Vision, but
they always find it full and inexhaustible to Reason and Intellection; They
always find something to be known in the Foundation of its infinite
Incomprehensibility, and they do there always know something that is New, and
something yet to be known.

The Reprobate Souls do also find by the Exercise of their Reasonings, a
thousand and a thousand new Despairs in their State of Reprobation and Misery;
The Prophets say that they always remain awake, to the end that they may see
always; Evigilabunt ut videant semper, and that does well enough express the
Exercise of the Active Faculty in unhappy Souls.

After having given an Account of the Perceptive Faculties, we ought to take
care to know how the Appetitive Faculties are out of the Body; We are able to
say in a very few words, all that one can wish to know thereof, and all that
can certainly be decided of them.

CHAP. XII.
How the Will is in Just Souls, and in those that are Reprobate.
THE Will, which is that invincible and insurmountable Movement which pusheth
on All-knowing Natures toward Good, Is without doubt, and Operates perpetually
in Just Souls, and in Reprobated Souls; but it Is there, and it Operates there
very diversely. The Just Souls have found the Good they sought, They are arrived
to the Term which they have so long pursued, They embrace it, They possess it,
They lose themselves, They plunge themselves, They drown themselves, and They
ingulph themselves in it; They are arrived to the Place of their Repose, to the
Center of their Desires, to the Port of their Wishes; They have nothing more to
follow or to search after; In this fortunate State they possess, and they taste
with an inexplicable Tranquillity, and an incomprehensible Satiety, the
Sovereign Good; They are contented, they are at quiet: But this Tranquillity
and this Satiety does not lull them asleep, nor ever cloy them; The Will
satisfied and arrived to its Term, does not cease proceeding on always; It
Operates and stirs up it self eternally in a most happy Repose. These Holy
Souls are always satiated and always a Hungry, always at quiet and always
stirred up; They Will and Desire always that which they have, they would always
have more of it; and being intimately, and immediately united to the Sovereign
Good, and to all his Joys, they are always still vehemently desirous of being
more united to it.

Thus the Will has its Exercise in Holy Souls; and it has it in all its
Perfection, without any of the Imperfections, to which it is at present
subject; It is no more floting and wavering, between the false Images of Good,
which the Imagination and the Senses present to it, in the present State, and
between the true and solid Goods which Instinct and Reason, which Philosophy
and Religion propose to it; It is happily drawn in by the Evidence, or to say
better, by the presence and enjoyments of the Sovereign Good. That kind of
Liberty, of being able to balance it self between true and false Goods, which
we so illy conceive as a great perfection of Liberty in Man, is an
Imperfection, which the Will is delivered from; It cannot be turned aside, by
any Image of false Goods, which do now, in so deadly a manner, turn aside our
Wills; it is a Repose, an Acquiescency, and an Eternal Satiating of the Soul in
God, and in the Assemblage of all the Goods which it finds in God, which do not
at all leave it the liberty of loving false Goods; This is a perpetual
Attraction, always insurmountable and invincible; This is a Charm, always
Almighty, and a strong and robust Chain, by which, God draws them, carries them
away by force, and fastens them to his Sovereign Beauty, and to his Sovereign
Delights.

The Will in the Reprobate Souls.
It is not at all after the same manner with Reprobate Souls; The Will, it is
true, remains in them; They conserve that Movement, which draws all Created
Spirits, and even the Increated, toward Good; for the Will is also in God, but
it is not in Him, as the love of Good is in us; but that Will which remains in
the Reprobate Souls, does not Operate there, as it does in Holy Souls; They are
driven and moved essentially, by an invincible Love toward Good; and instead
of Good, which they seek for with so much vehemence, They see nothing before
them but Pains, Despair and Misery; They launch out, and throw themselves
perpetually toward the Good, by Efforts and Movements inconceivable; and He,
in whom they see the Source of Good, and as it were, all the Treasure, and all
the Foundation of Good, Repulses them, and throws them back again, and in the
same time, wounds, and transpierces them, with a thousand deadly Darts: They
are Eternally thirsting after Pleasure, and they have Eternally nothing but
Grief, Pain and Despair, for their Portion; so that the Will placed in them, to
be the Beginning, and the Seat of their Happiness, is found to be the Eternal
Principle, and Seat of their Unhappiness and Despair.

It would be to no purpose to lose time, in saying, That all the agreeable
Passions will be in the Holy Souls, and all the afflicting ones in the
Reprobate, that is comprehended of it self; as also, That these Passions will
be in the Appetitive Faculty, independently of the Body, as we have said, That
the acts of Perceiving, Imagining, and Remembering, will be in the Perceptive
Faculty. So there remains nothing more to finish this last Illustration, and to
draw from thence, the so-essential Instruction of our Duties, of Time, and of
Eternity; of the Present Life, and the Future Life; of the Present World, and
the World to come; of all our Present Condition, and of all our Future State;
Than to remark, that this Estate of the Souls out of the Body, will not be
changed in the main at bottom (but only in some Circumstances, not essential)
by the Reunion of the Bodies, which will be made by the Universal Resurrection.

CHAP. XIII.
That this State of the Souls out of the Body, will not be changed in the main
or at Bottom, by the new State of the Universal Resurrection, but only in some
accessory Circumstances.
ALthough we do not at all find in the Sentiment, or in the precise Idea which
we have of our Souls, the Certainty, and the Conviction of their Future
Reunion with the Bodies, which Faith teaches us ought to be made by the
Universal Resurrection; it is for all that certain, That considering all the
Train, and all the Concatenation of the Mysteries and Principles, whereof the
Divine System of Religion, and of Christianity is formed, considering also the
honor of the Divine Attributes, which require That God should be jealous of his
Glory, and of the happy Event and Success of his Designs; It is altogether
evident, That God (who has been pleased to Assemble the two kinds of Natures,
which only are known to Us, whether as Existing, or as Possible, (viz.) To wit,
Corporeal Nature, and Spiritual Nature, into one single Compositum, and one
single Whole, or Hypostasis, to make thereof the Masterpiece of the Visible
World, and as it were an Epitome, an Abridgment, or a curious Recapitulation of
all his Works) ought necessarily to Re-place it, and to Re-establish it such,
as he formed it, and designed it at first.

He ought to do it, either for his own honor and glory as Creator, to the end,
That Man may eternally subsist in this admirable Composition of Body, and of
Spirit, who holding equally of the Visible and Corporeal World, and of the
Intelligible and Spiritual World, makes, as it were, a Third, and a kind of
One, altogether singular, which infinitely exalts his Wisdom and his Power;
or else for the honor and glory of the Redemption, and of the Man-God, who
would eternally remain Imperfect and Defective, if things were not
Re-established upon the foot of the first Platform, and of the first Design of
the Creation; and by consequence, if the Bodies were not re-placed with the
Souls, because the Man-God, would not be altogether a Repairer, and a Restorer,
if he did not re-place Man, such as he was at first Created and Designed; and
his Triumph over Sin, over Death and Satan, would not be complete and finished,
if the half of Men should remain in the Jaws of Death.

Considering then all this Train of the Divine System of Religion; it is
without doubt, most clear and certain, That the Universal Resurrection, ought
to be a Circumstance of that glorious Solemnity of Justice, which God ought
then to make at the Consummation of Ages, for the Consecration of his Eternal
Temple, for the Overture and Commencement of his Immortal Reign, for the Solemn
Coronation of his Predestined, for the complete Triumph of the Man-God, for the
Justification of all his Providence, and the Declaration of all his Designs: It
is, I say, indubitable and constant, That then, at the end of the present
Economy, and then when God will put an end to the Vicissitudes of Time, and to
the liberty of Revolt, and of License, which he gives at present to his
Creatures, then when he will fix all things in an Immutable and Eternal Order,
then when he will give a beginning to the New World; He will then Re-establish
all the Bodies, and Reunite every Soul to that which she animated, during the
present Life: But in the mean time, as we cannot say, That our Souls find in
themselves, the Sentiment of their future Reunion with their Bodies, so we
will not speak of it here, but as a Truth of Faith; because we proposed to our
selves, to decide nothing concerning Them, but what we should find Established,
either by our own proper Sentiment, and our indubitable Experience, or by a
clear Light of Evidence, arising from the Notion which we have made our selves
of it, as of a knowing Nature, sensible of Order and Duty, no less than of
Pleasure and Pain, and of all that is done in Her; but this Truth presupposed
and elsewhere sufficiently justified to the Idea of the Divine Attributes, and
in all the Train of the Principles of Religion, and of Christianity, We may
speak with assurance, of the manner how our Souls will be in their Resuscitated
Bodies.

He who calls Himself the Resurrection, and the Life, the Firstborn amongst
the Dead, the Father of the Ages to come; He in whom we are all raised up
again, in Mystery and in Figure, according to St. Paul's Expression, and by
whom, we all of us ought to be raised up again effectively, at the Last Day; He
tells us, that we shall be then, even in our Bodies, like the Angels,
disfranchised from the Businesses, and the Inclinations, which we have upon the
Occasion of the Body. St. Paul also teaches us, That our Bodies shall be
Spiritualized, and we may upon this Principle, decide with certainty, That the
Reunion of Bodies, does not at all change the Foundation of that State of the
Soul out of the Body, the manner and circumstances, whereof we have been
Illustrating.

When St. Paul says, That our Bodies shall be Spiritualized by the
Resurrection, he does not say, that they shall change Nature; and that by an
impossible Conversion and Metamorphosis, they shall become Knowing Natures, and
shall cease to be Extended Substances: He means, that the Bodies shall be no
more a Charge to the Souls, that they shall be to them, no more an Obstacle, or
Hindrance in any thing; and that they shall only serve to do Honor, to the
glory of the Creation and of the Redemption.

We will first of all, take away from Bodies, that which we call Gravity; which
is nothing else but an Impulsion, wholly exterior toward the Center of the
Earth, which happens to them at present, from the Impression of the Creator, by
reason of their Terrestrial Nature, and Composition. We will restore to them
their natural Indifference to Motion, and to Rest: For Bodies of themselves,
have not any Motion, neither of Lightness, nor of Weight; they neither ascend,
nor descend; they neither move themselves Perpendicularly, nor Horizontally, as
they say. At this present, as they are part of the Visible and Corporeal World,
which ought wholly to subsist upon that indivisible Point, which is called its
Center, which sustains all Bodies, without being sustained of any thing; They
must be moved, and driven continually toward the Center, and middle of the
Earth, which does not sustain it self upon its self, but by that Impulsion of
all its Parts, and of all that which we call Terrestrial Bodies, which from all
parts tend toward this middle, and the same indivisible Point; but then being
no longer Parts of the Terrestrial World, they no longer follow the Laws of
that Motion, which moves Corporeal and Terrestrial Nature; they will neither
have Levity nor Gravity, but a Perfect and Sovereign Agility, that is to say,
an entire Indifference for all sorts of Motion; which will cause them, without
any Resistance, to be carried every where, where the Souls would have them.

We will fix in these Resuscitated Bodies, such a Degree of Heat, and Motion in
the Blood, as shall be necessary to entertain the natural Movements; with a
certain Agility and Disposition, for the Animal and Voluntary Motions, which
the good Constitution of a healthful Body requires: This Heat will be
sufficient to make the Blood and Humors to flow, but not to escape, or
dissipate the least of the Parts, either fluid, or solid Parts of the Body;
from whence it will happen, That there will not be any Dissipation, and that
Nourishment, which is only to repair the Dissipation, will be never necessary.
Those Inclinations, which are now placed in Man, for the Propagation of
Species, will cease by this Reason, and this Principle; because, in these
Bodies, fixed in an Immutable Situation of Parts, and which never take
Nourishment, there will not be any excess of Superfluous Matter, by which those
natural Ebullitions and Fermentations are made, which give occasion to those
Desires, and to those Inclinations, which we now have for the Propagation of
Species: Erunt sicut Angeli Dei, neque nubent, neque nubentur.

Almost in the same manner, the Senses will have all their Functions; and
although the Souls ought to be enlightened, and affected with Idea's and
Sentiments, upon the Occasion of their Bodies, thus Spiritualized, in
proportion, as they themselves shall be affected, by the Corporeal Impression
of other Bodies, which shall act upon them; however, that will not at all
hinder, but that the Union of the Souls with God, and of God with the Souls,
shall be near and immediate, because, that independently of these Corporeal
Impressions, He will Act continually in them. The Bodies are now an essential
Occasional Cause of all the natural Action of God in the Souls; but then they
shall be the Cause Occasional, not Essential. God will Act by himself
immediately in them, enlightening them, and diversely modifying or affecting
them, without any Regard of the Body, in a thousand manners. The Bodies shall
be no longer neither a Wall, nor a Vail between God and the Souls, nor a
Channel of Communication between the Souls and God: He will Act in them
independently of the Disposition of the Body, which is now the essential
Condition of his natural Action in us. Then, when the Holy Souls shall be
reunited to their Bodies, They will not at all fail, as has been said, to
have the whole Spectacle of the Visible World; although there be but one part of
the Visible World, whose Species comes to be retracted in the Material Eyes:
They will not at all fail to have the Pleasure of Melodies, although there be not
any Symphony, which strikes their Corporeal Ears: Civitas non egebit Sole neque
Luna, nam Claritas Dei illuminabit eam. Such will be our Souls in their
Spiritualized Bodies, after the Universal Resurrection; and there remains
nothing more for us to do, after this last Illustration, than to make use of
these Knowledges, to reform our Idea's, and correct our Judgments; about
Eternity, and about Time; about the Present Life, and the Future; about the
Present World, and the World to come: And thereby, to comprehend the whole
Extent of our Duties.

CHAP. XIV.
What is Time and Eternity; the Present World, and the World to come; the
Present Life, and the Future Life.
IT is easy for us, after all that has been Illustrated, concerning that
Future State of our Souls, in the New and Immortal Life, which they ought to
Commence, in going out of the Body: It is easy for us, I say, to comprehend
what is Time and Eternity; the Present World, and the World to come; the
Present Life, and the Future Life. That which we Men call Time, is taken either
by Relation, to the Duration of the Abode of every Soul in its Body; or by
Relation, to the Duration of the whole present Economy of the Visible World,
destined to the Trial of the Souls in the Bodies; and in whatsoever
signification Men take Time, in the Opposition which Men make of it to
Eternity, It signifies, precisely, a State of Instability, of Change, and of
Vicissitude, and a State which ought to have an End; for these are the two
things which enter essentially into the Idea of that which is called Time,
Vicissitude and End. The space of the Duration, that our Souls are in our
Bodies, is called Time, for those two Reasons; because it ought to have an End,
and because in the Interim, so long as it endures, it holds us exposed to a
thousand Changes, and to a thousand Vicissitudes; and above all, to the
Vicissitude of being able to pass from Good to Evil, and from Evil to Good,
from Sin to Virtue, and from Virtue to Crimes or Vice.

You see here exactly, what Time is; and Eternity ought to be conceived by
Opposition; for Eternity is, on the contrary, The immutable and interminable
State, and Order of things: As much as Time, includes Instability and End; so
much does Eternity exclude them both. Time speaks Change and End; Eternity
speaks the being always the same, and never ending: Thus as our present State
in the Body is Time, so our Future State out of the Body is Eternity; and there
is the Principal clear Light, by which we ought to Judge of the difference of
our Present, and of our Future State. All may Change, and all ought to have an
End in out Present State; but nothing ought to Change, nor have an End in our
Future State, whether it be Happy or Unhappy. This is, as every one may see, a
fruitful Source, and abounding with strong and pressing Consequences, which
ought to penetrate Us, and to cause a General and Universal Change in our
Idea's.

Our Present State, which is called Time, is likewise called the Present Life;
and our Future State, the Life to come; because, that though in the two States,
it is only the same Soul, which in each State is essentially Living; yet it is
very much to the purpose, that we distinguish these two Lives, by their diverse
Objects and Conditions, although there be but one and the same Foundation of Life
in the two States. The Present Life does not Exercise it self, but upon the
false and perishable Objects of Time, and its deceitful and deceiving Economy.
The Future Life Exercises it self upon Objects wholly True, and wholly Solid.
The Present Life, is a perpetual alternativeness of real Cares and Torments,
and of false Shadows of Repose; of effective Business, and of seeming Riches;
of the agitations and Fevers of the Passions, and lucid Intervals of Reason; a
Theater of Eternal Mutations; a Chain enterlinck'd with short and transitory
Felicities, and long and durable Miseries; a rapid and precipitous Torrent,
which amongst some slender and false Pleasures, and some, but always bitter
drops of Pleasure, rouls on with cruel Pains, and tormenting Briers; A vehement
and impetuous Whirlwind of hurry and Ambition; Which after having much
tormented and agitated the Body and the Soul; after having raised a thousand
Storms in the Heart and in the Spirit, is dissipated into Air and Smoke. The
Future Life, on the contrary, is either but one Day all Uniform, all united to
everlasting Triumphs and Felicities, or one eternal Night of Horror and Despair.

In fine, Our Present State, is also called the Present World; and our Future
State, the World to come; because our Present State ties us, and affixes us to
the Visible and Corporeal World, much more sensibly, than to the Spiritual, and
Intelligible World; and our Future State ought to break off our Union, and our
Relation to the Visible World, and to unite us wholly and solely to God, and to
the pure Spirits, which make, together with God, that which we call the
Intelligible World.

And all these Idea's, ought equally to make us undervalue our Present State,
for such as it is, and infinitely to esteem our Future State, for that which it
ought to be; for whether we conceive our Present State, under the Idea of Life,
under the Idea of Time, or under the Idea of the Present and Visible World; and
on the contrary, Whether it be that we conceive our Future State, under the
Idea of Eternity, under the Idea of a Future Life, or under the Idea of the
World to come; the one appears infinitely Precious and Essential, and the other
infinitely Despisable. They ought, moreover, to make us conceive clearly, the
Crime, and the going astray of our Love of Time, of the Present Life and World;
and that of our indifference and forgetfulness for the Future Life, the World
to come, and for Eternity. There are some, who wonder that the Gospel should be
a perpetual Condemnation of the World; And who would that the Divine Redeemer
had more complaisance for our Appetites and our Inclinations thereto, and that
he had not found it so ill that we should love an Appearance so amiable, and
which has so many Charms and Enchantments; But they need only consider what
this Love, or the Love of the World is, upon which he lets fall his so terrible
Condemnations and Curses.

It Is this World the Gospel condemns, and thunders out so many Anathema's and
Curses against; It is this Love of Time, of Life, and of the present World,
which blinds, which besots and enchants Men, and makes them forget the World to
come, or the future State of Souls out of Bodies. It is not at all that
Assemblage of Elements which makes the World, that is condemned; It is not that
Society of Men, whether Natural, Civil, or Politic, which is sometimes also
called the World, which is rendered Criminal; But it is the Corruption of
Hearts blinded and enchanted by the Figure of this transitory World, from
whence is formed that overruling love of Vanity, which makes Eternity to be
forgotten; which is that impure and detestable World, which the Man-God,
High Priest of future Happiness, and Father and Monarch of the Age to come,
has necessarily cried down, to recall Men from this wandering of Vanity, to the
Essential Station of Eternity.

He could not but condemn the World in every Part in that Sense, in its
Conceits, in its Opinions, in its Maxims, in its Customs, in its Prosperities,
and in its Goods, in its Joys and in its Pleasures; because there could nothing
flow from so impure a Source, but what must be impure; But this is not a Place
to enlarge upon it, it is enough to have comprised the Judgment which we ought
to make of our two States, and the Preference which we ought to give to the one
above the other, we must now see the Obligations which come to us from thence.

CHAP. XV.
The General Order betwixt Time and Eternity, the present and the future Life,
and the present World and the World to come, which follows from the Knowledge
which we have been now acquiring.
THERE is without doubt a real Order of Duties between Time and Eternity, the
present Life and the future, the present World and the World to come; We will
not take notice of it, but it is certain that Time is indebted to Eternity, the
present Life to the future, the present World to the World to come, our present
State to the future State. Time is indebted to Eternity; for it Is not but for
the sake of Eternity: And that which it owes to Eternity, is, that it ought to
refer all unto it. The Order of Time is, that it should be carried back to the
Point of Eternity; All that is done in Time, and which is not carried back to
Eternity, (...) States with an absolute Power, and with a Sovereign Authority,
to gain Battles, to Conquer Provinces, to make all the Neighboring Thrones and
Kingdoms shake around us, to give what Motion and Impression we will to the
Universe, to reduce to an effective Reality that Idea of an Universal Monarchy,
the Vision and Chimerical Ambition of which we have reproached in the last Age
in our Neighbors; We believe that it is something very fine, and it is true,
that nothing in Human Affairs is greater; but even That if it be not in the
Order of Eternity, or if it be not made for the End or Prospect, and for the
Scope of Eternity, all that is nothing but a great and vast Folly, but a great
and frightful Wandering from the Mark and from the End, a Childish Illusion and
Amazement, a Sport of Ants, and a Triumph of those little Insects that we see
roll and remove with so much Effort, one Grain of Sand, or one little Clod of
Earth without any solid Profit. We must redress our Conduct by those Lights and
those Knowledges, which discover to us equally our Duties, and the Motives and
Incentives to our Duties.

The Holy Fathers have said, That the Eternity was a Light which is no sooner
risen in a Spirit and in a Heart, but that it causes more Instructions, and
more Lights of Duties to arise, than there flows Rays from the Body and the
Globe of the shining Sun, who is all Light and all Rays; and what sort of
Expression soever this may be, it does not come up to the Truth. Good God! what
crowd of Rays does not this beautiful Sun of Eternity spread over all our Ways?
What an Ocean of them does not he pour upon us, against our so Excessive and so
Idolatrous an Esteem of the World, and of its Vanity, against our Adoring of
vain Beauties, against the Illusions of Riches, against the Phantome of
Grandeur, against the Chimera's of Fortune, against the Enchanting and
Bewitching of Pleasures, against the Vanity of our Enterprises, against the
Inutility of our violent Transports, against the Foolishness of our Leagues and
Alliances, against the Blindness of our Maxims, and the Errors of our Opinions?
One of the Ancients said, That the Contemplation of Wisdom did cause in the
Spirit and in the Hearts of Men, that which the fixed looking upon the Sun
causes in Corporeal Eyes, which being blinded with his great Light, see not any
thing more in the World; But it is the Knowledge of the future State of our
Souls out of the Body, and in the Eternal World, which marvellously causes
this Effect; When we have well viewed the World to come, and the new State of
our Souls, we see nothing in this World but Darknesses and Shadows, but a great
and vast Nothingness, but a perpetual Illusion; For this is not only a Light
which obscures all the present Advantages, and all the Objects of Human
Passions; but it is a Day that annihilates them, and effaces them entirely.

From thence there springs together with the clear Knowledge and Conviction of
a thousand and a thousand Obligations, a thousand and a thousand Incitements to
Vigilance, whether it be on the side of Fear, or on the side of Hope: The fear
of the infinite Ills of the unhappy Fortune of this new Place, does not leave
us any thing in the Pains of Virtue which we might fear, nor any thing in the
Pleasure of the World and of Sin, with which we might be affected. The short
and little Interval which is between the Pleasure of Passions and of Sin, and
between these so affrighting Ills, does not permit us one single moment to have
the least rest; The Thunder rumbles over our Head, and is ready to break upon
us; we touch the End of the present Life as it were with Foot and Hand, we see
it before us as a high and lofty Wall, which stops our further Progress in
spite of us, and which presents it self like an unsurmountable Wall, against
which our exorbitant Desires ought to dash themselves in pieces, and which
ought to give a violent Interruption to our Covetousness; and at the same time
a large and vast Gate open to our Souls and to our Sins, for to procure them
the Passage to Eternity, and to make them enter into a new Career of
Unhappiness or of Felicity; the sort of which ought to be decided by the
Disposition and Situation of the Order or Disorder in which we die.

We see in the End of our Lives, which is so near and so inevitable, this Gate
and this Wall all at once; and the greatness of the Despair which we see so
near us, if we remain so carelessly Sleeping, is so powerful an Incitement to
Vigilance, and at the same time so fruitful a Principle of so many Duties and
of so many Obligations of Attention concerning our selves, of Reflection, of
Deliberation, and of Consultation concerning the End and Event of Lise,
concerning the Means and the Help of Innocence, that if I would here give a
particular Account of them, I should be forced to make a great Volume; whereas
I will only show, and give an Overture to the particular Reflections of every
one. I cannot however but remark, That the Duty of Vigilance, or of the
Cooperation of Salvation, does include them altogether; and that it is
(together with the Misprisal of this present Life, and the lively and ardent
Desire of the future Life) the most Essential Duty of the Order of Time and of
Eternity, which deserves here a particular Reflection.

CHAP. XVI.
The Duty of the Cooperation of Salvation, and what Divine Predestination, and
what Divine Reprobation is, on Gods part.
ALTHOUGH there are some amongst Men more particularly called to that which we
call Salvation, which is that which we mean by Divine Predestination, Men more
particularly favored and cherished for the happy End and the favorable Event,
of that Alternativeness of Happiness or Unhappiness, which is determined in
Time for Eternity; Men with whose Salvation God charges himself, as a
particular Cause if you will; for it is thus that some few conceive it: Yet it
is nevertheless certain and indubitable, That all Men are generally Called to
Salvation, to that happy Lot of Eternity, which Associates Man to all the
Felicities of God, Even those themselves which Men conceive as Reprobates,
antecedently, as they say, on Gods part, who are those whom God abandons to the
common Graces of the general Vocation, and with whose Salvation he does not
charge himself, or, to say better, he does not meddle as to the Success and the
Event, but as Universal Cause. This is called his Reprobation; for on his part
there is not any other which comes purely from him, or which can be imputed to
him; Even those very Men, I say, which others conceive as Reprobated on Gods
part, are really Called to Salvation: God generally prepares for them Means not
only sufficient, but abounding; and he would withal his Heart that they should
put no Obstacle to the sincere Intentions which he has of Associating all Men
to his Felicity and his Glory in his most happy Eternity. It is true, he will
not use all his Power to surmount the Obstacles which Men may put there, he
will not charge himself with the making the Salvation of all Men to succeed at
what Price soever it be, which is the Sense in which St. Augustine says in some
places, That God will not Save all Men, he will not charge himself with the
Effective Success and Event of the Salvation of all; which if he should do, it
would be impossible that there should one single Man perish; which is the Sense
in which St. Augustine says, That God being willing to Save Men, there can be no
Liberty which can resist him; He will not concur to the Success and to the
Event of the Salvation of All as Universal Cause; He has believed that he ought
to have more regard to the Honor of his Divine Attributes, than to the
Interests generally of all his Creatures; and that being willing to Save all
Men, as to himself, and to give to them all sufficient and necessary Means
thereto, he might suffer some of them to Perish by their own Negligence and
their own Fault; which is the Sense in which St. Paul compares him to the
Potter, who makes what he pleases of his own Clay, without any manifest Cause
to contradict him, and the unsearchable Mysteries of his Judgments, upon which
he cries out, Oh the depth!

But the same Authority of the Divine Word, which teaches us, that there are
Men more Dear, and more in Favor, with whose Salvation God does charge himself
more particularly, or that he anticipates by a more favorable Predestination,
does teach us, That All are Called, and sincerely Called, and that He would
have all Men to be Saved, and that he would not have one single Man Perish. And
it is very strange, that some Men, who do not believe the Predestination of
some few after the manner that they believe it, but that upon this Divine
Authority they will believe that All are sincerely Called, since the Divine
Word is no less express for the general and Universal Vocation of All, than for
the Predilection and Favor of a Special Predestination for some Few; nay, it
is more express and more formal for the General Vocation of All, than for this
Predilection of Particular Predestination for some Few, at least after the
manner that they conceive it, who will not that All are truly and sincerely
Called; And if we must necessarily quit one of these two Truths, both which
ought to be equally respected and retained, we ought rather to quit That of
Predilection and Singular Predestination of some Few, than that of a General
Vocation of All; for besides that it is the same Divine Authority which
requires both these Opinions to be received and respected, That of the General
Vocation has moreover the Authority, the Foundation and the Help of Natural
Evidence, which makes us see in God the Heart of a Father for all Men, and a
Foundation of Liberty in all Men, which was not given them but to serve them,
to determine in Time the Lot of their Eternity.

We cannot believe, That there is one single Man, whom God has Created to be
Damned, as some have believed that there are a great many. On Man's side the
State of Trial which holds us here balanced betwixt the two Eternities, which
we have said make the Foundation of the Present State, gives us Idea's quite
contrary, since we are not there preserved Free but to determine this Lot; And
on Gods side it appears to us so well in the manner how he continually Operates
in all Men in the Order of Nature, that we cannot at all conceive, that he
being so Essentially good in Nature, should not be so in Grace also.

Salvation is then a Lot whereby we may render our selves happy if we will; how
Reprobate soever we are, we have all Grace enough, if we have enough of
Vigilance and enough of Cooperation, to surmount the Obstacles of Salvation,
which do proceed wholly from our Natural Corruption, and not from any
Opposition or Difficulty which God imposes upon us.

All the World speaks of this Cooperation of Salvation, and of Christian
Vigilance, which ought to Animate and Conduct it; but there are but few People
who will apply themselves to understand well what is this Vigilance and this
Cooperation of Salvation. What means the Holy Scripture, when it bids us Watch,
Vigilate, and when it bids us Work out our Salvation? It is of Importance to
frame well a neat Idea of it, since what we ought to do in this respect, is but
a Cooperation; for we of our selves do not know how to work out our Salvation,
all that we can do in this Case is but to Cooperate: And as this word
Cooperation essentially imports a Relation to an Action and Operation of
Another; so we must say, that our Cooperation of Salvation ought to be the Deed
in Us which God does there, or which he would have done there by the Impression
of his Grace and of his Heavenly Vocation; and we shall have thereby a most
distinct and most easy Notion of all the Duty, and all the Obligation of
Cooperation of Salvation; For since to Cooperate to Salvation, is to be Active,
to Watch, to Labor, to Do and Atchieve in us that which God has begun there by
his Grace, which would finish jointly with us, that which it begun without us;
That the Vocation to Salvation, with all the Impressions of Grace which
accompany it, is in us but a beginning of a Separation from the World, a
Disesteem of the Vanities of it, a flaming and lively ardent Desire for
Eternity, a Victory over our Passions, the mystic Death of our Senses, a holy
Hatred of our Selves; It follows from thence, That our Cooperation to Salvation
is not a vain Presumption, and a vain Confidence of Faith, by which we regard
our Selves, as indubitably set apart to Eternal Election; which is, if I may be
permitted to say so, the Fanaticism, or the Fanatic and Chymerical Thought,
and the false Piety of some pretended Faithful Ones, who place all the
Essential Cooperation of Salvation, in the Belief that they are as indubitably
Saved as Jesus Christ himself. It is neither a false appearance of Zeal, and of
Devotion, or a Superstition about more essential Practices, wherein we every
day see, certain false Worshippers do place their whole Religion; nor is it a
simple Observation of the exterior Actions of Justice, and of Duty, nor a
superficial Sentiment of God, which only makes them vent toward him some
inefficacious and unprofitable Desires and Sighs, which is no more than to say,
Domine, Domine, Lord, Lord, as the Divine Redeemer has remarked: But it is a
constant, a perpetual, and an indefatigable Application, to withdraw our selves
from the World, to mortify our selves, to diminish the force of our disorderly
Concupiscence, to purify our Imaginations, to contemplate the Eternal
Beauties, to premeditate the next end of Life, to avoid the Pleasures of Sense,
and to taste those of Grace and Eternity. When we omit this Cooperation, all
the rest are useless; in vain do we repeat our Prayers, in vain do we frequent
Divine Mysteries.

St. Paul says, That this is beating the Air, that is to say, that it is to do
nothing. It is upon my Impure Senses, and upon my Rebellious Flesh, says this
Apostle, That I strike, and not upon the Air. I know, that to work out my
Salvation, I have only to do to work upon my Heart; and for that Reason, it is
upon It that I strike all my blows. I subject my Senses, I chastise my Body, I
make a continual Violence upon my Inclinations; for to do otherwise, were to
beat the Air, and to lose both Time and Labor. Cooperation then is essential
to Salvation, which is the most essential Duty of the Order of Time, and of
Eternity, and by consequence, of our Present State: And this Duty ought more to
employ us, than the care of our Fortunes, and the other interests of our
Pasions; it ought not to give us one moment of Truce; it ought to keep us
always in Breath; it is for that reason, that our Savior expresses it, by the
Name of Vigilance; it ought effectively to be a perpetual Application to Watch,
and to stir up our Heart to prepare it, and put it into a State, capable of
receiving this Impression of its proper Glory, and its proper Felicity; which
God would make upon those amongst us whom he shall find disposed to finish and
consummate his Divine Resemblance, which Nature and Grace began, and which his
Glory only finisheth.

CHAP. XVII.
The Duty of a lively, and ardent Desire of a Future Life.
Although the Cooperation of Salvation, does essentially import a Disesteem of
the Present Life, and a lively and ardent Desire of the Future; yet
notwithstanding, these two Duties are different in their Foundations; since the
Duty of Cooperation of Salvation ceasing, we do not cease however to be
obliged to endure the Present Life, with some sort of Impatience; and to Sigh
after the Future, with an ardent and expressive Desire. It is Essential to
observe, and to remark, That we ought effectively to be enflamed with a lively,
and ardent Desire of the Life to come, by a true Obligation, and a true Duty,
which we cannot omit or violate, without rendering our selves infinitely
culpable toward God, and worthy of all his Anger, and all his Vengeance.

Here is an Obligation very New, for almost all Men, who do so love the Present
Life, that they cannot so much as only comprehend, that they can love and
desire the Future; but this Obligation which appears New, to the Carnal Taste of
our Terrestrial Love, is of the same Date in the Soul of Man, as the Obligation
of Regarding, and seeking God only as the Sovereign Good; for since it is but
in this Future Life, that God is possessed, it follows, that in as much as we
are obliged to have this Love of that Holy Thirst, and of that Sacred
Concupiscence for God, that love of Union, and of Possession, and of Joy, the
Duty of which, has been already Established; so much are we obliged to Love
and Desire, with an ardent and impressed Desire, the Life to come.

St. Augustine perfectly understood this Principle; for it is for that Reason,
that he said, That he that finds himself well in this World, and would always
continue here, has not the least spark of the least perfect Love, which all
Men ought to have for God: And it is upon this Principle, that all the other
Holy Doctors have decided the same thing; They have not only determined, that
it is an essential Duty in the Heart of Man, To Groan and Sigh after the Life
to come; but they have remarked, that therein, is the most inseparable
Character of the Divine Predestination, and of the Impression which the Holy
Ghost makes in them to whom he bears witness of the Eternal Election, and
Adoption of the Heavenly Father: Those that are Predestined, say they, are
the bemoaning and desolate Turtle-Doves, who sigh without ceasing after the
Celestial Spouse, who does not receive these chaste Birds to his chaste Embraces,
but in the Life to come. They are the Citizens of the Heavenly Country, who
look upon themselves as banished upon Earth; They are the true Israelites, who
could find nothing good and agreeable in Babylon, and who could not propose to
themselves any other Pleasure, than that of returning to their dear Jerusalem;
They are the tender and passionate Children, who can find no pleasure out of
the Presence, and House of their Father; They are the judicious Travelers, who
regard the Places where they pass, as Places which they ought not to place
their Hearts upon, as Places whereat their Hearts ought not to stop, since they
cannot Rest there themselves; They are (say the Fathers) Stones out of their
Quarry, and a Fire out of its Sphere; They continually throw themselves
forwards toward him, who allures them with a Charm so sweet in this New Life;
Their Hearts continually say that which the Lips only Pronounce in the Person
of Reprobates, in the Prayer which our Savior, the King of the Age to come,
teaches us, Let thy Kingdom come.

Such are those who are Predestined, the Citizens, and the Children of the
Kingdom of Heaven; Filii Regni. They do not long, but after the Future Life,
which is their Kingdom, and that of their Heavenly Father: The Reprobates, on
the contrary, they love only the Present Life; they do not at all know of any
other Goods, or other Pleasures, than those of the Earth. The Dove that went
out of the Ark, returned to the Ark again, because she found no place where she
could rest her Feet; but the Ravens did not return at all, because loving
Corruption, their Impure Taste engaged them to all the dead Bodies, which they
found in the way. He that is Predestined, groans here, because he Suffers,
and he Suffers because he is separated from God, and from His Eternal Delights.
The Reprobate, on the contrary, does wallow in Joys; he esteems himself happy,
he is contented with his false Prosperity, because he does not at all think of
God, and his Immortal Felicities. He has his Satisfaction and Consolation in
this World, which obliges the King of the World to come, to dart out his Curse,
and his Compassion upon him, in these Terms, so violent and so terrible, Woe be
to you, that you have had your Consolation in this World.

To Love then, and to desire the Future Life; to Sigh after the coming of the
Eternal Kingdom, and to return without ceasing, from the midst of Babylon,
toward the Heavenly Jerusalem, is an indispensable Duty of the Love of God,
and of that proper Charity which we owe to our selves; and if we do not find in
us, this Love of the World to Come, and this Character of the Divine
Predestination, we ought to begin there by the Cooperation, which we ought to
contribute to our Salvation; to apply our selves without ceasing, to
contemplate the Beauty, and the Charms of the Eternal World, and the advantages
of the Future Life, above the Present; to the end, that perpetual Contemplation
may purify our Imaginations; that so we may hate our Earthly Taste, and imprint
the Celestial one upon us, which will cause that we shall cease to be those
Earthly Men, of whom St. Paul speaks, upon whom remains the Curse of Adam, and
that we shall become those Heavenly Men, who being thenceforwards drawn after
the lively resemblance of the New Man, shall eternally be the perfect Images of
his Glory, and of his Sovereign Felicity in Heaven.

CHAP. XVIII.
A Recapitulation of Moral Consequences, drawn from what has been Established,
concerning our Souls, for the Conviction of our Duties, and the Condemnation of
our Disorders.
WE had proposed to add here for a Fourth Part, a Recapitulation of all the
Moral Consequences, which might be drawn from what has been cleared,
concerning our Souls, in Relation to our Duties, and to our Disorders; and to
have given it by way of an Alphabetical Table: And therein, to have let you see
a Conviction of all our Duties, and a solid Establishment of all our
Obligations, the Shame and Disorder of all our Passions, the Rule of all our
Sentiments, and generally an Universal Conduct for all our Life to come. But we
were afraid That would have excessively increased the Volume: And we are
therefore determined to close up all, with a general Consideration of the
little esteem which we have for our Souls; and with the Condemnation of Five
principal Disorders in our Lives, which we believe, have deserved a particular
Reflection.

How unreasonable we are, to make so little an Account of our Souls, after so
much that has been already said of them.
We have showed, that there is in our Souls a Spiritual Nature, a Heavenly
Origin, an Immortal Condition, a Divine Quality, an Essential Union with God,
an Everlasting State of Misery or Happiness, after a short Trial in this Life.
We have showed, That they come from God, that they are always essentially in
God; that it is but for a little moment of Time, that their Union with the
Body, suspends their immediate Union with God; and that thus they ought quickly
to return to God, and remain everlastingly in Him. We have seen, that They are
imprinted with so many glorious and eminent Tracts of the Divine Resemblance,
which have rendered them worthy to be (if I may be permitted to say so)
reclaimed and redeemed so dearly, at the Price of the annihilation of all the
greatness of a God, at the Price of a thousand sorts of Revilings and
Humiliations, and of all the Merit of his Blood and Life.

We have seen how they ought to lay aside, the deceitful Garment of the present
Felicity of the Body, as a Theatrical Habit; how they ought to change Opinions,
Tastes and Ideas; how all the Spectacle of Time ought to be Effaced, and how
that of Eternity ought to discover it self to our Eyes; how they are to be
happy in all the proper licity of God, or unhappy according to the Extent of
his Power and his Anger. And there is not one of these Idea's and of these
Circumstances, which ought not to serve us for a Light to Enlighten in us a
thousand Duties; and which on the contrary is not a clear Light, to let us see
in our selves a thousand Disorders, wherewith we ought to be penetrated with
Confusion and to Reproach our selves; who carrying in us that Foundation of
Reason, and that Light of the Spirituality, of the Eternity, and of the Divine
Quality of our Souls which we do, we ought to guide otherwise than we do, our
Relishes and our Sentiments, our Opinions and our Maxims, our Desires and our
Affections, all our Actions and all our Life.

Oh the Folly and Disorder! Oh the Vanity and Illusion! Oh the Charm and
Enchantment! Oh the Fury and Frenzy of Man! who bearing an Eternal and
Immortal Soul in his Hands, does not know the Price nor the Fragility of the
Treasure which he carries, but continually strikes it against a thousand Rocks!
Our Souls are Immortal and Eternal, their Nature is not at all Frail and
Mortal, they ought to last Eternally like God; but as their Being and their
Nature is durable and solid, so is their Happiness, and so is their Lot of
Eternity nice and uncertain. There is no Glass so brittle, there is not one
moment of the Day wherein we do not strike them against Rocks and Marbles,
against all the Occasions of Sin and Ruin which present themselves. We do not
only hurt them so senselesly and inconsiderately, but we Stake this Treasure so
inestimable and so infinite, against the smallest Pleasures which the furious
and implacable Enemy of our Souls can propose and offer to us. No King did ever
Stake his Kingdom and his Throne upon the Chance of one Dye. What do I say, No
King? No Man did ever Stake his Fortune and his Hope, though never so mean; And
We! do not We continually Stake to Nothingness and to Shadows, Eternal Thrones
and Kingdoms, Immortal Hopes and Fortunes? David would not have the Pleasure to
quench the burning Thirst wherewith he was inflamed, at the peril of the Life
of some few of his Soldiers; How, said he, shall I Drink at so dear a Price?
Shall I hazard Souls for my Thirst? And yet We! We have no Desire, though never
so senseless, we have never so little Thirst, which we will not content at the
Price of the Eternal Loss of our Souls, or at least of the evident danger of
that Irreparable Loss. What shall we call Fury and Frenzy, if this be not? O
the Folly then and the Disorder! O the Madness and Frenzy of our Thoughts and
of our Desires, of our Relishes and of our Passions! if we do not henceforwards
guide them by the Knowledge which we have of the Heavenly Origin of the
Spiritual Nature, of the Immortal Condition, of the Divine Quality, and of the
Everlasting State after this Life, of the Immutable Felicity or Misery of our
Souls, and of all the other Advantages which we have showed to be in them.

Five Moral Consequences in Relation to Five Principal Circumstances concerning
the Nobility of our Souls.
We might draw a thousand particular Instructions, and a thousand strong
Condemnations of our Disorders, from all these Knowledges; but since we only
intend here to open a Way, as it were, to the end that every one may be
Instructed by himself in his Particular, and draw those Consequences which are
proper to himself, we will only draw Five of them from hence against Five of
our most common Disorders, which we do not acknowledge for Disorders only,
which we shall make to Answer to the Five Principal Circumstances of the
Dignity and of the Excellence which we have showed to be in our Souls.

We shall draw from the Principle of the Celestial Origin, and of the
Essential Dependence of our Soul, and of our Union with God, from the Principle
that they proceed from God, that they live in God, and that they ought
necessarily in a short time to retvrn to God, the Consequence of a terrible
Condemnation of our forgetfulness and of our going astray from God; whereof we
are so little afraid, and wherein we do not acknowledge even the Disorder and
the Irregularity.

We shall draw from the Principle of the Spiritual Nature of our Souls, a
Consequence of the clear and sensible Conviction of the Disorder, of our
foolish and Idolatrous love of our Body, which we believe to be so lawful and
so innocent.

We shall draw from the Principle of our Immortal Condition, the Consequence of
an evident Conviction of the Disorder of our bewitching love of the present
Life, whereof we have so little Remorse.

We shall draw from the Principle of the Divine Quality of our Souls, which is
the Honor of the Divine Resemblance (which Nature begins in them by Conscience
and by the Seeds of Virtue, and which Grace and Glory do finish) the
Consequence of the Condemnation of that little care which we have to cooperate
to the Honor of the Divine Resemblance.

We shall draw from the Principle of the Alternativeness of the immutable State
of Felicity and Misery, which must succeed the present Fortune, and which we
have presently to decide by the good usage of Time and of this Life, the
Conviction of the outrageous Folly of our violent Transports, and of our fury
of Ambition for the present Fortunes, which we regard as the only Prudence and
the only Wisdom of this Life.

The Condemnation of our Forgetfulness, and of our Wandering from God.
First of all, How condemnable are we for forgetting God? since it is true,
That our Souls do not only come from God, but they live Essentially in him; and
that after this short Interruption of their Immediate Union with him, which
makes the present Life, they ought to return, and eternally remain in him. How
great is the Disorder, in your Opinion, of this Forgetfulness?

The Scripture says, That the Stars being incapable of Sentiments and of
Knowledge, have a perpetual Acknowledgment for him who gave them Light; and for
that Reason to testify it to him, they send him back perpetually their Light,
and are continually turned toward him, as if it were to tell him, that for Him
only they desire to shine, that it is for Him only that they do shine; Lucent
ei qui fecit illas. Here is an Idea and a Lesson which they give us of the
continual Application and perpetual Return which we ought to have toward God,
for perceiving and acknowledging his Presence, his Divine Illumination and his
Influence in us; But we are far enough from following this Lesson, our Heart
and our Spirit do turn themselves equally from him, they equally lose
themselves in useless Thoughts, and plunging themselves, and advancing farther
and farther into this Land of Forgetfulness, and this Region of Darkness; they
do not so much as once a Day, no not, perhaps, once a Week, once a Month, once
a Year, call to mind their Divine Origin, and their Celestial Dependence;
Obstupescite Coeli super hoc, here would the Prophet Esaias say: All Nature says
the same thing with the Prophet, and would rise and Arm her self against this
so monstrous Ingratitude, and this so monstrous Insolence. There is not betwixt
Man and Man the like Example of Injustice, of Brutality, and of Rashness.

It would be very much, that the Heart only should forget God, and should
wander from him, in searching as she does, her Happiness and her Pleasure out
of him, which is the greatest Wandering that can be. But it is not the Heart
alone that for gets God, and wanders from him, the Spirit it self, the Spirit
who could have quitted it self at so easy a rate of the Duty of its Dependence
and its Acknowledgment, the Spirit forgets him, the Spirit effaces his Idea,
the Spirit turns it self wholly from him, it revolts entirely: And though the
Spirit receives continually a Light and Thought from God; it is by him that she
Perceives all that she perceives, it is by him that she Thinks all that she
Thinks, and it is by him that she Knows all that she Knows; and yet so far is
she from acknowledging and perceiving it, that she believes that she is a Light
to her self, and she does not at all believe that she owes any thing to God
for it. If the the Sun did never Set, or were never under a Cloud, we should
not at all believe that it was by it we had the Light, we should believe that
the Light, by the help of which we see all things, were in our Eyes; and
because God does continually Enlighten us, because that this Sun never Sets,
because that this Sun is always ready to Enlighten us every instant, we believe
that we have in our selves the Light and the Idea's where with He Enlightens
us. The Dog lifts up his Head to him who gives Bread to him, the Spirit of Man
does not at all lift up his Thoughts toward him who continually gives him all
his Light and all his Life; O Ingratitude! O Revolt!

What Judgment do you think does God make of those Men who live in Courts, in
Palaces, and in great Offices of all sort of Profession, who pass their Days,
their Weeks, their Months, their Years, all their whole Life, without any true
Remembrance, or any true Sentiment of him, and of the continual Dependence
which we have, of the perpetual Irradiation of his Eternal Essence? With what
Eyes do you think does he look upon them? What Violence do you think does he
offer himself, in not hastening the end of their Lives, and the beginning of his
Vengeance? Yet He never spoke with more Resentment than Laboravi sustinens, He
never thundered or demanded Justice from Heaven or Earth with more vehemence,
He never demanded it with a greater Indignation. Let us see if there be any
thing like this amongst Men, from a Subject to a King, from Children to their
Parents, from Husbands to their Wives, from Servants to their Masters, or
amongst the most savage Beasts toward those who take care to feed them.

But if you conceive thereby how Criminal our forgetfulness of, and our
wandering from God is, you will apprehend how unhappy it is, by the Anger with
which God will receive those ungrateful Souls who forget him, when they shall
return to him. The Rivers which flow from the Sea, return to the Sea; The
Bodies which came from the Earth, return to the Earth; And our Souls which came
from God, return also necessarily to God: They are as it were Portions of
himself, which he recalls, and would have reunited to the Whole, if we may be
permitted to say so, after the Ancient Fathers. Exivi a Patre and veni in
mundum (says Jesus Christ) and iterum relinquo mundum and vado ad Patrem; I am
come out from my Father, and I am come into the World, and I must again leave
the World and go to my Father. He said it for himself and for us equally.

He being come from God, ought to return to God; being sent from God to the
Earth, ought to return to God: And our Souls, which in the same manner are sent
into the Body, and into the Visible World, to be there tried, ought to return
to God; they came from God, and they return to God, and in God. In vain do we
wander, do we lose our selves and go astray. We never lose our selves for God;
he never lets us go for altogether; he has his Cord and his Chain, by which he
holds us, and by which he recalls us when he pleases, and when he thinks fit;
He will recall us, yes, and our ungrateful Souls, who are now all of them
turned away from him, always Fugitives and Vagabonds, wandering from Vanity to
Vanity, will be much astonished when we shall return to him. O what Surprise!
what Astonishment! what Confusion! what Disorder! what Dread! what Efforts! but
fruitless Efforts of Flying, of Hiding ones self, and of Escaping! What
Commotions! what Storms! what Agitations in the Hearts of these Fugitive Slaves
brought back to their Master, of these Rebellious Subjects dragged in Chains
before their King!

At this Meeting, what Despair in these Souls! what Movements in God! If these
Souls on their side are Troubled, Amazed, Affrighted and Agitated in
themselves, God, how is he on his side? how does he receive them? how do they
find him? what Entertainment? what Accosting? what Reception, in your Opinion?
But what Reproaches! or to say better, What Thunder and Thunderbolts! what
Looks! what Rage! what Threatenings! what Indignation! But if the the Accosting
and the Meeting causes so much Pain, what will the Judgment and the
Condemnation do? what will the Account which they must give of all the Thoughts
of the Spirit, and all the Motions of the Heart, of them who forget God?

There is not one Hair of our Head lost, says the Divine Word; That is to say,
says S. Augustine, That all our Thoughts are counted, all our Steps are written
down, there is an Account kept of all our Respirations; not one of our
Thoughts, not one of the Motions of our Hearts shall be lost, and every one of
them which shall have wandered from God (if we may be permitted to say so) in
our Lives; Every one of them which shall not have God for its Mark, for its
principal End and overruling Object, will be found Impious and Sacrilegious:
And then what Surprise will there be anew! what Regret! what Stinging and
bitter Repentance! what Shame and Confusion! what Despite! and what Rage of
ungrateful Souls against themselves! what Despair and what Fury! with what
Evidence and with what Sentiment will they acknowledge their Wandering? With
what Cries and with what Howlings will they tear themselves to pieces, and will
say, Ergo erravimus; Ah! it is too true, That so much as we have forgot God, we
have been truly wandering! All the Pleasure and the Happiness which we have
searched for out of God, has been a real Wandering! Oh! how far do we find our
selves from that Mark and Goal which we then did run to with so much violence
and fury! Oh! Pleasures! Oh! Goods, which we searched for out of God, and which
we now see, are no where but in God? O Error! O Wandering!

The Condemnation of our blind and senseless love of our Body.
If by the Principle of our Origin, and of our Celestial Dependence, which
ought to make us so essentially to turn to God; we ought so mightily to condemn
our forgetfulness, and our wandering from God. We ought no less to condemn by
the Principle of Nature, and the Spiritual Quality of our Souls, our Foolish
and Idolatrous love of our Bodies. For in fine, Since our Souls is the true
Foundation of our Being, how comes it to pass, That we only know our Bodies?
That we only Love, Adore, and Idolize our Bodies? That we are not concerned,
but for the Interests of our Bodies? That we do not labor, or much concern our
selves, but for our Bodies? We are sensible to all their little Businesses, to
all their little Advantages, to all their little Commodities; and insensible to
all the Businesses, to all the Interests and Advantages of our Soul!

Our Soul is, as has been said, The whole Foundation of our Being. It is by
her, That we ought to be eternally happy or unhappy? She is all our True and
Essential Being; The Body, and every thing which has the Body for its Basis,
for its Foundation, and for its Subject, is no more, than as it were an
accident of our True Being. The Whole Man is in the Soul; or to say better, It
is the Soul only, that is the Whole Man; because Man is nothing properly, but
what he ought to be Eternally; for there is nothing truly and properly real,
but what is Eternal. To be for a Moment, for a Day, for a Year, or for some
short time; This is not properly to Be. Eternity is the true Ground, and the
true Basis of a solid and real Being: Nothing properly and truly Is, but that
which is to be for ever. To be for a time only, is not truly to Be: It is a
Shadow of Being; It is a Figure of Being. The Present World is not according
to St. Paul, but a Figure of a World; not a True World, because it passes away.

All Corporeal Felicity therefore, all Grandeur, all Abundance, all the
Advantages which have Bodies for a Basis, and for a Subject, cannot make to a
Man a true and real Being, since Death ought to make her Prey upon them. The
true Being of a Man, is that which ought to Be Eternally; and since it is by
the Soul only, and by the advantages or disadvantages of the Soul, that Man
ought to be Eternally, all that which he ought to be. Therefore there is
nothing more true, than to say, That it is the Soul only, which is the Whole
Man.

Beauty, Ladies, which you make as the Basis and Foundation of all your Being;
And the Debaucheries, in which you infamous Sensual Men make your Felicity, and
all your Being to consist, will not go along with you into Eternity. The Body,
which is the Basis of Beauty and of Debauchery, is laid in the Grave, and
remains on this side, when the Soul returns to God, and makes her Passage into
Eternity; and then, at the Consummation of Time, and the Establishment of the
Immutable Order of the World to come, when the Soul shall come to Reassume the
Body, She will take with it nothing of that, which at present makes her
Felicity and her Pomps.

The Pleasures of the Body, are all of them Essentially false, as well as
empty. They leave the Heart, even during this Life, sick and Famished, and they
leave the Soul eternally deceived; they disappear, they fly away, they leave
the Soul in a cruel Privation, and in an insupportable Desolation of Regret and
of Repentance, of Horror, and of Despair. O Vanity then of Vanities! Illusion
of Illusions! Thus to abandon our selves, to love nothing but our Bodies; and
neglect the care of our Souls.

The Soul, at this very hour, has her Goods, her Riches, her Grandeurs, and
her Pleasures; which are worth more, without comparison, than the Pleasures,
the Goods, Riches, and Grandeurs of the Body. But though the Soul should have
none but the Pleasures, the Riches, and the Grandeurs of Eternity: The
expectation of those Pleasures, of those Grandeurs, and of those Riches of
Eternity, ought to possess us, instead of the Pleasure, Grandeur, and Riches of
the Body. In the mean time, How great is our furious and ridiculous Blindness
thereupon? What do we take care for, but the Body? What do we take Pains for,
but the Body? Does not every thing rely upon the Body? Do not all all things
terminate in the Body? Do not all things turn about the Body?

See a little, all the Pains, all the violent Transports, all the agitation of
Human Life; if we seek for great Riches, Treasure and Fortune; is it not that
we may have a sure and infallible Mean, of being able to make upon the Body,
all the Impressions of Pleasure and Voluptuousness, that we would desire? to
prefer it to High Places, to make it carry it self Superbiously? to make it be
reverenced by the People, and the Multitude? To cause it to be Lodged
magnificently? To cause it to be delicately, and excellently well Clothed? It
is for the Body, that we Labor, that we Sow, that we Reap. It is the Body,
that all Arts swet for; The Body takes up all; there is neither place nor time
for the Soul. See if you can find from Morning till Night, That the Body leaves
the Soul one moment free, and at leisure? What say you to this Conduct? What
think you of it? Is this good Order? Is this indeed Justice and Reason?

Ah! poor Soul, how ill art thou Lodged, how unjustly and unworthily art thou
Treated! yet in the mean time, thou art an Immortal and Eternal Nature and
Substance, or to say better, an Immortal and Eternal Queen, to whom equally
belong, both Time and Eternity, the Present World, and the World to come: It is
to Thee, that all ought to be Subservient, for thou art the sole End of all the
present Oeconemy. There cannot be a greater Subversion of Order, and of Reason,
than that Outrage, which we commit upon our Souls; than that Preference which
we give to our Bodies. Thou Reason of Man, do thou Justice to thy Self; Thou
Soul of Man, know thy Price and thy Nobleness; begin to know thy self, and to
know thy Body. Oh Soul! Oh Body! If we could weigh you in a just Balance, what
shame should we not have, that we thus vilify and debase, degrade and
dishonor our Souls, at the rate that we do?

They are not at all now sensible of the Outrage that they do to themselves,
but they will be cruelly sensible of it one day; and that one day will quickly
come: What Reproaches, and what Shame then will they not endure? What
Indignation, and what Storm, will they not then conceive against themselves?
And with what Air, will they look down from Heaven, and from the bosom of God
upon their Bodies, turned into Worms, or into Serpents; or if you will into
Dust and Ashes only, as they are lying in their Graves. See there, will they
then say, The Idols we Adored; See there The Subjects of our Felicities; See
there the Theater of our Vanities; See there the Object of all our Designs; See
there The Matter of our Passions; See there our perpetual and eternal Illusion.

Even the Happy Souls will make this Reproach, which will serve to augment
their Joy, of having at last acknowledged the Justice that was due to them. But
the Reprobate Souls, with what Grief will they cast their frightful and
terrible looks toward their Bodies; and with what Horrors will they join
Themselves again to them, at the Universal Resurrection? Good God! What Rage
and what Despair! What Horrors, and what Furies! It is then for Thee, thou Case
off filthiness and ordure, that we have kindled this Fire! It is long of thee,
That this of Fire and Brimstone, is prepared for us! It is long of thee, That
we shall burn Eternally! but let Us endeavor to prevent these Things, and let
us turn all our esteem, and all our cares toward our Souls, of which, there
will be nothing lost, but all will be Converted on the contrary, into an
Eternal Harvest of Incorruption and Immortality, of Felicities and of Joys; as
St. Paul says, Whereas all that is done (as the same Apostle says) that is cast
into, and sown in the Body, is cast and sown in pure loss, and produces nothing
but an eternal Harvest of Pain and of Despair.

The Condemnation of that little Care, which we have to Cooperate, to the
Honor of the Divine Resemblance.
It is one of the best Advantages of our Souls, That they are made after the
Image and Resemblance of God. It is for that Reason, the Sacred Historian, who
has given us the History of their Creation, does principally exalt their
Dignity, and their Nobility. And it is with Reason (says St. Augustine) because
there is there a Recapitulation of all their Advantages. This Advantage of our
Souls, of being the Images and Resemblances of God, implies, says He, all
their other Advantages, and adds something which nothing else contains.

How happy are we, that God has made us his Images, says St. Chrysostom? for
what advantage do you think here, we have of being his Image? It is not only a
glorious Title which flatters our Pride, or which puffs up our Vanity; it is a
Right which we have to the Immortal Happiness, and to the Ineffable
Participation of all his Felicity. We are his Images in Nature, that we may be
his Images also in Glory: For it is not in vain, that we are the Portraiture,
and the lively animated Picture of that Supreme and Eternal Nature, in the
Foundation of the Essence of our Souls. God does not leave his Works imperfect;
for, having made in us his Images in Nature, he has made us capable of being
the lively Images of all his Felicity.

This is it, which makes what I call, the Divine Quality of our Souls; Great
Nobility, without doubt! But a Nobleness, which ought to cost dear to our
Irregular Inclinations, and to all our Desires which are contrary to Duty and
Virtue; which ought to give, as it were, the Body, and put the Colors upon the
Picture of the Divine Resemblance which Nature Begins in Us, which Grace
Perfectionates, and which Glory Consummates: For God cannot, and ought not to
imprint the Image of his Eternal, and Sovereign Felicity, but in our Souls,
where-in, a constant and perpetual Vigilance to exercise Mortification and
Virtue, will have Copyed out, during the whole Course of our Present Life, his
Eternal Righteousness and Holiness. We are not in the Present Life, but to
finish that Divine Resemblance of Holiness and Virtue, which Nature has
rough-drawn in us by that love of Order and of Duty, which we call Conscience;
That is the Reason we ought to render our selves Subjects disposed to receive
the happy Impression of the Sovereign Felicity, which ought to complete this
Resemblance. The Scripture teaches us, That none of us shall enter into Heaven,
before we be compared with God, as with an Original, whereof we ought to be the
Copies; and it is for that we ought to be continually employed, as St.
Chrysostom says, To Exercise this Heavenly Agriculture of eradicating even the
least Fibers, or Strings of our Irregular Covetous Desire; and to make
Christian Virtues to rise, and to grow in their Place; whereof we have twice
received the Seeds, the one by Nature, and the other by Grace.

God has rough-drawn the Table, says St. Augustine; and then he has put into
our hands the Pencil and the Colors; and he has given us all our Lifetime to
complete and finish it. We ought not to lose one moment of Time; He would, that
every moment we should give one stroke of the Pencil, and that without ceasing,
we put Colors upon Colors; That is the Eternal and only Task, and all the
Employment of Life; that is all the Exercise of our sojourning in the Body: But
instead of finishing this Table, and instead of culvating these precious Seeds
of Virtue, which ought to form in us the Divine Resemblance, we Nip these
Sacred and Divine Buds of Conscience, and of Grace; and we commonly see in the
Soul but a Field, very ill cultivated, covered with the Thistles and Briars or
all Vices: We expunge the rough Draught of the Table, which God had begun; and
instead of that excellent Painting, which he would have seen finished in us, he
sees nothing but a monstrous and horrible Representation of all the Corruption
of Devils formed from the hideous Assemblage of all Vices.

It is not easy to say, with what trouble he sees this Disorder. The Holy
History teaches us, That the sad and deadly Spectacle, which the Impure Souls
did expose to his Eyes, at the time of the Deluge, made him hate and detest his
own Workmanship, which he at first had found so beautiful; for it is said, That
he was at first surprised with Love and Admiration, for the Workmanship which
he had begun: Vidit cuncta quae fecerat and erant valde bona. It teaches us,
that he Repented himself of having made Man, and of having given him the
Liberty of flinging Dirt and Ordure upon this rich and beautiful Work, upon
which he had imprinted his own Resemblance and Visage: But St. Chrysostom
observes very well, that what he said there, concerning the Inundation of
Impurity, which obliged him to send upon the Earth that Inundation of Water,
whereby he drowned the World; He says it continually, upon our Occasion, That
it was by reason of our Vices, and our Covetous Desires, by which he had
effaced in us the Divine Resemblance. He could not suffer this Indignity, this
Outrage: He thundered in himself, and meditated a just Vengeance.

How terrible, and how formidable shall this Vengeance be? It is from hence, he
will say, in looking upon his Image so Blotted, and Effaced in our Souls, and
covered over with the horrible Colors of all Vices. Is this then, will he say,
the fine Piece that thou have finished? Is it thus, that thou have answered all
my Intentions? Is it then for the making of this fine Work, that thou have
employed all thy Life? Look upon the Original; compare these Lines with my
Lines; compare the Original with the Copy.

The Condemnation of our enchanted Love of the Present Life.
God, who does not deny us any good thing, would not deny us the Pleasure of
loving Life; so far are we (in loving Life) from displeasing God, that we
cannot truly love Life, but that we must love God, in whom is the Source and
Principle of Life essentially; so then, it cannot be amiss to love Life: But we
must not mistake our selves, and under the Specious Pretense of loving Life, to
love only the Present Life.

God does not forbid us absolutely to love the Present Life; he commands us
indeed to love it in some respect. We may say, That there is a love of Life
permitted, a love of Life commanded, and a love of Life forbidden. We are
commanded to love the Present Life; in That we are commanded to rest satisfied
with our State of Trial in our Body. We ought not at all to murmur at it, or be
impatient under the Pains, or the Melancholies which accompany it. We are
commanded to submit our selves to that Order of Providence, which makes us pass
through so difficult a Trial: And as in the ancient Spectacle of the Combats of
the Gladiators, which were showed to the People, The Combatants were not
permitted to go out of the Amphitheater, till the Magistrate, or he that
proposed the Price, gave the Signal of the end of the Combat, and caused the
Gate of the Amphitheater to be opened; so we are not at all permitted to hasten
our Death, which we ought to expect from the hand of him that has put us; into
the Lists, to whom it belongs to give the the Signal of the end of our Combat,
and to open the Gate of the Amphitheater; we are then commanded to love the
Present Life in that respect. We are also permitted to enjoy the Agreements,
which we there find, as it were, upon the way; This is That Love, which is
permitted us, as we have said; but we are not at all permitted to place therein
all our Heart, all our Pleasure, and all our Happiness; for that would be to
make it our last End and Sovereign Good. We are not at all permitted, to love
the Present Life better than the Future; For thus to love the Present Life, is
a Love that is criminal.

It is so very Criminal (that it may be) it is the greatest of all the
Disorders that our Hearts can fall into: For to love the Present Life, in
prejudice to the love and the desire of the Future, is the greatest of all the
Idolatries that the Heart of Man can commit; it is to make the Body and the
Visible World his God, because this is to make of them his Sovereign Good; and
we always make that our God, which is our Sovereign Good. This sin of loving
the Present Life, was the sin of Esau; The sin of the Israelites, who perished
in the Desert for having despised the Land of Promise; The sin of the Tribes,
who would not pass the River Jordan; and in the Gospel, it is the sin of the
wicked Rich Man, of the Prodigal Son, and of the easy and happy ones of this
Age; upon whom falls the Curse of Jesus Christ, because they have their
Consolation in this World; that is to say, says St. Chrysostom, The heart and
affection to this Present Life; a Disposition which is not only criminal, by
reason of that kind of Idolatry, which we have said it contains; and by reason
of the Disesteem, which it makes of the order of Gods eternal Predestination,
and of the Subversion of his Designs: But also, because it is in the Soul, as
it were the Foundation of Corruption, from whence are formed all sorts of
Vices, Irregugularities and Disorders, and which produces naturally the
grossest of Libertinism and Atheism, says Thomas Aquinas, Because by reason of
much loving the Present Life, we come (says he) to hate the Future, and to
wish that there were none at all; and when we are gone as far as to hate it, we
shall easily come not to believe it at all; and when the Future Life is once
become a Fable, Divinity soon after will be but a Chimera only.

This excessive Love then of the Present Life, is a great Disorder and
Irregularity; and this Irregularity is mounted in us, even to the last Period,
and to the highest Degree: I call it a Love enchanted of the Present Life; for
it is a Love of Charm and of Enchantment; It is a Fury and a Rage, a Madness
and a Frenzy of Love. The Future Life allures us to it by a thousand Charms; it
glitters before us, I will not say like a Sun, but like an Immensity of Light,
which ought to carry as much Ardor into our Hearts, as Conviction into our
Spirits; it opens her Bosom to us, and lends us an assisting Hand: Instinct and
Religion, Grace and Nature, the Law and the Gospel, Heaven and Earth, all of
them show our Future Life in a happy Immortality, all sparkling with Joys, with
Felicities, and with Glories: The sweet and ineffable Impression of Grace and
the Holy Spirit; The lively sparkles of Heavenly Regeneration, which operate in
us by a thousand secret Incitements; The Example of the truly Faithful, who
groan without ceasing, with St. Paul, in Expectation of their Deliverance from
their Bodies, and of the manifestation of the Future Life, and of the Glories
of the Children of God, do solicit and impel us, and do call upon us. The
World it self by its Contradictions, and the Present Life by its Pains and its
Disgusts, do render the Love and the desire of the Future Life necessary to us,
to comfort us under our present Pains and Miseries; And yet notwithstanding, we
have the deadly weight upon our heart, which inclines us, and fixes us to the
Earth, and to this miserable Life; we are not able to raise our selves up, to
desire Celestial Beauties, and the Eternal Delights; we are more ready to say,
Let God take care of Heaven for himself, and let him leave the Earth for us. We
see here what sort of Creatures we are; it is impossible to make the least Ray
or Spark of the Love of the Future Life, to enter into our hearts.

St. Paul notwithstanding, teaches us, That the Present World is but a Shadow
of the World to come; and the Present Life, upon that account, cannot be but
the Shadow of the Future; that is to say, there is the same difference between
the Present Life and the Future Life, as there is between a Body that is all
real, and all effective; and between the Shadow, which is only a void and an
empty Figure. All the Shadows here below, that is to say, all the Joys, and all
the Felicities of this Life, which are only Shadows here, are in the Future
Things real: All that is here a Figure, is there Reality. The Honors, the Pomps
and the Glories, the Abundance, the Pleasures, are There true Pomps, true
Honors, true Glory, true Abundance, true Pleasures. Conceive the Difference,
says St. Chrysostom, between the Shadow and the Sun; conceive how great are
the Beauties of that Planet, which animates all the Beauty of the World, above
that drowsy Obscurity, which has only a pure Nothingness of Privation for the
Body, and the Foundation of its Being; and when you have comprehended that, do
not believe that you have comprehended the advantage of the Future Life above
the Present Life. St. Paul said very well, That to die, is gain; Mori lucrum.
We gain without doubt; because that instead of a World of Shadows, of Figures,
of Illusions of Vanities, of Dreams of pure Nothings, clothed with the Painted
Superficies of Being, or rather with the simple and false Appearance, we enter
into the Possession of a World, where all is Real, all Solid, all Effective,
and all Immortal.

The Condemnation of our violent Desires, for the Establishment of our Present
Fortunes; and of our deadly Indifference for the sort of Event of our Eternal
Predestination, which is decided in this Present Life.
We have acknowledged by the State of Trial, in which we have seen our Souls
are at present, their uncertain and doubtful State of Alternativeness, of the
formidable coming of Eternity, in which they ought to enter, in going out of
Time, and out of the Present Life. We have acknowledged, that we are here, as
it were, suspended and balanced betwixt two Extremes, of two different
Eternities; of which, we have the Lot to decide by our Vigilance, and by our
Application to Sanctify our selves, and to prepare our selves for that
Impression of Glory and Sovereign Felicity, which God will really give to all
those whom he shall find prepared and disposed for it, by a faithful and
constant Cooperation with his Grace; and there follows from thence, a
Condemnation equally just and formidable, of our violent Desires for our
present Fortunes, and of our brutal Indifference for that of Eternity, which we
are to make for our selves; and for which, we cannot rely and repose our selves
upon any one else.

If our Lot of Eternity was cast upon us, after the manner as some conceive it;
if it was a Destiny which ought to be effected without us, and if we were only
to expect the Event, and the infallible and inevitable Execution of it; there
would not be any Thing to reproach us thereupon; we might in the mean time,
wholly employ our selves about our present Fortunes: But besides That, even
then when God has a particular Cause in the Predestination of some few, and
that he Charges himself with the success of their Salvation, which I believe he
does for a certain number; he does not at all save even these Privileged
Persons without their Cooperation. It is certain, That in regard to the
generality of Men, he does not concur to their Predestination and their
Salvation, but as Universal Cause; and that the Success of it is left to the
Vigilance of every one. Thus our Souls do themselves beforehand, decide by the
good or ill usage of Time, of the Present Life, and of Grace, the
Alternativeness of the Immutable State of Happiness or Unhappiness, in which
they are to be fixed and established when they depart hence. Thus It is
certain, That all the Occupations, all the Designs, and all the Enterprises of
Men, which have not for their End, the great Object of that building of our
House of Eternity, which the Scripture frequently mentions, which we ought to
be building every moment of this Present Life, as it were, by so many Stones
that we are to raise one upon another, to the end, that our Souls may find
their Habitations ready prepared. It is certain (once again) That all our
Occupations, all our Cares, all our violent Desires, all our Designs, and all
our Enterprises, are things not only vain and unprofitable, but foolish,
furious and frenetic.

Our Souls ought to enter into a State of Everlasting Happiness, or Everlasting
Misery; they are to enter into the fixed and immortal Order of the Love, or of
the Hatred of God: After the Expiration of the short Time and Account of their
Trial, They are to receive (says St. Paul) accordingly as they have believed,
and governed themselves in the Body; accordingly as they have heaped up a
Treasure of Anger, or a Treasure of Love; the Price of their happy Eternity, or
the Pain of their Eternal Unhappiness: It is their part to decide this Lot;
They are suspended and balanced betwixt the two affrighting Extremeties; Every
moment of the Present Life, enters into one or other of these two Extremities,
and can thereby decide and determine the Event thereof; But instead of seriously
thinking upon so great an Interest, we heap up Wind, we make Spiders-Webs, we
build up Edifices, which are to bury us under their Ruins.

We give splendid Names and specious Titles to this Vanity and this Frenzy; we
call it, To extend the Limits of an Empire; to be Masters of the World; to make
a great and puissant Fortune; to raise a stately Structure, and to Establish a
mighty Family; to possess the chief Rank of Nobility, to make a fair Way to
Advancement, to be Exalted to be Governors, to leave a raised and settled
Posterity, a thousand fine Names, but Names only, Shadows and Illusions,
Chymera's and Visions, and true Ruins and Miseries! Can you call this the
Building of a famous Structure, and a mighty Fortune, to attain great Credit,
and vast Riches; and yet for all that, to be buried three days after in a
Grave, and remain eternally Poor and Naked, Hungry and Starved, torn to pieces
by Despairs, and thoroughly pierced with Torments? Can you call this Advancement
and Preferment? Can you call it Elevation and Fortune to find at the going out
of this Life, which is so short and so uncertain, a so affrighting Horror of a
vast and infinite Solitude, a sad Desert of Universal Privation and Misery; and
in the midst of the Horror of this Immensity of Nothingness, an Immensity of
Power and Wrath armed against You! A terrible and implacable God, Who regarding
his Eternity as his Foundation and his Riches, as Tertullian says, and as a
Foundation which he would make to advance his Glory, in all the moments of Time
which he gives us, and which are as so many Portions which he requires of us,
is rendered an inflexible and an inexorable Avenger of the loss and dissipation
which we make thereof, in following those Visions and Chimera's of Fortune!

After all this, Labor, you vain and ambitious Men; Labor to make to your
selves an uncomfortable and an eternal Despair; Labor to leave here behind you
a Great Name; and to find in the New World (wherein you are to enter so
quickly, and wherein you are to stay so long) a misery without end, and without
bounds. Labor to leave your Children, goodly Houses and fair Palaces, and not
find where to Lodge your selves in this New Country, where you are to Inhabit
always. Labor to leave them vast Riches, and to carry along with you, your
poor, naked, empty Souls murdered with Sins, and torn in pieces with Remorse,
transpierced with Regrets, having nothing at all for a Foundation, but that
infinite heap of Wrath and Vengeance, which they have amassed to themselves, by
all the Cares and violent Desires of raising their Families and their Fortunes.

Do you believe that the eternal Despair of a Soul, which the Chimera of
Fortune, which the Fury of Ambition, which the Vanity of the Court have
possessed during all the Present Life, will be much comforted by the Settlement
which it has left his Children? I do not know what you think of it, but it is
certain, That whether God let him see or no the State of his Family; whether
his Children have any true acknowledgment or no for his Memory, which is so
doubtful, and so uncertain; whether they maintain, or waste what He had raised
them to; it cannot be for that Soul, but an Eternal Subject of Regret, of
Repentance and of Remorse. This poor Father burns, and his Children enjoy the
Fruit of his eternal Misery; They possess his great Estate, his fine Houses,
his great Revenue, whilst He suffers the Despair and the Punishment of them. O
the Fury of our Ambition! O the Blindness of our Passions! O the Impertinence
of our violent Transports! Let us make a good use, Let us make a good use of
the Knowledge which we have of the Immutable State of Misery, or of Felicity,
into which we are to pass, when we are to go out of this Life. Let us undeceive
our selves, and disabuse our selves from all our care after Greatness and
Temporal Fortune, and think only of making for our selves a Grandeur and a
Fortune which will be Eternal.

FINIS.

