The Description and the Benefits of a Regular Education.

A SERMON Preached in the Cathedral Church of St. PAUL, AT THE Anniversary
Meeting OF THE GENTLEMEN Educated at St. Paul's School, January 25th. 1699/1700.

Published at the Request of the Stewards.

By Samuel Bradford, Rector of St. Mary le Bow, and Chaplain in Ordinary to His
Majesty.

London, Printed by William Redmayne, and to be Sold by John Nutt near
Stationers hall, 1700.

TO MY HONORED FRIENDS AND School-Fellows THE STEWARDS OF St. Paul's School
Feast.

John Tully Esquire; Richard Robinson Esquire; Richard Crawley Gent. Richard Lloyd
Gent. Anthony Smith Gent. Robert Paltock Gent. Edward Nelthorpe Esquire; Dr. Thomas
Sutton.
2 Timothy III. 14, 15. But continue thou in the things which thou have learned
and have been assured of, knowing of whom thou have learned them; and that from
a Child thou have known the Holy Scriptures, --


THese are the Words of St. Paul, that excellent Apostle, whose Memory we this
Day justly celebrate; We, whose Ancestors were Sinners of the Gentiles, to whom
he was particularly ordained a Preacher and an Apostle and a Teacher in Faith
and Verity; We, who inhabit an Island, 1 Timothy 2.7.
to which it is probable that this Apostle brought the first glad Tidings of
Christianity; and finally We, who besides our general Obligation as Christians,
are now assembled upon a more particular occasion also, to bless God for our
Education in a School which bears his Name, where we learned, as many other
good Lessons, so particularly those which this great Apostle taught, and were
in out Childhood daily exercised in reading the Holy Scriptures, in the writing
of which our Apostle had so considerable a part.

It would add mightily to the Solemnity of our present Assembly, and strangely
increase the Joy of it, if on this Day, and in this Place, we could have St.
Austin's wish granted us, to hear St. Paul speaking from the Pulpit to us. But
since that cannot be, I judged it might prove both to our Satisfaction and
Edification to entertain our selves with meditating upon some of his Words, and
those too such, as he might probably have himself uttered to us if he had been
here present with us, exhorting us to continue in the things which we have
learned, etc.

They were written to Timothy, whom as St. Paul had taken along with him,
whilst he was yet Young, first to attend, and afterward to assist him in
Preaching the Gospel, so finding him extraordinarily qualified, he appointed
him to abide at Ephesus, to settle and govern the Church planted there, and to
do the Office of a chief Pastor, or Bishop, in that City. And whereas there
were certain Seducers started up, whom our Apostle describes, as Men equally
vitiated in their Judgments and their Tempers, v. 8.
Men of corrupt Minds, and reprobate concerning the Faith; so in opposition to
these, and as the Duty of his Office, he frequently admonishes Timothy to
continue steadfast himself, and to endeavor that others should do so, in the
Profession of that Faith which he had received. 1 Timothy 6.20. 2 Timothy 1.13, 14. 2 Timothy 2.2.
Thus, O Timothy, keep that which is committed to thy trust; and again, Hold
fast the form of sound words, which thou have heard of me. That good thing,
which was committed unto thee, keep; and lastly, The things which thou have
heard of me, among many Witnesses, the same commit thou to faithful Men, who
shall be able to teach others also; all which Passages, as well as that in our
Text, do evidently refer to that Formulary of Faith, called by the Writers of
the following Ages, The Rule of Faith, which was committed both to those who
were entered into the Christian Church by Baptism, and to the Bishops and
Pastors of it at their Ordination, and is the same in effect with that which we
now call the Apostles Creed. This especially, with whatsoever other particulars
for the farther explication of this Rule of Faith, Timothy had at any time
heard and learned of St. Paul, or any other of the Apostles, he exhorts him to
retain. Continue thou in the things which thou have learned.

And have been assured of; the word is (...); the vulgar Latin reads it, and
credita sunt tibi, as if it had been in the Copy they made use of, (...): but
to keep to those Copies which our Translators followed, the Word here used
carries in it a fuller sense, importing that Timothy had not only received the
things here spoken of by hearsay; but been fully informed, and upon considering
the information entirely satisfied, upon solid and good grounds, of the truth
of those things which he had learned; and accordingly it follows, knowing of
whom thou have learned them.

If it be read, as in our Copies, (...), in the singular number, it must denote
St. Paul; if (...), in the plural, as the Alexandrian Manuscript has it, it
must take in one more at least, probably Barnabas St. Paul's Companion: but
whether one or more it matters not, since the Persons he intimately conversed
with, had been Eye and Ear Witnesses of the things which they taught, and were
of known Veracity and Probity. St. Paul to be sure was one of them, who was
intimately known to Timothy, and had upon all occasions testified an especial
regard to him, so that it could not be imagined that he would impose upon him.
Besides that he himself, upon account of his miraculous conversion to the
Christian Faith, was a more than ordinary Witness to it. Such were the Persons
of whom Timothy had learned, and from a serious consideration of what they had
taught him he became assured.

Now was this all; but he had yet a farther advantage, both in order to his
embracing and being confirmed in the Faith of Christ, namely, that he had known
the Scriptures from his very Childhood, by the Piety of those who had the care
of his tender Years; which Scriptures, viz. those of the Old Testament, gave
abundant evidence to the Doctrine of the Apostles, and were a standing
Testimony to what they taught.

Having thus explained the Words, we may observe in them these Three
Particulars, very proper to be considered upon this Occasion.

First, The view which they give us of a just and regular Education.

Secondly, An Intimation contained in them of something necessary on the part
of the Learner, as well as of the Teacher. And

Thirdly, The great Obligation which such Persons are under, who have been well
instructed, and assured of those things which they have learned, to continue in
them.

First, We have here a view given us of a just and regular Education, in the
instance of Timothy, to whom the Words are directed.

He had known, St. Paul tells him, the Holy Scriptures from a Child, no doubt,
by the pious care of his Grandmother and Mother, mentioned by our Apostle a
little before, 2. Tim. 1.5.
where commending the unfeigned Faith, which was in him, he says, that it dwelt
first in his Grandmother Lois, and his Mother Eunice, intimating that he
derived it from them, not certainly by mere descent, but by their carefully
instructing and forming his tender mind; and the same Persons, no question,
gave him also the first knowledge of the Holy Scriptures.

It Is true, Acts 16.1.
he had a Greek, or Gentile, proselyted, but not circumcised, to his Father; by
which means he himself was not circumcised, v. 3.
till St. Paul from prudent Considerations thought fit to do it, after he was
committed to his care; (the Father it seems governed in that matter, whilst the
Son was in his State of Infancy and Childhood, and not the Mother:) but to make
amends for this disadvantage, it is likely that both the Mother and Grandmother
were the more sedulous in his Instruction. Here then his good Education began;
these pious Women gave him the knowledge of the Holy Scriptures from his
Childhood.

And that the good Work which they had begun might be effectually carried on,
they, having themselves early embraced the Christian Doctrine, committed this
their Charge to St. Paul, that as soon as he was capable he might attend him,
and be farther instructed and improved by his Precepts and his Example. For
although the first mention we meet with of him is in that passage of the Acts of
the Apostles, Acts 16.1.
where St. Paul is said to have come to Derbe and Lystra, yet it is very
probable that he had attended the Apostle before that time, from a passage a
little before the Text, V. 10, 11.
where St. Paul tells him, that he had fully known, (the word is (...) which
may fairly denote that he had known by attending the Apostle, by seeing,
hearing, and observing) his Doctrine, manner of Life, Purpose, Faith,
Long-suffering, Patience, Persecutions, Afflictions, which came unto him at
Antioch, at Iconium, at Lystra. Acts 14.1. chapter 13.1.
So that it seems he had been with him at Iconium, before he came to Lystra;
and at Antioch, before he was at Iconium. It Is likely his Father was now dead,
and he at the dispose of his Mother; and to whom could she better commit him,
than to so admirable a Master as this; one who had himself had the most regular
Education, as a Jew, brought up in Jerusalem, at the feet of the great
Gamaliel, Acts 22.3. Gal. 1.14.
and taught according to the perfect manner of the law of the Fathers; one who
had profited in the Jews Religion above many his Equals in his own Nation; one
who could thank God, that he had served him from his Forefathers, with a pure
Conscience; one, 2 Timothy 1.3. Gal. 1.15, 16.
whom as it had pleased God to separate from his Mother's Womb, so in due time
he called him by his Grace, and revealed his Son first to him, and then by him,
and that in a very extraordinary manner; one who had not received the Gospel of
Man; V. 12.
neither had been taught it, but by the immediate Revelation of Jesus Christ;
and finally one who, as he had received, so he taught the Gospel with
Demonstration and Power, endeavoring to propagate the knowledge of it with the
most exact fidelity, the most indefatigable Industry, and the most ardent Zeal
that was possible. This was the Person, to whom young Timothy was committed for
his farther improvement.

And as the Apostle took him along with him in his Travels, so upon all
occasions he expressed the greatest tenderness toward him, 1 Timothy 1.2. 2 Timothy
1.2.
stiling him his own Son in the Faith, and his dearly beloved Son; and having
at length found him a fit Person, from his own experience, as well as from the
recommendation of others; Acts 16.2.
he consecrated him very early to the Work of the Ministry, and appointed him,
whilst yet Young, to be Bishop of the Church of Ephesus. 1 Timothy 4.12.
This was the Education of Timothy.

And if from thence we would form an Idea of a just and regular Education, it
must be to this purpose.

That in the first place Parents, those to whom God has committed the
principal care of their Offspring, being themselves well instructed, prudent,
virtuous and pious, make it their business, from the very dawning of
Understanding and Reason, to cultivate and improve the Minds of their Young
ones, instilling gradually, as their capacities shall be enlarged, such
Principles, and inuring them to such Practices, as become Men and Christians.

Where both the Parents shall conspire, in carrying on the same design by the
same methods, the Child will have an advantage above what Timothy seems to have
had in his Childhood: but if either of them shall thoroughly do their part, though
the other should prove more unapt or negligent, we see in this instance, that
by God's Blessing it may have it is effect.

And here even the weaker Sex may be of singular use. 1 Timothy, 2.11, 12. 1 Cor.
14.34, 35.
For although our Apostle would not suffer Women to teach, or to usurp Authority
over the Men; but commands them to learn of them in silence, and with all
subjection; yet we see he commends them for exercising Authority over and
teaching their Children. And here indeed they have in diverse respects the
advantage of the Men; their tender Offspring being first delivered by Nature
into their Arms, they having, during their minority, the greatest influence
upon them, and it being consequently their place and privilege to sow the first
seeds of Ingenuity, Virtue and Piety in them. But, where both Parents conspire,
each of them doing their proper part, the work is like to succeed best.

The next step in a regular Education is, that the Parents having thus done,
and still continuing to do, as they have opportunity, what becomes them, both
by their Instructions, Admonitions, Authority and Example, they take in the
assistance of others to complete what they have begun, committing their
Children to the care of such choice Persons, as shall be both able and willing
to second them in their designs and endeavors.

To this purpose, that they send them to well-manag'd Schools, where they may
both be confirmed and improved in the Principles and Practice of Virtue and
Piety; and may receive such farther Instructions, as may dispose them to become
wise and good and useful Men, in their several future Stations in the World.

And here great care is to be taken; for there are Quacks in all Professions,
as well as in that of Physic, and in none do they Practice more frequently or
more dangerously, than in this of teaching Youth. An ill Method, or an ill
management here will either Poison, or at least weaken the Constitution of the
Patient, and render him sickly and infirm through the whole remaining course of
his Life. An Error committed in this Instance is like a fault in the first
concoction, never thoroughly mended by any following digestions.

After Children's being continued at School so long, as to answer the ends for
which they are sent thither, the next care is to place them under serious and
judicious Directors of their following Studies, for the furnishing them with
more Manly Learning; or to commit them to such prudent and virtuous Masters, as
may Instruct them thoroughly in the Arts and Mysteries which shall be found
suitable to their Inclinations and Capacities.

And whilst they are passing through these several degrees of Education,
especial care is to be taken, that they be well grounded in the Principles of
Religion, the main and fundamental Articles of Faith and Practice; that they be
both privately and publicly Catechized in a form of sound Words, used to read,
and taught to understand the plain and practical parts especially of the holy
Scriptures; constantly brought to the public Worship of God, in the Company
and under the Inspection of those that have the Charge of them; in a word, that
they be led gradually into the habitual Practice of all those Instances of
Piety and Virtue, which are proper to their Age and Condition. This is the Sum
of what I intend by a just and regular Education.

Before I proceed to the next particular, give me leave only just to observe,
how much it becomes Parents in the first Place, and all whom they entrust in
the next, to discharge their Duty in this Instance.

Children stand in great need of this their care. The best that can be said of
them is, that their minds are rasae tabulae, blanks, on which any Characters
may be Written: but Zophar, in the Book of Job, Job 11.12.
carries the matter farther, when he tells us, that Man is born like a wild
asses Colt, which experience confirms, in those especially who are under the
disadvantage of a loose or careless Education. As they are Ignorant and dull,
insensible of that which is good; so they are moreover untamed and fierce,
impatient of all restraint, violently bent upon their own will and humor,
running wildly from one extravagance to another, to their own Perdition. Now
it is Education, which must mollify and tame, which must correct and cure by
degrees this untoward disposition.

And Childhood and Youth are, without all doubt, the proper Seasons for making
this attempt. Then it is, that they have not contracted strong habits of Vice,
which will be very difficultly broken. Then it is, that the Understanding is
easily opened, the Memory retentive, and the Mind soft and tender, so that
Impressions may be easily and deeply made upon it. Then it is, that they are
perfectly at leisure to attend to what is said to them, not engaged in an
hurrey of business, nor eager in the pursuit of Secular Designs. If these
Seasons be neglected, they are never to be retrieved, nor the loss thoroughly
repaired by any after care; no more than the Seasons of the Year can be
recalled by the careless Husbandman, who has neglected to sow his Seed, in the
time appointed by God in Nature. In fine, by an early care, Piety and Virtue,
and Learning of all kinds may be rendered easy and Pleasant; whereas by delay
it will become extremely hard at least, a great pain and drudgery, if not an
insuperable difficulty, to acquire either intellectual or moral Habits.

To conclude this particular. Those who have the charge of Youth, whether
Parents or Masters of any sort, should Remember that Providence has committed
them to their care, in order to their present and future welfare, and that an
Account will be expected from them, how they have discharged this their trust.

But to proceed to the next particular contained in the Words, viz.

Secondly, An Intimation of something Necessary on the part of the Learners, as
well as of the Teachers, and that is, a due Application of mind to what is
taught them, and a serious Reflection upon what they have learned.

Timothy had not only learned, but was assured; and how was that? No doubt, by
a careful observation of the Instructions given him by his Grandmother and
Mother in the first place; as afterward by a diligent attendance both to the
Precepts and Example of that great Apostle whom he accompanied; and finally by
a serious Reflection upon what he had learned either of the one or the other.

This is absolutely necessary in a Learner; it is the making that which he is
taught, his own; it is like the Digestions performed in the Stomach and in the
Blood, which first turn the food into chyle, and afterward into nutriment to
all the parts of the Body. It was for want of this, that some in the Apostles
days fell under the Character he gives in this Chapter, of such as are ever
learning, V. 7.
and never able to come to the knowledge of the Truth.

Such indeed was the Evidence given to Timothy of the Truth of those things
which he had learned, that nothing but Application and Reflection, attended
with Integrity of Mind, could be wanting to render him fully assured. The
Scriptures of the Old Testament, which he had known from a Child, do give so
full and pregnant Evidence to the truth of Christianity, the Law and the
Prophets were so perfectly fulfilled by our blessed Savior in the dispensation
of the Gospel, that a right understanding of both, and a just comparing one
with the other, must necessarily convince and satisfy an honest Mind. And St.
Paul, of whose ability, probity, and good will toward him, Timothy had such
abundant Evidence, could add over and above, such Testimony to the truth of the
Doctrine which he Preached, that nothing beyond it could be desired. He could,
for instance, recount to him the violent Prejudices he himself had once lay'n
under, the Zeal with which he then persecuted Christians, and which engaged him
in that very Expedition, in which he was converted; how he was then on a sudden
struck down to the ground, and both he and those who were with him, astonished;
how he saw a great light from Heaven, and heard the voice of Jesus himself
distinctly calling to him from thence; how after this he remained for three
days without sight, continuing in Prayer and Fasting, till Ananias was sent to
him, and by laying his hands upon him in the Name of Jesus restored his sight
to him, and admitted him into the Christian Church by Baptism; how since that
time he had been favored with diverse heavenly Visions and Revelations; how he
found himself inwardly enlightened and strengthened, enabled to Preach the
Christian Doctrine with great Zeal and Courage, and to confirm it with
Miracles, and to expose his Life and all that was dear to him in this World
upon its account. He could farther, since his becoming a Christian, expound to
Timothy the Old Testament more thoroughly, and apply it more clearly to the
Christian Revelation, confounding Gainsayers, and proving that Jesus was the
very Christ.

It Is true, even all this must have been lost upon Timothy, if he had not duly
attended and reflected upon it; and especially if he had been biased by any
corrupt or vicious Inclinations, against the Christian Doctrine. In such a
case, neither Moses nor the Prophets, not one risen from the Dead, not Jesus
himself, after his Resurrection and Ascension, appearing and speaking from
Heaven, nor any other Demonstration would prevail; so necessary Qualifications
are probity in the first place, and then seriousness and diligence, in our
enquiries after Divine Truth. And in all other cases, a just application and
reflection are equally necessary in a Learner.

This therefore should be an Admonition to Learners, that they be not satisfied
with being placed under able Teachers, nor glory in the regularity of their
Education, till they are conscious of having performed their own part, in
receiving and thoroughly digesting what has been taught them. It Is your great
Privilege and Felicity to have fallen into the Hands of those who are able and
willing to instruct and improve you: but it will turn highly to your reproach
and infamy, it will aggravate greatly your sin and misery, if you do not
thankfully improve so great a Blessing, by the addition of your own Care and
Industry.

Before I leave this Head, I shall only take notice of that dangerous Caution
of the Church of Rome, whereby it is Members are restrained from examining the
Principles of their Religion, and are obliged to believe as their Church
believes without nicely enquiring into particulars; nay, are moreover forbid to
read, and consequently to know the Holy Scriptures, not only whilst Children,
but even when arrived at years of Understanding and Discretion. Nothing
certainly but consciousness of guilt could ever have induced that Church to
take this scandalous course, whereby however it may prevail with its Members to
believe, it can never render them assured of those things which they have
learned. Men may be confident, as those that are most ignorant are most apt to
be, without Examination; but rationally assured they can never be.

How contrary is this to the Pattern of our Text! Both the Grandmother and
Mother of Timothy were it seems conversant with the Holy Scriptures, and took
care that he, whilst a Child, should be so too; and afterward as he grew up,
he did not only learn, but was assured, which he never could have been upon
solid grounds, unless he had first known the Holy Scriptures, and afterward
considered and examined what St. Paul taught him.

It Is true, there is a very considerable difference between the Capacities of
Men. Some are of weak and narrow Minds, and have but little leisure from the
necessary business of humane life; and in that case, supposing them truly
honest, there can be no question, but that God by his good Providence will take
care that they be competently instructed; and will make fair allowances for
their unavoidable Ignorance and Mistakes. But after all, the great and
necessary Truths of Religion are so intelligible, and so plainly expressed in
the Holy Scriptures, and a great part of those sacred Writings are so evidently
calculated for the use of all sorts and conditions of Men, that those who are
blessed with the means which we enjoy, may by a tolerable diligence and
application, such as they use in all other cases of concernment, not only
learn, but attain to a reasonable assurance of what they have learned.

But I hasten to the last particular I observed in the Words, viz.

Thirdly, The great Obligation such Persons are under, who have been well
instructed, and assured of those things which they have learned, to continue in
them.

This St. Paul urges upon Timothy; Continue thou in the things which thou have
learned, etc, And certainly the Obligation is as great as is possible, both in
gratitude to Almighty God, and to those who have been his Instruments for our
good; and in kindness and justice to our selves.

I. Such Persons are obliged in gratitude to Almighty God, who has conferred so
singular a Blessing upon them.

Next to our being made after the image of God, and our being restored to a
capacity of recovering the Divine Image and favor by Jesus Christ, is the
Blessing of a good Education, the having had wise and good Parents for the
Instruments of our coming into the World, and the being committed by them to
the care of others like themselves. There is according to all just Estimation,
no comparison between the Advantages of a mere descent from noble or wealthy
Progenitors; and those of an honest Parentage accompanied with a virtuous and
liberal Education. These may, and often do raise Men to as real a Superiority
above such, as can only boast of the former; as they are raised to an Imaginary
one above the rest of Mankind. These are the proper and likely means of
informing the Judgment aright, of rectifying the Temper of the Soul, of
repairing the Image of God upon the Mind, of bringing Men to a due knowledge of
themselves and their main end, and disposing them to act with a just regard
thereunto, of rendering them useful and truly easy in this Life, and preparing
and qualifying them for a better.

And surely they are greatly indebted to God, who are favored with such
Advantages, especially considering that they are the Effects of his mere
bounty, not our own choice. For it is he alone who can appoint what Parents we
shall be born of, it is by his Providence that our Masters and Governors, those
who have the charge of our younger Years are assigned to us. The Improvement of
these advantages is, under the conduct of his Grace, our part: but the
bestowing them is wholly his.

II. There is a farther Obligation upon such Persons, in gratitude to those,
who have been God's Instruments for their good.

Parents and Masters deserve a thankful acknowledgment, and ingenuous requital
from those who have been the Subjects of their tenderness and care, which is
such as we cannot be thoroughly sensible of till we our selves become Parents and
Masters to others. Then, if we discharge our duty faithfully, we best know,
because we feel, the weight and trouble of such a Trust. It should therefore be
one of the greatest Pleasures of our Souls, and it will be so, if they are
rightly disposed, to make grateful returns to so great Benefactors; and the
very best which they desire, or we can make, is to continue in the things we
have learned of them.

It Is true, if we are not first duly thankful to Almighty God, our first and
chief Benefactor, upon this account, it is not likely we should be so to his
Instruments: but both these considerations put together, may serve to increase
the sense of our obligation to both. And if neither of these will work upon our
Ingenuity, there is yet another which may move us from the principle of self
Love, for

III. Such Persons are farther obliged in kindness and justice to themselves.

Providence has done for them all that is possible, in an ordinary way, in
order to their present and their everlasting Well-being. The Paths of Wisdom,
Virtue and Happiness are plainly marked out to them, they are as it were led by
the hand into the right way, and custom and exercise have rendered their duty
easy and pleasant to them; so that they have nothing farther to do, but to
persevere in a strait course, turning neither to the right hand nor to the left.

It Is difficult and discouraging to begin to learn the Art of living, when we
are grown into Years; and to be forced to break off evil Customs and Habits
which we have been long contracting; (though this is absolutely necessary, if
we have been so unhappy as not to begin sooner:) but nothing can be more easy,
nothing more delightful, than to follow the Instructions which have been early
given us, and frequently inculcated upon us, which we our selves have been made
to understand and approve, and to persevere in those Habits which we have been
accustomed to from our tender Years.

Whereas on the other Hand, we cannot forsake the Instructions of our Youth,
nor depart from the good Ways in which we have been used to walk, without
contradicting our own Judgments, offering violence to our Consciences,
disturbing the Peace of our Souls, and filling them with constant Regret and
Horror; nor finally without exposing our selves to the highest displeasure of
Almighty God, and the severest Punishment from his Hands. Heb. 6.7, 8, 9.
For, as the Apostle to the Hebrews elegantly makes the Resemblance, The Earth,
which drinks in the Rain, which comes often upon it, and brings forth Herbs
meet for them by whom it is dressed, receives Blessing from God: But that
which bears. Thorns and Briars is rejected, and is nigh unto cursing, whose
end is to be burned. But beloved, we are persuaded better things of you, and
things that accompany Salvation, though we thus speak.

Give me leave to conclude all, with applying very briefly the Exhortation in
the Text to our selves, under the Three following Denominations.

I. To those amongst us who are devoted to any Spiritual Office or Employment
in the Church of Christ.

As the Exhortation was here given to Timothy, Bishop of the Church of Ephesus;
so it concerns all the Bishops and Pastors of the Church in every Age, to
continue in the things which they have learned and been assured of.

The Special Occasion of this Admonition, as I observed before, was the
starting up of some false and dangerous Teachers, who endeavored to corrupt
both the Faith and Manners of Christians. The Apostle compares them to Jannes
and Jambres, who withstood Moses; V. 8.
in like manner these also resisted the Truth, who were, as he adds, Evil Men
and Seducers, V. 13.
deceiving and being deceived. And I am afraid there is too much Occasion upon
the same Account, for the like Admonition in our Days also. There are arisen up
amongst us, Men of corrupt Minds, and Reprobate concerning the Faith, Men that
have presumed boldly and wantonly to dispute against the anciently received and
established Doctrines of Christianity, making their shallow Conceptions the
Measure of divine Revelation, and haughtily disdaining to believe what they
cannot fully comprehend; nay, there are some who have not only corrupted, but
denied the Faith, to whom the holy Scriptures cease to be sacred, and the
inspired Penmen are become of no authority, who make it their business to cavil
at what they do not understand, and to expose to contempt what they have never
considered, and what, during the affected levity of their tempers, they are
incapable of considering; who having first deviated from the Practice of
Christianity, accounting its Rules of Life and manners too strict, are forced
afterward for the ease of their minds to throw off it is very Principles too;
in a word, who not only like those of whom St. Paul complains in this Chapter,
V. 5.
have denied the Power; but also laid aside the very form of Godliness, who
have in effect renounced their Baptism, and broke loose from all the
Obligations of their Education.

We ought therefore not only to be steadfast our selves; but to make it our care
also to establish, as much as in us lies, the Flock committed to our Charge.

We have learned, and upon good grounds been assured of the things which we
profess, we know of whom we have learned them, namely of the Inspired Penmen of
the holy Scriptures, those sacred Books which we have taken as the Rule of our
Faith and Practice and Doctrine, and from which, thoroughly considered, we have
wherewith to stop the Mouths of all gainsayers.

II. I may apply the same Admonition to all of us, as Christians.

It is our duty as such firmly to adhere to the Form of Sound Words delivered
to us at our Baptism, and to be true and faithful to the solemn Vow and Promise
then made in our Names, which those of us who are come to years of Discretion,
have, as it may be presumed, taken upon our selves. We know of whom we have
learned these things, namely of our blessed Savior and his Apostles, by the
help of those sacred Books which lie open before us, for our constant
instruction and direction, and in the due use of which, we may arrive to a well
grounded assurance, upon the same Principles and Reasons upon which Timothy was
assured of what he had learned. It Is to be hoped we have all of us been
carefully instructed in them from our Childhood, and it becomes us to make them
our daily Study, that by a thorough acquaintance with them, we may be fortifyed
against all the attempts of such as would either shock our Belief, or vitiate
our Practice.

III. Let me in the last place apply this Admonition to those of us, who have
had our Education at St. Paul's School.

A School that makes good the Inscription upon it is Walls, viz. Schola
catechizationis puerorum in fide Christi, Opt. max. and bonis literis; which as
it was designed by it is Pious and learned Founder, heretofore a Dean of this
Cathedral Church, to these excellent purposes, so by the faithful and diligent
management of it is worthy Overseers, the Worshipful Company of Mercers, it has
been constantly blessed with a succession of excellent Masters, Persons eminently
skilled in their Profession, and thoroughly qualifyed to instruct those committed
to their charge. So that we may upon this account also say, that we know of
whom we have learned.

There we were early taught the Principles of True Religion, and the Rudiments
of good Learning. There we daily read the Holy Scriptures, and were frequently
Catechis'd, according to that form of sound Words, which our Church has
appointed for that use. There also we were daily Exercised in offering up our
joint. Devotions to Almighty God, rendering thanks to him for his Blessings,
and asking of him such good things as were suitable to our occasions and
circumstances. There our Youth was formed to Piety and Virtue, to real, not
only formal, good manners; and there moreover diverse of us laid the sure
Foundation of our future Studies. We are met together at this time to make a
public and grateful acknowledgment of these great Blessings to God and the
World.

Let us therefore in the words of our Apostle, continue in the things which we
have learned. So shall we truly answer the end of our Founder, our Patrons,
Benefactors and Masters; so shall we do honor to the Place of our Education;
finally, so shall we best express and testify our real Gratitude to Almighty
God, and comply with the main design of our present assembling, which is by
making this our public acknowledgment, to put our selves in mind of the
Obligations we are under.

Now to that good God who gave us our Beings, who formed us in the Womb, who
preserved, and Instructed us in our childhood and in our Youth, and who has
taken care of us to this day, to God even our Father, and our Lord Jesus
Christ, with the Eternal Spirit, be ascribed all Praise and Glory, now and for
ever. Amen.

FINIS.

