SUNDRY Particulars Concerning BISHOPS, Humbly offered to the consideration of
this Honorable PALIAMENT.

C P

ICH DIEN



Printed for the Author, and are to be sold by William Nowell Bookseller in
Norwich, 1661.

Against Bishops holding their Office, Jure Divino from God.
FIrst, Christ has forbidden his Apostles, and in them all Ministers and
Bishops, to exercise jurisdiction; as is proved in my book of Defense of the
Kings Supremacy; and as you may read in Mat. 20.25, 26. and 1. Pet. 5.2, 3.

2. If a Bishop exercise jurisdiction, as he does in his Consistory, then he
usurpeth the Magistrates authority; which is contrary to the will of God: as is
proved in my book of the Kings Supremacy.

3. Whilst a Bishop take upon him the Office of jurisdiction in his Consistory,
and summoneth and censureth any Magistrate, he makes himself a Pope or an
Antichrist; for he exalts himself above the Magistrate, 2. These. 2.4. who is
called God, Psa. 82.6. which is a brand of Antichrist.

4. It is against our public Oath and Covenant, to maintain Bishops; and will
Bishops be so wicked as to force us to be forsworn, by compelling us to
subjection unto them, and their jurisdiction?

5 Bishops cannot prove by the Scripture, that Christ has left them any
jurisdiction; and for them to prove it by humane Records to have been very
ancient, 1500. years as they say: this is no Divine authority, or no better
then Apocriphal Scripture; which are not admitted to prove any point of
Divinity, or no better then an Ordinance of Men, for a tradition received from
our Fathers: the Church or fifteen hundred years, of which were the Churches
of the Pope for many hundred years: now Christ reproves the Scribes and
Pharisees, for walking after the tradition of the Fathers or Elders, Mark. 7.2,
3, 4, 7, 8. and St. Paul warnes us to beware of the traditions of Men, which
are not after Christ, Col. 2.8. and such are the traditions of Bishops; for
they can plead no authority from Christ, but from Men.

And further what Scripture have they for Archbishops, Deanes, Chapters,
Presbends, etc. It is not meet to have so many, and so great Offices, and
Officers in the Church, which were never appointed by Christ.

6. If a Bishop take upon him the Office of Ruling, he must renounce his office
of Preaching; as shall be proved by and by.

7. If a Bishop shall exercise jurisdiction, he shall hold two Offices, which
are inconsistent, the one destroying the other; as shall be proved by and by in
my next point.

8. Being the Magistrate punishes all crimes, both in Laiety and Clergy, it is
merely superfluous for a Bishop to exercise jurisdiction; as shall be proved by
and by.

9. Being the Magistrate punishes all crimes, with a full and sufficient
punishment, it is unjust for a Bishop to punish also; as shall be proved by and
by.

10. A Bishop will be a Magistrate in and of the Church and exercise
jurisdiction, and yet has but one kind of punishment, as that of
Excommunication for all sins greater and lesser, but one Last for every foot,
which is too great for some, and too little for others; as shall be proved.

11 If a Bishop exercises jurisdiction, he will be exceedingly partial and
unjust, punishing two or three sins, letting all other go scotfree, etc.

12 A Bishop exercsiing jurisdiction, does usurp the Office of the Magistrate,
as is proved in my book of the Kings Perogative; and he does divest and rob the
King of his Supremacy; as is proved in the same book.

13. Men say Bishops have a Commission from the King. But how can this be? for
they own not the Kings Authority, having an higher Commission from God: If
their jurisdiction be Jus Divinum of God, then it is not jus Humanum of the
King: Now Bishops do not own jus Humanum; if then their office be not of the
King, how can he give a Commission to that thing wherein he has no right? a
man cannot give an house or land, unless he first have a right himself in them.

Against Bishops holding their Office jure Humano from the King, and if they
relinquish their jus Divinum, and derive their Authority from the King, then
quere if it be not more safe to put jurisdiction into the hands of the
Magistrate, then of the Bishops: for this,
FIrst, if the King would give the Office of jurisdiction unto a Bishop, yet he
may not take and exercise it; because Christ has forbidden it, Mat. 20 25. and
1 Pet. 5 3. And further in my book for the Kings Supremacy, I have proved by
many arguments, that jurisdiction belongs to the Magistrate, but none to a
Bishop or Minister; wherefore it is Lawful in a Magistrate, but sinful in a
Bishop to use jurisdiction.

2 If a Bishop would derive his Authority from the King, yet it is against our
public Oath and Covenant to maintain Bishops; and will Bishops be so wicked,
as to force us to be forsworn, by compelling us unto subjection unto them, and
to their jurisdiction. What a dreadful account shall Bishops have to make to
God, who for lucre, gain, and honor, will force many thousands to live in the
sin of perjury, all their lives long? Is it not better then for the King and
Parliament to put all jurisdiction into the hands of the Magistrate, whom we
can cheerfully and with a quiet conscience obey, then into the hands of a
Bishop: whom we cannot obey with a good conscience.

3 If a Bishop take upon him the Office of jurisdiction from the K. then he
makes himself a Pope or Antichrist; for by summoning and censuring any
Magistrate in his Consistory, he exalts himself above one that is called God, 2
These. 2 4. Ps. 8 26. Now it is better to make the King a Ruler over the Church,
and the Magistrate under him, then to make the Bishop a Pope.

4 If a Bishop take upon him the Office of jurisdiction from the King, then he
must disclaim and renounce his former Title and Office of jus Divinum, and
also his right to St Peter's Keys, with all other Scriptures, alleged to prove
their Divine right to a Bishopric; and must be content with an humane right
from the King.

To hold their Commission from God, and the King both; as to say, it is of God,
and by the King, this cannot be: for 1. To hold their Commission from God, it
is false Divinity, as is proved in my book of the Kings Supremacy: and further
I say, Bishops cannot prove by the Scripture that their Office of jurisdiction
is of God as shall appear by and by. 2 It is against the Honor of the King, by
denying his Supremacy, as is proved in my book. 3 If they hold a Commission
from God and the K. both, then the Kings Commission must be the inferior
Commission: for their Commission from God is higher then their Commission which
they have from the King: now it cannot stand with the Honor of the King and
his Supremacy, to make his Commission an inferior Commission: for how then can
they be Superior or next under Christ? Supremacy doubtless goes with the
higher Commission not with the lower: 4 If they hold from God and the King
both, yet they hold two Offices, of Preaching and Ruling which are
inconsistent, the one destroying the other; and that of Ruling is, 1
Superfluous, 2 Unjust, 3 Exceedingly Partial, 4 The Bishop must lay aside his
Office of Preaching; all which shall be proved by and by.

5 If a Bishop take a Commission from the King, to exercise jurisdiction,
though he was Ordained a Minister to Preach, yet he must lay aside, and
renounce his Ordination, and Office of Preaching, that he may so attend to his
Office of Ruling; for Queen Elizabeth said, that when she went about to make a
Bishop, she was going to stop a Preachers mouth, and our experience for fifty
or sixty years confirms it; for they Preached not above one, two, or three
Sermons in an year, and sometimes not once in a year. And indeed, these two
Offices to Preach and to Rule are inconsistent, and cannot be well managed by
any one man, as shall appear by and by.

6 Yea the Bishop must not only lay aside his Office of Preaching; but I say
further, that his Office of Preaching is merely superfluous, to Preach as a
Bishop of a Diocese, if he would be a preacher to a particular Congregation,
there might be good use of him, but none as a Bishop: for 1 He has no
particular flocks to feed, or Congregation to preach unto: for every
Congregation has a Minister of their own to Preach unto them; nor is it
possible for him to Preach to every Parish in his Diocese. 2 If he will make
his Cathedral Church to be his particular flock, yet there his preaching is
also superfluous: For first, Cathedral Churches are in Cities: Now in Cities
there are many Parishes and Ministers; and if people repair every one to his
own Minister, what need is there but of one Sermon in a day, at the Cathedral?
2 The Cathedral, is supplied for a single Sermon, once in the Sunday Morning,
not by the Bishop, but by a Combination of Ministers, chosen out of the
Diocese: and so it may be still continued, if there be necessity for a Sermon
in the Cathedral: and then the Bishops Sermon will be superfluous, though he
would preach every Sunday once.

Now let it be taken into consideration, if it be not a lavish and superfluous
reward, to allow a Bishop two or three thousands a year, for his preaching,
when as it is superfluous: or if he should preach fifty Sermons in a year, is
not two thousand a lavish reward? for he has a thousand pound for a Sermon if
he preach but twice or thrice in a year: or about fifty pounds, if the preach
fifty Sermons in a year. But it will be said, he Rules also, answer, but 1 He
Rules partially, 2 He holeth two Offices inconsistent, 3 He usurps, 4 Christ
forbad it, and so he deserves no reward for Ruling.

7. Yet further, 1 we ought by Gods word, to have Liberty of Conscience, as I
have proved in my book of this Title. 2. the King out of his gracious
compassion to tender Consciences has proffered it, in his Declarations more
then once; now, hence it follows, that the Office of jurisdiction in a Bishop
is needless and useless.

For first Bishops were wont to persecute and punish Conscientious men for
refusing the Cross and Surplice, and for working on the Popish Holidaies, etc.
but if we have Liberty of Conscience the learned Bish. must spare his wicked
persecution: there will be no need of a Bishops jurisdiction: 2. There are many
controversall points about Religion in our Church, which being points
disputable, ought not to be punished by the Bishop, as I have proved in my book
of Liberty of Conscience; and therefore there is no need of a Bishops
jurisdiction: 3. For matter of Heresy, being it is only in fundamentals: and
every thing about a fundamental is not fundamental, but something may be
disputable; such points should not be punished by the Bishop because they are
disputable, and therefore there is no need of a Bishops jurisdiction: 4. I hold
no point for fundamental, but such as is clearly laid down in Scripture: Now
where will you find a Christian to deny such a point, and therefore no need of
a Bishops jurisdiction to punish it.

But suppose there be found one or two such Heretics in our whole Kingdom,
what necessity is there for every Bishop in the Kingdom to have two or three
thousand a year, to punish that one Heretic who lives but in the Diocese of
one Bishop? May not ten or twelve Ministers be appointed for this end in every
Diocese? and so save that money. So you still see, it is needless to have a
Bishop use jurisdiction.

8. Yet again, being the Magistrate punishes all matter of fact, as Adultery,
Murder, Robbery, Drunkenness, and many others: There is no need at all for a
Bishops jurisdiction, to punish Adultery with Excommunication; shall Adultery
be twice punished? once by the Magistrate, and then again by the Bishop? this
is double punishment for a single sin, which is injustice, wherefore a Bishops
jurisdiction is superfluous.

But it will be said that Heresy is no matter of fact, but of opinion, and
therefore the Bishop must punish it: I answer, the Magistrate must punish it,
not the Bishop: for the Bishops deliver the Heretic over to the Secular Power
for punishment; wherefore jurisdiction is superfluous in a Bishop.

And further being the Magistrate punishes all manner of sins, with a full and
sufficient punishment, suitable to the demerits of the sin, it must be an act
of injustice in a Bishop to punish any with Excommunication afterward: it is an
act of justice in a Magistrate to punish sins, but it is an act of injustice
and a sinful act in a Bishop to punish any; and therefore a Bishops
jurisdiction is needless.

9. A Bishop will be a Magistrate in the Church, to punish scandalous sins, and
yet has but one salve for every sore, and but one Last for every foot, the
which is too big for some feet, and too little for many: He has but that one
punishment of Excommunication for all manner of sins, for the least and for the
greatest: Adultery, and Fornication, the one of these greater, the other
lesser, and the Bishop punishes both alike with Excommunication: For a man to
commit Adultery, and for a Minister to refuse the Cross and Surplice, or for
people to work or to open a shop on a Popish Holiday: though these latter be no
sins, yet the Bishop punishes all these alike with Excommunication, what
abominable injustice is this?

Yet further is Excommunication a punishment great enough for the most horrid
blasphemy against God? 1. For a son to kill his Father, or a Subject to murder
his King? The Magistrate has variety of punishments, some greater some lesser,
suitable to every sin and sinner: and therefore it is better to put the Office
of authority and jurisdiction, into the hands of the Magistrate, then of a
Bishop.

10. If a Bishop exercise jurisdiction, he will be exceedingly partial and
unjust in his Office, punishing one or two sins, letting all others go
scotfree: For the Bishop in the Consistory punishes Adultery and Fornication
with Excommunication, but lets go scotfree, the Thief, Murderer, Traitor; the
Swearer, and Perjured person; the Drunkard, the disobedient to Magistrates,
Masters, and Parents; him that wounds, strikes, or beats his neighbor, defames
him in his good name, by slanderous words: him that breaks his neighbors
fence, feeds his grass, and destroys his corn; that strikes, and lames, or
kills his horse or other cattle, and very many more: Now are not all these sins,
as well as Adultery and Fornication? why should a Bishop be so partial and
unrighteous, as for to Excommunicat for one or two sins, and not to
Excommunicat for many other sins? Is it not better therefore that the King and
Parliament, put all authority and jurisdiction, into the hands of the
Magistrate, who is not partial, but does and can punish all sins, then into
the hands of a partial Bishop, who does punish but two or three sins and
sinners?

11. If a Bishop exercises jurisdiction, he shall hold two Offices,
Magistracy, and Ministry, which are inconsistent the one destroying the other:
For first, look upon all Ministers in the Kingdom, who have Pastoral Charges,
and they will confess that they find work enough to study the six days against
Sunday, and then to Preach, to administer the two Sacraments, to bury the dead,
to visit the sick, and to reconcile his parishoners at variance: the Office of
a Ministry alone, requires the whole Man. 2. So does the Office of Magistracy
in a Bishop, for he is to exercise jurisdiction over a thousand Ministers and
Towns: And so this is more then he can do alone; for he must have his
Chanceler, and I know not how many Officers more to assist him: so you see the
two Offices of Magistracy and Ministry are inconsistent: because each one
requires the whole man; and to jumble them together, in the hands of one man,
the one destroys the other.

These two great Ordinances and Offices of Magistracy and Ministry have ever
been distinct, the one in the hands of the Laiety, the other in the hands of
the Clergy, save where the Pope has put in his foot: It is a confusion of
Order and Office, for a Bishop to Rule and Preach both; as it is for the
Lord-Chiefe-Justice, to Rule and Preach also. An Act was made 1640. In the
reign of Charles the first, to disinable Bishops for sitting in Parliament:
upon this ground, that Bishops ought not to be entangled with jurisdiction: the
Office of the Ministry, being of such great importance, that it will take up
the whole man: Now is not this reason as strong against a Bishops jurisdiction
in our days, as it was in the days of King Charles the first? It was the Pope
that introducted this confusion of distinct Offices, out of lucre, and gain,
and desire to domineer over the Laiety: He hatched or nursed if up this
Monster, this; Babel of confusion; which as there were two suns in the
Firmament, or two Kings in England, a Corporal King, and Spiritual King, or
one King over the Commonwealth, and another King over the Church: Is it not
better then to make the Bishop a Preacher only, and the Magistrate a Ruler over
all? For as you have seen proved, whilst a Bishop holds these two Offices of
Preaching and Ruling, his Preaching as a Bishop is superfluous, and his Ruling
as a Magistrate is superfluous also, unjust and partial.

12. If a Bishop take his Commission, to exercise jurisdiction, from the King,
then his Authority is jus Humanum: and then the King with his Parliament, may
order Bishops at his will and pleasure: He may make ten or twenty Bishops in his
Diocese, or every Minister in his Town or Parish a Bishop; in difficult causes
to order ten or twelve Ministers to determine it. 2. The King may have all done
freely without reward for he has under him many Magistrates, as High-Sheriffs,
Majors, and Justices of the peace, who exercise jurisdiction freely without
reward; and why should a Bishop require more for exercise jurisdiction in the
Church? Spiritual men should be farthest off from desire of lucre and gain.
No doubt but the King may find in every Diocese Ministers enough, who are
grave, sober, meek, learned and pious, who will take up their Office without
lucre, and gain.

These things considered, no doubt but Bishops will renounce jus Humanum, a
Commission from the King; and will have their Office to be jus Divinum from
God: but against this I have already said enough, yet for further satisfaction,
I will in brief answer their Texts.

1 They plead Peter's two keys, the one for their jurisdiction: Answ. The one
may be the keie to open heavens gate to the penitent: the other key, may be to
lock out the impenitent: and so there is not a third key for jurisdiction.

2. They plead the name Bishop, supposing more to be in the name, then in the
thing: Answ. 1. The name Bishop in Scripture, is given to every Minister, see
Act. 20. 17, 28. those called Elders, ver. 17. are called Bishops in the Greek
text, v. 28. see to the like purpose, Tit. 1.5.7. and see 1 Pet. 5.1, 2. it is
Elders in v. 1. and Bishops in the Greek Text, v. 2. Secondly, the name Bishop
does not employ any Lordly Superiority, and domineering jurisdiction, of one
Minister over another: This I deny, and must see it proved, before I grant it:
2 It cannot be proved, for Christ forbad it, Mat. 20 85 and 1 Pet: 5 3.

3 They plead the Honorable title of Angel given to Bishops, Rev. 2 1: Answer,
1 I may marvel why Bishops would cause the word to be translated Angel, rather
then Messenger: for so it is translated, Luke 7 24. and James 2 25. beside the
word should be translated Angel, when it is understood of a Spirit, but not so
when it is understood of a man, as it is in the text Rev. 2 1: But Bishops in
those days, being cock sure, that this honorable title of Angel, must be
applied to them, caused the word to be translated Angel, that so their
excellency might be admired among the vulgar sort, and so they were when a
Bishop in the Cathedral, sat in the chair of State adorned with his Rochet,
and pure white Surplisse, and Laune sleves, the people did behold him as an
Angel of Light: There is an Angel of Light, and Angel of darkness, but
those Bishops were not Light: For they gave no Light in the Pulpit all the year
long, unless of Christmas day, Easter day or Whit-Sunday in the forenoon: 2.
The word being translated Messenger, as it ought to be, it does not employ any
jurisdiction of one Messenger or Preacher over an other; but only a super
excellency of gifts and utterance, as that he was the best or chief Preacher
or speaker; like as Paul was called the chief speaker, Act. 14.12.

4. They plead, Heb. 13.17. Obey those that have the over sight of you; Answ.
There is a Magistraticall obedience, and a Ministerial obedience: Now this
latter may be understood of obedience to the Faith, Romans 6.17. Romans 10, 16.
Romans 15.18. Heb. 3. 18, 19. But it may not be understood of Magistracial
obedience; for if so, the Clergy may hang and draw: whip, and brand men.

5 They plead the postscript, in 2. Tim. 4. Where it is said Timothy was Bishop
of Ephesus; and that in Tit. 3. Where it is said, Titus was Bishop of Creet.
But these postscripts come too late, to do Bishops any good; for they are no
Canonical Scripture, but foisted into our Bibles of late: I have by me an old
Bible printed a 120, years ago, and there is not any word of these two
postscripts; beside the learneder Papists deny them, and say, somethings in
postscripts are false: Why then should learned Protestant Bishops own them?

6 When Bishops are beaten out of play by the Scriptures, they fly to
Antiquities, that Popish plea, and plead the the Records of the Church, that
there has been Bishops in the Church 1500, years: Answ 1 It seems by what
they say, that they find no such record for above 100, year after Christ, when
the Church was more pure: 2 Of this 1500, years whereof they boast, many hundred
years were Popish: 3 Why do Bishops, allege the Records of the Church long
since Christ, would they have us pin our faith on humane Histories, and make
them equal to Scripture? and do not they know that a Church may err? and that
the Churches since Christ have erred? 4 The Histories of the Church anciently,
will amount to no more then a tradition from our Fathers and Elders; now Christ
reproved the Scribes and Pharisees, for walking after the tradition of the
Fathers and Elders, Mark 7.2, 3, 4, 7, 8. and St Paul warnes us to beware of
the tradition of men, which are not after Christ, Col. 2 8. Now what are
Bishops but traditions of men, and the Fathers and Elders for many hundred
years before us which traditions are not after Chrst? for Bishops can show no
authority from Christ, but from our forefathers. The Record for the Church
1500, years, are no better then Apocripha Scriptures, which are not admitted of
to prove any point of Divinity:

But suppose there were such Scripture, to prove a Lording Bishop that may
exercise jurisdiction, what Scripture have Bishops to prove an Archbishop, a
Deane, a Chanceler, and the rest of them? these orders must needs be from the
Pope, as hatching, or nursing them, for there is no Scripture for them: God is
not their Father, but the Pope or some other thing is their Mother: so far of
my twelft point.

13 This my 13. point shall be of gain, of lawful gain; If the King and
Parliament would put all authority and jurisdiction into the hands of the
Magistrate, and take all jurisdiction from the Bishop, the State may save their
three or four thousand pounds a year, which now is wastfully spent on Bishops,
as is proved in my last point, and so it shall be again in four or five
particulars: The which money may better be added to the Crown lands, or a part
of it yearly to such Ministers as have little livings and a part to such Cities
and Towns that are over burdened with multitudes of many miserably poor, beyond
the abilities of the richer sort to relieve, who give four pence a week where
need is of eighteen pence.

But it will be said this is Sacrilege, and to rob the Church; Answ. To rob
the Church say you? 1. Though it be robbing, in a private man to take, yet it
is not in a Parliament, who may dispose of all men goods: 2. A Parliament may
without robbery or Sacrilege, take a part of a Bishops living, and of a
Ministers tithe, as well as of the Laieties money, for public use, as in the
case of war.

Again, I hope 20 Bish. are not the Church, but the least number of the Chu for
there are many thousands of Clergy men too, being members of the Chur. and must
go for a part of the Church, and for the greatest part too: Now if the
Parliament shall take away Bishops livings, they shall take but from 26 men, to
bestow on hundreds of poor Clergy men; or on many thousands of the poor Laiety:
God will have mercy rather then sacrifice, Mat. 12.7. God would rarher have the
poor Clergy, and the Laiety provided for, then rich Bishops, whose Office is
superfluous, and their great livings evilly bestowed: If men would unpartially
look into these, they might find it so.

For as their Office as Ministers, they do not say Service in their Cathedrals,
but others read for them; as for preaching in their Cathedral it is, and still
may be so, if the State please by a Combination of Ministers, as for their
office of Ruling the Chanceler in his Consistory, does it for the Bishop; and
it may as well and better be done by the Magistrate; for point of heresy, 10.
or 12. Ministers can judge as well as a Bishop: so their office being
superfluous, to allow them 2000, or 3000 yearly is wasted, for other men do
their work for them; me thinks therefore other men should have their great
livings divided among them; but it is in the power of a Parliament, to amend
all this.

But it will be said, if you take away Bishops livings, you discountenance
learning, and discourage young Students in the University: Answer, 1. None
shall be discouraged, but such as gape for a Bishopric; and as for such
Students, they are unfit to be Bishops; for St Paul says, a Bishop must not be
covetuous nor given to filthy lucre, 1 Timothy 3.3. and such are they that study
for learning, to obtain honor and gain by a Bishopick; If such men do not make
use of their Bishopric when they have it to get honor and riches by it, they
must fail of the end of their studies: 2. Bishops have been down in England
near 20 years, and yet learning flourishes in the Universities: 3. In
Scotland, Holland and other Countries, where there are no Bishops, yet learning
flourishes: It is the love of God and learning, that makes a profitable
preacher, not the love of honor and lucre by a Bishopric.

14 In this my 14. point, I shall propound four or five things more to be
considered of.

1. For matter of jurisdiction, the Bishops Chanceler, who is a Layman may
exercise this Authority in his Consistory as he does, assisted with two or
three Ministers; and then there shall be no need of a Bishop; and why may not
the Chanceler exercie this authority under the King, and for the King as well
as under the Bishop, and for a Bishop? But if you desire to hold this
authority, in the line of the Clergy still, then why may not every minister in
his parish do it? who will do it without reward from the State, or why not by a
Combination of 10. or 12. Ministers, ruling over 10. or 20. Towns. But I judge
it best, to have this authority in the hands of the Magistrate, for he is in
offiee exercising jurisdiction already: So if you take away a needless Bishop,
the State may save three or four thousand pounds yearly for better use.

2. The Metropolitan or Archbishop, with other inferior Bishops do consecrate,
or make a new Bishop: But why may not the King consecrate, and make a new
Bishop, if it be necessary to have Bishops, as well as the Metropolitan? For 1.
sure I am the King being the fountain of all jurisdiction in our Kingdom, he
has more right to confer his authority and jurisdiction to a new Bishop then a
Metropolitan has; does not the King create and make the Lord Chief Justice,
and other Judges, and High-Sheriffs, who exercise jurisdiction? 2. Moses did
consecrat Aron and his sons, Ex. 29 1 etc. Now if Moses did consecrat the
High Priest, may not our King consecrat an inferior Bishop? 3. Our Bishops
consecration is a strange thing to me; for our Archbishops being dead before
these times, where is there a Metropolitan to create a new Bishop.

3. When a Bishop was made minister he was ordained not to rule but to preach;
therefore when he is ordained a Bishop, it is to rule, not to preach; unless he
be twice ordained to preach, which is absurd, now to consecrat or ordain a
Minister (...) in State or Church, what warrant is there for Archbishop (...)
do it? doubtlesly Christ forbad it: Mat. 20.25, 26.

They say that Ordination and jurisdiction are two parts of a Bishops office,
and conferreth these two upon a Bishop, at his consecration: now the Archbishop
have no right unto jurisdiction in himself, how can he then give it to another?
can a man give what he has not? The first news that I ever heard of an
Archbishop, of a Deane, and a Chanceler, it came from the Popedom: This monster
was nursed of old in Rome, and thence translated into the Church of England; an
Archbishop draws into the Church a multitude of inferior officers under him,
every one having a yearly living as much as would maintain an able Minister and
all wastfully spent for things might be better ordered; as to dispose of their
livings for the poor Laiety and to the poor Clergy to mend their livings. I see
not but that we may have Abbots, and Cardinals, as well as Archbishops,, and a
Pope over all; take in one of that Hierarchy, and take in all; reject one, and
reject all and every one.

4 It is said that State and Church have flourished, for many hundred years,
under and with the government of Bishops: answ. As for the State, it flourished
as well when we were Papists, as since: 2 The Act in Charles the first, and 17
year of his reign, complains of Bishops then, for intermedling with secular
jurisdiction, which occasoned great mischief in State and Church, and
therefore disinabled Bishops to set in Parliament. As for the Church it has
flourished many hundred year; but it were with Popery till a 100. years agone;
and since it has flourisht with Popish ceremonies, and with Bishops
persecutions, for Cross and Surplice; for not observing them, very many godly
and constant preachers, of honest life and conversation, have been silenced,
and their livings taken away.

5. I have before confuted Bishops authority, to be jure Divino: and also to be
jure humano: But then their is an occasion which I have not wrote of: For
Bishops perhaps will say, we claim not jurisdiction from God, or from the King,
but the exercise of it; and we have the Kings commission to exercise our
jurisdiction: answ. 1. In Mat. 20.^5, 26. and 1. Pet. 5.2, 3. Christ forbad his
Apostles to exercise authority: 2 If your Commission be from the King, then he
may give the like Commission to a Lay man, as to a Magistrate? for the King is
not bound to give Commission only to the Clergy: 3. The office of preaching and
ruling, as before I have proved, are inconsistent the one destroying the other,
and therefore a Bishop must not take or seek for a Commission to rule or
exercise authority.

These things you have seen proved against Bishops jurisdiction: 1. That Christ
forbad it: 2. It is an usurpation of the Magistrates office: 3. He makes
himself a Pope: 4. It is against our Covenant: 5. It cannot be proved by the
Scripture: 6. If he rules he cannot preach: 7. His ruling is superfluous,
unjust, and partial: 8 St Paul warns us to beware the traditions of men, which
are not after Christ, Col. 2.8. Such are Archbishops, Deanes, Commissaries,
Chancelers, etc. 9. Bishops do not own the Kings authority in matters
Ecclesiastical: 10. They rob the King of his supremacy.

These things you have seen proved, against that other office of Bishops,
namely preaching: 1. If a Bishop exercise jurisdiction; he must lay aside his
ordination to preach, and his office of preaching: 2. It is superfluous for a
Bishop to preach as a Bishop, as has been proved. Then how can a Bishop desire
2. or 3 thousands a year, for his pains taken in the Church; cannot this money
be better employed.

By Theophilus Brabourn humbly submitting to the wisdom of this Honorable
Parliament.


