AN ADDRESS To the Honorable City of LONDON, And all other Cities, Shires and
Corporations, Concerning their Choice of a New Parliament. Together with a True
Character of Popery AND Arbitrary Government.

Humbly Presented by C. B.

Aude aliquid brevibus Gyaris, and Carcere dignum
Si vis esse aliquid: --
Rursus amor Patriae ratione valentior omni.
Cuncta prius tentanda, sed immedicabile vulnus
Ense recidendum. --
LONDON: Printed for Allen Banks, 1681.

The Epistle Dedicatory, To all the Honest CITIZENS of LONDON.
Gentlemen,
IT is not unknown to the rest of the Nation, how like your selves you have
acted. What great things you have done for the Glory of God, and the Protestant
Religion, for the Preservation of His Majesty's Royal Person, and for the Peace
and Safety of the whole Kingdom, is obvious to all persons that have considered
your several Loyal Petitions to his Majesty, and candid Applications to the
late excellent House of Commons: The just Harmony, and reciprocal Kindness
betwixt your City and the Nations Representatives, have given no small Terror
to our Enemies, and no small Comfort to our Friends. I need not trouble you
with any further instance, how much your proceedings influence the Countries,
more than by putting you in mind how the Papists thought to ruin them, by
laying you in Ashes. You are the only United Force that can oppose them, and
You only can protect your Sovereign, as being the chief support of the
Government, the chief Refuge of the People, and the Curb or Bridle to the
unjust illegal Ambition of all Arbitrary and Evil men: and this made those
Firebrands of the World, I mean the Jesuits, (of whom Martial prophetically
spoke, when he wrote, Turba gravis Paci, placidaeque inimica quieti) first
endeavor to compass your destruction, before they made any attempt upon the
Person of the King. Your late eminent choice of Officers, as Mayor, Sheriffs,
Recorder, etc. has given much discontent to the Popish Party, who stand in
need as well of corrupt Juries, as Judges. But above all, your most prudent
Election of such untainted Members to serve in the last Parliament, did render
to other Corporations so worthy a President, and your great Example was of so
vast consequence to the rest of the Nation, that I may without flattery say, as
we owe good Laws to a good Parliament, so must we in some measure attribute a
good Parliament, to your good City. And therefore, Gentlemen, although I
address this Paper to all other Cities, Shires, and Boroughs in general, yet
more particularly to You, the honest Citizens of London, whose Honorable
Proceedings so highly conduce to the preservation of that Church, that King,
and that People, for either of which, I would most freely render my self a
Sacrifice; dreading no curse like that of a Popish Successor, and wishing no
happiness more then his present Majesty's long and prosperous Reign. Now as a
Parliament must prevent the one, so does it at the same time help to preserve
the other, the King's Life being no longer in danger of the Papists, after once
the Exclusive Bill is passed. Upon the choice of this Parliament, depends the
happiness or misery not only of his Majesty's Dominions, but of the whole
Protestant Religion, and of all the Reformed Churches in Christendom: A good
Parliament may be a means to preserve the poor Hollanders from becoming an
innocent Victim to all our former and present Evil Counsels, as well as
Flanders and the whole Empire from being reduced to the French Yoke; after
which, the ruin of this Kingdom would be an unavoidable consequence: A good
Parliament may advise his Majesty to such things as shall fortify the
Protestant Interest, and terrify the French Tyrant into a greater moderation
toward the disconsolate Hugonots: A good Parliament may retrieve the
distressed Protestants in Ireland, from that second Popish Massacre which so
daily threatens them: And last of all, as to our own Domestic concerns, a good
English Parliament may secure us from our Enemies both abroad and at home; may
encourage the Kings Evidence, after those many Discountenances they have
received as well from Protestants as Papists; may make it appear not only more
honest, but more safe, to discover a Plot, then to contrive one; may remove
those distractions and fears which so daily amaze and threaten us; as also
establish us in such peace, tranquillity and plenty, as may render us a fit
object for the Envy of all Christendom. Therefore (Gentlemen) since providence
(though against our wills) has once more transmitted our fortune into our own
hands, Let us not be weary of well-doing, but present his Majesty with no worse
a Parliament then the Last, who acted in all things for the glory of God,
safety and honor of the King, and welfare of his three Kingdoms; in fine, such
a Parliament it was, that no one could except against, but such guilty persons,
who justly merited their Resentments, and for the same reason would decry all
Parliaments whatsoever. And therefore if your Members be mostly the same again,
you do thereby express that Gratitude, which they have justly merited from you
by their former Services; as also justify the prudence of your preceding
choice: Neither is it a small benefit to the Nation, if you elect such men as
are well acquainted with the manner of Proceedings in Parliament, and of whose
integrity and prudence you have had a former trial: this not being a time to
enter Novices. However, to consult the public Interest herein is best; and in
so doing, that God would endue you with the Spirit of Judgment, and direct you
to all things that may be for the good of King and Kingdom, is the daily and
hearty prayers of

(Gentlemen) Your faithful humble Servant, C. B.

An Address to the Honorable CITY of LONDON, and all other CITIES, SHIRES, and
CORPORATIONS, concerning their Choice of a new PARLIAMENT.
Hebr. 12.16. Lest there be any praphane person, as Esau, who for one Morsel of
Meat sold his Birthright.
Gentlemen,
THE many and eminent dangers occurring to this Kingdom of late years from its
intestine Treacheries and Baseness, have produced that consternation, and that
Jealousy in the minds of all good people, as render them diffident both of
their Friends and Fortunes, knowing no more which way to dispose of their
Estates, than their Affections: A Kingdom divided within it self, can never
stand: and this was our condition; when those very men (the servants of the
Public) who ought to conduct and stand by us in the day of Battle, have been
the Persons in the World most likely to betray us, and lead us up like Sheep to
the Slaughter. Those Danbaean Senators, from whose Wisdom so much was expected;
those Pensionary Tribunes of the People, in the late long Parliament, from
whose integrity so much was hoped, have, instead of securing that Peace and
Tranquillity, that Religion and Property which all good men wished for, not only
disturbed the one, but hazarded ruining the other; Quid non mortalia pectora
cogit, auri sacra fames? our Temple of Janus seems to be already unlocked, and
we have every hour reason to expect the French King should sling open the
doors: And then, if two or three hundred Dutch Mariners could present us with
such Horror and apprehensions, as we all know they did at their Arrival in
Chatham River, how much greater now will our distraction be, when an Army of
fifty or sixty thousand Frenchmen is Landed amongst us! When the Father must
forsake his innocent and pretty Orphans, the Husband his disconsolate and
helpless Widow, leaving them to be murdered by the Papists at home, whilst he
himself by his own death is completing the Tragedy abroad! Are you not yet
sensible of your condition? do you not yet perceive you approaching ruin?
Think how the French King shakes his Fasces over us, when at the same time the
Treacherous Papist renders us naked to his correction! Think how entirely your
happiness depends upon our Sovereign's Life; and then reflect upon the many
Attempts there have been to rob us of that Blessing! Think how many good
sufficient Housekeepers have no sooner committed themselves and Families to
rest, but by that dreadful noise of Fire, Fire, (occasioned by some Jesuitical
Malice) have been wakened from their innocent slumbers, just time enough to
behold their All consumed in a few hours, which they with the Sweat of their
Brows have been so many years acquiring! Think how your Trading's lost, and at
the same time your Charges enereas'd, by keeping up a standing Militia in your
own defense! Think how your ancient Apostolic Religion, (for the which your
Predecessors have not feared to die) is now upbraided and threatened by the
Idolatrous Superstition of an old Heathenish worship, under new Names, viz.
Popery! Think how your Magistrates are murdered before your eyes, for
supporting that Liberty and Property whereby alone you subsist! That Property
which entitles you to something you may call your own, which having enjoyed
your self, you may bequeath to your Posterity after you: That Property which
satisfies your hunger and thirst with wholesome and substantial food, as good
Beef, Mutton, etc. meats unknown to any in an absolute Monarchy, under the
degree of the Nobility: That Property which gives you wherewithal to protect
your Nakedness from the violence of the several Seasons: That Property which
submits your Taxes and Impositions to the will and discretion of your own
Representatives, who in all such cases have power to say, Hitherto shall you
come, and no farther: Also that Liberty which gives the Subject of England a
fair and equal Trial against his King, the Tenant against his Lord, and the
Servant against his Master; which preserves unviolable the Rights of the
meanest Peasant, even in despite of the highest Prerogative; securing both his
Life and Fortune from all but the most just decree of twelve of his own
Neighbors.

When at the same time, your Neighbors in France, Spain, and other Popish
Governments, have no other security either for their Estates or Beings, save
the grace or favor of their Prince; which renders them and their Posterity
perpetual Vassals to the Crown. When in Sicily you may behold many hundred
Acres of rich Soil lie untilled, by reason of the vast Impositions laid upon
them by the King of Spain. When in France upon any Holy Day you may behold
whole Troops of Farmers, begging the charity of Passengers as they travel along
the Road. Where their food and subsistence is, some course Branbread, a few
Onions, Roots, and Water: or if ever they become so wealthy as to purchase a
small Joint of Meat, then presently so much must be allowed to their Prince for
such a prodigal debauch. When their Farmers have scarce Clothes sufficient to
cover their Nakedness, being contented to go in Wooden Shoes, and all things
else proportionable; so that they are in a much worse condition, than those
Poor to whom we pay Collection. When they can call nothing their own, since you
may often see all that they have, to the very Clothes on their backs, taken
from them by an Edict or Proclamation: and this for no other end, then to
sacrifice them to the luxurious desire of Glory, (or rather destruction of
Mankind) so inseparable from absolute Monarchy. There you may see the poor
Tenant ground to Beggary, betwixt the Tax-gat^erers on one hand, and the
griping Landlords on the other. There you may behold the Merchants, Tradesmen
and Artificers, paying excessive Gabels or Excise, almost as much as the
Commodity it self is worth, for every Egg or bit of Bread they put in their
mouths. Their very Labors are not their own; their very Stocks are borrowed of
them by Privy Seals (which is but a civil way of Robbing) without any hopes of
ever being paid again either Principal or Interest: their Houses exposed to
Free-quarters; and what not? Nothing is more usual than to see a Nobleman, with
a whole Train of Horse and Attendants, ride over the poor peoples Corn when
ready to Reap, and no man dares ask why they do so. Nothing more frequent then
to have loaded Carts, Wagons, etc. compelled to retire and give way to any
giddy-headed Coxcomb on Horseback, that claims but the Title of Chevalier.
These and a thousand more inconveniences are incident to Absolute Monarchy, and
Absolute Monarchy incident to Popery; which is the only Reason that renders
this Religion so amiable in the eyes of Princes.

Rome Orbem domuit, Roman sed Papa subegit:
Viribus illa suis, fraudibus ^ste suis.
Now for you the Nobility and Gentry, give me leave to tell you, that in this
Matter you are no less concerned than the Commonalty, since the more you enjoy,
the more you have to lose: And I think you have no reason to question, but that
if once the Government of Parliaments be supplanted by the Sword, you would
soon be resolved into the Body of the Commonalty; for I never observed a
Red-coat in Oliver's standing Army, that ever made any difference between a
Lord's House and the meanest Farmer's; neither do I believe, that if there were
no Parliaments, the privilege of Peerage would long fignifie any thing. And as
for the Gentry, I know no privilege they could pretend to, why their Estates
should be less obnoxious to Taxes, than those of the meanest Commoner; however,
if they should be more favorably dealt with, it is but the Prince's courtesy,
which he may continue or abrogate at his pleasure. Therefore the Concern is
universal, and he who betrays it, is no less a Traitor to himself in
particular, than to his Country in general.

Having thus therefore exposed those misfortunes which ever attend upon Popery
and Arbitrary Government, give me now leave to recommend to your more serious
consideration some remedy, whereby you may at least hope to assuage the grief,
if not to perfect the cure, of what you so much fear: And this can only be
done, by searching to the bottom of our evils, Radicem petere, by retiring from
the event to the cause, wherein, I fear, we may discover some Members of the
late Long Parliament to have acted a considerable part, being themselves the
accessaries, but those that chose them the principals of all our present evils.

As we now have, so heretofore all other Nations had their Ordines Regni, or
States, though distinguished by different Names, such were the Fathers of
Families, and Princes of Tribes among the Jews; the Ephori among the
Lacedaemonians; the Senate among the Romans; the Forum superbiense among the
Arragonians; and now the Diet among the Germans; all which in England,
Scotland, France and Spain, are comprehended under the Name of Parliaments. But
however the original institution of these were for one and the same purpose,
viz. Salus Populi, the preservation of the people, as being all Governments of
the mixed or Gothic Model; yet they have most of them lost both their form and
ends, for the which they were at first designed, being subverted and
degenerated, some into Republics, as part of Italy, others into Tyranny, as
France and Spain; where, by the cunning and address of some of their late
Princes, by the servility and folly of the Nobility and Gentry, by the
suppleness, treachery and fawning of the Clergy; as lastly, by the Ignorance
and stupidity of the common people, in those Kingdoms where Popery had so long
prevailed, (in first giving up the power they had of raising Taxes, whereby
their consent to the making of Laws was quickly after thought unnecessary) they
are reduced to that pass, that their Parliaments are only to execute that Law
which the King himself makes, to raise that Tax with the King himself levies,
having a propriety in nothing but their own slavery. So that England at present
seems to be the only place, which retains its primitive method of Rule by
Parliaments, who (according to their first institution) serve as Council for
the King, and Advocates for the People; and this when duly executed, without
any fraud or partiality on either side, may be properly called a mixed or
limited Monarchy, wherein the King has his share in the Government, and
(subordimate under him) the people theirs, being undoubtedly (when each move
regularly within their own Sphere) the best Constitution for the good of both,
that is yet extant in any part of the known World, provided it could always
remain as it now stands, wherein we participate of the good, without any of the
ill of all other Governments. But when either some disaffected Minister with
the Prince, or some factious Subject with the people, shall out of their own
private ends occasion a separation or different interest between them, then the
Game being once begun, if the Court Suit turns up Trump, we hazard running into
a Tyranny and Popery; if the peoples, into a Republic and Presbytery; both
which evils proceed from one and the same venomous humor, only differing as
the Plague and the small Pox; where, in Popery as in the Plague the venom
resorts all into one Bubo, the Pope; when in Presbytery, like the small Pox,
the malignancy or virulent matter is more dispersed into several little Pustles
or Elders, which therefore renders it the least dangerous of the two.

I cannot but be sensible; that to commend to Englishmen the present
Government under which we live, and that wife Institution of the Great Council,
(as it was anciently,) or Parliament, (as it is now called;) some may think as
needless, as to praise the usefulness and necessity of the Air we breath; since
as we owe our subsistence to the one, so ought we to attribute all our
happiness and well-being to the other; For that it is this Constitution, this
conjunction of King and People, that has in so many Ages preserved us from
being exposed to the Arbitrary will of one single person, who though he may
happen sometimes to be wise, temperate and just, yet that is but casual, since
in most private Families there are seen two descents of rash, prodigal and
voluptuous Heirs, for one that is sober, prudent and thrifty. It is this that
hinders the Subject from being given up as a Prey, not only to the will of the
Prince, but (which is ten times worse) to the unreasonable passions and lusts
of Favorites, chief Ministers and Women, when Instead of a Monarch, (who
Governs but in Name, as it often happens) be ruled like the ancient French, by
an insolent Major of the Palace, who will be sure to mind the private interest
of himself and family, ten times more than that of the Prince, or the public
Good; or like the Turkish Empire, under a weak Grand-Seigneur, by the
prevailing Concubine of the Seraglio, who is perhaps her self managed by no
higher dictates than that of her chief Eunuch, or she-Slave. I should not speak
a word in a Subject so evident and perspicuous, did I not observe the impotent
Ambition of some men, who care not (provided they may trample upon, and
domineer over their inferiors,) how much their superiors do the like over
them, their souls (like most insolent men's,) being mean enough to submit to it;
or else through the ignorance and stupidity of some lazy insignificant
Gentlemen, who care not how things go, provided they may enjoy their Hawks,
Hounds, or Bowling-green meetings; and for Politieks, are governed by their
more impertinent Chaplain, or Parson of their Parish. Did we not (I say) daily
see the Designs of some idle, covetous and sycophant Clergymen, who like Ivy,
though it cannot grow without the support of the Oak, and yet will destroy it
at laft, do in private Parlours, over a Glass of Ale, as well as in their
Pulpits, over their Cushions, set up absolute Monarchy to be Jure Divine,
declaiming against the unreasonable stubbornness of any Parliament, that will
not give away the peoples money, and submit themselves to be fleeced, as often
as the chief Minister or Favorite thinks fit. They cry up the Prince like an
Angel, so long as he will be their Executioner, to whip, imprison or hang all
that are not of their flock; or refuse to give up their Souls, once again to be
managed by an implicit faith, whereby in the mean while they might not be
troubled with those uneasy tasks of Studying, Preaching and Catechizing, but
may have nothing else to do only to live at ease, keep their Coach and Horses,
with a Curate to do all the drudgery, whilst they are making their Addresses
above, by flattering and informing at some great Nobleman's or Bishop's Table;
or else if their parts reach so high, by some sycophant Pamphlet or Sermon
against the Government established by Law, they teach that men have no property
either in their Lives or Goods, but during the Prince's pleasure. It would be a
tedious business, nor is it the design of this paper to repeat or Answer all
their silly futillious Arguments upon this Subject; it is sufficient to tell
them it can be easily proved, that the Institution of the Wittena Gemots or
Great Councils, were more ancient than Christianity it self, amongst our Saxon
Ancestors, and consequently that the People had their Representatives in those
Assemblies, before the Bishops or Remish Clergy were so much as heard of in
this Island, as Mr. Petyt in his late Ingenious Tract has made appear; and
that Tithes (their Diana) were granted by King Ethelwolf, (Anno 885.) in a
general Council of Earls, great men, and an infinite number of other Liege men
of the whole Land: Vid. Spelmans Councils, fol. 348. This is but a Taste of
those many Presidents, which have been collected by learned Pens upon this
Subject; therefore I shall say no more to these Gentlemen, but hope, that if
ever their so much desired absolute Monarchy get uppermost, they may every one
of them be obliged to maintain (as William the Conqueror made the Monks of Ely)
upon free Quarter, a Trooper or Red-coat at least, to fight, as well as a
Curate to Preach for them, out of their fat Benifices and Pluralties.

Since therefore at present we live under so happy a Government, where being
securely landed our selves, we behold the Shipwreck of our Neighbors; and
since notwithstanding the goodness of our Sovereign, (who (I hope) desires
nothing less than the alteration or subversion of that Government, which as
well by his Coronation Oath, as by his own Lenity and good Nature, he thinks
himself obliged to preserve;) There are yet some, who out of their own private
ends, endeavor to remove our ancient Landmarks, introducing Popery and
Slavery amongst us. Since therefore it is so much the Interest of all true
Englishmen to maintain these Privileges, conveyed from their Ancestors
through so many Generations inviolable, upon which all our happiness, safety,
and well-being depends, I think no man in his Senses, but must confess, that
the right way to manitain the end is to look to the means, and that is, by
taking care what persons they choose for their Representatives, with whom alone
they must trust their Estates, Lives and Liberties. Now this Government by
Parliaments, however according to its primitive institution it was the best of
all others, yet as well in that, as in Christianity, there has been found out
ways of corruption, and that is when either they sit too long, too seldom, or
are too frequently Dissolved, for that too frequent Dissolutions are no less
dangerous to the Subject than too long Sessions; nevertheless it may be in the
Electors power to avoid the inconvenience of both, and that by making a good
choice. Whereas if the Country people will sell all that they have for a Glass
of Sack, or a pet of Ale, choosing him that will give them most Drink to day,
though they know him to be a person who will sell both their Religion, Lives
and Fortunes to morrow, then such frequent Dissolutious, must of necessity Ruin
us; for that the honest Country-Gentleman, designing no other private
advantage, but the true Service of his King and Country, has no reason,
neither is he able, once in half a year to spend 4 or 500 pounds, only to
purchase a place full of charge, trouble and danger without any profit to
himself, only to serve those who put him to such an unkind expense. Who ever
knew a Coach man or Groom buy his place, unless he designed to rob his Masters
Bin? And the case is the same; for no man can afford to bid so high, as he that
designs to make money again of his place. The Italians have a Proverb, and it is
a true one, That he who buys Justice must sell it again. Therefore whoever you
put to Charge in your Elections, blame him not if he makes money again of what
he bought, for that you did not lend him your Trust, you sold it him, and what
a man has purchased with his own money, he may lawfully sell again. Now that
man who does wilfully give his Voice for a knave or Fool, does his endeavor to
Ruin both his Country. Himself and his Posterity, and to be as bad or worse
than the person he chooses; when if the greater part of the House be Wiser or
Honester, it is no thanks to him; and for his part, if none else were concerned
with him, it were no matter if he were made a Slave to morrow, especially,
since he cannot but be sensible how many have already declared, that they would
sell their Country for a morsel of Bread; (for I look upon any consideration,
though it be an Office or Pension in the Custom-House of 2000 pounds per annum,
as no better in Balance with that) so as if a considerable number of such men
should get into the House (and we know that the children of darkness are wiser
in their Generation than the children of light) in what a miserable condition
were this poor Nation in at this Juncture of time? The old Lord Treasurer
Burleigh (who is thought to have been the greatest Statesman that ever this
Nation bred) did frequently deliver as a Maxim, or rather as a Prophesy, That
England can hardly be undone, unless it be by her own Parliaments, undoubtedly
foreseeing that all other Oppressions as being wrought by Violence, might
perhaps by Violence be in time shaken off again? whereas when in a
Parliamentary way we are undone by a Law, that can never be reverst but by a
downright Rebellion, because the Parties advantaged by that Law will never
agree to the repealing of it; and a Rebellion is both so dangerous and of so
black a Character, as men either Rich or Conscientious will hardly engage in
it; and therefore no public mischief is so irrecoverable, as that which is
grown into a Law, and that cannot be imposed but by a Parliament. Wherefore as
we tender our Religion, Liberties and Estates, we must (as much as in us lies)
choose a good House of Commons, since there never was a time wherein we more
needed men of Wisdom, Courage and Integrity, who will not quit their Duty,
either for want of consideration, for favor, reward or fear. The first and
second of these Accomplishments I suspect not, for that in such a numerous
Assembly there cannot want some wise bold men, who will be able to animate and
instruct the rest: therefore I need only speak to their want of Integrity, or
corruption from private Interest, which usually proceeds either from fear of
losing what a Man now enjoys, or hope of gaining what he yet has not. For
though men may talk high, and keep a great noise with Conscience, and Love to
their Country, yet when you understand mankind aright, (not as it should be,
but as it is, and ever will be) then will you find, that private Interests is
the string in the Bears Nose; it is that which governs the Beast. Therefore by
this Observation we may guess, who are fittest to be chose Members of
Parliament, and who are not.

First, Avoid all such as hold any Office of considerable value during
pleasure, they being subject to be over-awed. For although a man wish well to
his Country, and in the betraying thereof knows that at the long run he
mischieves his posterity, if not himself, yet the narrowness of men's minds is
such, as makes them more tenderly apprehend a small present damage, than a far
greater hereafter. Such men must of necessity be under a great temptation and
distraction, when their Consciences and Interest look different ways,
especially having observed some men turned out of their Employs, after voting
for the Interest of their Country, as Mr. Garraway was. Therefore since these
men know beforehand the Inconveniences, that attend the Trust of a Member of
Parliament faithfully discharged, it is very suspicious and reflecting upon
their honesty, if any such stand; and I think we are bound in Charity, nor can
we do them a greater courtesy, than to answer their Petition in the Lords
Prayer, Not to lead them into temptation.

Secondly, Suspect all those (men of ill repute) who in their Profession or
near Relations have any dependency upon the Court; for they (unworthily)
guessing at the King by themselves, are apt to vote right or wrong, as they
imagine will most please the Prerogative party. And perhaps this fancy helped
the Earl of Danby to that favor, which hindered him from coming upon his Trial
the former Sessions. It is a hard matter for a Courtier to please that Minister
who supports him, and those whom he represents at the same time; and if he
endeavors to oblige both, he becomes such an uncertain Weathercock, as most
commonly he pleases neither. Wherefore the most prudent and honestest of the
Courtiers are observed to decline being Parliament Men, for this very Reason.

Thirdly, Suspect all such as spend much upon you in Entertainments at their
Elections: for that (as I told you before) he who buys any Office, designs to
make Money of it again. And then consider with your selves, what Loosers you
will be, if to laugh and be merry one day, the Person you choose should give
You and your Children occasion to mourn for ever after! Think how justly the
ancient Heathens may upbraid this baseness of us Christians, when, as they
sacrificed many of their Children, nay, and oftentimes their own Lives for the
good of their Country; so on the contrary, do we sacrifice both our Religion,
Lives, and Country, for the pleasure of one days debauchery.

Fourthly, Shun all such men as are desperately in Debt; for they needing
Protection from paying of their Debts, are so afraid of being Dissolved, as
makes them submit to any thing, rather than be left to the unmerciful Rage of
their hungry Creditors, who have so long fasted for their Money. For all such
Persons (though some of them may be looked upon as honest fair-condition'd
Gentlemen, and good Housekeepers) are in danger of being tempted to repair the
decays of their own private Fortunes, by the Ruin of the Public. Moreover,
the choosing of such broken Fortunes, undoes Trade, ruins whole Families, and
I have known it drive many men (contrary to their own inclinations) to wish
never to see Parliaments more in England.

Fifthly, Avoid all such as have been known Favorers of Papists; or Relations
or Friends to any of the Lords in the Tower; Nay beware of any that shall be
recommended to you by such as are so, (let them be never so Great men in your
Countries) unless you intend to have their Friends to be their Judges. For when
any person shall out of a private Interest of his own, Elect, or give his Voice
for one who is either a Friend or Relation to Him that stands Impeached by all
the Commons of England of High Treason, he does in such a Case, as much as in
him lies, endeavor to destroy the Kingdom, by saving the Life of its Enemy;
for that if all other Electors should do the same, he might live to perfect
that Ruin amongst us* which otherwise he must leave unfinished: An Act no less
unnatural, than for a man to sell a Pardon to him that murdered his own Father!
It the former wise Parliament thought it reasonable (as they did) to Vote him a
Betrayer of the Rights and Privileges of the Commons of England, who should
dare to plead at Bar in behalf of the Earl of Danby; let not those who choose
his nearest Relations and Friends for his Judges, think themselves less faulty
than he that should have pleaded for him after the aforesaid Vote, since the
design of both is the same, viz. the saving of his Life. Therefore if any do
so, may their shame be their confusion.

Sixthly, Above all others choose not any of those who have been justly pointed
at by the name of Pensioners, as being the worst and basest of Traitors; who
making Shipwreck of all Honor, Honesty, and good Conscience, sell their Votes
for Offices present Gratuities, or constant Pensions. The first notorious brood
of these Vermin, were in the Old Long Parliament called by the name of Self
^eekers; but the late Lord Treasurer's Creatures were in greater numbers, more
voracious, and of more universal Obedience, or as the French call it, Sans
Reserve. They by the former excellent House of Commons, are for their Secret
Service branded by the open name of Pensioners, which they will hardly claw off
notwithstanding the Parliaments Dissolution, has, as yet rescued them from
other punishment. However, that the Populacy might not split twice upon the
same Rock, my request is, that before they go to any Election, they would
peruse Sir Stephen Fox's Catalogue both of such Persons and Sums as he
recollected in his memory, without the help of his Books which upon some
weighty Reasons (above us Vulgar peoples searching into) was denied him. Now
this Pensionary Institution of the Treasurers, was certainly of great advantage
to himself, and most pernicious to England; for if he did really distribute
such sums as is pretended, then he might in a short time make and repeal what
Laws he pleased; or if he did not distribute them, then to his own enriching,
he might by an untrue account, divert a vast Treasure into his own Purse.

Seventhly and Lastly, As for you Citizens, Burgesses, and Freemen of
Corporations and Cities. I shall say but little to you in particular, more than
what has been said already in general; only, whoever is u^fi^ to be chosen
Knight of the Shire, is likewise unfit to be chosen a Burgess. Neither let the
more specious pretenses of any man, (that shall promise to build you a
Town Hall, or relieve your Poor with Money, (or out of his adjacent Woods)
deceive you any longer; for if so, wherein are you better than your Horses,
whom you catch every day, and clap a Bridle into their Mouths, only by showing
them a few Oats, which they are never like to Eat Even the very Mice are too
wise to be taken by an old Bait, but will first have the Trap new baited,
before they will meddle; and yet I have known a Corporation, which has been taken
twice by the same Bait But however suppose these men do really perform what
they promise, what compensation is that, if that the men you choose should lay
a good swinging Tax upon your Estates, without any real cause; or should give
up the very Power you have of Taxing your selves, or sending your
Representatives in Parliament. (for one bad Parliament may ruin us,) what good
would the Money for your Poor do you in such a case, more than when you thereby
reduced to Beggary, you might perhaps your selves (the Gentry of the Country
having no reason to relieve you) be forced to come in for a small share of this
their Hypocritical Charity: An excellent reward for Folly. Neither say, Oh,
this is but one man, and can have but one Voice; he will do our Town a great
deal of good, and can do us but little hurt if he would. For that, first, one
or two Voices have sometimes carried a Vote of great importance: and secondly,
you know not the bad example this may give to other Neighboring Corporations,
and if all should do so, in what a miserable case would you be? since the
Voices of the Buroughs make two thirds of the House. Lastly, no man can tell
the influence that one cunning talkative man has over the rest of the House,
especially over those that weigh Words, more than Reason or Sense. But I shall
say no more upon this subject, only desire you to remember Esau, who sold his
Birthright for a mess of Pottage, and could never afterward recover it,
though he sought it with Tears: Also, when once you had Elected such a corrupt
Parliament, no Prince (but so just and gracious a Prince as ours) would suffer
you to get rid of 'em in have, or at leastwise till they had done your business
for you.

Having thus therefore showed you what persons you ought not to choose, so now
in the next place, the more clearly to perceive what kind of persons our
present necessity requires to be chosen, consider for what ends they serve, and
they are two: One is, the preservation of our Religion from Popery; The other
is, to preserve inviolably our Liberty, and Properly, according to our known
Laws of the Land, without any introduction of that absolute and arbitrary rule
in other Countries, which we are neither to imitate or regard.

First, Therefore as near as we can guess, we ought to elect good Protestants
toward God and just toward Ma. But forasmuch as in this corrupt Age wherein
we live, men are not so spiritual as they ought to be, it is not amiss to seek
for those, whose spiritual interests is seconded by a temporal one. Wherefore
the surest Champions for our Religion against the Papacy, are our Abbey land
d-men; for notwithstanding the registered Dispensation to Harry the Eighth from
the Pope, for the seizing of those Monasteries and Lands, yet of late they
pretend that the Pope had not power to alien them from the Church; wherefore
the present possessors can never trust or rely upon any new Promises or actual
Grants thereof, especially from him whose everlasting and declared Maxim it is,
Never to keep Faith with heretics. Undoubtedly to make easy his ascent into
the saddle, he will proffer many Assurances and Grants; But if these
Abby-landed men be not the most silly of all others, they will never believe
him; for when he is once firmly settled, then will with his Canon Law
distinctions, like Fire under Quicksilver evaporate away all his promises, and
violently resume the Lands, glorifying in his own Bounty, if he require not the
mean profits: -- habeat jam Rome Pudorem.

Secondly, For our Liberty and Property, men of fair Repute in their Country,
are of all others most likely to prove the stoutest Patriors, especially if in
Possession or Reversion they are men of good Estates; for their Concern is the
greater: And we find by experience of such as Travel into foreign parts, where
themselves have no Estates, Fascile habetur paupertas sine damno; and
accordingly when War and Confusion begins to arise, they apprehend it not with
the hundredth part of that anxiety, as they would do if the like should arise
at home, where their whole lively hood is at stake.

Thirdly and lastly, I conceive it will not be amiss, if for the most part you
choose the same Members again that serz'd you faithfully the last time; since
in so doing, you will both take off that fear of Dissolutions, which is of such
fatal consequence in a Parliament, as also oblige them to serve you more
cheerfully ever after, when you have so highly honored them twice. Now to this
purpose, give me leave here to insert a President worthy both the Consideration
and Imitation of all the Shires and Corporations in England; It is a most
generous Letter written (since this late Prorogation to Sir Gilbert Gerrard and
Sir Henry Calverly from the honest Burgesses of North-Allerton in Yorkshire,
(Dated Jan. 14.) in these Words:

Gentlemen, The unexpected and sudden News of this days Post preventing us from
those due acknowledgments, which the Greatness of your Services for Public
Good have merited from us, we have no better way (now left us) to express our
Gratitude and the high resentments of your Actions before, and in the last
Sessions of Parliament, than to manifest our approbation thereof, by an
Assurance that if a Dissolution of this present Parliament happen, (since you
have evidenced so sufficiently your affection to His Majesty's Royal Person,
and your endeavors for preserving the Protestant Religion, our Lives and
Liberties,) we are resolved (if you please to comply with us) to continue you
both as our Representatives, and do therefore humbly beg your acceptance
thereof; and father, that you will continue your Station during this
Prorogation, faithfully assuring you, that none of Us desire to give, or
occasion you the Expense or Trouble of a Journey in order to your Election, (if
such happen) being so sensible of the too great expense you have been at
already, in carefully discharging the Trust and Confidence reposed in You:
Subscribed by above Sixty, whose Worth and Loyalty deserve Immortal Fame, and
to be Recorded as an Honorable Example both now and hereafter, for all other
Corporations; which being all the Advice I can give you in this Matter, I shall
conclude with desiring you not to be weary of well-doing, neither to be alarmed
or troubled at frequent Prorogation or Dissolutions; since if you persist in
the same steady course you have already begun, it will but fall more heavily
upon the heads of those that are the contrivers of these Misunderstandings
between his Gracious Majesty, and his most faithful Subjects, for whose happy
union, as well in opinion as affection, none can pray more heartily, than

Your most Humble Servant, and Fellow Subject, C. B.

POSTSCRIPT.
WHat I have here written, I do declare before Almighty God, proceeded merely
from the earnest Zeal and desire I had of serving my King and Country; hoping
by this timely caution to the Vulgar, to procure such Senators, as might add to
the Luster of our King, and safety of our Government, such as might keep the
Balance even, and prevent our running either into Tyranny and Popety on the
one hand, or into a Republic and Fanaticism on the other: Such as might divert
that Storm which threatens us, giving us that Peace and that Pranquility, which
all men, who have either Estates or Families (like my self) ure bound to pray
for; such as might render to Caesar the things that are Cesars, and to God the
things that are God's, and to the People the things that are the Peoples. For
as I am governed by no private Faction or Interest, but purely by the dictates
of my own Conscience and Reason; so there is no Government but our English
Monarchy, nor no Religion but what is prescribed in the Church of England, that
I hope ever to see prevail amongst us, We have an old Proverb, and it is true as
to our Condition, Over Shoes over Boots; so that now both City and Commons have
proceeded thus far in opposing Popery, they cannot be safe but in doing more;
for that 'twill be too late to repent, when a never-forgiving Popish Successor
shall come amongst us, with that Text in his mouth of St. Luke 19.27. But those
mine enemies which would not that I should reign over them, bring them hither
and stay them before me. -- Wherefore to prevent all this ruin and misery, we
cannot too often and too sincerely pray for the Life, Happiness, and Prosperity
of our Sovereign, Charles the Second, whom God preserve both in this World and
the next; which is the constant Prayer of his most obedient and faithful
Subject,

C. B.

FINIS.

