The CASE and USAGE of Mr. Edward Bagshaw.
ON January 3. 1662. I living then peaceably in Northamptonshire, by a Servant
of Sir John Bernard, one of the Justices of Peace of our Country, was served
with a Warrant, subscribed by Sir Henry Bennet, wherein my Person was commanded
to be seized, with my Books and Papers: This was brought to me about seven a
clock at night, and though I might well have pleaded the unseasonableness of
traveling at that hour, yet to show how willing I was to clear my self, that
very night I rode seven Miles to Sir John Bernard's House, where I lodged, and
spent the Lord's Day following.

On Monday, Jan. 5. though the Weather was so tempestuous, that Sir John did
very civilly intimate his willingness to let me stay; yet, lest any Delay might
seem to argue Guilt, I refused his courteous offer, and that day rode to
Dunstable; which was about 25 Miles, in so much Wet, that nothing but a Zeal to
clear my Innocence, could have made me so willingly venture through it.

On Tuesday, Jan. 6. from Dunstable I rode to London, where I arrived about one
a clock: and though I was desired, after so long a Journey, to stay and refresh
my self; yet, so impatient was I to know my Crime, that, without either eating
or drinking, and in my Riding Habit, I went immediately to the Secretary Sir
Henry Bennet, by whom I was examined about three in the afternoon, but so
slightly, that I plainly saw he was not himself satisfied, that I deserved any
of that kind of Rigor; yet, whether because he was bound by his Place to
comply with the Information of my Accusers, o(...) not able to bear down the
Importunity and Address, by Sir Jo^^ies, he sent me forthwith to the
Gate House, and committed me Close-Prisoner, for Dangerous and Seditious Words
and Practices.

In that place I abode ten days, after which time, the Chancellor (who now
appeared as the sole Author of my Imprisonment) sent for me to Worcester-house,
and in his Chamber (the Secretary being present) asked me several captious and
ensnaring Questions; As, Whether I had never said that the Long-Parliament was
in Being? And, Whether I did not affirm, That by the Spring there would be a
Change? And, Whether I had never spoken Derogatory words of the King, by saying
that he kept Wenches, and the like? To all which, when I had, as I thought,
given satisfactory Answers, I desired I might be brought to a Trial: but was
answered, That should be when the King pleased: Upon which I was remanded to
the Gate House; but that afternoon, viz. upon Jan. 16. I was fetched from
thence, and sent to the Tower, whither I was committed Close-Prisoner by a New
Warrant, the words of my former being changed, into, Treasonable Designs and
Practices: But for what Reason that Alteration was made, I as yet know not,
having often desired a Trial, but could not obtain it.

With what unhandsom Circumstances of Rigorous Restraint I was used there, I
shall now forbear to mention, because a few words cannot express that matter:
but in short, notwithstanding I was forced to give ten pieces in Gold to Sir
John Robinson, to purchase the Liberty of Tower Air, and besides paid thirty
shillings a week for my Diet and Lodging, yet I was given to the Arbitrary
Disposal of an Absurd and Drunken Keeper, who being himself a slave to his
Lusts, was thought the fittest person to oppress the spirit of one, who never
was guilty of any State-crime, but the desiring of a sober Liberty.

In this condition I continued above a year, so hopeless of Redress, that I
never did attempt to seek it; when on Jan. 30. 1663. one Mr. L'Estrange (whom I
had heard much, and written something of, but never saw before) came to search
my cha(...) in my Window found a Paper, which contained (...) Mr. Davis, who
was then newly sent to Fangier in a very Extraordinary manner; In which Paper,
there were, it seems, some Marginal Notes likely to give Offense; and therefore
it was in all have conveyed to Whitehall, as a Discovery worthy the Diligence
of such a Needy and Officious Informer.

On Feb. 2. following, I was sent for to Whitehall, and by the King himself
examined about that Paper; not whether I contrived or writ it (for that, as Sir
John Robinson afterward told me, the King was satisfied I had no hand in) but
how, and by whom it was conveyed to me? To whose Questions, though I answered
in words of Truth and Sobriety, yet because I durst not do a thing so unworthy
of the Gospel, as to betray another; and because I could not humble my Language
to the false and flattering style of Court (for though I was called Rogue, and
used like one, yet I could not forget that I was a Minister of the Gospel, and
therefore was enabled to speak with that Constancy which became one.) For this
I was returned back by the King, in a Passion, much greater than his Title; and
that very night, about eleven a clock at night, I was by Sir John Robinson
committed to the Tower-Dungeon; where I continued four days and four nights,
without either Bed, Fire, Candle, or any thing else, that, as to humane
conveniences, could make my Life desirable: Besides the Dismal Horror of that
place, being all the time afflicted with the Piles, in so great extremity, that
the very vehemence of pain did often put me into a sweat, and so by accident
prevented my feeling the cold, which at that time of the year, and in that
place, was more than ordinarily piercing.

On Saturday, Feb. 6. about three in the afternoon I was released from thence,
without any seeking of my own, but by the unwearied Importunity of my Eldest
Brother, and (that I may be just in commemorating, as I think, an Effect of
Real Worth) by the generous and compassionate resentment of Sir Henry Bennet
the Secretary, by whose Warrant I was returned to my former Lodgings, and by
his Intercession, preserved from being remanded into the Dungeon, which, by Sir
John Robinson the very next day after, was most maliciously and inhumanely
solicited.

Though I came out of the Dungeon with so much Health, as made it evidently
appear that God himself did own and preserve me there, yet within three days
after, I fell into a violent Fever, which brought me very low; And though God
did then likewise deliver me from the Fury of it, yet Sir John Robinson was not
wanting to do his part that it might prove mortal; forbidding not only my
Brothers, but likewise my Physician access to me, notwithstanding both He and
They had an express Order for their free Admittance.

I am scarcely yet well recovered, when this News comes, that I am to be sent
away I know not whither; -- And since I understand that every part of this
Proceeding against me, is contrary, not only to God's, but likewise to our
English Laws, I thought fit to leave this Narrative behind me, that it may be
presented to the scanning of all sober and virtuous Men in the approaching
Parliament: And if they find that one Innocent Person cannot suffer unjustly,
but all are threatened; and besides, the Honor of the Nation suffers, which
consists in having Right done to all its Members; I shall then expect a
Redress, equal to my Injuries; At least* that I may be restored unto my
Birthright, and that is, my Liberty.

March 10. 1663/4. 11. at night. Edw. Bagshaw.

Postscript to the Reader.
I Have carefully perused this Narative; and if any Dispassionate and Impartial
Reader judge, that any expression here is too Sharp and Vehement, let him put
himself in my case, and then write more mildly if he can: For, to oppress an
INNOCENT Person in his just Rights; and to break those very Laws, which are not
only Righteous in themselves, but made Sacred by being sworn to; even moderate
men, thus provoked, would not have scrupled to call by their True Names; which
I, in civility, have forborne to mention. And though since the writing of this,
it has pleased God to overruled the Intentions, that were once taken up, and
resolved upon, of sending me away, yet I would not alter any part of my Case,
that so it might make the deeper impression: Since the words of departing, as
well as of dying men, may easily be supposed to be most weighty and serious.

March 16. 1663/4 Edward Bagshaw.

On the 2d. of February, by a Warrant from Sir Henry Bennet, I was sent for to
White Hall, and being conveyed to his Lodgings, he told me, The King within,
expected me; who immediately examined me as follows.
K. Do you know any thing of this Paper? (showing the Paper that L'Estrange
took.)


B. I know, that I neither had, hand, or head in it.


K. Do not you know who brought it into your Chamber?


B. It Is very possible, Mr. L'Estrange might, for he has malice enough to do
such a thing.


K. I perceive my Clemency does no good, I will take a course with such Rogues
as you are.


B. Sir, this is not Language becoming a Christian Magistrate.


K. You are a Rogue indeed, to teach me what I am to do; I will make your bones
stretch for it, how great soever you think your Party is.


Sir Henry Bennet. Pray Mr. Bagshaw, tell the King ingeniously who writ that
Paper.


B. I have said already, that I had not the least hand in it, and this I speak
as in the Presence of God, nor can I positively say, who is the Author.


K. But will you say, you know not, who put it into your hand?


B. I do not say so; but we close-Prisoners, are in that condition, that many
things may be done to us, that we can give no certain account of.


K. Well, I shall teach you the duty of a Christian Subject, you shall stretch
for it.


B. You say, I must answer for that Paper with my life, so that it is to no
purpose for me to say any thing.


K. No, Sir, that shall not serve your turn, I Will see how well this Pertness
mill abide with you.


B. Sir, you can do no more than God gives you leave to do, you have no Power
but what comes from Him; that truth I have learned of the Scriptures; and I
bless God I have peace in my Conscience, that I have neither spoken or done any
thing seditiously, and that I have had a care, to keep a Conscience void of
offense both toward God and men.


K. I Will see what peace you will have, your flesh shall pay for it; Mr.
Lieutenant, take him away.


B. In the mean time, I wish you true peace, inward peace. Upon the speaking of
which words he departed.


FINIS.

