IMPRIMATUR Liber, qui inscribitur Occasional Reflecti^ns, etc. quem Censeo
reliquis ab eodem Cl. Autore Scriptis (neque enim quicquam ^ajus de eo dicere
possum, nec minus ^ebeo) nequaquam cedere.

^dib. Lambetha^s. Feb. ^. 1664 Tho. Cook, Reverend. in Christo Patri ac Dom.
Dom. Gilberto Cant. Archiepisc. Sacellanus Domesticus.
OCCASIONAL Reflections UPON SEVERAL SVBIECTS. Whereto is premised A Discourse
About such kind of Thoughts.

Omnibus Rebus, omnibusque Sermonibus, aliquid Salutare miscendum est. Cum imus
per occulta Naturae, cum divina tractamus, vindicandus est a malis suis animus,
ac subinde firmandus.

Sen. Natural. Quaest. Lib. 2. cap. 5 9. LONDON, Printed by W. Wilson for Henry
Herringman, and are to be sold at his Shop at the Anchor in the Lower-walk in
the New Exchange. Anno Dom. MDCLXV.

TO It Is the name given to the same Lady, in the II. Section of the following
Meditations.
SOPHRONIA.
My Dearest Sister,
YOu receive in this Effect of my Obedience, one of the highest Proofs I can
give You of its Greatness. For when You Command but things that tend to Your
Service, the Performance is wont to be accompanied with a Satisfaction, that
suffers me not to find it Uneasy. But I confess it was not without Reluctance,
that I was prevailed with to venture abroad Composures, wherein, even when I
publish Them, I decline Owning them, and which, (if our Names be discovered)
may I fear, not only hazard the Reputation (if it have any) of my Pen; but,
(where You are less known) bring into Question that of Your Judgment. 'Twas
easy for me to represent to You how unfinished and unpolished the Trifles you
called for, were, especially considering that the Immatureness of some of them
would not probably be the Chief thing that would make many think they come
forth Unseasonably, since they avowedly Aim at the Persuading and Teaching men
to Improve their Thoughts, as well as Husband their Time, at a season, when
both those Precious Things are so Neglected, or so Mis-imploy'd, that the chief
use, which too many make of the Former, is to devise ways to get ridd of the
Later. But though to my Vnreadiness to Publish these very long neglected
Papers, at the same time when a Prae-engagement obliged me to Dispatch another
Treatise of a quite different Nature, I added all those other dissuading
Considerations that I have mentioned in the Preface to the Reader; yet what I
represented proved as Vnavailable, as what I had written was In-compleat. For,
whilst You fancied that the following Reflections (such as they are) had Fewer
Faults, and were like to do More Good, than I can presume; Your Charity for
others, and Partiality for me, made you so resolute and pressing to have me run
a Venture, which you are pleased to think but a very Small One; that I judged
it more excusable to present you Green Fruit, than, by obstinately Refusing
what you seemed almost to Long for, lose an opportunity of Evincing, That Your
Commands can Prevail, both where those of Others would have been wholly
Ineffectual, and when they required me to present You (some, if not many,)
things that are so little worthy of You, that perhaps they are scarcely so,
even of me.

Wonder not, Dear Sophronia, that I appear so Sollicitous to manifest the
Greatness of my Obedience; since That implies an Vrgency in your Commands, that
it highly concerns me to have taken notice of. For those that, having the
Happiness to converse with You, shall chance to cast their Eyes upon the
following Papers, will probably think that I show as little Discretion in the
Address, as I have shown Skill in the writing, of these Reflections; when I
expose such Censurable Things to the Judgment of a Person that has so piercing
a One, and present Trifles to one, that deserves the Noblest Productions of
(what she is so great a Mistress of) Wit, and Eloquence. Upon whose Account she
is wont to persuade Piety as Handsomely in her Discourses, as she expresses it
Exemplarily in her Actions; and might, if her Modesty did less confine her Pen
to Excellent Letters, both make the Wits of our Sex envy a Writer of Hers; and
keep Our Age from envying Antiquity, for those Celebrated Ladies, who, by their
Triumphant Eloquence, Ennobled the People of Rome, and taught their Children to
Sway those Rulers of the World.

But when I can plead, that not only Your Commands, but even Your Importunity
engaged me (though not to the Address, yet) to the Publication of these Papers;
I may reasonably hope, that among those many considerable Persons to whom Your
Seize are not unknown, not only my Dedication will be Excused, but even
my Book will not be so hastily Condemned.

But I dare not prosecute so Fruitful a Subject, for fear of offending Your
Modesty; since that predominant Virtue gives You so great an Vndervaluation for
all Your other Qualities, that it is as much Your Custom to look even upon
Small Praises as Flatteries, as it is Your Prerogative to keep Great ones from
being so. And I should therefore have omitted that little it self which I have
said, if, on This occasion, my Interest did not as well Oblige me, as the known
Truth Warrant me, so to Consider Your Modesty, as not to be altogether
Injurious to Your other Excellencies; since the Reader's knowledge of These (if
he be not a strnager to You) will promise me this Advantage, that diverse of the
Critics themselves will choose rather to Absolve my Writings, than Condemn Your
Judgment: and that at least, the Devout, to whom Your Practice has afforded so
many other Examples, will be scrupulous to be more Severe to these Papers, than
a Person in whom, upon the score of her own Style, Severity were more
justifiable than in most Readers (without excepting the Eloquent Ones) and will
imitate Her, in Considering, that this Book pretends to present them Thoughts,
rather than Words, and in Supporting, for the sake of the Design, the Manner in
which it is prosecuted.

And certainly, my Lady R's. Approbation, is a Happiness which diverse sorts of
Considerations may render as Advantageous as Welcome to me. For if any of these
Thoughts, do (which yet I can scarce hope) derive it from Your Justice, that
great measure of Esteem You do not only Merit, but Possess, may both Assure
them of a General One, and much contribute to Procure it them. But if all of
them owe your Approbation (as I fear they do) to your Partiality; since that
must not be* Small to be able to pervert such a Judgment, This it self will
prove an Evidence of the Blessing of Your Affection; which is a Felicity, that
I know You enough to value above all the Praises I can miss of: since Applause
can make me happy but in other Men's Opinion, but Your Friendship can make me so
in my own. Yet, apprehend not, Sister, That I should here endeavor, by a solemn
Character of You, to justify what I have been saying: For, though to write a
Dedicatory Epistle, without a Panegyric, be grown of late very Unfashionable;
yet since it is as much so, to take the Praises wont to be profusely given in
such Letters for Measures of any thing but the Writers Wit, I must rather
reserve the Acknowledgments I ow Your Merit and Your Favors to some Occasion,
where they may not be liable to pass for a Tribute paid to Custom, not a Debt
due to You; than draw a needless Suspicion upon the Sincerity of our
Friendship, by endeavoring to express my Affection and Esteem in a Dedicatory
Letter; and by choosing to Profess, upon an Occasion where Custom allows men to
Say what they do not Think, so Great and Real a Truth, as that of my being, far
more upon the Account of Esteem and Gratitude, than of Nature it self,

My Dearest Sister, Your most Affectionate, and most Faithful Servant. R.
Boil*

AN INTRODUCTORY PREFACE.
WHen I consider the Disadvantages, with which the following Trifles come
abroad, in an Age, that is not only so Censorious, but so Intelligent, as this
of ours; neither the Partiality of my Friends, nor the favorable Reception
that the public has hitherto vouchsafed to what has been presented it, of
mine, is able to give me a Confidence, (though they almost create a Hope) That
these Papers will meet with as kind an Entertainment, as those of the samehand
that have preceded them. And yet, without being wanting to my self, I cannot but
ad, that by the help of Their suggestions, who have urged the Publication of
these Thoughts, I am not unfurnished with (at least) Tolerable Excuses for the
things that seem likely to stand in need of any.

I shall not much wonder to find it said, That the Book is, in general, far
short of being an Exact and Finished Piece. For perhaps few Readers will be
more of that mind, than the Author is. But by way of Apology, it may be
represented, That most of the following Papers, being written for my own
private Amusement, a good deal of Negligence in them may appear as pardonable,
as a Careless Dress, when a man intends not, nor expects, to go out of his
study, or let himself be seen. And that which I now publish being designed, not
to satisfy the Critics, but to gratify the Devout, I hope it will be thought
a Venial Crime, if in some of these Meditations I have not aimed to express
Eloquence, but only to cherish Piety. I say, in some, because there may be
others (where a different style was thought fitter) in whose Favor I would
produce such Suffrages, as would not be slighted, if I were concerned to do any
more for those Papers, than Excuse them.

And perhaps they that shall take the pains to try their skill in making
Meditations, Indifferently upon the Occurrences that shall happen, and wander
no further from the Circumstances of their Themes, nor lard them any more with
Sentences and other Passages borrowed from the Fathers, or the Poets, than in
most of the following Papers, I have done: will not find the Task so easy, but
that they will think it reasonable to be Mild in their Censures, and will
discern, that in such Composures, some Unaccurateness is so hard to be Avoided,
that it should not be hard to be Forgiven.

I know the want of Uniformity in the style of the ensuing Reflections, may
speciously enough be censured. For, not to mention that some of them are very
long, and others very short; it will be said, that some are written in a very
Neglected, and others even in a Luxuriant strain; and there may (perchance)
appear betwixt some of them, as great an Inequality as can easily be found,
betwixt Composures that are none of them Excellent. Besides, that the
Incoherence of the Subjects, together with the differing Ways wherein they are
handled, may make them look so little of kin to one another, as scarce to
appear the Productions of the same Pen. But this Uneven way of writing will
possibly be rather pardoned than wondered at, by those that shall be informed.

That the nature of this kind of Composures requires not any other than a loose
and Desultory way of writing.

That these Reflections are very far from coming abroad in the Order of Time
wherein they were set down: but in that Casual order, wherein, when I was
engaged to tack them together, I was able to light on them among my loose and
forgotten Papers. Many of which being discovered to have been lost when some of
the rest were to be at the Press; I was fain, for the completing of the
number, to insert here and there some of a much fresher date, among those that
were made (as some know who then read them) sixteen or seventeen years ago;
when my Style could hardly be other than differing enough from what it now is.

And lastly, That the differing Natures of several Subjects required, that the
Reflections on some of them should be far Longer than on others; and As my want
of Leisure, and sometimes of Dispos'dness to write, induced me to make some of
my Considerations but short: So I thought fit to let them pass for Their sakes,
to whom, for want of Time or Skill, the Brevity of those, may make them the
fitter, and the more recommend them.

Besides, what has been alleged against the Style' I know it may be objected,
That in some of the Meditations, the Subjects are very Mean, and Trivial, and
that such I hemes are not Worthy the being descanted on. And indeed, if I aimed
at the Writer's advantage, more than the Reader's, I could easily have left
them out, and have substituted in their places some others that lie by me, less
liable to Contempt. But I confess, I did not think my self obliged, to publish
no Meditations, but the least Censurable ones that I had made; and diverse of
those intimated in the objection, were purposely inserted, when I was prevailed
with to bundle up these loose sticks into Faggots. For Then, designing this
Treatise for the Benefit of the Generality of Devout Readers, I thought it not
amiss, amongst diverse Reflections (such as most of the IId and of the IVth
Sections) more suited to those Perusers that are either of the more intelligent
sort, or good Proficients already; to insert some few Meditations, of more
familiar sort, and easier to be lighted on; to (...) from being discouraged,
from trying to ma^^ Occasional Reflections, who may chance to have either
Barrenner Fancy's, or more unpracticed Pens, than even I had then: And those
(perhaps) who, without such easily imitable Examples would not be invited to
make Occasional Meditations, may, by the Practice of composing them, grow such
Proficients in the Art, as to surpass some that despise such humble Beginnings.

But as I send abroad these Papers without the Authors name, that I may have
the greater Opportunity to hear other men's Opinions of them, and the less
Temptation to wave the complying with those that shall seem Reasonable: so if I
shall find, That such Readers as I esteem competent Judges in an Affair of this
Nature, shall think that those Reflections wherein I have complied with the
weaker sort of Perusers, may be better Spared, than Inserted: I can sily repair
that fault in the next Edition (if these Trifles shall be thought worthy of
another). In the mean time, I presume that those devout Readers who may be
concerned in this matter, will take it kindly that I have for their sakes
adventured to treat of Subjects too mean and barren to furnish me with almost
any thing considerable; save the Opportunity's of manifesting, how low I can
stoop to gratify such Persons.

I know it is a new thing, That I have ventured to put some Occasional
Reflections into Dialogues. But the Reader will be less startled at my
deviating in this, and other things, from Bishop Hall's way of writing
Occasional Meditations, if I acknowledge that not to Prepossess or Bias my
Fancy, I purposely (till of late) forbad my self, the perusing of that Eloquent
Praelates devout Reflections. Which Intimation being premised, I shall subjoyn,
That when I wrote for my own Divertisement, I sometimes took Pleasure to
imagine two or three of my Friends to be present with me at the Occasion, that
set my thoughts on work, and to make them Discourse as I fancied Persons, of
their Breeding and tempers, would talk to one another on such an Occasion. And
one of these, whom I call Eusebius, being a Dr. of Divinity; two others
(Eugenius and Genorio) being Travelers and fine Gentlemen; and the fourth,
(whom I name Lindamor) being a Learned Youth, both well Born and well Bred; I
was apt to think, that some of their Conferences, might be allowed to pass
among the other Papers; both because Novelty, and Variety, are wont to be not
unwelcome things, and because this way of writing allows a Scope for diversity
of Opinions, for Debates, and for Replies, which mostcommonly would be
Improper, where only a single speaker is introduced: Not to add, that possibly
if this way of writing shall be Liked and Practiced, by some Famed and happier
Pen, that were able to Credit and improve it; it may afford useful Patterns of
an Instructive and not unpleasant Conversation; and such Reflections, being of
the nature of short and Occasional Essays, may afford men the opportunitys, of
saying the Hansomest things they know, on several Subjects, without saying any
thing Else of them, or filling above a Sheet, or perhaps a Side of Paper at a
Time. And the Liberty that this way of introducing Speakers, allows, brings
with it a Convenience, which it is more Easy for an Intelligent Reader to
conjecture at, than 'twere Discreet for the Writer to mention expressly.

Another Novelty will probably be taken notice of, in the following Papers,
where the second and fourth Sections, though by far the longest in the whole
Book, are entirely taken up, the Former only by Meditations on Accidents
relating to an Ague that once afflicted me, and the Latter by those that
occurred to some Anglers by the River side. But for this Matter, I presume, it
will not be difficult to Apologize. For having observed Men to be inclinable,
either openly to Object, or at least tacitly to Suspect, That in Occasional
Meditations, that may hold true, which is (perchance not altogether
undeservedly) said of Epigrams, That in most of them the Conceits were not
Suggested by the Subjects, but Subjects were Pretended, to which the Conceits
might be Accommodated; I thought, that to manif^st, that (at least, some)
Writers of this kind of Composures need not have recourse to the suspected
Artifice; the fittest way I could take was, By putting together what the
Accidents of my Ague, and of my Angling Journey, had suggested to me, to show,
that it is very Possible for a person, that pretends not to a very pregnant
Fancy, to Discourse by way of Reflection upon the several Circumstances that
shall happen to occurr to his Consideration, though one Subject should require
above fifteen differing Meditations; and the other above twenty. Not to add,
That 'twas rather Weariness and Design, then want of Thoughts upon other
passages relating to the same Subjects, that kept me from increasing the Number
of those Reflections.

As for the Similitudes, though some would make me hope that they will be at
least excused; and though it were perhaps no great Vanity, for one that does
assiduously enough converse with the Works of Nature and the Productions of
Art, to think he has the means of furnishing himself with pretty store and
variety of Comparisons; yet for all this, I am not willing to quit my
Pretensions to a share in the wonted Effects of that common Equity which
forbids to exact too accurate a likeness in the making of Comparisons, which
Orators confess ought to be judged with Indulgence, and without exacting a
Conformity in Other Attributes betwixt the things compared, provided there be a
competent Likeness in reference to the Particular wherein the Collation or
Parallel is made.

And if I have, on some occasions, prosecuted the Resemblance through all the
particularities wherein the Parallel could be made to hold, more fully and
nicely than is usual in ordinary Comparisons; and if in so doing I may have at
any time a little Strained the Similitude, the better to accommodate it to my
present Theme, and Design; I have this to represent, That to Display
Resemblances to the full, and Insist on their particular Circumstances, is
oftentimes no more than the Nature of these Composures does allow, if not
require; and that, on such occasions, to stretch the Parallel as far as it can
well be made to reach, is but a venial fault, which many Readers are disposed
not only to Pardon, but to Like. As if, in some Cases, it fared with
Similitudes as with Bows, which though they may be bent so forcibly as to be
thereby broken or spoiled; yet by being strained somewhat more than ordinarily,
they acquire a greater strength, and enable the Arrow to Pierce farther, and to
make a smarter Impression, than else it would.

The Protasis (as Rhetoricians call the first part of a Comparison) may in some
of the following Reflections appear to be too much amplified, and needlessly to
lengthen the Meditation. But not to urge, that sometimes the more conspicuous
Adjuncts of the Subject were so mean and barren, that there was a kind of
necessity to Exaggerate, or to Exspatiate upon little Circumstances to invite
Attention; The Protasis, wherein we display and consider the minute
particularities of the Theme, being the Groundwork of all the rest, and it
being far more easy to say Little, than Much, with equal pertinency upon a
Subject; I thought it not amiss, to afford unpracticed Readers, the most
assistance of Examples in such Cases, wherein it is probable they will most need
it; especially since he that has accustomed himself to write Copiously, may
easily Contract his Discourse when he will, by Omitting as many passages as he
pleases; and it is far more difficult for a Beginner to supply Barrenness, than
retrench Superfluities. Which are not always such Faults, but that I remember
some great Masters in the Art of Oratory, have pronounced Redundancy to be a
good Sign in a Young Writer, as taking it for a mark of a fruitful and
exuberant Phansy, that, in it is Productions, there is something to be cut off.
So that if there should be found any Luxuriant Expressions in some of those
Thoughts that were written down, when I had not yet attained my 19th or 20th
year, when I might be allowed to write not always to employ, but sometimes to
amuse my self; I may hope, that the same Youth that was my Temptation to write
them, may prove my excuse for having written them; as it may for leaving them
Unexpung'd; That as I desire to invite as well young Gentlemen as other
Readers, to pen Occasional Meditations; So I find that some of the Readers I am
willing to pleasure, do as little dislike that Luxuriant way of writing Now, as
I did Then: as Youths and Ladies oftentimes better relish Must than Wine.

I know too, that there may be found in some of those Protases, diverse
passages, and particularly some Descriptions (that often make a great part of
them) which to some Readers will not seem Noble and Gaudy enough. But to such
Perusers it may be represented, that a sutableness to the Theme, how mean
soever it be, may very well, as a piece of Decorum, be allowed to a Writer, and
in few Cases more than in point of Descriptions; and that These being but
Pictures drawn (with Words instead of Colors) for the Imagination, the
skillful will approve those most, that produce in the mind, not the Finest
Idaeas, but the Likest: as a Critic in Limning will more prize the Picture of
an old meagre Sibill, where the Wrinkles, and the sallow skin are drawn exactly
to the Life, than a dozen ordinary Pictures of the Spring, (which yet are wont
to charm Vulgar eyes) though the Youthful face which represents that Florid
season, have as Gaudy Colors upon the Cheeks and Lips, as imbellish the Roses
and Lillies, which compose the Chaplet that adorns the Head.

And possibly there will be found other Readers (and those too, skilled in
Rhetoric) that will accuse some other of our Meditations, as being too
Elaborate, or too Pompous, for the Themes whereunto they are accommodated. But
having laid by a competent number of those lately mentioned Reflections,
wherein I aimed chiefly at inviting and assisting Readers of meaner Capacity: I
confess, that in the Other Meditations, aiming either at my own Divertisement,
or the gratifying Another sort of Persons, I allowed my self to make choice of
such applications of the objects I considered, as I thought every body would
not so easily light on. And, provided the Reflections were not strained, nor
too far fetched, I thought it not amiss they should be somewhat surprising:
that I might, by the way of Handling the Subjects I was to treat of, engage an
Attention, which otherwise I could scarce expect for such unpromising Themes. I
know that if the Judgment of some severe Critics, were as Infallible as
themselves think it, the style of some of the following Reflections would seem
disproportionate to such mean and trifling Subjects. I do not perhaps ignore
what Rhetoricians are wont to teach of what they call, the three differing
Characters of Writing; I have read those Discourses that Cornificius proposes
as the Patterns of the Sublime, the moderate, and the humble way of expressing
ones self on differing Occasions; and I have been taught, and willingly
acknowledge, that all Themes are not so well capable of that Character which
they call Sublime; and that according to the Nature and Dignity of the Subjects
that one treats of, the Manner of handling them ought to be varied. But if I
were much concerned in this matter, I might reply, that notwithstanding all
this, I know, That even the Artists themselves do not so perfectly agree about
the defining of these matters, and the grand Rule about these Characters being
only, That the Laws of Decorum (or, as the French call it Bien-seance) be not
violated, in the Estimate of that Decorum, I see no great Reason to confine my
self to the Magisterial Dictates of either Ancient or Scholastic Writers. For,
living in this Age, and in This part of the World, where we are not like to
have those for Readers that died before we were born, I see not why one may not
judge of Decorum by the Examples and Practices of those Authors of our own
Times and Countries, whose Writings are generally esteemed by Judicious Men.

And certainly, in the judging of what is Decent on particular Occasions, we
must as well consider, Who it is that is introduced as the Speaker, as what it
is he speaks of. And though it be Improper to do what those have done, that
have unadvisedly made Shepherds and Nymphs discourse like Philosophers or
Doctors of Divinity; yet when the Writer either speaks Himself, or introduces
any whom he represents as intelligent Persons; they may be allowed, even about
things Ordinary and Mean, to talk like themselves, and employ Expressions that
are neither mean, nor ordinary. As Virgil, in his admired Georgicks, It nigrum
campis Agmen.
does in some passages, where he treats of contemptible Insects, speak of them
in so noble and lofty a strain, That when he mentions Multitudes of Ants, one
would think he were speaking of an Army of Moors: and when he gives an Account
of Bees, his Expressions about their Common Wealth would scarce mis-becom the
Majesty of that of Rome. Such passages do, notwithstanding the great disparity
of Themes, make the Style of his Georgicks, as well Noble (if not strictly
Heroic) as that of his Aeneids; and when he writes of Ants and Flies, he does
it in a Strain worthy of the same Pen, that so loftily describes the
Destruction of Troy, and the Adventures of that Hero whom he would have to be
(though not immediately) the Founder of Rome.

I will not say, that since there is a Mode in Language as well as in Clothes,
I see not why the fashion, that now a-dayes allows our Gallants to wear fine
Laces upon Canvass and Buckram, might not warrant the tricking up of slight
subjects, with the richer Ornaments of Language: nor will I examine whether Men
may not Except against the Authority of some Jejune Writers, that taking upon
them to prescribe the Laws of Styles, make so many of their Precepts Negative,
that one may suspect them indicted not so much by Skill, as Envy, which makes
such assuming Lawgivers mistake the Impotence of a Barren Fancy for the
Skilfulness of a Critical Judgment, and (Valuing only the Idaeas they think
they can Reach) Condemn whatever they despair to Imitate. And, from those that
would be thought to censure the Moderns, but out of a Veneration for the
Ancients, one might methinks reasonably expect but Light Censures for employing
upon occasion, that noble Figure of Rhetoriok called Hyperbole; since I should
be loath to use it Often, with no more Reserve than those great Orators Tully
and Isocrates have Sometimes done before me. But a just debate of the Rules of
Estimating Decency, would take up so much room as must make it improper for
this place, where all I contend for, is, That though when one treats of Various
Subjects, somewhat Differing Styles are indeed to be accommodated to them; yet
this is to be so done as still to preserve a certain Dignity in Expressions: So
that a Writer may be sometimes engaged by his Subject to use a Lofty Style, but
without ever being obliged to employ an Abject one; though indeed in some cases
he may be allowed to stoop below what he is bound to, and forbear Soaring, as
well as avoid Creeping. Nor am I, for my own part much concerned to Insisthere
on the Subject I just now declined to Debate. For if I mis-remember not, Cicero
himself, as well as some succeeding Orators, allow in diverse cases to Shift
Characters, even in the same Discourse, according to the differing Particulars
that happen to fall under consideration: and some of them add this reason, That
hence there will arise variety, which is wont to be a welcome thing. And to
apply this to the Occasional Reflections that may be concerned in this Debate,
I must desire the Reader to take notice of these two things. The one, that
though the Thing it self, which sets a man's thoughts a-work may be but Mean in
Other regards, yet that which the Reflector pitches upon to consider, may be of
another Nature; as though the Glo-worm, which afforded me the I. Vth Reflection
of the Vth Section, be but a small and contemptible Insect, yet the Light which
shines in his Tail, and which makes the chief Theme of the Meditation, is a
noble and heavenly Quality, and might have justified the having many things
said of it, for which the Sublime Character would have been the most proper.
The other particular I meant to point at, is, That oftentimes, when the
Protasis, or former part of a Reflection, is spent upon considering some mean
and Trivial subject; the Apodosis, or Reddition, contains such an Application
of what one was taking notice of in the Subject, that the thing Pointed at, may
be some important Moral Instruction, or perhaps some Theological Mystery; and
consequently may Require and Justify, Another then the former humble Style,
and admit all the Quickness of Expression and the richest Ornaments, that
belong to those two higher Characters which Rhetoricians call the Subtle, and
the Magnificent. But if I should now and then deviate from Bounds, which, not
being Conspicuous, it is difficult Never to swerve from; I have this Peculiar
Apology to make for such Aberrations; That writing for the most part of Themes
wholly New, and untreated of by others, I must needs want the assistance of
Examples to Regulate or Authorize my Expressions: about which I need not yet be
very Sollicitous, if I may trust a Learned and applauded Writer (whose censure
I desired) that is both able to judge skilfully, and wont to judge freely.

These things I have the more carefully Insisted on, because I would not have
those Ingenious Persons, that may chance to cast their Eyes on these Papers, to
be tempted by any imperfections of mine, to think otherwise of Occasional
Meditations, than that though there be some, yet there are not very many, of
their Themes so Low and Contemptible, but they are capable of affording
Reflections of Another nature to Them, that are dexterous in making
Applications of things. And I would not have such discouraged from hoping to
find in many Themes, that seem despicable at first sight, some Hint or other
that may give those that have Wit or Eloquence, Opportunity enough to display
those Qualities. For as there is a great difference betwixt Such Writers, and
Common ones, so it is very material by what Pens the Subject is treated of; and
Extraordinary persons, in Estimating what they are like to perform, must not
only consider the unpromising Nature of their Subject, but the Activity of
their own Fancy, and the Pregnancy of their own Wit. For though the Stars
cannot, the Luminaries can, cloth the light and wandering vapors of the Air,
with the color of Gold, and of Roses; And the Sun, by his piercing and
improving Beams, cannot only make Diamonde sparkle, and Rubies flame, but by
his action upon an obscure Cloud can make even That exhibit all those Glorious
and charming Colors, for which we admire the Rainbow.

And, that the following Papers may prove to such Persons the lesser
Temptations to undervalue and mis-judge of this kind of Composures; I am first
to advertise the Reader, that they are capable of so much greater Variety, than
the following Treatise presents, that besides the vast multitudes of
particulars unmentioned in it, that may be added under those Heads to which the
ensuing Meditations are referred, there are several distinct sorts or kinds of
Occasional Thoughts (such as those that are Made upon Texts of Scripture, or
Relate to less familiar points of Divinity, or other Learning, or contain
Historical Applications, etc.) upon which I have, out of have, and other
Reasons, purposely forborne (though not to write, yet) to publish Reflections.
And in the next place, I must here frankly acknowledge, that many of the
ensuing Reflections are so far from being the Best, that en'n no better a Pen
than Mine could make, that they are much Inferior to diverse that I have already
Made; though (for allowable Considerations) I have for born to Publish them.
And I must confess, that I am more beholden to my Occasional Reflections, than
they are to me. For, whereas they have furnished me with Diverse of the
Thoughts, which have been the favourablyest entertained by the Readers of my
other Books of Devotion, I did much impoverish these Papers, that professedly
contain my Occasional Reflections, by not only leaving, but taking out of them
several things, which were the most likely to have recommended them; that I
might accommodate other Writings, for which I had a greater Kindness or Concern.

As for the Discourse of Occasional Reflections, all that I shall say of it,
is, That considering how early I attempted that Subject, and that I was fain to
repair, as well as I could, the unseasonable Miss of diverse Papers belonging to
it, when I dispatched it to the Press; considering these things (I say) I
despair not but that it will be thought, that I have not said nothing in favor
of a Subject that hitherto had so little said to recommend it, That even the
Eloquent Bishop Hall, In the latter part of his Proeme, whereof the whole
amounts not to one Page of this Preface.
employing but some Lines, not Pages, upon the Prise and Utility of it, (which
he mentions but in very General Terms) left me to find out, by my own
Thoughts and Experience, the various Considerations, by which I have
endeavored to Display the Usefulness of the way of thinking I would invite to.
Which I have further manifested, by applying to that Scope, diverse passages of
Scripture, (which the Reader must therefore not wonder, if he do not now meet
with) as Texts, that either by way of Example, or upon other Accounts, belong
to what I have written about the Method of making Occasional Reflections.

It Is true, the Discourse may seem somewhat Incomplete, because of the Omission
of this Way (that is more than once mentioned in it.

But though the loose Papers, wherein that Method, and diverse Examples of it,
are set down, were lying by me, when I tacked up those that now come abroad;
yet my Occasions easily prevailed with me to continue to suppress them. For
though I did not much scruple to comply with my have, and Avocations, by
forbearing to swell a Book, whose Bulk already much exceeded my Intention;
because, that, as the Papers that now appear, were extorted from me; so I
confess, that I was not fond of exposing those that I had an expedient to keep
back, but that I think it very fit to observe, first, whether the Reception
that the following Meditations will find, will make me and others think it
worth while, to have the ways published, that I was wont to use in making them.

I had almost forgot to intimate, That some urgent Avocations having obliged me
to send the following Treatise to the Press without reading it over my self, I
now find that my have will make me need an Apology to those Readers, that
expect to have the passages and Phraises of Scripture printed in a
discriminating Letter, and quoted in the Margent. For though in Books of
Positive, or of Controversial Divinity, I confess I have often observed, a
Margent stuffed with a multitude of Citations, to contain diverse so
unconcluding, if not impertinent, That the Number does better show the Authors
Memory than his judgment, yet in Books of Devotion, I am not much averse from
complying with the generality of Readers, who expect to be informed by the
Margent, where they may find those Stories, and Expressions, which their being
borrowed from an inspired Book, make more Operative and Emphatical. But I must
on this Occasion further intimate, That as to those Citations of Passages of
Scrpture wherein I may seem to have mis-recited the Words of the Text; though
as to some of them that were set down when I had not a Bible or Concordance at
hand, my Memory may have deceived me as to the words (which is no more than has
often happened to the Fathers themselves in the like case, and is a venial
fault, where Dogmatical or Pole^mical Divinity are not concerned) yet
oftentimes my variations from the English Version, were made on purpose. For
having had the Curiosity to get my self instructed, as well by Jews as
Christians, in the Eastern Tongues (especially the Hebrew) I thought I need not
strictly confine my self to the words of our Translators, when ever I could
render the meaning of a Text in such terms as to me seemed proper or
expressive; or without injuring the sense of the Hebrew or the Greek, could
better accommodate my presence purpose.

Now whereas some may think that in this Preface I employ Excuses that seem
(some of them) not to agree with one another; I desire it may be considered,
That the Meditations they relate to, being not only written upon differing
Subjects, but (which is more) designed for very differing uses (some of those
Discourses being intended to invite the more unskilful, and Encourage the more
Despondent sort of Readers; and Others, to entertain Proficients) it was but
Requisite that I should by very Differing, (and perchance seemingly Repugnant)
Considerations give an Account of such differing VVays of writing of them, as
such distant Subjects, and my Scope, required.

But what if it should fare with me Now as it has done on other Occasions, on
which my friends have accused me, of framing more Objections against my self,
than were afterward made against me by my Readers? I dare not say it is
impossible but that this may prove the case. But if it do so, I shall not yet
think my self to have Altogether missed my aim in what I have hitherto
represented. For I have Mentioned the more particulars, and Discoursed the more
largely of them, that if they prove not needful Apologies for my Reflections,
they may prove useful Considerations for those whom I would invite to exercise
their Pens in some such way of Writing: Diverse of whom will probably be
encouraged to venture upon making such composures, when they find Excuses for
diverse of those things that are the most likely to be thought to Blemish such
Essays, (or drhearten Beginners from attempting them) to be disawn up already
to their Hands. But as for my own particular, if I could make none of the
Apologies now insisted on, for the Imperfections imputable to this Treatise;
yet I should not be destituted of a very just Excuse for the Publication of it.
For diverse Devout Persons, that had more Partiallity for these Writings, and
less Tenderness of my Reputation, than I could have wished; having long
solicited the Publications of those they had in their Hands, were at length so
Resolved to effect it, that, in spite of the promises I at length made them to
comply with their desires, when some other Writings I was then about, shouldbe
Dispatched: I was fain to make use of a Legal Artifice to hinder for a while at
the Stationers Hall the Publication of diverse Papers that I had not so much as
read over.

But I confess I take notice of these passages, rather to excuse these
imperfections, which Have may have Occasioned in these immatue Productions,
them to Apologize for writing on Such a Subject. For so many Advantages that
may accrue to a Devout and skillful Person, by assiduously making of Occasional
Meditations, have been displaid in the Discourse that is premised to those that
follow; that I hope the former Part of this Book will sufficiently Apologize,
for my having written the later: Especially if to the Other particulars
proposed in the newly named Discourse, as things fit to Recommend that kind of
Thoughts, I here be allowed to add, That a man's Devotion may not alone be
cherished by Occasional Meditations, upon the Account of those which every
private Christian makes for Himself, but by the help also of those which he
finds made By others, or intends for them. For not only whilst pious
Reflections are making, they are proper to Instruct the Mind, Would we but keep
our wholesome Notions together Mankind would too rich. Bp. Hall in his Proeme.
and Warm the Affections; but the Objects upon which such Meditations have been
made already, either by our selves or others, do Revive the Memory of those
good Thoughts, that were suggested by them. So that when Diligence and
Proficiency in the Practice of our Meleteticks, shall have supplied us with
Religious and hansome Reflections, upon the most Obvious Works of Nature, and
the most Familiar Occurrences of humane Life; Devout persons will have the
Advantage to live almost Surrounded either with Instructours, or Remembrancers.
And when they want Skill, or are indisposed to extract Spiritual things out of
Earthly ones, they may, without racking their Invention, be furnished with good
Thoughts, upon many Objects by their Memory. For, (as I elsewhere more fully
declare,) those Truths and Notions that are dress^d up in apt Similitudes,
pertinently applied, are wont to make durable Impressions on that Faculty,
insomuch that though I am far from Pretending any of the Reflections to be met
with in the following Treatise, to be of that Nature; yet such as they are,
diverse Considerable persons of differing Ages and Sexes, have been pleased to
say (which is an Advantage may richly recompense more trouble than those
Writings cost me) That they scarce ever see such or such particular Things on
which I have written Reflections, without remembering both those Thoughts, and
their Author. So that They who have so easily attainable things, as Happier
Pens than Mine, in setting down Occasional Meditation, may have the
Satisfaction of making almost the whole World a great So they call a certain
Room, Arficially furnished with Pictures or other Images of things, whereby to
help the Memory,
Conclave Mnemonicum, and a well furnished Promptuary, for the service of Piety
and Virtue, and may almost under every Creature and Occurrence lay an Ambuscade
against Sin and Idleness.

Nor is this Indirectway of instructing men, Unlawful for a Christian, or
Unworthy of him. For in the spiritual Warfar, where our Adversary is the old
Serpent, Stratagems are as Lawful as Expedient, and he that gets the victory,
whether or no he Wins Reputation by the Manner, is sure to obtain (a greater
Recompense) Glory, by the Success. A Teacher is not obliged to imitate
Alexander, who upon a Disputable Punctilio of Gallantry, that was neither Wise,
nor Charitable, refused to steal a Victory: For the Prophet Nathan scrupled not
to Deceive David, that he might Reclaim him; and surprise him into a Confession
of the Criminousness of his fault. And the Apostles being termed by their
Masier, Fishers of Men, were warranted to make use of Baits as well as Hooks,
and Nets. And our Savior himself, by the Parable of the Wicked Husbandman that
usurped the Vine, drew the Pharisees to an Acknowledgment, which they started
from as soon as they perceived what they had done. And the same Divine Teacher,
did so frequently employ Fictions to teach Truths, that to condemn Figurative
and Indirect ways of conveying even Serious and Sacred matters, is to forget
How often Christ himself made use of Parables. And I am the less troubled to
see some Thoughts of mine, which, though unpolished, have an natural tendency
to Inveagle men (if I may so speak) into Piety and Virtue, thrust abroad into
the World; Not only because I see no reason to Despair, that even as to the
most Obnoxious of these Meditations, the Examples they afford may make them
Useful, when the Things they contain, do not make them Considerable and
Equitable, Readers will rather pity, than Admire to find, that an Author does
not Soar whilst he is Clogged or Depressed by the Meanness of his Subject: but
because some Experience seems to promise, that their Novelty and Variety, will
procure the Book in the general, a favorable Entertainment; And, indeed if I
had written in a more usual or a more solemn way, I should perchance have had
no Readers but Divines, or Humanists, or Devout Persons, or Despisers of the
World, or (in a word) the Masters, or Lovers of that one kind of Learning, to
which my Subject did belong: But treating as I do, of Whatever chanced to come
in my way, and consequently of many very Differing, and Unusual things,
Curiosity will probably invite both the Learned and the Devout; both Gentlemen,
and Ladies; and, in a word, Inquisitive Persons of several Kinds and
Conditions, to cast their Eyes upon these Reflections; which, by their Variety
and Shortness, will have this advantage, toward the making them entertained
with Patience, that scarce any of them will give him that peruses them, above
half a quarter of an hours Exercise of it.

And as I thought it not any Fault to have a Regard to what was like to Please
a good part of the Readers I wrote for, (though it would not else perhaps have
pleased me, any more than it will the nicer palats of the Critics;) So if
these Trifles chance to meet with half so kind a Reception from the Public, as
they have had from Particular Persons, I shall not, perhaps, want the
Consolation, which may be derived from the Judgment of a great Master of Wit,
who scrupled not to affirm, That he had rather his Entertainments should please
the Guests, than the Cooks. Though they that would complete the Good Fortune of
these Papers, may do it more effectually, by Addicting themselves, as
considerable Persons have been of late induced to do) to Write Occasional
Reflections (how excellent soever they may prove) than by being Kind to These;
since having written them, not to get Reputation, but Company, I cannot but be
Unwilling to travel alone: and had rather be out-gone, than not at all
followed, and Surpassed, than not Imitated.

An Advertisement touching the IV. Section.
A Reader that is not Unattentive, may easily collect from what he will meet
with in some of the ensuing Discourses, That they were written several years
ago, under an Usur^ing Government, that then prevailed. And this may keep it
from appearing strange, That in Papers, which contain some things not likely to
be Relished by those that were then in Power, the Author should take occasion
to speak of himself as of Another person, as well to avoid the being Suspected
by them, in case his Papers should come into any of their hands, as to comply
with the Design he then had; That if these Discourses should happen to be made
public, the Reader might be left to ghess, whether or no he were entertained
with a Fiction or a true Narrative. And though a Change of Circumstances, has
occasioned the Publication of these Papers, which should have come forth by
themselves (if at all) in such a way as will make most Readers look upon them
as containing a Story purely Romantic: Yet they may have in them much less of
Fiction, than Such will (it is like) Imagine. For being really a great Lover of
Angling, and frequently diverting my self at that sport, sometimes alone, and
sometimes in Company; the Accidents of that Recreation, were the true Themes,
on which the following Discourses were not the Only Meditations I had made. Nor
is the Intimation given at the end of this (4th) Section, of a further
Continuation of such Discourses, an Artifice or shift, to steal away from a
Conversation I was unable to Continue, without seeming to do so; there being in
readiness diverse Reflections relating to our Anglers, which had furnished
Eusebius and his Friends with Discourses for the Afternoon, if I had judged,
that to invite an Addition to so Prolix an Account as I had given of them
already, nothing could be requisite but a Supply of Thoughts.

A DISCOURSE Touching Occasional Meditations.
SECT. I.
CHAP. I.
THE way of Thinking, whose Productions begin to be known by the name of
Occasional Meditations, is, if rightly practiced, so advantageous, and so
delightful, that it is Pity, the greatest part, even of serious and devout
Persons, should be so unacquainted with it: And therefore, Dear Sister, your
Desire to bring this way of Meditation into Request, with some of our Friends,
is that which I cannot disapprove. But I am so far from having the Vanity to
think, that the Trifles of this kind, your Commands make me trouble you with,
would recommend Occasional Reflections to those, whose Eyes they were not meant
for, that I think my self obliged to premise something touching the Usefulness
of this way of Meditating, lest the careless and unpolished Instances you will
I fear meet with, among those I now present you, should disparage and bring a
Prejudice upon Composures of this kind in general; Wherefore, judging it
requisite, to premise something touching this way of thinking, I shall
forthwith apply my self to that Task: And I should judge it a very natural
Distribution to divide the following Discourse into two parts, the first of
which should contain some Invitations to the Cultivating this sort of
Meditations, and the latter should offer something by way of Method, toward
the better framing of them. But lest I should at this time be hindered from
treating of each of them distinctly, I will at present omit that Division, and
endeavor in recompense so to deliver the Motives I am to propose, that the
first part of the Discourse may not appear maimed, though it be unattended by
the second, and yet the Particulars that might compose the second, may (if it
prove convenient to mention them at this time) be commodiously enough inserted
in opportune places of the first.

Of Inducements to this Exercise, I might perhaps name many, but for order's
sake, I shall comprize them in the ensuing five; the first whereof will take up
the present Section, and the remaining four, as many others.

CHAP. II.
ANd first, the way of Meditating, I would recommend, conduces to keep the Soul
from Idleness, and Employments worse than Idleness; for while a Man's thoughts
are busi'd about the present subjects of his Reflections, our Ghostly Adversary
is discouraged to attempt that Soul, which he sees already taken up, with
something that is at least innocent, if not good. If I had not elsewhere
displayed the Evil and Danger of Idleness, and represented it as a thing,
which, though we should admit not to be in it self a sin, yet may easily prove
a greater mischief than a very great one, by at once tempting the Tempter to
tempt us, and exposing the empty Soul, like an uninhabited place, to the next
Passion or Temptation that takes the opportunity to seize upon it: If (I say) I
had not elsewhere discoursed at large against Idleness, I might here represent
it as so formidable an Enemy, that it would appear alone a sufficient Motive to
welcome our way of Meditation; That it banishes Idleness. He that is versed in
making Reflections upon what occurs to him; He that (consequently) has the
works of Nature, and the actions of Men, and almost every Casualty that falls
under his Notice, to set his Thoughts on work, shall scarce want Themes to
employ them on: And he that can (as it were) make the World vocal, by
furnishing every Creature, and almost every occurrence, with a Tongue to
entertain him with, and can make the little Accidents of his Life, and the very
Flowers of his Garden, read him Lectures of Ethics or Divinity; such a one, I
say, shall scarce need to fly to the Tavern, or a worse place, to get a Drawer,
or a Gamester (perhaps no better qualified) to help him to get rid of his time,
such a one will rather pity, than pursue those, who think it their Privilege
to spend their whole Life in Diversions from the main Business of it; and out
of an unskilful, and ill governed self-love, are come to that pass, that they
cannot endure to be with themselves. Such a one will not need to frequent the
company of those Gamesters, that are sure to lose that, which all their
winnings will never be able to buy, or to redeem, and expose themselves coldly
to as many Casualties, as even War could threaten; and voluntarily tempt those
Passions, it is the Task of Wisdom to decline, and a Virtue to suppress;
losing nothing but their time, without losing their Patience too, and commonly
a great part of that Reverence and Submission they owe to him, of whom the
Scripture tells us, Prove. 16. 33.
that even of Lots themselves, the whole disposal is his. Nor will he need, for
want of knowing what to do when he is alone, to make it his almost daily
Employment, to make impertinent Visits, to unsanctify'd Companies, where
sometimes he may lose his good Name, often his Innocence, oftener his Zeal, and
always his Time.

And, as the Exercise, I would persuade, will help to keep us from Idleness, so
will it, to preserve us from harboring evil Thoughts, which there is no such
way to keep out of the Soul, as to keep her taken up with good ones; as
Husbandmen, to rid a piece of rank Land of Weeds, do often find it as effectual
a Course to sow it with good Seed, as to cut them down, or burn them up. And
indeed, the Thoughts of many a Person, are oftentimes so active, and restless,
that something or other they must, and will perpetually be doing; and like
unruly Soldiers, if you have not a care to employ them well, they will employ
themselves ill.

Wherefore, when a Man has once rendered this way of Thinking, familiar,
sometimes the subject of his Meditation will lead him to Thoughts, and excite
Affections, full of Serenity, and Joy, like those fair Mornings, where the
cloudless Beams, and cherishing warmth of the Sun, inviting the Lark to aspire
toward Heaven, make her at once mount, and sing; and when the Mind is raised
to such a welcome and elevated state, to listen to an ordinary Temptation, a
Man must forgo his Pleasure, as well as violate his Duty, and in the difference
betwixt the Employment that busies him, and that whereto he is solicited to
stoop, he will easily discern, that his Innocence will not be the only thing
that he would lose by so disadvantageous a Change; And sometimes too, whether
or no the Employment that busies his Thoughts, happen to be so delightful, it
will however appear to be so considerable, that it will seasonably furnish him
with that excellent Answer of Nehemiah, to those that would have diverted him
from building of the Temple, to come to a Treaty with them, Nehemiah 6. 3.
I am doing a great Work, (and such indeed is the serving God, and the
improving the Mind, whether we consider its Importance, or its Difficulty) so
that I cannot come down; why should the work cease, whilst I leave it, and come
down to you? Which last Expression suits very well with the present case,
since, when a pious Soul is once got upon the wing of Contemplation, she must
descend and stoop to exchange her converse with Heavenly objects, for one with
Earthly vanities, and much more must she debase and degrade her self, if the
things she is tempted to, be Lusts, which she will thence clearly discern, to
be as Low as the Hell they belong to, and deserve.

And as these Objects will afford Employment enough to our Reflector, so will
the wholesome Instructions they will suggest, incline him to shun those ways of
wasting his time, which they enable him easily to avoid: For I have observed
this Difference, betwixt Ghostly dangers, and ordinary ones, that, whereas in
Military hazards, those that are the most forward to thrust themselves into
dangers, are commonly the best able to surmount them; they on the contrary, are
wont to be the most fearful of Temptations, that are the most resolved, and
best qualified to resist them.

CHAP. III.
NOr will the Meleteticks (or way, and kind of Meditation) I would persuade,
keep Men alone from such gross and notorious Idleness, that they may be asked
the Question, proposed by the Householder in the Gospel, Matthew. 20. 6.
Why sit ye here all the Day idle? But this way of Thinking, may in part keep
Men from the loss of such smaller parcels of Time, as though a mere Morallist
would not perhaps censure the neglect of them in others, yet a Devout person
would condemn it in himself: For betwixt the more stated Employments, and
important Occurrences of humane Life, there usually happen to be interposed
certain Intervals of Time, which, though they are wont to be neglected, as
being singly, or within the Compass of one day inconsiderable, yet in a Man's
whole Life, they may amount to no contemptible Portion of it. Now these
uncertain Parentheses, (if I may so call them) or Interludes, that happen to
come between the more solemn Passages (whether Businesses, or Recreations) of
humane Life, are wont to be lost by most Men, for want of a Value for them, and
even by good Men, for want of Skill to preserve them: For though they do not
properly despise them, yet they neglect, or lose them, for want of knowing how
to rescue them, or what to do with them. But as though grains of Sand and Ashes
be a part, but of a despicable smallness, and very easy, and liable to be
scattered, and blown away; yet the skilful Artificer, by a vehement Fire,
brings Numbers of these to afford him that noble substance, Glass, by whose
help we may both see our selves, and our Blemishes, lively represented, (as in
Looking-glasses) and discern Celestial objects, (as with Telescopes) and with
the Sunbeams, kindle disposed Materials, (as with Burning-glasses) So when
these little Fragments, or Parcels of Time, which, if not carefully looked to,
would be dissipated, and lost, come to be managed by a skilful Contemplator,
and to be improved by the Celestial fire of Devotion, they may be so ordered,
as to afford us both Looking-glasses, to dress our Souls by, and Perspectives
to discover Heavenly wonders, and Incentives to inflame our hearts with Charity
and Zeal; And since Goldsmiths and Refiners are wont all the year long
carefully to save the very sweepings of their Shops, because they may contain
in them some Filings, or Dust of those richer Metals, Gold and Silver; I see
not why a Christian may not be as careful, not to lose the Fragments and lesser
Intervals of a thing incomparably more precious than any Metal, Time;
especially, when the Improvement of them, by our Meleteticks, may not only
redeem so many Portions of our Life, but turn them to pious Uses, and
particularly to the great Advantage of Devotion.

And indeed, the Affairs and Customs of the World, the Employments of our
particular Callings, the allowable Recreations, that Health, or Weariness
requires, and the Multitude of unfore-seen, and scarce evitable Avocations,
that are wont to share our Time among them, leave us so little of it, to employ
in the set and solemn Exercises of Devotion, and make those so unfrequent, that
our Hearts are in great Danger, of being, by the Business, and Pleasures, and
Hurry of the World, if not perverted from Aspiring to, at least too long
diverted from Enjoying, Communion with God, and kept too much Strangers to Him,
if in the long Intervals of our more solemn Exercises of Devotion, we be not
careful to lay hold on the short, and transient Opportunities of Cherishing,
and reviving, that Grace in us, and do not by the Rises given us by the Things
that occur, take occasion to make frequent, though but short Flights
Heaven-wards, in extemporary Reflections, serious Soliloquies, piercing
Ejaculations, and other mental, either Exercises, or Expressions of Devotion,
by which means, we may make those very objects, and occasions, that would
Discourage, or at least Distract, our Minds, elevate and animate them: As
Jonathan made those very things, whereby his Enemies, the Philistims, sought to
entrap, or destroy him, Encouragements to fight with them, and Omens of his
Victory over them. And as scarce any Time is so short, but that things so
Agile, and asspiring as the Flames of a Devout Soul, may take a flight to
Heaven, (as Nehemiah could find time to dart up a successful Prayer to the
Throne of Grace, whilst he stood waiting behind the King of Persia's Chair) so
by these extemporary Reflections, as well as by other mental Acts of Piety
duly made, a Devout Soul may not only rescue these precious Fragments of
Time, but procure Eternity with them.

SECT. II.
CHAP. I.
A Second Inducement to the Practice of making Occasional Meditations, is, that
for an Exercise of Devotion, it is very delightful, and that upon sundry
accounts.

For first, Variety is a thing so pleasing to humane Nature, that there are
many things, which it, either alone, or chiefly, recommends to us, and it is
rarely seen, that we love the same things very much, and very long; and of
things that else would appear equally good, we usually think that the better,
which happens to be another. Now, a Person addicted to make Occasional
Meditations, may be supplied with Subjects, whose Variety is scarce imaginable:
For the works of Nature, and of Art, are not the only Objects that often
present themselves to our Reflector's Consideration; The Revolutions of
Governments, the Fates of Kingdoms, the Rise and Ruin of Favorites; and on
the other side, the most slight and trivial Occurrences: And in short, all that
he sees happen from the highest Transactions, to the slightest Circumstances,
incident to humane affairs, may afford matter of Contemplation to a Person
disposed to it. The mind of Man is so comprehensive, and so active a faculty,
that it can force its passage into those imaginary spaces, that are beyond the
outermost part of the outermost Heaven, and can in a moment return back, to
consider the smallest Circumstances of the meanest of humane affairs; so that
the thinking faculty, being equally fit, and disposed to reflect upon the works
of God, and the actions of Men, how unlikely is it, that it should want Variety
of Subjects to be employed on, whilst the whole World makes but a part of its
Object: And the several Productions of Nature, and Art, of the Providence of
God, and the Will of Man, may be so many ways considered, and (...) ^^riously
compounded, that they may (...) be supposed capable of affording O^^^sions to
Notions, and Reflections, far more numberless than themselves; so that the most
vigorous, and the most active Soul, is in less danger of wanting fresh Game,
than Thoughts to pursue such endless Variety of it.

Besides, whereas Men are wont, for the most part, when they would Study hard,
to repair to their Libraries, or to Stationers Shops; the Occasional Reflector
has his Library always with him, and his Books lying always open before him,
and the World it self, and the Actions of the Men that live in it, and an
almost infinite Variety of other Occurrences being capable of proving Objects
of his Contemplation; he can turn his Eyes no whither, where he may not
perceive somewhat or other to suggest him a Reflection.

But, that which may much indear such Meditations, is, their suprizing even
him, whose Thoughts they are: For one of the chief accounts, upon which Wit it
self is delightful, is, in very many cases, the unexpectedness of the things
that please us; that unexpectedness being the highest Degree of Novelty, which,
as I freshly noted, does exceedingly gratify most Men's minds. We need not in
this case, as in most others, make an uneasy Preparation to entertain our
Instructors; for our Instructions are suddenly, and as it were cut of an
Ambuscade, shot into our Mind, from things whence we never expected them, so
that we receive the advantage of learning good Lessons, without the trouble of
going to School for them, which, to many, appears the greatest trouble that is
to be undergone, for the Acquist of Knowledge. But though these Irradiations of
Light, be oftentimes sudden, as that which we receive from flashes of
Lightning, yet it is not always upon the single account of this suddenness, that
the Instructions, presented us by Occasional Meditations, have an
unexpectedness; for oftentimes, the Subject that is considered, appears not to
be any thing at all of Kin to the Notion it suggests. And there are many of
these Reflections, whose Titles, though they name the occasion of them, do so
little assist, even an ingenious Reader, to ghess what they contain, that if
you tell him what is treated of, he will scarce imagine, how such Thoughts can
be made to have a Relation to such remote Subjects; And the Informations we
receive from many Creatures, and Occurrences, are oftentimes extremely distant
from what, one would conjecture to be the most obvious, and natural Thoughts
those Themes are fitted to present us, though, when the Circumstances are
thoroughly examined, and considered, the Informations appear proper enough:
Thus, when a Navigator suddenly spies an unknown Vessel afar off, before he has
hailed her, he can scarcely, if at all, conclude what he shall learn by her,
and he may from a Ship, that he finds perhaps upon some remoter coast of
Africa, or the Indies, meet with Informations concerning his own Country, and
affairs; And thus sometimes a little Flower may point us to the Sun, and by
casting our eyes down to our feet, we may in the water see those Stars that
shine in the Firmament or highest visible Heaven.

CHAP. II.
AND, lastly, the pleasantness of these Meditations, to him that has attained
skill in making them, will, if he be not much mortified, be much increased by
their being Proofs, as well as Effects, of Skill. To be able to take up
Instructions in Books that are replenished with them, and where they are
purposely and distinctly exhibited in the form of Instructions, requires rather
that a man be docile than ingenious, but to be able to collect Moral and
Spiritual Documents out of a Book of Hieroglyphics, or from a Lanscape or a
Map, is more than every attentive considerer can do, and is that which argues
something of Dexterousness and Sagacity that is not very ordinary. And so, from
Ethical or Theological Composures, to take out Lessons that may improve the
Mind, is a thing much inferior to the being able to do the like out of the
Book of Nature, where most Matters that are not Physical, if they seem not to
be purposely veiled, are at least but darkly hinted. And methinks there is
such a difference betwixt him that but takes up Instructions in Books of
Morality and Devotion, and him that by Occasional Reflections derives them from
the Book of Nature, and the Accidents he chances to take notice of, as there is
betwixt an Ant that contributes nothing either to the Production or Improvement
of the Corn she lays up and feeds on, but only carries away that which she
finds ready formed into its little Granary or Repository, and the Industrious
Be, who, without stealing from Flowers any thing that can prejudice them, does
not only gather, but improve and transform, her food, and live on that which
otherwise would be useless, and besides, not only has the pleasure to gather
its food from Flowers, and from variety of them, but lives upon Honey, an
Aliment that is as sweet and delicious as nutritive. 'Twas doubtless a very
great pleasure to Aesop, that by his ingenious Fictions he could, in a manner,
lend Reason and Speech to Lions, Foxes, Crows, and other Animals, to whom
Nature had denied both; and I know not why it should be less delightful, by
Occasional Reflections, to turn not only Birds and Beasts, but all kinds of
Creatures in the world, as well mute and inanimate, as irrational, not only
into Teachers of Ethics, but oftentimes into Doctors of Divinity, and by
compelling senseless Creatures to reveal Truths to us, that they were never
acquainted with themselves, perform really something like that, which was but
pretended by the ancient Augures and other Diviners the Heathen world admired,
who took upon them, by the casual flights of Birds, and the Inspection of the
Intrals of Beasts, to learn the Will of Heaven. It Is a piece of skill, for
which Mathematicians have been deservedly admired, and which is little less
pleasing to those that have it, than wonderful to those that have it not, that
as if Artists were able to prescribe to the Sun and Moon, and the rest of the
luminous Globes of Heaven, both their pace and their stages, they can make that
inexhausted Fountain of Light, at so immense a Distance, by the Shadow of a
little Gnomon, fitly placed, give us an exact account of all the Journeys he
performs in the Zodiac; but perhaps, it is neither a less noble nor a less
delightful piece of skill, to be able, by an innocent kind of Necromancy, to
consult the dead, and conjure up worm-eaten Carkases out of their Mossy Graves,
without fearing to hear from them such dismal Discourses as Saul had from dead
Samuel, and to make, not the Stars only, but all the Creatures of Nature, and
the various occurrences that can fall under our notice, conspire to enrich us
with Instructions they never meant us; since the Motion of the celestial lights
are known, certain, and invariable; but these particulars are neither to be
defined by number, nor limited by Rules. Not to say, that this Secret does as
much excel that other, which recommends Astronomy, as Wisdom does Science, and
is as much the more useful of the two, as to know how to pass away our time is
more profitable, than to know how our time passes away.

But there is a fourth particular, which, though somewhat less directly than
the three I have already discoursed of, may be reduced to the Pleasantness of
Occasional Meditations; and it is, That whereas our innate Self-love is wont to
make any thing that minds us of our faults exceedingly uneasy and unwelcome:
in the Discoveries that, by this way of thinking, are made us of what is amiss,
the uneasiness is very much allai'd, and the Pill very well gilt. For there are
two main things that conduce to the sweetning of Reproofs* and to keep men from
being offended at them; The one is, when they come from a person whom we love,
and whom we believe to love us, and to have no other design in displeasing us
than that of serving us: And the other is, That the Discovery that is made us
of our faults be sweetened by Acknowledgments of our having Qualities of a
commendable Nature, whence wise Reprovers usually mingle, and, as it were, brew
their Reprehensions with Praises. Now, both these pleasing Vehicles, if I may
so call them, and Correctives of Reproofs, concur in those we meet with in
making Occasional Reflections. For, in these cases, being our own Instructors,
and our own Consciences being the Makers of the Application, we cannot suspect
the Reprehensions to come from Persons, that either mistake us, or are partial
against us; and that Truth which a man's Conscience applies to him, being found
out by the sagacity of his own Understanding, extracting from Objects that
which every Considerer would not have picked out thence; it may very often
happen, that the same Reflection will discover to a man his Excellencies, as
well as make him take notice of his faults; and that which makes him condemn
the Disorders of his Affections, may argue, and thereby commend, the Goodness
of his Parts.

CHAP. III.
I Know, it may be objected against the pleasantness of the Mental Exercise I
have been speaking of, That to make Occasional Meditations is a work too
difficult to be delightful.

In Answer to this, I might represent, That there are employments wherein their
being attended with somewhat of difficulty, is so far from deterring us, that
it recommends them: as we see that in Hunting and Hawking, the toil that must
be undergone is so much an indearment of the Recreation, of which it makes a
great part, that when it happens that we do not meet with difficulties enough,
we create new ones, as when Hunts-men give the Hare Law, (as they speak) for
fear of killing her before they have almost killed their Horses, and perhaps
themselves, in following her: Yet I shall rather choose to make a more direct
Answer, by observing, That the difficulties imagined in the practice I am
treating of, seem to arise, not so much from the nature of the thing it self,
as from some prejudices and misapprehensions that are entertained about it,
especially the following two.

The first is a needless Scruple, which makes some fancy themselves obliged to
confine their thoughts to the subject that set them on work. And this dwelling
long upon one Theme is to many men a thing uneasy and tedious enough. But for
my part, I see no necessity of such a strictness; and I have often observed the
thoughts successfully to follow objects of a quite differing nature from those
that were first started, from which, perhaps, though more obstinately persued,
very little instruction or advantage would have been obtained, and it not
unfrequently happens, that men trouble themselves in vain to make any
profitable use of the considerations of those first objects, where the thoughts
being licensed to expatiate themselves, they do often at length pitch upon
somewhat or other that is instructive, and at which, perhaps, they aimed at the
very first, though they attained it but by degrees, and persu'd it by winding
and untrac'd ways. As when we let a Greyhound loose in a Warren, we confine
him not to the first Rabbet he makes after, since we see it frequently happens,
that one sets him a running, and another proves his Quarry. Nor do I conceive
such a practice disagreeable to the nature of Occasional Meditations, nor to be
excluded by their name, for that appellation may well enough be applied to
those emergent thoughts which fortuitous Occasions did awaken or suggest to us,
nor is it necessary that our thoughts be always calculated for the subject that
excited them, provided we thence took occasion to think: So that in some cases,
the Occasion is not so much the Theme of the Meditation, as the Rise. For my
part, I am so little scrupulous in this matter, that I would not confine
Occasional Meditations to Divinity it self, though that be a very comprehensive
Subject, but am ready to allow men's thoughts to expatiate much further, and to
make of the Objects they contemplate not only a Theological and a Moral, but
also a Political, an Oeconomical, or even a Physical use. And I doubt whether
the groundless Imagination, that Occasional Reflections ought to be confined to
matters of Devotion, or, at furthest, of Morality, have not much helped to keep
our Meleteticks so little cultivated as hitherto they have been. And indeed
there is so perfect an harmony, and so near a kindred, betwixt Truths, that, in
many cases, the one does either find out, or fairly hint, or else illustrate or
confirm, the other. And it is no wonder that diverse of them should belong to the
same Object, and be deduced from it. And if men were sollicitous to apply the
things they take notice of in Occasional Objects, to the discovery or
illustration of Oeconomical, Political, or Physical matters, it would probably
bring such kind of thoughts more into request with several sorts of men, and
possibly conduce to the improvement of those parts of Knowledge themselves.

CHAP. IV.
THE other thing I proposed to mention, as that which discourages many from the
addicting themselves to make Occasional Meditations, is a fancy, That to
practice this kind of thinking, one is obliged to the trouble of writing down
every Occasional Reflection that employs his thoughts; and they conclude it far
easier to forbear making any, than to write down all: But, to do this, were to
undertake a task no less unnecessary than tedious. Those Meditations indeed
that have some Excellency in them, that fits them to instruct others, should
for that purpose be kept from perishing, and those that were not conceived
without some extraordinary Affection in a man's self, should be carefully
persued, as Bellows to blow or rekindle Devotion, by reminding us of the devout
thoughts the like Objects had excited in us. But for the rest of our Occasional
Reflections, though they fill our heads, they need not employ our hands, as
having performed all the service that need be expected from them within the
mind already.

Nor would I have any man be discouraged from this way of thinking, that cannot
express so much wit or eloquence in Occasional Meditations, as perhaps he may
aspire to. For, besides that much subtilty of wit is not to be expected, or at
least exacted, in this kind of composures, where we commonly make use of things
rather out of haste than choice, as frequently being but the first thoughts we
meet with, not the best we have; besides this, I say, that which ought most to
indear this sort of Reflections to a Christian, is rather that they cherish
piety, than that they express wit, and help to make the man good, whether or no
they make his style be thought so. 'Twere injurious to nature to fancy, that
the Fig Tree derives no benefit from the Rain and Sun, because they do not make
it, like other Trees, flourish with Blossoms, more gaudy than necessary, though
without praevious Buds it brings forth welcome Fruits. Not to add, that the
difficulty of framing Occasional Meditations, need not be estimated by that
which we find when we first addict our selves to the making of them; for
practice will by degrees so much lessen that difficulty, that after a while we
shall find, that Occasional thoughts will need but small invitation to frequent
those minds where they meet with a kind entertainment. And though men should be
reduced to purchase this habitude at the rate of a little difficulty, I doubt
not but they will find the benefit of it, when gotten, richly to recompense the
trouble of acquiring it. Nor will the practice, that must contribute to the
attainment of a reasonable degree of skill in making them, be half so
troublesome when those Exercises but make up the habitude, as they will prove
facil and delightful when they flow from it.

SECT. III.
CHAP. I.
THe third grand Advantage that may be derived from the custom of making
Occasional Meditations, is, That it conduces to the exercise and improvement of
diverse of the faculties of the mind. And this it may do upon several accounts.

1. For, in the first place, it accustomes a man to an attentive observation of
the Objects wherewith he is conversant. Whereas there is scarce any thing that
may not prove the subject of an Occasional Meditation, so the natural
propensity we have to manage well the Themes we undertake to handle,
unperceivably ingages us to pry into the several attributes and relations of
the things we consider, to obtain the greater plenty of particulars, for the
making up of the more full and complete Parallel betwixt the things whose
resemblances we would set forth. By which means a man often comes to discover a
multitnde of particulars even in obvious things, which, without such an
engagement to attention, he would never have minded, and which common beholders
take no Notice of. And though it may seem, that the habit, produced by the
practice of Occasional meditating, should accustom a man to heed only such
Objects as are like to suggest to him devout thoughts; yet, not to mention now
that I shall advertise you anon, that there is no necessity of confineing
occasional meditations, to matters Devout, or Theological, I shall only
represent, that, since we know not, before we have considered the particular
Objects that occurr to us, which of them will, and which of them will not,
afford us the subject of an Occasional Reflection, the mind will, after a
while, be engaged to a general and habitual attention, relating to the Objects
that present themselves to it. Besides, that though we should at first apply
our heedfulness to circumstances of only some few sorts of Objects, yet the
habit, being once acquired, would easily reach to others than those that first
occasioned it; as men, that by Learning to sing Anthems, are come to have
critical ears, will be able to judge, much better than they could before, of
the resemblances and differences of Tones in other Songs, and will take Notice
of diverse particularities in Voices, which would not be heeded by an
unpractised Ear: And as we have made it appear, that the way of thinking we
would recommend, does very much dispose men to an attentive frame of mind; so,
that such a frame or disposition is a great advantage in the whole course of a
man's life, will not appear improbable to him who duly considers, that since
attention, like a magnifying glass, shows us, even in common Objects, diverse
particularities, undiscerned by those who want that advantage, it must needs
make the things he is conversant with, afford the considerer much more of
instruction than they obtrude upon the ordinary regardless beholder, and
consequently, this exercise of the mind must prove a compendious way to
Experience, and make it attainable without grey-hairs; for that, we know,
consists not in the multitude of years, but of observations, from Numbers and
variety of which it results: nor is there any reason, why prudence should be
peculiarly ascribed to the Aged, except a supposition that such persons, by
having lived long in the World, have had the opportunity of many and various
occurrences to ripen their judgment; so that if one man can by his attention
make, as well he may in a small compass of time, as great a number of
Observations as less heedful Persons are wont to do in a longer, I see not why
such a man's Experience may not be equal to his, that has lived longer; for it
matters not much whether a man make a competent Number of Observations, in much
time or in little, provided he have made them well.

CHAP. II.
II. THe Practice I would recommend, accustoms a man to make Reflections upon
the things he takes notice of, and so, by exercising, improves his reasoning
Faculty. For, as most men have much more strength and Agility in the right hand
than in the left, and, generally speaking, those Limbs of the body that are
most exercised, are stronger than the rest of the same kind, so the faculties
of the mind are improved by Exercise, and those that we frequently employ, grow
thereby the more vigorous and nimble. And, for my part, I have been often
inclined to think, that the chief advantage that the reasoning faculty derives
from the Institution received in Logick-Scholes, comes not so much from the
Precepts themselves, which are pretended to make up an Art of reasoning, as
from the frequent exercises that, by occasion of such Precepts, the Students
are put upon; and perhaps, if men were obliged to read the controversies of
subtle Wits, and to engage in frequent Disputations, both premeditated and
extemporary, it would add little less of readiness and acuteness to their wits,
though they disputed of other matters than such as properly belong to Logic,
and were not before imbued with the Precepts of that Art; as we see, that the
use of singing with those that can sing well, does much improve ones Voice,
both as to strength and clearness, whatever the Tunes or Songs be that are
sung, and how little soever those with whom one sings make it their Business to
teach him the art of Music.

But this is only Conjecture; and whether it be true or no, yet this I am
confident is so, That the bringing of a man to be a thinking and a reflecting
Person, is to procure him so great an Advantage, as though it were the only one
may justly endear to him the custom of making Occasional Meditations; and he
that could bring this practice into the Request it deserves, would do a greater
piece of service, not only to the particular Persons he persuades, but to
mankind in general, than the greater part of good men themselves seem to be
aware of. For though God having been pleased to make Reason the chief part of
our Nature, among the various Objects that daily occur to us, it can scarce be
but that some or other will in a manner obtrude some Notions even upon the
unattentive; yet certainly, all that has been found worthy of Mankind in
Mathematics, Philosophy, and other kinds of Learning, has been attained by
thinking Men, or by a frequent and regular Practice of employing the thoughts:
And lest it should be objected, that these various, and Elaborate effects of
assiduous meditation were the productions only of Philosophers or other men of
speculative heads; Let us but consider, that though Gallants and Courtiers do
seldom love to tire themselves with thinking, and are as seldom fond of writing
Books, not to add, fit to write them, and though love be not the fruitfulest
Theme that may be pitched on, yet that Passion, and some Particulars relating
to it, frequently busying their thoughts, and being several ways considered by
them, has been displayed and contrived even by such writers as I have been just
now mentioning, into those numerous Play's that daily employ the Stage, and
those Voluminous Romances that are too often the only Books which make up the
Libraries of Gallants, and fill the Closets of Lady's. He that most truly
called himself, the Truth, tells us, that the Devil is not only a Liar, Jo. 8.
44.
but the Father of Lies, that is, the great Patron and Promoter of falsehood,
and, as such, he studiously opposes all useful Truths; not only those for which
we must be beholden to Revelation, but those also which may be attained by
Ratiocination, and the well regulated exercise of our natural Faculty's; And he
were much less an Adversary and an Old Serpent than he is, if his Enmity to God
and Man, did not justly make him think that scarce any thing is more his
interest than sollicitously to divert men from thinking, and discourage them in
it, there being few things whereby he could more effectually oppose at once,
both the Glory of God and the good of Men. And sure, if so subtle an Adversary
did not think it very much his Interest to be sollicitous about this matter, it
could not be that men should choose for a Privilege, the laying aside that
faculty of Meditating which is indeed so much their Privilege, that, if
Experience did not convince the contrary, I could never suspect that the
Non-employing of their thoughts could be their Choice rather than their
Punishment, and that rational Creatures, especially professing Christianity,
should either keep idle, or confine to Employments worse than Idleness; so
noble and improvable a Faculty, that enables an Ingenious Man to pry into the
innermost Recesses of mysterious Nature, and discover there so much of the
Wisdom; Power, and Goodness, of the Author, as are most fit to give the
Discoverer a high and devout Veneration for those Excellencies. A Faculty,
whereby an Inquisitive Soul may expatiate it self through the whole Immensity
of the Universe, and be her own Teacher in a thousand cases, where the Book is
no less delightful than the Lessons are Instructive. A Faculty (to conclude) by
whose help the restless mind having dived to the lowermost parts of the Earth,
can thence in a trice take such a Flight, that having traversed all the
corporeal Heavens, and scorned to suffer her self to be confined with the very
Limits of the World, she roves about in the ultra-mundane spaces, and considers
how far they reach.

CHAP. III.
III. BEsides the two already mentioned Advantages, which the Intellectual part
of the Mind may derive from the practice of Occasional Reflections, I should
not scruple to add a third, if there were not too just Cause of apprehending,
that my Writings may discredit any thing that comes proposed of that Nature, by
no better a Pen, and that the manner of what I am about to deliver, may
disparage the Matter. But since, from the Experience even of purblind and
dim-sighted Persons, good Perspectives may be, not improperly, nor
unsuccessfully, recommended, though their Native and peculiar Debility of Sight
keep them from being able to see as clear, and as far, through such Glasses, as
other Men can do, if themselves can, by the use of them, do far more than they
could without them. I will adventure to speak of an improvement I cannot boast
of, lest by suppressing the mention of an Advantage, because I cannot make it,
I should seem either Vain, or Envious, as well as Dull. I shall then take
notice, that the Meleteticks we are considering, may, where it finds a capable
and disposed Subject, much improve that nimble and acceptable Faculty of the
Mind, whereby some Men have a readiness, and subtilty, in conceiving things,
and a quickness, and neatness, in expressing them, all which the custom of
speaking comprehends under the name of Wit, which pleasing, and (if well
managed) useful, Quality, the exercise I am discoursing of, may three or four
several ways promote.

For (first) the accustoming ones self to make Extemporal Reflections, and that
upon all kind of Occasions, does by degrees bring the Mind to a readiness of
Conception, which keeps a Man from being easily surprised by the Subject he has
occasion to consider, and enables him oftentimes to surprise his Hearers; and
that such a kind of surprise is one of the most endearing Circumstances of the
productions of Wit, he must not have much considered the Nature of them, that
ignores.

Next, the same Exercise inures a Man to draw his Conceptions from the very
Nature of the thing he speaks of, which, among those that can judge of Wit, is
held a far greater sign of it, than the saying things more specious, and
elaborate, that appear to be Antienter than the Occasion, as is usual in
Epigrams, and other solemn premeditated pieces of Wit, where oftentimes the
Thoughts were not made for the Themes, but before them: Whereas, the suddenness
of a good Occasional Reflection, and its congruity to that which gave it Rise,
persuades the Hearers, that the Speaker's Wit is of its own growth, and is
rather suggested by the Occasion, than barely applied to it.

A third way, whereby our Meleteticks may conduce to Wit, is, by bringing those
that use to write their Thoughts, to what may be called a certain Suppleness of
Style; for when a Man treats of familiar, or of solemn Subjects, he is so much
assisted by the received phrases and manners of speaking, that are wont to be
imploi'd about them, that being seldom at a loss for convenient expressions,
his Wit is seldom distressed how to furnish him with words fit for his turn.
But the Subjects that invite Occasional Reflections, are so various, and
uncommon, and oftentimes so odd, that, to accommodate ones Discourse to them,
the vulgar and received forms of Speech will afford him but little assistance,
and to come off any thing well, he must exercise his Invention, and put it upon
coining various and new Expressions, to suit that variety of unfamiliar
Subjects, and of Occasions, that the Objects of his Meditation will engage him
to write of: And by this difficult exercise of his Inventive faculty, he may by
degrees so improve it, and, after a while, attain to so pliant a Style, that
scarce any Thought will puzzle him to fit words to it, and he will be able to
cut out Expressions, and make them sit close to such Subjects, as a Person
unaccustomed to such kind of Composures, would find it very difficult to write
of, with any thing of propriety.

CHAP. IV.
IT remains, that I mention one way more, and that a considerable one, whereby
the practice of Occasional Reflections may contribute to the Improvement of
Wit; and that is, by supplying Men with store and variety of good Comparisons.

How great, and how acceptable, a part of Wit that is, which has the advantage
to be expressed by apt Similitudes, every Man's own experience, if he please to
consult it, may, in some measure, inform him. And certainly, there is no one
part of Wit that is so generally applicable to all kind of Persons; for good
Comparisons serve equally to illustrate, and to persuade; the greatest Wits
disdain them not, and even ordinary Wits are capable to understand them, and to
be affected by them; and if a Sermon, or a long Discourse, be enriched with one
apt Comparison, what part soever else be forgotten, that will be sure to be
remembered. And, a but plausible Argument, dressed up in fine Similitudes, shall
be more praevalent among the generality of Men, than a Demonstration proposed
in a naked Syllogism; and therefore, the ancient Sages did so much choose to
employ a Figurative way of delivering their Thoughts, that when they could not
furnish themselves with Resemblances fit for their turns, they would devise
Parables, and Apologues, to recommend what they said to the attentention and
memory of those they would work upon. And those famous Orators, who, though
they Lived in Commonwealths, did, by their Eloquence, exercise a more than
Monarchical Government there, and who, by their enchanting Tongues, ruled those
Warlick people, whose Swords had made them Masters of the World; those imperial
Wits, I say, whose Oratory performed such Wonders, performed them chiefly by
the help of their happy Comparisons, which alone contributed more to their
success, than almost all the other persuasive Figures of their Triumphant
Rhetoric: Lucky Comparisons being indeed those parts of Wit, that as well make
the strongest Impressions upon the Mind, as they leave the deepest on the
Memory. Now, as the being furnished with apt Comparisons, does so very much
conduce to the making a Man's Discourses and Writings appear Witty, so there is
scarce any thing more fit and likely to supply a Man with store and variety of
Comparisons, than the Custom of making Occasional Meditations: For he that uses
himself to take notice of the properties and circumstances of most things that
Occur to him, and to reflect on many of them, and thereby observes the
relations of things to one another, and consequently discerns, how the
properties or circumstances of one may be accommodated, by way of Resemblance
or Dissimilitude, to somewhat that relates to the other, will often find,
besides those things which afford him his Occasional Reflection, diverse others,
which, though less fit for the Meditation, that invited his taking notice of
them, may be very fitly applicable to other subjects, and purposes, and will
easily furnish him with Resemblances, wherewith he may, if he pleases, much
increase the Books of Similitudes, already extant: And the Comparisons that may
be this way lighted on, may sometimes prove strange, and unobvious enough, to
be surprising even to Himself, as well as to his Auditors, or his Readers.

CHAP. V.
BUt, besides those Similitudes, we may be furnished with, by the things we
observe, without turning them into Occasional Meditations, we may find in those
very Subjects, whereon we do make Reflections, Circumstances, that, though
improper, or at least unnecessary, to be taken into the Occasional Meditation,
may be very fitly accommodateD to other things, and plentifully contribute to
the store and variety of Comparisons we lately mentioned; this must appear so
much a Truth, to any that is exercised in making Occasional Reflections, that I
should perhaps forbear to illustrate it, by any particular example, but that
this part of my Discourse recalls into my Mind some Thoughts that were
suggested to me, by one of the last Occasions I had, to make Reflections of
this Nature. I shall add then, that being all alone, and diverted a pretty
while by a sudden storm of Thunder, Lightning, Wind, and Rain, from the
employments I had designed my self to, I had the unwelcome leisure to make some
Reflections upon the rude Objects that obtruded themselves upon my Observation.

And the chief thing that presented it self to my Thoughts, was, a resemblance
betwixt Profane or Atheistical wits, and the black Clouds that then over-cast
the Sky: For, as those Clouds are raised to an elevated Station, and do afford
flashes of Light; so these Irreligious wits are oftentimes conspicuous enough,
and may bring forth Notions that are surprising, and instructive; but as the
same Clouds, whilst they give us but their own momentany Light, obscure (by
darkning the Sky) and hinder us, as much as they can, from receiving that of
the Sun, which reaches further, and is many other ways preferrable to vanishing
Coruscations; so these Wits, whilst they seem to enlighten those they dazzle,
with their own new Opinions, do really deprive them of the true Heavenly Light,
that would else shine forth to them in the revealed Word of God: And as the
Light that we do receive from the Clouds, may dazzle and astonish us, but is not
sufficient for us to Travel by; so the admired reasoning of these Sophisters
may surprise and amaze us, but will never prove sufficient to be, like the
Scripture, a constant Lamp unto our feet, Psalm. 119. 105.
and Light unto our paths. And as the Light afforded by such Clouds, is not
only wont to be attended with affrighting Thunder, and hurtful Storms, but
burns, and destroys, or at least scorches, and blacks, where it passes, and
oftentimes falls upon Churches, Hospitals, Colleges, and brings such frights
and ruins wheresoever it comes, that 'twere a great deal better Men wanted the
Light of such flashes, than that they should be exposed to such inconveniences
by them: So the insolent and irregular Wits, I am speaking of, do not only
make an unwelcome Noise in the World, but do oftentimes so denigrate the
Reputation of them that oppose them, and bear so little respect even to things
sacred, or useful to Mankind, without sparing the Church or Seminaries of
Learning, if either come in their way, that they do far more Mischiefs by their
errors, or their practices, than the little Instruction they give us, is able
to make amends for.

This, if I forget not, was the substance of the Occasional Meditation,
suggested to me by the Storm; but, besides that, there are in this some
particulars, which are not necessary to the Meditation it self, and may be
fitly enough accommodated, by way of Comparisons, to other Occasions. I
remember, the same Subject (the Storm) had other Circumstances in it, fit to
afford Similitudes, applicable to other Subjects, and some of them unobvious
enough: For instance, it is not easy to find so illustrious a Comparison, to
set forth, how the most contrary Qualities may proceed from the same Subjects,
as that which we may be supplied with, by considering, that, from the same
Clouds, we derive both Light and Darkness; and a noble Comparison of
contraries, conjoined in one Subject, may be borrowed from the same Clouds,
which afford us Lightning, and Rain, show, that they contain in them two of the
eminentest and seldomest consistent contraries of Nature, Fire and Water. And
another Comparison may be derived from the differing productions of these
Clouds, to illustrate those things which do at once both much good, and much
mischief, or sometimes the one, and sometimes the other: For the same Clouds
both produce the Thunder, and the Lightning, and thereby blast Trees, kill Men
and Beasts, fire Houses, and ruin the noblest Buildings, without sparing
Churches themselves; and, on the other side, plentifully afford us those
refreshing and fertilizing Showers, that correct the heat of the sultry Air,
and cure the barrenness of the parched Earth. And one that is skilled in
framing Comparisons out of Dissimilitudes, and exercised in the other ways of
turning and winding of Simile's, may easily enough find, in the Subject we have
been considering, Circumstances capable of being conveniently enough
accommodated to more subjects and purposes, than I have leisure now to take
notice of. And since, as the being able to find the latent resemblance betwixt
things seemingly unlike, make up a great part of what we are wont to call Wit;
so the being able to discern the unobvious disparities of things manifestly
resembling, is one of the chief things that displays the Faculty, Men call
Judgment; and since both these are very much assisted by the Custom of making
Reflections, wherein we must take notice of the several properties, wherein
things either are alike, or disagree; Methinks it should not a little manifest
the usefulness of our Meleteticks toward the improvement of Men's parts, that
they not only instruct the more serious faculty of the Soul, but sharpen the
more subtle.

CHAP. VI.
IV. BUt the Practice I have all this while been recommending, does not only
dispose us to Attention, in observing the things that occur to us, and accustom
us to reflect on them seriously, and express them fitly, but does also, though
insensibly, suggest to us Ways and Methods, whereby to make the Objects we
consider informative to us.

For by Example, Analogy, or some of those other ways which we may be invited,
on another occasion, to insist on, we are, as it were, led by the hand to the
discovery of diverse useful Notions, especially Practical, which else we should
not take any notice of. And indeed, the World is the great Book, not so much
of Nature, as of the God of Nature, which we should find even crowded with
instructive Lessons, if we had but the Skill, and would take the Pains, to
extract and pick them out: The Creatures are the true Egyptian Hieroglyphics,
that under the rude forms of Birds, and Beasts, etc. conceal the mysterious
secrets of Knowledge, and of Piety. And as Chemists boast of their Elixir, that
'twill turn the ignoblest Metals into Gold; so Wisdom makes all Objects, on
which it operates, enrich the Possessor with useful and precious Thoughts: And
since, even the illiterate Husbandman can, with the most abject Dung it self,
give a flourishing growth to the most useful Grains, to Medicinable herbs, and
even to fragrant Flowers; why may not a wise Man, by the meanest Creatures, and
slighted'st Object, give a considerable Improvement to the noblest Faculties of
the Soul, and the most lovely Qualities of the Mind?

But the particular Method of deriving Instruction from the Subjects we
consider, will be more fit to be particularly insisted on, when we shall have
more time, or some other opportunity, to treat of the manner of making
Occasional Meditations, and show, how they may be fetched from Example,
Analogy, Dissimilitude, Ratiocination, and other Topics, which we must not now
take any further notice of.

SECT. IV.
CHAP. I.
HItherto we have considered the Benefits that may be afforded by the practice
of Occasional Meditations to the Intellectual Faculties. We will now proceed to
the Advantages that may accrue from the same Practice to the Will and
Affections. These advantages being not only the most valuable in themselves,
but those upon whose account I have been engaged in the present Undertaking.

V. The last therefore and greatest Benefit I shall take notice of, in the
practice I would invite you to, is, That it awakens good thoughts, and excites
good motions, in the Will and Affections. For since we have already manifested,
that it is wont to suggest variety of Notions to the Meditator, and such as are
usually accompanied with delight: This friendly property to Devotion, which I
now ascribe to our Melecticks, is a very easy and genuine offspring of the
marriage of the two others: The Beams of Knowledge, acquired by such
Reflections, having in them, like those of the Sun, not only Light but Heat.
And indeed it were somewhat strange, as well as sad, if a person disposed and
accustomed to observe and consider, conversing with such instructive Books as
those of God's Creatures and his Providence, with an intention to take out
practical Lessons, should not find them. For amid'st that rich variety of
Objects that in differing manners proffer themselves to his consideration, and
suggest to him a great diversity of Reflections, it cannot reasonably be
imagined that he should not find subjects or circumstances, that are proper,
either to afford him Examples to imitate, or show him the Danger, or
Unhandsomeness, or Inconvenience of some thing that he should avoid, or raise
his thoughts and affections Heaven-wards, or furnish him with some new
practical consideration, or show him some known Truth in a varied and
delightful dress, or (at least) recall some Notions his frailty makes him need
to be put in mind of, or, in a word, either refresh his memory, or otherwise
cherish his Devotion. Let us suppose a person, who being qualified and
accustomed to reflect upon various objects that occur to him, mainly designs,
in the exercise of that faculty, the warming of his Affections, and the
improvement of his Piety, and we shall scarce doubt, but when he looks about
him in the world, he will find it, what one of the Fathers loftily styled it,
(...), (a Schole for Rational Souls to learn the knowledge of God.) There is
scarce any thing that Nature has made, or that men do or suffer, though the
Theme seem never so low and slight, whence the devout Reflector cannot take an
occasion of an aspiring Meditation; as in a hopeful morning the humble Lark
can, from the lowest furrow in the field, take a soaring flight toward Heaven,
and ascend thitherward with a melody that delights both her self and her
hearers. If such a person considers how amongst such an admirable Variety, and
such odd Antipathies of the numberless Creatures that compose the Universe, the
constant observation of the Laws of their Nature makes them universally, and,
as it were, unanimously, to conspire to make the Author of it appear wonderful
in it, he cannot but be willingly possessed with such an awful admiration of
the matchless wisdom of their great Disposer, as made the Psalmist cry out,
upon a somewhat what like occasion, So Junius and Tremelius translate the
place, Quam ampla sunt opera tua, O Jehova, quam ea omnia sapienter fecisti?
and so the Original will bear, if the Hebrew Ma, be made applicable as well to
the latter, as to the former part of the words.
How manifold are thy works, Ps. 104. 24.
O Lord, how wisely have thou made them all? If he have occasion to consider
the merciful Dispensations of Divine Providence to the Godly, or to take notice
of the severe Inflictions of Divine Justice on the Wicked, he will find himself
powerfully engaged to rely on the one, and to apprehend provoking the other.
If he take notice that the World is but our Storehouse, and that multitudes of
admirable Creatures seem to have had a being given them, principally for the
use of undeserving Man, insomuch that many of the Beasts, and Birds, and
Fishes, are but our Caters for one another, he will burst out into Mental, if
not Vocal, expressions of Thankfulness and Humiliation to the Father of
Mercies, for so unmerited and ill returned a Bounty, and will be apt to say
with David, Ps. 144. 3.
What is man that thou take knowledge of him? or the son of man that thou
make account of him? And if he compare this Munificence of God, in daily
giving so many Creatures, that never violate the Laws of their Nature, nor
endeavor to disappoint him of his Ends in creating them, for the necessities,
nay, for the pleasures, of rebellious and unthankful Man, he will resent an
ingenuous shame, and a noble disdain, That that Creature should be of all the
least grateful that has received the most Benefits, and that he should of all
others prove the most unruly, who alone has been endowed with Reason to rule
himself withal. If in a Starry night he looks upon the Firmament, and
considers how many fixed Stars there are, and how many thousand times more
there might be without wanting room, the least of which Astronomers teach us to
be far bigger than the whole Earth, which yet, by the probablest computation,
contains above ten thousand millions of Cubick German Leagues, (and
consequently above threescore times as many English miles of solid measure) he
will find abundant cause to exclaim with David, Psalm. 8. 3, 4.
When I consider thy Heavens, the work of thy hands, the Moon and Stars which
thou have ordained, What is man that thou should be mindful of him, or the
Son of man that thou visitest him?

CHAP. II.
ANd since our Discourse has led us to the mention of a Text, where the truly
inspired Poet (who, by his omitting to speak of the Sun, seems to have composed
this Psalm in the night) makes the Moon the chief subject of his Meditation, it
will not perhaps be amiss, if, on this occasion, we add a few short Reflections
on the same Theme, and thereby confirm what we lately noted about the differing
Reflections, and Similitudes, which may be afforded by the same subject, as its
several Attributes may be differingly considered.

If then, in the first place, when our Contemplator takes notice of the
greatest Brightness of the Moon, he remembers too, that it is when she is at the
Full, that she is subject to be Eclipsed, it would put him in mind of the
mutability of humane things, and that oftentimes Prosperity proves never the
more secure for appearing the more full and resplendent.

Next, our Reflector may find in the Moon, a lively Emblem of a true Minister
of the Gospel. For, as the Moon communicates to the Earth, the Light, and that
only, which she receives from the Sun; so the Apostles, and first Preachers of
Christianity, and (in their measure) their true Successors, communicate to
Mankind, the Light, which themselves have received from the bright Sun of
righteousness. And the Similitude may be advanced, by adding, that as the Moon
shines not on the Earth, with any other Beams, than those she derives from that
fountain of Light, the Sun; so the true Preachers of the Heavenly Doctrine
mingle not their own Inventions, or humane Traditions, with that pure and
sincere Light of Revelation, they are emploi'd to dispense; it being safest,
and most desirable, for the Church, that Christians should receive the Bread of
Life, as the Jews are recorded to have received the material Bread, Mat. 15. 36*
in a passage of St. Matthew's Gospel, where it is said, that Christ first
brake, and gave to the Disciples, the Bread, which they afterward, from Him,
distributed to the People; so that they might each of them, in a literal sense,
employ that expression of St. Paul, 1 Cor. 11. 3.
I have received of the Lord, that which I delivered unto you.

And as though the Moon be destitute of native light, yet by virtue of that
borrowed one, which she plentifully receives from the Sun, she affords more to
Men than any of the Stars, which, upon the score of their vast distance from
the Sun, are, by modern Naturalists, supposed to shine by their own Light, so
those illiterate Fishermen, whom the Sun of Righteousness called, and made the
Light of the world, did, by virtue of the copious Irradiations he vouchsafed
them, diffuse far more Light to mankind, than the greatest Philosophers, that,
being unassisted by Divine Revelation, had only their own native beams to
shine with.

And as oftentimes the same Subject, but variously considered, may afford both
somewhat fit to be shunned, and somewhat fit to be imitated; so, in that which
we suppose our Reflector now considering, he may easily discern the Emblem of
an ungrateful person: For as the Moon, though she receive all the Light that
ennobles her from the Sun, does yet, when she is admitted to the nearest
Conjunction with him, eclipse that bright Planet, to which she owes all her
splendor; so unthankful men abuse those very favors that should endear to
them their Benefactors, to the prejudice of those that oblige them.

And it is like that our Reflector may, by the way, take notice, That as what
passes betwixt the Moon and the Sun, does thus afford him a Simile, whereby to
set forth Ingratitude; so what passes betwixt the Moon and the Sea, may supply
him with an example of the contrary quality, and put him in mind, that a
thankful man will be true and obsequious to his Benefactor, though the person
that obliged him have lost that Prosperity that before made him conspicuous,
and attracted vulgar eyes, as the Sea follows the course of the Moon, not only
when she shines upon it with her full Light, but when at the Change she can
communicate little or no light to it.

To the two abovementioned Attributes, upon whose account the Moon afforded a
comparison for humane Prosperity, and another for Preachers of the Gospel, we
will now add, That she may afford us a Similitude to set forth a liberal Person
by: For as the Moon freely communicates to the Earth, the Light she receives
from the Sun, so the bountiful person imparts to indigent men the Largesses he
receives, from the exuberant goodness of God. And as to Intellectual
Communications the Parallel will hold further, since as the Moon enjoys not the
less of Light, for her imparting so much to the Earth; so in Mental
Communications Liberality does not impoverish, and those excellent gifts cease
not to be possessed, by being imparted. And it is very possible, (to add that
upon the By) That after the light of the Moon has (according to what I lately
noted) represented to our Contemplator the qualifications of a Preacher, it may
also put him in mind of the Duty of a Hearer. For, as it were very foolish in
us, and unthankful toward the Father of Lights, not to make use of the great
Light we receive from the Sun, by the Moon, or not to acknowledge the Moon to
be a very useful Creature, upon the score of that Light, wherewith she shines
upon the Earth, though, in her, that Light be destitute of Heat; so it were
unwise and ungrateful for Hearers to refuse to acknowledge, or to be guided by,
the conspicuous Endowments of Learning and Eloquence, that God vouchsafes to
great Scholars, though they themselves were but illustrated, not warmed, by the
Beams they reflect. But therefore, as Oysters, and other Shellfish, are
observed to thrive at the Increase of the Moon, though her Light be unattended
with Heat, and though even when she is at Full, she wants not her spots, so
devout Hearers will be careful to prosper proportionably to the Instructions
they receive even from those Preachers, whose Illuminations are unaccompani'd
with Zeal and Charity, and who, when they shine with the greatest Luster, are
not free from their Darknesses, as to some Points, or from notorious Blemishes.

And as the Moon may thus furnish our Contemplator with Similitudes, to set
forth both a Virtue and a Vice of the Mind, so may it supply him with an Emblem
of its Condition: For as the Light of the Moon is sometimes Increasing, and
sometimes in the Wane, and not only is sometimes totally Eclipsed, but even
when she is at the Full, is never free from dark Spots; so the mind of Man,
nay, even of a Christian, is but partly enlightened, and partly in the dark,
and is sometimes more, and sometimes less, Illustrated by the Beams of Heavenly
Light, and Joy, and not alone now and then quite Eclipsed by disconsolate
Desertions, but even when it receives the most Light, and shines the brightest,
knows but in part, and is in part blemished by its native Darknesses, and
Imperfections. And these Resemblances are not so appropriated to the mind of
Man, but that they might easily be shown to be applicable to his condition, in
point of outward Prosperity, and Adversity. And to these Resemblances other
Reflections on the several Adjuncts of the Moon might be also added, together
with several Examples of this nature on other Subjects, were it not that I
think my self to have spent time enough already upon a Theme, that fell but
incidentally under my consideration; and were it not also, that the Reflections
which might here be annexed upon the Attributes of other Objects, may be more
properly subjoined to what may be on another occasion presented you, by way of
Illustration of some Particulars, that belong to the fourth part of the
precedent Section, in which my haste, and some other reasons, made me content
my self, to give some few general Hints about such Reflections, and an
Intimation of the Topics whence I am wont to fetch them.

CHAP. III.
ANd having given you this Advertisement, en passant, we may now proceed a
little further, and add, that if we suppose our Contemplator's thoughts to
descend from Heaven to Earth, the far greater multitude and variety of Objects,
they will meet with here below, will suggest to them much more numerous
Reflections. But because so spacious a Field for Meditation as the whole Earth,
would afford us too vast a Theme to be attempted on this occasion, we will
confine our Contemplator to his Garden, or rather to any one of the Trees of
it, and take notice, not of all the Meditations he might fetch thence, but
only of four or five of the considerablest of those, that the viewing it, may,
as he walks by at several times, supply him with.

In then, in the Spring of the Year, our Reflector see the Gardener pruning a
Fruit-tree, we may suppose him invited by that Object, to reason thus within
himself: Though one that were a Stranger to the Art of Gardening, would think,
that that Man is an Enemy to this Tree, and goes about to destroy it, since he
falls upon and wounds it, with a sharp Iron, and strikes off several of its
Youthful parts, as if he meant to cut it in pieces; yet, he that knows, that
the Gardener's arm is not set on work by Anger, but by Skill, will not conclude
that he hates the Tree he thus wounds, but that he has a mind to have it
Fruitful, and judges these harsh means the fittest to produce that desirable
Effect. And thus, whatever a Man, unacquainted with the ways and designs of
Providence, may surmise, when he sees the Church not only exposed to the
common Afflictions of humane Societies, (for that is but like our Trees being
exposed to be weather-beaten by Winds, and Rain) but distressed by such
Persecutions, as seem to be Divine Inflictions, that invite Men to say of the
Body, what the Prophet foretold should be said of the Head, Isaiah 53. 4.
We esteemed him stricken, smitten of God, and afflicted. Whatever, I say, a
carnal, or a moral, Man would be apt to imagine, upon sight of the Churches
distresses; the knowing Christian will not from thence infer, that God hates
Her, or that he has abandoned Her, since it is He, that loved his Church so
well, as to give Himself for it, who declares, that as many as He loves, He
rebukes, and chastens. And this is so fitly applicable also to particular
Believers, John 15. 2.
that the Divine Son of the great That is, Cultivator of the Ground.
(...) does not only give us cause to think, that Afflictions do not suppose
God's Hate, but to hope that they may not always suppose Man's Guilt, but
sometimes rather aim at his Improvement; since they are the memorable words of
our Savior, speaking of his Father, John 15. 2.
Every branch in me, that bears not Fruit, he takes away, and every Branch
that bears Fruit, he purges it, that it may bring forth more Fruit. And it
may somewhat illustrate the Similitude, to add, that the Husbandman uses only
to prune the Trees of his Garden, not those that grow wild in his Woods: But
though he oftener wound these, yet he wounds the other more fatally, employing
but the pruning Hook to pare off the superfluous Twiggs, or, at most, Branches,
of the one, whilst he lays the Ax to the root of the other, to fell the Tree
it self.

But these are not the only Thoughts, which the pruning of a Fruit-tree may
suggest to our Reflector: For if he considers, That by cutting off several of
the parts of the Tree, and by Nailing many of the rest to the Wall, the
Gardener does not only secure the Tree from being blown down, or torn, by the
rudeneness of boisterous Winds, but makes it look well shaped: So the Divine
Husbandman, (as we have lately seen God styled in the Scripture) by the wise,
and seasonable, though seemingly rigorous, and usually unwelcome, Culture, he
imploys upon those Children of his whom he afflicts, does not only protect
them from several dangers, whereto, without those harsh restraints, they would
be exposed; but as he makes them amends in point of Safety, for what he denies
them in point of Liberty, so he adorns them by Wounding them. His kind and
skilful strokes adding as much to the Beauty of a Christian's Mind, as they cut
away from the Superfluities of his Fortune: For the pressures of Affliction do
give so much smoothness and gloss to the Soul that bears them patiently, and
resign'dly, that the Heathen Moralist ventured to say, That if there were any
Spectacle here below noble enough, and worthy to entertain the Eyes of God, it
was that of a Good Man, generously contending with ill Fortune. And the
Hyperbole (though after this manner somewhat loftily expressed) will appear the
less strange to him that considers, That Job had not only his Patience, when
it had been tried to the uttermost, crowned with a Fortune double to that which
had been the fairest in the East; but before his constancy was tried near so
far, received that much higher recompense of an Honor never vouchsafed to
Mortals until then, when God himself did not only approve, but (if I may so
speak with reverence) make his boast of, a Man. Have thou considered (says he
to Man's great Enemy) my Servant Job, Job 2. 3.
that there is none like him in the Earth, a perfect, and an upright Man, one
that fears God, and escheweth Evil? and still he holds fast his Integrity,
although thou moved'st me against him to destroy him without cause. Sure one
may call him more than happy Job, since, if, as David tells us, the Man is
happy whose sins God is pleased to cover; Psalm. 32. 1.
what may that Man be accounted, whose Graces he vouchsafes to proclaim?

CHAP. IV.
ANd as the consideration of the pruning of Trees, under the Notion of that
which wounds them, may afford our Contemplator the Reflections already pointed
at; so the considering of the same Action, under another Notion, may lead him
to Reflections of another Nature: For if he observes, that, in certain cases,
Gardeners oftentimes do not only prune away all the Suckers, and many of the
Luxuriant sprigs, but cut off some of the Branches themselves, provided they
spare the Master boughs; and yet these Amputations, though they take much from
the Tree, are designed to add to the Fruit, as accordingly they are wont to do:
If, I say, our Reflector takes notice of this, it may easily supply him with an
illustration of what he may have observed among some Men, who, by Afflictions,
even in point of Fortune, are brought to be far more charitable than they would
have been, if their peace and plenty had continued unimpair'd. As, besides that
Saint Paul, speaking of the Macedonian Churches, 2 Cor. 8. 2.
gives them this Character, That in a great trial of Affliction, the abundance
of their Joy, and their deep Poverty, abounded unto the Riches of their
Liberality; We have in Zacheus a memorable Instance to our present purpose,
since, after his Repentance had, Luke 19.
by his own consent, cut off from his Estate more than all that Slander,
Oppression, and other unjust ways of Getting, (which used to bring in but too
great a part of a Publican's) had added to it; he gave away more, out of the
Remainder of his Estate, than every liberal Man would have done out of the
Whole. His Wealth, like a skilfully pruned Tree bore the more Fruit to Piety;
for having had some parts of it cut away, he grew Rich (in good works) by being
despoiled, and his Charity increased as much as his Fortune was lessened.

If, toward the end of the Spring, our Reflector see the Ground under his Tree
strowed with the Blossoms, that Time and Winds may have cast down thence, it is
like it would furnish him with this consideration, That, as though the Blossoms
are in themselves great Ornaments to a Tree, and oftentimes both useful and
pleasant things, yet to be seasonably deprived of them, is not a mischief to
the Tree that loses them; since, till the Blossoms are gone, the Fruit, which
is a better and more lasting thing, and more principally intended by Nature,
cannot be had: So it will not always follow, that because certain things are in
their kind desirable, and therefore may be reckoned among Goods, the loss or
depravation of them must necessarily be an Evil. And so, though a fair and
healthy Body may be looked upon as a Blessing, yet it will not follow, (...).
that a Death (as the Scripture speaks) either in or for the Lord, because it
throws this flourishing Body to the Ground, Revel. 14. 13.
and makes it rot there, must needs be a deplorable Evil; since, as the
Blossoms falling off, is, according to the course of Nature, necessarily
praevious to the formation, or at least the perfection, of the Fruit: So the
being deprived of this Life, is, according to God's Ordination, a necessary
Antecedent to our being enriched with those more solid and durable blessings of
perfect Virtue and Happiness.

And if, whilst our Contemplator's Tree is adorned with Leaves, as well as
Blossoms, (as we often see several of the former come before all the latter are
gone) he chance to take notice how busy the Bees are in sucking these, whilst
they leave the others untouched, he may peradventure make this, or some such
other Reflection on it; That, though the Leaves be not only Ornaments of a
Tree, but Productions, often useful to shade and shelter the Fruit, and are of
a more solid Texture, and a more durable Nature than the Blossoms, which seem
to be of a slighter make, and rather gaudy and delightful than lasting; yet
it is not about the Leaves, but the Blossoms, that the industrious Be
assiduously imploys her time, as sucking from those gaudy productions of the
Tree, store of that Honey which the Leaves would not afford her.

Thus, though the Books written about Dogmatical and Controversial points in
Divinity, may be in their kind valuable and useful productions of skill in
Theology, and may seem more strong and substantial Composures, and likely to
retain their Reputations longer, than Books of Devotion; yet it is of these,
rather than those, that the devout Christian will be a sollicitous Peruser;
since it is not from barren, though solid Assertions or Disputes, but from
florid and pathetical Books of Devotion, which first allure the Reader, and
then affect him, that the devout Soul extracts her Honey, I mean those
Caelestial pleasures that result from, as well as maintain, a free communion
with God, which does at once both exercise her Devotion, and recompense it, and
afford her, as Flowers do the Be, an Aliment equally Nutritive and Delicious.

And he may somewhat illustrate, as well as continue, the Allusion further, by
considering, That Silkworms that live upon Leaves, and Bees that feed on
Flowers and Blossoms, do indeed both of them thrive upon their respective
Aliments, and are thereby enabled to present Men with useful productions, but
with this difference; That the subtle threads of Silkworms serve principally to
cloth others, whereas the Honey that is elaborated by the Be, does not only
supply others with a healing and cleansing Medicine in some Distempers, but
affords a great deal of pleasure to the Be her self: For thus, though as well
the diligent Studiers of Speculative and Polemical Divinity, as the careful
Perusers of Books of Devotion, may be advantaged by what they Study, yet this
difference may be observed betwixt them, that the former may, by the Discourses
they read, be assisted to write others of the like Nature, whereby their
Readers may be enabled to talk with more Acuteness, and Applause, but the
latter may not only be assisted by making such Composures as they assiduously
converse with, to contribute to the cleansing of Men's Consciences from Dead
works, and as well pacific the troubles of their Minds, as heal the Wounds
which Schism or Scandal may have given to the Church; but do often, in the
first place, feel themselves all the Joys, and Advantages, they would procure
to others, and they happily find Pious Reflections, Devout Soliloquies, Ardent
Ejaculations, and other Mental Entertainments of a Religious Soul, to be of a
Nature not only so sweet, but so improving, and so advantageous, that whilst
many other laudable Employments recommend us to the Students of Theology, these
more especially recommend us to the Author of it, and indear us to God himself.

If when our Fruit-tree has changed its white Livery for a Green, our
Considerer chance to take notice how thick it is set with Leaves, of which it
had not one some Months before, it may possibly put him in mind of the
Instability of their condition, that are undeservedly envied for a Numerous
train of such seeming Friends, and gaudy Attendants, as are so to the Fortune,
rather than the Person: For, as in the Sunshiny months of Summer, when the
fair weather would keep the Tree warm enough without the help of Leaves, it is
wont to be covered with those Verdant Ornaments, but loses them all in Winter,
when it needs their shelter from the Rigors of that Cold season: So those, that
during the Sunshine of prosperity, are beset with seeming Friends, of which
they had no need, find themselves left naked, and forsaken of them all, when
Adversity would make their Company of some Advantage. If our Contemplator
chance to observe how his Tree flourishes with verdant Leaves, and gaudy
Blossoms, at that Season of the Year, when it is providing to bring forth
Fruit, it may put him in mind of the pleas'dness and alacrity, with which a
Charitable person should set himself to the doing of good, and mind him, That
as the God of Nature loves a cheerful Giver, so the temper of a liberal Person
is pointed out by Nature her self, in a Tree, which seems to triumph in all the
Ornaments it can put on, when it is about to exhaust the greatest part of its
own stock of Sap to produce Fruits which only others are to eat.

If he take notice of the order wherein it is usual for the Leaves and Blossoms
to precede the Fruit, it may possibly invite him to look with a more favorable
Eye upon the green and immature Essays of early Writers, if they discover, that
the Author aims at good things, though he does not yet perform great ones: For,
however these Youthful productions of the Pen are commonly rather pleasing and
florid, than otherwise considerable, yet if they be good for their Season, and
in their Kind, though that kind it self be not of the usefullest, they may
deserve pardon, and perhaps encouragement; since, though they be not yet solid,
they may promise something that will be so; and even the best Trees present us
their Blossoms, before they give us their Fruit.

If the same Contemplator happens to see young people first shake the Tree in
vain, and then climb it to gather unripe Fruit, it may afford him a
representation of Men's over-eager and untimely persuits of several desirable
things, and especially of Honor: For, as green Fruit, though of a good Kind,
will not easily be shaken down by them that would gather it, but reduces them
either to climb the Tree, or forcibly strike it off, which commonly bruises,
and disfigures what it procures; and as the Fruit, when thus obtained, is but
sour, and unwholesome, being neither sweetened nor concocted by Maturity, so that
it usually both sets the Teeth on edge, and breeds Sickness in the Body,
whereas, if the same Fruit were let alone till it were fully Ripe, and in
Season, it would both readily drop into the Eater's mouth, and prove delicious,
and more wholesome Food: So, when we greedily pursue after Honor, and Pleasure,
of which this Life is not the proper Season, we not only meet with
Difficulties in acquiring them, but find not, in possessing them, either that
Satisfaction, or that Advantage, that the Eagerness of our unruly Appetites
promises us; whereas, if we would stay contentedly till God's time be come,
(which is always the best, and fittest) we should not steal, or force, but
receive unfading Honors, and uncloying Delights, by being presented with
Incorruptible Crowns of Glory, 1 Pet. 5. 4.
by him, with whom there is fullness of Joy, and at whose right hand (the
Station designed for those that overcome the World's Allurements, Psalm. 16. 11.
and their own Impatience) there are Pleasures for evermore; that is, Eternal
ones.

Lastly, if toward the end of Summer, or of Autumn, our Reflector, coming to
visit his Instructive Tree, find it present him store of Fruit, and perhaps
observes it to be grown taller since the last Winter, each Bough will afford
him a lively Emblem of a true Believer. For, as the loaded Branch makes use of
the moisture it attracts from the dirty ground, to recede as much as it can
from the Earth, and spends its sap in shooting up toward Heaven, and bearing
Fruit for Men: so the devout Christian improves the Blessings he receives of
this inferior World, to elevate his mind above it: And the use that he makes
of earthly Goods, and Advantages, is to raise his grateful Soul nearer to God,
and dispense them by works of Charity to men.

CHAP. V.
THese (Sophronia) are some, and but some, of the Thoughts, which the
Occasional Consideration of a Fruit-tree might suggest to a Considering Person.
And if we should lead our Reflector from the Garden to the Woods, or to the
River side, or into the Fields, or to the Street, or to a Library, or to the
Exchange, or, in a word, to I know not how many other places I could name, I
have some reason to think, that each of them would supply him with variety of
Occasional Meditations. Wherefore, since the want of Themes will not, it is fit
that somewhat else should, place Bounds to this Discourse. And since, by
finding, that I my self begin to be weary of writing, I have too much cause to
fear that you are quite tired with reading, I think it high time to hasten to a
Conclusion: Only, before I make one, I must do our Meleteticks the right to
advertise you, that you would do them wrong if you should imagine, that in the
passed Discourse I have either carefully enumerated, or fully displayed, the
Advantages, which a devout and ingenious Contemplator may derive from the
Exercise of the ways of Thinking I have been treating of. For, though I have in
the past Discourse, especially those parts of it that are contained in the 3d
precedent, and in this present 4th Section, said enough to recommend the
Subject to any that is not much indisposed to be prevailed with; yet I will not
deny, but that, even in those two Sections, I have left much unsaid.

For, besides the several Advantages and ways of making Occasional Meditations
already pointed at, there are other accounts upon which the practice I would
persuade may both benefit a pious Soul, and be made use of by an ingenious one.
For the respects one thing may have to another are so numberless, and the mind
of a rational man, versed in Meditations, may compound and disjoyn Notions so
many ways, and may make such Inferences from them, and such Applications of
them, that it frequently happens, that besides the Reflection, suggested by
that which gave the first Rise to his Meditations, he lights upon Conceits
differing enough from them, and perhaps better than they: As when Hounds,
hunting a Hare, meet in their way with a Stag. For, though Philosophers seem to
have justly enough rejected the Opinion, attributed to Plato, That all
Knowledge is but Reminiscence, yet certainly the Mind of a Man well furnished
with variety of Notions, is, by the Analogy or Contrariety of Things and
Notions, in reference to each other, so easily and readily excited to lay them
together, and discourse upon them, that he is oftentimes by any slight
occasion helped to light (and that with a strange and almost surprising
facility) upon things that he would else have scarce taken the least notice of.
When the Mind is once set on work, though the Occasion administered the first
Thoughts, yet those thoughts themselves, may, as well as the Object that
excited them, become the Themes of further Meditation: and the Connection of
Thoughts within the Mind, may be, and frequently is, so latent, and so strange,
that the Meditator will oftentimes admire to see how far the Notions he is at
length lead to, are removed from those which the first Rise of his Meditation
suggested. And by these Incidental Excursions he may sometimes be as much
delighted and surprised, Judges 14. 8.
as Samson was, when going aside to look upon the Carcass of a Lion, he met
with a Stock of Honey.

But I can add one thing toward the inducing you to exercise your self in the
way of Thinking, we have all this while been speaking of, which though I had
almost forgot to take notice of, it will, I doubt not, seem important to
Sophronia, to whom it need not be a discouragement from aiming at one of the
noblest uses of Occasional Reflections, that it supposes not a bare
acquaintance with them, but springs from an entire and (if I may so speak)
intimate familiarity with our Meleteticks. For this use of Occasional
Meditations, though it do but gradually differ from some of those that have
been already mentioned, will perhaps by the devout (and consequently by
Sophronia) be esteemed the highest Advantage that this way of Thinking can
confer; and it is, That the custom of making Occasional Reflections may
insensibly, and by unperceived degrees, work the Soul to a certain frame, or
temper, which may not improperly be called Heavenly Mindedness, whereby she
acquires an aptitude and disposition to make pious Reflections upon almost
every Occurrence, and oftentimes without particularly designing it. But as this
privilege will, as I was intimating, scarce fall to the share of any but those
that, by long or frequent Exercise, have so accustomed their minds to reflect
upon what they see, that they continue that practice, as it were, of their own
accord; so when once, by such a constant kindness and hospitableness to such
thoughts, that they will, as it were, come to the mind without calling, and
make themselves its guests, without particular Invitations, the Soul has
attained that desirable Frame we lately called Heavenly mindedness, which is a
Disposition and a Readiness to make Spiritual uses of Earthly things, both the
Advantage and the Delight of that frame of heart cannot but be extraordinary.
It must surely afford a great deal of satisfaction to an Ingenious and Devout
person, to be able to make the world both his Library and his Oratory. And
which way soever he turns his eyes (not only upon unobvious things, but even
upon the most familiar ones) to behold something that instructs, or that
delights him. And to find that almost every object that presents it self to his
notice, presents also good Thoughts to his Mind, to be gathered with as much
Innocence and Pleasure, and with as little prejudice to the things that afford
them, as Honey is gathered by the industrious Be from the differing Flowers
she meets with in her way. Certainly, if we would carefully lay hold on, and
duly manage, this help, it would prove a powerful Remedy to prevent or cure
much of that Dullness and Drousiness, that do so frequently smother or blemish
our Devotion. There would scarce any thing pass us, out of which we would not
strike some spark or other of that Heavenly Fire, or that would not contribute
something, either to kindle it, or to feed it, or to revive it. If but half the
precious time we impertinently trifle, or squander away, upon Employments that
will be sure to cost us either Tears or Blushes, were carefully laid out in the
cultivating of this kind of Thoughts, it might often save our Ministers the
labor of insisting so long upon the Uses of their Doctrines, when the whole
World would be a Pulpit, every Creature turn a Preacher, and almost every
Accident suggest an Use of Instruction, Reproof, or Exhortation. No Burial but
would toll a Passing Bell to put us in mind of our Mortality: No Feast but
would make us aspire to the Marriage Feast of the Lamb: No Cross but would add
to our Desires to be dissolved and to be with Christ: No Mercy but would be a
fresh Engagement unto Obedience to so good a Master as the Author of it: No
Happiness of others, but would prove an Encouragement to serve him that can
give That, and much greater: No Misery of others, but would awake and heighten
our Gratitude, that we are priviledg'd from It: No Sin in our Neighbors, that
would not dissuade us from what we see looked so unhandsomely in others: Nor
any Virtue of theirs, but would excite our Emulation, and spur us on to imitate
or surpass It. In a word, when the devout Soul is come to make that true use of
the Creatures, as to look upon them as men do upon water, that the Sun gilds
with his Beams, that is, not so much for it self as for the Reflective virtue
it has to represent a more glorious Object; and when she has, by long practice,
accustomed her self to spiritualize all the Objects and Accidents that occur to
her, I see not why that practice may not be one of the most effectual means for
making good that magnificent Assertion of the Apostle, That all things work
together for good to them that love God. Romans 8. 28.
A devout Occasional Meditation, from how low a Theme soever it takes its Rise,
being like Jacob's Ladder, whereof though the foot leaned on the Earth, Genesis
28. 12.
the top reached up to Heaven.

OCCASIONAL REFLECTIONS.
The I. SECTION.
REFLECTION I.
Upon his manner of giving Meat to his Dog.
IGnorantly thankful Creature, thou begg'st in such a way, that by what would
appear an antedated Gratitude, if it were not a designless Action, the manner
of thy Petitioning, beforehand rewards the Grant of thy Request; thy Addresses
and Recompense being so made and ordered, that the Meat I cast thee may very
well feed Religion in me. For, but observe this Dog, I hold him out Meat, and
my inviting Voice loudly encourages and invites him to take it: It Is held
indeed higher than he can Leap; and yet, if he Leap not at it, I do not give it
him; but if he do, I let it fall half way into his Mouth. Not unresemblingly
deals God with us; He shows and holds forth to us (the Soul's true Aliment)
Eternal Glory, and his most Gracious Word summons and animates us to attempt
it. Alas! it is far above the reach of our Endeavors, and our Deserts, and yet
if we aspire not to it, and strive not for it, in vain do we expect it; but if
we faithfully do what in us lies, and our Endeavors strain themselves to their
utmost, God mercifully allows the Will for the Effect, measures our
performances by what they aimed at, and favorably accepting what we can do,
for what we should do, He supplies the imperfections of our faint, but yet
aspiring Attempts, by stooping Condescentions; and what our Endeavors want of
reaching up to, his Grace and Acceptance brings down. Piety is the condition,
though not the price, of Heaven; and (like the Wedding Garment in the Parable)
though it give us not a Right to the Beatifick Feast, is, yet, that without
which none shall be admitted as a duly qualified Guest: For though we cannot
reach Heaven by our good Works, we shall not obtain it without them.

REFLECTION. II.
Upon his distilling Spirit of Roses in a Limbick.
ONe that knew how well I love the scent of Roses, and were ignorant of the
Uses of this way of Distillation, would, questionless, think me very ill
advised, thus hastily to deprive my self of the Flowers I most love, and employ
Art to make them wither sooner than Nature would condemn then to do; but those
that know, both the fading condition of Flowers, (which, unimprov'd by Art,
delight but whilst they are, what they cannot long be, fresh) and the exalting
Efficacy of this kind of Distillation, will think this Artificial way, that
Chemists take, of spoiling them, is an effect as well of their Providence as
their Skill: For that pleasing and sprightly scent, that makes the Rose so
welcome to us, is as short-lived and perishing, as the Flower, that harbors
it, is fading; and though my Limbick should not, yet a few days inevitably
would, make all these Roses wither. But by this way of ordering my Roses,
though I cannot preserve them, I can preserve that Spirituous and Ethereal part
of them, for whose sake it is, that I so much prize and cherish this sort of
Flowers; which, by this means, I preserve, not indeed in the fading Body, but
in the nobler and abstracted Quintessence; which purer and lastinger Portion of
them, will be more highly fragrant than ordinary Roses are wont to be, even
whilst they are fresh, in that Season, when those Flowers, that have not been
thus early and purposely destroyed, will, according to the course of Nature,
whereto they are left, wither and putrify.

Thus he that sees a charitable Person, liberally part with that Money, which
others are so fond of, if he be a stranger to the Operations of Faith, and the
Promises of the Gospel, he will be apt to mistake the Christian's Liberality
for Folly, or Profusion, and to think that he is fallen out with his Money: But
he that remembers how clear a Prospect, and how absolute a Disposal of the
future, the Scripture of Truth (to use an Angel's expression) ascribes to him,
that bid his Disciples make themselves Friends with the uncertain (or
unfaithful) Mammon, (for so the use I sometimes meet with of the Greek word,
together with the Context, invites me to render it) That when we fail, they may
receive us into everlasting Habitations; and he that shall likewise consider,
not only the transitory Nature of VVorldly Possessions, (from which their
Perishing, or ours, will be sure ever long to Divorce us) but the inestimable
Advantage, with which we shall receive in Heaven whatever we employ in pious
Uses here on Earth, will conclude this way of parting with our Wealth, the
surest and gainfullest way of preserving it; since the Christian, by parting
but with what (however) he could not long keep, shall, through God's munificent
Goodness, obtain a much more valuable Treasure, that he shall never lose: So
that thus to sacrifise Wealth to Charity, is not an early loss of it, but the
right way of securing it; for by this gainful way, when we shall, in another
World, be past the possibility of possessing our Riches in Kind, such an
Employment of them may help us to enjoy them, though not in the capacity of
Riches, yet in that noble capacity of Goods, under which Notion alone they are
desirable; and thus laid up, they may there procure us, what they could never
here afford us, Happiness.

REFLECTION III.
Upon his being in great Danger wandering, on Mendip Hills, among covered Lead
Mines that he knew not of.
HOw have I traveled all this while upon the Brink of the Grave! I thought
only to be out of my Way, but little dreamed to be so near the end of all my
Journeys, in that of my Life; by Traversing to and fro amongst those deep and
covered Pits, upon any one of which if my Horse had but chanced to stumble,
(and the very Mine-men I at length met with, think it a kind of Miracle he did
not) I had been Killed and Buried at once, and my Fate had been for ever as
much concealed from my Friends as my Body: And all this escape a Work so
totally of God's Goodness, that I did not so much as know my Danger till I was
past it; so that it seemed, sent, but to give me occasion of rejoicing in my
Deliverance. How vast a Debt of Gratitude then do I owe to God? and how
extremely do I fall short of acquitting my self of it? since, besides, that I
make him but very unsuitable Returns for the Blessings I know I have received,
I receive from him signal Blessings, that I do not so much as know of, and
which consequently I am very unlike particularly to acknowledge. But this
gracious Rescue, from so great and unexpected a Hazard, shall, I hope, teach me
henceforth to beware, both of security, since I often fall into Dangers that I
know not, and of Distrusts of God's Providence, since I have found it so
watchful to deliver me from those that I feared not.

REFLECTION IV.
His Horse stumbling in a very fair way.
HEre is a patch of way, to which any less smooth than a Bowlinggreen were
rugged, and in which it seems not only so unlikely, but so difficult, for a
Horse to trip, that nothing could have made me believe a Horse could have
stumbled here, but that mine has dangerously done so. This Jade has this very
Evening carried me safely through ways, where stumbles were so much to be
expected, that they were to have been forgiven; and now in a place so smooth,
that sure he could not faulter in it, only out of Curiosity and Trial, he falls
under me so Lubberly, that I as much admired my Escape as Danger: But it is too
usual with us, unfaultringly to traverse Adversities rough ways, and stumble in
Prosperities smoothest paths. The Observation is almost as Old as Prosperity,
That Fortune ruins more Persons whilst she Embraces them, than whilst she would
Crush them: But though the Observation be very common, it is not more so, than
it is to see even those that make it, add to the instances that justify it. I
have seldom yet been so fortunate as to be obnoxious to that less frequently
pitied than disarming Danger: Fortune has seldom yet vouchsafed to turn Siren
to pervert me; and she has hitherto given me much more Exercise for my
Constancy than for my Moderation. I think too, that without slandering my self,
I may confess, that I have sometimes wished my self in the Lists with that
bewitching Enemy, Prosperity; and increased the Number of those many, who never
think so fair an Adversary formidable till they find themselves Vanquished by
her: But upon second Thoughts, I judge it better, to leave the choice of my
Antagonist to him, who not only best knows my Strength, but gives it me;
especially, when I consider, that as we are all of us naturally such Stumblers,
that (as Solomon speaks in somewhat another sense) even the just Man falls
seven times a Day, Pro. 24. 16. so it is observed in Stumblers, that they are
most so in fair way; into which, if Providence lead my steps, I shall think it
seasonable to pray, and lead us not into Temptation; and shall not think it
unseasonable to remember, That Ice is at once the smoothest and the slipperest
of ways, and that (the Jadishness of our Natures well considered) there is no
way wherein we ought to Travel with more heed, than that whose treacherous
Evenness would divert us from taking heed to our way.

REFLECTION V.
Upon two very miserable Beggars, begging together by the Highway.
BEhold this fore-most Wretch, whose strange Deformity and ghastly Sores
equally exact our Pity and our Horror; he seems so fit an Object for
Compassion, that not to exercise it toward him can scarce proceed from any
other Cause than the not having any at all: The sadness of his Condition is
augmented by his want of Eyes to see it; and his Misery is such, that it calls
for an increase of Pity, by his being so Distracted, as to desire a longer
Life, or rather longer Death: He sues more movingly to the Eye than to the Ear;
and does Petition much less by what he says, than what he is: Each several
Member of his tortured Body is a new Motive to Compassion, and every Part of it
so loudly pleads for Pity, that (as of Scoulds) it may (in another sense) be
said of him, that he is all Tongue. But yet this other Beggar thinks not his
Condition the less deplorable for his Companions being the more so: He finds in
the Diseases of his Fellow as little Consolation, as Cure; nor does he at all
think himself supplied with a deficient hand, because the other wants one. And
therefore, he is as importunate for Relief, as if all Miseries were not only
heaped on him, but confined to him: His fellows Burden lightens not his Load;
and if Fortune never had persecuted any other, he could not more deplore nor
resent her Persecutions; so that, if we should judge of their Miseries rather
by the Ear than by the Eye, this latter's sadder Complaints would move us to
decree him the Advantage in point of Wretchedness.

Translate now (O my Soul) all this unto Spirituals; and as we measure the
straightness of Lines, not by a Ramms Horn, but a Ruler; so be not thou so
Rash, as to infer thy Health from others more forlorn and desperate Diseases:
Let not the greater difficulty of another's Cure, lessen the sollicitousness of
thy Care for thine, nor make thee the less earnest in the Imploring and
Laboring for Relief. In so depraved an Age as Ours, one may (and perhaps in
vain too) search Hell to find wickeder Men than are to be, but too frequently,
met with upon Earth: He will scarce be innocent, that will think himself so as
long as he finds a Man more culpable than he; and he shall scarce ever judge
himself Guilty, whom the sight of a Guiltier will absolve: Nor will that Man
(till it is perhaps too late) be apt to attempt an Escape from the Pollutions of
the World, that stays till he can see none more inextricably intangl'd in them
than himself. Do not therefore, O my Soul, content thy self with that poor
comparative Innocence that in Heaven (which it will never bring thee too) has
no place, by reason of the absence of all vicious Persons; and in Hell it self
(which it secures not from) can afford only the ill Natured consolation of not
being altogether as Miserable as the wretchedest Person in that place of
Torment.

REFLECTION VI.
Sitting at ease in a Coach that went very fast.
AS fast as this Coach goes, I sit in it so much at Ease, that whilst its rapid
Motion makes others suspect that I am running for a Wager, this lazy Posture,
and this soft Seat, do almost as much invite me to Rest, as if I were A-bed.
The hasty Wheels strike fire out of the Flints they happen to run over, and
yet this self-same swiftness of these Wheels, which, were I under them, would
make them Crush my Bones themselves into Splinters, if not into a Jelly, now I
am seated over them, and above their reach, serves but to carry me the faster
toward my Journey's end. Just so it is with outward Accidents, and Conditions,
whose restless Vicissitudes but too justly and too fitly resemble them to
Wheels: When they meet with a Spirit that lies prostrate on the Ground, and
falls Grovelling beneath them, they disorder and oppress it: But he, whose high
Reason, and exalted Piety, has, by a noble and steady Contempt of them, placed
him above them, may enjoy a happy and a settled Quiet, in spite of all these
busy Agitations, and be so far from resenting any prejudicial discomposure
from these inferior Revolutions, that all those changes, that are taken for
the Giddy turns of Fortune's Wheel, shall serve to approach him the faster to
the blessed Mansion he would arrive at.

REFLECTION VII.
Upon the Sight of a Windmill standing still.
Genorio, Eusebius, Lindamor. Genesis YOur Eyes, Gentlemen, have been so long
fixed upon this Windmill, that in spite of the Barrenness of the Subject, I
cannot but suspect it may have afforded one, or each of you* an Occasional
Meditation.


Eusebius. To justify your Conjecture, Genorio, I will confess to you, That I was
considering with my self, that if one, who knew not the Miller's Trade, and
Design, should look upon this Structure, he would think the Owner worthy of so
incommodious a Mansion, if not of a Room in Bedlam; for we see he has chose to
erect this Fabric in a Solitary place, and upon the cold and bleak top of a
swelling Ground, where nothing shelters it from the Violence of a Wind, whilst
its high Situation exposes it to the successive Violences of them all: But he
that is acquainted with the Exigencies of the Miller's Design, and Trade, will
think he has made a very proper choice, in scating himself in a place where no
Wind can blow, that he shall not be able to make an Advantage of. And having
considered this, Genorio, my Thoughts, when you interrupted them, were making
this Application of it, That we ought not to be too forward to censure Men,
otherwise Virtuous, and Discreet, for engaging themselves upon some accounts to
troublesome and unsettling Employments; for if the end be not mischosen, the
means are to be estimated by their tendency thereunto; and though a calmer
condition of Life, might be in it self more desirable, yet when a more exposed
one, can make him that is qualified for such Employments more serviceable in
his Generation, this may, upon that account, be more Eligible than the other,
since, as it exposes him to more hardships, so, in those very hardships, it
affords him more Opportunities of prosecuting his Aims, so that his Station is
recommended to him by those very Circumstances that make other Men dislike it.


Genesis But may not I also know what Thoughts this worthy Theme suggested to
Lindamor?


Lind. I was, Genorio, taking notice, that this whole Fabric is indeed but a
large Engine, where almost every thing, as well as the Sails and the Wheels, is
framed and fitted for the Grinding of Corn: But, though this whole Structure be
Artificially enough contrived, yet it can now do nothing in order to its end,
for want of such a light and Airy thing as a breath of VVind, to put all this
into Motion; And, Genorio, this VVind-mill, thus considered, brought into my
Mind the condition of a great Lord, that you and I not long since Visited, and
who is far from being the only Person to whom the Reflection may be applicable;
for one that not knowing his Humor, and his Aims, should see how great a
Provision his plentiful Fortune, and his Skill to manage it, have laid
together, of those things which are wont to be thought the chiefest Instruments
(and perchance the chief Parts) of Happiness, would be apt to envy his
Condition, as discerning nothing that is wanting to it. But alas! the Man
expects and covets Esteem, and Reputation; and though Fame have these
Resemblances to the VVind, that it is an Airy and Unsolid thing, which we must
receive from others, and which we are not only unable to procure for our
selves, but know not how long we shall keep it when we have it, yet the want of
this alone makes all the rest utterly insufficient for his satisfaction. Thus
the not so Great, as Ambitious Alexander, after all the Blood he had spilt in
Conquering the World, is said to have shed Tears, that he had Conquered but
one, when a Philosopher told him there were more. And all the Favors that the
greatest Potentate upon Earth, could heap upon proud Haman, were, by his own
Confession, unable to make him think himself happy, as long as he could not
neglect a Captives neglect of him; all his Greatness did him no good, if but
one Man had the Courage not to Bow to it; and an unsatisfied Appetite of
Revenge, quite spoild the Relish of the great Monarch's Favors, and the fair
Hester's Banquets. Nor do I doubt, Genorio, that we often marvel, if not
repine, at Providence upon a great Mistake; for by refusing to be God's
Servants, Men usually become* so to their own unruly Passions, and Affections.
And therefore, we often very causelessly Envy the Great and Rich, as if they
were as happy as the Advantages vouchsafed them, would make a wise and good
Man; whereas perhaps the Man courts a Reputation, that is not to be acquired by
what Men have, but by what they are, and do; or else he is in love with a Lady
that loves not him, or loves another better: And the Coyness of a Mistress, the
greater Title of a Neighbor, or some such trifling accident, that another
would either not be subject to, or not be much concerned for, will keep him
from Enjoying any of those very things, for which Bystanders Envy him: So just
it is, that in Estimating a Man's condition, we should not only consider what
Possessions he has, but what Desires.


REFLECTION VIII.
Upon his Paring of a rare Summer Apple.
HOw prettily has curious Nature painted this gaudy Fruit? Here is a green that
Emeralds cannot, and Flora's self might boast: And Pomona seems to have
affected, in the fresh and lively Vermilion that adorns this smooth Rind, an
Emulation at Rubies themselves, and to have aimed at manifesting, That she can
give her Vegetable productions, as Lovely, and Orient, though not as lasting,
Colors as those that make Jewels precious Stones; and if, upon the hearing the
Praises this Scarlet deserves* her Blushes ennoble her own Cheeks with so Vivid
a Color* perhaps such a Livery of her Modesty might justify her Pride. In a
word, such pure and tempting Green and Red dye this same polished Skin, that
our Vulgar boldness must be no longer questioned, for rendering that Fruit an
Apple, that inveagled our first Parents: But though these winning Dies delight
me strangely, they are Food for my Eye alone, and not my Stomach; I have no
Palate for Colors, and to relish this Fruit well, and know whether it
performs to the Taste what it promises to the Sight, and justify that
Platonic definition which styles Beauty the Luster and Flower of Goodness; all
this Gay outside is cut and thrown away, and passes but for Parings. Thus in
Opinions, though I look with Pleasure on that neat fashionable Dress, that
smoother Pens so finely Cloth them with, and though I be delighted with the
pretty and spruce Expressions, that Wit and Eloquence are wont to trick them up
with; yet when I mean to examine their true Relish, that, upon liking, I may
make them mine, I still strip and divest them of all those flattering Ornaments
(or cheating Disguises rather) which so often conceal or mis-represent their
true and genuine Nature, and (before ever I swallow them) after they have been
admitted by the more delusible faculty we call Fancy, I make them pass the
severer scrutiny of Reason.

REFLECTION IX.
Upon his Coaches being stopped in a narrow Lane.
HEre, for ought I can guess, my stay is like to be long enough, to afford me
the leisure of a Reflection on it: For I have found already, in this narrow
Lane, a very large Scene to exercise my Patience in; and this Churlish Dray-man
seems resolved to be as tedious to me, as Ludgate Hill is to his Horse, when
his Cart is overloaden. They that are going on Foot to the same place this
Coach should carry me to, find not their Passage hindered, or their Way
obstructed by that which keeps me here; and were I disposed to leave my Coach
behind, and Foot it after them, I might in their Company sooner reach the place
my Designs and Affairs call me to, than I shall (probably) be supplied with
hopes of getting quickly out from hence. Alas! How frequently falls it out thus
in our Journeys toward Heaven? Those whom their adverse Fortune, or a Noble
Scorn, has stripped of, or released from, these troublesome and intangling
Externals, may tread the Paths of Life nimbly, and cheerfully, being unstopt by
many Obstacles, that intercept the Progresses of others. But those stately
Persons, whose Pride or Effeminacy will not permit them to move an Inch toward
Heaven, unless they may be carried thither in Pleasure's easy Coaches, and who
will not bate a Superfluity, or lay by the least Circumstance or Punctilio of
Grandezza, to lessen themselves into a capacity of entering in at the strait
Gate, may soon find these treacherous and over-lov'd Conveniences turned into
cumbersome Cloggs, and real Impediments, that will, if not Block up, at least
Obstruct the passage to the Seat of so much Joy; that even to be cast Ashore
there, by Shipwreck, were a Blessing; and that he is thought unworthy to be
admitted there, that cannot think it his Happiness to reach that place himself,
though he leave all behind him to get thither.

REFLECTION X.
Looking through a Perspective Glass upon a Vessel we suspected to give us
Chase, Sailing betwixt Roterdam and Graves-end on Easter Day, 1648.
and to be a Pyrat.
THis Glass does indeed approach the distrusted Vessel, but it approaches her
only to our Eyes, not to our Ship; if she be not making up to us, this harmless
Instrument will prove no Loadstone to draw her toward us, and if she be, it
will put us into a better readiness to receive her. Such another Instrument in
relation to Death, is the Meditation of it; (by Mortals so much, and so
causelessly, abhorred) for though most Men as studiously shun all Thoughts of
Death, as if, like nice Acquaintances, he would forbear to Visit where he knows
he is never thought of, or as if we could exempt our selves from being Mortal,
by forgetting that we are so; yet does this Meditation bring Death nearer to
us, without at all lessening the real distance betwixt Us and Him: If that last
Enemy be not yet approaching us, this innocent Glass will no more quicken his
pace, than direct his steps; and if he be, without hastening his Arrival, it
will prepare us for his Reception: For my part, my Beardless Chin allows me to
presume, that by the course of Nature, I have yet a pretty stock of Sand in the
upper part of my Hourglass; Wherefore, though I am too Young to say with
Isaac, behold, now I am Old, And I know not the Day of my Death, Genesis 27. 2.
yet since the Youngest and Lustiest of us all, has cause to say with the
Mirror of Patience, When a few Years are come, then shall I go the way whence
I shall not return, Job. 16. 22. and since it is the wise Man's Counsel, Not to
boast our selves of to Morrow, because we know not what a Day may bring forth.
I will endeavor (to use our Savior's terms) To take heed to my self, least
at any time that Day come upon me unawares, Luke 21. 34. And as the only safe
Expedient in order thereunto, I will (in imitation of holy Job) All the Days of
my appointed time wait till my Change come, Job 14. 24.

The II. SECTION, Containing OCCASIONAL REFLECTIONS, Upon the Accidents of an
Ague.
MEDITATION I.
Upon the first Invasion of the Disease.
THis Visit, (Dear A name often given by the Author to his excellent Sister R.
who was almost always with him during his Sickness.
Sophronia) which you intended but for an act of Kindness, proves also one of
Charity; for though it be not many hours since we parted, and though you left
me free from any other discomposure than that which your leaving me is wont to
give me; yet this little time has made so great a change in my Condition, as to
be, I doubt not, already visible in my Looks: For whilst I was sitting quietly
in my Chamber, and was as far from the Thoughts of Sickness, as from any such
disorders as are wont to be the occasions of it; and whilst I was delightfully
entertained, by an Outlandish Virtuoso that came to Visit me, with an Account
of the several attempts that are either made, or designed* in foreign Parts, to
produce Curiosities, and improve Knowledge; I was suddenly surprised with a
Chilness, and a Shivering, that came so unexpected, and increased so fast, that
it was heightened into a downright Fit of an Ague, before I could satisfy my
self what it was. But I confess, that this unwelcome accident had not amazed
me, as well as troubled me, if I had sufficiently considered to what a strange
number and variety of Distempers these frail Carcasses of ours are Obnoxious;
for, if I had called to mind what my Curiosity for Dissections has shown me,
and remembered how many Bones, and Muscles, and Veins, and Arteries, and
Grisles, and Ligaments, and Nerves, and Membranes, and Juices, a humane Body is
made up of, I could not have been surprised, that so curious an Engine, that
consists of so many pieces, whose Harmony is requisite to Health, and whereof
not any is superfluous, nor scarce any insensible, should have some or other of
them out of order, it being no more strange that a Man's Body should be subject
to Pain, or Sickness, than that an Instrument with above a thousand Strings (if
there were any such) should frequently be out of Tune, especially since the
bare change of Air may as well discompose the Body of a Man, as untune some of
the Strings of such an Instrument; so that even the inimitable Structure of
humane Bodies is scarce more admirable, than that such curious and elaborate
Engines can be so contrived, as not to be oftener out of order than they are;
the preservation of so nice and exact a Frame being the next wonder to its
Work-man-ship. And indeed, when I consider further, how many outward accidents
are able to destroy the Life, or, at the least, the Health, even of those that
are careful to preserve them; and how easily the Beams of a warm Sun, or the
Breath of a cold VVind, or too much, or too little Exercise, a Dish of green
Fruit, or an infectious Vapor, or even a sudden Fright, or ill News, are able
to produce Sickness, and perhaps Death; and when I think too, how many evitable
Mischiefs our own Appetites, or Vices, expose us to, by acts of Intemperance,
that necessitate the Creatures to offend us, and practices of Sin, whereby we
provoke the Creator to punish us; when I say, I consider all this, and
consequently how many Mischiefs he must escape that arrives at Gray-hairs; I
confess, the commonness of the Sight cannot keep me from thinking it worth some
wonder, to see an Old man, especially if he be any thing Healthy. But these
kinds of Thoughts (Sophronia) are seldom entertained, unless they be excited
by some unwelcome Occasions; and when we are long accustomed to Health, we take
it for granted, that we shall enjoy it, without taking it for a Mercy that we
are so; we are not sensible enough of our continual need and dependence on the
divine Goodness, if we long and uninterruptedly enjoy it; and by that
unthankful heedlesness we do, as it were, necessitate Providence to deprive us
of its wonted supports, to make us sensible that we did enjoy, and that we
always need them: It being but fit that Mercies should cease to be constant,
which, their constancy only, that should be their indearment, keeps us from
entertaining as Mercies; I will therefore (Sophronia) endeavor to derive this
advantage from this sudden Fit of Sickness, to make me thankful for Health,
when God shall be pleased to restore it me, and to keep me from reckoning
confidently upon the lastingness of it: For though we are very unapt to take
even the Wise man's Counsel, where he forbids us to boast our selves of to
Morrow, because we know not what a Day may bring forth; yet by such accidents I
find, that Solomon spoke much within compass, and had not done otherwise, if
for a Day he had substituted an Hour: For so many, and so various are the
unfore-seen accidents to which we poor Mortals are exposed, that the
continuance of our Health, or Prosperity, do much more merit our thanks, than
the interruption of them can deserve our wonder. And I must confess,
(Sophronia) that though my falling Sick may be but my unhappiness, my being so
much surprised at it was my fault.

MEDITATION II.
Upon the immoderate Heat and Cold of the Aguish Fit.
ONe that, not knowing what Ails me, should come in, and see me in this soft
Bed, not only covered, but almost oppressed, with Clothes, would confidently
conclude, that, whether or no I be distressed by the contrary Quality, I cannot
at least be troubled with Cold; and if he himself were so, he will be apt to
Envy me. And if instead of coming in my Cold fit, he should Visit me in my Hot
one, and see me with my Shoulders and Arms quite uncovered, and nothing but the
single Sheet on the rest of my Body; he would be apt to think, that I must lie
very cool. But alas! in spite of all that lies upon me, an internal Frost has
so diffused it self through every Part, that my Teeth chatter, and my whole
Body does shake strongly enough to made the Bed it self do so; and, though I
still wish for more Clothes, yet those that are heaped on me, can so little
control this praeternatural Cold, that a Pile of them might sooner be made
great enough to Crush than to VVarm me: So that when I Traveled even in frosty
Nights, the VVinter had nothing near so strong an Operation on me. And as that
external Cold was far more supportable whilst it lasted, so it was incomparably
more easy for me, by Exercise, and otherwise, to deliver my self from it.

Thus, when a Great or Rich Man's mind is distempered with Ambition, Avarice,
or any immoderate Affection, though the Bystanders, that see not what disquiets
him, but see what great store of Accommodations fortune has provided for him,
may be drawn to Envy his Condition, and be kept very far from suspecting that
he can want that Contentment, the means of which they see him so Richly
supplied with: And yet alas! as the Colder heat of the external Air is much
less troublesome to a Man in Health, though furnished with an ordinary
proportion of Clothes, than the Cold or Hot fit of an Ague, with a pile of
Blankets first, and then a single Sheet; so to a Vigorous and Healthy
constitution of mind, External inconveniences are much more supportable than
any Accommodations can make the condition of a distempered Soul. Let us not
then judge of Men's happiness, so much by what they have, as by what they are,
and consider both, that Fortune can but give much, and it must be the Mind that
makes that much enough: And that, as it is more easy to endure Winter, or the
Dog Days in the Air, than in the Blood; so a Healthful mind, in spite of
Outward inconveniences, may afford a Man a condition preferrable to all
External accommodations without that.

MEDITATION III.
Upon the Succession of the Cold and Hot Fit.
WHen the cold Fit first seized me, me-thought it was rather melted Snow than
Blood that Circulated in my Veins, where it moved so Inordinately, and
maintained the vital Flame so Penuriously, that the greatest Sign which was
left to distinguish this Cold from that of Death, was, its making me shake
strong enough to shake the Bed I lay on. I called for more and more Clothes,
only because I needed them, not because I found any relief by them: I fancied
the torrid Zone to be of a far more desirable Constitution than that we call
the Temperate; and as little as I am wont to reverence vulgar Chemists, I then
envied their Laborants, whose employment requires them to attend the Fire: But
when the Cold Fit was once over, it was quickly succeeded by a Hot one, which
after a while I thought more troublesome than it. I threw off the Clothes much
faster than my former importunity had procured them to be laid on me; and I,
that could a little before scarce feel all that had been heaped on me, could
not now support a single Sheet, but thought its weight oppressed me.

I envied the Inhabitants of Norway, and Iceland, far more than those that
dwell either in the richest Province of East India, or of the Golden Coast it
self: And of all Creatures, not Rational, I thought the Fishes the happiest,
since they Live in a cool Stream, and, when they please, may Drink as much as
they List.

If then (Sophronia) the self-same Person may, within less than two hours, have
such different apprehensions of his own Condition, as now to complain of that
as a sad Grievance, which but an hour before he wished for as a Relief; we may
well acknowledge, that we frequently mistake in estimating the Hardships and
Afflictions we complain of, and find them not so uneasy as we make them,
whilst we not only endure the whole Affliction that troubles us, but often
increase it, by repining at the envied Condition of others.

An afflicted Man is very apt to fancy, that any kind of Sickness, that for the
present troubles him, is far less supportable than if it were exchanged for
another Disease; and imagines his case to be so singular, that one cannot say
to him in Saint Paul's Language, No Temptation has befallen you, but that which
is common to Men, 1 Cor. 10. 13. He presumes, that he could far more easily
support his Crosses, if instead of his present Disease, he had this or that
other, though, if the Exchange were made, he would perchance wish for his first
Sickness, if not be as much troubled at his own Folly, as with the Disease. He
that is tormented with the Gout, is apt to envy any Sick man that is exempted
from that Roaring pain, and able to Walk about; He that is swelled with the
Dropsy, fancies all Persons happy whose Diseases allow them Drink to quench
their Thirst: And the Blind man envies both these, and thinks no Persons so
miserable in this World as those that cannot see the World. Fevers burn us,
Agues shatter us, Dropsies drown us, Phrensies unman us, the Gout tortures us,
Convulsions wrack us, Epilepsies fell us, Collicks tear us; and in short, there
is no considerable Disease that is not very troublesome in it self, how ever
Religion may sanctify and sweeten it: For as a Fortress, whose Defendants are
not Treacherous, can scarce be taken otherwise than either by Famine, or Storm;
so Life, for whose preservation Nature is so faithfully sollicitous, cannot be
extinguished, unless either Chronical Diseases do Lingringly destroy, or some
Acute do hastily snatch it away. And indeed, if a Disease prove Mortal, it is no
more than is to be expected, if it tire out the Patient with tedious
Languishments, or else dispatch him with dismal Symptoms: Nor is it in point of
Sickness only, that we are often more unhappy than we need, by Fancying our
selves more unhappy than we should be, if we were allowed to exchange that
which now troubles us, for any thing which does not. But there are Evils,
which, though exceeding contrary in appearance, and circumstances, do yet agree
in being extremely troublesome; as the possessed Wretch our Savior cured in the
Gospel, though he were sometimes cast into the Fire, and sometimes into the
Water, yet in both states was tormented by the same Devil, who in variety of
Inflictions still expressed the same Malice. But we should make a righter
Estimate of suffering, if we did but consider, that much uneasiness is annexed
to an Afflicted condition in general; and that therefore, which we are sensible
of, may proceed rather from the general nature of Sicknesses, and Crosses, than
from the particular Kind and Degree of ours. And indeed, if a Man were
permitted to exchange his Disease with those of others, he would often find his
granted wishes to bring him a variety of Mischiefs, rather than an Exemption
from them; and many of those that we Envy, as thinking them far less Sufferers
than our selves, do look with invidious Eyes on us, and do but dissemble their
Grievances more handsomely than we, not find them more easy than ours. And
that of Saint Peter may be more generally applied, than most Men think, where
he exhorts to constancy, upon this consideration, That the same Sufferings are
accomplished upon our Brethren in the World, 1 Pet. 5. 9. For it is all one as
to the Efficacy of this Lenity, whether our Afflictions be the same with those
of others, in Kind, or not Superior to them in Degree: And I doubt not, but we
should support many of our Grievances as easily as those for which we wish them
exchanged, if the chief account upon which they trouble us, were not rather
that they are the present ones, than the greatest.

MEDITATION IV.
Upon the being let Blood.
ONe of the most troublesome Symptoms in almost all Feverish Distempers, is
wont to be Thirst; and in mine it was importunate to a degree, that made me
very much so, in frequently soliciting those that were about me for Drink,
which, in the heat of the Fit, seemed so desirable an Object, that it then much
lessened my wonder at that parched King's agreement, who, urged with Thirst,
sold his Liberty for a full Draught of cold Water. But alas! I sadly found,
that the Liquor I swallowed so Greedily, afforded me but a very transient
Relief, the latter being gone almost as soon as the former had passed through my
Throat, so that not only it did but amuse me, not Cure me; but, which is worse,
Drinking it self increased my Thirst, by increasing the Fever, whose uneasy
Symptom that was. Wherefore, seeing all the cooling Juleps that could be
administered, did free me from nothing but the Expectation of being much
relieved by such slight and palliative Medicines; the Doctor thought himself
this Day obliged to a quite contrary, and yet a more generous Remedy; and
ordered, that, instead of giving me Drink, they should take away Blood, as
judging it the best and far the surest course to take away the uneasy Symptom,
by removing that which Foments the cause.

Thus when the Mind is distempered with turbulent Commotions, and the
disquieted Appetite does too restlessly and eagerly crave Objects, which,
though perhaps in themselves not absolutely Bad, are at least made, by a
Conjunction of Circumstances, unfit and dangerous for the Person that longs for
them: We, like unskilful or unruly Patients, fondly imagine, that the only
way to appease our Desires, is, to grant them the Objects they so Passionately
tend to. But the wise and sovereign Physician of Souls, who considers not so
much what we do wish, as what we should wish, often discerns, that this
praeternatural Thirst indicates and calls for a Lancet, rather than a Julep,
and knows it best to attempt the Cure, rather by taking away somewhat that we
have than by giving us that which only a Spiritual superfluity reduces us to
want: And in effect, we often see, that as a few Ounces of Blood taken away in
a Fever, does cool the Patient more than the giving him ten times as much
Drink would do; so a few Afflictions, by partly letting out, and partly
moderating our corrupt Affections, do more compose and appease a Mind molested
with inordinate Appetites, than the Possession of a great many of the Objects
we impotently desire. Whilst our Appetites are roving, and unreasonable, and
insatiate, the obtaining of this or that particular Object does but amuse the
Patient, not take away the Disease; whereas seasonable, and sanctified Crosses,
that teach us to know our selves, and make us sensible how little we deserve,
and how little the things we are so Greedy of could make us happy, if obtained,
may reduce us to a Resignation, and Tranquillity of Mind, preferrable to those
over-valu'd things, which, as it keeps us from enjoying, so it keeps us from
needing. Thus Zacheus, who, whilst a Publican never thought he had enough, when
he had once entertained our Savior, though he offered to make a quadruple
Restitution of what ever he had fraudulently acquired, was, upon a sudden, by
being freed from Avarice, grown so Rich, that he was forward to give no less
than half he had to the Poor; as if his Divine Guest had wrought upon his
Goods, such Miracles as he had done upon the five Loaves, and two Fishes, of
which the Remains amounted to more than the whole Provision was at first.

MEDITATION V.
Upon the Taking of Physic.
THe last bitter Potion that I took, (Sophronia) was, I remember, sweetened with
the hopes were given me with it, that it might prove the last I should need to
take, and would procure me a settled and durable Health: But I find by sad
Experience, That the benefit I derived from it is nothing near so lasting as it
was welcome; for I am now reduced to take Physic again, and I fear must often
do so, before I shall be able to dislodge this troublesome Ague that haunts me:
For though the last Physic I took, wrought so well, that I hoped it had
brought away not only the ill Humors themselves, but the very sources of them;
yet by the effect of what I took this Morning, I not only find there is as much
to be purged away now as there was then, but, what is sadder, I can scarce hope
this Physic will excuse me from the need of taking more again ere long: But
though it is a troublesome thing, and must be often repeated, yet it is a
salutary thing too, and cannot be more unpleasant than it is useful; and as
Loathsome as it is, a Sickness were far worse. Thus when a relenting Sinner has
endeavored to wash away his Sins with his Tears, he may possibly think himself
so thoroughly washed in that abstersive Brine, (which yet owes its cleansing
Virtue not to its own Nature, but to the Blood of Christ) that if he be a new
Convert, and be entertained with those Ravishing delights wherewith God is
often pleased to engage such returning Prodigals, (as the Kind Father welcomed
his Riotous Son with Feasting, and with Music) that he is apt to fancy
Repentance to be like Baptism, which, being received once for a Man's whole
Life, needs never be renewed. But though, during such transports, an
unexperienced Convert may be apt to cast the Gauntlet to the World, saying in
his Spiritual prosperity, that he shall never be moved; yet, as our Savior
speaks, The Spirit indeed is willing, but the Flesh is weak; and too commonly
our Resolutions flagg with our Joys, and those that a while before imagined
they despised the World, find themselves Worsted, if not Captivated, by it; and
find it far more difficult than they thought it, to Live in the Company of
Sinners without being of their Number, and in so defiled a World without being
spotted by it.

And as the same David, who said in his Prosperity, he should never be moved,
said in his Distress, he should one Day perish by the hand of Saul: So many of
those, that whilst their Tears of Repentance, and of Joy, are not yet dried off
their Eyes, are apt to defy and contemn all the Ghostly enemies, and
difficulties, that oppose their present zealous Resolutions, will perhaps in a
while after, when they meet with unexpected Impediments, and Foyls, change
their confidence into despair, and think those very Enemies, whom they lately
looked on as Despicable, to be Insuperable: But as Physic, that does good for
a time, ought not to be rejected, because it does good but for a time; nor
should we reject the only sure means of our present Recovery, for fear of
future Relapses; so, though we sadly find that Repentance must be repeated, and
that after we have practiced it often, we must have need of it again; yet since
it is the only proper means to recover a Soul out of a state of Sin, which is
worse than any Disease, and leads to the worst of Deaths, we must never suffer
our selves to be so far Discouraged, as to forgo so necessary and so profitable
a Duty, and must not more frequently Relapse into faults, than renew our Sorrow
for them, and our Resolves against them: For Innocence indeed is far more
desirable than Repentance, as Health is than Physic. But as Physic is more
Eligible than the continuance of Sickness, so is Repentance more Eligible than
continuing in the state of Sin: And as the Drinking even of a bitter Potion is
a less Evil than the heat, and thirst, and restlesness of an Ague; so to lament
for Sin here, is a far less uneasy thing than to do it in a place where there
is nothing but remediless VVailing, and Gnashing of Teeth. It Is true, that our
Souls are in this too like our Bodies, that our whole Lives are spent betwixt
Purging away of naughty Humors, and accumulating them: And methinks I hear
the Flesh still saying unto the Spirit, as Ruth did to Naomi, The Lord do so to
me, and more also, if ought but Death part thee and me, Ruth 1. 14. But
although there are Defilements, which, though often washed off, will as often
come again to blemish us; Rom.. 8. 13.
and though the Deeds of the (...).
Body, will scarce all of them perfectly be put to Death, but with the Body it
self; yet next to an uninterrupted state of Health, frequent and early
Recoveries are desirable: And though the shameful necessity of needing to beg
many pardons for the same fault, may justly make an ingenious Christian cry out
with Saint Paul, O! Wretched Man that I am, who shall deliver me from the Body
of this Death; yet the same sense of his own frailty, that puts this
Exclamation into his Mouth, may comfort his Heart, by its being a pledge, that
he shall one Day be able Exultingly to say with the same Apostle in another
place, Thanks be to God which gives us the Victory, through our Lord Jesus
Christ, 1 Cor. 15. 57.

MEDITATION VI.
Upon the Sirrups and other sweet things sent him by the Doctor.
THis complaisant Physician (Sophronia) is you see very sollicitous, that his
Remedies should as well gratify the Patient, as oppose the Disease: And
besides, that this Julip is tinged with Sirrup of Clove-gilly-flowers, that it
may at once delight the Palate, and the Eye; some of these other Remedies are
sweetened with as much Sugar, as if they came not from an Apothecaries Shop, but
a Confectioners. But my Mouth is too much out of Taste to relish any thing
that passes through it; and though my Sickness makes this Flattering of the
Palate almost necessary to the rendering these Medicines takable by me, yet upon
the account of the same Distemper, all that the Doctor's tenderness and skill
could do to make them Pleasant, can at most but keep them from being Loathsome.
And therefore, you will easily believe, Sophronia, that I enjoy these sweet
things upon a score, that if it does Imbitter them, does at least, as to me,
deprive them of their Nature: So that he, that for the sake of these Sirrups,
and Electuaries, should, notwithstanding the Malady that needs them, envy me,
might be suspected to be troubled with a worse Disease than an Ague is, a
Frenzy.

Thus there are many Favorites of Fortune, whose seeming Enjoyments may
perchance be Envied by those that do but Gaze on their Condition, whilst it is
rather pitty'd by those that know it: To be brought by Greatness of Power, or
Riches, and Effeminacy of Mind, to that pass, that they seldom hear any thing
but their own Praises, even when their Actions merit Reprehension, and that
they can relish nothing that is not sweetened with so much of Flattery, as
quite to disguise, and perhaps pervert, its Nature. These, as I was going to
say, and such other unhappy Privileges, are things, which (whatever Fools may
think) will not recommend Greatness to a considering Man, and are far more fit
to procure the Possessour's ruin, than wise Men's envy: And besides, that a
vain and impotent Soul is, by those disquieting Qualities, molested with
greater Distempers than those Gratifications can make amends for, and which
often hinder the full Rellishing of these or any other Pleasure. The delight
these treacherous Delicacies afford, is so much less considerable than the
Weakness they suppose; that it is far more Eligible to be without them than to
need them.

MEDITATION VII.
Upon the want of Sleep.
AH! Dear Sophronia, in spite of all the care, and officiousness of those
diligent Attendants, that you were pleased to send to watch with me, I have
Slept all Night as little as I do now, or as I shall desire to do whilst you
stay here.

This unwelcome leisure brought me as much a Necessity as an Opportunity to
spend the time in entertaining my Thoughts, which on this occasion were almost
as Various, and seemed too as Wild, as, if I had Slept, my Dreams themselves
would have been: And therefore, I presume you will not wonder, if I can now
recall but few of them, and if the rest be as easily Vanished out of my Memory,
as they came abruptly into my Mind.

The first Thought that I remember entertained me, was that which was the most
naturally suggested by the condition I was in: For when I found how tedious and
wearisome each hour was, and observed how long a time seemed to intervene
betwixt the several Divisions that the striking of the Clock made of a Night,
that must at this time of the Year be much shorter than the Day, I could not
but consider, how insupportable their condition must be, to be cast into outer
Darkness, where tormented Wretches lie, not as I do upon a soft Bed, but upon
Fire and Brimstone, where no attendance of Servants, or kindness of Friends, is
allowed them, that need it as much as they deserve it little; and, which is
worst of all, where no Beam of hope is permitted to Consolate them, as if the
Day should Dawn after so Dismal a Night, though protracted to Millions of Ages,
each of whose miserable hours appears an Age.

The next thing I was considering, was, How defective we are in point of
Gratitude to God; I now Blush that I cannot call to Mind the time, when I ever
thought that his having vouchsafed me the power of Sleeping, deserved a
particular Acknowledgment. But now I begin to see that it is our Heedlesness,
not their Uselesness, that keeps us from daily being thankful for a multitude
of Mercies, that we take no notice of; Though it be injurious, That that only
commonness that heightens the Benefit, should keep us from being sensible of
the Greatness of it. I confess I was very lately one of them, who looked upon
Sleep as one of those inconveniences of humane Nature, that merit a
Consolation; and I very little apprehended, that I should ever complain of the
want of Sleep, as of a Grievance, the necessity of it being what I always
looked upon under that Notion: But I now perceive, he was a Wise man, who said,
That God made every thing Beautiful in its Season. And yet, when I consider
the Affinity betwixt Sleep and Death, whose Image it is, I cannot but think it
very unlikely, that this Life should be designed for our Happiness, since not
to lose almost half of it were an Infelicity.

Another thing I remember I was considering, was this, That though want of
Sleep be one of the uneasiest accidents that attend on Sickness, yet in many
cases it proves as useful as it can be unwelcome: For there is a sort of Jolly
people, far more Numerous than I could wish them, who are at utter defiance
with Thinking, and do as much fear to be alone, as they should to do any course
that is naturally productive of so unmanly a fear: And the same Sinful
employments, or Vain pastimes, that make them afraid of being alone, do so much
keep them from the necessity of being so, that they keep them almost from the
very Possibility of it: For in the time of Health, Visits, Businesses, Cards,
and I know not how many other Avocations, which they justly style Diversions,
do succeed one another so thick, that in the Day there is no time left for the
distracted Person to converse with his own Thoughts: And even, when they are
Sick, though they be debarred of many of those wonted Diversions, yet Cards and
Company will give them enough to prove a Charm against Thinking, which the
Patient is so willing, or rather sollicitous, to decline, the need of that
Sickness less troubles him, as it keeps his Body from going abroad, than as it
tends to drive his Thoughts home; so that Sickness does little or nothing
toward the making such Men consider, by casting them upon their Beds, unless
it also hinder them from Sleeping there. But in the long and tedious Nights,
when all the Praters, and the Gamesters (who are usually called good
Companions, but seldom prove good Friends) are withdrawn, and have left our
Patient quite alone, the Darkness of the Night begins to make him discern, and
take some notice of his own Condition* and his Eyes, for want of outward
Objects, are turned inwards, he must, whether he will or no, during the Silence
of the Night, hear those Lessons, which by the Hurry and Avocations of the Day
he endeavored to avoid. And though this be a very unwelcome Mercy, yet it is a
Mercy still, and perhaps the greater for being so unwelcome: For if he could
Sleep in Sickness, as he used to do in Health, he were in great danger of
having his Conscience laid Asleep, till it should be Awaked by the Flames and
Shriecks of Hell. And the design of God in chastning, being to reclaim and
amend us, we not only do, by our want of Reflecting, endure the trouble of
Sickness, without reaping the benefit of it, but also by our shunning to
consider, we are so Ill-natured to our selves, as to lengthen the Sickness, we
are so Impatient of; which is in us as foolish as 'twould be in a nice Patient,
after having been made to take a bitter, but a salutary Potion, to send
unseasonably for Cordials and Julips to hinder the working of it, and so by
such unruliness lose the benefit of the Operation, and lengthen his Pain and
Sickness, to avoid the far less trouble of complying with the Nature of the
Medicine, and the Designs of the Physician: So that Repentance being necessary
to Recovery, and the considering of a Man's own ways as necessary to
Repentance, the want of Sleep, which both allows us time, and imposes on us a
necessity to think, may well be looked upon as a happy Grievance, since it very
much tends to the shortning of our Afflictions, by the disposing us to
Cooperate toward God's aims in sending them.

MEDITATION VIII.
Upon telling the Strokes of an ill-going Clock in the Night.
THe same Violence of my Fit, that made me very much need Sleep, allowed me so
little of it, that I think I missed not hearing one stroke of the Clock all the
Night long. But since you know, Sophronia, that the Clock is kept by the
Soldiers that are Quartered in the place where it stands, you will easily
believe, that it is not very carefully looked to, especially since they are not
only wont to let it go Ill, but do often times make it do so on purpose, and as
may best comply with the Officers occasions, and as they would have the Guards
that are to be set here, or to be sent hence, sooner or later Relieved. Of this
uncertain going of the Clock, I never had occasion to take so much notice as
the last Night, when, lying too constantly awaked, I began to observe, that
though all the hours were so tedious, as to seem every one of them
extraordinary long, yet they manifestly appeared to me not to be equally so;
and therefore, when the Clock struck Eleven, to satisfy my self whether it did
not mis-inform me, I called to one that sat up by me for the VVatch I use to
measure the time with in nice Experiments, and found it to want but very little
of Midnight; and not much above an hour after, when by my VVatch it was but
about one, those that kept the Clock, whether out of Negligence, or Design, or
to make amends for past Slowness, made it strike two, which seemed to me to
hint a not unusefull Rule in estimating the length or shortness of Discourses:
For there are Cases, where the difficulty or importance of the Subject is such,
that though it cost a Man many words, yet, if what he says be not sufficiently
fitted to the Exigency of the Occasion, and the Theme, he may speak much,
without saying enough. But on the other hand, if (as it often happens) a Man
speak either Unseasonably, Erroneously, or Impertinently, he may, though he say
little, talk too much; The paucity or number of Words, is not, as many think
it, that which is in such cases to be chiefly considered; for it is not many, or
few, that are required, but enough. And, As our Clock struck not so often as it
should have done, when it struck Eleven, and yet struck a while after too often
when it struck but two, because the first time it was Midnight, and the second
time it was but one of the Clock; so to estimate whether what is said have its
due length, we are not so much to look whether it be little, or much, as
whether a Man speak in the right time, and say neither more nor less than he
should.

MEDITATION IX.
Upon comparing the Clock and his Watch.
THe occasion I had (Sophronia) to compare the Clock and my Watch, suggested to
me this other Reflection, That the Dyal-plate of the Clock being I know not how
many times larger than that of the Watch, the Circle on which the hours were
marked in the one, did by vast Odds exceed the correspondent Circle of the
other: And yet, though the Index of the Clock had then past through a far
greater quantity of space than that of the Watch, this little Index, being,
when it was indeed Midnight, arrived at the mark of the twelfth hour, when the
greater Index was come but to that of the eleventh, I justly concluded, That
the VVatch did not only go truer, but more forward than the Clock.

Thus in estimating Men's Lives, there is something else to be looked at than
the mere duration of them: For there are some Men, who having Loyter'd and
Trifled away very many Years in the World, have no other Argument of their
Age, than the Church-books of their Gray-hairs; and as little do they indeed
Live, that waste a number of insignificant Years in successive or perpetual
Diversions from the true business and end of Life. These, and many other kinds
of Persons, that consume much Time to little purpose, may be said rather to
have Lasted long, than to have Lived long: As the careless VVanderer, who,
instead of Traveling, does nothing but stray from one wrong way to another,
though he do so at Midsummer from Mornning to Night, may be said to have been
long a Horseback, but not to have performed a long Journey; whereas he, that
by thriftily Husbanding his time, and industriously Improving it, has early
dispatched the business for which he was sent into the World, needs not
Gray-hairs to be reputed to have Lived long enough, and consequently longer
than those that wear Gray-hairs, only because they were Born many Years before
him. In a word, to one of these sorts of Men we may attribute a longer Time,
but to the other a longer Life; (for even the Heathen could say, Non est vivere
sed valere Vita) and within how narrow a compass soever a Man's Life be
confined, if he have Lived so long, as before he comes to the end of Life he
have reached the ends of Living; The attainment of that Measure of Knowledge,
and the practice of those Graces and Virtues that fit a Man to glorify God in
this short Life, and to be Glorified by him in that which shall have no End.

MEDITATION X.
Upon a Thief in a Candle.
THe silence of the Night, and my being unable to Sleep, disposing me to have
my attention very easily excited; I chanced to take notice, that the Dim light
of the Candle, which the Curtains were not drawn so close as to exclude every
where out of the Bed, was on a sudden considerably increased, and continued so
long in that condition, that, for fear of some mischance, I put my Head out of
the Bed to see whence it was that this new and unexpected increase of Light
proceeded; but I quickly found, that 'twas from a Thief (as they call it) in
the Candle, which by its irregular way of making the Flame blaze, had melted
down a good part of the Tallow, and would have spoiled the rest, if I had not
called to one of those that Watched with me, to rescue the remains by the
removal of the Thief. But I had scarce done this, when, I confess to you,
(Sophronia) I found my self invited to make some Reflections upon what I had
done, and to read my self a new Lesson by the Beams of this new Light: For
though this Thief made the Candle shine more strongly, and diffuse a much
greater Light than it did before; yet because it made a great and irregular
waste of the Candle, I ordered it to be taken away; and on this occasion
me-thought I might justly make use of that saying of Pharaoh's forgetful
Butler, I do remember my Faults this Day, Genesis 41. 9. For though I find no
great difficulty in abstaining from other kinds of Intemperance, yet to that of
Studying, my Friends, and especially my Physicians, have often accused me of
being too Indulgent: Nor can I altogether deny, but that in mental Exercises,
there can be Exorbitancies, and Excesses, I may have sometimes been Guilty of
them; and that the things for which I think Life valuable, being the
satisfaction that accrues from the improvement of Knowledge, and the exercise
of Piety, I thought it allowable, if not commendable, to consume or hazard it
for the attainment of those Ends; and esteemed Sickness more formidable for its
unfitting me to learn, and to teach, than for its being attended with pain and
danger, and looked upon what it made me forbear, as far more troublesome than
what ever else it made me endure. But I find my Body is a Jade, and tyres under
my Mind, and a few hours fixed Contemplation does sensibly so spend my Spirits,
as to make me feel my self more weary that the Riding post for twice as many
hours has ever done. Wherefore, since, though the proper use of a Candle be to
consume it self, that it may give others Light, I yet thought fit to have the
Thief taken away, because, though it made the Candle give more Light, it would
have wasted it too fast, and consequently made it expire too soon; I see not
how I can resist their persuasions, that would have me husband better the
little stock of strength Nature has given me, and the rather, by a moderate
expense of it, endeavor to make it shine long, though but Dimly, then consume
it to fast, though for a while to keep up a Blaze: I will therefore endeavor
to learn of this Sickness, and of this Accident, what the Doctors hitherto
could never teach me, and enjoin my self an Abstinence, which to me is more
uneasy, than if Wine, or Women, or other sensual Pleasures were to be the
Objects of it; but if in so difficult an Exercise of Self-denial, I do not
always perform what I am now persuaded to, it is like I shall easily forgive my
self, for but a little hastening the end of my Life to attain the ends of it.

MEDITATION XI.
Upon the being in danger of Death.
I Know that Physicians are wont after their Master Hypocrates, to tell us,
That Fevers which intermit are devoid of Danger: But though an Ague, whilst it
continues such, could not be a mortal Disease; yet why may it not degenerate
into such a one? And for my part, who take the Prognostics of Physicians to be
but Guesses, not Prophesies, and know how backward they are to bid us fear,
till our Condition leave them little hopes of us: I cannot but think that
Patient very ill advised, who thinks it not time to entertain thoughts of
Death, as long as his Doctor allows him any hopes of Life; for in case they
should both be deceived, 'twould be much easier for the mistaken Physician to
save his Credit, than for the unprepared Sinner to save his Soul.

Wherefore, Sophronia, finding my Disease attended with unusual threatening
Symptoms, not knowing where they would end, I last Night thought it fit to
suppose they might end in Death: And two things especially made me the more
ready for such an entertainment of my Thoughts.

One, That we can scarce be too careful and diligent in fitting our selves for
the Acting of a part well, that we can never Act but once; For where the
Scripture tells us, It is appointed for all Men once to Dye; it is immediately
subjoined, That after that comes Judgment; and if we Dye ill once, we shall
never be allowed to Dye again, to see if we would Dye better the second time
than we did the first: But as the Wise man Allegorically speaks, Where the Tree
falls there shall it lie: So that the faults committed in this last and
importantest of humane Actions, being irreparable, I think the only safe way is
to imitate him, who, having said, If a Man Dye, shall he Live again? presently
annexed by way of Inference and Resolution: All the Days of my appointed Time
will I wait till my Change come.

The other consideration that recommended to me the Thoughts of the Grave, was
this, That we may be often sollicitous to provide against many Evils and
Dangers that possibly may never reach us; and many endure from the Anxious
fears of contingent Mischiefs that never will befall them, more Torment than
the apprehended Mischiefs themselves, though really suffered, would inflict.
But Death will sooner or later infallibly come, and never finally deceive our
Expectations, and therefore the fore-thoughts of it are an employment which may
prove, we know not how soon, of use, and will (however) prove of excellent
Advantage: The frequent Meditation of the end of our Lives, conducing so much
to make us lead them well, that the expectation of Death brings not less
Advantages to those that escape the Grave, than to those that descend into it.

Such like considerations (Sophronia) having put me upon the thoughts of Death,
I presume you may have some Curiosity to know what these Thoughts were; and
therefore, though I have neither Fitness, nor Inclination to mention to you
those that almost every Sober person would have upon a Deathbed, as a Man, and
as a Christian, I will only take notice to you of those few that were suggested
to me, by the less general Circumstances of my condition. And I am the more
willing to satisfy you Curiosity now, because I have my self been very
inquisitive on the like occasion: For the approach of Death will (if any thing
can) make Men serious and considerate, being for good and all to go off the
Stage; they make a truer and sincerer Judgment of the World they are ready to
leave, and then have not the wonted Partiality for the pleasures and profits of
a Life they are now abandoning. And as the Mind looks with other Eyes upon the
World, when Death is ready to shut those of the Body; so Men are then wont as
well to speak their Thoughts more franckly, as to have them better grounded.
Death stripping most Men of their Dissimulation, as well as of other things it
makes them part with; and indeed it is then high time for the Soul to put off
her Disguises, when she is ready to put off the very Body it self.

One thing then that I was considering, (Sophronia) was, in how wretched a
condition I should now be, if I had been of the same Mind with the generality
of those, who are of the same Age with me: For these presume, That Youth is as
well made for Pleasures, as capable of them, and is not more a Temptation to
Vanity, than an Excuse for it. They imagine themselves to do a great Matter,
if, whilst Youth lasts, they do so much as resolve to grow better when it is
gone; and they think, That for a Man to be otherwise than Intentionally
Religious before his Hair begin to change Color, were not only to lose the
privileges of Youth, but to incroach upon those of old Age. But alas! How few
are Destroyed by that incurable Disease, in comparison to those that Dye before
they attain it? And how little comfort is it upon a Death Bed, to think, that
by the course of Nature, a Man might have Lived longer, when that very Thought
might justly prove Dismal to an unprepared Man, by suggesting to him, that this
early Death may argue the Measure of his Iniquities exceeding great, and that
this untimely End is not so much a Debt due to Nature, as a Punishment of Sin.
All the fruition of these deluding Pleasures of Sin, cannot countervail the
Horror that a Dying Man's Review of them will create, who not only sees
himself upon the point of leaving them for ever, but of suffering for them as
long. And on the contrary, the Review of Youthful pleasures declined for
Virtue's or Religion's sake, will afford a Dying Man far higher Joys than their
Fruition would ever have afforded him.

MEDITATION XII.
Upon the same Subject.
ANd one thing more there is, (Sophronia) that I dare not conceal from you, how
much cause soever I have to blush at the disclosing it; And it is, That I judge
quite otherwise of a competent preparation for Death now I am near it, than I
did when I was in health. And therefore, if one, that, since his Conscience was
first thoroughly awakened, still resolved to be a Christian, and though he too
often broke those good Resolutions, never renounced them, but tripp'd and
stumbled in the way to Heaven, without quitting his purpose of continuing in
it, finds a formidableness in the approach of Death: How uncomfortable must
that approach be to those that have still run on in the ways of Sin, without
once so much as seriously intending to forsake them? A Youth free from Scandal,
and sometimes productive of Practices that were somewhat more than Negative
piety, is not so frequent among those that want not opportunities to enjoy the
Vanities and Pleasures of the World, but that the Charity of other being
seconded by that great inward flatterer Self-love, made me imagine that I was
in a Condition fitter to wish for Death, than to fear it. But now I come to
look on Death near at hand, and see beyond the Grave, that is just under me,
that bottomless Gulf of Eternity; methinks it is a very hard thing to be
sufficiently prepared for a Change, that will transmit us to the Bar of an
Omniscient Judge, to be there Doomed to an endless state of infinite Happiness
or Misery. There is no Art of Memory like a Death-Bed's Review of ones Life;
Sickness, and a nearer Prospect of Death, often makes a Man remember those
Actions wherein Youth and Jollity made him forget his Duty; and those frivolous
Arguments, which when he was in Health, and free from Danger, were able to
excuse him to his own indulgent Thoughts, he himself will scarce now think
Valid enough to excuse him unto God, before whom, if the sinless Angels cover
their Faces, sinful Mortals may justly tremble to be brought to appear. When
the approach of Death makes the Bodily eyes grow Dim, those of the Conscience
are enabled to discern, That as to many of the Pleas we formerly acquiesc'd in,
it was the prevalence of our Senses that made us think them Reason: And none of
that Jolly company, whose examples prevailed with us to join with them in a
course of Vanity, will stand by us at the Bar to excuse the Actions they
tempted us to: And if they were there, they would be so far from being able to
justify us, that they would be condemned themselves. It Is true, (Sophronia) if
we consider Death only as the conclusion of Life, and a Debt all Men sooner or
later pay to Nature, not only a Christian, but a Man, may entertain it without
Horror: But if one consider it as a change, That after having left his Body to
rot in the Grave, will bring his Soul to the Tribunal of God, to answer the
miscarriages of his whole past Life, and receive there an unalterable Sentence
that will Doom him to endless and unconceivable Joys, or everlasting and
inexpressible Torments; I think it is not inconsistent either with Piety or
Courage, to look upon so great a change with something of Commotion: And many
that would not fear to be put out of the World, will apprehend to be let into
Eternity.

MEDITATION XIII.
A further Continuation.
ANother thing, Sophronia, which my present state suggested to me, was, a
Reflection on the great mistake of those that think a Deathbed the fittest and
opportunest place to begin Repentance in: But sure these Men are very little
acquainted, either with the disadvantages of a dangerous Sickness, or the
nature of Repentance. It Is true, that Sin and Death do more easily frighten
one, when they are looked on as both together: But I much doubt whether the
being frighted by Hell, be sufficient to give a Man a well-grounded hope of
Heaven: For when we see Sin and Torment at one view, and so near one to
another, it is not so easy to be sure which of the two it is that, as we
presume, scares the Sinner toward Heaven. And surely Repentance, which ought
to be the change of the whole Man, and in some sense the work of the whole
Life, is very improperly begun, when Men have finished that course, which it
should have guided them in: Nor have Men cause to presume, that when God is
severely punishing them for their Sins, he will vouchsafe them so great a Grace
as that of Repentance, which they would none of, till it could not make them
serviceable to him. And as for the oppornity it is hoped an expiring State may
give Men for Repentance, they must needs be great Strangers to great
Sicknesses, that can promise themselves so unlikely a matter: Who can secure
them, that the Acuteness of the Disease will not invade the Brain? and as
Deliriums and Phrensies are not unfrequent in Fevers, and other acute
Diseases, so in case they happen to persevere, the VVretch'd patient is cast
into a desperate condition, even on this side the Grave, and as near as the
Body is to its Dissolution, the Man may be Dead a pretty while before it.

But supposing he escape these Accidents, which make Repentance impossible, a
dangerous Sickness has other Circumstances enough to make it very uneasy: For
the Organical faculties of the Mind cannot but be dulled and prejudiced by the
Discomposure of the Spirits, by which their Functions are to be exercised; and
the sense of Pain, the troublesome prescriptions of Physicians, the loathsome
and bitter Potions, the weakening Operation of Physic, the Languishments
produced by want of Spirits, the Restlessness proceeding from Heat and want of
Sleep, the distracting Importunity of those interested Persons, especially if
any of them be suspected to hover about the Dying Man's Bed, as Birds of Prey
that wait for a Carcass, the Sighs and Tears of Friends and Relations that come
to take their last Farewell, and to Imbitter it, The Lawyer that must be
directed to draw up the Will, the Divine that must be allowed to say something
concerning the Soul, and the affrighted Conscience, that alone brings more
disquiet than all the rest put together, do make a Dying Man's condition so
Amazing, so Dismal, and so Distracting, that to think this an Opportune time to
begin such a work, (which may well enough employ the whole Man in his calmest
state of mind) is a Madness as great as any, that even a Deathbed can, by the
translation of the Humors into the Brain, occasion: For my part, I think it so
wild, and so unadvisable a thing to put off the beginning to provide all Graces
to a Deathbed, that I think it uneasy enough so much as to exercise then
those that were acquired before; Men being in that state commonly unable so
much as to Reap the consolation they have been Sowing all along a pious Life.

And this (Sophronia) brings into my mind a consideration, which being taken
from the very nature of a Deathbed Repentance, should methinks very much
deterr Men from resolving before hand to rely on it; And it is this, That
granting those (Socians, and others) to be mistaken, that think so late a
Repentance to come too late to be available; yet the Dying Sinner, though he
may be kept from despair of passing to Heaven, can scarce in an ordinary way
have a comfortable assurance of getting thither! For though it be said, That a
true Repentance cannot come too late, yet it is a hard thing to be certain,
that so late a Repentance is true. Since Repentance confessedly imports an
abandoning and renouncing of Sin, at least in Hearty purpose and resolution;
it is very difficult for an habitual Sinner, that remembers what vows and
purposes of change of Life, Sicknesses or Dangers have formerly induced him to
make, which were forgotten, or violated, when the apprehensions that occasioned
them were over; it is hard I say for such a One to be sure, that his present
Repentance is not of the same ignoble and uncurrent kind, since he has no
Experience to satisfy him that it would be ordinarily, though not constantly,
prevalent over the opposite Temptations; and since also (which is mainly to be
considered) it is so easy for a Man to mistake for the true hatred of Sin, and
the love of God, a horror of Sin springing from the present painful sense of
the Mischief procured by it, together with the great fear of the approaching
Torments that it threatens, and a strong desire of going to Heaven, when seeing
himself unable to stay any longer on Earth, he must get thither to escape Hell.
And as it is thus difficult, when a Man already feels much Punishment for Sin,
and sees himself in danger of more, to discern clearly upon what account it is,
that he is sorry for what he has committed; so it must be certainly a state
unspeakably anxious and uncomfortable to find ones self dragged to the Grave,
without knowing whether the last Trumpet shall call him thence to Heaven, or to
Hell: And if he should be deceived in judging of the Validity of his
Repentance, the fatal error would be remediless, and the mistake far sadder
and more horrid than that of the Syrians, who, when they thought they were
arrived Victorious at Dothan, found themselves at the mercy of their Enemies in
Samaria, 2 Kings 6. 18. To conclude, (Sophronia) he that resolves not to
renounce his Sins, till he thinks Christ ready to renounce him for them, may
very probably lose his Soul, and has most certainly lost his Ingenuity; and
that will appear a very sad loss for a Man, that being by Death denied the
opportunities of actually leading a new and pious Life, must derive his comfort
from the assurance that he sincerely intends it.

MEDITATION XIV.
Upon the Apprehensions of a Relapse.
I Have now at length, Eusebia, by the goodness of God, regained that measure
of Health, which makes the Doctor allow me to return to my former Studies, and
Recreations, and Diet; and in a word, to my wonted course of Life, so that the
Physician having dismissed himself, nothing seems more seasonable and pertinent
to my present Condition, than that of our Savior to the Paralitick Man, to
whom he gave both Recovery, and an Admonition, which, if he obeyed, he found
the more advantageous of the two; Behold, thou art made whole, Sin no more,
least a worse thing come unto thee. But I am not so free from the apprehensions
of an Ague, as my Friends think me from the danger of it: For having sadly
Experienced the uneasiness of Sickness, I am thereby brought, though at no
easy Rate, to set a high Value upon Health, and be a very Jealous Preserver of
so great a Blessing; and those petty Chilnesses that formerly I regarded not,
but was apt to impute to nothing but Fumes of the Spleen, or Melancholy
Vapors, are now able to give me hot Alarms, and make me apt to fancy them the
forerunners, if not the beginners, of the Cold fit of an Ague, the first
Invasion of that Disease having been preceded by the like Distempers; and
accordingly, I carefully avoid the least Irregularities in point of Diet, or of
any other kind that may any ways endanger a Relapse into the Disease that once
handled me so ill. But why should I be more apprehensive for my Body than my
Mind; and if at any time (as it may but too often happen) any Sin should come
to be prevalent in my Mind, why should I not be sollicitously afraid of all the
occasions and approaches of it, and tremble at these Commotions of the
Appetite, which would not else perhaps be formidable to me, in case I have
found that such Beginnings indulged or neglected have ended in actual Sin, the
real Disease of the Soul; and as dangerous Sicknesses do for the most part
leave a crasie Disposition behind them, which threatens Relapses, so Sins once
prevalent, though afterward suppressed, do yet leave behind them a secret
Disposition or Propensity to the Repetition of the same faults; and as it is
less difficult to find examples of Bodily Diseases, than of Spiritual ones,
where the Patient is protected from Relapses, so I think we should be more
watchful against falling back into the Sins, than into the Sicknesses, we have
once found our selves subject to, unless we would think, that a greater Danger,
and of a Nobler part, deserved less of our care.

MEDITATION XV.
Upon his Reviewing and Tacking together the several Bills filled up in the
Apothecary's Shop.
EIther my Curiosity, Sophronia, or my Value of Health, has made it my Custom,
when I have passed through a course of Physic, to review the particulars it
consisted of; That taking notice by what Remedies I found most good, and by
what, little or none; if I should fall into the like Distemper for the future,
I might derive some advantage from my past Experience. In compliance with this
Custom, as I was this Day reviewing and putting together the Doctor's several
Prescriptions sent me back by the Apothecary; Good God! said I, in my self,
what a multitude of unpleasant Medicines have I been ordered to take: The very
Numbering, and Reading them were able to Discompose me, and make me almost Sick,
though the taking of them helped to make me Well. And certainly, if when I was
about to enter into a course of Physic, all these loathsome Medicines, and
uneasy Prescriptions, had been presented to me together, as things I must
take, and comply with, I should have utterly despaired of a Recovery that must
be so obtained, and should not perhaps have undertaken so difficult and tedious
a Work, out of an apprehension that it would prove impossible for me to go
through with it. Thus when a Man considers the Duties, and the Mortifications,
that are requisite to a recovery out of a state of Sin, into a state of Grace,
he must be resolute enough, if he be not deterred from undertaking the
conditions that Piety requires, by so many and great difficulties as will
present themselves to his affrighted Imagination: But let not this make him
Despondent; for it is true, that these discomposing Medicines, if I must have
taken so much as a tenth part of them in one Day, would have either dispatched
me, or disabled me to endure the taking any the next. But then, although I now
see these troublesome Prescriptions all at once, I did not use them so, but
took only one or two harsh Remedies in one Day, and thereby was enabled to bear
them, especially being assisted by moderate Intervalls of Respite, and
supported both by other seasonable Cordials, and by that highest Cordial, the
Hope that the use of these troublesome means of Recovery would soon free me
from the need of them. And thus, though the hardships of Piety are, by the
Ghostly and Carnal enemies of it, wont to be represented to one that begins to
grow a Convert, so great and formidable a Multitude as to be insuperable; yet
if he consider, that though his foresight meet with them all at once, yet he
will need to grapple with them but one after another, and may be as well able
to overcome a Temptation this Day, or to Morrow, as he did another Yesterday:
So that to this case also may in some sense be applied, that (either Counsel,
or Precept) of our Savior, not to be sollicitous for to Morrow, but to charge
no more upon a Day than the trouble that belongs to it. And if he considers
too, That as a wise Physician has always a great care, that his Remedies be not
disproportionate to the Patient's Strength, and after harsh Physic to relieve
him with Cordials, so God will not suffer those that entrust themselves to him
to be tempted above what they are able; but will allow them Cordials after
their Sufferings, in case he do not turn the Sufferings themselves into
Cordials. If (I say) our new Convert shall consider things of this Nature, he
will not be much discouraged by the appearance of difficulties, that will as
much ennoble and indear his success, as they can oppose it; and he will never
despair of Victory in an engagement, where he may justly hope to have God for
his Second, and Heaven for his Reward.

OCCASIONAL REFLECTIONS.
The III. SECTION.
REFLECTION I.
Upon the sight of some variously Colored Clouds.
THere is amongst us a sort of vain and flanting Grandees, who for their own
Unhappiness, and their Age's, do but too much resemble these painted Clouds;
for both the one and other are Elevated to a Station, that makes most Men look
upon them, as far above them; and their Conspicuousness is often increased by
the bright Sunshine of the Prince's favor, which, though it really leaves
them Creatures of the same frail Nature that it found them of* does yet give
them a Luster and a Gawdiness, that much attracts the Eyes, and perhaps the
Envy and Respect of those superficial Gazers upon things, that are wont to be
Amused, if not Dazzled, with their insignificant Outsides. But the Parallel
holds further; for as, in spite of these Clouds sublimity and conspicuousness,
they are but Aerie and Unsolid things, consisting of Vapors, and steered by
every VVind: So the fine People I am comparing them too, in spite of their
Exaltation, and of all the Show they make, are really but slight Persons,
destitute of intrinsic and solid worth, and guided either by their own blind
Lusts, and Passions, or else by Interests as fickle as those, (to which it will
be no addition to say) or as variable as the VVind. And as these Clouds, though
they seem Vast as well as High, and are perhaps able, for a while, to make the
Sky somewhat Dark, have usually but a short duration, and either quickly fall
down in Rain, or are quite dissipated, and made to disappear: So these Titled
persons, what Show soever their Greatness makes, do oftentimes, either by a
voluntary Humility and Repentance, as it were, descend of their own accord,
and, by doing of good, endeavor to expiate and make amends for their former
Uselesness, if not Mischiefs; or else, after having been for a while stared at,
they do (some of them more slowly, and some more abruptly) vanish, without
leaving behind them any thing that can so much as entertain our Sight in the
very place, where before they Engrossed it: And this Ruin sometimes happens to
the most Elevated persons, from that very Prince, whose favor made them
attract so many Eyes; as Clouds are oftentimes dispersed before Night, by the
same Sun that had raised and gilded them in the Morning.

REFLECTION II.
Upon his making of a Fire.
HOW many fruitless Blasts have I been spending upon this sullen Fire! 'Twas
not, though, the Greenness of this VVood* that made it so uneasy to be
Kindled; but, 'twas alone the greatness of the Loggs, on which the Fire could
take no hold, but by the intervention of such smaller Sticks as were at first
wanting here: VVitness* that I had no sooner laid on a little Brushwood, but
the Flame, from those kindled Twiggs, invading and prevailing on the Billets*
grew suddenly great enough to threaten to make the House it self part of its
Fuel, and turn it to such Ashes as it makes haste to reduce the VVood into.
Methinks the blaze of this Fire should light me to discern something
instructive in it: These Blocks may represent our Necessary, these Sticks our
less important, Religious practices, and this aspiring Flame, the subtle
Inhabitor of that of Hell. 'Twil be but succeslesly, that the Devil can attempt
our grand Resolves, till he have first Mastered our less considerable ones; and
made his successes against these, not only Degrees, but Instruments, in the
Destroying of the other: Our more neglected and seemingly trivial Affections,
having once received his Fiery impressions, do easily impart them to higher
Faculties, and serve to Kindle solider Materials. It is therefore the safest
way, to be faithful even to our lesser Determinations, and watchful over our
less predominant Passions, and whenever we find our selves tempted to violate
the former, or neglect the latter, not so barely to cast one Eye upon the
seeming inconsiderableness of what we are enticed to, as not to fix the other
upon the Consequences that may attend it; and therein, to consider the
importance of what such slighted things may, as they are managed, prove
Instrumental, either to endanger, or preserve.

REFLECTION III.
Upon my Spaniel's Carefulness not to lose me in a strange place.
DUring my stay at Home, whilst every Body this Cur chanced to meet, made so
much of their Landlord's Spaniel, that they seemed to have added to Oracles
that Proverb of Love me, love my Dog, the cajoll'd Cur would never keep at
home; but being welcomed to so many places abroad, made me few Visits, that
cost me not the trouble of sending for him. But now, that we are in a place,
where he sees not more Men than Strangers, he stirrs not from my Heels, and
waits so close, and carefully, that it were now more difficult to lose him,
than it was formerly to keep him from wandering. Thus does it generally fare
with us; whilst we are Environed with numerous outward Objects, which, smiling
on us, give our Gaddings to them, the Temptation of an inviting welcome; how
inclined are we to forget and wander from our great Master: But when we are
deprived of those Enveigling Courters, our Maker too is freed from those
seducing Rivals, and our undistracted Affections are brought to settle on their
noblest Object, by the removal, and the displacing, as well as they would be by
the Knowledge and the Undervaluation, of inferior ones. Lord! when I lose a
Friend, or any outward Idol of my Fondness, teach me to reduce him to leave
thee his Heir, by taking that loss for a Summons, to transfer and settle my
whole Love on Thee; and if Thou but vouchsafe to make me so happy, I shall
think my self enough so, not to Envy him, to whom the loss of his Asses proved
an occasion of his finding a Crown; and shall not so much Regret what thy
Dispensations shall have taken from me, as Gratulate to my self their having
reduced me unto Thee.

REFLECTION IV.
Upon the prodigiously wet Weather, which happened the Summer that Colchester
was Besieged. (1648.)
HOw strangely unseasonable is this Melancholy weather! and how tedious a
Winter have we endured this Summer? More than these few last Weeks have not
afforded us half as many Days, wherein we were neither troubled with Showry, or
threatened by Cloudy, weather; and we in England have great Temptations to envy
Nature's Kindness unto Rhodes, At Rhodes the Air is never so Dim and Cloudy,
but one hour or other the Sun shines out, Pliny, l. 2. c. 62. Where he also
says the same of Syracusa.
if it be true what Geographers relate of that Island, that it is a Rarity for
the Inhabitants to see a Day pass without their seeing the Sun: For among us,
the Confusions of our Country seem to have infected our very Air, and Serenity
is as great a Rarity in the Sky, as in Men's Consciences; so that those, who
are wont to make Fires, not against Winter, but against Cold, have generally
displaced the florid, and the verdent Ornaments of their Chimneys, and think
Vulcan more proper there than Flora; and some begin to doubt, whether our
Almanacks be not mistaken, by calling this Month July instead of November. But
notwithstanding all this appearance of Winter above our Heads, yet whilst we
see, that Cherries, and Strawberries, and other Summer fruits, do grow, and,
though but slowly, make a Progress toward Maturity in our Orchards, we doubt
not that it is Summer, and expect that these Fruits, though they will not be
Early ones, will at length come to be Ripe ones.

Thus, for Reasons, which, though we know not yet, our knowing of God may
assure us to be both Wise, and Just, a pious Soul may sometimes be reduced to
so sad a Condition, that the Face of Heaven does to Her appear perpetually
over-cast; and the Tokens of God's Displeasure do so closely follow one
another, that, to borrow Solomon's Phrase, The Clouds return after the Rain:
But if, notwithstanding all this, the seemingly deserted Soul, do, like the
good Ground mentioned in the Gospel, bring forth Fruit with Perseverance; if
Prayer, Charity, Resignation, and those other Divine Graces, that are wont to
be the proper and genuine Productions of God's Spirit, do flourish, and prosper
in the Soul, we may safely conclude that Soul, though never so Disconsolate, to
be in the state of Grace, and that she really receives the blessed Assistances of
Him, who can alone give the Increase (to the Seeds of Piety and Virtue) though
not in the glad and conspicuous way of an unclouded Heaven, yet in the
effectual, though secret, Method of fructifying Influences; and we may
reasonably hope, That He that has not only begun a good Work, but carried it on
through such Impediments, and Disadvantages, will perfect it, by bringing the
slow, but yet gradually, ripening Fruit to the due Perfection: For those that
are the humble Christian's proper Graces do so much depend upon the Author,
that, if they Flourish, his hiding himself in Clouds need not make us doubt the
Fruits we see, to be the Productions of the Son of Righteousness, though we see
Him not. We must not hastily conclude it VVinter with the Soul, though the
Heaven be Lowering, provided the Earth be Fruitful; but remember, that the
saving Influence of God's Spirit may be, where his comfortable Presence is not
perceived: The Living in sensible Comforts and Joys, is rather a part of our
Reward, than of our Duty; and that (consequently) it may save many Modest and
Pious persons a great deal of Disquiet, if they would learn to judge of their
Spiritual condition, rather by the Duties, and Services, they pay God, than by
the present Consolations he vouchsafes Them; or, in a word, rather by what they
do, than by what they feel.

REFLECTION V.
Upon his being Carved to at a Feast.
Through many hands has this Plate passed, before it came to mine; and yet,
though I bowed to every one of those that helped to Conveigh it, I kept my chief
and solemnest Acknowledgment for the fair Lady that sent it. Why should
thou not, O my Soul, instruct thy Gratitude to tread in the steps of thy
Civility? When thou receivest any Blessing from that Father of Lights, from
whom every good and perfect Gift comes down, pay a fitting share of thy thanks
to them that hand it to thee; but through all those means, look principally to
that God that sends it: Let not the Pipe usurp upon the Spring, (that were as
absurd, as 'twere for me to Kiss my hand to the Plate, or at best, to those
that helped to conveigh it, with a neglect of the Lady) but so pay thy due
Acknowledgment to the Reachers, that thou be sure to reserve thy principal
Thanks, and highest strains of Gratitude, for the Giver.

REFLECTION VI.
Upon the sight of a Looking-glass, with a rich Frame.
Eugenius, Lindamor, Eusebius. Lind. THis Glass, has a Frame so curious, and so
rich, that though I could scarce, if I would, withold my Eyes from Gazing
here; yet, I believe, the Operation it has on my Curiosity, is no more than
what it generally has on that of others; and by the attention with which I saw,
even you, Gentlemen, surveigh it, I am easily persuaded, that one needs not be
a Lady, not to pass by such a Lookingglass without repairing to it.


Eug. I am much of your opinion, Lindamor, and such a sight as this has often
made me a greater Friend, than many severer Persons are, to Eloquence in
Sermons: For as if this very Glass had been placed here in a mean or common
Frame, it would scarce have stopped us in our Passage through the Room, or have
invited us to consult it; so a Sermon, may, by the nicer sort of Auditors, be
left unregarded, though it be for Substance excellent: When, as the Frame,
though it be not part of the Glass, nor shows us any part of our Faces, does
yet, by its curious Work-manship, attract our Eyes, and so invite us to consult
the Glass, that is held forth in it; so the Wit, and fine Language, wherein it
is Dressed up, though it be no Essential or Theological part of the Sermon, yet
it is often that which invites Men to hear, or read it.


Lind. I think indeed, Eugenius, that Wit and Eloquence do highly recommend
Sermons, and devout Composures, to the Curiosity and Attention of some, that
else would scarcely mind them; and upon that account, I allow of your
Comparison, but give me leave to carry it on a little further, by observing,
That as the curious Frame does as well please, as attract, the Eye, without
representing to it the lively Image of the beholders Face; so the fine
Expressions you applaud, are commonly parts of a Sermon that have no specular
Virtue in them, I mean, that have no Power, like a good Looking-glass, to
acquaint the Beholder with the true Image or Representation of his own
Complexion, and Features: Nor will this Gaudy frame show him what is otherwise
than it should be, the discovery of which, nevertheless, in order to the
rectifying what is amiss, is the principal and genuine use of a Looking-glass;
and therefore, as no skillful Man will judge of the goodness of a Glass, by the
fineness of the Frame, but rather by its giving him a true Representation of
his Face, without liking it the worse, for showing him its Moles, and Warts, or
other Blemishes, if it have any; so no wise Christian will judge of a rowsing
Sermon, rather by the Language, than the Divinity, or will think the worse of a
good Book, for discovering his Faults, or making him think the worse of his
own, or other Men's, ill courses.


Eusebius. Let me add, Gentlemen, that as when a Glass has a rich and gaudy Frame,
Children's Eyes are oftentimes so entertained and amused with it, that they are
regardless of any thing else; and for the sake of that part, which they can but
see, they are unmindfull to consult that usefuller part, whose Office it is, to
discover to them, themselves: So, when there is too much of Rhetoric in a
Sermon, many, that should not be Children, have their Attention, not only so
attracted, but so detained, by that, that they are not thereby invited to
consult, but diverted from regarding, the more instructive part of the
Discourse. And the more VVitty and Critical sort of Auditors, are so much more
accustomed to judge of Sermons, than to judge of themselves by them, that they
deal with them, as if, in this Glass, a Man should only praise or discommend
the VVork-man-ship of the umboss'd Images of the Frame, without caring to make
use of the Glass it self, to mend any thing he finds out of order about him:
For thus, these Fastidious and Censorious hearers, make no other Use nor
Repetition of Sermons, than to censure or applaud the Expressions, and
Contrivance, (which should be looked upon but as the Ornaments of it) without
minding the Doctrine, or caring to amend what that has discovered to be amiss
in them. But it must be confessed, though I must Grieve and Blush, it can be
truly so, that it is but too often, as the Scripture somewhere complains, like
People, like Priest; and that there is a sort of Preachers, and those of the
most Celebrated, who take a Course more likely to encourage, than reform, such
Hearers, and which would, perhaps, make Men such, if it did not find them so:
For one of this sort of Preachers (for I am loath to call them Divines) appears
more sollicitous to make his Expressions, than to make his Hearers, good. And
whereas, these that are concerned for the winning, or the saving, of Souls,
think it a less sure sign of a good Sermon, that it makes the Hearers applaud
the Preacher, than that it makes them condemn themselves: The Orator I am
mentioning, had much rather hear their Praises, than their Sighs; and
accordingly, is more sollicitous to tickle their Ears, than, how much need
soever there be of it, to lance their Consciences: He may, with far more Truth
than Piety, invert the Profession of Saint Paul, and say, that he Preaches not
Christ crucified, but himself; and though now and then he seem very Vehemently
to declaim against Vices, yet one may easily enough perceive, that it is but a
personated Anger, and that he rather fences with Sin, than is concerned to
Destroy it, and speaks against it rather to show Skill, than to exercise Hatred;
and as he affects to appear rather an Orator, than a Divine, so he is well
enough content, his Auditors should rather admire his good Language, than
follow his best Counsel: And, as if all that belongs to Ministers, and their
Flocks, could be performed in the Pulpit, and the Pew, he is more careful to
remember his Sermons before he has delivered them, than to keep his Auditors
from forgetting them afterward; and unconcerned for their Proficiency, seeks
but their Praises, scarce ever aiming at so much as his own Discharge. In a
word, in such kind of Sermons, there is little spoken, either from the Heart,
or to the Heart; the Orator and the Auditory tacitly agreeing to deceive
themselves; and the Conversion of Sinners, being neither the effect, nor the
aim, of such florid, but unedifying, Discourses, the business is translated on
both sides, as if the Preacher thought he had done his part, when he has shown
his Wit, and the Hearers thought they had done theirs, when they have
commended it.


REFLECTION VII.
Upon my Spaniel's fetching me my Glove.
POor Cur! How importunate is he to be employed about bringing me this Glove?
and with what Clamours, and how many Fawnings, does he court me to fling it
him? I never saw him so eager for a piece of Meat, as I find him for a Glove:
And yet he knows it is no Food for him, nor is it Hunger that creates his
Longings for it; for now I have cast it him, he does nothing else with it, but
(with a kind of Pride to be sent for it, and a satisfaction which his glad
Gestures make appear so Great, that the very use of Speech would not enable him
to express it better) brings it me back again; as he meant to show me, he
desired it not to keep it for himself, but only to have it in his power, to
return it as a present to his Master. But he must not bring me thus an empty
Glove; it is in thee, my Soul, to fill this Accident with Instruction, by
learning from Religion, as dis-interess'd a Behavior toward God, as Nature
taught this Brute Creature toward me. I will in my addresses, for Externals,
less earnestly implore them for the service they may do me, than for the
service I may do God with them; and (as Princes Commands are looked upon by
Courtiers as Honors, and as Favors) contenting my self with the Satisfaction
of being trusted, and employed by Him, I will rejoice at the liberaller
Expressions of his Love, as they may be improved into proportionable
Expressions of mine, and will beg no Largess of his Bounty, without a design of
referring it to his Glory.

REFLECTION VIII.
Upon the taking up his Horses from Grass, and giving them Oats before they
were to be Ridden a Journey.
JUst so does God usually deal with his Servants; when he vouchsafes them
extraordinary Measures of Grace, they are to look for Employments that will
exercise it, or Temptations that will try it.

Thus that great Captain of our Salvation, Heb. 12. 2. whom the Scripture so
much and so deservedly exhorts us to have our Eyes on, When at his solemn
Inauguration into his Prophetic Office, the Heavens were opened, from whence
the Spirit of God did in a Bodily shape, descend like a Dove upon him,
accompanied with a Heavenly Voice, proclaiming him the Beloved Son of God, in
whom the Father is well pleased, Matthew. 4. Then, I say, that is (as Saint Mark
tells us) immediately, Merit 1. 12.
Jesus (being, as another Evangelist has it, full of the Holy Ghost, Luke 4.
1.) was led up of the Spirit into the Wilderness to be Tempted of the Devil.
That wise and merciful Disposer of all things, who will not suffer his
Children to be Tempted above what they are able, seasonably fortifies them by
these preparatory Provisions and Consolations, for the Labors and Difficulties
they are to be exposed to. But whereas, if these Horses had reason wherewith to
foresee the Journey in order whereunto the Provender is so plentifully given
them, they would (if not be troubled at their good Cheer) at least lose much of
the Pleasure of it, by thinking of the Labor to ensue; with the Servants of
God the case is much otherwise. For such is his Goodness to those he is pleased
thus to deal with, in proposing and reserving them a Crown in some sort
proportionate to, and yet inestimably out-valuing, the Toils and Difficulties
requisite to obtain it; that as advantageous, and as welcome as his Preparatory
Vouchsafements can be, the pious Soul may well think them less Favors upon
their own Account, than as they enable the Receiver to do the more Service to
the Giver.

REFLECTION IX.
Upon the making of a Fire with Charcoal.
THose that Lust fascinates are apt to imagine, that if they can suppress its
visible Effects, and sensible Heat, that will be sufficient to free them from
all the Mischiefs, they need fear from it: But Lust is so pernicious a Guest,
that not only he is very watchful to intrude again where he has once been
entertained, but, notwithstanding his Absence, he may continue to do Mischief
to those that seem to have quite expelled him. For as Wood that is once
thoroughly set on Fire, may afterward have that Fire quite choked, and
extinguished, and yet by those changes be turned into Charcoal, whereby it is
not only made Black, but disposed to be far more easily Kindled, and Consumed
than before; so those, who have once had their Hearts thoroughly possessed by the
pernicious Flames of Lust, (which is indeed, to employ an inspired Expression,
to be set on Fire of Hell) even when they have stifled these criminal Flames,
and feel no more of their Heat, may not only have their Reputation
irrecoverably blemished by what is past, but commonly carry about with them an
unhappy Disposition to be re-inflam'd, and to have by a few Sparks, and a
little Blowing, those destructive Fires so re-kindled, as to Rage more fatally
than ever.

REFLECTION. X.
Looking through a Prismatical or Triangular Glass.
THis more than flattering Glass, adorns all the Objects I look on through it,
with a Variety of Colors, whose Vividness does as much charm my Sense, as
their Nature poses my Reason; Without the help of the Sun, and Clouds, it
affords me as many Rain-bows as I please. And not only when I look on Trees,
and Meadows, and Gardens, and such other Objects that are of themselves
acceptable to the Sight; this Glass lends them Ornaments above any they are
beholden for, either to Nature, or Art: But when I cast my Eyes upon courser,
and homely things, and even on Dunghills, this favorable Interposer presents
them to me in such curious and gaudy Colors, that it does not so properly hide
their Deformities, as make them appear Lovely; so that which way soever I turn
my Eyes, I find them saluted, as if I were in some Rich Jewellers Shop, with
Saphires, Topazes, Emerauds, and other Orient Gems, the Vividness of whose
Colors, may justify those that think Colors to be but disguised Light,
which, by these various Reflections, and Refractions, comes to be rather Died
than Stained.

But this Glass must as well afford me Instruction, as Delight, and even by
deceiving me, teach me: For thus, sinful Christians, when God looks upon them
in themselves, must needs seem too Polluted, and Disfigured, not to appear
Loathsome to Him, Who is of purer Eyes than to behold Inquity without
Abhorrency; but when Christ interposes betwixt his Eyes and Us, we then seem
far other things than otherwise we should, and not only we do not appear
Filthy, but we do appear Lovely, if not Glorious. And as though, some Objects,
as things purely White, and Flames, look better through this Glass, than homely
and dirty ones; yet even these, looked upon through this Glass, are more Richly
adorned, than the others beheld without it: So, whatever Difference there may
be betwixt Persons that are either Innocent, or Exemplary, upon the bare
account of Morality; and those ignorant or frail Children of God, that, in
themselves considered, would be much inferior to those newly mentioned; yet
when these are looked upon through Christ, they are much more acceptable in
God's Eyes, than the others considered out of him. And I shall add this
further, that, whereas my looking upon Objects through the Prism, however it
makes them appear to my Eyes, does work no real Change in the things
themselves, but leaves those that were homely and foul before, foul and homely
still; God's gracious looking upon us in Christ, makes us by degrees become fit
for his Goodness to take delight in, and has an improving and transfiguring
Power on us, like the Sun, that cherishes Green and unblown Flowers, and paints
them with their curiousest Colors, by his looking on them. Since then, the
Scripture tells us, that we are not only reconciled to God, but, if I may so
express it, are ingratiated and endeared to him in the Beloved; How much do we
owe to that blessed Savior, upon whose Account we enjoy the invaluable
Privilege to appear (and grow fit to do so) pleasing in God's Eyes? which
besides, that it is the highest Honor, leads to the highest Happiness; or
rather, is the one as well as the other.

OCCASIONAL REFLECTIONS.
The IV. SECTION. Which treats of Angling Improved To Spiritual Uses.
DISCOURSE I.
Upon the being called upon to rise early on a very fair Morning.
THe Sun had as yet but approached the East, and my Body as yet lay moveless in
the Bed, whilst my roving Thoughts were in various Dreams, rambling to distant
places, when, me-thought, I heard my name several times pronounced by a not
unknown Voice; This noise made me, as I was soon after told, half open my Eyes,
to see who it was that made it, but so faintly, that I had quickly let my Self
fall asleep gaain, if the same Party had not the second time called me louder
than before, and added to his Voice the pulling me by the Arm. But though this
waked me so far, as to make me take notice that I was called upon to rise, yet
my Drowsiness, and my Unwillingness to forgo a not unpleasant Dream, keeping me
from discerning distinctly, who it was that called me, made me briskly enough
bid him, what ever his business were, let me alone; But though at the same time
I turned away my Head to shun the Light, though dim, which at the half opened
Curtain shone in upon me, yet the Party instead of complying with my desires,
did by throwing open the Curtains, further let in so much more Light upon my
Face, that finding it would not serve my turn to keep my Eyes shut, I opened
them to see who it was that gave me this unwelcome Disturbance. This I had no
sooner done, than I perceived that 'twas Eusebius, who with Lindamor, and two
or three other Friends, was come to call me to go a Fishing, to a place, where
by appointment we were to meet about Sunrising. The respect I paid Eusebius,
and the value I placed upon his Conversation, covered me with Blushes to be
thus surprised by him, and obliged me to satisfy him as well as I could, how
much I was troubled and ashamed to have the favor of his Company brought me to
my Bedside, which I ought, and intended to have waited on him. And thus,
whilst I was making him my Apologies, and he was pleasantly reproaching me for
my Laziness, and Laughing at the disorder I had not yet got quite out of, I
made a shift hastily to get on my Clothes, and put my self into a condition of
attending him and the Company to the Riverside.

Whilst we were walking thither-ward, and Lindamor was minding Eusebius of the
promise he had made the Day before, to exercise, upon most of the things that
should occur to us, his Art of making Occasional Reflections, I was delighting
my self with the deliciousness of that promising Morning, and indeed the
freshness of the Air, the verdure of the Fields and Trees, and the various and
curious Enammel of the Meadows, the Music of the numerous Birds, that with as
melodious as cheerful Voices welcomed so fair a morning. The curious and
orient Colors wherewith the rising Sun embellished the Eastern part of the
Sky, and above all that source of Light, who, though he shows us all that we
see of glorious and fair, shows us nothing so fair and glorious as himself, did
so charm and transport me, that I could not hold expressing my satisfaction in
terms that, Eugenius was after pleased to say, needed not Rhymes to make them
Poetical. And the sense of this invited me to add, that I now would not for any
thing have missed being waked, and thought my self hugely obliged to Eusebius's
freedom, that would not suffer me to sleep out so glorious a Morning, nor lose
the satisfaction of such desirable Company.

Eusebius, who was but a little way off in discourse with Lindamor,
over-hearing a good part of what I had said, thought fit to take thence a Rise,
to begin complying with his Friends requests, and accordingly, walking up
toward me, and addressing himself to me, he told me, you are unconcerned
enough, Philaretus, in what I am about to say, to make it allowable for me to
tell Lindamor, that what has this Morning happened to you, puts me in mind of
what I have several times observed on another occasion. For when a Man is so
lulled asleep by sensual pleasures, that like one that sleeps, he has but the
faculty, not the exercise of Reason, and takes his Dreams for realities, if
some serious Divine, or other devout Friend, concerned for the Sinner's soul,
or his glory that Died to redeem it, endeavor to awaken him, and rowse him out
of that State wherein he lies so much at ease; such attempts are wont at first
to be looked upon by the lazy Sinner, enamored of his ease, and present
condition, but as pieces of unseasonable, if not uncivil officiousness, and
entertaining the Light it self but as an unwelcome Guest, he obstinately shuts
his Eyes against that which alone makes them useful, and instead of looking
upon the Attempter as his Friend, he checks him, and expostulates with him, and
uses him almost as an Enemy; Insomuch, that too often those that love the
welfare of Souls too little, or their own ease too much, forgo, with their
hopes, their endeavors to reclaim him. But if by God's blessing, upon the
constancy of this kindness, and the letting in of so much Light upon the
Sinner, that he finds himself unable to continue his Slumber any longer with
it, he comes to be thoroughly awaked, he quickly grows sensible that he is
brought out of the Kingdom of Darkness into a true and mavelous Light, and
instead of those empty fleeting Dreams, which did before amuse and delude him,
and which to relish, and be fond of, the Eyes of his Mind must be as well
closed as those of his Body, he is admitted to noble and manly entertainments,
such as Reason chooses, Conscience applauds, and God himself approves. And this
change of his condition he finds so advantageous, that he would not for all the
World return again to that, he was at first so angry to be dissuaded from, and
he does not forgive, but thank the Person that disquieted him, and blushes at
the Remembrance of his having reduced others to importune him to be happy: And
betwixt shame and gratitude, the sense of his present, and of his past
condition possessing him, how much he has reason to make his Rescuer as well
amends for what he endured, as retributing for what he acted for him, he does
perchance, especially in the first fervours of his Zeal, think himself as much
obliged to his Awakener, as Philemon was to Saint Paul, to whom the Scripture
says, that he owed even himself. And sometimes such a new Convert, as I am
speaking of, will think his Obligation to the Instrument of his change so
suitable to the transcendent satisfaction he finds in the change it self, that
he would despair of seeing his Benefactor sufficiently recompensed, if he did
not remember a saying of the Prophet, (That those that turn others to
Righteousness, shall shine as the Stars for ever and ever,) that gives him
ground to hope that God himself (whose plenty as well as bounty is inexhausted)
will make the Recompense his work. Wherefore, concludes Eusebius, if you chance
to have any Friends, (as it is odds most Men have) that stand in need of this as
great as unwelcome expression of kindness, let us not be too soon discouraged,
by finding the effects of our friendship coldly received, and possibly too
looked upon as disturbances; for besides, that the less they are desired, and
the worse they are entertained, the more they needed: a Christian is not bound
so much to concern himself in the success of his endeavors, as to leave it in
the power of every one that will be obstinate, to make him unhappy, when the
business one way or other come to an end, he may miss his aim, without losing
his labor, since he serves a Master that is as ready to reward, as able to
discern Intentions; and in case your endeavors do succeed, you will at once
make a Man your Friend, and worthy to be so. And you shall scarce ever find Men
more affectionate to you, than those you have made your Friends, by making them
Enemies to Vice.

DISCOURSE II.
Upon the Mounting, Singing, and Lighting of Larks.
THe agreement we had made at our setting forth, that the motion of our Tongues
should not hinder that of our Feet toward the Riverside, was the cause, that
the past Discourses not having discontinued our Walk, by that time they were
ended, we began to Traverse certain plowed Lands, that lay in the way betwixt
us and the River. But we had scarce entered those Fields, when our Ears were
saluted with the melodious Music of a good number of Larks, whereof some
mounted by degrees out of Sight, and others hovering and singing a while over
our Heads, soon after lighted on the ground, not far from our Feet.

After we had a while enjoyed this costless, and yet excellent Music, both
Eusebius and I, chancing to cast our Eyes toward Eugenius, observed that his
did very attentively wait upon the motions of a Lark, that, singing all the way
upwards, and mounting by degrees out of sight, not long after descended and
lighted among some clods of Earth, which being of the color of her Body, made
us quickly loose sight of her. Whereupon Eusebius, who was full as willing to
hear as speak, and in the Occasional Reflections that he made, was wont at
least as much to aim at the exciting others thoughts, as the venting of his
own, begged Eugenius to tell us what it might be, which his attentiveness to
the motions of the Lark made us presume he was thinking on.

Eugenius after a little backwardness, which he thought Modesty exacted of him,
soon answered us in these terms.

Among all Birds that we know, there is not any that seems of so elevated, and
I had almost said Heavenly a Nature as the Lark, scarce any give so early and
so sweet a welcome to the Springing day. And that which I was just now gazing
on, seemed so pleased with the unclouded Light, that she sung as if she came
from the place she seemed to go to, and during this charming Song, mounted so
high, as if she meant not to stop, till she had reached that Sun, whose Beams
so cherished and transported her; and in this aspiring flight she raised her
self so high, that though I will not say, she left the Earth beneath her very
Sight, yet I may say, that she foar'd quite out of Ours. And yet when from this
towering height she stooped to repose or solace her self upon the Ground, or
else when to seize upon some worthless Worm, or other wretched Prey, she
lighted on the Ground, she seemed so like the Earth that was about her, that I
believe you could scarce discern her from its Clods. And whereas other Birds
that fly not half so high, nor seem any thing near so fond of the Sun, do yet
build their Nests upon Trees, the Lark does as well build hers upon the Ground,
as look like a part of it.

Thus I have known, in these last and worst times, many a Hypocrite, that when
he was conversant about sublimer Objects, appeared, as well as he called
himself, a Saint; nothing seemed so welcome to him as new Light; one might
think his Lips had been touched with a coal from the Altar, his Mouth did so
sweetly show forth Gods praise, and sacred dispensations. In sum, take this
Hypocrite in his fit of Devotion, and to hear him talk, you would think, that
if he had not been already in Heaven, at least he would never leave mounting,
till he should get thither.

But when the Opportunities of advantaging his lower Interests called him down
to deal about Secular affairs here below, none appeared more of a piece with
the Earth than he, for he looked as if he had been besmeared all over with the
Earth round about him, and he seemed, in providing for his Family, to be of a
meaner and a lower Spirit, than those very Men whom in discourse he was wont to
undervalue, as being far more Earthy than himself.

Since we know, says Eusebius, that the best things corrupted prove the worst,
it can be no disparagement to Piety, to acknowledge that Hypocrisy is a Vice
which you cannot too much condemn. And when the pretending of Religion grows to
be a thing in request, many betake themselves to a form of Religion, who deny
the Power of it; And some perchance, have been preferred less for their Jacobs
voice, than for their Esaus hands.

But, Eugenius, let us not to shun one extreme, fondly run into the other, and
be afraid or ashamed to profess Religion, because some Hypocrites did but
profess it; His course is ignoble, and praeposterous, that treads the paths of
Piety, rather because they lead to Preferment than to Heaven; But yet it is more
excusable to live free from scandal for an inferior end, than not to live so
at all: And Hypocrites can as little justify the profane, as themselves. It
may be, that all that own Religion are not Pious; but it is certain, that he
that scorns to own it must less be so. And if scoffers at Piety should succeed
the Pretenders to it, they cannot be said (as sometimes they would be thought)
to be an innocent sort of Hypocrites, that are better than they seem; for
Scandal is a thing so criminal, and contagious, that whosoever desires, and
endeavors to appear evil, is so: To refuse to be Religious, because some have
but professed themselves to be so, is to injure God, because he has been
injured. A skillful Jeweller will not forbear giving great rates for Neck-laces
of true Pearl, though there be many Counterfeits for one that is not so; Nor
are the right Pearls a whit the less Cordial to those that take them, because
the artificial Pearl made at Venice, consisting of Mercury and Glass, for all
their fair show, are rather Noxious, than Medicinal. And indeed our knowledge,
that there are Hypocrites, ought rather to commend Piety to us, than discredit
it with us; since as none would take the pains to counterfeit Pearls, if true
ones were not of Value; So Men would not put themselves to the constraint of
personating Piety, if that it self were not a noble Quality. Let us then,
Eugenius, fly as far as you please from what we detest in Hypocrites: But then
let us consider, what it is that we detest; which being a bare, and therefore
false pretense to Religion, let us only shun such a pretense, which will be
best done by becoming real Possessors of the thing pretended to.

DISCOURSE III.
Upon the Sight of a fair Milk-maid singing to her Cow.
EUgenius, who was not at all indisposed to listen to Exhortations of this
Nature, not only embraced this made him by his Friend, but with earnestness
enough continued the Conference to explain his meaning, and satisfy Eusebius,
that he did not think Piety fit to be discountenanced, though he thought
Hypocrisy was so, and that he was no Enemy to the Profession of Religion, but
to those that blemished it by unsuitable Practices. And with such kind of
Discourses we continued our Walk, till being come to a Style, over which we
were to pass out of one Meadow into another, I chanced to stop, and turn about
to pay Lindamor the Respect of desiring him to lead me the way over: But not
finding him there, I hastily cast my Eyes all over the Field, till at length
they discovered him a good way off, in a Posture that seemed extremely serious,
and wherein he stood as immovable as a Statue. This sight soon carried me
toward him, and I had dispatched half my way before his changing his Posture
gave him an opportunity to discover me, which as soon as he did, he immediately
came to meet me, and almost before I had asked him the occasion of what I had
seen; Whilst (replied he) Eugenius was purging himself from a fault that none
that knows him will suspect him to be guilty of, I was detained a little behind
you by the Music of one of those Larks, whose melody was so charming, that I
could not find in my heart to make haste from it: But whilst I was listening to
it, my Attention was diverted by a nobler Object, for I heard, from the further
corner of this Meadow, a Voice, which, though not governed with Skill, did so
repair the want of it by its native sweetness, that Art was absent without
being missed, and I could not but have some Curiosity to see who was the
Possessor of so much power to please; turning then my steps toward that part
of the Field whence the Voice came, my Eyes quickly ceased to envy my Ears, for
they discovered, kneeling by a Cow, and singing to her whilst she milk'd her, a
Person, who, in the habit of a Milk-maid, seemed to disguise one of those
Nymphs that Poets are wont to describe us. And that you may not wonder,
continues Lindamor, at what I shall say to you of a country Girl, Know, that
methought I saw in her Face something more like Hermione, before she proved
inconstant, than I expected to find in any of her Sex: I will not tell you,
that this fair Creature had the Blushes of the Morning in her Cheeks, the
Splendor of the Sun in her Eyes, the freshness of the Fields in her Looks, the
whiteness of the Milk she expressed in her Skin, and the melody of the Larks,
we were admiring, in her Voice, least you should think Mr. Boyls Seraphick Love
had lost its Operation on me. But I may perhaps without much Hyperbole, give
you this Account of her, that though her Clothes are almost as course as
cleanly, and though they are suited to her Condition, yet they are very ill
suited to her Beauty, which, as if Nature intended a Triumph over Fortune, has,
without any assistance of Ornament, more distressed my Liberty, than others
have been able to do with all their most curious Dresses. And this fair
Creature, continues Lindamor, as she is rich in Natures bounty, appeared as
well by the cheerfulness of the Tune she sung, as by the manner of her Singing
it, so satisfied with the unpurchas'd Treasures she possesses, that she seemed
almost as much pleased as I was to look upon her. This Character of Lindamors
inviting me to go see, whether or no it were deserved, and the frequent
Experience I have had, that even upon such bright Eyes as Poets, and Lovers,
called Suns, I could gaze undazel'd enough to approve my self a right Eagle,
assuring me I might safely do it, I fearlesly, but softly, approached the place
where the fair Milk-maid was soliciting the Udder of a fresh Cow, and I found,
that though indeed some Resemblance she had to Hermione, had made Lindamor
flatter her, yet she looked at once so innocently, and prettily, that she
seemed like to do Mischief, without at all intending it; and I could not but
fancy, that if some Ladies that are much cried up, and are very imperious
Mistresses, because they are so, were bound to change Dresses with this
unsophisticated and unadorned Maid, the one would appear to owe her Beauty to
Art, and the other to be beholden for hers to nothing but Nature. But,
Lindamor, who is not naturally indisposed to be Amorous, did not think that
this Imagination of mine did that pretty Creature right: for when I told him
she would eclipse a hundred of our fine Ladies, if she had but the Dress of one
of them; Why, that (replies he, with a kind of Indignation) she can do without
it, and perhaps, subjoyns he, as much as with it: For her present habit leaves
her most her self, and Bravery would but disguise, or hide what it cannot
adorn. And I am confident, (continues he) that should such a genuine Beauty
appear among the Gallants, she would really captivate many, even of those wary
ones that do but pretend to be so, to the designing and applauded Ladies: For
though Skill may encounter the Wiles of Art, it would scarce be able to resist
the Charms of Nature. But whilst Lindamor was thus Complementing with what he
fancied the Picture of his once loved Hermione, and had his Eyes as much fixed
upon her, as dazzled ones could be, the lovely Milk-maid, (who, all this while
having not taken notice of us, was as regardless of Lindamor, as he seemed to
be of all things but her) having dispatched what she was doing, took up her
Pail to carry it homewards: But her way chancing to lie by that part of the
Meadow where we were yet standing, she could not but discover us, and judging
by our Clothes, and more by Lindamors Mere, that we were of a Quality differing
from theirs she was wont to converse with, she gave us a Salute low enough to
let us see that she forgot not her Condition, but attended with so much
Gracefulness, as made Lindamor conclude she merited a better, and, as she
passed by him, to return the gesture of Respect, which he thought so much
Beauty had a right in any habit to exact; she vouchsafed him a Smile, which, I
after told him, would have made him happy, if he had thought it had proceeded
from Kindness, not Civility; and she went away with a Look so serene, as well
as taking, that she seemed to carry home with her far more quiet, than she left
him possessed of. But I that had lost sight of her, without losing any thing
with it, save the expectation of seeing in haste so fair a Milk-maid, was going
to Railler with Lindamor, about what had passed, when I was restrained, by
perceiving that the sight of a Person that seemed so contented, together with
the native pleasantness of that place, and of that glorious Morning, had such
an operation upon him, that he could not forbear to celebrate the happiness and
innocence of a Country life. And after he had with much Transport, and Fluency,
repeated the substance of what Ovid and other ancient Poets had in their strain
delivered concerning the felicity of the Golden Age, he began to apply as much
of it as the Matter would bear, to the recommending of a Rural life, and was
very sollicitous to make me acknowledge, that though we are wont to look upon
Villagers as an inferior and wretched sort of People, yet they are the persons
of the World, whose condition is the most proper, not only to keep them
innocent, but to make them happy: Their cheap and simple way of Living,
allowing them to rest contented, with what bounteous Nature has provided for
them, or an easy Industry can procure them. Whereas among Men nobly Born, or
Persons of Quality, it is looked upon as want of Breeding, for a Man not to
think himself unhappy, as long as he has not a thousand Pound a Year.

Lindamor, though he here made a Pause to take breath, would yet perhaps have
prosecuted his Discourse, had he not been prevented by the intervening of
Eusebius, who a while after we had left him, having missed us, had followed us
to the palace he found us in, and who, when he drew nigh, having overheard
Lindamor speaking, stood still a while at some distance off, to listen to what
he said, and so became an unsuspected Auditor of the last part of his Friends
Discourse. Whereupon taking him by the hand, and leading him toward the River,
he told him, with a serious, not to call it a severe Look; I had thought,
Lindamor, you had made righter Estimates of the several courses of Life, than,
by what I have newly overheard you say, I now suspect you do. Know then,
Lindamor, (adds he) That Innocence and Contentment depend more upon a Man's
mind, than upon his condition: To manifest this to you, I shall in the first
place observe, that it is not always the Occasion, or the Object, but rather the
Degree that makes an Affection of the Mind unruly and troublesome; Nor is it
according to the intrinsic value of things, which none save the Wise can
discern; but the Rate, how unskilfully soever fixed, which we put upon them,
that they operate upon our passions. And therefore, you shall see a Child take
on more sadly for the escape of a Sparrow, or the breaking of a Rattle, than
some will do for the loss of a good Estate, nay, of a Friend; and Haman, for
the want of a Bow from Mordecai, complained more in his Place, than Job, till
his miserable comforters had exasperated his grief, did for the loss of the
biggest Fortune in the East, and of the Children he reserved it for, and valued
far above it.

And then, Lindamor, (continues Eusebius) do not imagine, that though Courtiers
and Gallants have more spendid and glittering Temptations to Sin and
Discontent, Country people are exempted from Temptation to either: Theirs may
be as great, though not the same, nor so specious as the other; their Faults
and Infelicities are indeed less taken notice of, because their Persons and
Conditions are obscure, and their Poverty conceals their Vices, as well as
their Virtues, from our Eyes; as in a sharp Winter the Snow does as well hide
their Dunghills, as cover their Gardens. But if your Quality allowed you to
acquaint your self with the true state of this inferior sort of People, you
would soon perceive, that even of rural Families, there is scarce any, that, as
far as their Wits will reach, has not its several Parties, and little
Intrigues; Nor is there any Cottage so low, and narrow, as not to harbor Care,
and Malice, and Covetousness, and Envy, if those that dwell in it have a mind
to entertain them: And what Envy alone may do to produce Crimes and
Discontents, we may conjecture by what happened betwixt Cain and Abel, since
their being heirs to the whole World, could not keep two Brothers at peace,
whilst one of them was envious: And there are some sordid Vices, which are more
incident to the meaner and more necessitous sort of Men, as Spiders and Cobwebs
are wont to abound more in thatched Cabbins, than in great Men's houses. I
should perhaps (says Eusebius) think these people happy, if I found they
thought themselves so; but the Pomp and Vanities of the World have oftentimes
stronger allurements for them, than for the Grandees and Courtiers themselves:
For those that are possessed of these imaginary Joys, are disabus'd by their
own Experience; and those that live among these Theatrical persons, are near
enough to discern that they are but causelessly envied. As (for my part) when I
had occasion to be conversant in great Men's Families, and the honor to preach
in Princes Courts, the sight of their course of Life did as thoroughly convince
me of the Vanity of the World, as my Sermons endeavored to convince them.
Whereas Country people see but the glittering and deluding outside of
Greatness, and beholding it but at a distance, see it in the favourablest light
which Men can behold it in, and consequently are strongly tempted to envy what
they admire, and repine at their own condition, for the want of it: Nay, every
gaudy trifle, that those that live in Towns and Cities chance to make show of,
is wont to make a Country man envy, as well as gape; And it is odds, but that
very Milk-maid, whose condition you are pleased to think so happy, envies some
Neighboring Farmers Daughter for a piece of taudry Ribbon, or a black Hood:
Nor are they so much more priviledg'd from the assaults of Temptation, than Men
of higher rank; For it is not so much a Man's outward condition, as his inward
disposition and temper of mind, that makes Temptations either to sin, or to
discontent, prevalent, or unsuccessfull. When Joseph was sold into Egypt, and
solicited by a Woman that would needs be his Mistress upon more scores than
one, though his condition exposed him more to hopes and fears, than almost any
other condition could expose another Man, And though his Youth made him very
capable of rellishing the pleasures that his Beauty made him courted to
receive, by giving them; yet this chaste Youth chose rather to be Imprisoned any
where, than in a fair Ladies Arms, and preferred the being made a Captive,
before the Captivating of his amorous Mistress. But whilst young Joseph was
thus chaste in the Egyptian Potiphar's House, his eldest Brother Reuben was
Incestuous in good Jacob's whose Family was then the visible Church of God; and
Lot, who was chaste and temperate in Sodom it self, was Drunk and committed
Incest in a Cave; so much more does the success of Temptations depend upon the
temper of a Man's mind, than upon the place he lives in.

I know not (says Eugenius) whether the Innocence of Rural people be more easy
than that of great Men, but sure it is not so commendable: For as a Woman that
has never yielded, because she was never solicited, may be called rather
Innocent than Virtuous; so their condition, that owe their not being Inveigl'd
by the Vanities of the World, to their Ignorance of them, has more in it of
good fortune than of merit. I thank you for that consideration, (subjoyns
Eusebius) for I confess I think there is a great Disparity betwixt an
unacquaintedness with the bewitching pleasures of the World, and a contempt of
them. And he is the truly heroic Spirit, that can (as David could) plentifully
enjoy all those sensual Delights and Vanities he chose to reject: For he could
feast a Nation, and prefer Temperance before all that Abundance; He could gain
strange Victories at once over his outward Enemies, and over the Temptations he
was exposed to by such successes; He could Build stately Palaces, and then
profess himself to be but a Stranger, and a Sojourner upon Earth; He could
afford Humility room to sit with him on his Throne, and could listen to her
Memento's amidst all the Acclamations of his People, and the Panegyricks of his
Courtiers; He was not to be resisted by Beauties, that to others were
irresistible, when he postpon'd the fairest Objects that could here charm his
Eyes, to such as were visible only to those of Faith; He had got together the
greatest Treasure, that for ought I remember we read of in any History, and yet
seems never to have been much pleased with it, but when he dedicated it to the
Building of the Temple, and made the fruits of his Valor the oblations of his
Piety. To be short, he was the greatest Person upon Earth, when he was content
to leave it; and was willing to descend from the Throne into the Grave, whilst
he looked upon that as the place whence he must ascend to the Mansion of his
God; so much did he, even whilst he wore an earthly Crown, aspire to an Heavely
one. And though (continues Eusebius) we must now a days as little expect to
meet with a Man of David's condition, as of his temper, yet proportionably we
may put a vast Difference betwixt those that but escape the sight of the
World's allurements, and those that reject the Profers of them.

Eusebius was in this part of his Discourse, when we were come near enough to
the River, to discover it within a little way of us: And therefore finding by
his silence, that he thought it seasonable to desist, I only ventured to tell
him, with a low Voice, as we continued our Walk, that I suspected, that in some
of the things he had been saying, he had a design rather to check Lindamor a
little, and keep up the Discourse, than to deny, that a retired and rural Life
has great advantages toward Contentation: To which, that he might conclude
what he had to say, before we reached the River, he made haste to reply in the
same Tone, That I was not altogether mistaken: For (says he) I think the case
may be pretty well represented, by saying, that as there are some Airs very
much wholesomer than others, and fitter to preseve Men from Diseases; so a very
private and quiet condition of Life, does much more easily than a more exposed
and turbulent one, protect most sorts of Men from Vices and Disquiets. But then
on the other side, as there are some Men of such sound and strong
Constitutions, that they will enjoy their Health in the worst Airs, when Men of
tender and vitiated Complexions will be Sickly in the best; so there are some
generous and steady Souls, that will pass through the most troublesome and most
exposed courses of Life, with more of both Innocence and Contentment, than
others can enjoy in a condition far remoter from Disturbances and Temptations.
And, annexes Eusebius, (purposely raising his Voice) as for these Villages that
Lindamor thought so happy, I must dissent from him as long as I see they can
admire, and almost worship, a Man for wearing a Gaudy suit of Clothes, or
having two or three Footmen behind his Coach, before they know whether he be
not a Knave, or a Fool, or both: For I shall scarce think, that he, who is
himself possessed with Envy, deserves mine.

DISCOURSE IV.
Upon Fishing with a counterfeit Fly.
BEing at length come to the Riverside, we quickly began to fall to the sport,
for which we came thither, and Eugenius finding the Fish forward enough to
bite, thought fit to spare his Flies, till he might have more need of them, and
therefore tied to his Line a Hook, furnished with one of those counterfeit
Flies, which in some Neibouring Countries are much used, and which being made
of the Feathers of Wildfowl, are not subject to be drenched by the water,
whereon those Birds are wont to swim. This Fly being for a pretty while scarce
any oftener thrown in, than the Hook it hid was drawn up again with a Fish
fastened to it, Eugenius looking on us with a smiling Countenance, seemed to be
very proud of his success; which Eusebius taking notice of, Whilst, (says he)
we smile to see, how easily you beguile these silly Fishes, that you catch so
fast with this false Bait, possibly we are not much less unwary our selves; And
the Worlds treacherous pleasures do little less delude both me and you: For,
Eugenius, (continues he) as the Apostles were Fishers of men in a good sense,
so their and our grand adversary is a skillful Fisher of men in a bad sense;
And too often in his attempts, to cheat fond Mortals, meets with a success as
great and easy, as you now find yours. And certainly, that Tempter, as the
Scripture calls him, does sadly delude us, even when we rise at his best Baits,
and, as it were, his true Flies: For, alas! the best things he can give, are
very worthless, most of them in their own nature, and all of them in comparison
of what they must cost us to enjoy them. But however, Riches, Power, and the
delights of the Senses are real goods in their Kind, though they be not of the
best Kind: Yet alas, many of us are so fitted for deceits, that we do not put
this subtle Angler, to make use of his true Baits to catch us! we suffer him to
abuse us much more grossly, and to cheat us with empty titles of Honor, or the
ensnaring Smiles of great ones, or disquieting Drugeries disguised with the
specious names of great employments. And though these, when they must be
obtained by sin, or are proposed as the recompenses for it, be, as I was going
to say, but the Devils counterfeit Flies; Yet, as if we were fond of being
deceived, we greedily swallow the Hook, for Flies, that do but look like such;
so Dim-sighted are we, as well to what Vice shows, as to what it hides. Let us
not then (concludes Eusebius) rise at Baits, whereby we may be sure to be
either grossly, or at least exceedingly deceived; For who ever ventures to
commit a Sin, to taste the luscious sweets, that the fruition of it seems to
promise, certainly is so far deceived, as to swallow a true Hook for a Bait,
which either proves but a counterfeit Fly, or hides that under its alluring
show, which makes it not need to be a counterfeit one to deceive him.

DISCOURSE V.
Upon a Fishes struggling after having swallowed the Hook.
FOrtune soon offered Eusebius a fair Opportunity to confirm this last part of
his Reflection, for he had scarce made an end of it, when a large Fish, espying
the Fly that kept my Hook swimming, rise swiftly at it, and having greedily
chopped it up, was hastily swimming away with it, when I struck him, and thereby
stopped for a while his Progress; but finding himself both Arrested and Wounded,
he struggled with so much violence, that at length he broke my slender Line,
(that was fitted but for weaker Fishes) and carried away a part of it, together
with the annexed Hook, and Bait. If Philosophers (says hereupon Eusebius) be
not too liberal in allowing Brutes to think, we may well suppose that this Fish
expected a great deal of Pleasure from the Bait he fell upon so greedily, and
that when once he had got it into his Mouth, he might well look upon it as his
own, and those other Fishes that saw him swallow it, and swim away with it, did
probably envy his good Fortune; but yet indeed he does not enjoy his wish,
though he seem to have the thing wished for within his power, for by the same
action in which he sucked in the Fly, he likewise took in the Hook, which does
so wound and tear his tender Gills, and thereby put him into such restless
pain, that no doubt he wishes that the Hook, Bait, and all, were out of his
torn Jaws again, the one putting him to too much torture to let him at all
relish the other. Thus men, which do what they should not, to obtain any
Object of their sensual Desires, whatever Pleasure they may before hand fancy
to themselves in their success, are oftentimes, even when they obtain then
ends, disappointed of their expectations; sometimes Conscience, Reason, or
Honor, making them, even when their desires are not of the worst sort, do as
David did, when he had, more vehemently than became a pious General, longed for
Water out of the Well at Bethlehem, and by the strange Venterousness of his
bold and affectionate Officers obtained it, could not find in his heart to
Drink it, but poured it untasted on the Ground. But when the things we so long
for must be criminally obtained, then it not only often fares with them, as it
did with Amnon, who immediately upon the incestuous fruition of his ravished
Sister, hated her more than before he had loved her; but it sometimes happens
to those that sin more heinously in this matter, as it did to Judas, who, after
having betrayed a Master, that was incomparably more worth than all the World,
and thereby for ever lost himself for a few pieces of Silver, seemed to have it
in his power, without having it in his will, to enjoy them, and in a desperate,
but unseasonable, fit of anguish and remorse, did of his own accord disburthen
himself of that Money, which he had sold his Conscience to get; so that though
he had what he sought, he had not what he expected: And when what he coveted
was in his possession, he had the guilt of acquiring it, without the power of
enjoying it. And even in cases far less heinous, (concludes Eusebius) when Men
seem to have got what they aimed at, and to have carried it away as their
Booty, in spite of all opposition, the Wound thereby inflicted on injured
Conscience, puts them to so much of deserved pain, that the wishes they are
thus criminally possessed of, they do not enjoy, but detest.

DISCOURSE VI.
Upon the sight of ones Shadow cast upon the face of a River.
THe fight of some Fishes playing to and fro upon the top of the Water,
diverted us from prosecuting our Conference, and drew us to apply our selves
attentively to the catching of them, in which accordingly we spent some part of
the Morning; yet whilst we continued Angling, not far from one another, we
often cast our Eyes (as is usual in such cases) upon each others fishing Corks,
to learn as well the successes of our Friends, as in what places the Fish were
forwardest to bite: As I chanced to look toward that Cork at which Eusebius's
Hook was hanging, I perceived that it was diverse times drawn under Water,
without his endeavoring thereupon to strike that Fish that made thus bold with
his Bait; wherefore laying down my Angle a while, I went softly toward
Eusebius, to see what it was that made him so regardless of his Sport, whilst
yet, by the posture be continued in, he seemed to be intent upon it: But
approaching near enough, I quickly perceived, That instead of minding his Hook,
his Eyes were fixed sometimes upon his own Picture, reflected from the smooth
Surface of the gliding stream, and sometimes upon the Shadow projected by his
Body, a little beside the Picture upon the same River.

The unwilling noise I made in coming so near, having obliged Eusebius to take
notice of me, I thought fit, since I found I was discovered, to ask him
smilingly, whether he were Narcissus-like, making Love to his own Shadow.

Eusebius ghessing by these words, that I had conjectured what he was doing,
answered me with a look somewhat more serious than that I had spoken to him
with; I was indeed, Philaretus, attentively enough considering, sometimes my
Picture, which the Water presents me with, and sometimes the Shadow, which the
Sun and I together cast upon the Water; But (says he, with a half Smile) I
looked upon both these, not with the Eyes of a Narcissuss, (for that would make
me much Madder than he was) but with those of a Christian: For I was
considering, that one of the Differences betwixt the Law, and the Gospel, might
not be ill represented by the Difference betwixt a common Looking-glass, and
that afforded me by this Crystal stream: For though both being specular Bodies,
I can see my Face in either; yet if my Face be spotted with Dirt, or grown Pale
by reason of the Faintness usual in such hot VVeather, a common Looking-glass
will indeed discover those things to me, but will not otherwise assist me to
remedy them; whereas, when I consult this Stream, if it show me any spots in my
Face, it supplies me with water to wash them off, and by its cooling, and
refreshing Waters, can relieve me from that Faintness that reduces me to look
Pale.

Thus the Law, which is commonly, and which seems even by an Apostle to be
compared to a Looking-glass, shows us indeed the pollutions of our Souls, and
discovers to us the effects of our spiritual I anguidness, and Faintness; but
the Gospel does not only do so, but tells the Embracers of it, by Saint John's
mouth, If any Man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father Jesus Christ, the
Righteous, who is the Propitiation for our sins, and whose Blood cleanses us
from all sin. And the Author of the same Gospel invites all those, that find
themselves tired and thirsty, to come unto him, and to be refreshed.

By this time, Lindamor, who was Angling not very far off, perceiving us stand
together, as if we were engaged in some Discourse, laid by his Rod a while, and
came to listen to what he expected he might learn from Eusebius; who pausing
here, I put him in mind, that he had also mentioned to me the sight of his
Shadow upon the face of the River, as another object of his Contemplations, and
that therefore my curiosity (wherein I knew Lindamor, as soon as I should
acquaint him with the occasion, would share) made me very desirous to know what
thoughts had been suggested to him, by a Subject that seemed so slight and
barren.

Since you will needs know, (replies Eusebius) I will confess to you, that my
Thoughts were Theologically enough employed, and therefore, least you should
think, I affect to Preach out of the Pulpit, I will but succinctly mention some
of these Various things, that this Shadow, as despicable as you think it,
suggested to me: But since I was only entertaining and exciting my self, not
discoursing with Naturalists, or disputing with Atheists, I presume you will
not wonder, that I take the Doctrine of the Creation for granted, as it is
acknowledged by Christians in general, and particularly by You.

I was then considering, that this Shadow, related to me, might in some
particulars be no unfit one of the Universe in reference to God: And indeed,
perhaps the World may without much extravagance be termed the Shadow of him,
of whose Attributes, or Perfections, it exhibites to an attentive considerer
diverse excellent Impresses, and the resemblance may thus far be advanced, that
as though it represents the Shape and Out-lines of my Body, which projects it,
yet it represents but them, and consequently this Shadow in reference to it is
but a superficial and worthless thing; so the World, though it be not
destitute of several Impresses, and as it were Lineaments or Features of the
Divine Wisdom and Power, yet for all this, its representations of the Divine
Author of it, are but very Imperfect, Superficial, and Dark, and the Excellency
of the Adorable Author of things, keeps him infinitely above all the works that
he has made.

But to mention some of the Comparisons I took notice of: In the first place we
may consider, that I make this Shadow here without taking the least pains to do
so, Psalm. 33. 9.
and with as little toil God made the World: He spoke, and it was done; He
commanded, and it stood fast, (says the Psalmist, speaking of the Creation) and
elsewhere the Scripture says, Isaiah 40. 28.
That the everlasting God, the Lord, the Creator of the ends of the Earth
faints not, neither is weary, and therefore that Rest ascribed him on the
seventh Day, is to be understood but a Cessation from Creating, not a Repose
from Labor, for all disproportions to the power of created Agents, are so
equally inconsiderable, in reference to one that is Infinite, that Omnipotence
may make even the World without Toil.

Secondly, To make this Shadow, I neither use nor need Colors, nor Pencil; I
digg no Quarries, nor fell no Trees to perfect this work, and employ no
Materials about it; As little had God any Pre-existent matter to contrive into
this vast Fabric: Our Creed proclaims him the Creator of Heaven and Earth;
Revel. 10. 6.
the Angel, that holds the Book, in the Revelations, describes him
resemblingly; and the Apostle tells us, That through Faith we understand that
the Worlds were framed by the word of God; Hebr. 11. 8.
so that things which are seen, were not made of things that do appear: And
indeed it became an Omnipotent Architect, not to be beholden but to himself for
his Materials. He that calls things that are not, as though they were, makes
them by calling them; He brought forth Light out of Darkness, by calling for
Light, and there was Light; he spoke it, and it was done, says the Psalmist;
and the World was, if I may so express it, but the real Echo of that
productive, FIAT.

The next thing, I was considering, was, that, to destroy this Shadow, I needed
neither Sword, nor Pistol, the withdrawing of my self under the Neighboring
Trees being sufficient to make the Shadow disappear, and leave behind as little
shape of it, as if there never had been any. And thus, as the World could not
have had a beginning, without having been provided by God, so for the
continuance of the Being it enjoys, it depends altogether, and every moment,
upon the will and pleasure of its first Author, of whom Saint Paul tells us,
That in Him, we not only live, and move, but have our being; and to the same
purpose I think one may allege that place, where the Scripture says of God, not
only, Nehemiah the 9. and the 6.
That he has made Heaven, the Heaven of Heavens with all their Host, the Earth
and all things that are thereon, the Seas and all that is therein; but adds,
That he preserves them all, as our Translatours English it; for in the Hebrew
I remember it is, Vivifies them all, that is, sustains them in that improper
Kind of Life, or that Existence, which, whilst their Nature lasts, belongs unto
it; so that if God should at any time withdraw his preserving Influence, the
World would presently Relapse, or Vanish into its first Nothing, as there are
many Notions of the Mind such, as that of Genus, and Species, which are so the
Creatures of Reason, that they have no longer an Existence in the nature of
things, than they are actually upheld therein, by being actually thought upon
by some Intellectual Being; And God is so the preserver of all his Creatures,
that one may say of the rest, as the Psalmist speaks of many of them, where
addressing himself to God, he says, Thou hidest thy Face, Psalm. 104. 29, 30.
they are troubled; Thou take away their Breath, they Dye, and return to
their Dust; Thou sendest forth thy Spirit, they are Created, etc.

I was also taking notice, (pursues Eusebius) that to produce what changes I
pleased, in all, or any part of this Shadow; I needed not employ either
Emissaries, or Instruments, nor so much as rowse up my self to any difficult
Exertion of my own strength, since, by only moving this or that part of my own
Body, I could change at pleasure in the twinkling of an Eye, the figure and
posture of what part of the Shadow I thought fit: And thus, when God had a mind
to work those Miracles, we most admire, as when at Josuah's prayer he stopped
the course of the Sun, and at Hezekiah's, made him go back, we Men are apt to
imagine that these prodigious Effects must needs cost their Author much, and
that he must strain his Power, and be necessitated to a troublesome Exertion of
his Omnipotence, to be able to produce them, whereas to that Divine Agent,
those things that would be to all others impossible, are so far from being
difficult, and the Creatures have so absolute and continual a dependence on
him, that it is as easy for him to effect the greatest Alterations in them, as
to resolve to do so, And even those Miraculous changes of the course of Nature,
that do the most astonish us, do so naturally and necessarily flow from the
Motions of his own Will, that to decree, and to execute, (whether or no they
require powers otherwise than Notionally differing) are alike easy to him: And
that irresistible Agent finds as little more difficulty to produce the greatest
changes among the Creatures, than to produce the least; as I find it harder to
move the whole Arm of my Shadow, than to move its little Finger. And this
consideration (subjoyns Eusebius) might be, methought, consolatory enough to
his Church, who by reposing an entire trust in her God, entitles her self to
the protection of him, that can as easily produce changes in the World, as
resolve on them, and can with the same facility destroy her and his greatest
Enemies, as decree their Destruction.

I was also further considering, (says Eusebius) That though the little watery
Bodies, that make up this River, and consequently those that glided along by
me, were in a restless Motion, the hindmost always urging on, and chasing those
that were before them, yet my Shadow was as complete and stable upon the
fugitive Stream, as if it had been projected on the water of a Pond, or rather
as if all the parts of Water, whereon 'twas Visible, had been fixed and
moveless; of which I made this Application, that though we may say with
Solomon, in a larger sense than his, That one Generation goes, and another
comes, the World being maintained by perpetual Vicissitudes of Generation and
Corruption, yet the Wisdom and Providence of God does so far confine the
Creatures to the established Laws of Nature, that though vast Multitudes of
Individualls are always giving place to others, yet the particular Creatures,
which do at any time make up the World, do always exhibit the like Picture of
its divine Original.

But yet lastly, (says Eusebius) I was considering too, that though this Shadow
have some kind of resemblance to that, whose Shadow it is, yet the Picture is
but very superficial and obscure; And if we should suppose, the Fishes that
inhabit this Stream, to be endued with reason, they could even from Lindamors
shadow but collect, that the Original is a Man, and not a Brute; but they could
not hence make any discovery of what manner of Man he is, nor know any thing of
his Virtues, or his Thoughts, or his Intention, nor consequently have that
Notion of him, that I (pursues Eusebius, turning to him, and a little Smiling
on him) do harbor and cherish, who having the happiness to converse with him,
have the opportunity and the justice to admire him. Thus, where I formerly
ventured to call the World Gods Shadow, I did not forget, how imperfect a
Picture a Shadow is wont to be: And though this dark Representation, that God
has vouchsafed Men of himself in the Universe, be sufficient to convince us,
that it was not made by chance, but produced by a Powerful and Intelligent
Being; the eternal Power and Godhead of the Great Author of Nature, as the
Scripture seems to teach us, being manifested to attentive and rational
Considerers, in the visible productions of his Power and VVisdome; yet how
short and dim a Knowledge must they have of him, that have no other than these
Corporal Instructors. How many of his glorious Attributes are there, for whose
Knowledge we must be beholden, rather to his Written, than his Created Word?
and how little will humane Intellects, without Revelation, discover of that
manifold VVisdome of God, which the Scripture teaches us, Ephesians. 3. 10.
That even to the Angels it must be made known by the Church. And if those
Illuminated persons, such as Moses and Saint Paul himself, who had both
extraordinary Revelations from God, and intimate Communion with him, confessed,
that in this Life they saw him but Darkly, and, as it were, in a Glass; sure
the Dim light of mere Nature will give us but extremely imperfect, and
detracting Idea's of him, whom the like Limitedness of our Nature will allow us
to know but very imperfectly, in Heaven it self, though as we shall there see
him Face to Face, our apprehensive Faculties will as well be enlarged, as the
dazzling and ravishing Object be disclosed.

But, (says Eusebius) though I forget, that I am not in the Pulpit, I hope you
remember, that I told you at first, how little I pretended these kind of
Reflections would endure a rigorous Philosophical Examen, and that I am not so
Indiscreet, as to expect that they should work Conviction in an Infidel, though
I hope they may excite good Thoughts in a Believer.

These last words of our Friend being not followed by any other; Lindamor,
having waited a while to ascertain himself, that Eusebius had ended his
Discourse, began another, by saying:

I perceive, Eusebius, with much more satisfaction than surprise, that the same
Subject, and at the same time, did, as 'twas fit, suggest very differing
considerations to you and me; for whilst your Shadow afforded you the rise of
sublime Speculations, I was making but a moral Reflection upon mine: For taking
notice, (continues he) that the Shade my Body projected, near Noon, was almost
as much shorter than it, as in the Morning it was longer, prompted me to think,
how foolish it were for me, who know by sure ways of measuring my own Statute,
that it is moderate enough, not to be either proud of, or complained of, should
imagine that I am either as Tall as a Giant, or as Low as a Dwarf, because I
see my Shadow either exceeding long, or extremely short; and I was further
considering, pursues Lindamor, that if Philosophers, as well as the Vulgar,
have rightly called Fame or Glory the Shadow of Virtue, it would be as
irrational to estimate ones self not by the testimonies of ones Conscience,
which is the Authentic standard of Intrinsic worth, but by the sickle
Opinions of others, (which oftentimes flatter, and oftener detract) but very
seldom give a just and impartial estimate of merit: The Fame may have its
increase, and decrements, whilst the Person continues the same, and loses
nothing of substance with the Shadow. And for a Man that should examine
himself, and judge of himself by his own designs, and actions, not other Men's
words, to suffer himself to be puffed up by vulgar applause, or dejected by
unmerited censures, were to mistake a Shadow for a Standard.

DISCOURSE VII.
Upon a Fall occasioned by coming too near the Rivers Brink.
IT was not long after this, that Eugenius chancing to spy a little Nook, which
seemed to promise him a more convenient Station for his Angling, he invited
Lindamor to share the advantage with him, and began to walk thitherward along
the Rivers Brink, which the abundant moisture of the Waters that glided by it,
had adorned with a pleasant Verdure; But he had not marched very far, when
chancing to tread on a place, where the course of the Water had worn off the
Bank, and made it hollow underneath, he found the Earth falter under him, and
could not hinder his Feet from slipping down with the Turf that betrayed him;
nor could he have escaped so, had not his endeavors to cast the weight of his
Body toward the Bank been assisted by Lindamor, who though not so near the
Brink as to be in danger, was not so far off but that he was able to catch hold
of him, and draw him to the firm Land. The noise that Lindamor made, when he
saw his Friend falling, quickly drew Eusebius and me thither, where, after I
had a while made my self merry with the Disaster, I found to have been so
harmless; Eusebius (who arrived there a little later) as'd him how he came to
fall, and Eugenius answering, that he thought he had trod upon firm Ground,
because he saw the Bank look to the very edge as if it differed not from the
rest of the Field, which it terminated; Eusebius took occasion from thence to
tell him, You may from this take notice, that it is not safe Traveling upon the
confines of what is Lawful, and what is Sinful, no more than upon the Borders
of two Hostile Nations: When we suppose, that thus far we may go toward that
which is Sinful, without committing it, we are wont with more boldness than
considerateness to conclude, that we need not scruple to venture, or rather
that we shall run no venture, having firm footing all the way. But it is much to
be feared, that when we allow our selves to come as far as the utmost Verge of
what is Lawful, and to do that which in the Casuists Language, is, tantum non
to Sin, the natural Proclivity of our minds to Evil, which carries them
downwards, as weight does our Bodies, will sometime or other make us find
hollow Ground, where we presume to find it firm: He that to Day will go toward
Sin as far as he thinks he may, is in danger of going to Morrow further than he
should; And it is far more easy for him to be secure than to be safe, that
walks upon the Brink of a Precipice. He was a wise Man, that as soon as he had
forbidden his Son to enter into the path of the Wicked, and to go in the way of
Evil men, subjoyns, as the best course to conform to the Prescription, avoid
it, pass not by it, turn from it, and pass away: God's indulgence leaves us a
Latitude to comply with our Infirmities, and Necessities, and to give us
opportunities of exercising a pious Jealousy over our selves, and of showing
how much we fear to offend him. But a wary Christian will say in this case, as
Saint Paul did in almost a like, All things are Lawful for me, but all things
are not Expedient; And he must often go further than he can with Prudence, that
will always go as far as he thinks he can with Innocence.

DISCOURSE VIII.
Upon the Good and Mischief that Rivers do.
THis Discourse being ended, we All, as it were, by common Consent, applied our
selves again to prosecute the Sport that had invited us to the River: But we
had not Angl'd very long, before we were Disturbed by a loud and confused
Noise, which we soon discovered to proceed from a Ship, that, together with
some Barges, and other lesser Boats, were, by the help of a favorable Breath
of Wind, Sailing up the River toward London. The sight of these Laden-Vessels,
together with the prospect of the Thames, Which, (as it happened in that place)
seemed, in various Windings and Meanders, wantonly to fly, and to pursue it
self: This sight, I say, together with that of the rich and flourishing
Verdure, which the Waters, in their passage, bestowed upon all the Lands that
were on either side any thing near their Banks, invited Eugenius, to fall upon
the praises of that Excellent River, which not only imparts Fertility and
Plenty, here at home, by Enriching all the places that have the advantage to be
near it; but helps to bring us Home, whatever the Remoter parts of the World,
and the Indies themselves, whether East or West, have of Rare or Useful.

Lindamor, having both applauded and recruited these Commendations, Methinks,
(says he) That amongst other good things, wherewith this River furnish us, it
may supply us with a good Argument against those Modern Stoics, who are wont,
with more Eloquence than Reason, to Declaim against the Passions, and would
fain persuade Others, (for I doubt whether they be so persuaded themselves)
That the Mind ought to deal with its Affections, as Pharaoh would have dealt
with the Jews-Males, whom he thought it wise to Destroy, least they might, one
Day, grow up into a condition to Revolt from him. But, because the Passions are
(sometimes) Mutinous, to wish an Apathy, is as unkind to us, as it would be to
our Country, To wish we had no Rivers, because (sometimes) they do Mischief,
when great or sudden Rain swells them above their Banks.

When I consider, (says Eusebius) That of the Immaculate and Divine Lamb
himself, it is recorded in the Gospel, That He looked round about, upon certain
Jews, with Indignation, being grieved for the Hardness of their Hearts; So that
two Passions are ascribed to Christ himself in one Verse: And when I consider
too, the Indifferency, and (consequently the Innocence) of Passions in their
own Nature, and the Use that Wise and Virtuous Persons may make of them, I
cannot think we ought to throw away (or so much as wish away) those Instruments
of Piety, which God and Nature has put into our Hands: But am very well content
we should retain them, upon such conditions as Abraham did, Those Domestics he
bought with his Money, whom the Scripture tells us, He both Circumcised, and
kept as Servants.

But, (continues Eusebius) As I do not altogether disallow Lindamors
Comparison, between Rivers and Passions, so he must give me leave to add this
to it, That as Rivers, when they overflow, Drown those Grounds, and Ruin
those Husbandmen, which whilst they flowed Calmly betwixt their Banks, they
Fertiliz'd and Enriched: So our Passions, (when they grow Exorbitant and
Unruly) destroy those Virtues, to which they may be very Serviceable whilst
they keep within their Bounds.

Instances of this truth, (pursues Eusebius) are but too Obvious; it is said,
That Valor is Anger's Whetstone; and our being Counseled by the Apostle, To
be Angry, and not to Sin, argues, that Passion not to be Incompatible with
Innocence, whilst it is confined within the limits of Moderation. But when once
Anger is Boiled up into Rage, or Choler into an habitual Fury, or appetite of
Revenge, it makes more Havok in the World than Beasts and Inundations: The
greatest part of those Rivers of Blood, that are shed in Battles, (though spilt
by Anger) do rather Irritate than Appease the unnatural Thirst of that
insatiate Fury: The burning of Cities, the sinking of Fleets, and the
Desolations of Provinces, and of Kingdoms, make but part of the Tragic effects
of this Inhumane Passion, when it once thoroughly possesses those that wield
Scepters, and handle Swords.

I will not tell Lindamor, That even that noblest and best of Passions, Love,
as gentle and amiable as it appears, when once it comes to degenerate by
growing Unruly, or being Misplaced, is guilty of far more Tragedies than those
that have the fortune to be Acted on Theaters, or to furnish the VVriters of
Romances; and that which (perchance at first) seems to be but an Innocent Love,
being not duly watched, and regulated, may, in time, grow to disobey, or
deceive Parents, to violate Friendships, to send Challenges, and fight Duels,
to betray the Honor of harmless Virgins, and of the noblest Families, to Rebel
against Kings, procure the Ruin of Monarchies and Commonwealths; And, in a
word, To make thousands miserable, and those it possesses most of all, and
thereby to bring Credit to, if not also to Surpass, the Fictions of Poets, and
the Fabulous stories of Romances.

And as for the desire of Excelling others, as great and noble things as it
makes Men undertake, whilst it aspires only to a Transcendency in Virtue, and
in Goodness, when that Passionate desire, by making Men too greedy of
Superiority in Fame and Power, degenerates into Ambition; How many Vices are
usually set a work by this one Passion! The contempt of the Laws, the Vilation
of Oaths, the Renouncing of Allegiance, the Breach of Leagues and Compacts, the
Murder of ones nearest Relation, (if they be more nearly related to a Crown)
and all the other Crimes and Miseries, that are wont to beget or attend civil
Wars, are the usual as well as dismal Productions of this aspiring Humor in
a Subject; Nor does it less Mischief when Harbored in a Prince's Breast, for
the Undoing of his own People, the Subversion of his Neighbor's States, the
Sacking of Cities, the Slaughter of Armies, the Dispeopling of some Provinces,
and the Peopling of others with VViddows and Orphans, are Sacrifices that are
more frequently offered up to Ambition, than able to satisfy it: For what can
quench his Thurst of Rule and Fame, or hinder the Attempts to which it
stimulates him, that can find in his Heart to destroy Armies, and ruin
Provinces, only that he may be taken notice off to be able to do so.

Certainly (subjoyns Eusebius) he knew very well the Frame of humane Spirits,
that said by the Pen of an Apostle; From whence comes Wars and Brawlings among
you? James 4. 1.
Come they not hence, even of your Lusts that War in your Members: And I doubt
whether Plagues, Wars and Famines have done more mischief to Mankind, than
Anger and Ambition, and some other inordinate Passions; for these do frequently
bring upon Men those public and other fatal Calamities, either as Judgments,
which they provoke God to Inflict, or as Evils, which as proper consequents
naturally flow, from those Mischievous practices, to which unbridl'd Passions
hurry the criminally unhappy Persons they have Inflav'd.

Wherefore, (concludes Eusebius, casting his Eyes upon Lindamor) As the
usefulness of a River hinders us not from making good the Banks, and, if need
be, making Damms, to confine it within its Limits, and prevent its Inundations;
So the usefulness of the Passions should not hinder us from watchfully
employing the Methods and Expedients afforded us by Reason and Religion, to
keep them within their due Bounds, which they seldom overflow without showing
to our Cost, that, as it is observed of Fire and Water, they cannot be so good
Servants, but that they are worse Masters.

DISCOURSE IX.
Upon the comparing of Lands, seated at differing distances from the River.
THis last Discourse, to which the River had afforded the occasion, inviting me
to Survey as much of it as was within my View, a little more attentively, gave
me the opportunity of taking notice of a manifest difference betwixt the Lands
that lay near it, and those whose Situation was remoter from it, and having
acquainted Eusebius with what I had observed, which his own Eyes could not but
presently bear witness to; One (says he) that should only consider how swiftly
this Stream runs along these flowery Meadows, and how great a quantity of Water
passes through them, and from them, toward the Sea, would be apt to conclude,
that certainly these Grounds retain none of the Water which runs from them so
hastily, and so plentifully, especially since we can see no Channels, nor other
manifest Inlets, and Receptacles, that should divert and retain the fugitive
Water, so that the Grounds confining on the River, must be but little
advantaged by its Neighborhood. But, (continues Eusebius) though these Grounds
have not any patent Passages, whereby to derive Water and Fatness from the
River, and therefore must suffer the greatest part of it to run by them
undiverted, yet still some of the Cherishing and Fertilizing moisture is from
time to time soaked in by the Neighboring Ground, and (perhaps by blind Pores,
and crooked Channels) so dispersed through the whole Fields, that they have
thereby Water, and in that vehicle Fertility conveyed to them, which you will
not doubt, if you do but with me take notice, how much the Lands that lie on
both sides near the Course of the River, are more Verdant, and Flourishing, and
more Rich than those less happy Grounds, to whom their Remoteness denies the
advantage of so improving a Neighborhood.

Thus (resumes Eusebius) many a pious Person that is an Assiduous attendant on
the means of Grace, and has a care to place himself as it were in the way, by
which the Ordinances of God, especially those of Reading, and Expounding of the
Scriptures, are wont freely and copiously to flow, is (especially upon any fit
of Melancholy, or distress of Mind) apt to be extremely discouraged from
prosecuting that course of Duties, and by looking upon the little that he
remembers of so many excellent Sermons as he has heard, he is often inclined to
conclude not only he has lost all the good Sermons that he has heard already,
but that at least for such as he there is little to be expected from them for
the future.

But though to lose so much of a thing, so precious as the Doctrine of
Salvation, be that, which is oftentimes a fault, and always an unhappiness, yet
it is a far less Mischief to forget Sermons than to forsake them, the one may be
but an effect of a weak Memory, the other is that of a depraved Will, perverted
by Laziness, Impatience, or some greater fault, we should scarce allow it for a
Rational proceeding; if one in a Consumption, or Disentery, because he grows
not Fat with Feeding, should resolve to renounce Eating and Drinking.

But this (says Eusebius) is not that which I chiefly intended: For Pious, but
melancholy Persons, are oftentimes too Partial against themselves, to be
competent Judges of their own Estate, they seem not to forget any Sermon so
much as that, Charity should begin at home; And they are much more careful not
to accuse any body wrongfully than themselves, though they might remember, that
in the Estimate of Christ himself, all Grounds are not equally Fruitful that
are good, some bringing forth hundred, some sixty, some but thirty Fold, and
yet to all he vouchsafes the title of Good; and though, as mad Men that have
quite lost their Wits, seldom or never complain of the want of them; so those
that have forfeited, or are devoid of Grace, rarely bemoan themselves of the
weakness of it. And it is no mean sign of Proficiency in Piety, to be apt to
deplore ones unproficiency; It Is true, that Preaching is not always, and I fear
not so much as often, the Savor of Life unto Life, the Perverseness of the
Hearers making it but too frequently the Savor of Death unto Death. But yet,
speaking in the general, though it aggravate the Sins committed in spite of it,
yet it usually hinders many others from being committed; and he that twice a
Week is told of God, and Duty, and Heaven, and Hell, has his Conscience more
awaked than he that never hears of any of these things. And if you but compare
one of these despondent Christians, we are considering, with the careless
Sensualists, that fly a rowzing Sermon, as they should do what it would deter
them from; you will easily discern a sufficient disparity between them, to
invite you to conclude, that the Instructiveness of Preaching may, like the
moisture of the River, be conveyed but by little and little at a time, and by
unperceived Passages, and yet be able to impart Fertility: For though much run
by, yet commonly something will stick, which we may safely conclude, if though
we can discern it no other way, it disclose it self by the Effects; for it is
not always to those that remember the most of them, that Sermons do the most
good, as Water retained in Ponds makes not the Bottom flourishing, but the
Banks, and the Efficacy of a Sermon is better to be collected from the
Impression it has on the Understanding, and Affections, than from that it
leaves on the Memory, whether we retain the Particulars faithfully or no, and
carry them home with us; yet if a Sermon leave us Devouter than it found us, if
we go from God's Ordinances, with a love to them, and a relish of them, and a
purpose to frequent them, we may be Despondents, but are not altogether
Non-proficients; that incorruptible Seed by which we are Regenerated, being
once thrown into an honest Heart, may, as our Savior intimates, grow up we
know not well how, and though perhaps by insensible degrees, yet at length
attain Maturity. To dispatch, (concludes Eusebius) whether or no a Man can
orderly repeat all the Particulars that composed the Sermon, it does him good,
if it either makes him good, or keeps him so: And its Operation is to be
estimated, not so much by what we Remember, as by what we Resolve.

What you have been saying, (subjoyns Lindamor) when he perceived that Eusebius
had done speaking, suggests to me a Reflection, that till now I did not dream
of; And though it differ from that wherewith you have been pleased to entertain
us, yet because it is applicable to the same purpose, and occasioned by the same
River, I shall without scruple, though after your Discourse, not without
Blushes, tell you, that it is this; I, among many others that Live near it,
have often resorted in hot Weather to this River, to bathe my self in it, and
after what I have been hearing, I now begin to consider, that though
incomparably the greater part of the River run by me, without doing me any
good, and though when I went out of it, I carried away little or none of it
with me; yet whilst I stayed in it, that very Stream, whose Waters run so fast
away from me, washed and carried off whatever Foulness it might find sticking
to my Skin: And besides, not only cooled me, and refreshed me, by allaying the
intemperate heat that discomposed me, and made me faint, but also helped me to
a good Stomach for some while after.

Thus (resumes Lindamor) I have sometimes found, that a moving Sermon, though
it did not find me qualified to derive from it the Advantages it questionless
afforded better Auditors, and when I went from it, I found I had retained so
little of it, that it seemed to have almost totally slipped out of my Memory, yet
the more Instructive and Pathetick passages of it had that Operation upon me,
as to cleanse the Mind from some of the Impurities it had contracted, by
Conversing to and fro in a defiling World, without suffering Pollutions to stay
long, and settle where they began to be Harbored; And besides, I found that a
course of such Sermons, as I have been mentioning, did oftentimes (and if it
had not been my own fault, would have always done so) both allay those
Inordinate heats that tempting Objects are but too apt to Excite; refresh my
drooping Spirits, that continually needed to be revived, and raise in me an
Appetite to the means of Grace, which are Piety's (and consequently the Soul's)
true and improving Aliments. So that, (concludes Lindamor) though I seldom let
Sermons do me all the good they may, and should, yet I dare not forsake them,
because I forget them; since it is to do a Man some good, to make him less bad
than he was, and to give a Value and Inclination for the means of growing
better than he is.

DISCOURSE X.
Upon a Fishes running away with the Bait.
THis Reflection of Lindamor's was soon followed by another of the same
Gentleman's, who seeing many Fishes rise one after another, and bite at
Eugenius's Bait, which he let them sometimes run away with, that he might be
the surer to be able to draw them up, as he afterward did several of them;
See, (says Lindamor, as one of the Fishes had just swallowed the Hook) how
yonder silly Fish, having at length seized the beloved Bait, he has been
Courting, posts away with it as his obtained wish, little dreaming of being
himself taken: Thus (continues the same Speaker) when greedy Mortals have an
opportunity to obtain forbidden things, they joyfully run away with them as the
Goods they aimed at, and when they fondly think they have caught, they are so,
and whilst they imagine themselves to carry away a Booty, they become a Prey;
for that he is in his Judgment that never errs, who, whatever he gets into the
Bargain, loses himself.

The Scripture, (subjoyns Eusebius) mentions, among other properties of Vice,
that which it calls the Deceitfulness of Sin. And the wise Man tells us, that
Wine is a Mocker; and it may be one of the reasons of these Expressions, that
when we think our selves possessed of a sinful Pleasure, we are indeed
possessed by it, as Doemeniacks are possessed by the Devil, who serves many
other Sinners, though less perceivedly, as he serves Witches, whom he gets the
Power to command, by seeming to obey them, and to comply with their criminal
desires; And, if we compare this, with what I was just now observing to you, on
the occasion of the counterfeit Fly, we may add, That even when Sin seems the
Kindest and most Obsequious to us, and to answer if not exceed our Desires, our
case may be but like the Canaanitish General's, who though he had Milk brought
him by Jael instead of the Water he only requested, was but thereby invited to
Sleep the Sleep of Death, Judges 4. 29.
and to have his Fears more surpassed than his Desires had been.

But, (pursues Eusebius) this may supply us with another Reflection; for though
this Fish seems to have devoured the Hook and Bait it swallowed, yet in effect
it is taken thereby; so the Devil, when he had played the Serpent and the Lion,
when he had brought the Jews and Gentiles to conspire against their common
Savior, and had made Herod and Pilate friends to make them joint Enemies to
Christ, and when by these means he seemed to have obtained his end, by
employing their hands to Kill the formidablest of all his Enemies, this pursued
Prey destroyed the seeming Conqueror; and Death appearing to swallow the Lord
of Life, was, if I may so speak, choked by the Attempt, since he not only was
quickly able to say in the Apostles Triumphant Language: O Death, 2 Cor. 15. 15.
where is thy Sting? Hebr. 2. 14, 15.
O Grave, where is thy Victory? but did by Death conquer him that had the power
of Death, that is, the Devil; nay, and made all his followers so much sharers
in the advantages of his Conquest, as by the same way (which we are informed by
the same Text) to deliver those whom the restless fear of Death perpetually
kept from relishing the Joys of Life.

DISCOURSE XI.
Upon a Danger springing from an unseasonable Contest with the Steersman.
THis Discourse being ended, Eugenius, who was looked upon by us all as the
most Experienced as well as concerned Angler among us, descrying at a good
distance a place which he judged more convenient for our Sport, than that we
there were in, where the Fish began to bite but slowly; He invited the Company
to this new Station, but when we were come thither, finding in a short time,
that either it was ill stocked with Fish, or that the Season of their Biting in
the places thereabouts was over, he thought it concerned him to provide us some
better place; and accordingly, whilst we were yet, by the pleasure of mutual
conversation, endeavoring to keep the Fishes sulleness from proving an
Exercise to our patience, he walked on along the River, till he lighted upon a
Youth, that by his Habit seemed to belong to some Boat or other Vessel; and
having inquired of him, whether he could not be our Guide to some place where
the Fish would bite quick, he replied, that he easily could, if we would take
the trouble of coming to a place on the other side of the River, which his
Master, who was a Fisherman, had Baited over Night, and would questionless let
us make use of for a small Gratification; Eugenius, being very well content,
called away the Company, which were led by the Youth to a Boat belonging to his
Master, into which being entered, the old Man, who was owner of the Boat, hoys'd
up Sails, and began to steer the Boat with one of his Oars, to a place he
showed us at a good distance off, but did it so unskilfully, that since a
Mariner of his Age could scarce mistake so grossly for want of Experience in
the River, we began to suspect, that he had too plentifully tasted a far
stronger Liquor than that which was the Scene of his Trade; and as the old Man
was half Drunk, so the Youth appeared to be a mere Novice, both which we had
quickly occasion to take notice off: For some Clouds that were gathering out of
the Sea, passing over our Vessel, raised in their passage, as is usual enough,
a temporary Wind, that to such a slight Boat as ours was, might almost pass for
a kind of Storm; For then the old Man gave out his directions so ill, and the
Youth was so little able to execute them punctually, that two of the Company
offended at their unskilfulness, began by angry and unseasonable Expostulations
and Clamours, to confound the already disordered Boat-man, and being got up,
with no small hazard to the Boat, they would perchance, by crossing the
VVater-men in their endeavors, have made it miscarry, had not Lindamor, whose
Travels had made him well acquainted with such cases, earnestly requested them
to sit still, and let the VVater-men do their own work as well as they could,
affirming, that he had seen more than one of those easily over-set Boats cast
away by the confused and disagreeing endeavors of the VVater-men and
Passengers to preserve it: This counsel was thought very reasonable, since the
greater the VVind was, and the less the Steerman's dexterity, the more
necessary it appeared, that we should be orderly and quiet, and by leaning our
Bodies sometimes one way, and sometimes another, as occasion required, do what
in us lay to keep the Vessel upright, and herein we were so prosperous, that
soon after the Cloud was passed, and the Shower it brought with it was over,
the VVind grew moderate enough to allow us to make some calm Reflections on
what had happened: This Lindamor, from the thanks that were given him for his
advice, took occasion to do in these terms: Since Statesmen and Philosophers
are wont to compare a Commonwealth to a Ship, I hope the Reflection suggested
to us by what had just now happened, will be the easier pardoned. The skill of
ruling Nations, is an Art no less difficult than noble; for whereas Statuaries,
Masons, Carpenters, and other Artificers work upon inanimate Materials, a Ruler
must manage free Agents, who may have each of them interests or designs of
their own, distinct from those of the Prince, and many times repugnant to them:
And the Prizes that are contended for in Government, either are, or (which is
in our case all one) are thought, so Valuable, and the concurrents are so
Concerned, and consequently so Industrious to drive on each his own design,
that without mentioning any of those many other things which make good
Government difficult, these alone may suffice to make it more our trouble than
our wonder, that the Rulers of States and Commonwealths should oftentimes
mis-govern them. But the public Infelicities of declining States, are not
always wholly due to the Imprudence of the Ruler, but oftentimes those that
most resent such Imprudency, even by those very Resentments, increase the
public Disorders they appear so much troubled at; and it may be a question,
Whether it be more prejudicial to Commonwealths, to have Rulers that are mean
Statesmen, than to have a Multitude of Subjects, that think themselves to be
Wise ones, and are forward to Censure what is done by their Magistrates,
either because it is done by their Superiors, or because it is not done by
themselves.

Yet it may well be doubted, (says Eugenius) whether the Reverence and
Submission we owe to Senates, or Princes, extend to our very Reasons, and our
inward Thoughts: For the Right, and the Skill to Govern, are two very distinct
things; nor does the one confer the other: A Crown, how precious soever, adorns
but the outside of the Head, without enriching the inside; and its Splendor
will scarce dazzle a Wise beholders Eyes, though it but too often does theirs
that wear it: No, the Tribunal of reason has a Jurisdiction that reaches to
Thrones themselves, and what you well observed just now concerning the
difficulty of avoiding faults in Government, will, I presume, make you think it
excusable, if I confess that I think, Sovereigns do now and then do what you
confess it is so hard for them to avoid doing; Nor is it more a Breach of
Loyalty, not to think a weak Governor a Prudent one, than not to think him
Tall, or Straight, or Sharp-sighted, if Nature have made him Low, or Crooked,
or Purblind. A Senate or a Monarch may indeed command my Life and Fortune; but
as for my Opinions, whether of Persons, or things, I cannot in most cases
command them my self, but must suffer them to be such as the Nature of the
things I judge of requires; and therefore, the thinking all things done with
VVisdome that are done by Men in Power, is too great an Impossibility to be a
Duty; and besides, it would lessen the Merit of Obedience, which otherwise
would not appear to be paid to the Authority of the Magistrate, since we
readily obey the Injunction of Lawyers and Physicians, as long as we think them
Prudently framed for our good, though we acknowledge not these Persons to have
any right to Command us.

But though (continues Eugenius) I take Reason to be so supreme a thing, that
as even the greatest Princes Actions should be regulated by it, so they may be
judged by it; yet I allow lawful Authority a Jurisdiction over my Actions,
that I deny it over my Opinions; and though I can obey the Orders that have the
Impresses of VVisdome, as well as the stamp of Authority, with more hope and
alacrity, yet I can obey those wherein I think Power is unguided by Prudence,
with no less Punctualness and Fidelity: I would not resist a Magistrate when I
cannot esteem him; and though I dare discern Folly even in the greatest
Princes, yet I can reverence Authority in the weakest.

I know Eugenius too well (says Lindamor) not to believe him: But though I
confess, that to do what you say, is to do much, and to do that which I fear is
not usually done, yet methinks it were well if we did somewhat more; for
whereas most humane Actions, especially about Matters political, are attended
with great variety of Circumstances, according to some or other of which, they
may be differingly considered, and estimated, as it is not very difficult to
make many, if not most Actions appear politic or unwise, according as they are
Clothed with those of their Circumstances, that may be applied to excuse them,
or with those that are fit to discommend them; so I would take a care to put
the favourablest Constructions on those public Counsels, that are capable of
more Constructions than one, and use the Parents of my Country, as Noah's two
dutiful Children did their distempered Father, whose Nakedness when they had
once discovered, they covered too; and that in such a way, as showed they were
unwilling to see more of it than was necessary to enable them to hide it. And I
say this, (continues Lindamor) with Relation to Eugenius, and such as he; for
as to the Vulgar, who yet make up the far greatest and loudest part of those
that would intrude themselves into State Affairs, upon the pretense of their
being ill managed by their Superiors; I cannot but think, that whatever the
course of Affairs be, these cannot but be incompetent Judges of their being
Politic, or the contrary: For to judge of things barely by success, were
somewhat to forget that there is a supreme and absolute disposer of Events, and
has been a practice always rejected by the Wise, as both discouraging Wisdom
and affronting it; And as for the Counsels, by which indeed the Prudence or
Imprudence of public Actions is to be estimated, the Vulgar is rarely admitted
to have such a Prospect into the true State of Affairs, as is requisite to
enable them to judge of the Expedience or unadvisedness of them, being
unacquainted with the frame and Motives of the Prince's Counsels and Designs:
Ordinary Men may often think that Imprudent, whilst they consider it only in
it self, which its congruity to the rest of the Prince's designs may make
Politic enough, and a private Whisper, or the Intimation from an unsuspected
Spy, or an intercepted Letter, or diverse other things unperceived, and perhaps
undreamt of, by those that are not of the State-Cabal, may make it wise to do
several things, which to those that look only at the Actions, without knowing
the Motives, may appear Unpolitick, and would indeed be so, were it not for
these Reasons, which yet ought to be as little Divulged as Disobeyed: So that
the Peoples forwardness, to quarrel with the Transactions of their Prince, is
usually compounded of Pride and Ignorance, and is most incident to those, that
do not sufficiently understand either State Affairs or themselves; and whilst
they judge upon incompetent Information, even when their Superiors are in the
fault, they may be so, for censuring them.

I must not now dispute, (says Eusebius) whether such as you, Gentlemen, whom
their Conditions, Parts and Opportunities qualify to discern the Interests and
Designs of Princes, may not be allowed to judge of their Counsels, and see
their Errors; As our late Astronomers, being assisted with good Glasses, are
allowed to tell us, that they discern Spots even in the Sun it self. But
certainly, the Ambition of Pragmatical Inferiors, to make themselves
Statesmen, upon pretense that those that sit at the Helm do not Govern it as
wisely as these would do, if they were in the same places, is a fault no less
prejudicial to any State, than Epidemical in some of them: For whilst the
Government is thus Decryed, the same disadvantageous Representatations embolden
Strangers and Forrainers to attempt the Subversion of a State, and make the
dispondent Subjects despair of preserving it, little considering that there are
scarce ever any Imprudences in a Government, that can prove any thing near so
Prejudicial to the Generality of the Subjects, as would the Subversion of it,
whether by Forain Conquest, or by Intestine Jarrs; such changes seldom doing
less than entail upon unhappy Countries the fears and mischiefs of War. And
that though it be granted, that the right of Governing does not confer the
Skill, yet it is much better to stick to the former, than oppose or desert it,
because it wants the latter: For a right to a Crown, is that, which for the
most part manifestly belongs but to one, and is seldom plausibly pretended to
by above two or three, whereas the Skill to Govern is so undetermined, and so
uncertain a thing, that Men's Innate pride and Self-love would incline almost
every Man to claim it for himself, especially, since by challenging that, he
might put for no less than Sovereignty: And in a State thus abandoned to the
craftiest or the strongest, there would never want disturbing Vicissitude of
Governments, as well as Governors, since whoever could get Interest enough in
the Soldiery, or the Multitude, would quickly devise and impose such a frame
of Government, as may put the Management of Affairs into his and his Parties
hands, and give them the Authority that have the Power. But (resumes Eusebius)
I must remember, that not Politics, but Divinity is my Profession, and
therefore without enlarging upon the confusion that is inevitable in a State,
where the right of Governing being not heeded, or at least not ascertained,
every Man would pretend to Counsel or Command, and none would think himself
bound to Obey; I shall only mind you, that Magistracy having been instituted by
God, for the good of Mankind, we may in obeying our Lawful Magistrates, though
perhaps less Wise than we could wish them, not only participate the Advantages
naturally accruing from Obedience to Superiors, but diverse peculiar Blessings
that God oftentimes vouchsafes to our Obedience to his Vicegerents, and his
Institutions. Let Subjects therefore (says Eusebius) wish for wise Princes, but
submit to those the Providence of God, and the Laws of their Country, may have
given them: Let us, if by any just way we be called to it, assist a Prince with
the wisest Counsels we can; if not, let us assist him to make the best of the
unwise Counsels he has taken, without adding our Factiousness, or our Passions
to his Misgovernment, remembering that, at least in my Opinion, to the happiness
of a Commonwealth, it is not only requisite that the Prince know how to
command well, but that the Subjects obey well; and that even weak Counsels,
faithfully assisted, and as much as may be rectified or repaired by those that
are to Execute them, may less prejudice the public, than the froward and
jarring endeavors of Men, that perhaps would be wiser Rulers if they had a
right to be so. It may be (continues Eusebius) that affection and diligence in
the public Service, may, in spite of the Governments miscarriages, prevent,
or at least retard and lessen, the Ruin of the State. But however, (concludes
he) it will be no small satisfaction to an honest Man, and a loyal Subject, not
to be conscious to himself of having contributed to the public Calamities,
either by his own Provocations, or his Factious indignation at the Princes
faults; if a Man have done his utmost to hinder the Ruin he comes to be
involved in, the public Calamity will be far lighter to him, being not clogged
by private Guilt; and he will support the misfortune of it with far the less
trouble, if he be to support nothing else. Nay, since the Service we do to
whatever Prince is rightfully set over us, upon the score of his being Gods
Vicegerent, is ultimately directed to that Supreme, and as the Scripture calls
him, Only Potentate, whose Manificence is as inexhausted as his Treasure; we
may safely expect, that whatever prejudice we here sustain upon the account of
the Prince's commands, will hereafter be advantageously considered to us in the
reward of our Obedience.

DISCOURSE XII.
Upon Clouds rising out of the Sea, and falling down in Rain not Brackish.
THis Discourse had already lasted so long, that as well my Unwillingness that
one Theme should detain us any longer, as my Desire to keep Eugenius from
making any Reply, which on such an occasion might perchance have begot some
Dispute, made me forward to divert the Discourse, by inviting the Company to
take notice of a black Cloud that was coming toward us, which soon after, in
its passage under the Sun, interposed betwixt our Sight and that gloriousest
Object of it. Lindamor then having a while attentively enough considered it,
took thence an occasion to say: This Cloud, Gentlemen, whenever it shall fall
down in Rain, will sufficiently show that it was before but Water, which
whilst it lay mingled with the rest of the River, or the Sea, whence it is
Exhaled, may be supposed as Clear and Limpid as any of the rest; but now that
the Sun has by its powfull Beams elevated this Water in the form of Vapors,
and drawn it near it self, we see it Composes a Cloud, which does no longer
receive or transmit the Light, but robs the Earth of it, and eclipses the Sun
that raised it, and sometimes too, produces dismal storms of Rain, and Wind,
and Hail. Thus (pursues Lindamor) there are many, who while they continued in a
low and private Fortune, were as blameless as others; and yet, when by a
peculiar Vouchsafement of Providence, they are raised from that humble state to
a conspicuous height, they seem to have as much changed their Nature as their
Fortune, they grow as much worse than meaner Men, as their condition is better
than that of such; and the principal things by which they make their Exaltation
be taken notice of, are, the Prejudice they do to their Inferiors, and the
Ingratitude they exercise toward that Monarch of the World, that raised them
above others. Of so perverting a Nature, is so high a Station, that the gaining
of an Earthly Crown, is very far from being a furtherance to the acquiring of
an Heavenly one: And many, whom an humble condition of Life kept as Innocent as
Lowly, are, by the highest Advancement in point of Fortune, impaired in point
of Morality; and these supreme Dignities, which the ambitious World so fondly
Courts and Envies, do so often manifest those that have attained them, to be
unworthy of them.

I know not whether Eugenius imagined that Lindamor did in this Discourse make
some little Reflection, upon what we had lately said on the behalf of Princes:
But I afterward suspected, that it was partly to reply to this Observation, as
well as entertain the Company with a new one that he subjoined. As this Cloud
has furnished Lindamor with one Reflection, so that which lately brought us the
Shower of Rain, whose marks are yet upon our Hats, may supply us with another,
which may show, that Themes of this Nature are applicable to very differing
purposes, according as one or other of their Circumstances happens to be
considered and employed: For as far (pursues he) as we can judge by the
Neighborhood of the Sea, and by that Cloud's being driven hither by a VVind
blowing thence, it consisted of the Seawater raised in the form of Vapors.
But though the Water of the Ocean is Salt and Brackish, Unpleasant and
Unwholesome whilst it lies there Unelevated; yet that Water which has the
Advantage of being raised to the second Region of the Air, appears, when it is
turned into Rain, to have left all its Brackishness behind it, and proves both
wholesome for Men's Bodies, and fertilizing to their Fields.

Thus (continues Eugenius) we sometimes see, that Men, who in a private
condition were subject to diverse Vices, divest them when they are advanced to
the honor of putting on Royal Robes, as Silkworms leave their Husks behind
them, when by acquiring Wings they turn into (a nobler sort of Creatures)
flying Animals; as most Men change, so some improve their Minds with their
Condition, and seem to have mis-behav'd themselves in a lower Station, but
because they were Born to a higher, and were, whilst beneath it, detained out
of their proper Sphere. And indeed, as a Throne exposes those that sit on it to
peculiar Temptations to Vice, so does it afford them peculiar Engagements to
Virtue, as so Elevated a Station is apt to make Men giddy, so is it proper to
make them circumspect, by letting them see that all the World sees Them; the
Sublimity of such a Condition would make any Soul, that is not very mean,
despise many mean things that too often prevail upon Inferior persons. If
Princes have any sense of Shame and Honor, it will be a great Curb to them, to
consider, that, as there are too many Eyes upon them to let their Vices be
secret, so their Faults can as little escape Censure as Discovery; and Men will
be the more severe to their Reputations, because it is the only thing wherein
Subjects can punish their Sovereigns. If they have any thing of Generosity in
their Natures, their very Condition, by placing them above other Objects, will
make them aspire to Glory, and that is a Mistress, that even Monarchs cannot
successfully court, but with great and good Actions. And if they have withal a
sense of Piety, they cannot, but, in Gratitude to him, whose Vicegerents they
are, endeavor to promote his Interests that made them so, and so make
themselves as like him as they can in his other Attributes of Clemency,
Justice, and Bounty, as he has vouchsafed to make them in his Power and
Authority: And besides, that the actual Possession of an Earthly Grown leaves
them nothing worth aspiring to but a Heavenly one: The consideration of the
great Advantages they have above other Men of doing Good, and the Exemplariness
and Influence as well of their Vices as of their Virtues, will make them
tremble at the thoughts of the Account they must one Day render of so many
Thousands, perhaps of so many Millions, (of Subjects) committed to their
Charge, if, as they are sure it will be a great one, they shall not make it a
good one. Nor (pursues Eugenius) is History altogether unfurnished with
Examples of those whom a Throne has as well Improved as Dignified: 1 Samuel 10.
6. 9.
Saul was not the only Person, who when he was created King had another Spirit,
and became another Man; That Titus, who was the Head of it, was justly styled
the Darling of Mankind, though his Virtue and Nobleness did, more than his
Crown, keep the greatest part of Posterity from taking notice of any thing in
him, but an Obligingness proportionate to his Greatness: Yet I find in some
ancient VVriters, to whom Truth was more dear than even this Favorite of
Mankind, that before he came to that supreme Pitch of humane Dignity, his
course of Life did not promise the Roman World the happiness it derived from
his Government; His Life before he came to be Emperor, having not been so free
from Blemishes of Lust and Blood: But that I may, in writing his Character,
invert what the Roman Historian said of one of his Predecessors, and say, that
Titus had been thought Indignus Imperio nisi imperasset. And, without going as
far as Rome, our own History affords us a Henry the Fifth, who, before he came
to the Kingdom, was scarce thought worthy to Live in it, and did so degrade
himself to the Practices of the meanest Malefactors, that a Judge, that was
then his Fathers Subject, was fain to use him at that Rate; and yet this
Prince, as soon as he had Seated himself in the Throne, did as suddenly as if
the Place it self had some secret Virtue to improve those it admitted, behave
himself as a Person worthy of it; and not only Conquered France, but, which was
a Nobler, as well as a more difficult Victory, his own Resentments too, by
preferring that Judge, when King, that had Imprisoned him, when Prince; and
evincing by so memorable an Action, that he preferred Virtue above himself, and
renouncing the Pleasure of Revenge, he scrupled not to promote one whom he
could not commend without condemning himself; were it not, that in this Prince,
according to what I was saying, the King was become another Man than the
Subject. And perhaps, (concludes Eugenius, a little Smiling) I could proceed to
give you other Examples enough to keep it from being improbable; that one main
Reason, why there are but few good Princes, is, because there are but few
Princes; were it not that I see the VVater-man prepare to Land us: And in
effect, we were now come so near the place, where the Fisherman designed to
set us Ashore, that whether or no Lindamor had a mind to return any thing to
what Eugenius had said, it would then have appeared unseasonable, either to
resume the Debate, or prosecute the Discourse.

DISCOURSE XIII.
Upon drawing the Boat to the Shore.
WHen we were now come to the place where we were to be Landed, least the Boat
should be carried away by the Stream before we could step Ashore, the Owner of
it reached out his long Pole, and by means of the Crook, taking fast hold of
the Bank, he drew the Pole toward him with all his might, and thereby brought
the Boat to Shore. This endeavor of the VVater-man's, and the effect of it,
inviting Eusebius to smile a little, gave me the Curiosity, as soon as we were
Landed, to enquire why he did so: It is almost as ordinary, (answers Eusebius)
for Men to think themselves wiser than God, as it is impossible for them really
to be so. Those that study nothing but to obtain their Ends, and that scruple
at nothing they judge conducive to them, do oftentimes lay their designs and
plots with so much Artifice and Subtilty, that they do not doubt, that,
whatever may become of Gods designs, and of his promises, and threats, those
which themselves have laid so Politickly cannot but succed. And even pious and
well-meaning Persons, that have the opportunity to discern the Politic ways
that these Men take to compass their Ends, are oftentimes tempted to needless
Fears, that Divine providence will be puzzled and distressed by them; and to
think, that for Reasons secret, though just, Providence may be put by these
Men's craft to play an after-game in the World to come. But in such cases, it
often fares with these grand Designers, as it did just now with our VVater-man:
He had fastened his Grapling-Iron to the Shore, and putting to his utmost
strength, did so forcibly endeavor to draw it toward him, that one, that did
not know that the Shore was fixed, might expect this Lusty Fellows endeavors
capable to put into Motion whatever he so forcibly drew toward him: But the
Shore being fixed, and immovable, instead of making that come to him, his very
strainings drew him and his Boat to that. Thus the contrivers of the proud Pile
of Babel, whereby they meant (not, as most imagine, to secure themselves
against a second Flood; the Text being silent as to that Aim, and a Plain being
a very improper place for such a purpose, but) to make themselves a Name, and
prevent Dispersion. These ambitious Contrivers, who had laid their Plot so
hopefully, that they had engaged no less than Mankind, and who probably had
Designs as raised as their intended Fabric, since those Expressions of him,
that knew their Hearts, Genes. 11. v. 6.
(And this they begin to do, and now nothing will be restrained from them,
which they have imagined to do) seemed methinks to warrant my Conjecturing,
that those had designs very aspiring, that intended but to make a Rise to their
soaring flight of a Tower, whose Top should reach unto Heaven. But the Policy
of these ambitious Builders being contrary to the charitable decree of God, to
have the Earth Peopled, he made use of that very conspiracy, that brought them
together, to effect that which they conspired to prevent; so, that now the
remotest Parts of the Inhabited World are but the Colonies of Babel, whose
scattered Architects have indeed made themselves a Name, but upon a quite
contrary Account than they intended or expected. Thus the Purblind envy of
Joseph's Brethren, having made them resolve to prevent his future Dreams of
Superiority over them, made them think, that by Selling him for a Slave, they
had taken sufficient Order he should never come to be their Master. And yet we
see, that Joseph's being sold into Egypt, was made use of by the wise Orderer
of humane Affairs, to make him in effect Lord of that rich and populous
Kingdom; and thereby, of his envious Brethren, Pharoah's Dreams having
advantageously made him amends for the hardships his own had exposed him to. So
the proud Favorite of Ahasuerus questionless thought he could scarce miss his
Ends, when, by the Counsel of his Friends, and, as he fondly thought, of his
Gods too, he provided for Mordecai that fatal Gibbet, which probably he might
have escaped, if he had not erected it. Thus the High Priest and Sanhedrin of
the Jews, seemed to Act with much Policy, though no Justice, when they resolved
upon the Death of our Savior, least, as the Gospel tells us, the Romans should
come and Destroy their Temple, and Nation, which whether indeed it did not
rather procure than divert the coming of the Romans, the Church History can
inform you. Nay, the Old Serpent himself, that Arch-politician, that was the
Instructor of those others I have been naming, even in his chiefest
Masterpiece, found himself the most Over-match'd by him, to whom the Scripture
ascribes the taking of the Wise in their own Craftiness. For questionless, he
highly applauded his own Subtilty, and seemed to have taken the directest and
most prosperous way to his impious Ends, that could be devised, when, having
made Herod and Pilate Friends upon such terms, that the Lamb of God should be
the Victim of their new Confederacy, he had engaged both Jews and Gentiles in a
ruinous and tragic Conspiracy to Kill the Prince of Life, and by that
unparalled Crime at once destroy the Devils chief Enemy, and make God theirs:
And yet the Event has sufficiently manifested, that the Apostle might well
affirm, that Christ by his Death destroyed him that had the Empire of Death,
the Devil, and that Satan's Kingdom never received so deadly a Wound, as that
which pierced our Crucified Savior's side. Wherefore in short, (concludes
Eusebius) the Decrees of Providence are too solid and fixed to have Violence
offered them by humane Attempts, how specious soever they be; and those that
think to bring God to their Bent, will find at long Running, that they have to
do with One, whose Power and Wisdom are so Overruling, that not only he can
frustrate their utmost endeavors, but make those very endeavors frustrate
themselves, and employ Men's subtilest Policies to accomplish those very things
they were designed to defeat.

DISCOURSE XIV.
Upon Catching store of Fish at a Baited place.
AS soon as we were come to the place the Fisherman told us of, we found it as
plentifully stored with Fish as he had foretold us, and caught more in some
few Minutes than we had taken in a whole hour before: But we did not half so
much marvel at this, as we were pleased with it, because the Fisherman
informed us, that he had liberally Baited the place overnight with Corn, as
well as Worms; whilst this pleasant Exercise lasted, Eusebius marking how
great a Resort of Fishes there was in that place, and how fast we drew them up,
upon comparing what he saw happen, with the Occasion of it, thus acquainted us
with the thoughts thereby suggested to him. Those (says he) that Yester-day in
the Evening might see this Man (pointing at the Fisherman) throw in his Baits
by handfulls into this place, and then depart, as minding them no more, were
probably, if they knew not his Design, and the Custom of Fishers, tempted to
think him a wastfull Prodigal, or at best a venturous Fool, to bury his Corn in
the River, and throw his Baits to be caught up by Fishes, that for ought he
knew would never come back to thank their Host. But those that know (what we
now find) how profitable a Course this is wont to prove, would, in stead of
thinking such a practice a piece of Folly, look upon it as a piece of
Pro^idence: For though he be sure not to recover in kind the things he cast
upon the Waters, yet such a loss is wont to prove very gainful unto him,
whilst he loses but a Grain of Corn, or a Worm, to obtain Fishes of far more
Value. Thus, though the purblind World may think a liberal Almes-giver, or a
generous Confessor, a Fool, or a Prodigal, whilst they only consider him as
one that throws away what he has in present Possession, and seems not so much
as to hope for the recovery of the same Goods, or any of the like Nature; yet
those whose Eyes being Illuminated with a Heavenly light, are thereby enabled
to look into the vast and distant Regions of the future, and to descry there
the final Issues of all Temporal things, will be so far from thinking him
unwise, for parting with unsatisfying Trifles, to procure the highest and most
permanent Goods, that they will think his Proceedings far more justifiable in
point of Prudence, than we now think the Fisher-man's: Nor will the parting
with a greater Fortune, as freely as with a lesser, any more alter the Case,
than the Fisher-mans throwing in his bigger Worms, and grains of Corn, with no
more scruple than his lesser: For Heaven does as well incomparably outvaue the
greatest, as the least Goods poor Morals can lay out for it; and he, who has
all things to give, and is infinitely more than all himself, has promised, that
those that Sow plentifully, shall Reap so too; and though the least of future
Acquists would incomparably transcend the greatest Price that can be here given
for it, yet the future Rewards will betwixt one another bear a proportion to
the Occasions of them; and as the Fisherman is sure to lose what he throws
into the Water, and is not sure to get by it any thing of greater Value than
some Fishes; the Christian-Adventurer, (if I may so call him) may hope, though
not confidently promise himself, in this World the hundred fold mentioned by
our Savior, as well as in the World to come Life everlasting. And therefore,
if we do indeed in Saint Paul's Language, look, not to the things which are
seen, which are but Temporary, but to the Invisible ones which are Eternal, we
shall think that Exhortation of his very Rational, as well as very Pious,
where, having Discoursed of the future and glorious State of the true
Christians, he concludes, Wherefore, my beloved Brethren, be ye steadfast,
immovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord; for as much as you know,
that your Labor is not in vain in the Lord.

DISCOURSE XV.
Upon the Magnetical Needle of a Sun-Dyal.
WE had not yet dismissed the Waterman, when Eugenius chancing to express a
Curiosity, to know what a Clock it was, when we had freshly begun to Angle at
our new Station; as Lindamor and the rest drew their Watches to satisfy his
Question, so the Boat-man took out of his Pocket a little Sun-Dyal, furnished
with an excited Needle to direct how to Set it, such Dyals being used among
Mariners, not only to show them the hour of the Day, but to inform them from
what quarter the VVind blows; upon the sight of this Dyal, my natural Curiosity
invited me, after it had told me the hour, to try whether the Magnetic Needle
were well touched, by drawing a little Penknife out of a pair of Twises I then
chanced to have about me, and approaching it to the North point of the Needle,
which according to the known custom of such Needles, readily followed it, or
rested over against it, which way soever I turned the Penknife, or whereabout
soever I held it still; Eusebius seeing me give my self this Diversion, came up
to me to be a sharer in my sight, which no Familiarity can keep from being a
VVonder: But after a while, he looked upon it in a way that made me think it
presented him somewhat else than the hour of the Day, or the corner of the
VVind; and I was confirmed in that thought, by seeing him apply to it the case
of Lindamor's VVatch, and then a Diamond-ring plucked from his own Finger, and
in effect, he soon began to tell me; Methinks, Philaretus, this Needle may
afford us a good direction in the choice of Companies: And that is a matter of
such moment, that some Divines perhaps would question, whether or no the
direction it gives Navigators to find the Poles, be of much greater Importance:
For not only it has been truly observed, that the choice of ones Company does
exceedingly discover whether a Man be Good, or Bad, Wise, or Foolish; but I
shall venture to add, that it does very much contribute to make him what others
say it declares him: For an assiduous Converse does insensibly dispose and
fashion our Minds and Manners to a resemblance with those we delight to
converse with, and there are few that have so much Resolution, as to disobey
Customs and Fashions, especially when embraced by Persons that we love, and
would be esteemed by, and from whose Opinions and Practices we can scarce
dissent constantly without impressing a Dislike, that threatens to make them
dislike us. For my part, (says Lindamor) I have always thought there is great
difference betwixt keeping Company with some Men, and choosing to do so; For
whilst we Live in this World, we must often have to do with the Lovers of the
World: But though to be cast by the Exigencies of our Callings upon bad
Company, be an Infelicity without being a Fault, yet certainly, to choose such
Company, and prefer it before that of wise and good Men, is in a high Degree
both the one and the other. And I confess, (continues he) I cannot think, that
the proper use of Conversation is but to pass away our time, not to improve it.

You are certainly much in the right, (subjoyns Eusebius) for though too many
of those that are now cried up for good Company, do either so dissuade us from
good and serious things, or so divert us from them, that it is oftentimes
counted a piece of Indiscretion to say any thing that may either enrich Men's
Understandings, or awaken their Consciences; yet I cannot but think, that
Conversation may be, as well as ought to be, rescued from being an Instrument
to promote Idleness and Vice; and, if Men were not wanting to themselves, I
doubt not, it may be so ordered, that Conversation, which so often robs Men of
their time, and so frequently of their Devotion, might be made a great
Instrument of Piety, and Knowledge, and become no less Useful than it is wont
to be Pleasant.

To make Companies (replies Lindamor) such as you think they may be, they must
grow very different from what most commonly they are: For, not to speak of
those loose and profane ones, where Virtue and Seriousness are openly derided,
and any thing, how contrary soever to Piety, or right Reason, may be used, not
only with tolleration, but applause, if Men can bring it out, I say not in
Jest, (for they are seldom more in earnest) but neatly wrapped up in Raillery;
even in those civiller sorts of Company, where Vice is not professedly
maintained, you shall seldom, during a long stay, hear any thing that is
really worth carrying away with you, or remembering when you are gone. And to
Discourse of any thing that is Grave enough, either to exercise Men's
Intellects, or excite their Devotion, is counted a piece of Indiscretion, that
is wont to be more carefully avoided than almost any thing that is really such;
so, that even in such Companies, the Innocentest use that we are wont to make
of our time, is, to lose it: And really, (continues Lindamor) when I consider
how ensnaring the worser sort of Companies are, and how little, even those that
do not openly defy Piety and Knowledge, are wont to cherish either of them; I
begin to be reconciled to Hermites, who fly from such Conversations as are so
apt to make Men either Vicious, or at least Idle into those Solitudes, where
they are not like to be Tempted, either to renounce their Devotion, or to
suppress it, to entertain idle Thoughts, or stifle good ones: Nor could I
without much Scruple, as well as Impatience, allow my self to spend some part
of my time in such kind of entertainments as many spend most of theirs in, were
it not, that looking upon Civility as a Virtue, and Hospitality as in some
cases a Duty, and upon both of them as things of good report, I can think those
hours they make me spend, may be justly cast upon their account, and that the
Ceremonious and Insignificant conversations whereto they oblige me, may be
undergone upon some such account as that, on which serious Parents converse and
oftentimes play with their Children; for, as though the things they do, are in
themselves trivial, and useless, yet they may be justifiable Effects of a
paternal care to still a Child, or keep him from harming himself; so the Duty
of exercising of Civility makes me look upon as justifiable, though unpleasant,
those Expressions of it, which, in themselves considered, I could not Reflect
on without Indignation, and could not but think very much below any Man, whom
Education has fitted for the exercise of Reason, or whom Religion has elevated
to the hopes of Heaven.

But it may (says Eusebius) on the other side be represented, that since it is
scarce possible not to meet sometimes with Companies that are not of the best
sort, we should look upon those Necessities, as calls of Providence, to improve
those Opportunities for the advantage of them we are engaged to converse with;
for Nature, as well as Christianity, teaches us, that we are not Born only for
our selves, and therefore, as we ought often to converse with the best Men, to
acquire Virtue and Knowledge, so we must sometimes converse with others, that
we may impart them, and learn how much we are beholden to God's Goodness, that
has so much discriminated us from other Men; and though we do not find that our
Conversation does immediately and visibly reform those we converse with, yet it
will not presently follow, that it is altogether ineffectual on them: For,
besides that the seeds of Virtue and Knowledge, as well as those of Plants, may
long seem to lie dead, even in those Soils wherein they will afterward
Flourish and Fructify, there may be at present a Good, though not a
Conspicuous, Effect of your Discourse and Example. For when Men are hasting to
Hell, he does them no small Service, that does so much as Retard their course,
as Cordials, and other Medicines, may do good even to decrepid Old men, whom
they cannot perfectly cure.

And trust me, Lindamor, it is no such useless performance as you may think it,
for a Man of known Piety and Parts, by conversing with the Children of this
Generation, To dare to own Religion among those that dare to deride it; To keep
alive and excite a witness for God and Good things in their Consciences; To let
them see, and make them (at least inwardly) acknowledge, the Beauty of a pious,
Industrious, and well-ordered course of Life; To convince them, that it is not
for want of knowing the Vanities they dote on, that he despises them; To show,
that a Man, that denies himself their sinful Jollities, can Live contented
without them: And, (to dispatch) To manifest, by a real and visible
Demonstration, that a virtuous and discreet Life is no unpracticable, no more
than Melancholy thing, even in Bad times, and among Bad men. And says,
Eusebius, to me it seems very considerable, that our Savior himself, the great
Author of our Faith, and Exemplar of our Piety, did not choose an Anchorites,
or a Monastique Life, but a sociable and an affable way of conversing with
Mortals, not refusing Invitations, even from Publicans, or to Weddings, and by
such winning Condescensions gained the Hearts, and thereby a Power to reform
the Lives, of multitudes of those he vouchsafed to converse with.

Other considerations (pursues Eusebius) might be represented to the same
purpose with these: But since I promised you something of Direction, I suppose
you will expect I should tell you, not what I could say, but what I do think. I
will tell you then in few words, that though I think it as well possible as fit
for Men of radicated Virtue, and fine Parts, to make sometimes a good use of
bad Company, especially when their lawful occasions cast them into it; yet for
others to be often engaged in such Company, though it may be but an Infelicity,
is a very great one; and to choose such Company, is, what is worse than an
Unhappiness, a Fault: But generally speaking, I would distinguish three sorts
of Companies; for there are some, that not only are unable to improve me, but
are unwilling to be improved themselves; A second sort there is, that are as
well ready to learn, as able to instruct: And there are others, that, though
they are not Proficients enough to teach me things worth my Learning, are yet
desirous to be taught by me, the little that I know, and they ignore. Now, as
the Magnetic Needle we were looking on, and which affords us the Theme of this
Discourse, if you should apply a Loadstone to it, would be most powerfully
attracted by that, because it can receive fresh Virtue from it; and even, if
you approach a piece of Steel to it, the Needle will, though not so studiously,
apply it self to it, from which, though it receives no Magnetic virtue, it can
impart some to it: But if you offer it the Silver case of your Watch, or the
Gold that makes up your Ring, or the Diamonds that are set in it, none of all
these, how Rich or Glittering soever, will at all move the Needle, which
suffers them to stand by unregarded; So I shall with the most of Cheerfulness,
and Application, seek the Company of those that are qualified, to impart to me
the Virtue or the Knowledge they abound with: Nor shall I refuse to entertain a
Society with those few, that being such small Proficients as to need to learn
of me, are also forward to do so. But those that can neither teach me any thing
that is Good, nor are disposed to let me teach it them, how great a show soever
they make, among those that make choice of their Companions by their Eyes; I
may be cast-upon their Conversation, but shall very hardly choose it.

DISCOURSE XVI.
Upon the Quenching of Quicklime.
I Had almost forgot to relate, that not far from the place where we went on
Shore, and which we had not yet quitted, we saw diverse heaps of Quicklime,
some Smoking, and some that had not yet been Drenched in Water; and upon
Enquiry of those that looked to it, we were soon informed, that the convenience
of the Neighboring River, both for slacking of Lime, and conveying Mortar, had
made the Owners bring their Lime thither, to be tempered and made fit for the
Reparation of some Houses that we saw a little way off: But while we were
talking, one of the Workmen began to throw Water upon one of the heaps that had
not yet been Slack'd, and afterward poured on so much more as served quite to
drown the Lime; and Eus^bius marking, both what he did, and what ensued upon
it, took thence occasion to say to us; He that should see only the Effect of
the first Effusion of cold Water upon quick Lime, would think, that by a kind
of Antiperistesis, the Internal heat of the Lime is rather increased than
suffocated by the Coldness and Moisture of the Water; for that which before
was not taken notice of, to manifest any sensible warmth, as soon as its Enemy
the Water begins to invade it, acquires a new heat and new forces in the
Conflict, and not only shows a great Impatience, or Enmity, to that cold
Liquor, by acting furiously upon it, and throwing off many parts into the Air,
but prevails so far as to heat that cold Element it self, to that degree, as to
make it Smoke and Boil. But this Conflict is seldom near so lasting as it is
eager; for if you have but the Patience to stay a while, you shall see the
Lime, after it has spent its occasional Ardour, and after its Fire is quenched,
lie quietly with, nay under, the Water, as cold and as moveless as it. Thus,
when a devout Man, (especially if his Fervor be adventitious from Education,
or Custom, as the Fire in the Lime from the Calcination) first falls into the
Company of Persons, either Profane, or otherwise grossly Vicious, we often see,
that his Zeal, instead of being smothered by such a rude and unaccustomed
Opposition, seems rather to be excited and kindled thereby, and possibly seems
more likely to impart the warmth of his Devotion to its Enemies than to lose
any of it himself; but when he is constantly, or at least frequently,
surrounded with such Company, you will too often see him lose as well his own
Ardour as the endeavors of communicating it; and with those very Persons, that
did at first kindle and exasperate his Zeal, you shall at last see him Live
very quietly, and perhaps manifest as little of Religious warmth as they; and
that which at first did so strangely exasperate and discompose him, becomes
after a while so familiar, as not at all to move him.

DISCOURSE XVII.
Upon ones Talking to an Echo.
WE had possibly dwelt longer upon such Reflections, had I not been suddenly
diverted by the repeated Clamours of a Voice, which each of us imagined he had
very often heard: VVhereupon, as it were, by common consent, we began to look
round about us, to see if any of our little Company were missing, and finding
that Eugenius was so, we readily concluded the Voice we heard, though somewhat
altered by distance, and other circumstances, to be his; and accordingly we
hasted toward the place, whence we judged the Voice to proceed, that in case
he were in any Distress, or had met with any Disaster, we might rescue or
relieve him: But when we came near, we could now and then distinctly hear him
speak some words so loud, and yet so incoherent and unable to complete a Sense,
as if he meant that all thereabouts should hear him, and no Body understand
him. This made us double our Curiosity, and our Pace, till at length we
descried him all alone in a solitary corner, wherein yet his Loudness kept us
from believing he sought privacy: But as soon as he discovered us, he seemed
both surprised and troubled at it; coming to meet us, he first begged our
pardon, if having been Louder than he thought, he had put us to a trouble he
did not intend; and then Laughing, asked us, if we did not think him Mad: But
Eusebius smiling, told him, that before we could answer that Question, we must
ask one of him, which was, what he had been doing. Whilst you, (answers
Eugenius) were (I doubt not) better employed, my natural Curiosity seduced me
to spend some time in Ranging about the places near the Riverside, and as I
was passing by this Field, the accidental Lowing of an Ox made me take notice,
that this Neighboring Hill and Wood, furnish this place with an excellent
Echo, which I at first tried only by VVhooping and Hollowing; but afterward
diverted my self by framing my Questions so, as to make that Babbling Nymph (for
so you know the Poets will have Echo to be) to Discourse with me.

For my part, (says Lindamor) I should by no means like her Conversation,
because that two Qualities she has, which to me would very much discommend it:
And to prevent our asking him what those Qualities were, One of them, (says he)
is, that she vouchsafes to Discourse indiscriminally with all comers that Talk
to her, provided that they make Noise enough.

You are much in the right, (says Eugenius) for that easiness of admitting all
kind of Company, provided Men have boldness enough to intrude into ours, is one
of the uneasiest Hardships, (not to say Martyrdoms) to which Custom has exposed
us, and does really do more Mischief than most Men take notice off; since it
does not only keep impertinent Fools in countenance, but encourages them to be
very troublesome to wise Men. The World is pestered with a certain sort of
Praters, who make up in Loudness what their Discourses want in Sense; and
because Men are so easy Natured as to allow the hearing to their
Impertinencies they presently presume that the things they speak are none; and
most Men are so little able to discern in Discourse betwixt Confidence and Wit,
that like our Echo, to any that will but talk loud enough they will be sure to
afford answers. And, (which is worse) this readiness to hazard our Patience,
and certainly lose our Time, and thereby encourage others to multiply idle
words, of which the Scripture seems to speak threatningly, is made by Custom an
Expression, if not a Duty, of Civility; and so even a Virtue is made accessory
to a Fault.

For my part, (subjoyns Eugenius) though I think these Talkative people worse
public Grievances than many of those for whose prevention, or redress,
Parliaments are wont to be assembled, and Laws to be enacted; and though I
think their Robbing us of our time as much a worse Mischief than those petty
Thefts for which Judges condemn Men, as a little Money is a less valuable Good
than that precious Time, which no sum of it can either purchase or redeem; yet
I confess, I think that those of our great Lords and Ladies, that can admit
this sort of Company, deserve it: For if such Persons have but minds in any
measure suited to their Qualities, they may safely, by their Discountenance,
banish such pitiful Creatures, and secure their Quiet, not only without
injuring the Reputation of their Civility, but by advancing that of their
Judgment. And I fear, (continues Eugenius) that those who decline this
Employment (and indeed Improvement) of their Titles, or other kinds of
Eminency, do by their Remisness more harm than they imagine; For though the
Judgment and Company of such Persons, be not always the best grounded, or the
best chosen, yet their Quality or Station in the World makes it usually the
most conspicuous, and the most considered. And I doubt not, there is no such
Multitude of dis-interest Lovers of Good things, but that there will be the
fewer found Studious to express Wit and Virtue in Conversation, when they see,
that in the Estimate of those that are looked upon as the chief Judges of what
is or is not good Company, the most empty and impertinent Prattle with
confidence, or loudness, procures a Man at least as good a Reception as the
best and most rational Discourse without it. And, which is yet worse, that
Tyrannous thing, which we misname Civility, has so degraded Reason, as well as
displaced Piety, in Conversation, that if there be never so many Persons
together, entertaining themselves with rational or instructive Discourse, in
case there come in but one impertinent Creature that is below it, all these
shall sink themselves to his Level, and as much debase their Discourse, as if
they believed it fitter, that all the rational Conversers should fore-go the
Exercise and the Benefit of their Wit and Virtue, than that a Fool should not
appear to talk as wisely as any of them; and thus they seemed ashamed of their
Seize, instead of making him ashamed of his Ignorance, and reducing him
to improve himself into a capacity of being fit for their Company; whereas,
from a contrary practice, they might derive the great Advantage, either of
freeing themselves from uninvited Companions, or of making them worth the
having.

But, (subjoyns Lindamor) I remember I told you there was a second Quality,
that I disliked in the Nymph I found you entertaining, and that is, that, when
I will, I can make her speak to me, just what I please. I know (replies
Eugenius) that a moderate degree of Complaisance, is not only in many cases
allowed us by Discretion, but necessary to keep up the Pleasantness, not to say
the very Peace, of humane Societies; For if all Men, at all times, spoke their
Minds freely, and did not soften one another by concealing their mutual
Dislikes, and Dissents, and by certain outward Expressions of Kindness, or
Respect, made by Complements and Gestures, Men have so many Imperfections, and
so much Self-love with all, that scarce any two of them would endure one
another; Nay, and in spite of that Indulgence, which provident Nature has
implanted in all Animals, for the preservation of their Species, in that of the
Individuals that compose it, and as much as our own Faultiness has added to
that Fondness; yet, I doubt, we shall scarce find one Man of a thousand, that
would endure so much as himself, if we did not for the most part exercise
Complaisance within our own Breasts, and did not as much flatter our selves,
and disguise our selves, to our selves, as we flatteringly disguise our selves
to others.

But, (continues Eugenius) when all this is said, I may endure, but I shall
scarce choose and prize a Companion, that, like an Echo, uses no liberty of
his own, but allows me to direct whatever I would have to be answered me: And I
know not whether I could not better like one that would ever dissent from me,
than one that would never do so; I cannot look upon him either as my Friend, or
as Person worthy to be made so, who never evinces his being more concerned to
advantage me, than to please me, by making use of the liberty of a Friend, and
thereby showing, that he considers not barely himself, but me; besides, that as
there is no true Friendship where there is not an Union of Affections, so
methinks there can be no good Company where there is not sometimes a Dissent in
Opinions.

Eusebius, that was a Friend to Seriousness, without being an Enemy to
Pleasantness, gathering from the long Pause made by his Friends, that they
designed not the prosecuting of this Discourse any further; Methinks,
Gentlemen, (says he, Smiling) you are very severe to a harmless Nymph, who is
so modest, and reserved, that she will never put you upon beginning a
Conference with her, and so Complaisant in it, that it is your own fault if ever
she says any thing to you, that displeases (...), and for my part, (continues
he) I have that opinion of humane things, that as I think there are very few so
perfect, but that we may find something in them fit to be shunned, so there are
not many so imperfect, but that they may suggest to us somewhat or other, that
may not be unworthy of our imitation; and as Lindamor has taken notice of two
Qualities in our Echo, which discommended it to him, so I have observed as
many, that I rather approve than dislike.

For, in the first place, it is evident, that our Nymph (however Eugenius has
been pleased to mis-call her a Babbler) is much less Talkative than most of her
own Sex, or indeed of ours; for she never begins to talk with any Body, not
speaking unless she be spoken to. He that considers how much of the Discourse
that wastes Men's time, and entertains the most Companies with the most
applause, consists of Talk that tends either to flatter those that are present,
or detract from the absent, or to censure our Superiors, or our Betters, or to
express our own Profaneness, or to excite the Pride or Carnality of others; and
he that shall consider, that though by these and many other ways we are
extremely apt to offend in words, yet we must give an Account for that kind of
words, what sort soever bemeant by them, which our Translators render Idle
ones; and that the Judge himself tells Men, that they shall by their words, as
well as by their actions, be justified, or condemned; will easily believe, that
if Silence were as much in Fashion as it is charitable to Mankind to wish it,
the Regions of Hell would be far thinlier Peopled than now they are like to be.

I could tell you, that Silence discovers Wisdom, and conceals Ignorance, and
it is a property that is so much belonging to wise Men, that even a Fool, when
he holds his peace, may pass for one of that sort; And I could easily add I
know not how much in the commendation of this excellent Quality, if I knew how
at the same time to praise Silence, and to practice it; so that it may well
pass for an excellency in the Nymph, whose Apology I am making, that she does
not speak but when it is necessary she should, I mean, when she is spoken to,
in such a way as does exact her answer.

But this is not all the good qualities of our Echo; for as she rarely speaks
but when it is expected she should, so she seldom repeats above a small part of
what is said to her; this I account a very seasonable piece of Discretion,
especially in such treacherous and fickle times as ours, where, almost as if he
thought himself fit to be an universal Statesman, such a one concerns himself
very needlessly for almost all the public Quarrels in Christendom, and shows
himself zealous for a party which will receive no advantage by his disquiets;
and not content like a Merchant-venturer, his Passion may upon this account
make him a Sufferer by what happens in the Remotest parts of the World; In our
own fatal Differences, (which it is almost as unsafe to speak freely of, as it is
unhappy to be involved in them) he will on needless occasions declare, with his
Opinion, his want of Judgment, and perhaps Ruin himself with those under whose
Protection he lives, by spreading Reports, and maintaining Discourses, that
rendered him suspected among those, who think that a Man must wish their Forces
should be beaten, if he can think they may have been so; Nay, I have known
some, that, though put into considerable Employments, could not hold talking of
their own Party, at a rate of freedom which those that have so much Innocence
as not to deserve it, will scarce have so much Goodness as to support it: So
that methinks, these Men deal with their Fortunes as Children oftentimes do
with their Cards, when having taken a great deal of pains to build fine Castles
with them, they themselves afterward ruin them with their Breath.

It may be a greater without being a more prejudicial price of Folly, to
believe all that one hears, than to report all that one believes; and
especially, those are to be censured for want of our Nymphs reservedness, by
whom it loses that name; for though those kind of Men make sure by their way of
Talking, to make others take notice how much they are confided in by their own
party, yet sure they would take a discreeter course, if they did but consider,
that the proof they give, that they are trusted with secrets, is, that they are
unfit to be so.

DISCOURSE XVIII.
Upon a Giddiness occasioned by looking attentively on a rapid Stream.
THese thoughts of Eusebius suggested so many to Lindamor, and me, that to
entertain our selves with them, we walked silently a good way along the
Riverside; but at length, not hearing any more the Noise his Feet were wont to
make in going, turning my self to see what was become of him, I perceived him
to be a pretty way behind me upon the Rivers brink, where he stood in a fixed
Posture, as if he were very intent upon what he was doing. And 'twas well for
him, that my curiosity prompted me to see what it was that made him so
attentive; for, before I could quite come up to him, me-thought I saw him begin
to stagger, and though that sight added wings to my Feet, yet I could scarce
come time enough to lay hold on him, and, by pulling him down backwards, rescue
him from falling into the River. The shrieck I gave at the sight of my Friends
danger, was, it seems, loud enough to reach Eusebius's Ears, who, turning his
Eyes toward the place whence the Noise came, and seeing Lindamor upon the
Ground, made hastily toward us, and came up to us by that time I had helped
Lindamor up, and before I had received from him the obliging Acknowledgments he
was pleased to make me for a piece of service that I thought had in it more of
Recompense than Merit. Eusebius hearing what passed betwixt us, joined his
thanks to Lindamor's, and at the same time congratulated my Friend for his
escape, and me for having, to use his Expressions, had the honor and
satisfaction to be such a Person as Lindamor's Deliverer. But after our
Expressions of Joy for his escape were over, Eusebius and I had both a
curiosity to learn particularly the occasion of his Danger, which he told us in
these words; As I was thinking, Eusebius, on your last Reflection, I was
diverted from prosecuting my Walk in Philaretus's Company, by happening to cast
my Eyes on a part of the River, where the Stream runs far more swiftly than I
have all this Day taken notice of it to do any where else, which induced me to
stop a while, to observe it the more leisurely: And coming nearer, I found the
Rapidness of the Current to be such, notwithstanding the depth of the Water,
that I stood thinking with my self, how hard it were for one to escape, that
should be so unlucky as to fall into it: But whilst I was thus musing, and
attentively looking upon the Water, to try whether I could discover the Bottom,
it happened to me, as it often does to those that gaze too steadfastly on swift
Streams, that my Head began to grow giddy, and my Legs to stagger toward the
River, into which questionless I had fell, if Philaretus had not seasonably and
obligingly prevented it. Something like this (says Eusebius) does not
unfrequently happen in the unwary consideration of some sorts of sinful
Objects, especially those suggested by Atheism and Lust: For not only we
oftentimes consider Atheistical suggestions, and entertain Libidinous fancies,
without any intention to quit our Station, or the secure and solid Basis of
Religion, and Chastity; but we are often inclinable to think, that we converse
with these Objects only to discern their Formidableness the better, and
fortify our Resolutions to shun them. And yet such is the pernicious Nature of
Atheism, and of Lust, that they turn our Brains, and oftentimes, if Providence,
or Christian prudence, do not seasonably interpose, we may unawares fall into
the Mischief, even by too attentively surveying its greatness, and may be
swallowed up by the danger, even whilst we were considering how great it is. To
parley with such fascinating Enemies, though with a design to refuse them, and
strengthen our Aversion to them, is against the Laws of our Christian warfare:
And though it be not as criminal, may often prove as fatal, as to hold
Intelligence with the Enemy. It Is true, that the deformity of both these Sins
is such, that all their Ugliness cannot be taken notice of at first sight: But
the discovery is more dangerous than necessary, since a little knowledge of
their Hideousness is enough to make every honest Heart abhor them. And since
their less obvious Deformities are more dangerous to be pried into, than
necessary to be known, let us fear to learn of these deluding Sins, more than
we need know to hate them, and remember, that even those that are frighted by
seeing Faces recently marked with the small Pox, may, notwithstanding that
fear, catch the Disease with that sight.

DISCOURSE XIX.
Upon ones Drinking water out of the Brims of his Hat.
WE were by this time come back to the Baited places we had left, when
Eugenius, to whom his Rambling up and down, added to the heat of the Day, had
given a vehement Thirst, spying a place where the Banks were very low, and
almost level with the Surface of the Water, left us for a little while to
repair thither; and Kneeling upon the Ground, he took up with his Hat, which by
Cocking the Brims he turned into a kind of Cup, such a proportion of Water that
he quenched his Thirst with it; and carelessly throwing the rest upon the
Ground, quickly returned toward the Company, which he found he had not left so
silently, but that our Eyes had been upon him all the while he was absent; and
that sight afforded Eusebius an occasion to tell us, Our friend Eugenius,
might, if he had pleased, by stooping lower with his Head, have Drank
immediately out of the entire River; but you see he thought it more safe, and
more convenient, to Drink out of a rude extemporary Cup; and that this way
sufficed him fully to quench his Thirst, we may easily gather, by his pouring
away of some remaining Water as superfluous: And (...) he should tell us, that
he could not have quenched his Thirst with a sufficient quantity of Water,
because he Drank it not out of the River, but out of his Hat; I doubt not, you
would think him troubled with a more formidable Distemper than Thirst, and
conclude him in a greater need of Physic than of Water.

Thus (resumes Eusebius) to a sober Man, provided he have a Competency of
Estate suited to his Needs and Condition, it matters not very much whether that
Competency be afforded him by a moderate or by an exuberant Fortune, and
oftentimes it is more safe and convenient, and no less satisfactory, to receive
this Competency out of that which is but a little, than out of that which is a
great deal more than enough; for not only the necessities of Nature are few,
but her capacities are limited. And therefore, how much soever you have of
Meat, and Drink, and the like accommodations; the Body of a Man can enjoy but a
certain, and that too no very great, Measure of them, proportioned to the
Cravings of our stinted Nature, by more than which it is not the Body, but the
unruly Fancy, that is Gratified; as when the Stomach is satisfied, a Table full
of untouched Dishes feeds but a Man's Eye, or his Pride; and if he should Cram
a little part of it into his Stomach, it would but be Nauseated at first, and
afterward breed ill Humors and Diseases. And accordingly, it is no less than
Solomon that says, When Goods increase, they are increased that Eat them; and
what Good is there to the Owners thereof, saving the beholding of them with
their Eyes? I dare not absolutely (pursues he) condemn those that think not the
necessities of Nature the only Measures of a Competency of Fortune; for though
he that wants not them, wants a just cause to quarrel with Providence, yet
Custom has so Entailed some ways of Expense upon some Stations in the World,
that since a Man can scarce Live without Them, and yet without Disgrace, there
are but few who are so great Stoics, or such mortified Christians, as not to
think, that what is more than enough for one, may be less than enough for
another, and as not to estimate their having or wanting a Competency, not only
by the Exigencies of Nature, but by those of a Man's particular Quality, or
Station. But (subjoyns Eusebius) he that has, in this liberal sense, a
sufficiency of outward Goods, is methinks but ill advised, as well as
unthankful, if he repine at his Portion, because it is inferior to those of
the famously Rich: For though an unwieldy Affluence may afford some empty
Pleasure to the Imagination, (for to the Body it scarce affords any at all) yet
that small Pleasure is far from being able to countervail the Imbittering cares
that attend an overgrown Fortune: For whatever the unexperienced may imagine,
the frequent and sad Complaints of the Rich themselves sufficiently manifest,
that it is but an uneasy Condition, that makes our Cares necessary for things
that are merely superfluous; and that Men, whose Possessions are so much spread
and displayed, are but thereby exposed the fairer and wider Marks that may be
hit in many places by misfortune. Nor will Carelessness secure them, since a
provident concern of a Man's Estate, though it be great, being by the
Generality of Men looked upon as a Duty, and a part of Prudence, he cannot
suffer himself to be wronged or cheated of that, without losing, with his
Right, his Reputation.

For my part, (says Lindamor) I do the more wonder to see Men so greedy of
Lading themselves, as the Scripture speaks, with thick Clay, that they Hoard up
their Treasures from those uses which alone make Riches worthy the Name of
Goods, and Live by a temper quite contrary to that of Saint Paul, As having all
things, and possessing nothing. When I consider the things they pretend to by
this as mean as unchristian Appetite; The two chief of these, are wont to be,
The keeping of a great House, and the leaving their Children great Matches. As
to the former, though others are too much advantaged by it not to extol it, and
though it be sometimes indeed in some cases a decent, and almost necessary,
piece of Greatness, yet it is in my opinion one of the most unhappy Attendants
that retain to it; for the Laws of Hospitality, and much more those of Custom,
turns him that keeps a great Table into an Honorable Host, subjects him to
comply with the various and oftentimes unreasonable Humors of a succession of
Guests, that he cares not for at all, and that care as little for him; it
brings him in a world of Acquaintance, to whom he must own himself obliged,
because they come to Eat his Meat, and must really requite them, by giving them
the pretiousest thing he has to part with, his Time: And a full Table, together
with the Liberties that Custom allows at it, if not exacts there, tempt him
both to Indulgence to his Appetite, prejudicial to his Health, and if they do
not prevail with him to speak, do often at least to dispose him to hear, and to
connive at, such free Discourses as are prejudicial to his Interests; so that
there is more than one account upon which a great Entertainer may be involved
in David's Curse, against his mortal Enemy, of having his Table become a Snare.

And for the design (continues Lindamor) of laying up vast Estates for a Man's
Children; if they be Sons, he thereby but increases their Temptation to wish
the Father Dead, and provides Incentives to their Vice, and Fuel for their
Excesses, when he is so: And if they be Daughters, not to repeat the newly
mentioned Inconveniences; how many unhappy young Women have we seen, who, upon
the score of the vast Portions left them by their Parents, have been betrayed,
and sold by their Guardians, or by those Relations that should have been, as
they were called, their Friends? and how often have we also seen, that an
unwieldy Fortune has been so far from Purchasing the Heir to it a good Husband,
that it has procured her a Bad one, by making her think her self obliged and
qualified to Match with some high Title, and procuring her to be Haunted by
some, whose Vices perhaps alone have reduced him to Sell himself to redeem his
Fortune, and to make an Address which aims but at the Portion, not the Person;
and accordingly, when he has got the one, he slights the other, and despises
her for the want of that high Extraction she prized in him, and perchance hates
her too, for confining him from some former and more than pretended Passion.

I perceive then, Lindamor, (says Eusebius) that you are, as well as I,
disposed to think him not a mere Fool, that prayed God to give him neither
Poverty, nor Riches, but to supply him with things suitable to his Condition,
Prove. 30. 8. (That seeming to be the meaning of the Hebrew Phrase;) A pinching
Poverty, and a luxuriant Fortune (though different Extremes) being liable to
almost equal Inconveniences, and a Competency affording us enough to engage us
to Thankfulness, without Administering such Temptations to Sensuality and Pride.

DISCOURSE XX.
On seeing Boys swim with Bladders.
THe Sun was yet so near the Meridian, that if the Attention Eusebius's
Discouses excited, had not diverted us from minding the heat of the VVeather,
we should have found it troublesome; and in effect, soon after we had left
listening to the conferences I have been repeating, we begun to feel a heat,
uneasy enough to oblige us to retire from it: But taking several ways, as
Chance or Inclination directed us, to shun the same inconvenience, it was my
Fortune to hold the same course with Lindamor, and both of us, by following no
Guide, but the design of shunning all beaten Paths, and unshelter'd Grounds,
that being the likeliest way to reach our double end of Coolness and Privacy;
after we had a while walked somewhat near the Riverside, we were at length
brought to a Shady place, which we should have found, as well as we wished it,
a Solitude, if others had not concurred with us in the same hopes; for the
Expectation of Privacy had brought thither diverse, whom the Suns scorching heat
invited to that cool and retired part of the River, where they hoped to shun
all other Eyes, as well as that of Heaven; among those Swimmers we observed
some Novices, who, to secure their first Attempts, had Bladders tied under
their Arms, to keep them from sinking any lower. This sight (says Lindamor,
after he had a while mused upon it) has Circumstances in it, that methinks
are applicable enough to the Education of many of the young Ladies of these
times; of whose faults, the Excellent Celia, and all the others, that you and I
can think worth our Concern, are free enough to let me entertain you without
Rudeness of them; the Commonness of these Blemishes ennobling those few that
are exempted from them. You cannot then (continues Lindamor) but have observed
with me, that many of those young Ladies, whose Parents, out of a mistaken
Zeal, condemn that which at the Court was wont to be called good Breeding, and
Principles of Honor, as things below a Christian, and insufficient to bring
their Possessours to Heaven, are so unluckily Bred, and so ill Humored, as
well as Fashioned, that an almost equally unhappy Education is requisite to
make their Company tolerable: Civility, which is almost as Essential to a
complete Lady, as her Sex, they are perfect Strangers to, or rude Despisers of
it; and not only their Minds are not Imbued with those Principles of
Friendship, Generosity, and Honor, which make some of their Sex so Lovely, and
so Illustrious in Story, and of which more Ladies would be capable, if more
were taught them; but these are utterly uninstructed in the Laws of what the
French call Bein seance, and are altogether unpracticed in that Civility, and
suppleness of Humor, which is requisite to endear Conversation, and is so
proper to the softer Sex. I must confess, (pursues Lindamor) that I never have
been more puzzled how to behave my self then in their Company: The serious sort
of Discourse, (even such as is to be found in our fresher and more polished
Romances) they are utterly incapable of; And in the trifling and pitiful
Prattle that alone is not above them, they are so Unsociable, so Indiscreet,
and oftentimes so Bold, that in spite of the respect, such as Celia gives me
for her Sex, I find in their Conversations as much Exercise for my Patience as
my Chastity, and being tempted to put off the respect that belongs to Ladies,
as they do the modesty, I find it more difficult to retain my Civility than my
Liberty. The Bladders (resumes Lindamor) which young Swimmers use, are, it is
confessed, but light and empty things, that are easily made useless; nay,
though they help beginners, they are Cloggs to skillful Swimmers, and yet these
Trifles are they that hinder Novices from sinking into the Mud: Thus Honor,
though it be an Airy unsolid thing, nay, though it oftentimes proves a
hinderance to great Proficients in Christianity, yet to Persons that have not
yet attained to higher Principles, it is an excellent support, and hinders them
from sinking into many Meannesses, and Miscarriages, into which, those
especially of the fairer Sex, that want a due sense of Honor, are too apt to
be precipitated: You know what Lord told his accused Lady, that he knew she was
too proud to be a Whore. And certainly, though Principles of Gallantry include
not all Virtues, yet they avert those they sway from grosser Vices: And though
to be well Bred, be not to be a Saint, but incomparably inferior to it; yet to
be both, is more desirable than to be the latter only: And they are very
unwise, who, before they are sure their Children will admit the higher and more
perfect Principles of Religion, neglect to give them that Education that may
render Moral Accomplishments acceptable to Them, and Them to well bred Company,
least by proving indisposed to Spiritual graces, their not having been taught
the Moral Ornaments of the Mind, leave them destitute of all good Qualities.

THE TRANSITION Containing A DISCOURSE Upon the Sports being interrupted by
Rainy weather.
NOtwithstanding the Serenity and Promisingness of the Morning we came out in,
we have already upon the Water had one proof of the unsettl'dness of the
Weather, and now upon the Land we meet with another: For, by that time Lindamor
was come somewhat near the end of his Discourse, he was obliged to hasten to it,
by the approach of a Cloud, whose Largeness and Blackness threatened us with an
imminent Shower: Nor did it give us a false Alarm, for by that time we could
recover the next Shelter, the Shower we fled from, began to fall violently
enough upon the Trees, we were retired to. And this unwelcome accident reducing
us all to look about us, we quickly saw, to our Grief, that not only the Rain
but the Clouds were increased, and the Sky being almost every where over-cast,
left us no way to escape the inconveniences it threatened us with, but the
making with what haste we could toward the place, over which we perceived
smoke enough, to conclude there was some Village beneath it: And finding at our
Arrival thither, as good an Inn, as we could reasonably expect in such a place,
after we had a while dried our selves by the Fire, Eugenius (to whom Exercise
and the time of the Day had given a good Stomach) moved the Company, that in
spite of the meanness of the House, we might rest our selves there, till we
had Dressed the Fish we had taken, to make up the best Dinner the place would
afford: This motion I did not alone readily assent to, but seconded it, by
representing, that probably by that time we had Dined, we should either recover
some fair Weather, or lose the hopes of regaining it for that Day. To which I
added other considerations to persuade the Company, though, That indeed which
prevailed with me, was, the expectation of having an opportunity while Dinner
was providing, to retire, as I soon after did, into another Room, and set down
in short hand, what I have hitherto been relating, least either delay should
make the particulars vanish out of my Memory, or they should be confounded
there by the accession of such new Reflections, as, in case a fair Afternoon
should invite us to return to the River, Eusebius would probably meet with
Occasions of presenting us. But before I could handsomely slink away, I
happened to be entertained a while with some things of the like Nature with
those I was about to set down: For this unwelcome change after so glorious and
hopeful a Morning, did naturally suggest to all of us, some thoughts of the
Mutability and Fickleness of Prosperity, and how easily, as well as quickly, we
may be deprived of that we cannot easily part with. But whilst the rest of us
were entertaining themselves with these thoughts, Eugenius, who was more
concerned than any other of us, for the sport he came for, having a good while
looked with melancholy Eyes upon this change, began to repine and murmur at the
interruption, which the persisting Rain continued to give him in it: Whereupon
Lindamor took occasion to say, for my part, if I could dissipate these Clouds
with a wish, I should scruple at the Ridding my self of them, even at so easy
a Rate: For I see, that the Gaping clefts of the parched Ground do, as it were
with so many Mouths, proclaim its need of the Rain you repine at. And I always
(continues he) am ready to join with the Husbandman in his wishings, as well
for Rainy as for fair Weather, and am so much a Commonwealths Man, that I had
rather at any time not escape a Shower, than let him want it.

You are I confess, (says Eugenius) now I think a little better on it, in the
right, and have more reason to be discontented at my Impatience, than I at the
Weather; for we should, even in these lesser Occasions, as well as on greater,
Exercise self-denial, and prefer a public good to our private conveniences:
And indeed it were far better, that I should miss some Fishes, than that
thousands of Families should miss of Bread.

Eusebius, that had hitherto listened to what was said, being unwilling, that
his Friends Ingenuity should make him any longer accuse himself, told him, (to
divert the Discourse) This accident, Eugenius, was suggesting to me, a thought,
wherewith I shall not scruple to acquaint you, and the Company. For (continues
he) as pleasant, and as much desired, as fair Weather is wont to be, and as
much as we use to be discontented at a lowering and dropping sky, yet the one is
no less necessary nor useful in its season, than the other. For too
uninterrupted a course of Heat, and Sunshine, would make the season fruitful
in nothing, but in Caterpillars, (or such kind of Vermin) and in Diseases, and
is far more proper to fill Graves, than Barns: Whereas seasonable vicissitudes
of Clouds, and cloudy Weather, make both the Ground fruitful, and the Season
healthful. Thus in our outward Condition, too long and constant a prosperity is
wont to make the Soul Barren of all, but such Wantonnesses as it is ill to be
fruitful of, and the interposition of seasonable Afflictions is as necessary,
and advantageous, as it can be unwelcome. But (persues Eusebius) the
consideration that chiefly entertained me, was this, That as here, to make the
Earth fruitful, the face of Heaven must be now and then obscured, and
over-cast, we must be deprived of the welcome pleasure of the Sun to receive
the fertilizing Benefit of the Rain; so such is our condition here below, that
our perverseness makes it necessary, that God should oftentimes appear to
frown upon us, to make us fruitful in those Works, to which he is pleased to
vouchsafe his smiles. But, Oh! (concludes Eusebius, lifting up his eyes and
hands toward Heaven) how happy shall we be in that glorious and everlasting
Day, when our Condition shall be as blessed in not requiring Vicissitudes as in
not being subject to them. When the Sunshine alone shall perform all that is
wont to be done here both by it, and by the Rain; and the Soul, like Egypt,
being fruitful without the assistance of the Clouds, we shall not need to have
our joys Eclipsed, to have our Graces kept from being so, or to make our Light
shine the brighter: But each blessed Soul shall be emblem'd by that Vision in
the Revelations, where St. John saw an Angel standing in the Sun, we shall not
then need to have our Love weaned from inferior or undue Objects, by any
Experience of their Imperfections; since the clear Discovery that God will
vouchsafe us of his own Excellencies will abundantly suffice to confine our
Affections to them: And since the works wherein we are to be fruitful in Heaven
will be but to admire and thank him, that is infinite in Beauty, and in
goodness, the perfecter sight and fruition we shall have of his astonishing as
well as ravishing Attributes, will but proportionably increase our Wonder, and
our Praises, and will naturally make us as Grateful For such a state as happy
In It.

OCCASIONAL REFLECTIONS.
The V. SECTION.
REFLECTION I.
Upon the sight of N. N. making of Syrup of Violets.
ONE that did not know the Medicinal Virtues of Violets, and were not
acquainted with the Charitable Intentions of the skilful person, that is making
a Syrup of them, would think him a very great Friend to Epicurism: For his
Employment seems wholly designed to gratify the senses. The things he deals
with are Flowers and Sugar, and of them he is solicitous to make a Composition
that may delight more than one or two Senses; For in One Syrup he endeavors to
please the Eye, by the loveliness of the Color; the Nose, by the perfume of
the Scent; the Taste, by as much sweetness as Sugar can impart. But he that
knowing that Violets, though they please the Palate, can purge the Body, and
notwithstanding their good smell, can expel bad humors, knows also that the
Preparer of these fragrant Plants, in making their Juice into a Syrup, is
careful to make it acceptable, that its pleasantness might recommend it, and
invite even those to prove its Virtues, who had rather continue sick, than make
Trial of a disgusting Remedy; will not blame his Curiosity, but commend his
prudent Charity; since he doubly obliges a Patient, that not only presents him
Remedies, but presents him Allurements to make use of them.

If I see a person that is Learned and Eloquent, as well as Pious, busied about
giving his Sermons, or other devout Composures, the Ornaments and Advantages
which Learning or Wit do naturally confer upon those productions of the Tongue,
or Pen, wherein they are plentifully and judiciously emploi'd; I will not be
forward to condemn him of a mis-expence of his Time or Talents; whether they be
laid out upon Speculative Notions in Theology, or upon Critical Inquiries into
Obsolete Rites, or Disputable Etymologies; or upon Philosophical Disquisitions
or Experiments; or upon the florid Embellishments of Language; or (in short)
upon some such other thing as seems extrinsecal to the Doctrine that is
according to Godliness, and seems not to have any direct tendency to the
promoting of Piety and the kindling of Devotion. For I consider, that as God
has made man subject to several wants, and has both given him several
allowable appetites, and endowed him with various faculties and abilities to
gratify them; so a man's Pen may be very warrantably and usefully emploi'd,
though it be not directly so, to teach a Theological Truth, or incite the
Reader's Zeal.

And, besides what I have been alleging, there is a further and more principal
Consideration which belongs to this matter. For even wise men may prosecute the
same design, without doing it all of them the same way; and the several Means
and Methods they employ, notwithstanding a great Difference in other
particulars, may agree in this, That the Respective Chusers of them had each of
them a good Aim, and proceeded in a rational way. Though therefore I see a man
of good parts, studious of learning, or of practicing, the Precepts of
Eloquence, and spend much time in reading florid Composures, or in making such;
I dare not be forward to censure him, for an effeminate or useless Writer. For
there are so many things pious or laudable, and so many ways whereby some or
other of them may either be directly promoted, or indirectly served, by
removing Objections, or other Impediments, that it is not easy to be sure that
a Rational Man cannot have as well a Rational as a well-meant design to
instruct, if not reform, in those very Composures that seem fitted only to
delight. There being a Nicer sort of Readers which need Instruction (and to
whom it is therefore a Charity to give it) who are so far from being likely to
be prevailed on by Discourses not tricked up with Flowers of Rhetoric, that
they would scarce be drawn so much as to cast their eyes on them.

A while before Esther made that generous Attempt, wherein, to rescue the
people of God, she hazarded a Throne, to which above an hundred other Peoples
paid homage, and ventured at once the greatest Crown and the fairest Head in
the world; One that had seen only what she was doing, without knowing why she
did it, would perchance have thought her emploi'd, more like a Disciple of
Epicurus, than of Moses, whose People and her own was then in a forlorn and
gasping condition. For the Scripture telling us, Est. 5. 1.
that she put on her Royal apparel, and the Tenor of the story intimating with
what aim she did it, we may well suppose that she was not sparing in Jewels,
and other of the richest Ornaments, on an Occasion where her Quality exacted
that she should appear with a Magnificence befitting the greatest Princess in
the world; and that she was very curious in a Dress that was to heighten her
Beauty, when by That, with the Giver's assistance, she was upon her knees to
dazzle the world's greatest Monarch on his Throne, and make Him pay Homage to
her Charms, to whom above an hundred Nations had presented their fairest
Productions, (the brightest Nymphs of the East.) And those that have read any
thing of the Asiatick Luxury, will easily believe our pious Queen to have been
also very sollicitous about the choice and ordering of her Sweetmeats, when
she was to treat an Asian Monarch, who had treated the whole People of the
chief City of the world for many days together, and as many Princes as made up
the Noblest part of Mankind for above twenty times as long: and yet this
Magnificent Queen, th^a seemed busi'd about none but sensual Imploiments, had
so commendable a Design both in her Ornaments and in her Banquets, that so
meritorious an Imploiment of her Greatness showed her to be worthy of it; and
as it appeared in the Event, that her Banquets did cooperate with her Fasts,
and her Royal Robes with Mordecay's Sackcloth and Ashes, to that happy rescue
of her Nation, for which, after so many Ages, it does to this day yearly
celebrate her Memory. So whilst she seemed busied to gratify others sensuality
and her own pride, her Disposition of Mind was so worthy the Success that
crowned her Attempt, that at the same time she was providing all that Pomp and
those Delicacies, she was also providing to give them up, and sacrifize them,
for the Interest of God's Church, and her People; generously venturing for the
service of Heaven a Height of prosperity, for whose loss nothing but Heaven it
self could make her amends.

REFLECTION II.
Upon the sight of a Paper-Kite in a windy day.
Eugenius, Lindamor. Eug. IF the Air were calm and quiet, this Kite would lie
unregarded even by those very Youths, that now look at nothing else. But the
wind that blows away straws and feathers, and throws down leaves, does even by
its being contrary, help to raise this Paper-Engine to that admired height,
which makes it be gazed at by many others, than Boys, and not only attract our
eyes, but sometimes soar out of their reach. Thus, if a great Person, for
Courage, or Parts, or both, have the ill fate to live in quiet, and peaceful
times, he may long enough languish unregarded in an Age that needs him not. But
if the times grow troublesome and dangerous, his generous spirit will not only
surmount the difficulties that are wont to attend them, but be raised by them,
and turn them into steps to Glory and Preferment.


Lind. Methinks, Eugenius, these Kites may afford us no less fit a resemblance
of the fate of some Errors about Religion, especially if they chance to be
maintained by Men that are resolute, and viceless. For there are some of these
conceits so fond, and groundless, that they could not long subsist of
themselves, and would soon cease to tempt a solemn Opposition, if they did not
too soon meet with it. And as you were observing to another purpose, that these
artificial Kites, which men take no notice of in calm weather, are both
elevated and kept aloft by the blasts of contrary winds, so these erroneous
Opinions I speak of, would, if they were let alone, grow quickly unregarded,
whereas needless or ill managed Persecutions of Doctrine, not prejudicial to
Government, (for it is only such that I mean) bring them into every body's Eye,
and give them a Repute, that nothing else would have procured them, and make
them be looked upon as things of a sublime and celestial nature, that lead to
that Heaven, they seem to aspire to. To thrive by Persecution, though it be a
great Advantage, yet it is not the incommunicable Prerogative of Divine Truths;
And though it be certain that they get most by it, yet even Errors do often
gain by it too, there being certain Advantages that accrue to Opinions, by
being persecuted, without distinguishing whether they be true, or false. For
men that are persecuted for their Religion, are generally careful to instruct
themselves thoroughly in it, and furnish themselves with Arguments to defend it.
The frowns of the Magistrate, and the watchful Eyes of their Adversaries, are
strong Disswasives to them from doing any thing that may arm his hand, or
provoke other's tongues against their Sect, to which they know their personal
faults will be imputed. And above all this, their sufferings entitle them to
popular commiseration, which is a thing that distress does so much invite, that
even condemned Malefactors seldom want a share in it. And to some of these men
Persecution is the more favorable, because it puts them upon fighting with the
weapons they can best handle. For some are far better at Suffering, than at
Disputing, and can more easily endure a Prison, than answer a Syllogism. And as
this Constancy is often their best Argument, so is it an Argument, that the
Generality of Men best understand, and consequently is likely to be most
wrought on by, so that the more harsh than effectual way wherein they are dealt
with, gives them the opportunity to display a Resoluteness, that makes most men
think them well meaning, and in earnest, and their own Party cry them up for
Martyrs, or at least Confessors; which, in case that (as it happens in most
States) scandalous sins be left unpunished at the same time, that Harmless
Errors are so severely dealt with, gives them the fairer opportunity to
insinuate into the minds of the people, that their Persecutors had rather see
men vicious, than inquisitive. And, generally speaking, any personal sufferings
that a well-meaning man undergoes for what he judges his Conscience, is but
such a kind of burden to his mind, as feathers are to an Eagle, or a Falcon,
which though in themselves considered they have a weight, yet instead of
clogging him, they not only help him to support himself, but enable him to
soar toward Heaven, and reach a height that makes him praised or wondered at.


REFLECTION III.
Killing a Crow (out of a window) in a Hog's-trough, and immediately tracing
the ensuing Reflection with a Pen made of one of his Quills.
LOng and patiently did I wait for this unlucky Crow, wallowing in the sluttish
Trough, (whose sides kept him a great while out of the reach of my Gun) and
gorging himself with no less greediness, than the very Swinish Proprietaries of
the Feast, till at length having guzzl'd and croak'd enough, when by hovering
over his beloved Dainties, he had raised himself high enough, to prompt me to
fire at him, my no less unexpected, than fatal shot, in a moment struck him
down, and turning the Scene of his Delight into that of his Pangs, made him
abruptly alter his Note, and change his triumphant Chant for a dismal and
tragic Noise. This Method is not unusual to Divine Justice toward brawny and
incorrigible Sinners, whose Souls no less Black, than this inauspitious Bird's
feathers, do wear already the Livery of the Prince of Darkness, and with
Greediness do the works of it, whose Delights are furnished (as the Feasts of
Crows are by Carrion) by their own filthy lusts, or other people's faults, and
who by the Oaths and Curses wherewith they offend Christian ears whilst they
live, and by the ill odor they leave behind them when they are dead, do but
too much justify my resembling them to these hateful Creatures. Such sensual
and obdurate Epicures, I say, God ofttimes suffers to run on their long Carier,
in paths of their own choosing, without checking them in the fruition of those
Joys, which are to be their only Portion, till at length their iniquity
filling up the determinate measure, Genesis 15. 16
he cuts them off, in the height of their Enjoyments, and employing oft-times
their own sins for their Executioners, or at least Instruments of their
Destruction, precipitates them headlong from the Pinnacle of their Delights,
into the bottomless Pit, which one of their Predecessors (the rich man in the
Parable) called, as he sadly found it, Luke 16. 28
the Place of Torment, where the luscious sweets of sin, are so dearly reckoned
for, and afford so much Bitterness in the latter end, 2 Samuel 2. 26.
that their sense sadly convinces them, of (what their sensuality kept them
from believing) the folly of gaining any thing at the rate of losing their own
Souls. Thus the Israelitish Prince found a Nemesis bold enough to violate the
Sanctuary, even of his Mistress's arms, and (regardless of its charms) enter
that lovely Circle, their Kindness closed him in, Number. 25
to snatch him thence, and extinguish the lustful flames that lighted him
thither, with the cold blasts of Death. Thus the mutinous Loathers of Manna,
and lusters after flesh, had their wish severely granted, for they had indeed
Quails served in by fieldsfull, but attended with so sudden and sharp a
Reckoning, Number. 11. 33.
that whilst the flesh was yet between their teeth, ere it was chewed, Death
hindered them to swallow it, choked them with it, and devoured them as
greedily, as they did those Birds. Thus the insolent Philistines found
themselves ill protected by their vainly celebrated God, Judges 16.
and his (much stronger) Temple, though in the latter there were thousands of
them, without any other Enemy, than one, they had sent for to be a friend to
their Mirth. For in the very midst of all the Triumphs of a solemn Festival
(which had more properly been kept to Dililah) whilst they were insulting over
captive Samson's Blindness, they could not see their own approaching Destiny,
though it were then so near, that the next fit of Laughter had not time to pass
to their Mouths, ere an unexpected Vengeance (the provoked Deity lending an
Omnipotent Arm to Samson's hand) confounded in one Ruin, the Idol with the
Worshippers, and suddenly turned the whole Temple into an Altar, with which the
Priests themselves, fell surprised Sacrifices to that tragical Solemnity. And
thus (to hasten from so sad a Theme) the revelling Belshazzar, in the midst of
his Magnificent and Royal Feast, saw an intruding hand, which by its manner of
appearing, as well as by what it wrote, was able to mar the Supper, without
impairing the Dainties. And that Monarch, whom even a Siege could not reduce
below a condition of Feasting, though he were carouzing in the consecrated
Cups, had such a Brimmer of trembling put into his hand, as both presaged and
perchance began the Destiny approaching him under the Ensigns of the Noble
Cyrus, whose Conquering Sword, guided by Providence, and made the Sword of
Justice, did that very same night, let out his Wine, and Blood, and Life
together.

Upon the same Subject.
It Is hard on such an occasion to avoid making some Reflection upon the
Mutability of worldly Conditions! How little did this Crow imagine, a quarter
of an hour since, that in so short a time, his Body should be as senseless, and
as stinking Carrion, as that he was wont to feed it with; that his feathers
should wear so unlucky a kind of Mourning for his Destruction, and that I
should write his Epitaph with one of his own Quils! Sure since a few minutes
can turn the healthiest Bodies into breathless Carkases, and put those very
things into the hands of our Enemies, which were they that we principally
reli'd on, for our safety, it were little less than Madness, to repose a
distrustless Trust in these transitory Possessions, or treacherous Advantages,
which we enjoy but by so fickle a Tenure. No; we must never venture to wander
far from God, upon the Presumption that Death is far enough from us, but rather
in the very height of our Jollities, we should endeavor to remember, that they
who feast themselves today, may themselves prove Feasts for the Worms tomorrow.

REFLECTION IV.
Upon a Glowworm that he kept included in a Crystal Viol. At Lees.

IF this unhappy Worm had been as despicable as the other reptils that crept up
and down the Hedge, whence I took him, he might, as well as they, have been
left there still, and his own Obscurity, as well as that of the Night, had
preserved him from the confinement he now suffers. And if, as he sometimes for
a pretty while withdrew that Luminous Liquor, that is as it were the Candle to
this small dark Lanthorn, he had continued to forbear the disclosing of it, he
might have deluded my search, and escaped his present Confinement.

Rare Qualities may sometimes be Prerogatives, without being Advantages. And
though a needless Ostentation of ones Excellencies may be more glorious, a
modest Concealment of them is usually more safe: And an unseasonable disclosure
of flashes of Wit, may sometimes do a Man no other service, than to direct his
Adversaries how they may do him a mischief.

And as though this Worm be lodged in a Crystalline Prison, through which it
has the Honor to be gazed at by many Eyes, and among them, by some that are
said to shine far more in the Day than this Creature does in the Night; yet no
doubt, if he could express a sense of the Condition he is in, he would bewail
it, and think himself unhappy in an excellency, which procures him at once
Admiration and Captivity, by the former of which he does but give others a
Pleasure, while in the latter he himself resents a Misery.

This oftentimes is the fate of a great Wit, whom the Advantage he has of
ordinary Men in Knowledge, the Light of the Mind exposes to so many effects of
other Men's Importunate Curiosity, as to turn his Prerogative into a Trouble:
The light that ennobles him, tempts Inquisitive Men to keep him, as upon the
like score we do this Glowworm, from sleeping: And his Conspicuousness is not
more a Friend to his fame, than an Enemy to his quiet; for Men allow such much
Praise, but little Rest. They attract the Eyes of others, but are not suffered
to shut their own, and find, that by a very disadvantagious Bargain, they are
reduced for that imaginary good, called Fame, to pay that real Blessing,
Liberty.

And, as though this Luminous Creature be himself imprisoned in so close a Body
as Glass, yet the Light that ennobles him, is not thereby restrained from
diffusing it self: So there are certain Truths, that have in them so much of
native Light or Evidence, that by the personal Distresses of the proposer, it
cannot be hidden, or restrained; but in spite of Prisons, it shines freely,
and procures the Teachers of it Admiration, even when it cannot procure them
Liberty.

REFLECTION V.
Upon a Courts being put into Mourning. Hague 1648.

The I. PART. For there was a second part of this Reflection, but when it was
to be sent to the Press it could not be found, nor would the Presses haste, and
the Authors occasions, allow him either to stay till it were found, or write a
new one.

Genorio, Eusebius, Lindamor. Genor. MEthinks, you look, Eusebius, as if the
change that Blacks have made in this place, since I last saw you here, tempts
you to question whether or no this be the Court.


Lind. Yet, I fear, Eusebius will scarce doubt, that you, and these other
Gentlemen are Courtiers, whilst he sees how much you dissemble in personating
sadness: For though your Clothes look mournful, your Faces do not, and you talk
to one another as unconcern'dly, as when you wore lighter Colors; and your
Grief is so slight, that it has not an Influence so much as upon your looks,
and words, which yet are things that Courtiers are said to be able to disguise
without an over-difficult constraint.


Genor. But, I hope, Lindamor, I need not labor to persuade such as you, that,
when we seem to mourn, without doing it, we may be thought guilty of
dissimulation without being so: For what Duty is there, that you and I should
be really troubled for the Death of a Prince, whose Subjects we were not, who
never obliged us, and who perhaps did only keep the Power of doing Good, which
himself never used, from a Successor that had the will to employ it. But you
will demand, why then we put on Black, To which, the Answer is easy, that
Custom having established that Ceremony in the Courts of Princes, in Amity with
each other, the Omission would be looked upon as an Affront, and be a
Provocation. And therefore, the Blacks we wear, are not meant to express a
Grief for the Dead, but a Respect to their living Relations: And thus, this as
heartless as solemn show of Mourning, is not put on by Hypocrisy, but by
Prudence, or Civility. And in this case, I would appeal to Eusebius himself,
but that I perceive some Object or other, has ever since we began to talk,
engrossed his Attention, as well as sealed up his Lips.


Lind. I have taken notice of it, as well as you, Genorio, and I confess, I
would give much to learn his Thoughts.


Eusebius. It Is odds then, Lindamor, that you would over-purchase so worthless a
Knowledge: And to satisfy your Curiosity, at an easier rate, I will tell you,
that I was observing, how a Gentleman, who, it seems, does not much frequent
the Court, chancing to come in a Colored suit, that, but last Week, would have
been thought a fine one, was star'd at by all in the room, except your selves,
whose Faces chanced to be turned from him, like a Man of another Country, (not
to say of another World) which the poor Gentleman at length perceiving, he soon
grew so sensible of it, that in spite of the Richness and Newness of his
Clothes, with many Blushes he slunk out of the Court, to which he found Men's
gazing at him concluded him to be a Stranger.


Lind. But this, Eusebius, is only to tell us, what you observed, not what
Reflections you made upon it, and you know, that which I was inquisitive after,
was your Thoughts.


Eusebius. I will add then, Lindamor, since you will have it so, that I was
considering, that there has been no Law made by the State to forbid any, much
less Strangers, to appear in this Court in Colored clothes: And those, which
the Gentleman I was speaking of, had on, were such, both for fineness, and
fashionableness, as would very well become a greater Court, if it were not in
Mourning. But, now the Prince, and those that have the Honor to belong to him,
or to frequent this place, have put themselves into Blacks, to appear in
another, though in a finer Habit, is, to betray ones not belonging to the
Court, nor using to come to it; and among so many, that think they have a Right
to give Laws in point of Clothes, a Laced, or an Imbroider'd suit, though last
Week in request, would now they have laid them by, make a Man look not so much
like a Courtier, as a Player. And this Reflection invited me to consider
further, what a strange Influence fashions have on Mankind, and what an happy
change might be easily made in the World, if they, who have it in their Power
to introduce Customs, would make it their Endeavor to introduce good ones.


Lind. I am so much of your mind, Eusebius, that I confess, I envy not Princes
so much for the Splendor and the Pleasures that they live in, nor for the
Authority of raising Armies, nor perchance for the Happiness of making them
Victorious, as for the power of imposing and reforming of Fashions. And I think
it a less improvable Prerogative, to be able to coin any Metal into money, or
call it in at pleasure, than by the stamp of their Authority to introduce good
Customs, and make them current.


Genor. But, do not Princes enough, when they take care to make good Laws, and
see them well executed.


Lind. I will not dispute, whether by That, they do all they ought, but sure I
am, they do not all they may: For humane Laws being made for the civil Peace of
humane Societies, they are wont to be framed not for the making Men virtuous,
but the restraining them from being mischievous; they consist far more of
Prohibitions than Commands, and even their Prohibitions reach but to a little
part of what is ill; the Business of Laws being to provide, not against all
Evils, but those grosser ones, that are prejudicial to civil Societies: So that
there are a thousand Rules of Reason, or Christianity, which States have not
thought fit to turn into Laws. For Pride, Envy, Covetousness, Gluttony,
Intemperance, Effeminateness, Oaths, Idleness, and I know not how many other
Sins, contrary to the Laws of Nature, and of Christ, are so little provided
against by humane Sanctions, that one may be a bad Christian, and a bad Man,
without being a bad Citizen; There being nothing more easy, nor I fear more
usual, than for Multitudes to pass uncited before Man's Tribunal, to receive
their Condemnation at God's. But though a Prince can scarce, as a Legislator,
prevent, or suppress such Sins, yet, as a Pattern, he may do much toward it:
For by his Example, his Opinions, his Encouragements, and his Frowns, he may
reform an hundred particular things, which the Laws do not (and perhaps cannot)
reach. His declared Esteem of such and such Practices, joined with his
particular Actions suited to it, and his professed dislike of those Sinful or
Dishonorable courses, he finds the Rifest, backed with a steady and resolute
discountenance of those that do not decline them, will, in a short time, bring
those that are about him, to conform their Actions and Behavior to what Men
are satisfied, he desires, or likes. And those whom their nearness to Him, or
their Employments, make the conspicuous and exemplary Persons, being thus
modeled, their Relations and Dependants will quickly be so too, and then that
which is in request at Court, being upon that very account looked upon as the
Fashion, it will by degrees be imitated by all those on whom the Court has
Influence; since, as we just now saw in the Instance of Eusebius's gaudy
Gentleman, Men will be ashamed to be unlike those, whose Customs and
Deportments pass for the Standards, by which those of other Men are to be
measured.


REFLECTION VI.
Upon hearing of a Lute first tuned, and then excellently played on.
THe Jarring strings made so unpleasant a noise, whilst the Instrument was
tuning, that I wonder not at the Story that goes of a Grand Signior, who being
invited by a Christian Ambassador to hear some of our Music, commanded the
Fiddlers to be thrust out of his Seraglia, upon a mis-apprehension that they
were playing, when they were but tuning. But this rare Artist had no sooner put
an end to the short exercise he gave our Patience, than he put us to the
Exercise of another Virtue: For his nimble and skilful Fingers make one of the
innocentest Pleasures of the Senses to be one of the greatest, and this
Charming melody (for which Orpheus or Orion themselves might envy him) does not
so properly delight as ravish us, and render it difficult to moderate the
Transports of our Passions, but impossible to restrain the praises that express
our satisfaction: So that if this Musician had been discouraged by the
unpleasant Sounds that were not to be avoided, whilst he was putting his Lute
in Tune, from proceeding in his work, he had been very much wanting to himself,
and to save a little pains, had lost a great deal of Pleasure and Applause.

Thus, when the faculties and passions of the Mind, either through a native
unruliness, or the remisness of Reason and Conscience are discomposed, he that
attempts to bring them into order, must expect to meet at first but an uneasy
Task, and find the beginning of a Reformation more troublesome, for the time,
than the past disorders were: But he is very little his own Friend, if he
suffers these short-lived difficulties to make him leave his Endeavors
unprosecuted: For when once they have reduced the untuned Faculties and
Affections of the Soul to that pass* which Reason and Religion would have them
brought to, the tuned or composed Mind affords a satisfaction, whose greatness
does even at present abundantly recompense the Trouble of procuring it, and
which is yet but a praelude to that more ravishing Melody, wherein the Soul
(already Harmonious within it self) shall hereafter bear a part, where the
Harps of the Saints accompany the glad Voices that sing the Song of the Lamb,
and the Hallelujahs of the rest of the Caelestial Quire.

REFLECTION VII.
Upon being presented with a rare Nosegay by a Gardener.
Lindamor, Eusebius. Lind. HEre is indeed a Present, for which I must still
think my self this fellow's Debtor, though he thinks I have over-paid him. It Is
pity these Rarities were not more suitably addressed, and worn by some of
Natures other Masterpieces, with whom they might exchange a graceful Luster,
and have the Ornament they confer reflected back upon them. But one that had
never been a Lover, would perhaps say, that that wish were more civil to the
Flowers, than the Ladies, of whom there are few, which these soft polished
Skins, and Orient Tinctures, would not easilier make Foils, than prove such to
them: For (not to name the Rest) this Lovely fragrant Rose here, wears a Blush
that needs not do so, at any Color the Spring it self can, amongst all her
Charming Rarities, show. Yes, here are Flowers above the flattery of those of
Rhetoric; and besides, two or three unmingled Liveries, whose single Colors
are bright, and taking enough to exclude the wish of a diversity; here is a
variety of Flowers, whose Dies are so dexterously blended, and fitly
checkered, that every single Flower is a variety. I envy not Arabia's Odours,
whilst that of this fresh Blusher charms my sense, and find my Nose and Eyes
so ravishingly entertained here, that the Be extracts less sweetness out of
Flowers; which were they but less frail, I fear would make me more so (than yet
I am.) Surely this Gardener leads a happy Life! He inherits nothing of Adam,
but that Primitive profession that employed and recompensed his Innocence, and
such a Gay and priviledg'd Plot of his Eden, as seems exempted from the general
Curse, and instead of the Thorns and Thistles that are the unthankful Earths
wonted productions, brings him forth Lillies and Tulips, and gratefully crowns
his Culture (for Toil I cannot think it) with chaplets of Flowers.


Eusebius. I perceive, (Lindamor) that you judge of the Delightfulness of this
Man's calling, only by these Lovely and Fragrant productions of it. And you
see these curious Flowers in their prime, without seeing by what practices, and
degrees, they have been brought from despicable seeds to this perfection and
luster. And perhaps, if you considered, that a Gardener must be digging in the
violent heats of the Summer, and must be afraid of the bitter cold of the
Winter, and must be watchful against surprising frosts in the Spring, and must
not only prune, and water, and weed his Ground, but must, to obtain these
gaudy and odoriferous Flowers, submit to deal with homely and stinking Dung; If
(Lindamor) you would take notice of these and of some other Toils and Hardships
that attend a Gardener's Trade, you would (I doubt not) confess, that his
Employments, like his Bushes, bring him Thorns as well as Roses.

And now give me leave (Lindamor) to tell you, that this may be applied to the
condition of some studious persons, that you and I know. For when we hear a
Learned or Eloquent Sermon, or read some Book of Devotion, or perhaps some
Occasional Discourse handsomely written, we are apt to envy the Preacher or the
Writer, for being able to say some things thar instruct or please us so much.
But alas, (Lindamor) though we see not these Productions of the Brain till they
are finished, and consequently fitted to appear with their full Advantages
abroad, yet to bring them to that pass, the Author may perhaps undergo many a
trouble that we dream not of. For he that has to do with difficult or weighty
Subjects cannot present us a good Book, or a Fine Discourse, with the same ease
that a rich man can present us a fine pair of Gloves, or a fine Collation,
which may be had at an hour's warning from the next Milleners or Confectioners.
For to be able to write one good Book on some Subjects, a man must have been at
the trouble to read an hundred: To grow capable to give a better rendering of a
Greek Text, he must perchance have perused Suidas, Stephanus, Hesychius, and I
know not how many Lexicographers and Scholiasts: To be qualified to make a
Translation of an Hebrew Word or Phrase, that shall illustrate a dark Text, or
clear a Difficulty, or more fitly agree with his notion, or accommodation of a
place in Scripture, a man must have not only like a Schoolboy learned an
Hebrew Grammar, and turned over Buxtorf's Schindler's, and other Dictionaries,
but (which is worse) he must in many cases hazard his eyes and his patience in
conversing with such Jewish Writings, not only as Elias his Tishbi, and
Kimchi's Michlol; but to gain a little Rabbinical Learning, and find out some
unobvious signification of a Word or Phrase, he must devour the tedious and
voluminous Rhapsodies that make up the Talmud, in many of which he can scarce
learn any thing but the Art of saying nothing in a multitude of words; and in
others, which are not so useless, the most he will find in I know not how many
dull pages, (written with as little Wit as Truth) will perhaps be an Account of
some wild Opinion, or some obsolete Custom, or some superstitious Rite of a
generation of people, whose Fancies and Manners scarce any thing makes worth
our inquiring after, but their having lived many Ages since. And even when a
man sets himself to write those smooth Composures, where Eloquence is
conspicuous, and seems to be chiefly designed, the Author seldom comes by his
Contentment on as easy terms as the Readers come by theirs. For, not to
mention, that sometimes Periods that in a well printed Book look very
handsomely, and run very evenly, were not in the written Copy without
interlining and Transcriptions. Those that are Scholars themselves can hardly
write without having an ambition, or at least a care, to approve their
Discourses to them that are so too. And in the judgment of such Perusers, to be
able to write well, one must not only have skill in the Subject, but be well
skilled in the way of writing, lest the Matter be blemished by the manner of
Handling it. And although to show ones self a Master in treating of variety of
Themes with a florid style, and even in those Composures that are designed
chiefly to express Wit and move Affections, one may think that Nature may be
well let alone to supply any she has been kind to, with all they need, yet even
in these cases there are some Toils and uneasinesses that are scarce to be
avoided; since a discreet man, though never so rich in Natures's gifts, will
think himself obliged to study Rhetoric, that he may be sure he does not
transgress the Laws of It. For though an Author's Natural parts may make his
Book abound with Wit, yet without the help of Art he will scarce make it free
from faults. And to be well stocked with Comparisons, which when skilfully
managed make the most taking passages of fine Pieces, one must sometimes survey
and range through the works of Nature and Art, which are the chief Warehouses,
where variety and choice of Similitudes is to be had, and to obtain those
pleasing Ornaments there is oftentimes required no less pains than to devise
useful Notions. As one must search the Ditches amongst Briars and Weeds, not
only to find Medicinable Herbs, but to gather Prim-roses and Violets. So that
(Lindamor) to conclude, if we consider the trouble that applauded Composures do
oftentimes cost their Authors, we should be sensible we owe more than most men
think we do to those to whom we owe good Books. But then unless they find some
Recompense for their Labors, in the satisfaction of promoting piety, or in the
well-natur'd Pleasure they feel themselves in pleasing others, I should scarce
doubt but that some of the Writers, we think so happy, may rather deserve our
Esteem than our Envy.


REFLECTION VIII.
Upon a Child that cried for the Stars.
I Remember P. S. did once, upon just the like Theme, discourse to the
following purpose.

Amongst those numerous Eyes, that these fair Lights attract in so clear a
night as this, there are not perhaps any that are more delighted with them,
than this Child's seem to be. And those Persians that adored the rising Sun,
could not be more charmed with that glorious Object, than this Child is with
these twinkling Lights, that need his absence to become so much as visible. But
his is a pleasure, that is not more great than unquiet, for it makes him
querulous, and unruly, and because he cannot by his struggling, and reaching
forth his little hands, get possession of these shining Spangles, Thus in a
Starry night fond Children cry
For the rich Spangles that adorn the sky.
Mr W.
that look so finely, their fires produce water in his eyes, and cries in his
mouth, that are very little of kin to the Music the Platonists fancied in the
Spheres he looks at. Whereas, though my inclinations for Astronomy make me so
diligent a Gazer on the Stars, that in spite of my great Obnoxiousness to the
inclemency of the nocturnal air, I gladly spend the coldest hours of the night
in contemplating them; I can yet look upon these bright Ornaments of Heaven it
self, with a mind as calm and serene, as those very nights that are fittest to
observe them in.

I know diverse men for whom Nature seems to have cut out too much work, in
giving them, in an unconfinedly amorous Disposition of mind, strong Appetites
for almost all the fair Objects that present themselves to their sight: These
amorous Persons may be, I grant, very much delighted when they first gaze upon
a Corstellation of fair Ladies, but the Heart commonly pays dear for the
Pleasure of the Eye, and the eager desires that Beauty creates, are in such men
excited too often not to be frequently disappointed, and are wont to be
accompanied with so many jealousies, and fears, and repulses, and difficulties,
and dangers, and remorses, and despairs, that the unhappy Lovers (if those that
love more than one can merit that Title) do rather languish than live, if you
will believe either their own querulous words, or their pale and melancholy
looks, which would make one think they were just entering into the Grave, or bad
been newly dug out of it. Whereas a person that has his Affections, and
Senses, at that command, which Reason and Religion require, and confer, can
look upon the same Objects with pleased but not with dazzled Eyes: He considers
these bright and curious Productions, as fair animated Statues of Nature's
framing, and contenting himself to admire the workmanship, adores only the
Divine Artificer, whose infinite amiableness is but faintly shadowed forth even
by such lovely Creatures. And therefore what has been said of Mistresses, may
be more justly applicable to all the other Objects of Men's too eager Passions.
To be short, looking upon these curiousest Productions of Nature, with a
Philosopher's and a Christian's Eyes, he can cast them on those bright Objects
with pleasure, and yet withdraw them without trouble, and allowing Beauty to
contribute to his Delight, without being able to create him any Disquiet;
though it afford him a less transporting Pleasure than it sometimes does the
Amorist, yet, all things considered, it may afford him a greater Pleasure, by
being more innocent, more untroubl'd, and more lasting; And there may be such a
Difference betwixt the Contentment of this calm admirer of Beauty, and that of
a greedy and unconfined Prostituter of his Heart to it, as there is betwixt the
unquiet Pleasure that the sight of the Stars gives to this Child, and the
rational Contentment it may afford to an Astronomer.

REFLECTION IX.
Upon my Lady D. R. Her fine Closet. A. D. 1651.

Lindamor, Eusebius. Lind. IS not this Closet strangely fine, Eusebius? Here is
such a variety of pretty and taking Objects, that they do as well distract the
Eye as delight it; the abundance, the choice, and the Order, do as well
disclose the fair Posssessors skill, as Her magnificence, and show at once,
that she both has plenty, and deserves it, by knowing so well how to make use
of it. Those things that are here solitary, or single, will scarce be elsewhere
matched, and all the rest are so pretty, and so excellent in their several
Kinds, that the number of fine things that make up this curious Collection,
cannot hinder any of them from being a Rarity. And in a word, the
Embellishments, that adorn and ennoble this delightful place, are such, that I
believe the Possessor of them, as welcome as she is unto the best Companies,
scarce ever looks upon finer things, than she can see in her Closet, unless
when she looks into her Glass. But, methinks, Eusebius, you hear and view all
this with a silent seriousness, which begins to make me suspect, that what I
thought might be an Effect of your Wonder, may be so of your Dislike.


Eusebius. The Collection, Lindamor, is, I confess, very curious in its Kind, and
such, as if the Mistress of it were less handsome than she is, might give her
as well Cause to be jealous of these fine things, as to be proud of them, since
a Beauty, that were but ordinary, could not divert a Spectator's Eye from
Objects, whereof many are not so. But, Lindamor, I must freely tell you, that I
like both the Lady, and the Closet, much better than the Custom; such sights as
these are introducing among Ladies of furnishing such Kind of Closets: I know
that Youth may in certain cases, excuse some of the Impertinencies it is wont to
occasion; And it is not strange to me, that Persons of the fairer Sex, should
like, in all things about them, that handsomness for which they find themselves
to be the most liked; Nor would I forbid, even such of them, as are not of a
very high Quality, to have a retiring place so neatly adorned, as may invite
them to be alone, and withdraw to it, to read, or meditate, provided these
Ornaments be not so costly, as to rob Charity, or so gaudy, as to distract the
Devotion they should but accommodate. And in case Circumstances should so
conspire, as that Youth and Quality should be attended by such a plentiful
Fortune, as that after all, that either Justice, Prudence, or Decency can
challenge, there remains yet enough, both to relieve the Poor, and purchase
Rarities themselves: I will not be so severe, as to condemn Persons so
circumstanc'd, nor fall out with those that are able to reconcile Sumptuousness
and Charity. But the number of such Ladies, especially so soon after a long
civil War, must needs be but small, and I fear much inferior to that of those,
who will consider more what they see done before their Eyes, than they will the
disparity of Circumstances betwixt their own Condition, and that of those they
Aemulate: And the greater appearance of Ingeniousness, as well as Innocence,
there is in the practice I am disapproving, the more dangerous it is, and the
more fit to be examined and decri'd. For as the old Serpent has variety of
Wiles, so he fits them to the various tempers of the Persons he assays to work
upon; and when he meets with Ladies virtuously disposed, since he cannot quite
eradicate their inclinations to the best part of Religion, Charity, he will at
least blast and render them fruitless; and he justly thinks, he has reached no
small part of his end, if though he cannot seduce them to do ill, he can at
least hinder them from doing good. And this he has of late attempted but too
prosperously, by persuading us to take those for the standard and examples of
our Expenses, that making none of the score of Piety, have the more left for
their Vanities and their Appetites, which they gratify at such high rates,
that those that think themselves bound to imitate them in those Excesses, that
are misnam'd Gallantry, shall have as little ability, as the other have will,
to apply any considerable part of their Estates to those Uses, which chiefly
God granted them those Estates for; and by that time, the Lady her self, and
the House, and the Closet, are furnished with all the Ornaments that Vanity and
Emulation call for, there is nothing left for Charity to dispose of, nay,
perhaps not for Justice; the Creditor being oftentimes turned back empty as
well as the Beggar, if not also made a Beggar by ruinous delays. And greater
fortunes, than most Ladies have, may be exhausted, by gratifying such an
ambition, as that of a Closet, to whose Costliness nothing can put limits, till
Discretion do: Custom it self having not yet regulated a piece of Vanity,
which, as imposing as Custom is wont to be, it has not yet dared to enjoin.


Lind. Methinks, Eusebius, you are somewhat forward to accuse those fair
Creatures, that though they should want Innocence, would scarce want Advocates;
and you are to good a Casuist to ignore, that they are wont to allege, that
the Bravery you are so severe to, is no where expressly prohibited in the
Scripture, and this unforbiddenness they think sufficient to evince, that the
Sumptuousness you so condemn, is not absolutely, and in its own nature, Sinful.


Eusebius. I can readily believe, that Lindamor has Wit and Amorousness enough to
make him find it more easy to defend fair Ladies, than to defend himself
against them: And I know, it is said, that these sumptuous Closets, and other
Vanities, are not simply unlawful in their own Nature; but I know too, that
diverse things, not in their own Nature unlawful, may be made so by
circumstances, and if so, then I fear, That that can be no other than ill,
which makes a Man needlessy disable himself to do good. The Apostle, that
discountenanced Woman's wearing of Gold, or precious things upon their Bodies,
would sure have opposed their having more sumptuous Ornaments upon their Walls:
These cannot pray for us, but the poor and distressed, they keep us from
relieving, may either successfully pray to God for us, or cry to him against
us. The Scripture that represents Dives in Hell, without saying that he
oppressed or defrauded any, gives no other account of his Doom, than that
living at a high rate, and going richly dressed, he neglected to relieve the
starving poor. A few such Closets as this Ladies, might be easily enlarged, and
contrived into an Hospital: A small part of these Superfluities would relieve
the necessities of many Families, and a liberal Heart might purchase Heaven at
an easier rate, than the furniture of this Closet cost the Owner of it. Nor is
this practice so unallied to a fault, as to escape a punishment even in this
World; these Courtiers of Applause being oftentimes reduced to live in want,
even in the midst of a plentiful Fortune; these costly trifles so engrossing
all that they can spare, that they must sometimes deny themselves things
convenient, and perhaps almost necessary, to flaunt it out with those that are
neither the one nor the other, and being frequently enough fain to immolate
their own inclinations and desires, though perchance strong and innocent, to
their Vanity. And those that have once found the happiness there is in making
others happy, will think their Treasure better bestowed in feeding hungry
Mouths, than idle Eyes: The costly Practice I am yet censuring, does not only
offend Charity, but starve it, by substracting from it that which should feed
it, and enable it to act like it self. And for my part, I think, he that
devises, and by his Example brings Credit to, a new Expensive way of Vanity,
does really destroy more Poor, than if he usurped an Almshouse, or ruined an
Hospital. And by the ill President he leaves, he takes the way to be
uncharitable, even after Death, and so do harm, when Misers and Usurers
themselves are wont (by their Legacies) to do some good. To conclude, it is no
very Christian practice to disobey the Dictates of Piety, without having so
much to plead for so doing, as the pretense of following the Dictates of
Custom: And it is a great deal better to be without a gay Closet, than to be
without Charity, which loveliest of Christian virtues, she must sure very much
want, that will needlessly begin an new Example to give a bad one.


REFLECTION X.
Upon his seeing a Lark stoop to, and caught with, Day-nets.
Eusebius, Lindamor. Eusebius. POor Bird! thou were just now so high upon the
Wing, that the tired Gazers feared thou had lost thy self in Heaven, and in
thy fatal stooping seem to have brought us thence a Message, that so
rellishes of that place, that I should be troubled to see thee so rudely
entertained, if that Circumstance were not necessary to the Instructions of thy
Message; some Birds, you know, Lindamor, we usually beguile with Chaff, and
others are generally drawn in by appropriated Baits, and by the Mouth, not the
Eye. But the aspiring Lark seems composed of more sprightly, and refined
Materials, she is ever a Natural, though no Native, Persian, and the Sun makes
not a cloudless Visit to our Horizon, which that grateful Creature gives not a
welcome to, both by Notes, which, could he hear them, he would think worthy of
him, and by a flight as aspiring as if she meant he should hear them; and, in a
word, so conspicuous is this Creatures fondness of Light, that Fowlers have
devised a way to catch her by it, and pervert it to her Ruin: For placing
broken Looking-glasses upon a moveable Frame betwixt their Nets, the unwary
Bird, while she is gazing upon that glittering Light the Glass reflects, and
sporting her self in those Beams, which derive a new Glory from their very
being broken, heedlessly gives into the Reach of the surprising Nets, which
suddenly cover her, and which the Light it self kept her from seeing. The Devil
is like this Fowler, Lindamor, and you, or I, had perhaps resembl'd the unhappy
Lark, if sometimes Providence did not both graciously, and seasonably,
interpose, and even when we were come near enough to have been covered by the
Nets, rescued us from them; for it has ever been that old Serpent's Policy, and
practice, to take the exactest measure of our Inclinations, that he may
skilfully suit his Temptations to them; well knowing, that that Dexterity gains
him a Devil within us, that conspires with him without us, to make us Instances
of that Truth which represents Things divided against themselves as ruinous. If
therefore, the Tempter find by Experience, that you are indisposed to be
wrought upon by common Temptations, to forget the Practice of Religion, that
you have Unconcern'dness enough not to be much distracted with the empty and
trifling Chaff, Youth is wont to be caught with, (which perhaps seldom employ
any of your Thoughts so much as those of Scorn, and Pity) that the very Gain
and solider Goods of this World (for which many thought wise Men lose those of
the next) cannot make you so greedy, nor so fond of them, as he desires. If, I
say, the Devil have sufficiently observed how uneasy it were to entice you
with common Baits, he will alter his Method strait, and attempt to catch you
with Light. He knows as well as I do, that you have a Curiosity, or rather a
Greediness of Knowledge, that is impatient of being confined by any other
Limits than those of Knowledge it self; and accordingly, seldom, or perhaps
never disturbing or frightning you, he will let you freely sport your self
about the glittering Intellectual Glass, Men call Philosophy, and suffer you
not only to gaze upon all its pieces, and survey a pretty Number, but
peradventure, pry into more than one; and among so numerous, and delighting
Objects, I fear, that if you will frankly own what my own Guilt makes me
suspect you of, you must confess, That he had made you so share your Time, that
you should scarce have left your self any for Heavenly Themes, and the
Meditation of Death, (which consequently might have then surprised you, had it
invaded you) if Providence had not mercifully snatched you out from between the
Nets you were allured to, before you were quite involved in them; and by
Sickness, or else, by Means (in other cases) so unlikely, as outward
Distractions, called your Thoughts home by driving them away from those
enchanting Studies, whose Light might much likelier have betrayed you into the
Net, than have shown it you.


Lind. Though I am not surprised to hear Eusebius, yet I am glad to hear a
Scholar talk at this rate, and believe with you, that many a one that was
neither Crow, nor Wood-cock, has perished in this Snare; and we have known but
too many great Scholars, so entirely taken up with writing, and reading of
Books, with learning this Science, and with teaching that, that by setting
themselves such Tasks, as required and imploi'd the whole Man, Death has
undiscernedly stoll'n upon them, and unawares intruded into their Studies,
where their restless Ambition to enrich the Mind never left them the leisure to
prepare it, to leave the Body, but either made them surprised Instances of that
sad (but true) Observation of Seneca, Plerosque in ipso Vitae apparatu Vita
destituit, or else made their Condition like that of Archimedes, who was so
busy in tracing his Circles, that he took no notice of that victorious Enemy
that came to dispatch him.


Eusebius. I allow, that it is the Innocence, as well as Pleasure of Knowledge,
that deceives those Learned Men; but they, as well as others, must remember,
that even the wholsomest Meats may be surfeited on, and there is nothing more
unhealthy, than to feed very well, and do but very little Exercise. And I take
it to be as true of the Intellectual, as the Material World, that it profits
not a Man if he gain the whole World, and lose his own Soul. Whatsoever
therefore Philosophers do tell us, of a wise Man, that he is no where banished,
because he is a Citizen of the World; I must think a Christian every where in
Exile, because he is a Citizen of the Heavenly Jerusalem, and but a Stranger
and a Sojourner here. It was not absolutely in the capacity of the Father of
Lies, that the Devil boasted, that the Earth was his Dominion; for, as our
Savior himself styled him, The Prince of this World, I find, that he has all
things here so much at his Devotion, that there is no place that he cannot lay
an Ambush in, since he can pervert even Light it self, to hide his Snares. Let
us, therefore, hereafter endeavor still to stand upon our Guard, as remembering
our selves to be in an Enemy's Country, where Distrust is the only Mother of
safety; and since Providence has so graciously presented us a Lesson, our Books
would not have taught us, against such a fondness of them, as is injurious to
Piety, and dangerous to the Soul; Let us justify, better than this silly Lark
has done, that saying of Solomon, Surely in vain the Net is spread in the sight
of any Bird. Let not Philosophy any more take up our Life so, as not to leave
us leisure to prepare for Death, and study a Science which shall most benefit
us in another World, and which alone will do so there: No, we may visit Athens,
but we should dwell at Jerusalem; we may take some turns on Parnassus, but
should more frequent Mount Calvary, and must never so busy our selves about
those many things, as to forget that Unum Necessarium, that good part which
shall not be taken away from us.


OCCASIONAL REFLECTIONS.
The Last SECTION.
REFLECTION I.
Seeing a Child picking the Plums out of a piece of Cake his Mother had given
him for his Breakfast.
Eusebius. Lindamor. Eusebius. THis Child is so much one in his humor, that
despising mere Bread, though never so nourishing and wholesome, his Mother is
fain to disguise the Materials of it into Cake, out of a belief that the
toothsome, would make the nutritive part go smoothly down. But this lickerish
Chit, I see, defeats her plot, and knows already how to nibble off the bait
from the hook, and casting by the Meat, make his whole Meal of what was meant
only for Sauce, to give a Relish to what he rejects for it. This puts me in
mind of the unwelcome fate those Papers of mine, that treat of Devotion, have
met with: For when I first was so unacquainted with the world, as to expect
that Piety and Virtue were able, by their native charms, so much to endear my
dress, as to win themselves adorers in a plain, or even a severe one; I
ventured some of them abroad, though not in Print, yet among my Acquaintance,
in a careless Matron-like habit, in which I soon found they almost frighted
most of those I had designed them to work the quite contrary effects on. But
when my Acquaintedness with the Genius of the Age had sadly taught me, that I
was to alter my Method, that the Eloquence of Virtues Sermons was that which
must attract an Auditory, and engage Attention to them; and that those orders
of hers, in which she employed not Rhetoric for her Secretary, could not be so
much as listened to, much less obeyed, I endeavored to cloth Virtue, though
not in a gaudy, in a Fashionable Habit, and devesting her not only of her
Sackcloth, but her Blacks, where I saw she appeared in them with Disadvantage,
I endeavored to give her as much of the modern Ornaments of a fine Lady, as I
could without danger of being accused to have dressed her like a Curtizan. This
Attempt having not proved so unsuccessful, but that many were pleased to assure
me, I had not been unlucky in it, I spent some time in the self-denying
Exercise of minding Words, and improving a Style, I hoped to be able to improve
to Virtue's service, and subduing my Inclinations to be fit to Teach, as I had
done to Learn, her Precepts; I some times, for her sake, tried my Pen in a
smoother, and more florid style, than that which the nature of the Studies I
was most addicted to, made the most familiar to me, flattering my self with a
Belief, that since my Writings had usually the good fortune not to be ill
approved, I might so happily mingle and interweave Instructions with Delight,
as to necessitate my Readers to swallow both together, or at least bribe them
by the latter to entertain the former.


Lind. You have better luck, as well as better skill, than many others, if you
find it not often to fare with the Fishers of Men as it did with those other
Fishers, that first were honored with that glorious Title, when they
complained to our Savior, that we have toiled all the night, Luke 5. 5.
and have taken nothing. For I see that men are grown witty enough to elude
what they cannot despise, and resemble the deaf Adder that stops her spiritual
ears from hearkening to the voice of Charmers, be the Charmer never so cunning.
And the best Reception that the moving'st Eloquence, that pleads for Piety, can
obtain of them, is but such as may serve to make that applicable to the
Preacher, which God once said to a Prophet, Lo thou art unto them as a very
lovely song of one that has a pleasant voice, and can play well upon an
Instrument; For they hear thy words, but they do them not. But the best is,
that you serve a Master, that is as inclinable to reward, as able to discern,
Intentions, and does not make his Estimates by Events, but judges of our
Performances, not by the Effects they produce, but the Affections they flowed
from, and the Ends they aimed at.


Eusebius. The Disciple is not above his Master, nor the Servant above his Lord.
And therefore, Lindamor, as I dare not repine at the unsuccessfulness of my
Endeavors, so I dare think, that whilst it proceeds but from the Obstinacy of
others, it is not likely to be imputed to me by Him that complained plain'
Himself, That all the day long he had stretched forth his hands to an
unpersuadable and gainsaying people. Otherwise, I confess, I should not have
much cause to be satisfied with the Return that all my Endeavors have hitherto
brought me home. For I see that men can read a Book of Devotion as
unconcern'dly as they do a Romance or a Play, in both of them culling out only
what they call Wit, and making no better use of it than either to exercise or
improve their own. They hear the most pathetick Sermons, not as Christians but
Orators, and if in such Discourses they have been so just as to praise the
Rhetoric, they think they may well be excused if they overlook the Divinity:
In short, nothing but what gratifies their Fancy can leave any Impressions on
their Memory, and that it self, if it tend to reform them, makes none on their
Affections. And some whose happier Pens allow them to do it far more justly
than I can, do complain, That if a devout Book have not good store of witty
passages, they will not mind it at all, and if it have, they will mind nothing
else.

So that, Lindamor, I should sometimes be discouraged from prosecuting
Endeavors, which, though they now and then succeed, are oft-times so
unprosperous, if I did not think, with you, that they who labor to win Souls
to God, are set on work by him, that having no need of our Performances, seeks
in our services but the opportunities of exercising his own Goodness.


REFLECTION II.
Upon the sight of Sweetmeats, very artificially counterfeited in Wax.
THE shape and colors of the best Sweetmeats of these kinds, are here so
luckily represented by a skilful Hand, that Art seems to have designed rather
to rival Nature, than barely to imitate Her, and a Lover of Junkets that
approches not too near to these, must have much quickness of sight, or but
little of appetite, if such inviting Objects do not tempt him both to mistake
and to desire them. But, though at this distance these alluring Sweetmeats
appear very pleasing; yet if one should be so unadvised as to endeavor to eat
them, instead of enjoying them more fully by the taste than he did by the
sight, he would both spoil and disfigure them, and perhaps be so near choking
himself, that he would more earnestly wish them out of his mouth, than ever he
wished them in it.

There are some pleasures and conditions too in the world, which make so fine a
show at a distance, that in those that gaze at them aloof off, they frequently
beget envy at them, and wishes for them; and yet he that calmly beholds them
takes the best way of enjoying them: since that which whilst it is but aimed at,
is expected to be very satisfactory upon a nearer and fuller fruition, would be
so far from proving so, and would so little be as sweet to the palate as
specious to the eye, that it would not only cease to afford them any delight,
but would make them wish they had let those deluding Sweets alone, and would
make seize more uneasy and troublesome than even desire was.

REFLECTION III.
Upon the eating of Oysters.
Eugenius, Lindamor. Eug. WHilst every body else is commending these Oysters,
either with his Tongue or with his Teeth, so that one of the Company sticks not
to say, that they are as much worth as if they contained each of them a Pearl,
you only seem as unconcerned a Spectator, as if you thought their proper use,
like that of Flowers, were, rather to be looked on than to be eaten.


Lind. I confess, Eugenius, that I found my self more inclinable to reflect on
what you are doing, than to keep you company in it, and whilst I saw such
persons so gustfully swallow these extolled Fishes, the sight lead me to take
more notice than perhaps you have done of the strange power of Education and
Custom.


Eug. And what, I pray you, has Custom to do with Oysters?


Lind. You will soon know that, if I tell you, that I was considering, on this
occasion, how forward we are to think other Nations absurd or barbarous for
such practices, that either the same, or little better, may be found unscrupled
at among our selves; and I acknowledge it to be one of the chief advantages I
account my self to have obtained by my Travels, that as I do not easily admire,
so I am not forward to deride, the Practice of any People for being New, and am
not apt to think, their Customs must be therefore worse than ours, because they
widely differ from them.

I could give you store of Instances to justify this impartiality, but because
the circumstances of eating and drinking are those which make men, with the
greatest confidence, term other Nations Brutish and Barbarous, I will confine
may self to some Examples of that nature.

We impute it for a barbarous custom to many Nations of the Indians, that like
Beasts they eat raw Flesh. And pray' how much is that worse than our eating raw
Fish, as we do in eating these Oysters? Nor is this a practice of the rude
Vulgar only, but of the politest and nicest persons among us, such as
Physicians, Divines, and even Ladies. And our way of eating seems much more
barbarous than theirs, since they are wont to kill before they eat, but we
scruple not to devour Oysters alive, and kill them not with our Hands or Teeth,
but with our Stomachs, where (for ought we know) they begin to be digested
before they make an end of dying. Nay sometimes when we dip them in Vinegar, we
may, for sauce to one bit, devour alive a schole of little Animals, which,
whether they be Fishes or Worms, I am not so sure, as I am, that I have, by the
help of convenient Glasses, seen great numbers of them swimming up and down in
less than a Sawcer full of Vinegar.

We detest and despise some other Nations, for feeding upon Caterpillars,
Grass-hoppers, and other Insects; and others, for feeding upon Carrion, and
stinking food.

And do not many of us do as bad, when we not only eat, but extol, rotten
Chief, whose Livid Color sufficiently betrays its Putrefaction, and whose
odious smell offends most men's Noses, and turns some men's Stomachs? Nay, when
this Cheese is grown to that high degree of rottenness that our critical palats
like it best in, we then devour whole hundreds of Mites, which are really
crawling Insects, bred out of Putrefaction, and these too are so numerous and
little, that our greediness makes us swallow many of them alive.

Among the Savagest Barbarians we count the Cannabals, and as for those among
them that kill men to eat them, their inhumane cruelty cannot be too much
detested; but to count them so barbarous merely upon the score of feeding on
man's flesh and blood, is to forget that woman's milk, by which alone we feed
our sucking Children, is, according to the received Opinion, but blanched
Blood; and that Mummy is one of the usual Medicines commended and given by our
Physicians for falls and bruises, and in other cases too. And if we plead that
we use not Mummy for food, but Physic, the Indians may easily answer, that by
our way of using man's flesh, we do oftentimes but protract sickness and pain,
whereas they by theirs maintain their health and vigor. And there is no reason
why it should be allowable to eat Broth, for instance, in a Consumption, and be
condemnable to feed upon it to maintain health.

But lastly, as the highest degree of Brutishness, our Travelers mention the
practice of the Soldanians at the Cape of Good hope, who not only eat raw
meat, but, if they be hungry, eat the guts and all of their Cattle, with the
Dung in them. I will not answer, that I know several among us, (and perhaps
some fair Ladies too) that to prevent the Scurvy and the Gout, drink their own
or Boy's Urine: nor that women themselves do oftentimes take Parmacitty
inwardly, though the Latin name (Sperma Ceti) sufficiently declare what
excretion of a Whale it is (though perhaps mistakenly) believed to be: nor yet
that under the name of Album Graecum, Dogs dung is commonly given to Patients
of all sorts and qualities against sore Throats: nor will I mention, that in
Holland it is usual, as I have seen my self, to mingle Sheep's dung with their
Cheeses, only to give them a color and a relish: But I will rather demand,
how much less we do our selves, than what we abominate in those Savages, when
we devour Oysters whole, guts, excrements, and all; nay, when not for Physic,
but only for Delicacies, our Courtiers and Ladies themselves are wont to make
sauce for the bodies of Lobsters of that green stuff, which is indeed their
Dung: And to these I could add other Examples, if I were not afraid to divert
you too long from so much pleasure as the Company seems to take in eating raw
Fish.


Eug. You put me in mind of a fancy of your Friend Mr. Boil, who was saying,
that he had thoughts of making a short Romantic story, where the Scene should
be laid in some Island of the Southern Ocean, governed by some such rational
Laws and Customs as those of Utopia or the New Atlantis, and in this Country he
would introduce an Observing Native, that upon his return home from his Travels
made in Europe, should give an account of our Countries and manners, under
feigned Names, and frequently intimate in his Relations, (or in his Answers to
Questions that should be made him) the reasons of his wondering to find our
Customs so extravagant and differing from those of his Country. For your Friend
imagined, that by such a way of proposing many of our practices, we should our
selves be brought unawares to condemn, or perhaps laugh at them, and should at
least cease to wonder to find other Nations think them as extravagant, as we
think the manners of the Dutch and Spaniards, as they are represented in our
Travelers Books.


Lind. I dislike not the project, and wish it were prosecuted by some Body,
that being impartial were more a friend to Fables. For when I consider, that
the name of Barbarian was given by the two Noblest Peoples of the Earth, the
Greeks and Romans, not only to all the rest of the World, but to one another,
though both those Nations were highly civilized, and the courtly Persians, and
other voluptuous Asiaticks, were perhaps no less so than they; I doubt that
most Nations in stileing one another Manners extravagant and absurd, are
guided more by Education and Partiality than Reason, and that we laugh at many
Customs of Strangers only because we never were bred to them, and prise many
of our own only because we never considered them. And we may well believe that
Custom has much a larger Empire than men seem to be aware of, since whole
Nations are wholly swai'd by it, that do not reckon themselves among its
Subjects, nor so much as dream that they are so.


REFLECTION IV.
Upon a Lanthorn and Candle carried by, on a windy night.
AS there are few Controversies more important, so there are not many, that
have been more curiously and warmly disputed, than the Question, Whether a
public or a private life be preferrable? But perhaps this may be much of the
nature of the other Question, Whether a married life or a single ought rather
to be chosen? that being best determinable by the Circumstances of particular
cases. For though indefinitely speaking, one of the two may have advantages
above the other, yet they are not so great, but that special Circumstances may
make either of them the more eligible to particular persons. They that find
themselves furnished with Abilities to serve their Generation in a public
capacity, and Virtue great enough to resist the Temptations, to which such a
condition is usually exposed, may not only be allowed to embrace such an
Employment, but obliged to seek it. But he whose parts are too mean to qualify
him to govern others, and perhaps to enable him to govern himself, or manage
his own private Concerns, or whose Graces are so weak, that it is less to his
Virtues or to his ability of resisting, than to his care of shunning the
occasions of sin, that he ows his escaping the Guilt of it, had better deny
himself some opportunities of doing Good, than expose himself to probable
Temptations. For there is such a kind of difference betwixt Virtue shaded by a
private, and shining forth in a public life, as there is betwixt a Candle
carried aloft in the open air, and enclosed in a Lanthorn; in the former place
it gives more light, but in the latter it is in less danger to be blown out.

REFLECTION V.
Upon the first Audience of the Russian Extraordinary Ambassador, at which he
made his Emperor's Presents.
I See the general Expectation that there will be here this night a Magnificent
Appearance, has produced one. And as it often happens in public Shows, that
the chief part of them is made by those that come to see them: so here, besides
them whose Duty obliges them to attend at the Solemnity, there is a greater
concourse of fine people of either Sex, than any thing of this nature has for
these many years occasioned. And not only many of the Ladies wear in their
Ribbands little less vivid colors, than those of their faces, and are set out
with Jewels almost as sparkling as their Eyes, (which yet the Courtiers think
were able to warm the Russian hearts, though all the Ice and Snow of their
Country guarded them) but the Men themselves are many of them as finely and as
richly dressed, as if even they came as well to be seen as to see. And if the
Ambassador be, what a man of his Employment should be, (and what some say he
is) a Person acquainted with the Manners of Men, he cannot but know, That we,
as other's Nations, value our own Fashions enough, to look upon Men disguised
by the Russian dress, as little better than Anticks, if not as some new kind of
Northern Animals. But for all this Gazing throng of Gaudy spectators, that were
able to put an ordinary Stranger out of Countenance, to appear in a Habit
differing from theirs; the Ambassador, and those that come along with him,
think it not fit to decline the Russian habit or Ceremonies, for the English,
but keep to the Ceremonies used in Muscovy, as strictly as if the Monarch of it
that sent them hither saw them here; and are not discouraged from this Manly
proceeding, by seeing themselves star'd at for it by a number of Gawly
spectators, that wear Clothes, and use Ceremonies, so differing from theirs.
And what ever those may think of the Ambassador, that are wont to estimate Men
by the fashionableness of their Clothes; yet the Wiser and more Intelligent do
not blame him, for refusing to disparage the Fashions of his own people, by
appearing ashamed of them; but, do rather think it prudent in him, to prefer
the pleasing of his Master, and his own Countrymen, before the gratifying of
Strangers, since it is not here, but at home, that he expects the recompense of
his Behavior, and Embassy.

Thus, when a Christian, who belongs to a Celestial King, and whose
Citizen-ship is in Heaven, being but a Stranger upon Earth, converses among the
Men of the World, though in Matters indifferent, there is ofttimes required by
Prudence, as much of Compliance as is allowed by Innocence; yet, when there
happens an Occasion, wherein he cannot comply with the depraved Customs of
those among whom he Lives, without disobeying Him for whom he Lives, and whose
Servant he is, or doing something that would derogate from the Dignity of a
Person related to such a Master, he will then less consider what may be thought
of him by a Multitude, than what Account he is to render to him, who has
forbidden Men to follow a Multitude to do Evil. And, as he knows, That his
reward would be much less than he reckons upon, if it were a thing to be
received on Earth, not in Heaven: So, how strange and unfashionable soever his
Conformity to the Orders of his own Sovereign may appear, he chooses rather to
displease Men than God, and acts, as both seeing, and being seen by, Him that
is Invisible.

A Continuation of the Discourse.
ANd this ought to be more easy to him, than their Singularity is to the
Russians, I have been mentioning; for whereas these, if they be knowing, and
impartial, refuse our Modes and Rites, not because they are worse, but only
because they are other than those of their Country; he refuses to conform to
the forbidden fashions of this World, not for their being different from those
of the Kingdom he belongs to, but for their being bad, and condemned by Him
that cannot err: Whereas, of the opposite practices, the same infallible Judge
pronounces by the mouth of a Person by him inspired, that these are the good
things, and the profitable unto Men. Titus 3. 8.
And whereas, these Strangers see nothing in this magnificent Assembly, whose
Fashions they decline, fit to be despised, but see some Persons in it, to whom
they pay a great respect, and who deserve it upon another account, than that of
their wearing Crowns; those that are Loyal to Virtue, have cause to look upon
those they refuse to be like, with a noble, and just Indignation, as Persons
that have degraded themselves, and by unworthy Practices blemished, and almost
forfeited, the Dignity of their Nature, and the nobler Title of Christians.
And, whereas these Muscovites are morally certain, that we shall never prefer
their Fashions to our own; the Christian has as great an assurance, that those,
whose Practices he dissents from, will one day repent, that theirs dissented
from his, and will wish they had imitated what they now seem to scorn. And
however, when he shall come to the celestial City he belongs to, he will be in
no danger to be derided for the sake of Piety, since those, that deride Piety,
will not be admitted there. And as these Russians could not take a better way
than that of not sneaking, to avoid the having their Rites and Persons
undervalu'd; so for a Christian, not to blush at his unfashionablest Practices,
seems the hopefullest way to keep them and him from being scorned, especially
with those, who having themselves no Quality better than Confidence, value it
most in others. And sure it were a very unlikely way to keep others from
despising the Customs of the Heavenly Jerusalem, for him that belongs to it to
appear ashamed of them himself. Nor have pious Persons cause to be out of
Countenance, at the singularity even of a strictly virtuous Deportment, since,
being (as the Scripture tells us such Men in general are) fellow Citizens with
the Saints and Domestics of God, they cannot justly be blamed, if they aspire
to be as like as they can here, to those, whom they desire and hope to be
perfectly like hereafter. And if the Angels (as the Scripture in several places
seems to intimate) are witnesses of our Actions, the smallest number of
unfashionable good Men, may, upon that score, say to one another, as the
Prophet did to his Servant, upon the account of the Heavenly Host that
surrounded him, Fear not, for they that be with us are more than they that be
with them. 2 Kin. 6. 16*
And the approbation of these illuminated, happy, and glorious Spirits, is sure
more considerable than that of mortal, and, which is worse, of sensual Men,
whether we consider their Number, or their Judgments. And however, the Day will
come, when those that despise his Singularity, will envy his Happiness; one
welcoming smile from Christ will make him amends for all the scornful smiles of
Sinful men; And the sentence of Absolution, and Bliss, solemnly pronounced
before God, Angels, and Men, will not only recompense him for the World's
Disesteem, but show that he did not deserve it.

REFLECTION VI.
Upon the sight of Roses and Tulips growing near one another.
It Is so uncommon a thing to see Tulips last till Roses come to be blown, that
the seeing them in this Garden grow together, as it deserves my notice, so
methinks it should suggest to me some Reflection or other on it. And perhaps it
may not be an improper one, to compare the difference betwixt these two kinds
of Flowers, to the disparity which I have often observed, betwixt the Fates of
those young Ladies, that are only very handsome, and those that have a less
degree of Beauty recompensed by the Accession of Wit, Discretion, and Virtue:
For Tulips, whilst they are fresh, do indeed by the Luster, and Vividness, of
their Colors, more delight the Eye than Roses; but then they do not alone
quickly fade, but as soon as they have lost that freshness, and gawdiness, that
solv indear'd them, they degenerate into things not only undesirable, but
distastful; whereas Roses, besides the moderate Beauty they disclose to the
Eye, (which is sufficient to please, though not to charm it) do not only keep
their Color longer than Tulips, but when that decays, retain a perfumed Odor,
and diverse useful Qualities, and Virtues, that survive the Spring, and
recommend them all the Year. Thus those unadvised young Ladies, that because
Nature has given them Beauty enough, despise all other Qualities, and even that
regular Diet which is ordinarily requisite to make Beauty it self lasting, not
only are wont to decay betimes, but as soon as they have lost that Youthful
freshness, that alone endeared them, quickly pass from being Objects of Wonder,
and Love, to be so of Pity, if not of Scorn; Whereas those that were as
sollicitous to enrich their Minds, as to adorn their Faces, may not only with
a mediocrity of Beauty be very desirable whilst that lasts, but
notwithstanding the recess of that, and Youth, may, by the fragrancy of their
Reputation, and those Virtues and Ornaments of the Mind, that Time does but
improve, be always sufficiently endeared to those that have merit enough to
discern, and value, such Excellencies; and whose Esteem and Friendship is alone
worth their being concerned for. In a word, they prove the happiest, as well as
they are the wisest, Ladies, that whilst they possess the desirable Qualities
that Youth is wont to give, neglect not the acquist of those that Age cannot
take away.

REFLECTION VII.
(Taken out of the 2d Book of the An unpublish'd Piece of the Author's.
Martyrdom of Theodora, and turned into an Occasional Meditation.)
Upon the sight of a Branch of Corral among a great Prince's Collection of
Curiosities.
THE present and future condition of a Christian, especially of a Martyr, is
not ill represented by what we take notice of in Corral; for whilst that Shrub
yet lives, and remains fastened to its native earth or soil, it grows in an
obscure Region of the world, and is perpetually surrounded, and over-flown, by
the brackish and unpleasant waters of the Sea, and oftentimes exposed to the
irregular agitations of its waves. Besides, the substance of this Plant (as
those that should know inform us) is but soft and tender under water, and its
color but sad and unlively: nor is it, like the Tulip or the Rose-bush,
adorned with any pleasant verdure, and much less does it flourish with gaudy
colors. And whilst it remains under water, the excellency of it does so little
disclose it self, that men sail over it without suspecting or dreaming they
have any thing of precious under their feet; and by the fishes, in whose
Region, or rather Element, it grows, it is passed by wholly unregarded: But when
this unheeded Corral comes to be torn off from its root, and plucked out of his
soil, and so is killed in the capacity of a Plant, it then exchanges the dark
and unquiet place it was confined to, for a more elevated and lightsome Region;
and instead of sharing the fate of common Shrubs and Flowers, first to
degenerate into fading colors and offensive smells, and then to perish, either
by rottenness or fire, our Corral, by the violence offered to it, acquires a
delightful redness, together with a solidity and a durableness, that makes it a
thing so lovely and immortal, that it serves for an Ornament, for the Cabinets
of the Curious; and what stupid Fishes do not at all regard, those nobler
Creatures, Men, do so highly prise, that oftentimes it finds place even among
the Rarities of Princes.

Thus, a true Christian, whilst he is yet confined to the Region of the Animal
Life, lives oftentimes in an obscure and low condition, and far from that
prosperous state wherein the world's Favorites are wont to flourish, he is
almost perpetually exposed to pressures and afflictions, and either most men
consider him not at all, or those that look at his outside only are apt to
despise him because it is so homely. And he is not only in such a (seemingly
forlorn) condition, as made the Psalmist complain of himself, that all the
waves passed over him; but (like those Plants of Corral, that, not growing so
near the shore, are constantly covered with water, as well as sometimes
disordered by storms) the calamities that do, as it were, over-whelm him, are
never altogether removed, even in the intervals of those tempestuous Fits which
increase his Distresses: But when the violence of sickness, or the fury of a
Persecutor shall have taken away his life, he must be then translated into a
higher and happier Region, Afflictions and Distresses will be all left behind.
And when the sensual Idolizers of their Bodies shall be condemned to have those
as loathsome as were their Minds, and as restless as their guilty Consciences,
His Body will obtain new and glorious Qualities like that of his Redeemer, and
his Soul shall find no less happy a Transfiguration, 2 Cor 5. 4.
the mortal part will be swallowed up of life, (...).
that perfection which is but in part shall be done away. And these newly
acquired Excellencies of the whole man, will never after vanish or decay. And
he that lived unregarded by the stupid Inhabitants of the earth, shall be
joyfully welcomed into the blessed society of Celestial Spirits, and, what is
infinitely more, be graciously welcomed and dignified by the Son of God
himself. Men should not therefore, by a Christians present state, take their
measures of his future fate, but rather should remember that he who said of
such, Mal. 3. 17.
They shall be mine in the day when I make up my Segullah.
special treasures, is one whose Estimate of Persons and Conditions we may
safely rely upon, since he is able to make any of them infallibly such as he
pleases to pronounce them, and consequently we may look upon the constant
Christian's differing condition, with his eyes that said, Joh. 3. 2.
We are now the Sons of God, and it does not (indeed) yet appear what we shall
be, but we know that when he shall appear, we shall be like HIM; who would be
like himself alone, did not his goodness vouchsafe to exalt those that love
him, to a likeness, which makes them very unlike the gloriousest things we here
admire, by incomparably transcending them.

REFLECTION VIII.
Upon the sight of the effects of a Burning-glass.
IT is a fault incident to many good men, to be too much indisposed to
entertain the Precepts of Virtue, as such excellent things deserve, in case
those that teach them do not practice them. There are too many that do not
think themselves obliged to take even the wholesomest advice from those, whom
they see more careful to give it others, than to follow it themselves. And some
of them are so nice, that they will scarce read a Book of Devotion, unless it
come, like that St. John eat in the Apocalypse, from the hand of an Angel. But
for my part, though I hope I both value and desire Religious Preachers as much
as the rest of my Brethren, yet I think it would be much to the injury of
Scripture and of Reason, if we should suffer the personal faults of men to keep
them from doing that good, their nature fits them for. The Etymology of the
Gospel importing its being welcome news, it is pity that any one that teaches it
should not have a title to the Character David gave Ahimaaz, of whom he said,
that he is a good man, and brings good tidings. But my desirousness of piety in
a Preacher is more for others sake than mine. For I know not why Truth, which
is an intellectual thing, should lose its nature by any moral vitiousness in
the Proposer. I know there is something extraordinary in the case of Noah, who
awoke from his Wine and immediately prophesied, and yet the Event verified his
Predictions. Our Savior instructing his Disciples about the Scribes and
Pharisees, who sat in Moses's Chair, at the same time commands them to conform
to their Doctrine, when he forbids them to imitate their Example. The Wisemen
did not the less find Christ at Bethlehem, though the Priests and Pharisees
sent them without accompanying them thither. And the Assyrian General was cured
of his Leprosy by following the Prophet's prescription conveyed him by that
Gehazi, who, by his unworthy carriage in that business, transplanted (if I may
so speak) that foul Disease into himself and his posterity. I will therefore
consider Sermons more than Preachers: For as in a Burning-glass, though the
Sunbeams do but illustrate, not heat, it in their passage, they may yet, by
its assistance, kindle subjects that are more disposed to receive their action:
So those very Truths and Notions of a learned Preacher, which do but enlighten
him, may inflame his Hearers, and kindle in their hearts the love of God. And
as if a Perfume be set on fire by the Beams projected through a Burning-glass
(which they do not so much as warm in their passage) the Scent is no less
odoriferous and grateful, than if it had been produced by an actually burning
coal. So neither is that Devotion which is kindled by the Eloquence of an
indevout Preacher, any whit the less acceptable to God for their not being
themselves affected with the Zeal they beget in others. And what the Book of
Kings relates of Elisha's Bones, contains a far greater Miracle in the
Historical, than in the Allegorical sense, in which it is no such wonder to see
a man raised to life by a dead Prophet.

REFLECTION IX.
Upon the finding a Horse-shoe in the Highway.
THe common people of this Country have a Tradition, that it is a lucky thing to
find a Horse-shoe. And though 'twas to make my self merry with this fond
conceit of the superstitious Vulgar, I stooped to take this up; yet now I
observe in it a Circumstance that may, for ought I know, somewhat justify the
Tradition. For I take notice, that though Horse-shoes are by traveling worn
out, yet if they had a sense of their own condition, it might afford them some
consolation in it, that the same Journeys that waste them make them both useful
and bright. Whereas, though the Horse-shoe I have taken up have not been
consumed upon the account of traveling, it has been eaten up by rust, which
wastes it as well as Attrition would have done, but does not give it the luster
it would have received from that. I meet with many, who, very unmindful that He
who was justly styled the Wiseman, whose counsel it was, that what ever our
hand finds to do, we should do it with all our might, etc. make it the main
business of their life merely to lengthen it, that are far more sollicitous to
live long, than well, and would not undergo the least labor, or endure the
least hardship, to do the greatest Good, but had rather lose an hundred
opportunities of serving God, or obliging Men, than one Entertainment, or an
hours sleep, and all this under the pretense of minding their Health, and
complying with the Dictates of Self-preservation. But I have often observed
too, that even these jolly People that seldom have a serious Thought, but how
to avoid serious Employments, may, by making their whole Lives a Succession of
Divertisements, or rather a constant Diversion from the true end of them, make
their Lives indeed thereby useless, but not at all immortal. And truly,
Fevers, Plurisies, and other acute Diseases, that are home-bread, besides
those numerous fatal ones that are caught by Contagion, and a multitude of
Casualties, do cut off so many before they reach old Age, in comparison of
those, that the Diligence, and Industry, imposed by Religion, or Curiosity,
destroy, that I think so great a fear of using the Body for the interests of
the Soul, and of him to whom we owe both, does very little become his
Disciples, who said, That 'twas his Meat to do the Will of God that sent him,
Joh. 4. 34.
and to accomplish his Work. The trouble of Thirsting, and Sweating, and
Undressing, would to an ingenious Man be but just recompensed by the bare
pleasures of Eating, and Drinking, and Sleeping, to confine an honest and
inquisitive Person from those, which he looks upon as the almost only Manly
employments, the exercise of Virtue, and the pursuit of Knowledge, by telling
him, that such a forbearance may protract his Life, is, to promise a thing upon
a condition that destroys the end and use of it; and he will look upon it, as
if you should offer him a Horse, provided he will not ride him, or a
Perspective-glass, upon condition he shall not draw it out, for fear the Air
should, as it sometimes does, impair the Glasses. A Heaven-born Soul would
scarce think it worth while to stay here below, if its work must be, not to
employ the Body, but to tend it. Those that are so unreasonably afraid to spend
their Spirits, are in some regards less excusable than Misers themselves; for
though both hoard up things that cannot be better enjoyed than by being parted
with, the chief uses for which they were entrusted with them; yet in this,
those I blame are more censurable than the Covetous themselves, since these, by
their Niggardliness, can avoid spending their Money, but the others, by their
Laziness, cannot avoid the Consumption of their time. I know a Man may be
Prodigal of himself, as well as his Estate, and that both those Profusions are
faults, and therefore fit to be declined. But if I could not shun both the
Extremes, certainly, since we all must Dye, and the question is not whether or
no we will Live for ever, (for the most that can be hoped for, is not to be
priviledg'd from Death, but only to be longer repriv'd) but whether we will
rather endeavor to lead a Life, mean, and unprofitable, a few more days, or a
glorious Life, for a somewhat less number of them? I should rather choose to
spend my Life quickly, than uselessly; for he that lays out himself for
Eternity, if he lose any Portion of his time upon that account, is the sooner
put into possession of an Inexhaustible stock of it; whereas those, who, that
they may Live long, meanly forgo the ends of Living, and seek, by Laziness, to
protract an insignificant stay on Earth, would, should they reach their Aim,
add rather to their Years than to their Life.

REFLECTION X.
Upon the Shop of an ugly Painter rarely well stored with Pictures, At the
Hague.
of very handsome Ladies.
Genorio, Lindamor, Eusebius. Genor. HEre is a deceitful Shop of Beauty, where
many that come but to wonder, meet with Love, and even when they buy, not what
they like, pay their Hearts for it; the Shop being so well furnished, that
Beauty seems here to have assumed all the variety of Features, and Complexions,
she can be dressed in, and so exquisitly to have fitted all Gazers, with
proportionate and attractive Objects, that nothing but an absolute Incapability
of Love, is here able to protect them from that Passion, which, not to resent
among so many inspiring Wonders, were one. If in these Faces, the Originals
equal the Transcripts, if Art have not flattered Nature, and attempted more to
instruct than imitate her; and if the Painter have not elected, rather to have
his Pieces liked, than like, here are Apologies for Love, that can procure it,
not only Pardons, but Proselites. I must (in that case) add, that there are
more Suns than one, whose Brightness, even by Reflection, can dazzle; here are
Princesses more illustrious for the Blood that lightens in their Cheeks, than
for that which runs in their Veins, and who, like victorious Monarchs, can
conquer at a distance, and captivate by Proxy.


Eusebius. I fear, Genorio* that you are so transported with your Text, that you
will quite forget (if ever you intended it) to make a Homily upon it: For you
talk at such a rate, as if you were about to lose, to the Pictures of Ladies,
the liberty, your Friend Mr. Boil would be thought to have ever defended
against their Originals, and fancied, that it might add to the other
Resemblances you so admire betwixt them, if both of them were made Enemies to
seriousness.


Lind. I presume, Genorio will willingly allow me, to serve him at this turn;
for whether or no he meant us a Reflection, some charms or other he has met
with in these Pictures, seem to have so arrested his Thoughts, as well as his
Looks, that we shall not have them hastily delivered from so pleasing a
Captivity; and the Knowledge I alone, of us three, have of the Drawer of these
Pictures, supplies me with a Circumstance, without which, I should not, when
Eusebius is by, offer at an Occasional Meditation: But upon this advantage, I
shall venture to tell you, That the thing I was considering, was, that though
the Limner have drawn some Pieces, as handsome as Lovers think, or wish their
Mistresses, and some (as they tell me) so like, that an actual Confrontation of
the Artist's works, and Nature's, would scarce distinguish them, (since the
former would appear to differ from the later, but in that silence, which the
laters admiration, to see themselves so perfectly represented, would impose)
yet is the Painter himself so deformed a Creature, that he might draw a
lovelier Face even than any here, by drawing one perfectly unlike his own.
Alas, this discloses the difference there may be betwixt the being able to
write fine Characters of Virtue, and the possessing of it. How ridiculous
should I esteem this Limner, if with all this ugliness, he should esteem
himself handsome, because his Pencil can draw Faces that are so! As absurd were
it for us, to grow proud of our devout Composures, and fancy Piety ours,
because our Discourses can possibly inamour others of it. The Devil sometimes
does unmolestedly suffer us to write well, if he can but persuade us we need do
no more, and that good Pens may dispense us from good Actions. Our Paper-warrs
against Vices, are oftentimes like Alexander's, against the Neighboring
Nations, not out of Hatred, but Glory, not to Extirpate, but to Conquer them,
and manifest to the World the sufficiency of our Parts, by a Victory, after
which, we often treat the vanquished Enemy with greater Courtesy, than those
whose Quarrel we undertook. Discourses against Vices, may be as well indicted by
Vanity, as by Zeal, and meant to express Wit, not persuade Piety. And if (as it
chances but too frequently) we grow proud of them, we do, like Witches turning
Exorcists, only comply with Satan to cast out the Devil.


Eusebius. To second your pious, Reflection Lindamor, with some thoughts suitable
to my Profession, I will add, that in the case you put, it happens to us as it
once did to Gideon, Judges 8. 24. 25. 26. etc.
who, of the spoils of God and Isreal's conquered Enemies, made an Idol, which
proved, in the end, his, and his houses Snare. 'Twas a most instructive Check,
and divine admonition, that our Savior gave his Apostles, when, in the account
they brought him of their Embassy, they joyfully related their excercis'd
power, of dispossessing Devils; Notwithstanding (answered Christ) in this
rejoice not, that Spirits are subject to you, but rather rejoice that your
names are written in Heaven. In effect, though Judas were one of the Persons,
invested with this miraculous power of casting Devils out of others, yet we
read that Satan afterward entered into Judas, and that it had been good for
him, that he had never been born. And though, as Solomon tells us, He that
wins Souls, is wise, yet it is he only that shall do, as well as teach, the
Commandments that shall be called great in the Kingdom of Heaven. Mat. 5. 19.
And the Judge himself informing us, that, at the worlds last day, many will
plead their having in his name not only prophesied or preached, but cast out
Devils, and shall yet be disclaimed by him; sufficiently intimates, Mat. 7. 22.
23.
that it is as possible, as unavailable, to do many wonderful works (for
Religion) and to be workers of Iniquity. The true Christian should, Lindamor,
be willing to impart any useful Discoveries that God shall please to vouchsafe
him; but he will ever consider the taking'st Notions he can frame of virtue,
more as Engagments to it, than Arguments of it; and since there is not any
thing in which Charity ought more to begin at home than in devout Instructions,
he will endeavor to make himself as much Piety's Votary, as Advocate; to
imitate those truly Wisemen, that as they informed those of Jerusalem, of the
Starr they had seen in the East, did themselves follow it, till it brought them
unto Christ; to entitle himself to that of our Savior, A good man, Luke 6. 45.
out of the good treasure of his heart, brings forth good things; and (finally)
to take his Celebrations of virtue from his Experience, not his Fancy; as Nurse
first feed themselves, to nourish their sucking Infants, to whom they give no
meat, which they have not in their own Breasts first digested into Milk, lest
(like the Carpenters that toiled to build the Ark to save Noah from the Deluge,
themselves perished in,) 1 Cor. 9. 27.
when he has preached to others, himself should prove a Castaway.


A Continuation of the Discourse.
Genor. SUre, Gentlemen, it is a happy thing to be able to convert the meanest
things to the noblest uses, and make whatever one pleases, subservient to
Piety, by skilfully employing even slight and unpromising Occasions, to
represent her, which the Advantages of a varied and surprising Dress, whereby
you may procure that Virtue lovers, and your selves friends: For her Votary's
are so ingenuous and disintress'd in their Amors, that they have as well as
kindness for their Rivals, as their Mistress.


Lind. I will not deny but that there may be Persons so inflamed with heavenly
Love, that their Devotion is able, like the last fire, that is to refine or
destroy the World, to turn all things into Fuel for its victorious flames, and
who, when they are once engaged in Meditation, can make their pious thoughts
excite themselves and flame up higher, and higher, without the assistance of
other Incentives, than what their own fervency procures them; as it is observed,
that when the fire has seized upon a Town, by how small a spark soever it have
been kindled, if the flame come to be very great, though the air be very calm,
the fire it self will produce a wind, that, without the help of Bellows, shall
strongly blow it, and make it blaze the more, and aspire toward Heaven. But,
Genorio, whenever (for I answer but for my self) I shall meet with any such
happy Contemplators, I shall have the Justice to be one of their Admirers,
without having the vanity to pretend to be one of their number.


Eusebius. And I, for my part, shall tell you, Genorio, that though there may be
diverse charitable persons, besides your self, that by the Expressions it
becomes me to use in some of my Meditations, and other composures of the like
Nature, may be apt to fancy that I am my self, as devout as I endeavor to make
my Readers, yet you must not imagine that my mind, like one of those Writing's,
has no other thoughts than Religious, or at least moral ones; For those may be
the productions, not of a constant frame of mind, but of Occasional Fits of
Devotion: And you may read a greater number of such Reflections in an hour than
perhaps I have made in a month, not to say, in a year. And I must ingeniously
confess to you, that I think it more easy to make ten good Sermons than to
practice one, and to declaim against all sins than to relinquish any: There
goes much less self-denial to conform to the Precepts of Cicero, than to those
of Christ, and I find it so much less difficult to excite other men's passions,
than to command my own, that if you will not suffer your charity too much to
injure your judgment, You must look upon the devouter passages you may have met
with among my Composures, as Expressions of what I aim at, rather than of what
I practice.


The End of the last Section.
THE TABLE.
A Discourse touching Occasional Meditations. 1 SECT. I. REFLECTION I. UPon his
manner of giving meat to his Dog. 161 II. Upon his Distilling Spirit of Roses
in a Limbeck. 163 III. Upon his being in great danger wandering, on Mendip
hills, among covered Lead-mines that he knew not of. 167 IV. His Horse
stumbling in a very fair way. 169 V. Upon two very miserable Beggars, begging
together by the Highway. 172 VI. Sitting at case in a Coach that went very
fast. 175 VII. Upon the sight of a Windmill standing still. 176 VIII. Upon his
paring of a rare Summer-apple. 181 IX. Upon his Coaches being stopped in a narrow
Lane. 182 X. Looking through a Perspective-glass upon a Vessel we suspected to
give us Chase, and to be a Pyrat. 184
The II. SECTION, Containing Occasional Reflections upon the Accidents of an
Ague. MEDITATION I. UPon the first Invasion of the Disease. 187 II. Upon the
immoderate Heat and Cold of the Aguish Fit. 192 III. Upon the succession of the
cold and hot Fit. 194 IV. Upon the being let Blood. 199 V. Upon the taking of
Physic. 202 VI. Upon the Syrups and other sweet things sent him by the Doctor.
206 VII. Upon the want of Sleep. 209 VIII. Upon telling the strokes of an
ill-going Clock in the night. 214 IX. Upon comparing the Clock and his Watch.
216 X. Upon a Thief in a Candle. 218 XI. Upon the being in danger of death. 221
XII. Upon the same Subject. 226 XIII. A further Continuation. 229 XIV. Upon the
apprehensions of a Relapse. 235 XV. Upon his reviewing and tacking together the
several Bills filled up in the Apothecary's Shop. 237
The III SECTION. REFLECTION I. UPon the sight of some variously-coloured
Clouds. 241 II. Upon his making of a Fire. 243 III. Upon my Spaniel's
carefulness not to lose me in a strange place. 245 IV. Upon the prodigiously
wet weather, which happened the Summer that Colchester was besieged. (1648) 246
V. Upon his being Carved to at a Feast. 250 VI. Upon the sight of a
Looking-glass, with a rich Frame. 251 VII. Upon my Spaniel's fetching me my
Glove. 256 VIII. Upon the taking up his Horses from Grass, and giving them Oats
before they were to be ridden a Journey. 258 IX. Upon the making of a Fire with
Charcoal. 260 X. Looking through a Prismatical or Triangular Glass. 261
The IV. SECTION. DISCOURSE I. UPon the being called upon to rise early on a
very fair morning. 1 II. Upon the Mounting, Singing, and Lighting of Larks. 8
III. Upon the sight of a fair Milk-maid singing to her Cow. 13 IV. Upon Fishing
with a counterfeit Fly. 27 V. Upon a Fish's struggling after having swallowed
the Hook. 30 VI. Upon the sight of ones Shadow cast upon the face of a River.
33 VII. Upon a Fall occasioned by coming too near the Rivers Brink. 47 VIII.
Upon the Good and Mischief that Rivers do. 50 IX. Upon the comparing of Lands,
seated at differing distances from the River. 56 X. Upon a Fishes running away
with the Bait. 64 XI. Upon a Danger springing from an unseasonable Contest with
the Steersman. 67 XII. Upon Clouds rising out of the Sea, and falling down in
Rain not Brackish. 80 XIII. Upon drawing the Boat to the Shore. 87 XIV. Upon
Catching store of Fish at a Baited place. 92 XV. Upon the Magnetical Needle of
a Sun-Dyal. 95 XVI. Upon the Quenching of Quicklime. 105 XVII. Upon ones
Talking to an Echo. 107 XVIII. Upon a Giddiness occasioned by looking
attentively on a rapid Stream. 118 XIX. Upon ones Drinking water out of the
Brims of his Hat. 122 XX. On seeing Boys swim with Bladders. 129
THE TRANSITION Containing A DISCOURSE Upon the Sports being interrupted by
Rainy-weather. 133 The V. SECTION. REFLECTION I. UPon the sight of N. N. making
of Syrup of Violets. 139 II. Upon the sight of a Paper-Kite in a Windy day 145
III. Killing a Crow (out of a Window) in a Hog's-trough, and immediately
tracing the ensuing Reflection with a Pen made of one of his Quills. 149 Upon
the same Subject. 153
IV. Upon a Glowworm that he kept included in a Crystal Viol. 154 V. Upon a
Courts being put into Mourning. 156 VI. Upon hearing of a Lute first tuned, and
then excellently played on. 162 VII. Upon being presented with a rare Nose-gay
by a Gardener. 165 VIII. Upon a Child that cried for the Stars. 171 IX. Upon my
Lady D. R. Her fine Closet. 175 X. Upon his seeing a Lark stoop to, and caught
with, Day-nets. 182
The Last SECTION. REFLECTION I. SEeing a Child picking the Plums out of a
piece of Cake his Mother had given him for his Breakfast. 188 II. Upon the
sight of Sweetmeats, very artificially counterfeited in Wax. 193 III. Upon the
eating of Oysters. 194 IV. Upon a Lanthorn and Candle carried by, on a Windy
night. 201 V. Upon the first Audience of the Russian Extraordinary Ambassador,
at which he made his Emperor's Presents. 203 A Continuation of the Discourse.
206
VI. Upon the sight of Roses and Tulips growing near one another. 209 VII. Upon
the sight of a Branch of Corral among a great Prince's Collection of
Curiosities. 211 VIII. Upon the sight of the effects of a Burning-glass. 215
IX. Upon the finding a Horse-shoe in the Highway. 217 X. Upon the Shop of an
ugly Painter rarely well stored with Pictures, of very handsome Ladies. 221 A
Continuation of the Discourse. 227


FINIS.

