A VINDICATION OF THE REMARKS ON THE BISHOP of DERRY's DISCOURSE ABOUT Human
Inventions, From what is Objected against them in the Admonition annexed to the
Second Edition of that Discourse. By the Author of the REMARKS.

LONDON: Printed for John Lawrence at the Sign of the Angel in the Poultrey.
1695.

To the Dissenting Inhabitants of the Diocese of DERRY.
SInce the Bishop of Derry has been pleased in his late Admonition to You,
almost wholly to wave the Argument between Us, and to turn this Debate about
your Worship into a Dispute about Matters of Fact; nay, since he has frequently
appealed to your own Consciences for the Truth of what he has said concerning
you, acknowledging, That it would be odd for him to think of imposing on you in
matters you know so well, and that he can only hope to prevail on you by the
Integrity of what he says, [See Admonition, p. 141, 148, 158, 159, 187, 188.]
I thought I could not reasonably refuse to concur with him in referring the
decision of this part of our Controversy to your selves, as the most competent
and proper Judges, the Matters controverted relating to your own or your
Ministers public practices. And I may do it with the greater assurance,
because you will find all that I now assert attested by your own Ministers,
(besides the particulars relating to your Communions attested by such as are
Elders, or principal Members in your Congregations.) And as they must doubtless
know these Matters better than the Bishop can do, who is never present at their
Worship; so I may justly presume they are not so prodigal of their Reputation
to the World, as to avouch so many things as True, which all their Hearers
could convict 'em of Falsehood in, if they were not. I confess it is something
hard that the Bishop should thus put 'em to this double labor, of proving
their Practice by Affidavits, as well as defending it by Arguments. But when
one is once engaged with such unreasonable Disputants, there is no declining
even such drudgery as this. For since the things which the Bishop objects
against you are such as himself supposes, will prove scandalous to all that
profess Christianity, If those Objections be founded on palpable mis-reports of
your Practice, sure the just esteem of so many Christian Pastors and Churches
deserves a modest Vindication. And indeed this Vindication had not been
deferred so long, if the multiplicity of the Particulars to be inquired into
had not retarded it beyond expectation; and your Ministers were unwilling to
run into so many Mistakes as the Bishop has unhappily done, by giving too hasty
accounts of these Matters upon slight Informations. I shall therefore freely
leave this part of our Debate (which now lies between the Bishop and your own
Ministers) to your impartial Examination. And that those excellent Churches you
are Members of, may under the vigilant care of such laborious Pastors, improve
their external Rest and Peace, by walking in the fear of the Lord, and in the
comfort of the Holy Ghost, and thereby be both edified and multiplied, is the
hearty desire of

Dear Brethren, Your affectionate Brother and Servant in our common Lord J. B.

A VINDICATION OF THE Remarks, etc.
In this Admonition of the Bishops we may consider the Introduction, The Three
Heads he proposes to give an Account of: And The Reflections he adds on some
Passages in the Remarks.

IN the Introduction his Lordship is pleased to insinuate, though he does not
venture directly to assert, Admon. Octavo Edit. p. 134.
That I have treated the Opinions and Practices of the established Church in a
passionate and angry, in a scoffing and deriding manner. But since he has given
no instances or proof of it, but referred it to the Reader's judgment, I shall
with some confidence appeal to it also, as being well assured of the innocence
of those Papers as to this particular. Only, since he alleges a passage in his
Discourse against this way of treating Controversies, I hope I may take the
liberty of reciting one of my own, wherein I had taken care to obviate this
Objection. It Is Remarks, p. 142. I do fully concur with him in his Advice, Not
to treat one another with scurrilous and unseemly Reflections; but I hope he
will not account those such wherein a Man is justly reproved for gross
mis-representations of other Men's Opinions or Practices, or a trifling
Argument is not always treated with grimace, but sometimes with the slight it
deserves. Let but the Reader make me this reasonable allowance, and I shall not
be very fearful of his censure on this account.

For the Three Heads which the Bishop proposes to give an account of relating
to the Remarks, I shall examine 'em in their order.

I. He acquaints us with the true Motive that prevailed with him to publish his
Book, in which these particulars are suggested.

1. He tells us how much Ignorance he found among the poor People, Insomuch, as
of 800 or more of the Dissenters Communion, whom he personally discourst, he
found not above four persons that could give any account of their Catechism,
Admon. p. 135.
and only two that could repeat it.

Now as to this matter of fact which the Bishop professes moved his compassion,
I shall give him the Account sent me by the Dissenting Ministers that are in
his Diocese, and I hope that Christian Charity which he so often professes,
will render it very welcome to him, by assuring him that the generality of 'em
are not so ignorant as be has mistaken 'em to be.

We can give no Account how many persons the Bishop has examined, but we know
several whom he did examine that had the Assemblies Catechism, and could both
give an account of it and repeat it, but would not, partly because they heard
him so enveigh against it, that they judged he questioned 'em rather to affront
than edify 'em; and partly because they were not free to subject themselves to
an Examination he pretended to make as their Pastor. But to evidence how little
ground he had to suppose 'em so generally ignorant of their Catechism. If we
may be allowed to judge of other Congregations in the Diocese by those two in
in the Parish of Temple-more (alias Derry) where he resides, and may be
supposed to have examined the greatest number. We can on good grounds affirm
there are in those two Congregations 600 who can give a good account of and
repeat the Assembly's Catechism: And we know of few in any of our Congregations
that cannot repeat the Creed, the Lord's Prayer, and the Ten Commandments. Now
if this Account of their own Ministers, who should be best acquainted with
their own People, be true, the Bishop's Account is absolutely incredible,
unless he has taken some extraordinary pains to pick out the most ignorant
Dissenters of his Diocese, that by them he might pretend to judge of the rest.
But any one that considers the genius of that People, and their particular
dissatisfaction with his Lordship, will be easily inclined to believe this
genuine Account of the Matter; That he has mistaken their Silence for their
Ignorance, and concluded they could not repeat their Catechism, because they
would not admit him to be their Catechizer.

2. He computes, that there being but nine Meetings in the Diocese, (and taking
one Meeting House and one Lord's Day with another) not 300 at each Meeting, and
there being 30000 Dissenters in the Diocese, Admon. p. 136.
it may be thence concluded, that only one in ten, or thereabouts, go to
worship God any where on the Lord's Day. And this he professes was a great
grief to him. Now as to this matter of fact, I hope the Bishop cannot take it
unkindly that I endeavor to allay his grief, by offering him the following
Account from the Dissenting Ministers in his Diocese.

In the Parish of Temple-more, alias Derry, there are two Meetings, in which
there will be found above 2400. who ordinarily worship God every Lord's Day.
For though every one of these does not attend every Lord's Day, because some of
'em must be left to secure their houses, yet these and more are ordinary
Hearers, as the Ministers of those two Congregations can undeniably prove by
their Examination Rolls. Nay, the least Congregation among us are ordinarily
600, and some above a 1000, that do worship God every Lord's Day together. So
that where Ministers are settled in Parishes, we do not know of one in 20, that
do not ordinarily attend on public worship. And for those which the Bishop
says have not been at any public worship these seven years, we know none such
of our Communion. And for those places that are not furnished with Ministers,
the Ministers that are settled supply 'em as frequently as their work in their
own Congregations can allow. Now if this Account be true, the Bishop's
Computation, and the Conclusion he draws from it, is far enough from being so.
And that there are yet some Congregations that want Ministers, and can only
have occasional supplies, is much more their grief, who are doing all they can
to remedy it, than it can be supposed to be his Lordship's, who does all he can
to lessen the number of their Meetings, by obliging his Tenants to suffer
neither Ministers nor Meeting Houses to be upon his Land.

3. The Bishop pretends that his Book contains an Answer to what he found
objected by those of the Dissenters, Admon. p. 137.
that he conversed with against the ordinary Lord's Day worship in the
established Church, and that he confined himself to what he had seen and known
to be their Opinion and Practice. Ans. It Is evident by Mr. Craghead's Reply to
his Discourse, which Taxes him with the same Calumnies as the Remarks, that if
those Dissenters he Convers't with, gave him that Account he pretends of these
matters; they were such as understood not the known Opinions or Practices of
their own Teachers. As when they alledg so many Reasons either against the
lawfulness of all Forms of Prayer, and against joining in public worship where
they are used, or against the public reading the Scriptures, or against all
bodily worship, etc. And therefore if the Bp. had been ingenious in prosecuting
what he now says was his design, he should have told us, that he intended only
by this Book to Correct the mistakes of a few Ignorant People, that neither
knew the Judgment of their Pastors, nor the common Practice of the
Congregations they Joined with. And that he intended not to charge the
generality of the Dissenters, even not those of his own Diocese with those weak
Opinions, and weaker Arguments and Objections which he endeavors to censure
and confute. But he has been so far from doing this, that tho in the Conclusion
of his Book, he particularly Addresses himself to those of his Diocese; yet in
his very Entrance on his Subject, he undertakes to represent the Practice of
Dissenters in general, or (in his own terms) of them that differ from the
Established Church. Nay, Where he supposes his charge only to be true of those
in the North of Ireland, he takes care to confine it to them; and therefore he
gives us just ground to conclude, that where he mentions the Dissenters without
any such Restriction, he is to be understood as speaking of the whole Body of
them, according to the very Titles of his several Chapters, Praise, Prayer,
Hearing, Bodily Worship, how practist among Dissenters. And to Convince him of
the Reasonableness of this, I shall put a Parallel case to him. Suppose I
should write a Book about Ecclesiastical Discipline, how Practiced in the
Established Church, and among Dissenters; and in the Account of the Practice of
the Established Church, should represent the sad neglect of all the Duties of
their Function, both by Bishops and Priests; and accordingly should charge the
Bishops with so many years Non-residence, in which there had been no
Consecration of Churches, nor Confirmation of Children, nor Ordination of
Priests, and the Priests with such neglect of their Cures, as a great many in
the Diocese of Down and Connor were Accused of: And suppose I should
particularly address this Book to the late Bishop and Clergy of that Diocese,
Would his Lordship in this case think me Excuseable from the guilt of
Calumniating, because I had particularly addressed this Discourse to them, when I
have not in the Body of the Book confined my Accusations to them, but speak all
along of the faults of the Conformable Bishops and Clergy in general, without
any such particular limitation, or would he think me Ingenuous in producing
such Arguments, as the Bishop and Clergy of the forementioned Diocese may
allege to excuse themselves, as the common Reasonings of the Conforming
Clergy: And yet, this were of the two more justifiable than the Bishop's
management of this Charge against Dissenters, in which he has wronged the
generality; even of those to whom he now pretends that this Discourse was
confined, but much more the generality of the Dissenters, against whom the
greatest part of his Book is levelled without any Distinction. I confess, to
have told us plainly, that he only Confuted the weak Discourses he had met with
among some few of the Dissenting Laity, would have lessened the Character of
his Book, by supposing the cause of the Dissenters to be little concerned in
it; and so probably the main Design of it, to blast the Reputation of the whole
Party had been frustrated, by such an ingenuous Confession. But without such an
ingenuous Confession, I do not see how it is possible to excuse his Discourse
from untruth and disingenuity; either in attributing to Dissenters in general,
what is peculiar to those in the North of Ireland (as in the Head of Frequent
Communion) or in ascribing to a whole Party without distinction, so many
Opinions, Arguments and Practices, as either none at all, or none but very Weak
and Ignorant People are chargeable with; of which there are so many to be found
in all Persuasions, that he who will measure the rest of their Communion by
them, can never want matter enough to expose the Wisest and Soberest Body of
Christians whatsoever. So that should we allow the truth of all his Lordship
here suggests, ( viz. that he truly represents what the Dissenters he Convers't
with alleged to him.) It appears how little this signifies to clear him from
the guilt of groundless Aspersions.

II. The Bishop proposes to show, That I have granted the principal things
designed in his Book. Admon. p. 138.


As to these I assure him, That I see no reason to retract any of those
Concessions I have really made; and if they will be of any use to reconcile
sober Protestants to more charitable thoughts of each others Worship, I shall
rejoice in it. But then I must desire him not to stretch them beyound their
just Bounds, as he seems to do in the following Particulars.

Thus, Tho I have owned Singing in Prose (as opposed strict to Meter,) lawful
in general, p. 10 -- yet as to the Practice of it in Cathedrals, whereby the
main part of the Auditory is excluded from joining in the public Praises,
through their incapacity to Sing them in Prose; I have censured it as
disagreeable to the Apostle's Rule, of doing all to Edification, p. 23.

So, Tho I have granted Responses in general lawful, yet I have censured the
method of them in the Parish-Churches as applied to all Psalms, as not only
unscriptural but unreasonable and disorderly, p. 23.

As to the 4th Concession, Tho I think not those unscriptural Practices of
Singing Psalms by a Quire, and of Responses in the Parish-Churches, to fall
within the compass of what our Lord Censures, 7 Mark. 7. yet I think them a
very defective and disorderly way of Worship; to which I judge the more
Scriptural way practis't among the Dissenters far preferrable.

For the 5th Concession, Tho I grant, Praying with or without a Form in general
undetermined in Scripture, yet I do not think it only a matter of Convenience:
For I doubt not Praying with a Form is a Duty, to those who cannot Pray without
it; and I think it is sinful to exclude necessary matters of Prayer by confining
our selves to a Form, when we can Pray without one.

From Concession the 6th he draws a wrong Inference, which I had particularly
obviated; viz. That because God prescribed a Form of Words to the Jews, in some
extraordinary parts of Worship, therefore be does in particular command
Christian Pastors and their Flocks to Pray to him in Forms, for that must be
the sense of his Lordship's Inference, if it be any thing to his purpose: For I
have challenged him to produce any Form prescribed to the Christian Church
except the Lord's Prayer, or any particular Command for the constant use of
that in public; and for its being sometimes used as a Form, the
Westminster-Assembly in their larger Catechism, declare their Judgment for it.

For Concession the 8th, I do not own (as his Lordship here alleges) that
there is no reading of Scripture in the North of Ireland in the Winter Quarter;
for tho this Exercise is in some places forborne during the Winter Quarter, yet
it is not in all, and particularly but in one Meeting in all his Lordship's
Diocese, the rest continuing it through the whole Winter; of which I shall have
occasion to take notice afterward.

For Concession the 9th, Tho I have owned that Bodily Worship is commanded in
Scripture; yet I have not owned, but Censured it as practis't by such as bow
toward the East, or Altar, or at the Name of Jesus.

For Concession the 10th, Tho I do not condemn kneeling in the Act of Receiving
as unlawful, yet I have showed it to be disagreeable to Scripture Example, and
by the strictness of the Bishop's own Rule unlawful to, p. 123.

The third thing the Bishop proposes, is to show, That whereas there are
several matters of Fact which he affirms, and I deny; the mistake lies on my
side, Admon. p, 141.
notwithstanding I impute them to him with great assurance as falsehoods, etc.

Answ. What I have charged him with as untruths, in reference to the Dissenters
in general, it lies on me to make good; what relates to those in the North of
Ireland, as I have asserted nothing but upon their Information, so I can
produce no other vouchers than themselves: And sure I need not produce any
other, since their Testimony concerning their own Practice, must by all
reasonable Men be allowed to be of greater weight and credit than his
Lordship's, who cannot pretend to know so well as themselves what is done by
themselves.

This premised I come to examine the matters of Fact, wherein the Bishop
attempts to vindicate himself, tho they are but a small part of what I have
charged him with Misrepresenting.

For the two first matters of Fact, I shall take the liberty to offer them in
the same order, and in the very words of his Discourse, p. 83, 84. Edit. Quarto.

But the most sad and deplorable defect of your performance of this Duty, is
the casting out the reading of the word of God from most of your public
Assemblies, directly contrary to God's Institution and Ordinance for the
Instruction of his Church; insomuch, that in many of your Meetings, setting
aside a Verse or Two for a Text or Quotation at the Discretion of the Teacher,
the Word of God is never publicly heard among them; this is matter of Fact and
undeniable. And in all the Meetings of the North of Ireland, in a whole year
perhaps there is not so much Scripture read as in one Day in our Church, by the
strictest Enquiry I could make, Disc. p. 83, 84. And ib. p. 84. The Dissenters
banish the word of God out of their Meetings. -- Sure it is a sad thing, That a
Man may go to most Meetings many years, and never hear one entire Chapter read
in them. It Is here obvious, That his main and positive Accusation is, That the
Dissenters have cast the reading of the Word of God out of most of their
Meetings, That setting aside a verse or two for a Text or Quotation at the
Discretion of the Teacher, the Voice of God is in many of them never publicly
heard among them: And that a Man may go to most Meetings many years, and never
hear one entire Chapter read in them; and this Accusation he more particularly
fixes on the Meetings in the North of Ireland.

In opposition to this Accusation I had told him, Remarks, p. 92, 93.
It Is the general Practice of the Dissenting Ministers in the North of Ireland,
for about three quarters of the year, (for in the most, the Winter quarter is
only excepted) to read every Morning an entire portion of Scripture, usually a
whole Chapter, at least so much of one as they can go through with in an
Exposition of half an hours length.

The very same matter of Fact; The Reverend Mr. Craghead has affirmed in his
Answer, and more largely, without excepting the Winter Quarter, since in his
Diocese all the Dissenting Ministers except one continue their Lecturing through
the whole year.

Now this matter of Fact all the World must allow to be directly contrary to
his severe charge; so that if it prove true, His Lordship could have no
pretense to complain of my Reproving him, for offering such barefac't untruths
for undeniable matters of Fact.

Let Us then enquire what he has said to make good his Charge, and to that
purpose he alleges Two Things.

1. That the Reading the Scriptures should be so ordered, That the diligent
Hearers may in a competent time be acquainted with the whole Body of them;
Whereupon he challenges me to produce one Meeting in the North where this has
been observed. Admon. p. 144.


Answ. As to this Allegation, it is evident, That it concerns not the matter of
Fact in Dispute at all, which is, Whether setting aside a verse or two for a
Text or Quotation at the discretion of the Teacher, the voice of God is never
publicly heard among them, and a Man may attend most Meetings many years, and
never hear an entire Chapter read in them. For the Allegation concerns only the
manner of Reading them, whereas the Accusation supposes them not Read at all,
except a verse or two for a Text or Quotation, etc. so that I might justly
dismiss any farther Consideration of it; but since the Bishop gives me this
occasion to compare their Practice and ours, I shall suggest to him, That tho
we Read not so much of Scripture as they in such entire Portions as whole
Chapters, yet we Read the Scriptures more regularly then they, and a Man may
sooner hear them Read through in a Meeting, than he can in most of the
Parish-Churches. To clear this I must premise, That in the generality of the
Parish-Churches through the Kingdom, there is no Divine Service Read except on
Sundays; Now if we consult the Calender in the Common Prayer Book, we shall
find, That (excepting the Psalms) there is never read from one generation to
another, but about 104 Chapters of the Old Testament, and that in such order or
rather disorder, as breaks the Coherence of the Sacred History: So that a Man
may if he lived to 80 years, attend the Public Worship in most Parish-Churches
all his Days, and never hear the 4th, 5th, 6th, 7th, 8th. Chapter of Genesis and
so on. See the Lessons proper for Sundays; and how is the New Testament Read?
This Sunday we have the Matt. 1. and the Romans 1. Read; the next Sunday the 8th
of each, and next 15th. Four Months hence the 3d of Matt. and the 4th of Romans
So that in the generality of the Parish-Churches, the Scriptures are Read most
confusedly; so that the Hearers are incapable of observing the admirable
Connection of its parts; and in most Parishes, the far greater part of them is
never read at all: Whereas in the Meetings, it is the general Practice to Read
on a Book in order; and tho their Exposition hinder them from Reading so large
a Portion, (for which there is abundant Compensation by their Expounding what
is read from Parallel places of Scripture) yet they will in the course of some
years be read all over, which they never are nor can be, in the generality of
the Parish-Churches that are shut all the Week. But as this first Allegation
had it been true, signifies nothing to the purpose it is brought for, so let us
see whether the other be more considerable.

2. The Bishop Appeals to our selves, Whether any of, our Ministers ever read
one Portion of Scripture, but what was either designed for a Text to a Lecture
or Sermon or a Quotation. If any one pretend the contrary, he desires me to
name the time and place that he may reprove those Informers, which I affirm
have so grossly imposed on him; Admon. p. 144.
but till the time and place be named, his Assertion he says is literally
true, and in a larger sense then he expressed it.

Ans. I must desire his Lordship to review this passage and tell us, Whether it
be literally true, that except a verse or two for a Text or Quotation, the
voice of God is never publicly heard in their Meetings, when it is (as Mr.
Craghead informs him) their ordinary Practice to Lecture every Lord's Day, and
usually to Read a whole Chapter, or divide a long one that is full of Textual
difficulties. Is a whole Chapter or half a long one, only a verse or two for a
Text? Nay is it literally true, That a Man may go to most Meetings many years,
and never Hear an entire Chapter Read, when in the generality of them he shall
most commonly Hear a whole one Read every Lord's Day? But what does he mean,
when he challenges me to name the time and place in which any entire Portion of
Scripture was Read, but what was either designed for a Text to a Lecture or a
Sermon? What is this to the matter of Fact that he Ascerted? For besides that a
Text to a Lecture is a new Phrase; Is a whole Chapter or half a long one, only
a verse or two? Or is a whole Chapter never Read, because it is always read with
a design to Expound it? Nay, is this so deplorable a fault as he has supposed
it that we never Read an entire Portion of Scripture without intending to
illustrate the sense of it, by comparing parallel Scriptures with it? (for
that is all his Lordship can mean, by making it a Text to a Lecture) Is it not
rather our great commendation, That the Scripture is always Interpreted as well
as Read, and rather matter of Reproach to others that it is barely Read, without
giving the People such help to understand it? And shall our extraordinary
diligence be made our deplorable crime, and their sloth so great a virtue? And
upon the whole, would it not have been more ingenuous in him to own that his
Informers had grossly imposed upon him, then to persist in so plain a mistake,
and then color it over with an Apology, the weakness and unreasonableness
whereof had been so largely and justly exposed in that part of the Remarks, to
which he has not yet thought fit to give any Answer?

But though the Bishop be in the wrong, as to the Substance of the Accusation, he
seems very confident of what he has said to vindicate that Circumstance of it,
viz. That in all the Meetings of the North, in a whole year, perhaps there is
not so much Scripture read as in one day in the established Church. This he
pretends to prove so fully, that by his Computation there appears to be four
times more Scripture read in the established Church, than in all the Meetings of
the North. To this purpose he pretends to take my own Computation of half a
Chapter read in each Meeting for three quarters of a year; and so in the nine
Meetings in his Diocese he computes 175 Chapters and a half to be read in a
year.

On the other hand, He computes 11 Psalms and 5 Chapters, and so in all 16
Chapters read in the 42 Parishes in his Diocese, Adm. p. 142, 143.
and consequently in all 672 every Lord's Day.

This Computation at first view looks like Demonstration, but is indeed liable
to manifold and just Exceptions.

1. The Bishop here puts that sense on his words that was not the plain and
obvious meaning of 'em.

Their obvious sense is, That there is as much Scripture read in every
Parish Church in one Lord's Day, as in all the Meetings in the North in a year.
And there was good reason to suppose he intended 'em in this sense, both
because it is but the same Chapters are read in every Parish Church through the
Kingdom; and because, without this sense, his Lordship's words left us wholly
in the dark how to judge of the truth of 'em, when he never told us, whether by
the established Church he meant all the Parish Churches in the Kingdom, or only
those in the North of Ireland, nor gave us any Account what proportion the
number of the one, or the other, bore to the number of the Meetings, without
which Particulars none could judge whether his Assertion were true or false; or
if true, whether any matter of reproach, or no? For perhaps in the whole
Kingdom the number of Meetings is not much more to that of Parish-Churches,
than that of 1 to 52. But,

2. If we allow his Lordship the sense that he now puts on his Assertion, yet
his Computation will appear much too Liberal on his own side, and much more too
scanty on the Dissenters.

His Computation is too liberal on his own side. For,

1. He takes a day, viz. the first of April in his Computation, on which there
were several Psalms extraordinary used. For take the Psalms one with another,
about five is the proportion of what is ordinarily used every Lord's Day, and
'twas only casual that eleven were then used, the eight first Psalms, as well
as the three other, being short, and not above the proportion of four ordinary
Chapters of five and twenty Verses long.

2. He brings in eleven Psalms as Chapters Read for Instruction, (about which
alone the present Dispute lies) whereas he himself supposes 'em to be used as
Forms of Thanksgiving; and so does the Common Prayer Book, in which these are
not proposed to be read as Lessons, but sung or said between the Minister and
People. So that by a just Computation there remains only the five Chapters a
day.

And his Computation is as much too scanty on the Dissenters side: For though I
have drawn such a Computation as he mentions, yet I have drawn it only as a
Computation of what is read in an entire Portion; and indeed have drawn it much
below the Truth: for there is more usually a whole Chapter read, and in the
Meetings of his Diocese none but one, make any Exception of the Winter Quarter.
But I was so far from designing this, as a Computation of all that is read,
that I have, in the very words following those he quotes, Remark. p. 93.
told him, That I look on his Charge to be so unjust, that if we take the
Scriptures to be read whenever they are verbatim recited to the People, and so
compute all the parallel Passages of Scripture that occur in their Expositions
and Sermons, (in which both the N. C. Ministers in general, and particularly
those in the North, use not to be sparing in their Concordances.) I see little
reason to doubt, but there is as much of Scripture read, or as much of the
inspired Word of God proposed for the Instruction of the People in each
Meeting, as in each Parish Church. And this way of reading the Scripture I have
shown to be most agreeable to the Pattern and Practice of the Apostles, and of
the Christian Church in their time.

Why then would the Bishop take no notice of this, which would have brought
this Debate to a more fair and easy trial. For what is read this way among us,
will amount to vastly more than what is read in an entire Portion. For take one
Lord's Day with another, we may by a reasonable Computation allow, between the
Portion read, and the parallel Texts in the Exposition, a Chapter and a half.
And if we compute two Chapters more to each Sermon, there will be every
Lord's Day five Chapters and a half read; and I do not here mention what
Passages of Scripture occur in Catechizing, though those will amount to a very
considerable Portion, if put together. And for the Psalms, he has no more
reason to bring them into the Computation, than I have to bring in all the
Scriptural Expressions that occur in our Praises and Prayers, which I have also
shown him are more agreeable to the directions of the New Testament.

But to examine the Bishop's present Computation, if we allow him his eleven
Psalms that are used as Forms of Thanksgiving, I hope he will allow us all
that is strictly read for Instruction. And that he may not scruple my
Computation, I Will only allow one Chapter between the Portion read and the
Exposition of it; I Will only compute two Chapters more for the two Sermons
preached every Lord's Day; and upon this Computation (which is really much less
than is read) it will appear, That in nine Meetings, allowing a Chapter for the
Lecture, there is read in the three quarters of the year 351; and allowing two
Chapters each Lord's Day in the year for their Sermons, there is read 936
Chapters in a year: both these joined make up 1287. Whereas in 42
Parish-Churches the Bishop computes (with the 11 Psalms and all) only 672
Chapters; and if we should add 42 Chapters more for their Sermon, (for few
preach more than once a day) this will make 714, which is a little more than
half of what is read in those nine Meetings by the former Computation. But if
this Computation were drawn to the utmost of Truth on the Dissenters side, (for
since eight Meetings in his Diocese Lecture throughout the whole year, there
are 104 Chapters to be added to the account, and as the Bishop reckons the
Psalms, we should add all the Scriptural Passages that occur in our
Thanksgivings) the Bishop's account would still appear the more wide from
Truth. However, upon the lowest Computation he is really mistaken in this
Matter of Fact, as he is apparently so in the foregoing, and has wronged 'em in
the Circumstance as well as Substance of his Charge.

The third Matter of Fact which the Bishop undertakes to vindicate, is his
Assertion, That a Man may frequent the Meetings of the Dissenters all his life,
Disc. p. 82.
and yet have no security, or hardly possibility, of learning from their
public Teachings all the great Mysteries of his Religion.

This I have indeed censured as a gross and shameless Accusation, and therefore
was the more obliged to prove it so. To that purpose I not only told him, That
the peculiar Mysteries of the Christian Religion were the ordinary subject of
their Sermons, but that once a year at least they constantly went through all
the necessary Articles of the Christian Religion in their Public Catechizing,
in which the Dissenting Ministers in the North were so particular, as to
Examine every particular Person of whose knowledge there could be any occasion
to doubt. Rem. p. 85, 86.
And sure one would think if this be true, there can be no Modesty in such a
heinous Accusation, Let Us then hear what the Bishop has offered to Vindicate
himself.

1. He proposes a Summary of the Principles of our Christian Religion, drawn
rather from the Calendar than from the Apostles Creed, of which several
Articles are omitted, because his Lordship could find no Holy Days for 'em.

2. He tells us their Ministers have a certain time appointed every year for
Teaching each of these Mysteries.

3. That there lies no Obligation on the Dissenting Ministers to go through these
Mysteries in any such time, nor in their whole lives.

4. That he could not find upon Examination that their Ministers had done it.

5. See Adm. p. 145, 146, 147.
He pretends that I endeavor to excuse this by putting him to produce
Scriptural Command relating to it.

Now I would desire him to review this, and tell us whether it signify any
thing to take off the plain Evidence I have produced, of the injustice of his
Accusation, viz. That their people are in public Teachings yearly Catechized,
in which Exercise all the Mysteries of the Christian Religion, and particularly
those mentioned by his Lordship, are explained to 'em. So that it is impossible
they should attend their Meetings one year, but they will have the opportunity of
learning 'em. Is it not strange that the Bishop should overlook so clear a
Demonstration against the Truth of his Charge, under this Head, to which it
properly does belong? For if this be true, there needs nothing more to prove
what he has said to be so gross a Calumny as I have represented it. His
Lordship has indeed thought fit to take notice of this in another place, viz.
p. 149. where he dare not downright deny it, but would gladly insinuate a
strong suspicion against the Truth of it. His words are these: I leave this
Matter of Fact with you, and know what you must conclude, and hope you will be
so just to your selves, as to determine of what credit this Author ought to be
in his Relations. I will not derogate from your Ministers labors in
Catechizing their people; but notwithstanding their pains, there are some
thousands of Men and Women in this Diocese that profess themselves of your
Communion that were never Catechized by 'em, etc. Now either he means there are
so many Persons that were never Catechized in those places where Ministers are
settled, or in those where there are none. If he mean the latter, What Is this
to the purpose if it were true, as I do not find the Dissenting Ministers in
his Diocese think it credible; if he mean the former, they do declare, They
know of none that were never Catechized where there are Ministers settled; but
all are ordinarily examined once in the year, if not oftener. So that if any
such remain ignorant, it is not for want of their pains to instruct 'em. And
since he leaves this Matter of Fact with 'em, to be determined upon their
serious consideration, he may easily see how contrary their Judgment of it is
to his; and if he would yield to their Testimony concerning their own Practice,
I hope he will be convinced there is some Credit due to my Relations, but none to
his rash and mistaken Accusations.

But besides that the necessary Principles of Religion are yearly explained in
the Catechism, I have told him concerning the Dissenters in general, that though
they have no other Rule to direct 'em herein than that of the Holy Scriptures,
yet they do in their Sermons most frequently insist on the particular Mysteries
of the Christian Religion, and can appeal to their People as witnesses thereof.
And that this is true concerning the Dissenting Ministers in his Diocese, he
may find Mr. Craghead's Account in these words, P. 75, 76.
relating to the forementioned Charge. I declare upon certain knowledge, that
what he has asserted is a most unjust Imputation, for which he has reason to
ask forgiveness of God; and I do appeal to many Thousands now living, who are
ordinarily witnesses to the contrary; and many of the Author's Persuasion know
the contrary. With what Peace of Conscience can any Man thus impose on
Strangers, and impress future Generations with that which is so far from Truth!
it being publicly known that we ordinarily and orderly go through all the Heads
of our Christian Faith in our Public Sermons. And what if this be nor
particularly prescribed by the Directory? will it follow that it is not done? Or
is not the Scripture a sufficient Directory for that purpose? And whereas the
Bishop insinuates this suspicious Argument of our neglect, That he has seen
many Sermons printed by our Party, and yet does not remember above two or three
on these most necessary Subjects, ( viz. the great Mysteries of our Religion).
Is it not hence evident that he speaks at random of matters that he has little
or no knowledge of? For I doubt not that instead of two or three, there are
above two or three hundred Sermons published by N.C. Ministers on the principal
Mysteries of the Christian Religion, (including those that he has mentioned).
What does he think of the first Collection of Sermons in the Morning Exercise
on the principal Heads of Christian Doctrine? Nay, some Divines have printed a
large Body of Sermons on the particular Heads of the Assemblies Catechism; 176
of Mr. Watson's are now extant. How many of those Mysteries are fully treated
of in the large Volumes of Dr. Mantons and Mr. Charnock's Sermons? Not to
mention Mr. Baxter's, Mr. Ant. Burgesses, Dr. Bates's, and many more. So that
if the Bishop have met with no more than two or three, it is only because he was
never conversant in their Writings. But why then should he throw about such
severe Reproaches in the dark, and censure with such assurance what he is so
entire a stranger to, and what any, that ever was in the least acquainted with
their Writers, can show him his ignorance and indiscretion in? And if the
Conformists have printed more, it is no wonder, when the Press has been more
open to them, and they have had greater advantages for appearing in Public.

And is it not strange the Bp. should pretend that I allege what he quotes (
p. 146, 147.) as an excuse in this matter, when I expressly disclaim the
alleging of it for that end, because we need no excuse, and only produce it as
an argument ad hominem, which he was concerned to answer on the Principles he
had laid down? So that upon the whole, the Bp. is obliged in all reason to do
us right in this point, by owning so unhappy a Mistake, and wiping off an
Aspersion, which as it is manifestly untrue, so it is highly injurious to the
Reputation of his Brethren; since if it were believed, no Man that has any
concern for his own Soul, would trust it to their Pastoral conduct, who are so
grossly negligent of so necessary a Duty.

The next Matter of Fact is, the Bishop had affirmed That not One in Ten of the
Dissenters Children get their Catechism by heart, Disc. p. 83.
nor One in Five hundred retain it.

On the contrary I suggested, That I believed upon a more accurate trial, he
would find that as many of the Dissenters Children have got it by heart, Rem.
p. 87.
as of others that have done so by the Church Catechism.

To clear himself, the Bishop here alleges, That he has, besides grown People,
Confirmed near a thousand Children, all above 13 years old, who could say the
Church Catechism. And on the other hand, he tells us of many trials he made in
whole Schools at a time, etc. among the Dissenters, and found that the
generality could not go above a leaf or two in it; Adm. p. 47, 48.
and he doubts whether any at all after twenty retain it.

Now in Answer hereto, the Dissenting Ministers in his Diocese declare, That
there are several Thousands of their People, both old and young, that can
repeat the whole Catechism. And how many there are in other Parishes may be in
part computed from that of Temple-more, in which there are 600, or more, can
repeat it. So that if his Lordship had so ill success in his trial, it is to be
imputed either to the sullenness or the bashfulness of those he examined: For
certainly their own Ministers should know this matter better than he; and since
he appeals to them, they declare That they are assured he is mistaken in it.

I come then to the fifth and principal Matter of Fact disputed, viz.
Concerning the frequency of Celebrating the Lord's Supper.

As to this the Bishop had appealed to the Dissenters in general without any
distinction, Whether it were not a great thing among many of 'em, if once in a
year or two a Communion be Celebrated in one of their Meetings; that among
some, it is often omitted for several years together, and in some places for ten
or more: and on this account severely upbraids 'em with rare or no Communion as
their peculiar practice. Disc. p. 161, 162.

In opposition to this Charge, I had told him, That for those Meetings in
England and the South of Ireland, where Pastors are settled, the most of 'em
constantly Celebrate the Lord's Supper once a Month, others once in six Weeks
or two Months, and a few every Lord's Day, etc. From whence I insert'd the
injustice of this Accusation, since the generality of the Dissenting Ministers
celebrate this Ordinance much more frequently than the generality of the Parish
Ministers; and their Communions are ordinarily more numerous, as well as more
frequent, than those in the Parish-Churches, allowing for the proportion which
the Number of the Dissenters bears to that of the Conformable Laity.

And now let us consider what the Bp. replys to this.

First he says He is not much concerned in it, Adm. p. 155.
having addressed himself to those of his own Diocese. Answer, Can his Lordship
with any reason pretend that he has asserted this only concerning the
Dissenters of his own Diocese, when he does not only in the very entrance of
his Book, propose to examine the several parts of Worship, as they are
practiced by those that differ from the established Church, or (as in the same
page) by Protestant Dissenters -- See Disc. p. 8. -- But gives this very
Chapter the Title of, The practice of Dissenters about frequency of
Communicating. But of this I have said enough already to show him the
unreasonableness of this Excuse.

Secondly, He insinuates these Arguments against the probability of it: If this
be true, (says he) their practice is much altered from what it was formerly:
For when the Churches were in their hands, it was quite otherwise. St.
Warburgh's was a considerable Parish in the heart of Dublin, but had not the
Lord's Supper administered in it for Twelve Years; and I have heard the like of
some other Churches in Dublin at that time. I find the same observed concerning
the whole University of Oxford, from the Year 1648 to 1660. Antiq. Oxon. And he
adds, that he was told, That the Dissenters in Waterford did not Communicate
above once a year before the Troubles, if so often. Admon. p. 155.

Answ. For what was practiced either in Dublin or Oxford in Oliver's time, I
neither know, nor am concerned with. But for this Assertion of mine concerning
the present practice of those Meetings of Dissenters in England, and the South
of Ireland, in which Pastors are settled, I need no Vouchers at all. It Is a
Matter of Fact as easily known as our Public Assemblies are, and what we can
produce as many Vouchers for as we have ordinary Hearers, there being always
public notice given of our Communions. And if the Bishop dispute this Matter
of Fact, he may next dispute, whether our Senses may be trusted in what we
daily see and hear. For what he alleges concerning the practice of Dissenters
in Waterford, of which he says he had opportunity to enquire, it will appear
by the account given me by Mr. Sinclare, See his Letter in the end.
who was at that time their Minister, that either his Enquiry was very slight,
or his Informers very ignorant of the Matter; and that he has been as unhappily
imposed on by 'em, as I shall now show him he has been by those on whose credit
he has related what is practiced in his whole Diocese.

It Is evident then he has wronged the main Body of the Dissenters in this
Charge of their rare or no Communion.

But there are some things relating to the practice of the Dissenters in the
North of Ireland which I have asserted, and which the Bishop does very
positively conclude me mistaken in.

I had told him from their Information, It Is so far from being true, that it is
rare if once in a year or two a Communion be celebrated in their Meetings; that
it is universally usual in every Meeting where an Ordained Minister is settled,
to have the Lord's Supper administered constantly once a year, and twice in the
larger Towns. That when the Sacrament is administered in one Meeting, it is usual
for most of the Members of neighboring Parishes to frequent it. That the most
serious People among them Communicate four or five times a year; and have the
opportunity of doing so 10, 12, or 15 times, if they will take the advantage of
Receiving it in Neighboring Congregations, etc. And what I have here affirmed
is the very account sent me from the Reverend Mr. Adair of Antrim, with the
approbation of that Meeting: and I shall here subjoin this following
Observation he makes in his own words; You know also, That where the Sacrament
is Administered, two parts of the Receivers are usually strangers; by which it
is evident, that once Administering according to the custom usual among
Christians here, where they Communicate with each other in their several
Congregations respectively, is equivalent to the Administering of it three or
four times a year to each particular Congregation, where this way is not in use.

Now as to this, the Bishop tells us, He has as good opportunity of informing
himself in these matters, as any can have, and has been as diligent in his
Enquiries, in his Progresses through his several Parishes, and on all occasions
as he could; and he has the following Account returned him from many hands, and
is satisfied there can be no great mistake in it.

In these last seven years the Lord's Supper has been Celebrated among you, in
Derry twice, in Clandermot once, in Ballindret once, at Ballikelly once, at
Burt twice, at Ardstra once, at Ahadowy once, in all nine times, ( Admon. p.
151, 152.) And p. 153. he adds a significant reason why he could not easily
mistake in these matters, viz. Because their Sacraments are Administered with
such a concourse of Spectators and Hearers, that they can hardly escape
Observation. (Tho by the way, why the Bishop should suppose this an Abuse
brought in by Popery, I do not understand; for I take it to be a very proper
means of exciting in the Spectators Pious desires of becoming Communicants: And
for the Practice of the Primitive Church in dismissing all that were not
Communicants when they entered on the Celebration of this Ordinance: I know of
no other occasion for it, than their care to conceal these Mysteries of their
Religion from the Pagans; a reason that we are not concerned in.)

But now, If after all this diligent Enquiry, the Bishop's Informers have
grossly imposed on him in almost every particular of this Account: Nay, if the
Account where it is true signify nothing to the purpose for which it is
alleged, and appear highly disingenious, then I hope he will think himself
under some Obligation to distrust those Informers for the future, and will be
more cautious of asserting any thing on their Credit, to the Reproach of his
Brethren.

And here I would premise, That there is an instance of Disingenuity in the
Bishop's Method of comparing the Practice of the Dissenters with that of the
Established Church, too obvious and palpable to be overlooked. In his accounts
how often the Sacrament has been Administered in the Established Church, he goes
no farther back then the time of his own Advancement to the Sea of Derry, which
was soon after the Troubles; but in his Accounts how often it has been
Administered by the Dissenters, he takes in seven years, tho he knows well
enough that for two of the seven at least, both the Ministers and People were
scattered, and had no opportunity for Celebrating that Institution; and yet he
is so imprudent as to make this a great aggravation of their neglect; That some
of those sevon years being times of afflictions, required a more frequent
Celebration of this comfortable Sacrament then ordinary; (See his Errata that
refers to p. 27. l. 2.) as if he were ignorant, that some of their Ministers
were fled to Scotland, others shut up in the Walls of Derry, and their People
so dispers't, that they could not for any considerable time after the Raising
that Siege make up any distinct Congregations again. And if the Bishop allege,
that at least the Dissenters in Derry during the Siege should have had it
Administered, I would desire him if he blame them on this Account, yet to be so
impartial as to give the Conformists there a share in his Reproof; for those I
have desired to enquire upon the place, could not learn that they Administered
it any more than the other: So that those 2 years of public Troubles and
Confusion, ought in all reason to be shut out of his Account. And how
unfortunate he has been in his particular and exact Account he now pretends to
give, will appear by the following one that the Dissenting Ministers of his
Diocese have after a very particular enquiry given of the year 87, 88, 91, 92,
93, 94.

In the year 87, 88. The Sacrament was Administered in Derry twice, in
Donaghedee twice, in Drumrah twice, in Ardsta twice, in Vrney twice, in
Donaghmore twice, in Lifford once, in Glendermot once, in all fourteen times.

In the four last years since the troubles, the Sacrament was Administered.

In Derry four times, in Burt thrice, in Ahadowy twice, in Ardstra twice, in
Ballindret or Lifford once, in Mahara once, in Ballikelly once, in Donaghmore
once, in Strabane once, in all sixteen times. So that for the last Six years,
in which there can be any pretense for requiring the Administration of the
Sacrament from 'em, it has instead of nine times been Administered 30. Nay, Tho
we reckon the two years of the Troubles in which they had no opportunity, yet
the year 88 falling within the compass of the seven mentioned by the Bishop,
they had it 22 or 23 times.

But I have a more just and severe Challenge against the Sincerity and Candor
of this Account, which the Bishop's Informers have given him, viz. That they
were not so honest as to acquaint him, that besides the two years of Troubles,
in a great part of the other years, several of those Congregations had no
Ministers at all, whom yet he makes accountable for the Sacrament during 7
years together; whereas that Ascertion of mine which the Bishop here undertakes
to disprove, concerns only such Congregations where Ministers are settled. (For
it were ridiculous to expect Sacraments where there are no Ministers to
Celebrate them.) Now besides the two years of seven that are to be taken off
from each Congregation, (for even Derry itself had no Ministers from the year
88 till after the Troubles) the following Congregations had no Ministers for
the years hereafter mentioned.

Glendermot or Clondermot had none at all since the Troubles, so that there has
been a Minister there only one year of the seven, Ardstra had a Minister only
two years since the Troubles, and in them two Sacraments, but had no Minister
at all till after the Troubles. For Ballindret two Communions were appointed,
but both prevented by their Ministers being visited with Sickness, and it is a
year since he died, so that only one Sacrament could be Celebrated since the
Troubles. For Ballikelly, their Minister besides long Sickness after the Siege
of Derry, has been much in Scotland and elsewhere. For Strabane the Minister
has not yet been two years there, and the true reason why the Sacrament was but
seldom Administered there before, was (besides the Bodily Infirmities of their
Minister) chiefly the violence of Persecution, which forced him out of that
Parish. And yet such Blame the neglect, whose unchristian severity was the
cause of it. For the other places which the Bishop has overlook't in his
Account and I have added to mine, I must also add, That Mahara had but one
Sacrament since the Troubles, because they have had a Minister but one year;
and the same must be said of Donoghmore. For Donaghedee, Drumra and Urny, which
had constant yearly Communions before the Troubles, they have none of them had
any Minister since. Now by this Account it appears, that according to what was
practiced where Ministers have been settled, there would have been about 70
Communions Celebrated in the last seven years in the 10 Meetings now mentioned,
if either the want of Ministers in places, or their Sickness, or the two years
of Confusion and Troubles, or the like extraordinary Accidents had not
prevented. So that for the Bishop not only to mistake nine times for about
twenty three or thirty, but to charge these rare Communions on their Negligence
in Administering this Ordinance, when they were wholly owing to these
extraordinary occasions forementioned, is so highly disingenuous and unjust,
that he ought not to suffer those that have so unhappily abused him in these
matters, to pass without a severe Reproof. For since the Dissenting Ministers
in the North, on the account of the extraordinary pains they take to prepare
their People for the Sacrament, celebrate it so seldom in each Congregation as
once a year, there was the greater reason they should not be wronged in the
Accounts given of their Practice. So that in this Matter of Fact, I hope the
Bishop will own and retract his mistake.

For what I asserted concerning the Sacraments being twice a year administered
in the larger Towns in the North, was intended, and is true of Belfast,
Carickfergus, and Antrim.

For what I have asserted concerning their Members Communicating four or five
times a year, is true of the most devout and serious of them; and so is it,
That they may have the opportunity of Communicating ten, or twelve, or fifteen
times a year, within some miles of their respective Habitations.

This indeed the Bishop concludes to be a great mistake. Because on this
Supposition he thinks it will clearly follow, that not much above a hundred
distinct Persons have Communicated in the Diocese these last seven years. For
four times 7 makes 28; and 3600 (which his Lordship computes to be the full
number of their Communicants in seven years) divided by 28, gives about 128;
but this can by no means be true: Therefore (says the Bishop) he is certainly
misinformed in this particular. Admon. p. 153.

Answ. The whole of this Computation depends on his two Suppositions, That the
Sacrament has been Administered but nine times in seven years, and that one with
another, only 400 have received at one time, and so 3600 in all. How great a
mistake the former Supposition is, I have already shown; and how much greater
the latter is, will appear from this one Passage, That in the Parish of
Temple-more alone, (alias Derry) including the two Meetings of Derry and Burt,
there have Communicated since the Troubles above 5000, which is above 1400 more
than he supposes to have Communicated in all the Diocese in seven years. Nay,
whereas he supposes, That near as many have received in the Cathedral, in three
years past, as have Communicated with the Dissenters in his whole Diocese in
twice that time. It appears that near 2000 more of the Dissenters have Received
in the same Parish, in about the same time, than have Received at the
Cathedral, notwithstanding the Sacrament being Administered there every Month
(though by the way, the Dissenters of Derry think he has stretched the number of
his Monthly Communicants beyond all just bounds, of which they can give very
shrewd Evidence.) Since then his Computation of the number of Communicants
among the Dissenters is so vastly wide from Truth, his Inference from it falls
of course.

For what I asserted concerning their having the opportunity of Communicating
ten, or twelve, or fifteen times a year, within some miles of their respective
Habitations, the Bishop concludes it to be a mistake; Because there being but
nine Meetings in his Diocese, though each Member should communicate at each
Meeting, he could but communicate nine times a year, and must sometimes travel
forty miles for a Sacrament. Admon. p. 154, 155.

Answ. I might here justly enquire, Why the Bishop should think the Dissenters
of his Diocese so confined to it, that those that live near Meetings in another
Diocese, may not take the opportunity of Communicating there. Does he think
their Communion limited within the bounds of his Jurisdiction? But I must here
acquaint him, That this Assertion of mine respects the generality of Meetings
in the North; and therefore the truth of it is to be estimated from those parts
where the main Body of the Dissenters are to be found. Now he cannot be
ignorant that they are most numerous in the Counties of Antrim and Down. And
therefore since he is pleased to arraign the Truth of the Assertion, I shall
give him the following Demonstration of it, in reference to the Congregations
that belong to the Meeting of Antrim, sent me by the Reverend M. W. Adair
Minister of the Town of Antrim.

I take Carn-castle, which is the most remote Congregation save one Northward
in our Meeting, and within twelve miles they may Communicate at Glanarm, Blade,
Ballimanoch, Coymer, Ballyraston, Ballyclare, Carmony, Dunagor, Lorn, I.
Macgee, Broad-Island, Caricfergus twice, Temple-Patrick, and Carn-castle it
self. In all fifteen times.

I take Belfast, which is the farthest of our Meeting Southward, and I suppose
within twelve miles they may yearly Communicate above twenty times; viz. at
Belfast twice, at Caricfergus twice, Antrim twice, Holywood, Knock,
Kirk-donold, Newton, Cumber, Killinchy, Donachadee, Tonochneer, Danmurry,
Lisbon, Annahilt, Bangor, Carmony, Temple-Patrick, Ballyclare, Ballyraston,
Dunnagor, upper Killade, lower Killade, Broad-Island, (which is within 11
miles.) In all 26 times.

You may easily conceive that many places, or almost all in our Meeting which
are toward the Center, can have the Sacrament as often at least, and generally
oftener than at Carn-castle.

So that this Matter of Fact is true beyond all Exception, as I have asserted
it, concerning the generality of their Meetings. And I am no way obliged to
prove it, concerning every particular one in the remotest parts of the Province
of Vlster.

Again, whereas the Bishop had affirmed in his Discourse, That he could not
compute that one in ten that go to their Meetings, ever Receive through the whole
course of their Lives; and blames me for asserting the contrary, That there is
not one in ten but do Communicate, except such as are withheld for want of
competent knowledge, or on the account of Scandal, (or I might here add, through
their own Scruples about their preparation for it) as if this were a great
Reflection upon 'em; Admon. p. 154.
as if 19 in 20 were ignorant or scandalous. This will appear to be a very
mistaken Account of this Matter, if we compare the number of Hearers in the two
Meetings of Derry and Burt, with the number of Communicants. For their ordinary
Hearers are about 2400. (Of which some part are supposed to be left at home
every Lord's Day.) And yet in some of the Communions there since the Troubles,
there have Communicated 984 Persons in one of those Meetings. So that we may
compute about 1600 Communicants in both. Now though we allow a considerable
deduction out of this number of Communicants, for the Strangers that may be
supposed to have Received, yet the number of Communicants belonging to those
two Congregations, compared with that part of their Hearers that are of Age to
Receive, will sufficiently demonstrate that the Bishop's Computation, That not
one in ten Receive, must be very wide from Truth.

For the generality of the Dissenting Ministers administering this Sacrament far
oftener than the generality of the Conforming Clergy, I did not, as the Bishop
here groundlesly supposes, Admon. p. 151.
assert it concerning the Dissenting Ministers in the North of Ireland, but of
those in England and the South of Ireland, (which make up the generality of
'em) concerning whom it is too apparently true to admit of being disputed.

And for their pressing their People as much or more to it, if we may judge
thereof by the success of their Exhortations, I think it past doubt, that take
an equal number of Meetings and Parish-Churches, and according to the
proportion of Hearers in the one and the other, the Communicants are far more
Numerous in the Meetings than the Parish-Churches, even though the former are far
more strict in their Admissions; and in the latter few are ever refused that
desire to come. Of which, if the Bishop please, I shall produce him manifold
Instances. And for what his Lordship affirms of their Sermons tending rather to
deter poor weak Creatures from Receiving, than encourage 'em, by magnifying the
difficulty and danger of the undertaking. I know no ground he has for this
Assertion, unless it be, that they endeavor to deter all that are grossly
ignorant or scandalous from profaning that Holy Institution; and dare not
encourage any to approach to it, but such as in some measure understand the
nature of it, and do not by a scandalous Life contradict those solemn Vows of
Obedience which they there come to renew upon the memorials of a Crucified
Savior.

As for this last Matter of Fact, in reference to this Head about a reputed
Elder, (or as in his Errata he corrects it) Professor of thirty or forty years
of Age that never Received, but disputes against it. Admon. p. 158. If the
Bishop had pleased to name him, the truth of what he asserts might have been
examined. But till we know who he is, we must let this matter lie undecided,
unless we dispute in the dark.

So that in the whole of this Debate which relates to the Sacrament, the
mistake lies on the Bishop's side, even in reference to the North of Ireland;
though he was obliged to make his Charge in his Discourse good concerning the
Dissenters in general, without any such limitation.

For the Bishop's being offended at my saying, That too many profligate sinners
are admitted to the Communion in the Parish Churches, and his charging me on
that account with being uncharitable and unjust, Admon. p. 156.
and challenging me to instance in some of his Diocese. I shall only reply,
That I never yet met with any Person, before his Lordship, that doubted this
Matter of Fact, and would not rather lament than dispute it. For it is no more
than has been frequently owned by the best of their own Writers, and imputed to
the present corruption or weakness of their Discipline. And though for naming
particular instances I must beg the Bishop's pardon, yet I will allege what is
equivalent to it. Does his Lordship think there are no profligate sinners in
Military and Civil Employments in England? and yet the Sacrament-Test obliges
'em all to receive the Sacrament, and he knows they are not scrupled when they
come. Nay, were not the common Soldiers since the Restoration in Dublin forced
to receive, and driven to it by their Officers with Oaths and Curses, when
nothing but the consciousness of their own wickedness deterred 'em? But as to
this matter, I shall freely appeal to the common judgment of all sober Persons
of his own Party, and fear not their Censure on this score; it being rather to
be wished, for the honor of the Reformed Religion, that the evidence of this
Truth were less notorious. Nay, to the judgment of the same Persons I would
refer it, what ground there is for that Observation which the Bishop tells us
some have made, That Enmity to the established Religion and Immoralities are
gotten on one side in too many instances, of it be meant of the Dissenters. For
besides that, the Dissenters have no Enmity at all to the established Religion,
having Subscribed in England all the Doctrinal Articles of it: That the Members
of their Communion, compared with those of the established Church are more
generally guilty of Immoralities, is an Observation that I suppose will hardly
pass current with any but such as have a faith to believe whatever their
Interest or their Affection to a Party dictates to 'em.

And since in reference to these Matters of Fact his Lordship requires me to
produce my Vouchers, and charges me as writing upon none, or very partial
Information, I shall so far comply with his Demand, as to produce the following
Testimonial of the Truth of what I have said, in reference to the practice of
the Dissenters in his Diocese, about whom our present Debate lies, from these
three under-named Ministers in his Diocese, who have diligently examined these
Matters of Fact, and whose Informations communicated to me, relating to 'em,
were, together with these Papers, reviewed and approved by the whole Presbytery.

WE the under-subscribers having perused these Papers of the Reverend Mr.
Joseph Boyse, drawn up in Answer to that part of the Bishop of Derry's
Admonition which concerns the practice of the Protestant Dissenters in this
Diocese of Derry, do declare, Those Informations which we have given him
relating to it, and to which he here refers, to be true; and hereby attest 'em
as such to the World, in order to our just Vindication from the
misrepresentation made of those Matters of Fact by the Bishop of Derry.

Robert Craghead Minister of Derry. Andr. Ferguson Minister of Burt. Will.
Homes Minister of Strabane.


And for his Lordship's farther satisfaction, Whereas one of the most
remarkable differences between his account and theirs, relates to the frequency
of Celebrating the Lord's Supper (his account supposing them guilty of very
scandalous negligence) the Reverend Mr. Craghead has now in his hands, and is
ready to produce whenever his Lordship desires it, particular Testimonials of
this Account now given under the Hands of the Elders, and other Communicants of
each Meeting. Nay, since the difference is most remarkable in reference to
Derry it self, which he affirms has had the Sacrament but twice these seven
years, whereas they assert it has been administered five times, (though for two of
the seven years they had no Minister of their own;) and since the Bishop's
Friends pretends to undeniable Evidence for the truth of this Matter of Fact, I
shall (to shame, if possible, his Informers out of their Confidence) trouble
the Reader with the following Certificate, as a Specimen of what shall be
produced, if required, from the other Congregations.

WE the under-named Subscribers having heard and read of several things charged
on the People of the Presbyterian persuasion of this City and Suburbs, now
under the Pastoral charge and care of the Reverend Mr. Robert Craghead, and
formerly of the Reverend Mr. Robert Rule, for the honoring the great God who
is a God of Truth; and in opposition to all those that have endeavored to
possess the minds of such as are Strangers to us, by speaking or writing
contrary to Truth; We do hereby certify and give under our Hands, and are
ready to make it farther appear, if need be, upon Oath, that from the time of
our being under the charge and care of Mr. Robert Rule, as our Pastor, which
commenc't about the Year 1672. till the time of his being necessarily called to
go for Scotland, which was A. D. 1688. we had the Sacrament of the Lord's
Supper duly Administered by him once a year in his Congregation; excepting those
wherein we were violently hindered by the severity of Persecution. And more
particularly that the Reverend Mr. Robert Rule Administered that solemn
Ordinance of the Lord's Supper to us in this place, in May 1687, and in April
1688. soon after which we were desolate of any fixed Minister, till it pleased
the Lord our now Reverend Pastor, Mr. Craghead, was fixed among us in the year
1690; and he has since then Administered this Sacrament in this Congregation the
12th day of July 1691. On the 24th of July 1692. On the 14th day of May 1693.
And on the 22d day of July 1694. The cause of our knowledge hereof is, that we
were Members of this Congregation, and did then partake of that Ordinance. And
we desire this may be compared with what is asserted in a Book, Entitled, An
Admonition to the Dissenting Inhabitants of the Diocese of Derry, etc. p. 153.
In Testimony of the Truth whereof we have hereunto set our Hands at
Londonderry the 25th of September, 1694.

Henry Long, Mayor. Alexander Lekey, Mayor Elect. James Wilson. Hugh Davey.
Hugh Eadie. Edward Brooks. James Lenox. Horas Kennedy. Robert Harvey. Andrew
Garven. Alexander Gourdon. John Cowan. Will. Mackie. John Harvey.


And sure if the Bishop's Enquiries be so strangely unsuccessful in the very
place where be resides, we may justly infer how little regard is due to those
he made in other places. And upon the whole the unbiast Reader may judge, what
ground his Lordship had to say, in reference to all these Matters of Fact, That
concerning the Truth of what he had said, he need do no more than appeal to the
Consciences of Dissenters. And that he must tell 'em, that what he wrote was
from Sight, Experience, or certain Information; whereas he says I had my
Accounts of things only at second hand, and produce no Vouchers. Admon. p. 142.
If he will stand to their Judgment to whose Consciences he has appealed, he may
easily foresee his doom; for their Sight and Experience are quite contrary to
his. And since he obliges me to produce Vouchers for what I have said, I hope
he will either yield this Point, or produce as credible ones as these.

But before I dismiss this Head, it will be requisite to take some notice of
those remarkable words wherewith the Bishop closes it, To conclude, (says he)
it were as easy to show, That Mr. B. is mistaken in every Matter of Fact,
wherein he has charged me with falsehood, as in these; but the designed
shortness of this Admonition will not give me leave to pursue 'em.

Answ. I hope the Bishop will at length be convinced, That instead of
vindicating his former Mistakes, he has only run into new ones, which are
somewhat the less excusable, because he had so much time and leisure, as well
as advice to correct 'em. And since most of them are very injurious to the good
Name of his Brethren, common Justice should have obliged him, instead of
Reprinting, to have Retracted 'em. But as he has had so little success in his
endeavors to clear himself in the foregoing Particulars, so I something wonder
that he should, with all this assurance, pretend that I have in all the other
Instances groundlesly charged him with falsehood or mistakes. What! will his
Lordship still go about to persuade us, Disc. p. 24.
That we have no other way of praising God, but by singing a verse or two of a
Psalm? Or that the first Principle he ascribes to us about Prayer, is asserted
in the Directory, when he himself tacitly corrects the mistake in this Second
Edition of his Discourse? Or that he has truly represented the Judgment and
Sense of the General Assembly in Scotland in their Directions concerning Family
Worship? p. 44, 45, Will he still persuade us, That a considerable Body of
Dissenters teach all Forms of Prayer to be unlawful, and affirm it sinful to
join where any are used? p. 57. Or, that on the account of this Principle, the
pious custom of Training up young People to a constant course of Devotion in
their Morning and Evening secret Prayer, is too universally laid aside among
the Dissenters; concerning the truth whereof, he confidently appeals to all of
'em? p. 64. Will he still affirm, That the Directory excludes all Bodily
Worship? p. 128. Or, That the Dissenters in general do not stand up at their
Thanksgivings, and generally sit at their Public Prayers? p. 129. And that
they have not one visible Act of Adoration in their Assemblies, except the Men's
uncovering their Heads in Prayer? p. 130. Nay, will he still persist in it,
That the Dissenters are taught' that External Postures of Bodily Worship may in
no case be practiced? p. 137. That the Directory does not allow the People to
signify their Consent by saying Amen to their Public Thanksgivings? p. 138.
That as to Gestures, such as Kneeling, Standing, Bowing the Head, the
Dissenters condemn 'em all as Relics of Idolatry and Superstition? That by
turning all Bodily Worship out of their Assemblies, they are mere Spectators,
not Joynt-worshippers? p. 138, 139. Or, That neglecting to kneel at the
Sacrament has hardened them against all Reverence in other parts of Worship? p.
144. And to add no more, Will he still justify all as true concerning the
Dissenters in general, which he has affirmed of 'em, without any distinction in
reference to the Lord's Supper? p. 161, 162: Will the Bishop still think to
persuade us that in all these Matters of Fact he has justly accused us, and we
have no reason to complain of being Misrepresented and Abused? Does he think
his bare word sufficient to bear down the Reputation of so considerable a Body
of Protestants? Or would he have us silently bear the odium of so many grievous
Reflections cast upon us, which we are sure of the injustice of, as we are that
we know our own Opinions or Practices. His Lordship must therefore give us
leave to be free with him on this occasion, and to demand once more, That he
either make good his Charge against us in these Particulars, or honestly
confess his being mistaken or misinformed about 'em. Which if he would once do,
he will find us very ready, not only to forgive the wrong done us, but to
entertain more favorable thoughts of his veracity and charity, than it is
almost possible for us to do, while these mistakes in his Book and in his
Admonition, stand unretracted.

There are but Two things more which I think my self obliged to take notice of,
before I come to consider the Exceptions he produces against some particular
passages in the Remarks.

The first is, That the Bishop tells me, I have nothing to do with him, and the
Dissenters of his Diocese; and blames me for interposing my self without any
Call or Reason, as well as Writing upon little or no Information. Admon. p. 158.

To which I shall only offer a few Things in my own defense.

1. I have already had occasion to show, That the Bishop's Discourse was in all
just construction levelled against the Dissenters in general. Nay, he usually
falls upon the Directory. which is a Book the generality of Dissenters have a
great and just value for, (the Compilers of it having used great modesty and
tenderness in its Composure, without following the imposing temper of those
that required so peremptory a Declaration of Assent and Consent to all things
contained in and prescribed by the Book of Common Prayer, and the Form of
Ordaining Bishops, Priests and Deacons) So that since his Discourse is directed
against what himself supposes to be the common Opinions and Practices of
Dissenters, every Man among 'em had a just right to defend the Common Cause,
and the Bishop has no just ground to complain of any ones interposing in it Nay,

2. I had a very just Call to it; and that from the Dissenting Ministers of his
own Diocese; who urged this Reason for it: That as the Bishop's Discourse might
possess those that were strangers to the Dissenters, with ill apprehensions of
'em, if his Mistakes were not discovered; so few would read an Answer to it, if
it came not out while the Matter was fresh in their minds; and they had less of
leisure for such an undertaking at that time. And as I did not interpose
without their desire, so neither did I write without particular Informations
from 'em, to which I have exactly adhered, and from which I have yet seen no
reason to recede.

3. I had yet a more particular concern in the Bishop's Book; for though he would
not vouchsafe an Answer to some former Papers of mine (showing the
unreasonableness of his excluding us from the Catholic Church) yet he took the
liberty to misrepresent the Principles laid down in 'em, and charged em as
inconsistent with the Unity and Peace of the Church. So that I lay under a
particular obligation to vindicate my Self, as well as under a common one to
justify the common Opinions and Practices of Dissenters, which the Bishop had
either misrepresented or argued against upon weak and insufficient grounds.

The second the Bishop complains of, is, That I give him hard words, and speak
hard things of him. Admon. p. 141, 142, 145, etc.

Answ. I may, I think, in this Matter appeal to any equal Judges of things,
Whether the Dissenters have not juster reason to complain of him, for saying so
many hard and reproachful things of them without any just ground, than he to
complain of me, only for telling him how greatly he has wronged us, and how
little regard he has had to Truth in such a multitude of Particulars wherein he
has unreasonably accused us. And indeed some of those Accusations tended so
apparently to defame and render us odious, that it would have looked like a
tacit confession of Guilt, to have expres'd no distaste at such disingenuous
Treament. Nor do I understand that the Bishop had any great reason to expect
the same deference to be paid to him, that would have been due to any other of
his character, that had given any evidence of his Moderation and Charity. It Is
true indeed, both his Discourse and Admonition (bating the many severe, but
groundless Aspersions in 'em) have an air of mildness and temper in the style
of 'em, and we often meet with friendly Appellations in 'em. But I take men's
declared Opinions, and especially their Actions, to be a surer Indication of
their Temper than the common Civilities that occur in their way of writing.
Joab had very obliging Language toward Amasa in his mouth, Art thou in health
my Brother? but he carried a sharp Tool in his hand, and he had no friendly
design. We can lay little stress on any seeming expressions of a man's charity,
who will not recall that virtual Sentence of Damnation he has publicly past
upon us, by denying us to be a part of the Catholic Church. We like not the
gentle language of Writs de Excom. Cap. And we can perceive no extraordinary
mildness and friendship in such Covenants inserted in Leases, as the following
one: [And the said A. B. his Executors, etc. does by these Presents covenant to
and with the said William Lord Bishop of Derry and his Successors, etc. for the
time being, that neither he the said A. B. his Executors, etc. nor any of 'em,
etc. shall or will Set, Let, or Demise the Premises, or any part thereof, to
any Mass or Popish Priest, etc. or to any Minister or Teacher dissenting from
the Church of Ireland. Neither shall wittingly or willingly suffer 'em to dwell
or reside on any part, parcel or member thereof, but him or them shall
endeavor to expel and keep from the same, so far as by the Laws of this Realm
they shall be enabled.] So that if the Bishop have been reproved somewhat
sharply for his unfair Dealing in this new Dispute, he has but furnished us
with too just an Apology for it. And yet I know of no words given him so hard
(how deserved soever) as those he has given the whole Body of Dissenters which
have been wholly undeserved. And I am sure he will not find in the Remarks any
such uncharitable Sentiments expressed concerning the established Church, as occur
frequently in his Discourse concerning the Dissenters. And for what Touches
himself only, he seems to have little reason of complaint, unless he can clear
himself a little better in Matters of Fact than he has done in this Admonition.

I come now to consider the Bishops few Exceptions against the Argumentative
part of the Remarks.

In his Entrance on which he alleges, That it is the design of the Remarks to
hinder the Dissenters from joining with the established Church in their ordinary
Lord's Day Worship. Admon. p, 159.
Now I know no reason why his Lordship should pretend that to be my design,
which I no where proposed as such: For all I professed to attempt was, the
Vindication of our own worship from the weak charge of human Inventions, and
the retorting his Arguments, where they were stronger against the Worship of
the established Church than against ours. But if the Bishop here speak of
occasional Communion with the established Church in her ordinary Lord's-Days
Worship, it is strange that he should suppose it my design to hinder the
Dissenters from it, when I expressly declare my own opinion for the lawfulness
of it, Remarks p. 146. and urged him to express the same Charity toward us,
which I perceive he cannot be so easily persuaded to.

He farther premises, That it was incumbent on one that answered his Book, to
justify our way of Worship, by showing that the manner of performing it, in
the several parts of it, as distinguished from theirs, is warranted by
Scripture Precept or President, or by direct consequence from thence, etc. But
(he says) instead of undertaking this Task, Mr. B. argues against and condemns
the Rule; whereas, as strict as it appears, he has justified all the particular
ways of Worship in the established Church by it; and if I could have done the
same for ours, I need not have declined it. Admon. p. 159, 160.

Answ. If his Lordship had answered the Remarks, he would have had perhaps some
pretense to have said this. But he has none now, when he himself is forced (as
I shall show) to alter his own Rule, when I had so largely proved that our
Worship, in most particular parts of it, was more agreeable to
Scripture-Precept or Example than theirs; and also shown him that his Rule, as
laid down by himself, would condemn all Churches in the World in which there
were some circumstantial modes, and those very lawful, that neither express
Scriptural Precept nor Pattern could be produced for, nor indeed could
reasonably be expected. And therefore since the Bishop lays so great stress on
this Matter, I shall carefully examine the Three Heads he suggests in reference
to it.

1. He says, I give another Rule for the ordering God's Service.

2. He says, I endeavor to persuade the Dissenters that the greatest
Exception they have against joining with the established Church is not matter of
Worship.

3. He says, I allege that he has omitted to handle that part of Worship
against which the Dissenters have the greatest Exception, and that because he
could not defend it.

1. He says, I give another Rule for the ordering God's Service. And to that
purpose he thus pretends to cite my own Expressions. As to his new Rule of
Worship, you will find it in p. 7. in these words. Modes and Circumstances of
Divine Worship, -- though necessary in general by Divine Precept, yet are left in
particular to be determined by Human Prudence. For though God has commanded
Public Prayer, etc. yet what time or place we shall assemble in, in what order
these parts of Worship shall be performed, etc. are left to Human
Determination, only therein the general Rules of Scripture must be regarded.
From whence his Lordship concludes, That it is my Rule or Principle. That all
Modes of Worship whatever are left to Human Prudence, and particularly the
determination of Time, Place, Order, Circumstances, Postures, and Utensils in
all Cases. Against which he argues, That God has not only given us general
Rules to praise him, pray to him, hear his Word, etc. but he has likewise given
us many particular Rules and Examples concerning each of these, to which if we
diligently attend, and mind the consequences of 'em, and apply 'em to the like
cases, we may have sufficient Directions from Scripture to order our Worship,
without having recourse to Human Prudence.

Answ. If the Bishop please to review the Marks, he will find that he has
plainly mistaken and misrepresented what they assert in reference to this
matter, that he might have some pretense to find fault with it. For in the
place he cites I am laying down no Rule at all, but only mentioning an improper
sense of Human Inventions, as the Reader would have evidently perceived if the
Bishop had not, by mis-citing my words, maimed 'em, and perverted the plain
sense of 'em: For they run thus in the Remarks, p. 7. It remains only that I
subjoyn, in order to the clearing the state of this Controversy, That there is
a very improper sense, in which this phrase of Human Inventions in the Worship
of God may possibly be used, viz. To signify such Modes and Circumstances of
Divine Worship, as though necessary in general by Divine Precept, yet are left in
particular to be determined by Human Prudence, etc. Of which kind of
Circumstantial Modes, I there produce several Instances relating to Time,
Place, Orders, Utensils, etc. and would gladly know whether his Lordship can
produce any particular Determination of 'em in Scripture for every particular
Church, viz. What time of the Lord's Day their Public Worship shall begin,
what Place they shall assemble in, what Translation of the Bible they shall
use; whether they shall begin with Prayer or Praise, or what Vessels they shall
use in the Celebration of the Sacraments. But I do by no means suppose, That
God has given no particular Directions at all in reference to the Modes of
Worship, but the quite contrary; for it is one Instance I produce of Human
Inventions. p. 55. That whereas every part of Worship enjoined by God as
Prayer, Praise, etc. is capable of being performed in various Circumstantial
Modes, if the Law of God expressly enjoin us any particular Mode, than to devise
another of our own, exclusive of that which he has chosen and determined, is to
bring in a sinful Human Invention into his Worship. As I instance there in
Prayers in an unknown Tongue, Communicating without the Cup, Solitary
Communions, etc. Such Modes then as God has determined by the particular
Directions of his Word, I plainly exclude from the Determination of Human
Prudence. Nay, so far am I from supposing that Human Prudence may Arbitrarily
appoint any Modes of Worship that Men think fit, that I rank among sinful
Inventions, p. 6. All such Rites and Ceremonies of Men's own devising, as are no
way warranted by any general Rules of Scripture, and yet made stated Appendages
of any part of Divine Worship, and terms of Communion in it. All therefore that
I assert is, That all those Circumstantial Modes of Worship, that are in
general necessary by Divine Precept (because God's own Commands about his
Worship cannot be executed without the determination of 'em) and yet are not in
particular determined in Scripture, must be determined by Human Prudence; and
that to call such Circumstantial Modes, when determined agreeable to the
general Rules of Scripture, Human Inventions, is a very improper sense of the
word, and to make 'em sinful, is a Principle fit only for the wildest Sectaries
since it would condemn a great many prudential orders practiced both by them
and us, and indeed by all Churches in the World. And if the Bishop pretend to
disprove this Assertion, he must produce us particular Precept or Pattern from
Scripture, for his beginning Public Worship at nine or ten in the forenoon,
rather than twelve, for his meeting at the Cathedral, rather then in another
place; for his using the old Translation of the Psalms, and the new one of the
rest of the Bible; for his using at the Sacrament Loaves rather than Cakes, and
using one sort of Wine rather then another, and employing Peuter or Silver
Vessels rather than Wooden or Golden ones. So that what I assert, is not only
very innocent, and free from any such dangerous consequences as the Bishop
suggests, but indeed too obvious and plain for any Man of sense to doubt of it;
and his Lordship could never have begun any new Dispute about it, if he had not
raised a mist by misunderstanding the sense of as clear Expressions as could
well be used on this Subject. Since then he has so plainly mistaken in
ascribing such a Rule to me as I no where laid down, but have so fully
disclaimed, all the consequences he draws from it, either to his own Advantage,
or our Prejudice, fall of course, and I am no way concerned in 'em as
consequences drawn from any Opinion of mine: For it is plain, the Rules laid
down in the Remarks do not justify all the Modes of Worship practiced in the
established Church, neither that way of singing the Prose Psalms that excludes
the generality of the People, nor the Cathedral Music, nor the confining all
Public Prayers to stinted Forms, nor reading the Apocripha, nor bowing toward
the East or Altar, or at the Name of Jesus, nor Reading one part of the Prayers
where many of the People cannot hear 'em, nor the use of the Cross, or our sort
of Sponsors in Baptism, nor so much as kneeling in the Act of Receiving. These
and many more particular Modes are not defensible by any Rule I have laid down,
though I have shown him that our own Practices are. Nay, no Rule I have laid down
will defend all sort of Holy Days, nor any Determinations relating to Habits,
Place or Utensils that are contrary to Edification, or to Order and Decency.

But whereas the Bishop pretends, That (...) those particular Rules and
Directions he had produced from Scripture, Adm. p. 43, 44.
relating to the several parts of Worship, The Letter of Scripture is clearly
on his side, and I have not opposed Scripture to Scripture, but have declined
the literal sense in many cases without reason, and have preferred the
determinations of Human Prudence in others, as being more for Edification than
the Scripture Examples, and particularly in the singing of Psalms. I must needs
on this occasion acquaint him, that I think the quite contrary to what he
Asserts, will appear to any that impartially compare the Remarks and his
Discourse together, at least I hope his Lordship does not expect we should take
his peremptory Assertion for a proof of it: but since he supposes this
Observation to be manifest in reference to that particular Mode of Praising God
by singing of Psalms, I should add, that I think it not so ingenious in the
Bishop to Assert this with such assurance, when I have in the Remarks taken
such particular pains to show, That our ways of singing Psalms is most
conformable to the only Precept in Scripture, that relates to the use of 'em in
our Praises, 5 Ephesians. 19. 3 Col. 16. to which he has yet vouchsafed no Answer. He
has been told, That the Precept enjoins vocal singing, which bare saying 'em no
way Answers, p. 13, 14. That since the Psalms of David were wrote in such sort
of Meter and Verse as was then used, and since the knowledge of their Musical
Tunes and Instruments is quite lost, to suppose us obliged to an exact
imitation of 'em, were to suppose us obliged to impossibilities. That therefore
the Command which obliges Christian Churches to sing Psalms, necessarily
obliges us to turn 'em into such sort of Meter and Verse, as will best
accommodate 'em to be sung by the People. Whereas to put 'em into no other
Meter than the pointed Psalter in the Common Prayer Book, is to exclude the
generality of the People from any capacity of complying with God's own Command
for singing 'em. And as the Tunes of those pointed Psalms are quite different
from Hebrew ones, so they are as much a Human Invention as the Tunes of the
Common Metro-Versions, and therefore do set up that pointed Psalter in the
Service Book, whose Tunes the Body of the People cannot follow to the Exclusion
of those Metre-Versions according to which they can join in singing Psalms, (as
the Bishop seems to design) is in his language to set up an Human Invention to
the violation of a Divine Command, by rendering the Peoples observance of it
impracticable, p. 189, 190. And should not his Lordship in all equity and
reason have attempted a clear refutation of this Argument, before he had
ventured to say, That in this particular of singing Psalms, the Scripture is on
his side, and that I prefer the determinations of Human Prudence before
Scripture Examples; when I have so plainly shown him, That the Example or
Pattern of Jewish singing is unimitable by us, because unknown to us, but that
the Precepts of Scripture plainly obliges us to this way of singing, because
it is most generally practicable among us. To what purpose is it to reason in
these matters, if the Bishop think his bare Affirmation sufficient to weigh
down all Arguments? And why does he call this Admon. p. 164. Our manner of
singing Psalms, when it is theirs as well as ours; and though he has ventured to
exclude it from being any substantial part of their Worship, and made it a mere
Diversion, yet he has done it without any Authority or Commission from the
established Church, by whom it seems allowed as a stated part of Worship.

And as the Bishop has ascribed to me a Rule about Worship that I never laid
down, so he stiffly pretends to adhere to his own, when yet what I had alleged
against it, as unhappily worded by himself, has so far convinced him, that he
found himself necessitated to enlarge it. He had before said, That all ways of
Worship are displeasing to God that are not expressly contained in the Holy
Scriptures, Disc. p. 3.
or warranted by Examples of Holy Men mentioned therein. He had used the
phrase, ways of Worship, frequently to signify circumstantial Modes of it. I
had told him, That if his words be taken in this strict sense, they contain
such an Assertion, that if a man believed it, he would find it hard to join in
any Assembly in the Christian World, and must renounce Communion with the
Parish Churches. (For many circumstantial Modes of Worship are practiced there,
which are neither expressly contained in the Scriptures, nor warranted by any
Examples of Holy Men that have used those particular circumstantial Modes, ex.
gr. The singing Psalms as appointed in the Common Prayer Book, or in the Meter
composed by Sternhold and Hopkins, the use of a stinted Liturgy in general, and
particularly our English one, Reading the Apocrypha, bowing at the Name of
Jesus, kneeling at the Sacrament, etc.) But his Lordship, instead of taking any
notice of this objection against his Rule, very silently now extends it, Admon.
p. 165.
only to make those things unlawful that are not contained in Scripture, or
warranted by Example of Holy Men in it, or may not be deduced by clear
consequence, or parity of Reason from them. Now it is evident that many things
may be drawn by clear consequence and parity of reason from the Precepts of
Scripture that are not expressly contained in 'em. And the same may be said of
Scripture Examples. So that the Bishop has now really charged his Rule by this
new comprehensive Addition to it, and as it is now laid down, it is much the same
with what I have asserted, though I think not so clear. And now he will find,
there is nothing in our Worship but what is easily justifiable by his own Rule
in this just latitude: For our manner of singing it self, (which is the
Instance he so often insists on) may be drawn by just consequence and by parity
of reason, both from the Precepts and Examples of singing in the Holy
Scriptures. For if we must sing Psalms, and that in a way most conducive to
general Edification, we must use such Meter and Tunes as the People can join
in: And if the Jews used such sort of Meter and Tunes as were most known and
common among them, we may by parity of reason choose those that are most
familiar to us. And now I hope the Bishop will, upon the review, see how little
reason he had to except against this part of the Remarks, when they have really
obliged him to reform and correct his own Rule, and bring it up to that I had
laid down, though to conceal the matter, he has thought fit to misunderstand and
pervert mine, or rather to coin a new one for me.

2. The Bishop alleges, That I endeavor to persuade the Dissenters of his
Diocese, that the greatest Exception against joining with the established
Church, is not the matter of their Public ordinary Worship. On which he makes
several Observations.

Before I consider 'em, I must premise that it is true, I have told his Lordship
that the Contest between the established Church and Dissenters, does not lie
chiefly about their ordinary Lord's Day Worship, but what occurs in other
Offices, and chiefly about the corruptions and abuses of Discipline, and it is
no more than has been frequently suggested by the most judicious N.C. Divines
that have wrote on the Subject of our Differences. But why does he pretend that
I diswade any Dissenters from joining with the established Church (if he mean it
concerning all occasional Communion with 'em) when I have so expressly declared
my Judgment for it, and in vain urged him to the like declaration of his
Charity toward us, and never pretend to allege our Differences in Reference
to Worship or Discipline, as any Argument against such occasional Communion in
their ordinary Lord's Day Service. There is no reason then to pervert what I
have offered to such an uncharitable purpose, so that his following
Observations are founded on a mistaken supposition. And therefore I shall
content my self with these short Remarks on 'em.

1. I did then, and do still think it requisite to acquaint the Reader, that
the Bishop had not in this Discourse so much as touched the Principal Matters
in Difference between the established Church and the Dissenters, and
particularly those to which this charge of Human Inventions does most properly
belong. And whereas be now tells us, that if he writ about Discipline, we
should be less pleased with his performance, Adm. p. 165, 166.
because he must look on the general Frame of our whole Constitution as a mere
Human Creature, etc. I must so far agree with him. That if he treat that
Subject in the same manner that he has done this about Worship, we shall
certainly be less pleased with it, because all those faults that occur in the
manner of handling this Subject, will be the more aggrevated if he repeat 'em
on another.

2. Whereas the Bishop pretends, I desire to shift ground, and thence presumes
I apprehend some disadvantage in it. I do not find he has any reason for such a
Triumph for my having avoided the consideration of any thing in his Book that
carried the face of an Argument: Nor have I any need to multiply Matters of
Controversy from any Answer that his Lordship has yet given to the Remarks.
Admon. p. 46.
And whereas he says, That I attempt not to justify their sitting at Prayers,
nor their omitting to add their Amen to their Prayers, nor the manner and
frequency of their Communion, nor their way of singing Psalms; I shall only
add, That for sitting at Public Prayer, I was no more obliged to defend any
particular persons in that posture that indulge it out of sloth, than he to
defend the Toying or Laughing, that is too often used in their Churches: But his
Lordship was obliged, either to defend his charging this upon our Opinion, as
if we taught, That no postures of Reverence may be lawfully used; and condemned
such as standing and kneeling as Relics of Idolatry; or else to retract so
heinous Calumnies as these must be, if they are untrue and groundless. For
adding Amen, I shall, if that will please the Bishop, concur with him that it is
more agreeable to Scripture Pattern, that the People pronounce it more audibly;
but I hope this omission signifies nothing to his Charge of Human Inventions.
For the Matter of Celebrating the Lord's Supper, if it refer to the posture, I
hope the Bishop is convinced, that ours is more agreeable to Scripture Pattern.
For the frequency of it, I hope he will allow the generality of the Dissenters
have much the advantage above the generality of the Parish Churches by
communicating much oftener. And for what concerns the Practice of the Dissenters
in his Diocese, it has been already considered in the Account of Matters of
Fact, and I have there shown that their way of Administering it once a year, is
equivalent to its being Administered thrice in the Parish Churches, as to the
frequency of their Members Communicating. And for singing Psalms, I have
already said enough to show him that our Practice needs no Reformation, but
rather his unreasonable prejudices against this part of Divine Worship, common
both to them and us.

3. The Bishop need take no pains to prove, That my demands about the
Reformation of the Discipline of the established Church, are not Arguments
against all occasional Communion with 'em. For they were never propo'd for that
end; but then I must tell him, That where there are in a Kingdom two Parties,
or Bodies of Protestants, in one of whom both the Worship and Discipline of
Christ is more fully restored to its primitive simplicity and purity, in the
other there are some defects and corruptions left in their Worship and
Discipline almost entirely neglected or perverted and abused. I think every
considerate Christian should prefer the stated Communion of that Party, in
which necessary Reformation has made a happier progress, and those better
Reformed Churches, have no reason to subject themselves to those corruptions
they have rejected. And moderate and wise men will separate from the Churches
of neither Party, as if they were no true Churches, and no part of the Church
Catholic, but will rather to show their regard to Truth, more statedly
communicate with those on whose side it lies in the Matters in Difference, and
yet to express their Charity, maintain occasional Communion with the other, so
far as they can do it without Practicing what themselves think unlawful.

4. Whereas the Bishop is so much displeased with those Requests that I have
offered to the Conforming Clergy, relating to those Practices wherein we
chiefly desire some Reformation of their present Discipline, and thinks me very
unreasonable in proposing 'em, and cannot see to what good purpose they can
serve; I shall, to give him all the satisfaction I can, acquaint him with the
true Reasons of my offering 'em.

1. I take the Abuses, of which some Reformation is there requested, to be the
chief Obstacles to that happy Union among us, which has been so long the
earnest desire of all good men, and I hope I can most sincerely say my own. So
that I think none who have that end in their Eye, can be reasonably blamed for
humbly proposing to Public Consideration so proper and effectual means to
attain it; from which I thought his Lordship's Discourse had some tendency to
divert the minds of men by amusing 'em with a new Dispute of Human Inventions.
And therefore I thought this a very suitable occasion to lay open the main
grounds of our unhappy Differences, that if any charitable Persons should think
of any attempts to compose them, they might by a true view of the Disease judge
of the Remedy proper to heal it. And truly, 'till these Corruptions be
reformed, I see as yet little reason to hope for any concord in our practice,
though I would hope to see much greater in our mutual Affections.

2. I take these to be abuses, which the generality of the most judicious and
learned, as well as sober and charitable of the Conforming Clergy and Laity are
sensible of, and would readily concur in their desires and endeavors to
reform, if they had a fair opportunity for it, so that I did not believe these
Requests would be any matter of just offense to them, nor do I yet find that
they are. And for the offense of any that would perpetuate our Divisions, by
keeping up those Corruptions that are the chief Engine of 'em, because they are
serviceable to their Secular Interest, I think not my self much obliged to
regard it. The Glory of God, and Concord of Christians are so much more
valuable an Interest, that we may justly pursue it, though it should clash with
the Humors, the Ambition or Avarice of Men, to which too many even of the
Clergy, have too long Sacrificed the more precious Concernments both of the
Churches Purity and Peace.

There are two things indeed which the Bishop Accuses those Requests, of which
I am concerned to consider,

1. That some of 'em are founded on most unjust Representations of their
Practices and Principles, which if truly Represented needs no Reformation, as
may appear (says he) from his adding to, Admon. p. 171.
and taking from our third and fourth Canons, p. 179. And may farther appear in
the 2d, 3d, 4th, 7th, 8th, 11th, 12th, and 13th Requests. Now I have reviewed
all these, and can see no such unjuct Representations in 'em. So that I think,
his Lordship had been more just, if he had, either never advanced this Charge
against me, or had taken the pains to prove it. Particularly, I cannot imagine,
wherein I have added to these two Canons, in what I have cited of 'em, or why I
must be said to take from 'em, because I only cite that part of 'em, which my
Discourse there led me to take notice of.

2. He is pleased to insinuate, That I give ill Language in those Requests; and
to that purpose faith, That I expose the Kingdom and Protestant Inhabitants of
it, as again, overspread with Swearing, Profanation of the Lord's Day,
Uncleanness, Pride, Luxury, etc. An Imputation (says he) which I can by no
means allow to be general; there being, I am persuaded by the goodness of God,
a manifest abatement of these in this Diocese.

Answ. I should be glad to hear of such an Abatement of these Sins in his
Diocese, and doubt not if true, that the Dissenting Ministers have been no way
negligent to contribute toward it. But if the Bishop deny the Truth of this
Complaint, concerning the generality of the Protestants of this Kingdom, as
it is there delivered, he sees with other eyes, than any sober Person I have yet
conversed with. For Swearing and Profanation of the Lord's Day, no good Man can
converse in any part of the Kingdom, without being a sorrowful Ear and
Eyewitness of it. Nor does there appear any considerable abatement of those
other Crimes, from what was before, besides what the diminution of men's Estates
have necessitated them to. So that I cannot imagine what ill Language it should
be, to mention and lament the revival of these Vices, and request all Ministers
to concur in their endeavors, to preserve or reclaim those under their care
from 'em. And I fear that the generality of Protestants among us, need the
loudest call we can give 'em to Repentance, instead of such an undeserved
Commendation as tends to persuade 'em, there is not so great and general a
necessity of it. The common guilt is too great and too deeply aggravated, to be
either concealed or extenuated, and deserves a fuller Description and a severer
Reproof then I had then occasion for.

III. The third Allegation which the Bishop says, I use to take off the force
of his Book, is, That he has omitted to handle that part of the Worship of the
established Church, Admon. p. 54.
against which the Dissenters have the greatest Exception, and particularly
what refers to Baptism.

Answ. I felt no such force in his Book, as needed this new Dispute to take it
off. But it is true enough, That the Debate about Human Inventions does more
particularly concern Baptism, than the other parts of Worship his Lordship had
insisted on.

And therefore, since the Bishop has offered us something new on this Subject,
I shall the more willingly address my self to the Examination of it, because
the precedent part of the Admonition, has left the Argument between us almost
wholly untouched, and contains little but such slight Cavils about it, as were
in effect obviated in the Remarks themselves. And here

I. The Bishop gives us the Reason why he omitted this part of Worship, viz.

1. "Because it was occasional, Admon. p. 172, 173.
not ordinary.

1. Answ. But he knew that in a Discourse about the Inventions of Men in the
Worship of God, it was proper to consider that part of Worship about which that
Dispute chiefly lay.

2. Because he found the Defects and Additions of our Directory so great in
this Office, that they deserved a Discourse by themselves. Admon. p. 173, 174.
And accordingly he mentions these following Defects in the Directory.

1. There is no express Covenant ordered in the Directory, to be made in the
name of the Child Baptized, either by the Parent or any else, though there be no
other way of engaging a Child that cannot Covenant for it self.

2. There is no Profession of the Christian Faith required in the Directory
from any Parent or Offerer of any Child.

3. There is no solemn Recognition of the Vow of Baptism required from Persons
Baptized in their Infancy, when they come to understand their Duty. As it is in
Confirmation with us.

4. The express words of the Covenant, are not prescribed out of the Word of
God, but is left to the Discretion of every Minister, to impose what he will on
the Baptized, etc.

Answ. I know no great harm to the Cause of Dissenters, if we should own there
are some Omissions in the Directory; especially when the Compilers, to avoid
the rigorous and imposing humor, that had too long reigned in others, seem to
have left many things to the discretion of particular Pastors, which they would
not positively enjoin. And for these Defects which the Bishop has cited out of
Mr. Baxter's Treatise of Infant Baptism, they are not so material as his
Lordship seems to imagine, and are easily supplied by every Minister that
thinks more express Professions requisite than are there positively enjoined.

As to the first, The making of an Express Covenant in the name of the Child,
if the Bishop mean by it, that the Parent should explicitly profess his
Dedicating his Child to God, and bringing it thereby under a Solemn Obligation
to the Duties of his Covenant, this is really included in that Profession he is
required by the Directory to make of his desire to have it Baptized: and
accordingly it is usual for the Ministers to propose the Question more fully to
this purpose; Do you profess your desire of having this Child dedicated by
Baptism to the Faith, Worship and Service of God the Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost? But if he mean that the Parent or Offerer of the Child should make such
a Profession in the Child's name, as our Sponsors are ordered to do in the
Common Prayer Book, it is so far from being a Defect in our Directory that it
enjoins no such thing, that it is no small Blemish of the Office of Baptism in
the Service Book, that it requires such a Profession from 'em, as personating
the Child they present. And that his Lordship may be assured Mr. Baxter
intended no such Express Covenanting in the name of the Child as this is, I
shall produce his own words (and the rather because I take them to carry great
weight and force in 'em) in his N. Conformity stated, etc. he brings in the
Lawyer asking, What is your fourth Objection against our way of Baptism? To
which the Minister thus Answers: That in personating the Child, they say, that
they (and so he by them) does at present believe, renounce and desire, etc.
falsely intimating that Infants are at present bound to do this by another. And
yet the same Men plead that God does not accept him for the Faith of his
Parents, when as God requires no Faith or Repentance of Infants, but only that
they be the Seed of Penitent Believers devoted to Christ. And in the Catechism
it is said, that (Repentance and Faith are required of Persons to be Baptized;
and that Infants who cannot perform these, are Baptized because they promise
'em by their Sureties, which Promise when they come to Age, themselves are
bound to perform.) Where note, that the former Common Prayer Book had [They
perform 'em by their Sureties] They perceived that having said Faith and
Repentance are requisite, Infants they saw must have at present what is
requisite at present. And they knew that they had them not themselves, and so
were fain to hold that the Sureties Faith and Repentance was theirs, and a
performance of that required Condition. But the Makers of the new Book saw that
this would not hold, and so they say, "[Though Faith and Repentance be required
of Persons to be Baptized, yet Infants are Baptized because they promise 'em by
their Sureties to be hereafter performed,] amending the former Error by a
greater or a double one: 1. Granting Faith and Repentance are pre-requisite,
and yet confessing that Infants have neither of their own or Sureties for 'em,
and yet are to be Baptized. 2. Or making a Promise Future Faith and Repentance
to be Present Faith and Repentance. 3. Or though Faith and Repentance be
requisite in those that are to be Baptized, yet God will at present justify
and save all that have it not in Infancy, because they promise it hereafter.
All plain Contradictions; as if they said, It Is requisite in Persons to be
Baptized, and it is not requisite. L -- How would you have 'em have answered
these? M. Professed Faith and Repentance are requisite in adult Persons to be
Baptized; and in Infants, that they be the Seed of the Faithful, devoted by
them to God in Christ, according to his offered Covenant of Grace.

Thus far that accurate Divine, from whom his Lordship may learn, That the
modesty of the Compilers of the Directory, which made their Orders about this
Matter, seem defective by leaving some Particulars to the prudence and liberty
of particular Ministers, is far more excusable, than the assurance of those who
impose in such solemn Professions, things so confused and inconsistent. If
there be any defect in their Orders, it is easily supplied; but the mistakes of
the Service Book are remedilesly imposed on all that Administer this Ordinance
according to it.

For the second Defect, viz. That there is in the Directory no Profession of
the Christian Faith required from the Parent or Offerer of any Child; I think
there is such a virtual Profession required by the Directory, when it enjoins
the Minister to require from the Parent, a solemn Promise to bring up his Child
in the knowledge of the Grounds of the Christian Religion, and in the Nurture
and Admonition of the Lord. For this implys his owning himself the Christian
Religion; besides that his being a known Professor of it, is presupposed to his
Childrens Admission to that Ordinance. Nor does the Directory hinder the
Minister from requiring a more express Profession from the Parent, of the
Christian Faith, where it is doubtful whether he own it or no. And I am sure
the Form of Baptism drawn up by the N. C. Divines at the Savoy-Conference, in
their Proposals for Accommodation, does expressly require it; and I have
observed it ordinarily required, at least in general terms.

For the third and fourth Defects of the Directory, That there is no solemn
Recognition of the Vow of Baptism required of Persons Baptized in Infancy, when
they come to understand their Duty, as there is in the Confirmation practiced
in the established Church; and that the express words of the Covenant are not
prescribed out of the Word of God. Though I take this to be an Omission, and
therefore have both my self practiced, and known many others practice that
Confirmation recommended in the Reformed Liturgy, drawn up by the N. C. Divines
at the Savoy-Conference, ( according to which no Person Baptized is admitted to
the Lord's Supper, till at years of discretion, not only understand the
Baptismal Covenant, but with his own mouth, and with his own consent openly
before the Church, ratify and confirm it, and promise his faithful observance
of it to the end. In which Liturgy there is also an excellent Form of the
Baptismal Covenant, drawn up as agreeable to the Scripture as any I have yet
seen) yet I think this Omission of the Directory, far more excusable than what
the Common Prayer Book imposes in reference to Confirmation, of which they have
both made something too like a Sacrament, and also turned a very useful
practice, and agreeable to the general Rules of Scripture into a Childish
Formality, as I had occasion to show in the Remarks. It Is easier to supply such
Defects, than to remove such unreasonable Impositions.

I shall conclude this Head, with observing that the Bishop has, of all Men,
the least reason to blame the Directory for these Defects: For unless he could
produce express Scriptural Precepts or Pattern for these things, which he says
the Directory has omitted, (as I think no Man can do it) he must, according to
his former Principles, censure 'em for Human Inventions, and rather commend the
Directory for omitting them.

For the Bishop's Charge against the Directory, for requiring Additional
Conditions contrary to Scripture Presidents, of which he gives us only one
Instance, viz. Its ordering that Baptism be not Administered in private Places,
Admon. p. 174.
but in the place of Public Worship, and in the face of the Congregation. I
suppose the Bishop will grant that it should ordinarily be Administered in
Public; and if these words of the Directory were intended in the strictest
sense they are capable of, I am sure the generality of Dissenters have receded
from the rigor of this Rule.

II. The Bishop comes to show that my Argument against the Cross is of no force.

Of this he only gives us this short Account, Admon. p. 175. His great
Objection against it is, That we make a new Human Sacrament, and then it must
be a Human Invention. And upon this the Bishop proceeds to give us a new
Account of his own concerning the Nature of a Sacrament, and endeavors to show
that the Cross is not made a Sacrament by 'em, according to that Account. Now
though I should have thought it fairer to have proposed the Argument in the same
manner I had done, yet in order to the bringing this Debate to some issue, I
shall do these two things.

1. I shall set the Argument I had proposed against the Cross in Baptism, in
its due light, by giving as distinct and clear an Account as I can, of the
Nature of those Parts of Positive Worship which we call Sacraments, and
applying it to the Subject in dispute.

2. I shall show the insufficiency of the Bishop's Answer to this Argument.

1. I shall set the Argument I had proposed against the Cross in Baptism in its
due light, by giving a distinct and clear Account of the Nature of those Parts
of Positive Worship which we call Sacraments, and applying it to the Subject in
dispute:

And this is the more necessary, not only because the uncertain signification
of the word Sacrament has involved this Subject in great obscurity and
confusion, but especially because the Account which the Bishop gives of it,
(when he supposes us ill-instructed in it, and proposes to inform us better)
seems to me not only indistinct, but also very lame and defective, omitting
several considerable uses of Sacraments, which were the chief strength of this
Argument against the Cross.

There are two Ordinances of Positive Worship prescribed in the New Testament,
viz. Baptism and the Lord's Supper: There have been two Names invented and
frequently used among Christian Writers, to signify the common nature of these
two Institutions, that of Mysteries in the Greek Church, and that of Sacraments
in the Latin, a word probably borrowed from the Military Oath which Soldiers
took with certain Rites appointed for that end, and which was called the
Military Sacrament. But it is the thing it self we are concerned to enquire
into. Now if we can fix upon the true general Notion, wherein these two
Ordinances of Baptism and the Lord's Supper agree, we may thence easily infer
what a Divine Sacrament is: For of that I am now speaking.

And if we attentively consider this Matter, we may soon observe, that those
two Ordinances of Baptism and the Lord's Supper agree in this, that they are
Foederal Rites, or Sacred Ceremonies instituted by God for Public Solemnizing
the Covenant between him and us. And on the other hand, in this they differ,
that the former is the Sacred Rite, whereby that Covenant is first publicly
Entered into; the latter is that whereby it is Renewed. And accordingly these
Positive Institutions under the Gospel, succeed in the place of two parallel
Ordinances, or foederal Rites under the Old Testament, viz. Circumcision and
the Feasts upon Sacrifices. By the former the Israelites were initiated into
that Covenant made with Abraham and his Seed: By the latter their League of
Amity and Peace with God, was (upon the Atonement made by Sacrifices) renewed
by these Feasts upon 'em. Of which more may occur anon.

Now these Sacred Rites that are appointed by God, both in our first public
Entrance into the Covenant, and our public Renewal of it at the Lord's Table,
are designed for several uses, and principally for the three following.

1. As representing signs for Instruction.

2. As obliging signs to Confirm and Ratify the Covenant Entered into.

3. As distinguishing Signs or Badges of our Profession, and the Relations we
thereby are invested in.

All these uses of 'em must be carefully and distinctly considered.

1. These Sacred Rites are used in these two Ordinances, as Representing Signs
for Instruction. (The infinitely wise God condescending herein to our infirmity
and weakness.)

Thus washing with Water, which is the Rite appointed in Baptism, is by its
resemblance instructive to us, both concerning the Privileges and Duties of
the Covenant we enter into.

Concerning the Privileges, Thus it is designed to represent our Natural
pollution and defilement, and the necessity of the Regenerating and Purifying
Virtue of the Holy Spirit. And hence we are said to be born of Water and the
Holy Spirit, 3 John 5.
i. e. formed to a new and divine Life by that sanctifying efficacy of the Holy
Spirit, which is compared to the purifying Virtue of Water. And elsewhere in
allusion to this Baptismal Rite, we are said to be Saved by the Laver of
Regeneration, and the Renewing of the Holy Ghost, 3 Tit. 5.

Nay, this Rite seems also designed to instruct us concerning our Guilt, as
well as Pollution, and of the necessity of our being Cleans'd from it by the
Laver of our Mediatour's Blood. For the most judicious Expositors understand
those words of Ananias concerning the Remission of Sins, when he says to Saul
upon his Conversion, Arise and be Baptized, and wash away thy Sins, (or be thou
washed from thy Sins, (...)) calling on the Name of the Lord Jesus, 22 Acts 16.
And accordingly such a cleansing virtue is ascribed to the Redeemer's blood,
and that Expression of his Washing us from our Sins, in it, seems to carry an
Allusion to this Sacred Baptismal Rite. See 1 John 1.7. 1 Rev. 5.

The same Sacred Rite is designed to represent our Duty to us, viz. To renounce
the Defilements of Sin and of the World, and to consecrate our selves to a Life
of Holiness, as Christ's purified peculiar People. And this use of it the
Bishop omits in his Account. To this Rite those Expressions seem to refer, Such
were some of you, but ye are washed, ye are sanctified, 1 Cor. 6.11. And thus
the Apostle supposes in our Baptism, that there is a Resemblance of our Dying
with Christ, and our Rising with him, that should instruct us in our Duty, to
Dye to Sin, and Live to Righteousness, 6 Romans 3, 4, 5. 2 Col. 12. For our Dying
to Sin and Walking in newness of Life, is not signified in Baptism as the
Benefit conferred by God, as the Bishop seems to suppose, but rather as the Duty
required from us, though the renewing and purifying efficacy of the Holy Spirit,
whereby we are enabled to do so, is signified as a Benefit which we receive
from God.

The same I might observe concerning that other Institution of the Lord's
Supper, in whose Sacred Rites there is not only a Commemorative Representation
of the Death of Christ, but also an Instructive Representation of our Spiritual
Communion with him in his Body and Blood, (viz. in the precious Fruits of his
Sacrifice,) and of those Duties or Exercises of our Faith and Devotion to him,
by which we are said to Eat his Flesh and Drink his Blood, 6 John 53, 54.

I might observe the same concerning those two parallel Institutions under the
Old Testament, Circumcision and Religious Feasts upon Sacrifices. But this use
of Sacraments being so obvious, I shall not insist any farther upon it, but
only add, That though I suppose all Sacramental Signs to be Representing ones,
and to carry such an Instructive Resemblance and Allusion, yet I do not suppose
all barely instructive Signs to be Sacramental or Foederal ones. For there
seems to be more requisite to such

2. The Sacred Rites in Baptism and the Lord's Supper are intended also as
obliging Signs to Confirm and Ratify that Covenant that is then Entered into
or Renewed between God and us.

It Is evidently so in Baptism; for the Sacred Rite there used is both,

1. An obliging Sign on God's part; whereby he confirms and ratifies the
Promises of his Covenant to all that are interessed therein, even that grand
comprehensive Promise of being the God of the Faithful, and of their Seed, and
particularly that eminent Promise of the Remission of Sins. See 17 Genesis 7, 11.
and compare it with 2 Acts 38, 39. Repent and be Baptized every one of you for
the Remission of Sins, and ye shall receive the Gift of the Holy Ghost; for the
Promise is to you and your Children, etc. And our being Baptized into the Name
of the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, implys his engagement to be a reconciled
Father, Redeemer and Sanctifier, to all that sincerely devote themselves to him.

So in that other Foederal Rite of the Lord's Supper, 22 Luke 20.
it is said of the Cup, That it is the New Testament in the Blood of Christ, i.
e. This Sacred Memorial of his Blood is like an Authentic Seal set to the New
Testament, wherein so many precious Legacies are conveyed to us as the Fruits
of his Death and Sacrifice.

And the same may also be observed concerning Circumcision, both in the place
fore-quoted 17 Genesis 7, 11 -- and in its being called by the Apostle Paul the
Seal of the Righteousness of Faith, (viz. of that right to impunity and life,
which Abraham was as a Believer entitled to through the Merits of that Redeemer,
who was his promised Seed) 4 Romans 11.

So in their Religious Feasts upon Sacrifices, God's admitting the Offerers or
Guests to his Table, was a solemn Ratification of the League of Amity and Peace
renewed between em, through the virtue of that future attoning Sacrifice of
Christ, of which the Legal ones were only Types and Figures.

2. This Sacred Rite of washing with Water in Baptism, is no less an obliging
Sign from us to God, whereby we bind our selves to the Duties of his Covenant.

Now this important use of a Sacrament, the Bishop not only omits in his
Description of it, but plainly Denies that it belongs to its nature. For Admon.
p. 180. he asserts it to me a Mistake concerning Sacraments, to suppose. That
they are Signs from us to God; whereas he affirms 'em to be wholly (for only)
Signs from God to us: I confess this seems very surpri^ing, because if this be
a Mistake, it is such a Mistake as he himself has run into in his Discourse: For
there p. 4. he gives this reason, Why the Celebration of the Sacraments is a
part of Outward Worship, viz. because in them we not only express our
dependence on God for his grace, but likewise oblige and bind our selves to
serve him. Now how this can be true, without making the Sacramental Rite a Sign
from us to God, of that obligation to his Service, I cannot comprehend. So that
his Lordship seems to me in this Particular inconsistent with himself, and
speaks more accurately of these Matters, where his Partiality to his Cause does
not mislead his Judgment. But since he now asserts this to be a Mistake, and
demands some place of Scripture to prove this Notion, of a Sacraments being a
Sign from us to God, (See Admon. p. 180.) I shall endeavor herein to give him
all reasonable satisfaction.

And this Account of Sacraments I shall particularly prove, in reference to
Baptism, which is the Sacrament in dispute.

That Baptism is a Sign from us to God of our Obligation to the Duties of his
Covenant, as well as a Sign from God to us of the Truth of his Promises, is
evident from the Apostle Peter's excellent Description of that Internal and
Saving Baptism which the External Washing is the Sign of, viz. 1 Pet. 3.25.
That it is not the putting away the filth of the Flesh, (i. e. Baptism is not
merely or principally that) but the Answer of a good Conscience toward God.
Which words manifestly allude to the Covenant-Transaction that passes between
the great God and the Adult Person baptized, (for of such the Apostle here
speaks) and to the Questions that were to that end proposed to such as received
this Seal of God's Covenant. They were ask't, If they believed in the Lord
Jesus with all their heart? (See 8 Acts 37.) or, as some ancient Christian
Writers propose the Question, If they recounc'd the Devil and his Angels, the
World and its Pomps? If they believed in, If they devoted themselves to the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost? etc. And their sincere Profession and Promise of
doing so, which in Baptism they ratified by this External Rite of Washing with
Water, is that which the Apostle here calls the Answer of a good Conscience
toward God. So that the Apostle was so far from supposing that Baptism was not
a Sign from us to God, that he rather defines it by this part of its end and
use, viz. To be a Solemn Rite whereby we profess to engage our Hearts to the
Duties of his Covenant. And indeed since Baptism is the Solemnizing a mutual
Covenant between the Blessed God on the one part, and our Selves or our Seed on
the other, it is first a Sign from us to God, of our Consent to the proposed
Terms of his Covenant, before it can be a Sign from him to us, of our or our
Childrens interest in those Benefits of his Covenant that presuppose our
consent as the Condition thereof. It Is the Baptism of Repentance for the
Remission of Sins, 1 Mark 4. and is therefore first a Sign of our Repentance
toward God, before it can be a Sign from him of the Remission of Sins. And so
it is proposed by the Apostle Peter at the first time we read of its
Administration to his Adult Converts, 2 Acts 38, 39. Repent and be Baptized
every one of you in the Name of Christ for the Remission of Sins, for the
Promise is unto you and your Children. Where they were by Baptism first to
profess their Repentance toward God, and Faith in our Lord Jesus, and then
receive the promised Benefit, Remission of Sins. Nay, Christ's own Command to
his Apostles, first, to Disciple or Proselyte all Nations, and then to Baptize
'em, plainly implys that one great use of Baptism was to be a solemn Bond upon
'em, to the Duties of that Christian Profession they had embraced, and the
Baptizing 'em in the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, has been always
supposed to imply a Solemn Dedication of 'em by this Sacred Rite to the Faith,
Worship, and Service of that Blessed Trinity, into whose Name they are
Baptized. There is in that Institution a Seal set to the Covenant of God on our
part, as well as on his: To which it is not improbable that those words of the
Apostle Paul refer, 2 Timothy 2.19. -- Nevertheless the Foundation (or as some
reader the word (...), Tabula contractus, the Covenant) of God stands sure,
having this Seal (on God's part) The Lord knows them that are his; and (this
Seal on our part) Let him that names the Name of Christ depart from iniquity.
As the Covenant is mutual, so the External Rite is intended to ratify our
Restipulation as well as God's Promise, and accordingly our breach of the
Baptismal Covenant by Apostasy or Infidelity is Perjury, and therefore so
often in the Scripture Language represented by the breach of the Conjugal Vow,
that the Adulteress is guilty of. And this Notion of Baptism as an obliging
Sign from God to us, is the more unreasonably denied by the Bishop, if we
consider, that it is this very use of Baptism, that chiefly occasioned the Name
of a Sacrament being given to it, because Baptism was reckoned (like the
Military Oath of the Roman Soldiers) as a solemn Listing the Person Baptized
into the Service and Warfare of Christ against the World, the Flesh, and the
Devil. So that the Bishop has excluded that from the nature and notion of a
Sacrament, which was the chief, if not the only ground, of this Rite of the
Christian Religion being called one.

And it were as easy to show the same concerning the other Institutions that
are called Sacraments. Thus as Circumcision was a Token of the Covenant between
God and Abraham and his Seed in their Generations; so 'twas an obliging Sign on
their part, as well as on God's part. It obliged them to receive and obey the
Revelations of the Divine Will to 'em. And hence, after the delivery of the Law
of Moses, Circumcision was an External Bond on those that received it to
observe that Law; as the Apostle Paul plainly intimates to us, 5 Gal. 3. -- He
that was Circumcised made himself a Debtor to the Law to do it; i. e. brought
himself under a solemn Tie thereto by this External Rite.

That the Feasts upon Sacrifices under the Law were Foederal Rites (in allusion
to the general Custom of those Eastern Nations, to Confirm mutual Covenants by
Eating and Drinking together; See 26 Genesis 30, 31.31 Genesis 44, 45, 46. 9 Jos.
14.41 Psalm. 9.5 Lam. 6. Obad. 7. v.) is so largely proved by the Learned Dr.
Cudworth in his excellent Treatise on the Lord's Supper and Feast upon a
Sacrifice, that I shall refer the Reader to it for fuller satisfaction. And
that one passage in the 50 Psalm v. 5. is sufficient to put it out of doubt;
Gather my Saints together, those that have made a Covenant with me by
Sacrifice. Now the Covenant was made and celebrated, not merely by Offering it
up, but chiefly by their Religious Feast upon it.

And as the Lord's Supper succeeds in the place and stead of those Jewish
Feasts upon Sacrifices, so it is evidently designed as such a Foederal Rite,
whereby we renew our League of Peace with God, upon the Memorials of the
Attoning Sacrifice of his own Son by our renewed Consent to the Terms of his
Covenant: And hence the Apostle Paul warns his Corinthian Converts against the
Idolatrous Practice of Feasting in the Temples of the Heathen Idols, as
inconsistent with the Obligations which their Feasting at the Lord's Table had
laid upon 'em to be the Worshippers of the only true God, who was too jealous
of his own Honor to admit of any Rival in it. See 1 Cor. 10 chapter from the
fourteenth to the twenty third verse.

3. These Foederal Rites of Baptism and the Lord's Supper must be considered as
intended also to be distinguishing Signs of our Christian Profession, and the
Relations which we are thereby invested in.

Thus our Baptism is the honorable Badge of our Discipleship, whereby we are
discriminated from the Infidel World. We do hereby put on the Livery of Christ,
(as those words of the Apostle Paul imply, -- 3 Gal. 27. For a many of you as
have been Baptized into Christ, have put on Christ.) And therefore he adds,
they were no more to be distinguished into Jew or Greek, etc. but all were one
in Christ Jesus. This one Livery was to be the common Sign of their belonging
to him as their one Lord and Master. And accordingly, our partaking of one
External Baptism, is made a Mark and Character of those that belonged to that
one visible Body, or Church of which Christ is the Lord and Head, as our
partaking of one Internal Baptism is the certain Mark of our belonging to the
one invisible Church, or mystical Body of Christ. See 1 Ephesians. 4, 5, 6. To the
same purpose we read elsewhere, that we are by one Spirit baptized into one
Body, whether we be Jews or Gentiles, whether we be bond or free, and have been
all made to drink into one Spirit. The latter words, of being made to drink
into one Spirit, according to the general consent of the best Expositers, refer
to the Lord's Supper, as the former do to Baptism. And the words plainly imply,
that Baptism and the Lord's Supper are the Symbol and the Bond of our External
Communion, as Members of the visible Church, as by partaking of the sanctifying
Operations of the same Holy Spirit, we become Members of one mystical Body of
Christ. So that by our Baptism we are incorporated into the Christian
Community, and thereby discriminated in our right to its External Privileges
from them that are without, who are yet Aliens and Foreigners. And so by the
Lord's Supper we are, as partakers of Christ's Holy Table, distinguished from
them that partake of the Table of Devils, and are in fellowship (or Communion)
with them -- 1 Cor. 10.20, 21.

Thus was Circumcision the discriminating Mark of these that embraced the Faith
of Abraham, from such as were Aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel, and
Strangers to the Covenants of Promise. Circumcised and Uncircumcised was
equivalent to one that did, or did not own the Jewish Religion.

Having thus far cleared the general Nature and Uses of these two Institutions
in the Christian Religion which we call Sacraments, (for all the particular
uses of each of 'em, I am not now concerned to consider) I come to apply this
Account to the Matter in Debate.

And accordingly, it is obvious to any that shall consider the foregoing
Account, that there is one Use of these Foederal or Sacramental Rites that does
necessarily presuppose Divine Institution, viz. Their being obliging signs on
God's part to ratify his Promises. For it were too absurd for any to imagine
that God will oblige himself by signs he never appointed for that end. And
therefore the Papists themselves pretend their new Sacraments to be Divine
ones, by feigning God's Institution for 'em.

When therefore I speak of a Human Sacrament, I mean no more by it, than an
External Rite set up by mere Human Authority, without any pretense of Divine
Institution, for several Sacramental Uses, such as conconstitute it as truly a
part of Religious Worship as Baptism and the Lord's Supper are. So that it
wants nothing but God's Instituting it to be a Seal to his part of the
Covenant, as Men have made it a Seal to their part, to render it as proper a
Sacrament as either of the two former. And it is only in this sense that I
suppose the Cross to be made a Human Sacrament by the established Church. It Is
made by 'em a Sacrament, as far as Men can make one of a Religious Rite that
they can pretend no Divine Authority for. And this is sufficient to prove it a
sinful Human Invention, as I shall now show, in prosecuting the Particulars
here suggested.

I. The Cross is set up for several Sacramental Uses, even the like Uses as
Baptism and the Lord's Supper are appointed for.

For according to the foregoing Account of these Foederal or Sacramental Rites,

1. It Is set up as a Representing or Instructive sign. And that both in the
Duties and the Benefits of the New Covenant.

It Is set up as Instructive in the Duties of it. And this the Bishop grants
when he owns, ( Admon. p. 178.) That the Cross is used to signify the Return
we ought to make to God, for the Benefits received in Baptism. And indeed the
words of the Service Book put this out of doubt: We sign this Child, etc. in
token that he shall not be ashamed to Confess the Faith of Christ crucified,
etc.

It Is set up as Instructive in the Benefits of the New Covenant. This indeed
the Bishop denis in the place last quoted; and tells us, The Cross is not used
by 'em to signify any Grace or Benefit communicated from God. But I think
there is just ground to conclude the contrary from the Reason which the
Convocation alleges for Retaining the use of the Sign of the Cross, viz. That
the Holy Ghost by the Mouth of the Apostles did honor the name of the Cross so
far, that under it he comprehended not only Christ crucified, but the force,
effect and merit of his Death and Passion, with all the comforts, fruits and
promises we receive or expect thereby. See the Thirtieth Canon of the Church of
England. Now I would gladly know what this Reason can signify to vindicate
their retaining the use of the Cross, unless they supposed it a fit external
Sign to signify the same things which the Holy Ghost had honored the Name of
the Cross to signify. And this Inference seems the more just, from the account
they give of this Ceremony of Crossing, as practiced by the Primitive
Christians, viz. That they signed their Children with the Sign of the Cross
when they were Christened, to dedicate 'em by that Badge to his Service, whose
Benefits bestowed on 'em in Baptism, the name of the Cross did represent. And
consequently, the Sign of it is designed to represent too.

But,

2. Which is more considerable, The Cross is made by the established Church an
obliging and ratifying sign on our part, to bind us to the Duties of God's
Covenant, even to the same which Baptism is appointed to oblige us to, viz. To
confess boldly the Faith of Christ crucified, To fight manfully under his
Banner against the Flesh, the World, and the Devil, and to continue Christ's
faithful Soldiers and Servants to our lives end. And I may still renew the
Question proposed in the Remarks, What more peculiar Duties of the New Covenant
could Baptism oblige us to? And to put the matter, if possible, out of doubt,
the Infant is expressly said in the Canon to be by this Badge dedicated to the
Service of Christ. See Coll. of Cases, 2d Edit p. 377, 378.
I know indeed the ingenious Author of the Case relating to the Cross in
Baptism, distinguishes here between and immediate and proper, and an improper
and declarative Dedication, and accordingly would persuade us that the
Convocation only designed the latter; partly, because they refer to the words
used in the Service Book when the Child is cross't, partly because they suppose
the Child dedicated by Baptism before, and suppose Baptism complete without the
sign of the Cross.

But I see not that either of these Reasons warrant us to take the words of the
Convocation in so very strained and improper a sense as this is, viz. That when
they affirm the Cross to be a lawful outward Ceremony, and honorable Badge
whereby the Infant is dedicated to the Service of him that died on the Cross,
they should mean no more than that it is a lawful outward Ceremony and
honorable Badge, to declare that the Infant has been dedicated to Christ by
another outward Ceremony and honorable Badge before. For it is evident that the
words used when the Child is signed with the sign of the Cross, do as fully and
directly express a proper immediate Dedication, as the words used when it is
Baptized, and therefore we have no reason from them to apply so unusual and odd
a sense to the words of the Canon, and the Convocations supposing Baptism
complete without the sign of the Cross; does no way Argue that they designed
not a proper renewed Dedication by the Cross; for though we are dedicated by
Baptism, yet we properly renew that Dedication as often as we attend the Lord's
Table. And the Romish Church does in, their Ritual, See Rit. Romans Paris 1635.
p. 7.
suppose no more necessary by Divine Right to this Sacrament than we do, and
speak of their Ceremonies as only pertaining to the Solemnity of that
Sacrament, yet they use several other Rites for proper immediate Dedication,
besides that of washing with water

3. The Cross is made a distinguishing sign of our Christian Profession, and
the Relations we are thereby invested in.

For this evidently follows from its being made the Honorable Badge of our
Dedication to the Service of a crucified Savior. So that by being cross't, we
do truly (according to the established Church) wear the Livery of Christ, as by
being Baptized. And this former Paternal sign is as effectually made the common
Symbol and Tessera of our Discipleship, the mark of our belonging to him as our
Lord and Master, as the latter can be.

II. Now from hence I farther infer, That the Cross is made as much a Sacrament
as Men can make any sign of their own, for which they can produce no Divine
Institution. It Is set up for most of the same uses as Baptism, nay for such
uses as do constitute it a proper part of positive Worship, that has no stamp
of Divine Authority, and consequently it is made a sinful Human Invention. For
if (as the Bishop himself supposes) all ways of Worship are displeasing to God,
that are not expressly contained in the Holy Scriptures, nor warranted by the
Examples of Holy Man therein, or (as he now adds) that cannot be by parity of
Reason deduced thence; much more are all parts of Worship truly displeasing to
him, (and such as our Savior justly censures for vain Worship) that are no way
Instituted. And yet, that all those Rites in Religious Worship, whereby we
oblige and bind our selves to serve God, or (which is the same) Dedicate our
selves to his Service, are a proper part of Positive Worship, is evident from
the Bishop's own confession, who ( p. 4. of his Discourse) does therefore make
the Sacraments to be a part of outward Worship, not only on the account of our
expressing therein, our dependence on the grace of God, but likewise on the
account of obliging and binding our selves by 'em to serve him. And doubtless,
it does as properly belong to God alone to appoint the Religious Rites whereby
we bind our selves to his Service, as to the Supreme Magistrate to appoint the
Ceremonies used in our taking the Oath of Fidelity and Allegiance. Nay it
belongs to him alone to appoint the Honorable Badge of our Discipleship, who
receives us into his Holy Covenant; and no inferior Pastors are any more
authorized to superadd any other Rite for this use, to that he has Instituted
already, than the Servant of any great Prince is warranted of his own Head to
prescribe to his Fellow Servants the wearing of a new Livery, as an Honorable
Badge of their belonging to such a Master, besides that which he has appointed
of his own choosing. To set up External Rites for such Sacramental uses as
these, viz. not only to instruct us in the Privileges and Duties of the New
Covenant, but to oblige and bind us to 'em, and to be the Honorable Badge of
our Christian Profession, when God has already instituted other Rites for these
very ends, is a piece of Presumption we dare not be guilty of: It Is an offering
him a part of Worship which has no stamp of his Authority, which therefore we
have no reason to hope he will accept; nay, which there is no shadow of Reason
for, if his own Foederal Rites be sufficient for all the ends they are
appointed for.

Having thus stared my Argument, I come

II. To show the insufficiency of the Bishop's Answer to this Argument.

All that I can find, he has directly replied to my Argument, is only this;
That the whole force of it seems to proceed from two Mistakes concerning the
nature of Sacraments: First, As if they were signs from us to God, and not
wholly from God to us. Secondly, As if we were to learn the true Nature of
Sacraments from the Schools and partial Definitions of interessed Disputants,
and not from the Holy Scriptures Hence, says the Bishop, he has not given us
one place of Scripture, to prove his imperfect Account of a Sacrament.

As to this Answer to the Argument, I need do no more for the Refutation of it,
than refer the Reader to the foregoing Account of a Sacrament, wherein I fully
proved concerning Sacraments in general, and particularly that of Baptism, that
they are as truly and properly signs from us to God, as from God to us; nay,
that they cannot be the latter without being the former. And this I have
proved, not from the Dictates of the Schools, but from the Oracles of God;
having quoted no other Human Authority but his own, and I hope he will not
reckon himself one of those Partial and Interessed Disputants he speaks of. So
that it is not the force of my Argument, but of his Answer, that proceeds from a
Mistake.

But I suppose his Lordship may lay more stress upon his Account of a
Sacrament, and his Application of it to vindicate the Cross, which therefore I
shall also briefly consider.

To this purpose he acquaints us, There are Three things necessary to make up a
Sacrament.

First, An outward visible sign instituted by God, signifying some Spiritual
Grace we expect from him.

Secondly, An Obligation on God by some Promise of his to grant us that
Spiritual Grace or Benefit whenever we duly use the visible Sign.

Thirdly, Our use of this visible Sign, without which we are not to expect the
Spiritual Benefit if we wilfully neglect it.

Accordingly the Bishop thinks me obliged to prove that These things concur in
the Cross in Baptism, viz That the established Church teaches that the Cross is
instituted by God to signify some Spiritual Grace we expect from him, and that
he has obliged himself by Promise to grant us that Spiritual Grace upon the use
of the Cross, and will deprive us thereof if we neglect it.

Now to show the insufficiency and weakness of this Answer, I need only suggest
these two things.

I. The Bishop has in this Account of Sacraments omitted several of those uses
and ends for which they were appointed, and particularly those from whence the
force of this Argument is derived. For he neither considers their being made
representing signs to instruct us in the duties of the New Covenant, nor (which
should have been chiefly observed) their being obliging signs to bind us to
'em, nor their being distinguishing badges of our Profession and Communion. And
yet these are very important uses of those Foederal Rites of Baptism and the
Lord's Supper, and such as chiefly occasioned their being called Sacraments.

2. He expects I should prove that which my Argument no way obliges me to, viz.
That the established Church teaches, that God has obliged himself by Promise to
grant us some Spiritual Benefit upon our use of the sign of the Cross, and will
deny that Benefit to all that neglect that sign. Now though he might justly have
expected me to prove this, if I had said, That the established Church feigns the
Cross to be a Sacrament of God's appointment, and uses it as such; yet it is
evident from the foregoing Account, that it is unreasonable to expect it in what
I call a Human Sacrament. For when I suppose it made a Human Sacrament, I
intend no more, then that it is made a Sacrament as far as Men can make one of a
Religious Rite of their own. Now they may make it a sacred Foederal Rite to
oblige and bind themselves to God's service; though it is absurd to expect they
should make it a Rite to oblige God to confer his Benefits. And their setting
it up to this former Sacramental use (as well as other uses aforementioned) is
sufficient, as I have shown him from his own Principles, to make it a sinful
Human Invention, as every part of Worship is that has no stamp of Divine
Authority. So that I can easily allow the Bishop, without any prejudice to my
Argument, That to be a Seal of God's part of the Covenant, is so necessary to a
true and Divine Sacrament, that what wants that, is but the lifeless Image of
one. But Men may presumptuously appoint Rites of their own to so many
Sacramental uses as shall as truly render 'em Parts of Divine Worship as Divine
Sacraments are, though they do not suppose God obliged to confer his Benefits on
all that use them. And by doing so, they set up such vain Worship as our
Savior condemns, as only taught by the Precepts of Men, 15 Matthew. 8, 9.
compared with 29 Isai. 13. So that the Bishop here only cavils at the name of
Human Sacraments, while he overlooks the plain force and stress of the
Argument, which depends not on the Name at all, but on the Uses, for which the
Cross is appointed. And I have showed it is appointed for all but that one that
necessarily supposes Divine Institution.

But because the Bishop now pretends to a Divine Warrant for the use of the
Cross to those purposes for which he supposes it appointed by the established
Church, it is requisite I should consider what he has offered on that Head.

II. The Bishop undertakes to show, That the use of the Cross in Baptism is
warranted by Scripture.

His Argument to prove this is drawn out to a considerable length, from p. 181.
to p. 187. And that I may not wrong him in contracting it, I shall take this
method in what I shall offer against it.

First, I shall show, That the Bishop's Argument does not reach the main use of
the Cross, which he was concerned to defend.

Secondly, I shall show that the fame Argument will justify many other Rites
added by the Romish Church to Baptism, and other parts of Worship, which they
have rejected as well as we.

Thirdly, I shall consider the distinct Propositions the Bishop has laid down,
and show where I judge the Argument in 'em to be weak and unconcluding.

First, I shall show that the Bishop's Argument does not reach the main use the
Cross which he was concerned to defend.

For he was chiefly obliged to defend the Cross's being made a Dedicating sign,
whereby we bind our selves to the service of Christ, and thereby a common
distinguishing Badge of our Christian Profession; whereas in his Argument he
attempts to prove no more, than that the Scripture does warrant our using it as
an Instructive sign to signify or express this particular Duty of our Glorying
in the sufferings of Christ. Now though I do not think he has produced us any
clear Scriptural warrant for this very use of the sign of the Cross, yet if he
had, what he has said falls very far short of justifying those two other more
important uses of it, which are more peculiar to Foederal or Sacramental Rites,
viz. It Is being a Rite of Dedication to the Service of Christ, and thereby the
Livery or Badge of the Christian Profession.

Secondly, I shall show that the Bishop's Argument will serve as well to
justify many other Rites which the Romish Church has added to Baptism and
other parts of Worship.

As to Baptism, a Papist may from the Bishop's Argument draw the following Plea
for several other Ceremonies added to it by the Roman Ritual; such as the
Priests putting salt into the mouth of the Infant, his anointing his ears and
nostrils with spittle, his putting a lighted Taper into the Infants or
Godfathers hand, his putting a white Garment on him, etc.

We are obliged (says the Bishop) to express the inward sense of our Minds
concerning God by outward means, the Scriptures command to express it by our
Actions as well as Words; as to these outward Actions, we are to use such as
the general Custom of our Country has made significant in the like Cases. Thus
because making the sign of the Cross is an Action, which universal Custom has
applied to signify our glorying in the sufferings of Christ, and it is proper
to make a Profession of doing so in our Baptism, Therefore the Scriptures
warrant our use of it in general, and particularly at that time. Admon. p. 181,
182, 183.

Since then (may the Papists in Italy or Spain argue) it is our Duty to savor
the things of God; To have our Lips seasoned with Wisdom and Grace; To open our
Ears to the Doctrine of Christ as becomes his Disciples; To preserve our
Garments clean by immaculate Purity of Life, that we may appear faultless
before the Tribunal of Christ; To walk in the Light by a blameless observance
of our Baptismal Vows, that we may with the wise Virgins be admitted to the
Heavenly Nuptials; Nay, since it is as proper to make a Profession of all this
in our Baptism, as of Glorying in the sufferings of Christ: And since the
Scriptures warrant us to make that Profession not only by Words, but also by
such Actions as the Universal custom of our Country has made significant to
those Uses, we are thereby warranted to use all the Rites forementioned in the
Celebration of Baptism, since by the universal custom of our Country, See Rit.
Romans
they are applied to signify our obligation to these undoubted Duties of
Christianity.

Nay, the Bishop's Argument will go farther: For since it is as lawful to
profess our Glorying in the sufferings of Christ in other parts of Religious
Worship as in Baptism, and universal custom has applied this Action to signify
our doing so, why do we not imitate, instead of blaming the Papists, for their
so frequently crossing themselves in all their Devotions? Or rather, since the
Scriptures command us to express the inward religious sense of our Minds by
Actions; nay, since (as the Bishop asserts) Scripture-Presidents, not only
warrant but oblige us to use such actions as well as words, as by universal
custom signify our glorying in the sufferings of Christ. How come we to lay
aside so pious a custom, so commendable, nay so necessary an Expression of our
devout respect to a crucified Savior, which we are not only warranted but
obliged to use?

Nay, as the Romish Church has in other parts of Divine Worship introduced a
great number of Actions or Rites to express some part or other of our Christian
Duty or Devotion, and those Actions are rendered significant to that purpose by
universal custom among those of that Church, it is plain by this Argument, that
all those Rites are warranted by Scripture, and our first Reformers seem to
have been very unreasonable in their Rejection of 'em. So that this loose way
of Reasoning will serve to worse purposes than I hope his Lordship ever
designed it: For it will altogether as well fit the mouth of a Papist, for
justifying his observance of most of those numerous Rites and Ceremonies (or in
his Lordship's language, significant Actions) which their Church has enjoined,
as it does his for justifying the Cross in Baptism. If the Bishop should
pretend that the numerousness of those Rites is the only fault of 'em, he would
do well to acquaint us where we may stop, what number of 'em is innocent, and
what becomes sinfully excessive.

Thirdly, I come to examine the Propositions the Bishop has laid down for
proving the use of the Cross in Baptism to be warranted by Scripture, and show
wherein I think his Argument in 'em weak and unconcluding.

That we are, according to Proposition the first, to express our inward
Reverence or Worship of God by outward Means, such as Praise, Prayer, etc. will
be freely granted.

That we are, according to Proposition the second and third, to express that
inward Worship in general, by such bodily Gestures, as either nature or civil
custom direct us to, and render most fit to represent and testify it to others
by, will be also owned. But I cannot so easily grant, That the Scriptures
warrant our expressing the sense of our Minds in all Religious Things or
Matters by significant Actions. The particular Duties we owe to God are almost
numberless; and if we were warranted by Scripture to express the Thoughts and
Sense of our Mind, as to each of 'em, by some significant Rite and Ceremony,
the Romish Church would be sufficiently authorized by Scripture in her
introducing such a load of significant Rites and Ceremonies into Christian
Religion, Admon. p. 181.
especially if (as the Bishop observes) such significant Actions be more
effectual, and sincere expressions of the sense of our Minds then words.

Though then the Scriptures enjoin Bodily Worship in general, and consequently
warrant all such devout Postures as either nature or civil custom has taught us
to express it by, as bowing, prostration, kneeling, standing, and (in these
parts of the world) the men's being uncovered, yet they do not warrant us to
contrive distinct significant Actions to express each distinct part of inward
Worship, as one to express our Faith in God, another to express our Love to
him, another our Hope, another our subjection to his Authority, another our
resignation to his disposal, another our dread of his Justice, etc. So though we
may testify our Worship of Christ as the Incarnate Word, by the forementioned
Postures of Devotion, yet the Scriptures no where warrant our contriving one
significant Action or Rite to express but Believing his Gospel, another to
express our Reliance on the virtue of his Merits and Sacrifice, another to
signify out subjection to his Royal Authority, another to declare out glorying
in his Cross or Sufferings. Besides the Religious Postures that are expressive
of Worship in general, the Scriptures require no other External Rites as Signs
of our particular respect to him, besides those of being Baptized in his Name,
and commemorating his Death by receiving the Bread and Wine as the sacred
Memorials of it. Therefore,

As to the fourth and fifth Proposition, Though it is our duty to glory in the
sufferings of Christ, yet the Scripture does not warrant (much less oblige us,
as the Bishop adds) to contrive any particular Rite or Ceremony to signify it,
any more than to contrive such a Rite do signify but belief of his Gospel, or
dependence on his Mediation, or subjection to his Government. The Scriptures
command our expressing our inward Worship by Reverence in our Bodily Postures,
and consequently uncovering the Head is to us a Particular included in that
general Precept. But the Scripture no where commands us to signify this
particular Duty of glorying in the sufferings of Christ by any External Rites,
and therefore does not warrant any particular Rite for that end; for that would
have been to have left a Gap open for bringing in an endless Train of such
significant Rites of our own devising, into Christian Religion, even such as
would have made the Yoke of Christianity as heavy as that of Judaism once was.

As to the sixth and seventh Proposition, it plainly follows from what has been
suggested, That if the Scripture neither oblige nor warrant us to contrive an
External Rite for signifying our glorying in the Cross of Christ, much less
does it warrant our use of it in Baptism where there is an External Rite
appointed by Christ himself, sufficiently expressive of the whole of our Duty
to him. What if the same Authority that set up this very sign of the Cross, had
appointed leaning on a material Cross, to signify our Faith and Reliance on
the Merits of a crucified Savior, and kissing a Scepter to signify our Homage
to him as a King, etc. and had introduced these Rites into the Office of
Baptism? Could they justly pretend the Scripture warranted them, because it
enjoins Faith in a crucified Savior, and subjection to him as our exalted Head
and Lord? And yet these would be as fit Actions to signify these Duties, as
the making that a cry sign to express our glorying in the sufferings of Christ.
But the Scriptures have given no countenance to such foolish Inventions of our
own, nor opened any such door to our Fancies, which if indulged this way, will
soon prove very fruitful in such Superstitious Devices; as the Church has
learnt by the sad experience of so many Ages, in which the multiplicity of such
Rites (or in the Bishop's language significant Actions) had almost eaten out
the Vitals of Religion.

For the eighth Proposition, I shall consider the particular Instances of such
significant Rites in religious Worship, for which the Bishop produces
Scriptural-Presidents, and by which he thinks this Ceremony of Crossing equally
warranted.

For that of Christ's washing his Disciples feet. I cannot see what it should
signify to his purpose: For who doubts but Christ might teach his Disciples
Humility, by practicing before their eyes a common, but in him a most
condescending Instance of it; or, that he might improve that occasion, (as he
did almost all occurrents) to remind 'em of the Necessity of being washed in
his Blood, or purified by his Grace. But what is this to our appointing a new
External Badge of our Dedication to Christ, besides that he has appointed
already?

For the second Rite of Dipping entirely under Water in Baptism, if the Bp. had
proved both that the words of the Apostle did certainly refer to the Practice
of Dipping under Water, assigning this Spiritual signification to that
particular Rite, and yet that the Christians of that Age had arbitrarily, and
without any warrant from Christ or his Apostles, set up this Mode of Baptising
as a religious Rite, to signify their obligation to die to sin, and live to
righteousness, in conformity to the Death and Resurrection of Christ, then
indeed this Instance had signified something to his purpose; but unless he
prove both these Particulars, it signifies nothing.

And the same Answer may be applied to the next Rite, viz. The change of
Clothes. He should have first proved that the Apostles words do certainly refer
to such a Religious Rite practiced in Baptism to signify our obligation to put
off the old Man, and put on the new; and then proved this was a Rite merely
introdu'd by arbitrary custom, without any warrant from Christ.

For if the Apostles expressions refer to these two Rites as used to these
purposes, it will be much more reasonable to conclude that they are a part of
the Ordinance of Baptism, and consequently should still be retained and used by
us; (unless we suppose that as to the former, that Maxim of our Savior will
warrant our Omission of it in this colder Climate, That God will have Mercy and
not Sacrifice) And on this supposition the Bishop can draw no Argument from
hence to his purpose.

For the Feasts of Charity and the Holy Kiss, I do not see that they were
Religious Rites at all, but rather real Expressions of their mutual Charity. If
the richer sort in a Congregation should on the Lord's Day invite the poor to
Dinner, this would be such a real instance of their Love, (agreeable to our
Savior's advice about Feasting, Luke 14.12, 13, 14.) as those Feasts of
Charity were, but it would be no such symbol of their spiritual communion as
their Feasting as the Table of the Lord is. And the same may most probably be
said of the Holy Kiss, which being then a common instance of mutual Respect and
Amity among Persons in their ordinary Assemblies, was therefore innocently
continued in their Religious ones. As no doubt we may there pay the same Marks
of our Respect and Friendship to each other when the Public Worship is over
that we do on other occasions of meeting together. Nay, if we suppose these two
to have been Religious Rites yet it will be then more reasonable to suppose
they had a temporary Institution, than that they had no other warrant than mere
arbitrary custom. And upon either of these Suppositions there can be no show of
any Argument drawn from 'em, to prove that the Scripture warrants us to
institute a Religious Rite of our own, as an honorable Badge whereby we are
dedicated to the service of a crucified Savior, when Christ himself has
instituted one for that use. For this is that which the Bishop was concerned to
produce a scriptural warrant for. And therefore I may justly add here, that
though the Bishop's Argument had proved that the Scriptures warrant us to express
our glorying in the sufferings of Christ, by crossing our selves as the
Primitive Christians did in their common Conversation, yet this would not prove
that they warrant us to use it as a Religious Rite in Baptism for our solemn
Dedication to the Service of Christ, because that is a needless doing that over
again by a Rite of our own devising, which is sufficiently done before by a
Rite of Christ's Institution. Whereas this is the thing in question, and which
to us looks like sinful Presumption.

But before I dismiss the Argument of the Bishop's, it is requisite I should
consider those two significant Ceremonies among the Dissenters, which he thinks
liable to the same Exceptions as the use of the Cross in Baptism, viz Their
giving their Children names at their Baptism, and giving Tickets to
Communicants.

For the former significant Ceremony, viz. Of giving names to Children at their
Baptism, The Bishop tells us, it signifies their giving up their Names to
Christ, and engaging 'em to be his Servants. So that our Names are a lasting
Token and Badge to us of our Dedication to the Service of Christ, and an
Obligation on us to behave our selves accordingly. Admon. p. 184.

Answ. It seems somewhat strange the Bishop should so positively assert; that
we give our Children a Name at Baptism for any such purpose as this. For we use
it not as any Religious Ceremony at all, much less as an External Sign or Token
of giving up their Names to Christ, and engaging 'em to be his Servants. This
is all suggested by his own fancy without any ground; for we know of no other
use of this practice in Baptism, then that the Person baptized may be notified
to the Congregation, by being called by his Name. And for the Bishop's remark
on God's giving Abraham a new Name at his Circumcision, in allusion to the
custom of Masters giving their Servants a new name upon their admission into
their Families; besides that, it is asserted without any proof, (there being no
such reason, but a different one, assigned by God himself, for changing his
Name from Abram to Abraham, 17 Genesis 4, 5.) yet if it were true, I know not what
use it can be to his purpose: for if he would infer from it, That this is a
Scriptural warrant for giving Names to Children at Baptism, as a Token of their
Admission into God's Family, he makes it a significant Ceremony of God's own
appointment, and consequently can draw no Argument from it, to justify the use
of the Cross as a Ceremony arbitrarily appointed by Men, to signify their
Dedication to Christ.

For the other significant Ceremony, which the Bishop says, the Dissenters
have added to the Lord's Supper, and which he desires 'em to reflect on, viz.
Giving of Tickets to such as are to be admitted thereto. It Is, I confess, a
very dangerous one, in which he has found out abundance of very strange and
mysterious significations. For in this Ceremony he tells us, There is an
outward and visible Sign, a Ticket. Secondly, An inward Spiritual Grace, our
Aptitude and Title to the Lord's Supper and Communion of Saints, found upon our
Examination when we receive the Ticket. Thirdly, It Is a Badge and Token whereby
priviledg'd Members are distinguished from those that are without. Lastly, It Is
a sort of necessary Term of Communion, since those that neglect this Badge,
shall not be admitted to the Sacrament.

Answ. If all these wonderful spiritual significations assigned to this poor
Ticket prove merely the product of the Bishop's Imagination, then I hope there
can be no Argument drawn from it to patronise the Cross. The Ticket is I
confess an outward and visible sign, but I could never learn before that it was
a sign of any thing more, then that the Person that brought it, was allowed by
the Minister to Communicate at that time, and did not intrude there without his
permission. But how it should come to signify a Man's qualifications for
Receiving, or his title to any spiritual Benefits that belong to worthy
Communicants, is very hard to conceive. All that can be said of it is, that
it is probable the Minister would not have given him leave to Communicate by
giving him a Ticket, if he had not known him to be a Member of his own or some
other Congregation. And the Bishop farther mistakes in making the Ticket a
Badge to distinguish priviledg'd Members from those that are without; for there
may be many present as spectators at Communions that are Members, and have not
Tickets at present, because they do not at present Receive. Nor would any Man's
having a Ticket secure his Admission, if he were known to be no Member of that
or some other Congregation. Nay, the Ticket is no necessary Term of Communion
neither, since no man that is a noted Member of that, or any other
Congregation, would be refused, though he should have no Ticket, or left it
behind him. It Is plain, that the giving those Tickets is a circumstance that
genuinely falls within the Apostles Rule of doing all things decently and in
order. Now in such multitudes as in the North of Ireland ordinarily frequent
their Communions, there cannot be a more easy and orderly expedient to
distinguish the Communicants from mere Spectators, and prevent any Persons from
intruding into the Communion of particular Churches without leave, then this of
giving Tickets to such as they allow to Receive at that time. So that the
general Rule of Scripture forementioned, does oblige 'em to use this or some
other method of the like kind; for the decent and orderly celebration of that
Holy Institution, and preventing the contrary confusion and disorder. But I
hope the Bishop will not pretend, that Baptism cannot be decently and orderly
performed without using the sign of the Cross, as an Honorable Badge whereby
the Person baptized is dedicated to the service of a crucified Savior, and
therefore the Cross, is no way warranted by that rule of order and decency, as
the forementioned custom evidently is. If indeed this perilous Ticket had had
a Cross upon it, and the Persons that brought it were ordered to wear it upon
their Breasts or Foreheads as a sign whereby they publicly professed their
Remembrance of and renewed Dedication of themselves to the service of a
crucified Savior, as the adult Members of his Church, the Bishop might then
have had some pretense to have compared these two customs together. But as they
are really practiced, there is no more resemblance between 'em, then between a
prudential Mode of ordering Christ's own Institution in general necessary, and
vertually included in his own Rule of order, and an unnecessary Religious Rite
unwarrantably added by Man, to Christ's Institution, to some of the same uses
as he had appointed another already; and any one that pleases may easily
discern a wide difference between these two.

I shall only add here, that as the Bishop has failed of producing us any clear
Scriptural warrant for the Cross, (and consequently ought by his own Rule on
that very score to discard it as a Human Invention) so he has not so much as
attempted to vindicate that other Human Invention of Godfathers and Godmothers,
set up to exclude the Public Promise of Parents, for the pious Education of
their own Children, and to enter into rash Vows, which few ever perform, which
I take to be the more dangerous corruption of the two. See Remarks p. 167, 168,
169.

As to the Bishop's Conclusion I shall only observe,

1. I do not find that he has made good his Charge of Human Inventions against
the Dissenters in any one particular instance of their Worship, notwithstanding
all the assurance wherewith he had asserted, Disc. p 187. That they were so
strangely misled as to content themselves to meet together, perhaps for some
years with a design to worship God, when one could hardly ever see any thing of
God's immediate appointment in their Meetings. For this the Bp. there says,
was manifestly the case of the Dissenters in his thoughts. And he still takes
the same for granted, Admon. p. 188. That the worship of Dissenters has no
express warrant of Scripture for it. And now to advance so terrible and
comprehensive a Charge, and not prove the Truth of it in any one particular
Instance, seems to us a very unadvised, as well as a very uncharitable attempt.
Nay, it is strange, that (except that of Crossing) he has not so much as
endeavored to vindicate one practice of the established Church from his own
Arguments when retorted upon himself.

2. Since the Bishop threatens us, if the Matters of Fact be disputed, to
produce his Vouchers and Authorities, we must now desire him either to do so,
or own those Mistakes whereby he has highly injured the Reputation of his
Brethren. And I hope he will take care that the Testimony of his Vouchers be as
credible as that of those I have produced. And he need not spare to produce 'em
out of tenderness to the Dissenters of his Diocese, for they desire no other
tenderness in this point, besides that of speaking nothing but Truth of 'em.

3. I think his Caution against the Remarks which he here gives very unfair,
unless he had proved, instead of barely asserting, That my Arguments are not
founded on Scripture, and that my Answers to his Proofs contradict the Letter
of Scripture. I hope his Lordship will excuse us, though we are unwilling to take
all this for granted on no other evidence than his bare word.

Lastly, I hope he will find nothing in these Papers contrary to a spirit of
meekness, or savouring of passion, And though the Dissenters of his Diocese,
cannot carry their civility to so high a strain as to thank him for his Book,
as he does them for the entertainment they have given it, yet they can readily
comply with his Request to 'em, Not to be offended with him for telling 'em the
truth. For the chief offense they took at his Book, was not his reasoning
against their Opinions and Practices, but his giving so untrue an Account of
'em. And therefore they cannot altogether assent to what his Lordship
insinuates in these following words: Remember nothing is more apt to provoke
Mankind then Truth. And if you meet with any Book in Answer to mine, that
discovers the writer to have been in a Passion when he wrote it, you may look
on it as a probable Argument of the truth of what I have proposed. And if upon
reading what I have wrote, you find any motion in your selves toward Passion,
consider well whether it proceed not from the same cause, namely my declaring
the truth to you. For they think there is one thing more apt to provoke even
the mildest and best of Men, and that is, to be unjustly accur'd to the world,
and yet, when the Accuser is admonisht of his mistakes, to have the Accusation
renewed, and be appealed to themselves as Evidences for what they as certainly
know to be untrue, as they know their own Judgment and Practice. For in this
case they think it no probable Argument of Guilt in the accused, if they should
express some just displeasure against such ill usage. And yet I hope he will
find even this extraordinary provocation has not drawn out any language that
looks like passion. But yet as the Bp. expects we should allow plain-dealing to
be a part of his character, so I hope he will not deny us the same liberty of
dealing plainly with him, not only in vindicating our Opinions and Practices
where we think his objections against 'em invalid, but especially in clearing
both from such misrepresentations as we think manifestly groundless and
injurious, and in desiring an ingenuous Retraction of 'em, as an act which a
regard to Justice as well as Truth should prompt him to. For common Justice
forbids our ascribing to our Brethren Opinions and Practices which are none of
theirs; nay, it forbids our receiving and publishing mistaken Accounts of 'em,
from the informations of others, when a little care and diligence might have
enabled us to discover the falsehood of 'em. And consequently the same Principle
should prompt us to do right to the Reputation of our Brethren, when we have,
through our unwary credulity, or in the heat of opposition spoken or written of
'em what is not true, and yet what if believed, would tempt others to very
unjust and uncharitable apprehensions of their Judgment and Practice. And when
his Lordship has given the Dissenters of his Diocese this evidence of his
Justice toward 'em, they will then be more ready to believe his sincerity in
studying their good.

And now if these Papers contribute any thing to reconcile his Lp. and those
whom his Book and Admonition may have misled, to more charitable thoughts of
our Worship, and to caution us in such Debates as these to be more strict in
observing that excellent Rule of the Apostles, To speak the truth in love, Ephesians.
4.15. I shall not think my pains in writing 'em wholly lost. For though in the
Matters in dispute between us, it becomes every good man as to his own
practice, to adhere impartially to the rule of the Holy Scriptures as far as he
understands it; yet nothing is more plain, then that those great Truths and
Duties of Christianity wherein we are agreed, are of incomparably greater
moment and importance than those wherein we differ. And as it is our unity in
those more important Truths and Duties that chiefly recommends us to the
acceptance of our blessed Lord; so that alone is sufficient to endear us to one
another; and for those smaller Differences among us that are so fully
consistent with a happy Unity in these essentials of our Religion, however they
may now distinguish us into Parties, yet they can never be reasonably thought
to exclude the Churches on either side from the Communion of the Church
Catholic; much less will they exclude the truly pious Members on either side
from the Heavenly Society. How little then should those Differences tend to
disunite our affections, or to obstruct our amicable endeavors to advance the
common Interest of Practical Holiness? how should we rejoice to see that
blessed work prosper in each others hands? how entirely should Charity govern
all our debates in the points wherein we disagree, and make us unwilling to
misrepresent each others opinions or practices, when we calmly reason against
'em? how strongly should it prompt us to treat each other in all respects as
brethren, in whom we behold the image of our great Master stamped, though we may
not see the inscription of this or that party, which we judge to be the most
happily reformed, or the best constituted and modeled? how much more zealous
should we be to proselyte Men to the substance and power of Religion, then to
any external Modes of Worship and Discipline? And how heartily should we join
in that Apostolical Benediction, Grace be with all them that love our Lord
Jesus Christ in sincerity, Amen. 6 Ephesians. 24.

Mr. Sinclare's Letter referred to p. 14.
SIR,
THe Argumentative and Historical parts of the Bishop of Derry's Admonition,
seem both of a piece as to the many apparent mistakes in 'em. A satisfactory
Answer to the former is justly expected from your self. But for the latter, as
its necessary to make use of the Information of others, who, I am confident,
will be more faithful to you, thou the Bishop's Informers have been to him: so
I shall readily comply with your desire, to give a true and certain account of
the practice of Dissenters in Waterford before the late Troubles; which was so
very different from that which his Lordship gives, when he says, p. 32. He had
opportunity to enquire, and was told they did not Communicate above once a
year, if so often: That (as he has taught us in the former page) we may thence
conclude the probability of what he says concerning others.

This account I Am more concerned and better enabled to give you with greater
assurance, because I preached to 'em at that time, and have also carefully
preserved a Memorial of such things in my Diary, which are as follows.

I was Ordained a Pastor to that People about a year and a half before the
Troubles, and Administered the Lords Supper five times in thirteen Months of
that time, viz. December. 18. 1687. May 6. 1688. July 1. 88. Oct. 28. 88. Jan.
27. 88. besides four times more I Administered that Sacrament the same year to
another Congregation, that was supplied by some neighboring Ministers and my
self. And I can assure you, that those Ministers gave the Communion more
frequently, most of 'em once a Month, some of 'em once in two Months to their
own Congregations.

But that I may conceal nothing from you, that the Bishop's Information may
possibly be supposed to reach unto, I shall acquaint you, that though the
Dissenters in Waterford, both before I came among 'em, and while I preached to
'em only as a Candidate, had no fixed Pastor, yet even then they had the
Communion Administered to 'em oftener than once a year, by some of the aforesaid
Ministers that used to visit them for that end, and many of the People used
also to Communicate frequently with these Ministers in their own Congregations.

I shall further suggest to you, that the reason of my preaching to 'em for
some time as a Candidate only, was the extreme discouragement I met with there
from the severities of some that called themselves Protestants, for we were
frequently disturbed in our public worship, and 6 times forced to change the
place of our Meeting: the best part of the Auditory was for a whole Sabbath
detained prisoners by armed men, and toward evening, I was conveyed by a
strong Guard through a throng of Papists, who rejoiced to see Protestants doing
that drudgery for 'em; and several times besides that, I was brought before the
Magistrate, and instead of being accused, was only reviled and threatened. But
at last they attempted, the common practice of that time, to accuse me of Plots
and when they were shamefully disappointed and vented their rage against me,
the then Mayor hardly rescued me from 'em. But soon after another Mayor
succeeded that was for their purpose, and joined with some of 'em, to expose me
after this manner: The Military Governor rudely assulted me in the Mayor's
house (where I came to see some friends take horse, for he kept a public Inn)
and dragged me into the streets, where the Soldiers received mo, the rude
Officers pulled off my Hat, and forced me to go bare-headed through the chief
parts of the City, with two Drums tabering before me, till they sent me over
the River, with a threatening Message to the Inns on the other side, if they
should dare to entertain me. This forced me to complain to the L. Clarendon
then L. Lieutenant, who being fully convinced of my Persecutors malice, and the
miseries I had suffered gave his Order that I should return peaceably to my
habitation, and be safely protected in it. And having then some hope of ease
from the violence of my adversaries, I accepted the call of the people and was
Ordained, among 'em by some of the neighboring Ministers, and administered the
Communion for the time I continued with 'em as is abovementioned; and I am
assured that the same Congregation has the Sacrament administered to 'em 6
times a year by their present Pastor Mr. Cock. This I judge sufficient to
vindicate our practice from what we are accused of, and being a Matter of Fact
so generally known. I could produce many witnesses (if it were needful) to
confirm this Testimony of,

Sir, your Affectionate Brother and Servant, Alexander Sinclare.

THE CONTENTS.
THe Bishop's Introduction considered, p. 1 His Three Heads examined. 1. That
relating to the Motives of writing his Book, from p. 4. to 7 2. That relating
to the Concessions made in the Remarks. p. 7. to 9 3. That relating to Matters
of Fact, from p. 8, to 38 His other Exceptions against the Remarks considered.
Two relating to the Author examined, p. 37. to 40 That relating to the Rule of
Worship which the Bishop pretends to be laid down in the Remarks, answered from
p. 40. to 48 His Exception against the Requests offered to the Conf. Clergy
Answered, from p. 48. to 53 His Exceptions relating to what the Remarks object
against the Cross in Baptism. The Bishop's Objections against the Directory in
reference to Baptism, considered from p. 53. to 58 The Argument proposed in the
Remarks against the Cross, more fully stated, from p. 58. to 73. The Bishop's
Answer to this Argument examined. p. 73. to 76 The Bishop's Argument to prove
the use of the Cross in Baptism warranted by Scripture, answered from p. 76. to
86 Remarks on the Bishop's Conclusion. Mr. Sinclare's Letter concerning the
Practice of Dissenters in Waterford, as to the frequency of their Communions.
POSTSCRIPT.
WHereas the Bishop, Admon. p. 69. asserts, That some, who have been found
unqualified and insufficient for Learning by them, are received as Preachers
among the Dissenters, after being rejected by them. And adds, That he has a
notorious Example thereof since he came to this Diocese. The Dissenting
Ministers of his Diocese Declare they know of no such Person. And if the Bishop
(as there is some ground to conjecture) mean Mr. Sq. he declares he was never
Examined as to his Learning by them; and (besides that, he is no Preacher in
that part of the Kingdom) most that know him) think that if his Lordship should
reject all those of his Clergy that are not Mr. Sq.'s Superiors in Learning,
he must exclude a great many of those that are now in his Diocese.

FINIS.

