New Experiments PHYSICO-MECHANICAL, Touching the AIR

The Third Edition.

Whereunto is added A DEFENSE of the Author's EXPLICATION OF THE EXPERIMENTS,
Against the OBJECTIONS OF FRANCISCUS LINUS And, THOMAS HOBBS.

NEW EXPERIMENTS PHYSICO-MECHANICAL, Touching The SPRING of the AIR, and its
EFFECTS, Made, for the most part, in a New Pnuematical Engine, Written by way
of LETTER To the Right Honorable CHARLES Lord Vicount of DUNGARVAN, Eldest Son
to the EARL of CORK.

By the Honorable ROBERT BOIL Esquire

LONDON, Printed by Miles Flesher for Richard Davis, Bookseller in Oxford,
MDCLXXXII.

To the Reader.
ALthough the following Treatise being far more prolix than becomes a Letter,
and than I at first intended it; I am very unwilling to increase the already
excessive bulk of the Book by a Preface, yet there are some Particulars that I
think my self obliged to take notice of to the Reader, as things that will
either concern him to know, or me to have known.

In the first place then: If it be demanded why I publish to the World a
Letter, which by its Style and diverse Passages, appears to have been written
as well For, as To a particular Person; I have chiefly these two things to
answer: The one, That the Experiments therein related, having been many of them
tried in the presence of Ingenious Men; and by that means having made some
noise among the Virtuosi (insomuch that some of them have been sent into
Foreign Countries, where they have had the luck not to be despised) I could
not, without quite tyring more than one Amanuensis, give out half as many
Copies of them as were so earnestly desired, that I could not civilly refuse
them. The other, That intelligent Persons in matters of this kind, persuade me,
that the publication of what I had observed touching the nature of the Air,
would not be useless to the World; and that in an Age so taken with Novelties
as is ours, these new Experiments would be grateful to the Lovers of free and
real Learning: So that I might at once comply with my grand Design of promoting
Experimental and Useful Philosophy, and obtain the great satisfaction of
giving some to ingenious Men; the hope of which, is, I confess, a temptation
that I cannot easily resist.

Of my being somewhat prolix in many of my Experiments, I have these Reasons to
render, That some of them being altogether new, seemed to need the being
circumstantially related, to keep the Reader from distrusting them: That diverse
Circumstances I did here and there set down for fear of forgetting them, when I
may hereafter have occasion to make use of them in my other Writings: That in
diverse cases I thought it necessary to deliver things circumstantially, that
the Person I addressed them to might, without mistake, and with as little
trouble as is possible, be able to repeat such unusual Experiments: and that
after I consented to let my Observations be made public, the most ordinary
reason of my prolixity was, That foreseeing that such a trouble as I met with
in making those trials carefully, and the great expense of time that they
necessarily require (not to mention the charges of making the Engine, and
employing a Man to manage it) will probably keep most Men from trying again
these Experiments: I thought I might do the generality of my Readers no
unacceptable piece of service, by so punctually relating what I carefully
observed, that they may look upon these Narratives as standing Records in our
new Pneumaticks, and need not reiterate themselves an Experiment to have as
distinct an Idea of it, as may suffice them to ground their Reflections and
Speculations upon.

And because sometimes '-tis the Discourse made upon the Experiment that makes
it appear prolix, I have commonly left a conspicuous interval betwixt such
Discourses, and the Experiments whereunto they belong, or are annexed; that
they who desire only the Historical part of the account we give of our Engine,
may read the Narratives, without being put to the trouble of reading the
Reflections too: which I here take notice of for the sake of those that are well
versed in the New Philosophy, and in the Mathematics; that such may skip what
was designed but for such Persons as may be less acquainted, even than I, with
matters of this nature (scarce so much as mentioned by any Writer in our
Language) and not for them from whom I shall be much more forward to learn,
than to pretend to teach them. Of my being wont to speak rather doubtfully, or
hesitantly, than resolvedly, concerning matters wherein I apprehend some
difficulty, I have in another Treatise (which may, through God's assistance,
come abroad ere long) given a particular, and, I have, a satisfactory account:
wherefore I shall now defend my practice but by the Observation of Aristotle,
who somewhere notes, That to seem to know all things certainly, and to speak
positively of them, is a trick of bold and young Fellows: whereas those that
are indeed intelligent and considerate, are wont to employ more wary and
diffident expressions, or (as he speaks) (...).

There are diverse Reflections, and other Passages in the following Epistle, and
even some Experiments (occasionally mentioned) which may seem either
impertinent or superfluous, but are not so: Being purposely written, either to
evince some truth opposed, or disprove some erroneous conceit maintained by
some eminent New Philosopher, or by some other Ingenious Men, who, I presumed,
would easily forgive me the having on such occasions purposely omitted their
Names; though an inquisitive Person will probably discover diverse of them, by
the mention of the Opinions disproved in the Experiments I am excusing.

Ever since I discerned the usefulness of speculative Geometry to Natural
Philosophy, the unhappy Distempers of my Eyes, have so far kept me from being
much conversant in it, that I fear I shall need the pardon of my Mathematical
Readers, for some Passages, which, if I had been deeply skilled in Geometry, I
should have treated more accurately.

And indeed, having, for Reasons elsewhere deduced, purposely kept my self a
stranger to most of the new Hypotheses in Philosophy, I am sensible enough that
the Engine I treat of has prevailed with me to write of some subjects which
are sufficiently remote from those I have been most conversant in. And having
been reduced to write the greatest part of the ensuing Letter at a distance,
not only from my Library, but from my own Manuscripts, I cannot but fear that
my Discourses do not only want many choice things wherewith the Learned
Writings of others might have enriched or imbelished them: But that partly for
this reason, and partly for that touched upon a little before, It is possible I
may have mentioned some Notions already published by others, without taking
notice of the Authors, not out of any design to defraud deserving Men, but for
want of knowing such particulars to have been already published by them:
Especially the Experiments of our Engine being themselves sufficient to hint
such Notions as we build upon them.

The order of the Experiments every Reader may alter, as suits best with his
own design in perusing them: For not only all those betwixt whom there is an
Affinity in Nature (by belonging to one subject) are not always placed one by
another, but they are not still set down so much as in the order wherein they
were made; but most commonly in that casual one wherein my occasions induced me
to dispatch them to the Press. And, which is worse, I did usually send quite
away the former Experiments, before the later were written, or perhaps so much
as made: Whereby I lost the advantage of correcting and supplying the
Imperfections of what I had formerly written, by the light of my subsequent
Trials and Discoveries.

Besides all this, the distemper in my Eyes forbidding me not only to write my
self so much as one Experiment, but even to read over my self what I dictated
to others: I cannot but fear, that besides the Author's mistakes, this Edition
may be blemished by many, that may be properly imputed to a very unskilful
Writer (whom I was oftentimes by haste, reduced against my custom, to employ)
and may have escaped the Diligence of that Learned Friend, that does me the
favor to oversee the Press; especially, there being the distance of two days
Journey betwixt it and me.

I need not, perhaps, represent to the equitable Reader, how much the strange
Confusions of this unhappy Nation, in the midst of which I have made and
written these Experiments, are apt to disturb that calmness of mind, and
undistractedness of Thoughts, that are wont to be requisite to Happy
Speculations. But I presume, that by all these things put together, he will
readily perceive, That I have been so far from following the Poet's prudent
Counsel touching the flow Publication of Books designed to purchase credit by,
-- Nonumque prematur in Annum
that I suffer this Treatise to come abroad into the World with a multitude of
disadvantages.

But if it be demanded, why then I did not make it fitter for the Press before
I sent it thither? my Answer must be, That not at first imagining that this
sort of Experiments would prove any thing near so troublesome, either to make,
or to record, as I afterward found them, I did, to engage the Printer to
dispatch, promise him to send him the whole Epistle in a very short time: So
that although now and then the occasional vacations of the Press, by reason of
Festivals, or the absence of the Corrector, gave me the leisure to exspatiate
upon some subject; yet being oftentimes called upon to dispatch the Papers to
the Press, my promise, and many unexpected Avocations, obliged me to a haste,
which, though it has detracted nothing from the Faithfulness of the Histerical
part of our Book, has (I fear) been disadvantageous enough to all the rest.
And I made the less scruple to let the following Papers pass out of my hands,
with all their Imperfections; because, as the Public Affairs, and my own, were
then circumstanc'd, I knew not when, (if at all) I should be again in a
condition to prosecute Experiments of this kind; especially, since (to omit my
being almost weary of being, as it were, confined to one sort of Experiments) I
am pre-ingag'd (if it please God to vouchsafe me Life and Health) to employ my
first leisure in the publication of some other Physiological Papers, which I
thought'twould make me much the fitter to take in hand, if I first dispatched
all that I had at this time to write touching our Engine.

I have this farther to add, by way of Excuse, That as it has been my design
in publishing these Experiments to gratify Ingenious Men; so, if I have not
been much flattered, I may hope that the various hints to be met with in the
following Letter, will (at least) somewhat awaken Men's thoughts, and excite
them to new Speculations (such as perhaps even inquisitive Men would scarce
else light upon) and I need not despair, that even the examination of such new
Suspicions and Enquiries will hence also, at least occasionally, be
facilitated: I said occasionally, because it being, as'tis proverbially said,
Facile Inventis addere: It seems not irrational to expect, that our Engine it
self, and diverse of our Experiments, will be much promoted by the industry of
Inventive and Mathematical Wits, whose Contrivances may easily either correct
or supply, and consequently surpass many of those we have made use of. And,
particularly, if Men by skill and patience can arrive both to evacuate such
Receivers as ours, till there be no more Air left in them, than there seems to
have remained in the Glasses made use of about the Magdeburgick Experiment
(hereafter to be mentioned) and to keep out the Air for a competent while, the
Usefulness and Discoveries of our Engine, will not be a little advanced. And
perhaps that may belong to it, which I remember Seneca speaks of Nature:
Initiatos (says he) nos credimus, in Vestibulo ejus haeremus: For being now in
a place where we are not quite destitute of moderately skillful Artificers, we
have since the Conclusion of the following Letter, made some Additions to our
Engine, by whose help we find (upon some new trials) that we may be able,
without much of new trouble, to keep the ambient Air out of the exhausted
Receiver for a whole day; and perhaps we should be able to keep it out much
longer, if before we shall have dispatched some urgent Affairs, and published
some Papers for which a kind of Promise is thought to make us Debtors to the
Press, we could be at leisure to prosecute such Experiments, as may possibly
afford a Supplement to the following Treatise, from which I shall now no longer
detain the Reader.

Friendly Reader,
I Know all Persons that have a public Spirit for the Advancement of Learning,
will think much that this piece came not out in a Language of more general Use,
than this you see it now attired in; especially since the Excellent Noble
Person, who is the Author, is known to be well able himself (being almost
universally a Linguist) to have given it either the Old Latin, or the Newer
French Dress.

But if it be an Honor to a Language to be preferred, and this Honor breeds
sometimes an Emulation, as anciently it did between the Greeks and Romans, it
cannot be thought unhandsome for an English Nobleman to have preferred his own:
And it may be a sufficient Reason for the Gentry of Foreign Parts to learn our
Speech, or keep Interpreters, that they are sure to have for their requital,
from many of our English Writers (as here from this Piece) much curiously
ingenious, and profitable Learning.

But as to this Particular (give me leave to use words from a Story) Since the
Mountain cannot come to Mahomet, Mahomet will go to the Mountain: I mean thus;
Because many witty Men, Persons of Honor and Estate especially, may be
supposed to be able to make a better account, by employing their Studies and
Time on Matter than Words, and so are justly impeded from learning Languages;
And because (as I may judge) the Noble Author is willing to oblige all Men, He
has already provided, that this Piece shall shortly be done into Latin, that
so it may come home to diverse worthy Persons in its Stream, who cannot travel
to find it out in its first Origin.

Having therefore leave so to do, I cannot forbear to give the World the
Advertisement of this Latin Edition, lest some skillful Artist should take
needless pains about a work, which will ere long (by God's furtherance) be done
to his Hands; For such unprofitable expenses of Study have too frequently
hapened, and too much to the disadvantage of Learning, for want of a sufficient
Correspondence and intercourse between such as are exercised in the Mines of
Wisdom.

This is all the trouble I shall at present give you: Nor shall I need mind
you, if you have a true gust for the Book you read, to have an honor and
thankful regard to the Person that has favored us with the Communication of
these his Trials, and is manifestly so great a Patron and Friend to
Experimental Learning, and all true Wisdom; for should you fail in this, you
might deservedly be deprived of some other Observations on the same subject,
which the Author, I hear, has made since the finishing of this Treatise.

I desire to be excused that I do not make Excuses for the slowness of the
Publication, hoping that the long expectation you have had of it, will enhance,
and not diminish your delight in the enjoyment of a piece like to be, amongst
the Students in accurate Philosophy, of so general acceptance. Farewell.

R. Sh.

A SUMMARY of the chief Matters treated of in this Epistolical Discourse.
THe Proaemium wherein is set down the occasion of this discourse. 1. The
motives that induced the Author thereunto. 2. The hints he received 3. The
things wherein this Engine excels any that have yet been made use of. 4. The
description of the Engine and its parts, 5 etc. The way of preparing and using
it, 8 etc. The division of the Experiments triable thereby into two sorts, and
the difficulty of excluding the Air. 10, etc. The first Experiment, touching
the manner of pumping out the Air, and by what degrees the Receiver is emptied,
11, etc. A digression touching the Spring or Elastical power of the Air, with
an attempt for a Mechanical Explication thereof, necessary to be premised for
the explanation of the Phenomenon, exhibited in this and the subsequent
Experiments. 12, etc. The second Experiment, touching the pressure of the Air
against the sides of the Bodies it invirons, 20, etc. with a digressive
Explication of the pressure of the Air included within an ambient Body. 21 etc.
The third Experiment, touching the force requisite to draw down the Sucker, 23
etc. The Opinion of an eminent Modern Naturalist examined. 24 etc. The fourth
Experiment, touching the swelling of a Bladder; with the degrees by which it
increases, 25 etc. Another Opinion of a Learned Author examined, 26 etc. The
fifth Experiment, touching the breaking of a Bladder in the Receiver. And of
another by heat. 27, 28. The sixth Experiment, of diverse ways by which the
elastical expansion of the Air was measured. 29, etc. The seventh Experiment,
touching what Figure does best resist the pressure of the Air. 33 The eight
Experiment, tending to a farther Demonstration of the former, from the breaking
of a glass Helmet inward. 34 The ninth Experiment contains a farther
confirmation from the breaking of a Glass outward, 35 etc. with an Experiment
to prove, that these Phenomenon proceed not from an invincible Fuga vacui, 37.
A description of other small Receivers, and their conveniences, 38 etc. A
Receipt for the making of a Composition to cement cracked Glasses. 39 The tenth
Experiment, touching the flaming of Candles enclosed in the Receiver. 39 etc.
The eleventh Experiment, touching the burning of Coals: and the lasting of the
excandescence of an included piece of Iron. 42 The twelfth Experiment,
concerning the burning of Match. 44 The thirteenth Experiment, concerning the
farther prosecution of the preceding, tending to prove the extinction of the
Fire in the former Experiments, not to have proceeded from the pressure of the
Fire by the Fumes. Some remarkable Circumstances of it. The Experiment of Match
tried in a Small Receiver. 45 etc. The fourteenth Experiment, touching the
striking Fire, and klindling of Powder with the Lock of a Pistol in the
evacuated Receiver. 47 etc. The fifteenth Experiment, touching the
unsuccessfulness of kindling included Bodies with a Burning-glass, and the
Author's intention to prosecute it farther. 49 The sixteenth Experiment,
concerning the operation of the Loadstone. 52 The seventeenth Experiment,
touching the gradual descent of the Quicksilver in the Torricellian
Experiment, 51 etc. Some observable Circumstances concerning it, 54 etc. The
same Experiment tried in one of the small Receivers, 55. How this Experiment
may be made use of to know the strength of the pressure of the Air for every
degree of Rarefaction, 56 etc. The trial of the same Experiment in a Tube not
two foot long, 57. The raising of the Mercurial Cylinder, by the forcing of
more Air into the Receiver, ib. Some Allegation for and against a Vacuum
considered, 59 etc. Some Advertisements concerning the inconveniences that may
arise from the diversity of measures made use of for the defining the altitude
of the Mercurial Cylinder; and from the neglect of little parcels of Air apt to
remain between the Mercury and the concave surface of the Tube, 60 etc. Some
Expedients for the more exact filling the Tube, 61. The height the Author once
found of the Mercurial Cylinder, according to English measure. 63 The
eighteenth Experiment, containing a new Observation touching the variation of
the height of the Mercurial Cylinder in the same Tube, with an offer at the
Reason thereof. 63 etc. The nineteenth Experiment, touching the subsiding of a
Cylinder of Water, 69. The same tried in a small Receiver. 70 The twentieth
Experiment, touching the Elater of Water, with a digressive Experiment to the
same purpose. 71 etc. The 21 Experiment, being a prosecution of the former
Enquiry, by experimenting the Generation of Bubbles under Water, a recital of
some not able Circumstances, with some observable Corollaries deduced
therefrom. 73 etc. The 22 Experiment, tending to a determination of the Enquiry
proposed in the former Experiment, by proving the matter of these Bubbles from
their permanency to be Air: The Experiments tried in the great and small
Receivers, evincing the same thing, 77 etc. An Experiment wherein there
appeared Bubbles in Quicksilver, 79. The Author's Inference, 80. A digressive
Enquiry, whether or no Air may be generated anew; with several Histories and
Experiments, tending to the resolving and clearing thereof, ibid. etc. The
Author's excuse for so long a digression. 90 The 23 Experiment, containing a
farther enquiry touching Bubbles made with common and distilled Water. 91 The
24 Experiment, wherein the enquiry is prosccuted with other Liquors, as with
Sallet Oil, Oil of Turpentine, a Solution of Tartar, Spirit of Vinegar,
Red-Wine, Milk, Hens Eggs, Spirit of Urine, Spirit of Wine and Water, Spirit of
Wine. 94 etc. The wonderful expansion of the Spirit of Wine. 97 The 25
Experiment, touching the expansion and gravity of the Air under Water. 98 etc.
The 26 Experiment, touching the Vibrations of a Pendulum. 102 etc. The 27
Experiment, touching the propagation of sound: and the Author's intention of
trying some other Experiments, for the further elucidation thereof. 103 The 28
Experiment, touching the sudden eruption of Bubbles from the Water, when the
Air's pressure was speedily removed. 108 The 29 Experiment, touching the cause
of the ascent of Fumes and Vapors, wherein't is proved (from the several
motions, (which the Fumes of a strange smoking Liquor, of the Author's, were
observed to have in the Receiver, upon the exsuction of the Air) that the
reason of their ascent proceeds from the gravity of the ambient Air, and not
from any positive levity of their own. 110 etc. The 30 Experiment, concerning
the nature of a fluid Body, illustrated by the example of smoke, which in
several circumstances seems very much to resemble the property of a fluid Body,
113. A conjecture of the cause of the Sun's undulation. 115 The 31 Experiment,
concerning the Phenomenon of two flat Marbles exactly plained and wrought
together, and the true reason thereof. The Author's intention for the further
prosecution thereof, and what hindered him; the reason why the under Marble did
not fall from the upper (being only conjoined with Spirit of Wine) when the
Receiver was evacuated. And a notable relation concerning the cohesion of flat
Bodies. 116 etc. The 32 Experiment, touching the forcible pressure of the Air
against the outward Superficies of a Valve, fastened upon the Stop-cock of the
Receiver. The Diameter of it, and the weight it sustained. 118 etc. The 33
Experiment, touching the great pressure of the Air against the under
Superficies of the Sucker, 120 etc. what weight was requisite to depress it,
and what weight it would lift and carry up with it, 121 etc. What improvement
and use there may be made of this Experiment, ib. A Discourse touching the
nature of Suction, proving that Suga vacui is not the adequate cause thereof.
123 etc. The 34 Experiment, containing several attempts for the weighing of
light Bodies in the exhausted Receiver. 131 etc. The 35 Experiment, touching
the cause of a Filtration, and the rising of matter in Siphons, 133 etc. A
relation of a new kind of Siphon, of the Author's, upon the occasion of trying
the Experiment lately observed by some Frenchmen, and further improved by
himself; and some conjectures touching the cause of the exhibited Phenomenon.
136 etc. The 36 Experiment, touching the weighing of a parcel of Air in the
exhausted Vessel; and some other Observations for the explication thereof, 138
etc. An accidental Experiment, tending to the further confirmation of the
Author's Reflections upon the first Experiment; with a digressive observation,
noting the subtle penetrancy of some Spirits, to exceed by far that of the
Air, 140 etc. and some other Experiments to show the difficulty of the ingress
of the Air into the pores or holes of some Bodies into which water will readily
insinuate it self, with a conjecture at the cause thereof, 142. The Author
returns to the prosecution of the inquiry after the gravity of the Air: But
first, (upon the occasion of the tenacity of a thin Bubble of Glass) sets down
his thoughts concerning the strange exuperancy of strength in Air, agitated by
heat, above what the same has unagitated: and then proceeds to the examination
of the weight of the Air by an AEolipile, and compares the result thereof, with
that of Mersennus, 143, 144 etc. The Opinions and Experiments of diverse
Authors, and some of his own, touching the proportion of weight betwixt Water
and Air, are compared and examined by the Author, 145. The result thereof,
ibid. Mersennus his Observation reconciled, with that of the Author; and the
proportion between the gravity of Water and Air about London, 146 etc. After
the recital of the Opinions of several Writers, touching the proportion of
gravity between Water and Quicksilver, the Author sets down his own trials,
made several ways, together with his conclusion therefrom, 147 etc. The use he
makes of this inquiry for the ghessing at the height of the Atmosphere, 148.
what other Experiments are requisite to the determination thereof. 149 The 37
Experiment, touching the strange and odd Phenomenon, of the sudden flashes of
light in the cavity of the Receiver; the several circumstances and difficulties
of it, with some attempts toward the rendering a reason thereof, 153 etc. The
difficulty of so doing farther shown from the consideration of the various
changes of Air which do not immediately fall under our senses: This last
proposition proved by several Observations. 156, 157 The 38 Experiment,
touching the freezing of Water. A problem (concerning the great force wherewith
a freezing Liquor extends it self) proposed upon the consideration of diverse
admirable effects wrought thereby. 162 The 39 Experiment, containing an
inquisition after the temperature of the substance that remained in the cavity
of the Receiver, after the Air was well exhausted. The relation of a
Phenomenon, seeming to proceed from the swelling of the Glass: with an
advertisement concerning the pliableness of Glass in small pieces. 164 The 40
Experiment, touching the difficulty that occurred in making trial whether
rarefied Air were able to sustain flying Insects. 166 The 41 Experiment,
exhibiting several trials touching the respiration of diverse sorts of Animals
included in the Receiver, 167 etc. with a digression containing some doubts
touching Respiration, wherein are delivered several Experiments relating
thereunto. 171 The 42 Experiment, touching the differing operation of corrosive
Liquors in the emptied Receiver and in the open Air. 196 The 43 Experiment,
touching the spontaneous Ebullition of warm Liquors in the exhausted Receiver.
198 The Conclusion. 201
TO THE LORD of DUNGARVAN, My Honored and Dear NEPHEW. My Dear Lord,
REceiving in your last from Paris, a desire that I would add some more
Experiments to those I formerly sent You over: I could not be so much your
Servant as I am, without looking upon that Desire as a Command; and
consequently, without thinking my self obliged to consider by what sort of
Experiments it might the most acceptably be obeyed. And at the same time,
perceiving by Letters from some other Ingenious Persons at Paris, that several
of the Virtuosi there, were very intent upon the examination of the Interest of
the Air, in hindering the descent of the Quicksilver, in the famous Experiment
touching a Vacuum: I thought I could not comply with your Desires in a more fit
and seasonable manner, than by prosecuting and endeavoring to promote that
noble Experiment of Torricellius: and by presenting Your Lordship an account of
my attempts to illustrate a Subject, about which (its being so much discoursed
of where you are, together with your inbred Curiosity, and love of Experimental
Learning) made me suppose you sufficiently inquisitive.

And though I pretend not to acquaint you, on this occasion, with any store of
new Discoveries, yet possibly I shall be so happy, as to assist you to know
some things which you did formerly but suppose; and shall present you, if not
with new Theories, at least with new Proofs of such as are not yet become
unquestionable. And if what I shall deliver, has the good fortune to encourage
and assist you to prosecute the Hints it will afford, I shall account my self,
in paying of a duty to you, to have done a piece of Service to the Commonwealth
of Learning. Since it may highly conduce to the advancement of that
Experimental Philosophy, the effectual pursuit of which, requires as well a
Purse as a Brain, to endear it to hopeful Persons of your Quality: who may
accomplish many things, which others can but wish, or at most, but design, by
being able to employ the Presents of Fortune in the search of the Mysteries of
Nature.

And I am not faintly induced to make choice of this Subject, rather than any
of the expected Chemical ones, to entertain Your Lordship upon, by these two
Considerations: The one, That the Air being so necessary to humane Life, that
not only the generality of Men, but most other Creatures that breathe, cannot
live many minutes without it; any considerable discovery of its Nature, seems
likely to prove of moment to Mankind. And the other is, That the ambient Air,
being that whereto both our own Bodies, and most of the others we deal with
here below, are almost perpetually contiguous; not only its alterations have a
notable and manifest share in those obvious Effects, that Men have already been
invited to ascribe thereunto (such as are the various Distempers incident to
humane Bodies especially if crazy in the Spring, the Autumn, and also on most
of the great and sudden changes of Weather) but likewise, the further discovery
of the Nature of the Air, will probably discover to us, that it concurs more or
less to the exhibiting of many Phenomenon, in which it has hitherto scarce
been suspected to have any Interest. So that a true account of any Experiment
that is New concerning a thing, wherewith we have such constant and necessary
intercourse, may not only prove of some advantage to humane Life, but gratify
Philosophers, by promoting their Speculations on a Subject which has so much
opportunity to solicit their Curiosity.

And I should immediately proceed to the mention of my Experiments, but that I
like too well that worthy saying of In Praefat. lib. 1. the Naturalist Pliny,
Benignum est and plenum ingenui pudoris, fateri per quos profeceris, not to
conform to it, by acquainting your Lordship, in the first place, with the Hint
I had of the Engine I am to entertain you with. You may be pleased to remember,
that a while before our separation in England, I told you of a Book that I had
heard of, but not perused, published by the industrious Jesuit Schottus,
wherein 'twas said, He related how that ingenious Gentleman, Otto Gericke,
Consul of Magdeburg, had lately practiced in Germany a way of emptying Glass
Vessels, by sucking out the Air at the mouth of the Vessel, plunged under
Water: And you may also perhaps remember, that I expressed my self much
delighted with this Experiment, since thereby the great force of the external
Air (either rushing in at the opened Orifice of the emptied Vessel, or
violently forcing up the Water into it) was rendered more obvious and
conspicuous than in any Experiment that I had formerly seen. And though it may
appear by some of those Writings I sometimes showed your Lordship, that I had
been solicitous to try things upon the same ground; yet in regard this
Gentleman was beforehand with me in producing such considerable Effects, by
means of the exsuction of Air, I think myself obliged to acknowledge the
assistance and encouragement, the Report of his Performances has afforded me.

But, as few inventions happen to be at first so complete, as not to be either
blemished with some deficiencies needful to be remedi'd, or otherwise capable
of improvement: so when the Engine we have been speaking of, comes to be more
attentively considered, there will appear two very considerable things to be
desired in it. For first, the Wind Pump (as some body not improperly calls it)
is so contrived, that to evacuate the Vessel, there is required the continual
labor of two strong Men for diverse hours. And next (which is an imperfection
of much greater moment) the Receiver, or Glass to be emptied, consisting of one
entire and uninterrupted Globe and Neck of Glass; the whole Engine is so made,
that things cannot be conveyed into it, whereon to try Experiments: So that
there seems but little (if any thing) more to be expected from it, than those
very few Phenomenon that have been already observed by the Author, and recorded
by Schottus. Wherefore to remedy these Inconveniences, I put both Mr. G. and R.
Hook (who has also the Honor to be known to your Lordship, and was with me
when I had these things under consideration) to contrive some Air Pump, that
might not, like the other, need to be kept under Water (which on diverse
occasions is convenient) and might be more easily managed: And after an
unsuccessful trial or two of ways proposed by others, the last named Person
fitted me with a Pump, anon to be described. And thus the first Imperfection of
the German Engine, was in good measure, though not perfectly remedied: And to
supply the second defect, it was considered that it would not perhaps prove
impossible to leave in the Glass to be emptied, a hole large enough to put in a
Man's Arm clothed; and consequently other Bodies, not bigger than it, or
longer than the inside of the Vessel. And this Design seemed the more hopeful,
because I remembered, that having several years before often made the Experiment
De Vacuo with my own hands; I had, to examine some Conjectures that occurred to
me about it, caused Glasses to be made with a hole at that end, which uses to
be sealed up, and had nevertheless been able, as occasion required, to make use
of such Tubes, as if no such holes had been left in them, by devising stopples
for them, made of the common Plaster called Diachylon: which I rightly enough
guessed, would, by reason of the exquisite commixtion of its small parts, and
closeness of it is texture, deny all access to the external Air. Wherefore,
supposing that by the help of such Plasters carefully laid upon the
commissures of the stopple and hole to be made in the Receiver, the external
Air might be hindered from insinuating it self between them, into the Vessel, we
caused several such Glasses, as you will find described a little lower, to be
blown at the Glass-house; and though we could not get the Workmen to blow any
of them so large, or of so convenient a shape as we would fain have had; yet
finding one to be tolerably fit, and less unfit than any of the rest, we were
content to make use of it in that Engine: Of which, I suppose, you by this time
expect the Description, in order to the recital of the Phenomenon exhibited by
it.

To give your Lordship then, in the first place, some account of the Engine it
self: It consists of two principal parts; a glass Vessel, and a Pump to draw
the Air out of it.

The former of these (which we, with the Glass-men, shall often call a
Receiver, for its affinity to the large Vessels of that name, used by Chemists)
consists of a Glass with a wide hole at the top, of a cover to that hole, and
of a Stop-cock fastened to the end of the Neck, at the bottom.

The shape of the Glass, you will find expressed in the first Figure of the
annexed Scheme. And for the size of it, it contained about 30 Wine Quarts, each
of them containing near two Pound (of 16 Ounces to the Pound) of Water: We
should have been better pleased with a more capacious Vessel, but the Glass-men
professed themselves unable to blow a larger, of such a thickness and shape as
was requisite to our purpose.

At the very top of the Vessel, (A) you may observe a round hole, whose
Diametre (BC) is of about four Inches; and whereof, the Orifice is incircled
with a lip of Glass, almost an Inch high: For the making of which lip, it was
requisite (to mention that upon the by, in case your Lordship should have such
another Engine made for you) to have a hollow and tapering Pipe of Glass drawn
out, whereof the Orifice above mentioned was the Basis, and then to have the
Cone cut off with an hot Iron, within about an Inch of the Points (BC.)

The use of the lip, is to sustain the cover delineated in the second Figure;
where (DE) points out a brass Ring, so cast, as that it does cover the lip (BC)
of the first Figure, and is cemented on, upon it, with a strong and close
Cement. To the inward tapering Orifice of this Ring (which is about three
Inches over) are exquisitely ground the sides of the Brass stopple (FG;) so
that the concave superficies of the one, and the unequal of the other, may touch
one another in so many places, as may leave as little access, as possible, to
the external Air: And in the midst of this cover is left a hole (HI) of about
half an Inch over, environed also with a Ring or Socket of the same Metal, and
fitted likewise with a Brass stopple (K) made in the form of the Key of a
Stop-cock, and exactly ground into the hole (HI) it is to fill; so as that,
though it be turned round in the cavity it possesses, it will not let in the
air, and yet may be put in or taken out at pleasure, for uses to be hereafter
mentioned. In order to some of which, it is perforated with a little hole, (8)
traversing the whole thickness of it at the lower end; through which, and a
little Brass Ring (L) fastened to one side (no matter which) of the bottom of
the stopple (FG) a string (8, 9, 10.) might pass, to be employed to move some
things in the capacity of the emptied Vessel, without any where unstopping it.

The last thing belonging to our Receiver, is the Stop-cock, designed in the
first Figure by (N,) for the better fastening of which to the neck, and exacter
exclusion of the Air, there was soder'd on to the shank of the Cock (X) a Plate
of Tin, (MTUW) long enough to cover the neck of the Receiver. But because the
cementing of this was a matter of some difficulty, it will not be amiss to
mention here the manner of it; which was, That the cavity of the Tin Plate was
filled with a melted Cement, made of Pitch, Rosin, and Wood ashes, well
incorporated; and to hinder this liquid Mixture from getting into the Orifice
(Z) of the shank (X,) that hole was stopped with a Cock, to which was fastened a
string, whereby it might be pulled out at the upper Orifice of the Receiver;
and then, the Glass neck of the Receiver being well warmed, was thrust into
this Cement, and over the shank, whereby it was effected, that all the space
betwixt the Tin Plate and the Receiver, and betwixt the internal superficies of
the Receiver, and the shank of the Cock, was filled with the Cement; and so we
have dispatched the first upper part of the Engine.

The undermost remaining part consists of a Frame, and of a sucking Pump, or as
we formerly called it, an Air Pump, supported by it: The Frame is of Wood,
small, but very strong, consisting of three legs, (111) so placed, that one
side of it may stand perpendicular, that the free motion of the hand may not be
hindered. In the midst of which frame, is transversly nailed a board, (222)
which may not improperly be called a Midriff, upon which rests, and to which is
strongly fastened, the main part of the Pump it self, which is the only thing
remaining to be described.

The Pump consists of four parts, a hollow Cylinder, a Sucker, a handle to move
that Sucker, and a Valve.

The Cylinder was (by a pattern) cast of Brass; it is in length about 14
Inches, thick enough to be very strong, notwithstanding the Cylindrical cavity
left within it; this cavity is about three Inches Diametre, and makes as exact
a Cylinder as the Artificer was able to bore. This hollow Cylinder is fitted
with a Sucker, (4455) consisting of two parts; the one (44) somewhat less in
Diametre than the Cavity of the Cylinder; upon which is nailed a good thick
piece of tanned Shoe-leather, which will go so close to the Cylinder, that it
will need to be very forcibly knocked and ram'd in, if at any time it be taken
out; which is therefore done, that it may the more exactly hinder the Air from
insinuating it self betwixt it and the sides of the Cylinder whereon it is to
move.

To the midst of this former part of the Sucker is strongly fastened the other;
namely, a thick and narrow plate of Iron (55) somewhat longer than the
Cylinder, one of whose edges is smooth, but at the other edge it is indented
(as I may so speak) with a row of Teeth, delineated in the Scheme, into whose
intervals are to be fitted, the Teeth of a small Iron Nut, (ab) (as Tradesmen
call it) which is fastened by two staples (22) to the underside of the formerly
mentioned transverse board (222) on which the Cylinder rests, and is turned to
and fro by the third piece of this Pump, namely, the handle or Manubrium, (7)
of which the Figure gives a sufficient description.

The fourth and last part of this Cylinder, is the Valve, (R) consisting of a
hole bored through at the top of the Cylinder, a little tapering toward the
cavity; into which hole is ground a tapering Peg of Brass, to be thrust in, and
taken out at pleasure.

The Engine being thus described, it will be requisite to add, that something
is wont to be done before it be set on work, for the more easy moving of the
Sucker, and for the better exclusion of the outward Air: which, when the Vessel
begins to be exhausted, is much more difficult to be kept out, than one would
easily imagine.

There must then be first poured in at the top of the Receiver, a little sallad
Oil, partly to fill up any small intervals that may happen to be betwixt the
contiguous surfaces of the internal parts of the Stop-cock: And partly, that it
may be the more easy to turn the Key (S) backwards and forwards. Pretty store
of Oil must also be poured into the Cylinder, both that the Sucker may slip up
and down in it the more smoothly and freely, and that the Air might be the
better hindered from getting in between them: And for the like reasons, a little
Oil is to be used also about the Valve. Upon which occasion, it would not be
omitted (for it is strange) that oftentimes, when neither the pouring in of
Water, nor even of Oil it alone, proved capable to make the Sucker move easily
enough in the Cylinder; a mixture of both those Liquors would readily
(sometimes even to admiration) perform the desired effect. And lastly, the
Brass cover of the Receiver, being put into the Brass ring formerly described,
that no Air may get between them, it will be very requisite to plaster over
very carefully the upper edges of both, with the Plaster formerly mentioned,
or some other as close, which is to be spread upon the edges with an hot Iron;
that, being melted, it may run into and fill up all the cranies, or other
little cavities, at which the Air might otherwise get entrance.

All things being thus fitted, and the lower shank (O) of the Stop-cock being
put into the upper Orifice of the Cylinder (and) into which it was exactly
ground; the Experimenter is first, by turning the handle, to force the Sucker
to the top of the Cylinder, that there may be no Air left in the upper part of
it: Then shutting the Valve with the Plug, and turning the other way, he is to
draw down the Sucker to the bottom of the Cylinder; by which motion of the
Sucker, the Air that was formerly in the Cylinder being thrust out, and none
being permitted to succeed in its room, it is manifest that the cavity of the
Cylinder must be empty in reference to the Air. So that if thereupon the Key of
the Stop-cock be so turned, as that through the perforation of it, a free
passage be opened betwixt the Cylinder and the Receiver, part of the Air
formerly contained in the Receiver, will nimbly descend into the Cylinder. And
this Air being, by the turning back of the Key, hindered from the returning
into the Receiver, may, by the opening of the Valve, and forcing up of the
Sucker to the top of the Cylinder again, be driven out into the open Air. And
thus by the repetition of the motion of the Sucker upward and downward, and by
opportunely turning the Key, and stopping the Valve, as occasion requires, more
or less Air may be sucked out of the Receiver, according to the exigency of the
Experiment, and the intention of him that makes it.

Your Lordship will, perhaps, think that I have been unnecessarily prolix in
this first part of my Discourse: But if you had seen how many unexpected
difficulties we found to keep out the external Air, even for a little while,
when some considerable part of the internal had been sucked out; You would
peradventure allow, that I might have set down more circumstances than I have,
without setting down any, whose knowledge, he that shall try the Experiment,
may not have need of. Which is so true, that, before we proceed any further, I
cannot think it unseasonable to advertise Your Lordship, that there are two
chief sorts of Experiments, which we designed in our Engine to make trial of:
The one, such as may be quickly dispatched, and therefore may be tried in our
Engine, though it leak a little, because the Air may be faster drawn out, by
nimbly plying the Pump, than it can get in at undiscerned leaks; I say at
undiscerned leaks, because such as are big enough to be discovered, can scarce
be uneasy to be stopped. The other sort of Experiments consist of those that
require, not only that the internal Air be drawn out of the Receiver, but that
it be likewise for a long time kept out of it. Such are the preservation of
Animal and other Bodies therein, the germination and growth of Vegetables, and
other trials of several sorts, which it is apparent cannot be well made, unless
the external Air can, for a competent while, be excluded: Since, even at a very
small leak, there may enough get in, to make the Vacuum soon lose that name; by
which I here declare once for all, that I understand not a space wherein there
is no Body at all, but such as is either altogether, or almost totally devoid
of Air.

Now this distinction of Experiments I thought fit to premise to the ensuing
Narratives, because, upon trial, we found it so exceeding (and scarce
imaginably) difficult a matter, to keep out the Air from getting at all in at
any imperceptible hole or flaw whatsoever, (in a Vessel immediately surrounded
with the compressed Atmosphere,) that in spite of all our care and diligence,
we never were able totally to exhaust the Receiver, or keep it when it was
almost empty, any considerable time, from leaking more or less: although (as we
have lately intimated) by unwearied quickness in plying the Pump, the internal
Air can be much faster drawn out than the external can get in, till the
Receiver come to be almost quite empty. And that is enough to enable Men to
discover hitherto unobserved Phenomenon of Nature.

The Experiments therefore of the first sort, will, I fear, prove the only ones
wherewith my Avocations will allow me to entertain Your Lordship in this
Letter. For till your further Commands shall engage me to undertake, by God's
permission, such an Employment, and more leisure shall better fit me for it, I
know not whether I shall be in a condition to try what may be done, to enable
me to give you some account of the other sort of Experiments also.

EXPERIMENT I.
TO proceed now to the Phenomenon, exhibited to us by the Engine above
described; I hold it not unfit to begin with what does constantly and regularly
offer it self to our observation, as depending upon the Fabric of the Engine
it self, and not upon the nature of this or that particular Experiment which
it is employed to try.

First, then, upon the drawing down of the Sucker (the Valve being shut) the
Cylindrical space, deserted by the Sucker, is left devoid of Air; and
therefore, upon the turning of the Key, the Air contained in the Receiver
rusheth into the emptied Cylinder, till the Air in both those Vessels be
brought to about an equal measure of dilatation. And therefore, upon shutting
the Receiver by re-turning the Key, if you open the Valve, and force up the
Sucker again, you will find, that after this first exsuction you will drive out
almost a whole Cylinder full of Air: But at the following exsuctions, you will
draw less and less of Air out of the Receiver into the Cylinder, because there
will still remain less and less Air in the Receiver it self; and consequently,
the Particles of the remaining Air, having more room to extend themselves in,
will less press out one another. This you will easily perceive, by finding,
that you still force less and less Air out of the Cylinder; so that when the
Receiver is almost exhausted, you may force up the Sucker almost to the top of
the Cylinder, before you will need to unstop the Valve to let out any Air: And
if at such time, the Valve being shut, you let go the handle of the Pump, you
will find the Sucker forcibly carried up to the top of the Cylinder, by the
protrusion of the external Air; which, being much less rarefied than that
within the Cylinder; must have a more forcible pressure upon the Sucker, than
the internal is able to resist: And by this means you may know how far you have
emptied the Receiver. And to this we may add, on this occasion, that constantly
upon the turning of the Key to let out the Air from the Receiver, into the
emptied Cylinder, there is immediately produced a considerably brisk noise,
especially whilst there is any plenty of Air in the Receiver.

For the more easy understanding of the Experiments triable by our Engine; I
thought it not superfluous, nor unseasonable in the recital of this first of
them, to insinuate that notion by which it seems likely that most, if not all
of them, will prove explicable. Your Lordship will easily suppose, that the
Notion I speak of is, That there is a Spring, or Elastical power in the Air we
live in. By which (...) or spring of the Air, that which I mean is this: That
our Air either consists of, or at least abounds with, parts of such a nature;
that in case they be bent or compressed by the weight of the incumbent part of
the Atmosphere, or by any other Body, they do endeavor, as much as in them
lies, to free themselves from that pressure, by bearing against the contiguous
Bodies that keep them bent; and, as soon as those Bodies are removed or reduced
to give them way, by presently unbending and stretching out themselves, either
quite, or so far forth as the contiguous Bodies that resist them will permit,
and thereby expanding the whole parcel of Air, these elastical Bodies compose.

This Notion may perhaps be somewhat further explained, by conceiving the Air
near the Earth to be such a heap of little Bodies, lying one upon another, as
may be resembled to a Fleece of Wool. For this (to omit other likenesses
betwixt them) consists of many slender and flexible Hairs; each of which may
indeed, like a little Spring, be easily bent or rouled up; but will also, like
a Spring, be still endeavoring to stretch it self out again. For though both
these Hairs, and the Aereal Corpuscles to which we liken them, do easily yield
to external pressures; yet each of them (by virtue of its structure) is endowed
with a Power or Principle of self-Dilatation; by virtue where of, though the
hairs may by a Man's hand be bent and crowded closer together, and into a
narrower room than suits best with the nature of the Body, yet, whilst the
compression lasts, there is in the fleece they compose an endeavor outward,
where by it continually thrusts against the hand that opposes its Expansion.
And upon the removal of the external pressure, by opening the hand more or
less, the compressed Wool does, as it were, spontaneously expand or display
itself toward the recovery of its former more loose and free condition, till
the Fleece has either regained its former Dimensions, or at least, approached
them as near as the compressing hand (perchance not quite opened) will permit.
This Power of self-Dilatation, is somewhat more conspicuous in a dry Sponge
compressed, than in a fleece of Wool. But yet we rather chose to employ the
latter, on this occasion, because it is not like a Sponge, an entire Body, but
a number of slender and flexible Bodies, loosely complicated, as the Air it
self seems to be.

There is yet another way to explicate the Spring of the Air, namely, by
supposing with that most ingenious Gentleman, Monsieur Des Carts, That the Air
is nothing but a Congeries or heap of small and (for the most part) of flexible
Particles; of several sizes, and of all kind of Figures which are raised by
heat (especially that of the Sun) into that fluid and subtle Ethereal Body that
surrounds the Earth; and by the restless agitation of that Celestial matter
wherein those particles swim, are so whirld round, that each Corpuscle
endeavors to beat off all others from coming within the little Sphere
requisite to its motion about its own Center; and (in case any, by intruding
into that Sphere, shall oppose its free Rotation) to expel or drive it away: So
that according to this doctrine, it imports very little, whether the particles
of the Air have the structure requisite to Springs, or be of any other form
(how irregular soever) since their Elastical power is not made to depend upon
their shape or structure, but upon the vehement agitation, and (as it were)
brandishing motion, which they receive from the fluid Either that swiftly flows
between them, and whirling about each of them (independently from the rest) not
only keeps those slender Aereal Bodies separated and stretched out (at least, as
far as the Neighboring ones will permit) which otherwise, by reason of their
flexibleness and weight, would flag or curl; but also makes them hit against,
and knock away each other, and consequently require more room, than that,
which, if they were compressed, they would take up.

By these two differing ways, my Lord, may the Springs of the Air be
explicated. But though the former of them be that, which by reason of its
seeming somewhat more easy, I shall for the most part make use of in the
following Discourse: yet am I not willing to declare peremptorily for either of
them, against the other. And indeed, though I have in another Treatise
endeavored to make it probable, that the returning of Elastical Bodies (if I
may so call them) forcibly bent, to their former position, may be Mechanically
explicated: Yet I must confess, that to determine whether the motion of
Restitution in Bodies, proceed from this, That the parts of a Body of a
peculiar Structure are put into motion by the bending of the Spring, or from
the endeavor of some subtle ambient Body, whose passage may be opposed or
obstructed, or else it is pressure unequally resisted by reason of the new shape
or magnitude, which the bending of a Spring may give the Pores of it: To
determine this, I say, seems to me a matter of more difficulty, than at first
sight one would easily imagine it. Wherefore I shall decline meddling with a
Subject, which is much more hard to be explicated, than necessary to be so, by
him, whose business it is not, in this Letter, to assign the adequate cause of
the Spring of the Air, but only to manifest, That the Air has a Spring, and to
relate some of its effects.

I know not whether I need annex that, though either of the abovementioned
Hypotheses, and perhaps some others, may afford us an account plausible enough
of the Air's Spring; yet I doubt, whether any of them gives us a sufficient
account of its Nature. And of this doubt, I might here mention some Reasons,
but that, peradventure, I may (God permitting) have a fitter occasion to say
something of it elsew here. And therefore I shuold now proceed to the next
Experiment, but that I think it requisite, first, to suggest to your Lordship
what comes into my thoughts, by way of Answer to a plausible Objection, which I
foresee you may make against our proposed Doctrine, touching the Spring of the
Air. For it may be alleged, that though the Air were granted to consist of
springy Particles (if I may so speak) yet thereby we could only give an account
of the Dilatation of the Air in Wind Guns, and other pneumatical Engines
wherein the Air has been compressed, and its springs violently bent by an
apparent external force; upon the removal of which, it is no wonder that the Air
should, by the motion of restitution expand it self till it has recovered its
more natural dimensions: whereas in our abovementioned first Experiment, and
in almost all others triable in our Engine, it appears not, that any
compression of the Air preceded its spontaneous Dilatation or Expansion of it
self. To remove this difficulty, I must desire Your Lordship to take notice,
that of whatever nature the Air, very remote from the Earth, may be, and
whatever the Schools may confidently teach to the contrary, yet we have diverse
Experiments to evince, that the Atmosphere we live in, is not (otherwise than
comparatively to more ponderous Bodies) light, but heavy: And did not their
gravity hinder them, it appears not why the streams of the Terraqueous Globe,
of which our Air in great part consists, should not rise much higher, than the
Refractions of the Sun, and other Stars give men ground to think, that the
Atmosphere, (even in the judgment of those Rescent Astronomers, who seem
willing to enlarge its bounds as much as they dare,) does reach.

But lest you should expect my seconding this Reason by Experience; and lest
you should object, That most of the Experiments that have been proposed to
prove the gravity of the Air, have been either barely proposed, or perhaps not
accurately tried; I am content, before I pass further, to mention here. That I
found a dry lambs-bladder containing near about two thirds of a pint, and
compressed by a packthred tied about it, to lose a grain and the eighth part of
a grain of its former weight, by the recess of the Air upon my having pricked
it: And this with a pair of Scales, which, when the full bladder and the
correspondent weight were in it, would manifestly turn either way with the 32
part of a grain. And if it be further objected, That the Air in the Bladder was
violently compressed by the packthred and the sides of the Bladder, we might
probably (to wave prolix answers) be furnished with a Reply, by setting down
the differing weight of our Receiver, when empti'd and when full of
uncompress'd Air, if we could here procure Scales fit for so nice an
Experiment; since we are informed, that in the German Experiment, commended at
the beginning of this Letter, the ingenious Triers of it found, That their
Glass Vessel, of the capacity of 32 measures, was lighter when the Air had been
drawn out of it, than before, by no less than one ounce and 3/10 that is, an
ounce and very near a third: But of the gravity of the Air, we may elsewhere
have occasion to make further mention.

Taking it then for granted that the Air is not devoid of weight, it will not
be uneasy to conceive, That that part of the Atmosphere wherein we live, being
the lower part of it, the Corpuscles that compose it, are very much compressed
by the weight of all those of the like nature that are directly over them; that
is, of all the Particles of Air, that being pil'd up upon them, reach to the
top of the Atmosphere. And though the height of this Atmosphere, according to
the famous Kepler, and some others, scarce exceeds eight common miles; yet
other eminent and later Astronomers, would promote the confines of the
Atmosphere to exceed six or seven times that number of miles. And the diligent
and learned Ricciolo makes it probable, that the Atmosphere may, at least in
diverse places, be at least fifty miles high. So that according to a moderate
estimate of the thickness of the Atmosphere, we may well suppose, that a Column
of Air, of many miles in height, leaning upon some springy Corpuscles of Air
here below, may have weight enough to bend their little springs, and keep them
bent: As, (to resume our former comparison,) if there were fleeces of Wool
pil'd up to a mountainous height, upon one another, the hairs that compose the
lowermost Locks which support the rest, would, by the weight of all the Wool
above them, be as well strongly compressed, as if a Man should squeeze them
together in his hands, or employ any such other moderate force to compress
them. So that we need not wonder, that upon the taking off the incumbent Air
from any parcel of the Atmosphere here below, the Corpuscles, whereof that
undermost Air consists, should display themselves, and take up more room than
before.

And if it be objected, That in Water, the weight of the upper and of the lower
part is the same: I answer, That, (besides that it may be well doubted whether
the observation, by reason of the great difficulty, has been exactly made,)
there is a manifest disparity betwixt the Air and Water: For I have not found,
upon an Experiment purposely made, (and in another Treatise Recorded) that
Water will suffer any considerable compression; whereas we may observe in
Wind-Guns, (to mention now no other Engines) that the Air will suffer it self
to be crowded into a comparatively very little room; in so much, that a very
diligent Examiner of the Phenomenon of Wind-Guns would have us believe, that in
one of them, by condensation, he reduced the Air into a space at least eight
times narrower than it before possessed. And to this, if we add a noble
Phenomenon of the Experiment De Vacuo; these things put together, may for the
present suffice to countenance our Doctrine. For that noble Experimenter,
Monsieur Pascal (the Son) had the commendable Curiosity to cause the
Torricellian Experiment to be tried at the foot, about the middle, and at the
top of that high Mountain (in Auvergne, if I mistake not) commonly called Le
Puy de Domme; whereby it was found, That the Mercury in the Tube fell down
lower, about three inches, at the top of the Mountain than at the bottom. And a
Learned Man a while since informed me, That a great Virtuose, friend to us
both, has, with not unlike success, tried the same Experiment in the lower and
upper parts of a Mountain in the west of England. Of which, the reason seems
manifestly enough to be this, That upon the tops of high Mountains, the Air
which bears against the restagnant Quicksilver, is less pressed by the less
ponderous incumbent Air; and consequently is not able totally to hinder the
descent of so tall and heavy a Cylinder of Quicksilver, as at the bottom of
such Mountains did but maintain an AEquilibrium with the incumbent Atmosphere.

And if it be yet further Objected against what has been proposed touching the
compactness and pressure of the inferior Air; That we find this very Air to
yield readily to the motion of little Flies, and even to that of Feathers, and
such other light and weak Bodies; which seems to argue, that the particles of
our Air are not so compressed as we have represented them, especially, since by
our former Experiment it appears, that the Air readily dilated it self
downward, from the Receiver into the Pump, when it is plain, that it is not the
incumbent Atmosphere, but only the subjacent Air in the brass Cylinder that
has been removed: If this, I say, be objected, we may reply, That, when a man
squeezes a fleece of Wool in his hand, he may feel that the Wool incessantly
bears against his hand, as that which hinders the hairs it consists of, to
recover their former and more natural extent. So each parcel of the Air about
the Earth, does constantly endeavor to thrust away all those contiguous
Bodies, (whether. Aereal or more gross,) that keep it bent, and hinder the
expansion of its parts, which will dilate themselves, or fly abroad toward
that part, (whether upwards or downwards,) where they find their attempted
Dilatation of themselves less resisted by the neighboring Bodies. Thus the
Corpuscles of that Air we have been all this while speaking of, being unable,
by reason of their weight, to ascend above the Convexity of the Atmosphere, and
by reason of the resistance of the surface of the Earth and Water, to fall down
lower, they are forced, by their own gravity and this resistance, to expand and
diffuse themselves about the Terrestrial Globe; whereby it comes to pass, that
they must as well press the contiguous Corpuscles of Air that on either side
oppose their Dilatation, as they must press upon the surface of the Earth, and,
as it were recoyling thence, endeavor to thrust away those upper particles of
Air that lean upon them.

And, as for the easy yielding of the Air to the Bodies that move in it, if we
consider that the Corpuscles whereof it consists, though of a springy nature,
are yet so very small, as to make up (which it is manifest they do) a fluid
Body, it will not be difficult to conceive, that in the Air, as in other Bodies
that are fluid, the little Bodies it consists of, are in an almost restless
motion, whereby they become (as we have more fully discoursed in another
Treatise) In a Discourse touching fluidity and firmness.
very much disposed to yield to other Bodies, or easy to be displaced by them;
and that the same Corpuscles are likewise so variously moved, as they are
entire Corpuscles, that if some strive to push a Body placed among them toward
the right hand (for instance) others, whose motion has an opposite
determination, as strongly thrust the same Body toward the left; whereby
neither of them proves able to move it out of its place, the pressure on all
hands being reduced as it were to an AEquilibrium: So that the Corpuscles of
the Air must be as well sometimes considered under the notion of little
Springs, which remaining bent, are in their entire bulk transported from place
to place; as under the notion of Springs displaying themselves, whose parts fly
abroad, whilst, as to their entire bulk they scarce change place: As the two
ends of a Bow, shot off, fly from one another, whereas the Bow it self may be
held fast in the Archer's hand; and that it is the equal pressure of the Air on
all sides upon the Bodies that are in it, which causes the easy Cession of
its parts, may be argued from hence: That if by the help of our Engine the Air
be but in great part, though not totally, drawn away from one side of a Body
without being drawn away from the other, he that shall think to move that Body
to and fro, as easily as before, will find himself much mistaken.

In verification of which we will, to divert your Lordship a little, mention
here a Phenomenon of our Engine, which even to diverse ingenious persons has
at first sight seemed very wonderful.

EXPERIMENT II.
THe thing that is wont to be admired, and which may pass for our second
experiment is this, That if, when the Receiver is almost empty, a By-stander be
desired to lift up the brass Key (formerly described as a stopple in the brass
Cover) he will find it a difficult thing to do so, if the Vessel be well
exhausted; and even when but a moderate quantity of Air has been drawn out, he
will, when he has lifted it up a little, so that it is somewhat loose from the
sides of the lip or socket, which (with the help of a little oil) it exactly
filled before, he will (I say) find it so difficult to be lifted up, that he
will imagine there is some great weight fastened to the bottom of it. And if (as
sometimes has been done for merriment) only a Bladder be tied to it, it is
pleasant to see how men will marvail that so light a Body, filled at most but
with Air, should so forcibly draw down their hand as if it were filled with
some very ponderous thing: Whereas the cause of this pretty Phenomenon seems
plainly enough to be only this, That the Air in the Receiver, being very much
dilated, its Spring must be very much weakn'd, and consequently it can but
faintly press up the lower end of the stopple, whereas the Spring of the
external Air being no way debilitated, he that a little lifts up the stopple
must with his hand support a pressure equal to the disproportion betwixt the
force of the internal expanded Air, and that of the Atmosphere incumbent upon
the upper part of the same key or stopple: And so men being unused to find any
resistance, in lifting things up, from the free Air above them, they are
forward to conclude that that which depresseth their hands must needs be some
weight, though they know not where placed, drawing beneath it.

And, that we have not mis-assign'd the cause of this Phenomenon, seems
evident enough by this, That as Air is suffered by little and little to get
into the Receiver, the weight that a man fancieth his hand supports, is
manifestly felt to decrease more and more, the internal Air by this recruit
approaching more to an AEquilibrium with the external, till at length the
Receiver growing again full of Air, the stopple may be lifted up without any
difficulty at all.

By several other of the Experiments afforded us by our Engine, the same notion
of the great and equal pressure of the free Air upon the Bodies it environs,
might be here manifested, but that we think it not so fit to anticipate such
Experiments: And therefore shall rather employ a few lines to clear up the
difficulty touching this matter, which we have observed to have troubled some
even of the Philosophical and Mathematical Spectators of our Engine, who have
wondered that we should talk of the Air exquisitely shut up in our Receiver, as
if it were all one with the pressure of the Atmosphere; whereas the thick and
close body of the Glass, wholly impervious to the Air, does manifestly keep the
incumbent Pillar of the Atmosphere from pressing in the least upon the Air
within the Glass, which it can no where come to touch. To elucidate a little
this matter, let us consider, That if a man should take a fleece of Wool, and
having first by compressing it in his hand reduced it into a narrower compass,
should nimbly convey and shut it close up into a Box just fit for it, though
the force of his hand would then no longer bend those numerous springy Bodies
that compose the Fleece, yet they would continue as strongly bent as before,
because, the Box they are enclosed in, would as much resist their re-expanding
of themselves, as did the hand that put them in. For thus we may conceive, that
the Air being shut up, when its parts are bent by the whole weight of the
incumbent Atmosphere, though that weight can no longer lean upon it, by reason
it is kept off by the Glass, yet the Corpuscles of the Air within that Glass
continue as forcibly bent, as they were before their inclusion, because the
sides of the Glass hinder them from displaying or stretching out themselves.
And if it be objected that this is unlikely, because even Glass bubbles, such
as are wont to be blown at the flame of a Lamp, exceeding thin, and
Hermetically sealed, will not break; whereas it cannot be imagined that so thin
a Prison of Glass could resist the Elastical force of all the included Air, if
that Air were so compressed as we suppose: It may be easily replied, That the
pressure of the inward Air against the Glass, is countervail'd by the equal
pressure of the outward against the same Glass. And we see in bubbles, that by
reason of this, an exceeding thin film of Water is often able, for a good
while, to hinder the eruption of a pretty quantity of Air. And this may be also
more conspicuous in those great Spherical bubbles, that Boys sometimes blow
with Water, to which Soap has given a Tenacity. But that, if the pressure of
the ambient Air were removed, the internal Air may be able to break thicker
Glasses, than those lately mentioned, will appear by some of the following
Experiments; to which, we shall therefore now hasten, having, I fear, been but
too prolix in this Excursion, though we thought it not amiss to annex to our
first Experiments some general Considerations touching the Spring of the Air,
because (this Doctrine being yet a stranger to the Schools) not only we find
not the thing it self to be much taken notice of; but of those few that have
heard of it, the greater part have been forward to reject it, upon a mistaken
persuasion, that those Phenomenon are the effects of Natures abhorrency of a
Vacuum, which seem to be more fitly ascribable to the weight and spring of the
Air.

EXPERIMENT III.
WE will now proceed to observe, that though, by the help of the handle, the
Sucker be easily drawn down to the bottom of the Cylinder; yet, without the
help of that Leaver, there would be required to the same effect, a force or
weight great enough to surmount the pressure of the whole Atmosphere: since
otherwise the Air would not be driven out of its place, when none is permitted
to succeed into the place deserted by the Sucker. This seems evident, from the
known Torricellian Experiment, in which, if the inverted Tube of Mercury be but
25 Digits high, or somewhat more, the Quicksilver will not fall, but remain
suspended in the Tube, because it cannot press the subjacent Mercury with so
great a force, as does the incumbent Cylinder of the Air, reaching thence to
the top of the Atmosphere: Whereas, if the Cylinder of Mercury were three or
four digits longer, it would overpower that of the external Air, and run out
into the Vessel'd Mercury, till the two Cylinders came to an AEquilibrium, and
no further. Hence we need not wonder, that though the Sucker move easily enough
up and down in the Cylinder by the help of the Manubrium; yet if the Manubrium
be taken off, it will require a considerable strength to move it either way.
Nor will it seem strange, that if, when the Valve and Stop-cock are well shut,
you draw down the Sucker, and then let go the Manubrium; the Sucker will, as it
were of it self, re-ascend to the top of the Cylinder, since the spring of the
external Air finds nothing to resist its pressing up the Sucker. And for the
same reason, when the Receiver is almost evacuated, though, having drawn down
the Sucker, you open the way from the Receiver to the Cylinder, and then
intercept that way again by returning the Key; the Sucker will, upon the
letting go the Manubrium, be forcibly carried up almost to the top of the
Cylinder: Because the Air within the Cylinder, being equally dilated and
weakened with that of the Glass, is unable to withstand the pressure of the
external Air, till it be driven into so little space, that there is an
AEquilibrium betwixt its force and that of the Air without. And congruously
hereunto we find, that in this case, the Sucker is drawn down with little less
difficulty, than if the Cylinder, being devoid of Air, the Stopcock were
exactly shut: We might take notice of some other things, that depend upon the
Fabric of our Engine it self; but to shun prolixity, we will, in this place,
content our selves to mention one of them, which seems to be of greater moment
than the rest, and it is this; that when the Sucker has been impelled to the
top of the Cylinder, and the Valve is so carefully stopped, that there is no
Air left in the Cylinder above the Sucker: If then the Sucker be drawn to the
lower part of the Cylinder, he that manageth the Pump finds not any sensibly
greater difficulty to depress the Sucker, when it is nearer the bottom of the
Cylinder, than when it is much farther off. Which circumstance we therefore
think fit to take notice of, because an eminent Modern Naturalist has taught,
that, when the Air is sucked out of a Body, the violence wherewith it is wont
to rush into it again, as soon as it is allowed to re-enter, proceeds mainly
from this; That the pressure of the ambient Air is strengthened upon the
accession of the Air sucked out; which, to make it self room, forces the
neighboring Air to a violent-subingression of its parts: which, if it were
true, he that draws down the Sucker, would find the resistance of the
external Air increased as he draws it lower, more of the displaced Air being
thrust into it to compress it. But, by what has been discoursed upon the first
Experiment, it seems more probable, that without any such strengthening of the
pressure of the outward Air, the taking quite away or the debilitating of the
resistance from within, may suffice to produce the effects under consideration.
But this will perhaps be illustrated by some or other of our future
Experiments, and therefore shall be no longer insisted on here.

EXPERIMENT IV.
HAving thus taken notice of some of the constant Phenomenon of our Engine it
self, let us now proceed to the Experiments triable in it.

We took then a Lambs Bladder large, well dried, and very limber, and leaving
in it about half as much Air as it could contain, we caused the neck of it to
be strongly tried, so that none of the included Air, though by pressure, could
get out. This Bladder being conveyed into the Receiver, and the Cover luted on,
the Pump was set on work, and after two or three exsuctions of the ambient Air
(whereby the Spring of that which remained in the Glass was weakened) the
Imprisoned Air began to swell in the Bladder, and, as more and more of the Air
in the Receiver was, from time to time, drawn out; so did that in the Bladder
more and more expand it self, and display the folds of the formerly flaccid
Bladder: So that before we had exhausted the Receiver near so much as we could,
the Bladder appeared as full and stretched, as if it had been blown up with a
Quill.

And that it may appear that this plumpness of the Bladder proceeded from the
surmounting of the debilitated Spring of the ambient Air remaining in the
Vessel, by the stronger Spring of the Air remaining in the Bladder; we returned
the Key of the Stopcock, and by degrees allowed the external Air to return into
the Receiver: Whereupon it happened, as was expected, that as the Air came in
from without, the distended Air in the Bladder, was proportionably compressed
into a narrower room, and the sides of the Bladder grew flaccid, till the
Receiver having readmitted its wonted quantity of Air, the Bladder appeared as
full of wrinkles and cavities as before.

This Experiment is much of the same nature with that which was, some years
ago, said to be made by that eminent Geometrician Monsieur Roberval, with a
Carps Bladder emptied and conveyed into a Tube, wherein the Experiment De Vacuo
was afterward tried, which ingenious Experiment of his, justly deserves the
thanks of those that have been, or shall be solicitous to discover the nature
of the Air.

But to return to our Experiment, we may take notice of this Circumstance in
it, That after the Receiver has been in some measure emptied, the Bladder
does, at each exsuction, swell much more conspicuously than it did at any of
the first Exsuctions; insomuch that toward the end of the pumping, not only a
great fold or cavity in the surface of the Bladder may be made even, by the
stretching of the inward self-expanding Air: But we have sometimes seen, upon
the turning of the Key to let the ambient Air pass out of the Receiver into the
Cylinder, we have seen (I say) the Air in the Bladder suddenly expand it self
so much and so briskly, that it manifestly lifted up some light Bodies that
leaned upon it, and seemed to lift up the Bladder it self.

Now because it has, by very learned Men, been doubted, whether the swelling
of the Bladder may not have proceeded (not from the Dilatation of the included
Air,) but from the Texture of the Fibers, which, being wont to keep the Bladder
extended when the Animal (to whom it belonged) was alive, may be supposed in
our Experiment to have returned, like so many Springs to their wonted extent,
upon the removal of the ambient Air that compressed and bent them: Because
this, I say, has been doubted, we thought fit to make this further trial.

We let down into the Receiver with the forementioned Bladder two other much
smaller, and of the same kind of Animal; the one of these was not tied up at
the neck that there might be liberty left to the Air that was not squeezed out
(which might amount to about a fifth part of what the Bladder held before) to
pass out into the Receiver: The other had the sides of it stretched out and
pressed together, almost into the form of a Cup, that they might intercept the
less Air betwixt them, and then was strongly tied up at the neck: This done,
and the Air being in some measure sucked out of the Pneumatical Glass (if I may
so call it) the Bladder, mentioned at the beginning of our Experiment, appeared
extended every way to its full Dimensions; whereas neither of the two others
did remarkably swell, and that, whose neck was not tied, seemed very little, if
at all less wrinkl'd than when it was put in.

We made likewise a strong Ligature about the middle of a long Bladder partly
emptied, and upon the drawing the Air out of the Receiver, could observe no
such swelling betwixt the Ligature and the neck of the Bladder, which had been
purposely left open, as betwixt the same Ligature and the bottom of the
Bladder, whence the included Air could no way get out.

But a farther and sufficient manifestation whence the intumescence of the
Bladder proceeds, may be deduced from the following Experiment.

EXPERIMENT V.
TO try then at once both what it was that expanded the Bladder, and what a
powerful Spring there is even in the Air we are wont to think uncompress'd: We
caused a Bladder dry, well tied and blown moderately full, to be hung in the
Receiver by one end of a string, whose other end was fastened to the inside of
the Cover: and upon drawing out the ambient Air, that pressed on the Bladder;
the internal Air not finding the wonted resistance, first swelled and distended
the Bladder, and then broke it, with so wide and crooked a rent, as if it had
been forcibly torn asunder with hands. After which a second Bladder being
conveyed in, the Experiment was repeated with like success: And I suppose it
will not be imagined that in this case the Bladder was broken by its own
Fibers, rather than by the Imprisoned Air.

And of this Experiment these two Phenomenon may be taken notice of: The one,
that the Bladder at its breaking gave a great report, almost like a Cracker:
And the other, That the Air contained in the Bladder, had the power to break it
with the mentioned Impetuosity, long before the ambient Air was all, or near
all, drawn out of the Receiver.

But, to verify what we say in another Discourse, where we show, That even
true Experiments may, by reason of the easy mistake of some unheeded
Circumstance, be unsuccessfully tried; we will Advertise, on this occasion,
that we did oftentimes in vain try the breaking of Bladders, after the manner
above mentioned: Of which the cause appeared to be this, That the Bladders we
could not break, having been brought us ready blown from those that sold them,
were grown dry before they came to our hands: whence it came to pass, that, if
we afterward tied them very hard, they were apt to fret and so become
unserviceable; and if we tied them but moderately hard, their stifness kept
them from being closed so exactly, but that when the included Air had in the
exhausted Receiver distended them as much as easily it could, it would in part
get out between the little wrinkles of the Sphincter of the Neck: Whence also
it usually happened, that, upon the letting in the Air from without, the
Bladders appeared more flaccid and empty than before they were put in; whereas
when the Bladders were brought us moist from the Butchers, we could, without
injuring them, tie their necks so close, that none of the Air once blown in,
could get out of them, but by violently breaking them.

It would not be amiss on this occasion to point at something which may deserve
a more deliberate Speculation than we can now afford it; namely that the
Elastical Power of the same Quantity of Air may be as well increased by the
Agitation of the Aerial Particles (whether only moving them more swiftly and
scattering them, or also extending or stretching them out, I determine not)
within an every way enclosing and yet yielding Body; as displayed by the
withdrawing of the Air that pressed it without. For we found that a Bladder,
but moderately filled with Air and strongly tied, being a while held near the
Fire, not only grew exceeding turgid and hard, but afterward, being brought
nearer to the Fire, suddenly broke with so loud and vehement a noise, as
stony'd those that were by, and made us for a while after, almost deaf.

EXPERIMENT VI.
HAving thus seen that the Air has an Elastical Power, we were next desirous
to know in some measure how far a parcel of Air might by this its own Spring be
dilated. And though we were not provided of Instruments fit to measure the
dilatation of the Air any thing accurately, yet because an imperfect measure of
it was more desirable than none at all, we devised the following method as very
easily practicable.

We took a limber Lambs Bladder which was thoroughly wetted in fair Water, that
the sides of it being squeezed together, there might be no Air left in its
folds: (as indeed we could not afterward upon trial discern any) The neck of
this Bladder was strongly tied about that of a small Glass, (capable of holding
five full drachmes of Water) the Bladder being first so compressed, that all
the included Air was only in the Glass, without being pressed there; then the
Pump being set on work after a few exsuctions, the Air in the little Viol began
to dilate it self and produce a small Tumor in the neck of the Bladder; and as
the ambient Air was more and more drawn away, so the included Air penetrated
farther and farther into the Bladder, and by degrees listed up the sides and
displayed its folds, till at length it seemed to have blown it up to its full
extent: Whereupon the external Air, being permitted to flow back into the
Receiver, repulsed the Air that had filled the Bladder, into its former narrow
receptacle, and brought the Bladder to be again flaccid and wrinkled as before:
Then taking out the Bladder, but without severing it from the Glass, we did, by
a hole made at the top of the Bladder, fill the Vessel, they both made up, with
Water, whose weight was five Ounces five Drachmes and a half: Five Drachmes
whereof were abovementioned to be the contents of the Bottle. So that in this
Experiment, when the Air had most extended the Bladder, it possessed in all
above nine times as much room as it did when it was put into the Receiver. And
it would probably have much enlarged its bounds, but that the Bladder by its
weight and the sticking together of its sides did somewhat resist its
expansion: And which was more considerable, the Bladder appeared tumid enough,
whilst yet a pretty deal of Air was left in the Receiver, whose exsuction would
according to our former Observation, probably have given way to a farther
expansion of the Air, especially supposing the dilatation not to be restrained
by the Bladder.

SInce we wrote the other day the former Experiment, we have met with some
Glasses not very unfit for our purpose; by means of which we are now able, with
a little more trouble, to measure the expansion of the Air a great deal more
accurately than we could by the help of the abovementioned Bladder, which was
much too narrow to allow the Air its utmost distention.

We took then first a Cylindrical Pipe of Glass, whose bore was about a quarter
of an Inch in Diameter: This Pipe was so bent and doubled, that,
notwithstanding its being about two foot in length, it might have been shut up
into a smaller Receiver, not a Foot high: But by misfortune it cracked in the
cooling, whereby we were reduced to make use of one part which was straight and
entire, but exceeded not six or seven Inches. This little Tube was open at one
end; and at the other, where it was Hermetically sealed, had a small Glass
bubble to receive the Air whose dilatation was to be measured.

Along the side of this Tube was pasted a straight narrow piece of Parchment,
divided into twenty six equal parts, marked with black Lines and Figures, that
by them might be measured both the included Air and its dilatation. Afterward
we filled the Tube with Water, almost to the top; and stopping the open end
with the Finger, and inverting the Tube, the Air was permitted to ascend to the
above mentioned Glass bubble. And by reason this ascent was very slow, it gave
us the opportunity to mark how much more or less than one of the twenty six
divisions this Air took up. By this means, after a trial or two, we were
enabled to convey to the top of the Glass a bubble of Air equal enough, as to
sight, to one of those Divisions: Then the open end of the Tube being put into
a small Viol, whose bottom was covered with Water, about half an Inch high; we
included both Glasses into a small and slender Receiver, and caused the Pump to
be set on work. The event was, That at the first exsuction of the Air there
appeared not any expansion of the bubble, comparable to what appeared at the
second, and that upon a very few exsuctions the bubble reaching as low as the
surface of the subjacent Water, gave us cause to think, That if our Pipe had
not been broken, it would have expanded it self much farther: Wherefore we took
out the little Tube, and found that besides the twenty six divisions formerly
mentioned, the Glass bubble and some part of the Pipe to which the divided
Parchment did not reach, amounted to six divisions more. Whereby it appears
that the Air has take up one and thirty times as much room as before, and yet
seemed capable of a much greater expansion, if the Glass would have permitted
it. Wherefore after the former manner, we let in another bubble, that by our
guess was but half as big as the former, and found, that upon the exsuction of
the Air from the Receiver, this little bubble did not only fill up the whole
Tube, but (in part) break through the subjacent Water in the Viol, and thereby
manifest it self to have prossessed sixty and odd times its former room.

These two Experiments are mentioned to make way for the more easy belief of
that which is now to follow. Finding then that our Tube was too short to serve
our turn, we took a slender Quill of Glass which happened to be at hand, though
it were not so fit for our purpose as we could have wished, in regard it was
three or four times as big at one end as the other. This Pipe which was thirty
Inches long, being Hermetically sealed at the slender end, was almost filled
with water; and after the above-related manner a bubble was conveyed to the top
of it, and the open extreme was put into a Viol that had a little fair Water at
the bottom: Then the Cover, by means of a small hole purposely made in it for
the Glass Pipe to stand out at, was cemented on to the Receiver, and the Pump
being set on work, after some exsuctions, not only the Air manifestly appeared
extended below the surface of the subjacent Water; but one of the Bystanders
affirms, that he saw some bubbles come out at the bottom of the Pipe and break
through the Water. This done, we left off Pumping, and observed how at the
unperceived leaks of the Receiver the Air got in so fast, that it very quickly
impelled up the Water to the top of the Tube, excepting a little space
whereinto that bubble was repulsed, which had so lately possessed the whole
Tube; this Air at the slender end appeared to be a Cylinder of parts of an Inch
in length, but when the Pipe was taken out and turned upside down, it appeared
at the other end inferior in bulck to a Pea.

These things being thus done we took (to make the Experiment the more exactly)
a small pair of Scales, such as Goldsmiths use to weigh Cold Coin in; and
weighing the Tube and Water in it, we found them to amount to one Ounce thirty
Grains and an half: Then we poured in as much Water as served to fill up the
Tube, wherein before we had left as much space unfill'd up as was possessed by
the bubble, and weighing again the Pipe and Water, we found the weight
increased only by one Grain. Lastly, pouring out the Water, and carefully
freeing the Pipe from it (which yet we could not perfectly do) we weighed the
Glass alone, and found it to want two Drachmes and thirty two Grains of its
former weight: So that the bubble of Air taking up the room but of one Grain in
weight of Water, it appeared that the Air by its own (...) was so rarefied, as
to take up one hundred fifty two times as much room as it did before: Though it
were then compressed by nothing but the ordinary pressure of the contiguous
Air. I know not whether it be requisite to take notice, that this Experiment
was made indeed in a moist Night, but in a Room, in whose Chimney there was
burning a good Fire, which did perhaps somewhat rarifie the Air of which the
bubble consisted.

It has seemed almost incredible which is related by the Industrious
Mersennus, That the Air by the violence of heat, though as great as our Vessels
can support without fusion, can be so dilated as to take up seventy times as
much room as before: Wherefore because we were willing to have a confirmation
of so strange a Phenomenon; we once more conveyed into the Tube a bubble of
the bigness of the former, and prosecuting the Experiment as before with the
same Water, we observed that the Air did manifestly stretch it self so far, as
to appear several times a good way below the surface of the Water in the Viol,
and that too with a surface very unequal toward the bottom of the Pipe. Nay, the
Pump being plied a little longer, the Air did manifestly reach to that place
where the bottom of the Tube leaned upon the bottom of the Viol, and seemed to
knock upon it and rebound from it: Which Circumstances we add, partly that the
Phenomenon we have been relating may not be imputed to the bare subsiding of
the Water that filled the Tube, upon the taking off the pressure of the ambient
Air. And partly also that it may appear that if our Experiments have not been
so accurately made as with fitter Instruments might perhaps be possible; yet
the expansion of the Air is likely to be rather greater than lesser than we
have made it: Since the Air was able to press away the Water at the bottom of
the Pipe, though that were about two Inches below the surface of the Water that
was then in the Viol, and would have been at least as high in the Pipe, if the
Water had only subsided and not been depressed: So that it seems not unlikely
that if the Experiment could be so made, as that the expansion of the Air might
not be resisted by the Neighboring Bodies, it would yet enlarge its bounds,
and perhaps stretch it self to two hundred times its former bulk, if not more.
However, what we have now tried will, I hope, suffice to hinder diverse of the
Phenomenon of our Engine from being distrusted: Since in that part of the
Atmosphere we live in, that which we call the free Air (and presume to be so
uncompressed) is crowded into so very small a part of that space, which if it
were not hindered it would possess. We would gladly have tried also whether the
Air at its greatest expansion could be farther rarefied by heat; but do what
we could, our Receiver leaked too fast to let us give our selves any
satisfaction in that particular.

EXPERIMENT VII.
TO discover likewise by the means of that pressure of the Air, both the
strength of Glass, and how much interest the Figure of a Body may have in its
greater or lesser Resistance to the pressure of other Bodies, we made these
farther trials.

We caused to be blown with a Lamp, a round Glass bubble, capable of
containing, by guess, about five Ounces of Water, with a slender neck about the
bigness of a Swan's Quill, and it was purposely blown very thin, as Viols made
with Lamps are wont to be, that the thinness of the matter might keep the
roundness of the Figure from making the Vessel too strong. Then having
moderately emptied the Receiver, and taken it out of the Pump, we speedily
applied to the Orifice of the bottom of it, the Neck of the newly mentioned
Glass, carefully stopping the Crannies with melted Plaster, that no Air might
get in at them: And after turning the Key of the Stop-cock, we made a free
passage for the Air to pass out of the bubble into the Receiver: Which it did
with great celerity, leaving the bubble as empty as the Receiver it self; as
appeared to us by some Circumstances not now to be insisted on. Notwithstanding
all which, the Vessel, continuing as entire as before, gave us cause to wonder
that the bare roundness of the Figure should enable a Glass, almost as thin as
Paper, to resist so great a pressure as that of the whole incumbent Atmosphere.
And having reiterated the Experiment, we found again that the pressure of the
ambient Body, thrusting all the parts inwards, made them, by reason of their
arched Figure, so support one another, that the Glass remained as whole as at
first.

Now that the Figure of the Glass is of great moment in this matter, may be
evinced by this other Experiment.

EXPERIMENT VIII.
WE took a Glass Helmet or Alembick (delineated by the seventh Figure) such as
Chemists use in Distillations, and containing by conjecture between two and
three Pints: The Rostrum or Rose of it marked with ( c) was Hermetically
closed; and at the top of it was a hole, into which was fitted and cemented one
of the Shanks of a middle-siz'd Stop-cock; so that the Glass being turned
upside-down, the wide Orifice (which in common Glass-Helmets is the only one)
was upwards; and to that wide Orifice was fitted a cast cover of Lead, which
was carefully cemented on to the Glass: Then the other Shank of the Stop-cock
being with cement likewise fastened into the upper part of the Pump, the
exsuction of the Air was endeavored. But it was not long before, the remaining
Air being made much too weak to balance the pressure of the Ambient Air, the
Glass was (not without a great noise) cracked almost half round, along that
part of it where it began to bend inwards: As if in the Figure, the crack had
been made according to the Line ( a b,) and upon an endeavor to pump out more
of the Air, the crack once begun, appeared to run on farther; though the Glass
where it was broken seemed to be (by conjecture) above ten, some thought above
twenty times, as thick as the bubble mentioned in the foregoing Experiment.

This will perhaps make it seem strange, that having taken another Glass bubble
blown at the same time, and like for ought we discerned for size, thickness and
Figure, to that thin one formerly mentioned; and having sealed it up
Hermetically, and suspended it in the Receiver, the exsuction of the ambient
Air did not enable the imprisoned Air to break, or in the least to crack the
bubble; though the Experiment were laboriously tried, and that several times
with bubbles of other sizes: But that perhaps the heat of the Candle or Lamp
wherewith such Glasses are Hermetically sealed, (not to mention the warmth of
his hands that sealed it) might so rarefy the contained Air, as much to weaken
its Spring, may seem probably by the following Experiments.

EXPERIMENT IX.
WE took a Glass Viol able to hold three or four Ounces of Water, and of the
thickness usual in Glasses of that size; into the Neck of this was put a
moderately slender Pipe of Glass, which was carefully fastened with a mixture
of equal parts of Pitch and Rosin to the Neck of the Viol, and which reached
almost to the bottom of it, as the sixth Figure declares.

This Viol being, upon a particular design, filled with Water, till that came
up in it, a pretty deal higher than the lower end of the Pipe, was put into one
of our small Receivers, (containing between a Pint and a Quart) in such manner
as that the Glass Pipe, passing through a hole made purposely for it in the
Leaden-Cover of the Receiver, was for the most part of it without the Vessel,
which being exactly closed, the Pump was set on work: But at the very first
exsuction, and before the Sucker was drawn to the bottom of the Cylinder, there
flew out of the Viol a piece of Glass half as broad as the Palm of a Man's
Hand, and it was thrown out with such violence, that hitting against the
Neighboring side of the Receiver, it not only dashed it self to pieces, but
cracked the very Receiver in many places, with a great noise that much
surprised all that were in the Room. but it seemed, that in so little a
Receiver, the Air about the Viol being suddenly drawn out, the Air imprisoned
in the Vessel, having on it the whole pressure of the Atmosphere (to which by
the Pipe open at both ends, It and the Water were exposed) and not having on
the other side the wonted pressure of the Ambient Air to balance that other
pressure, the resistance of Glass was finally surmounted, and the Viol once
beginning to break where it was weakest, the external Air might rush in with
violence enough to throw the cracked parcel so forcibly against the
Neighboring side of the Receiver, as to break that too.

And this may be presumed sufficient to verify what we delivered in that part
of our Appendix to the first Experiment where we mentioned the almost equal
pressure of the Air on either side of a thin Glass Vessel, as the cause of its
not being broken by the forcible spring of the contained Air. But yet that it
be not suspected that chance had an interest in so odd an Experiment as we have
been relating, we will add that for farther satisfaction we reiterated it in a
round Glass containing by Guess about six ounces of Water: This Viol we put
into such a small Receiver as was lately mentioned, in such manner as that the
bottom of it rested upon the lower part of the Pneumatical Glass, and the Neck
came out through the Leaden-cover of the same at a hole made purposely for it.
But being made circumspect by the foregoing mischance, we had put the Viol into
a Bladder, before we put it into the Receiver to hinder this last-named Glass
from being endangered by the breaking of the other. Then the Pneumatical Vessel
being closed so that no way was left for the outward Air to get into it, but by
breaking through the Viol, into whose cavity it had free access by the mouth of
it, (which was purposely left open,) the Sucker being nimbly drawn down, the
external Air immediately pressed forcibly as well upon the Leaden-cover as the
Viol; and the Cover happening to be in one place a little narrower than the
edge of the Pneumatical Glass, was depressed, and thrust into it so violently
by the incumbent Air, that getting a little within the tapering Lip of the
Glass, it did (like a kind of Wedge,) thrust out that side where it was
depressed, so as, (though the Receiver was new,) to split it. This accident
being thus mentioned upon the bye to confirm what we formerly said touching the
fitness or unfitness of Glasses of some Figures to resist the pressure of the
Atmosphere; We will proceed to relate the remaining part of the Experiment,
namely, That having fitted on a wider Cover to the same Receiver, and closed
both that and the crack with Cement, we prosecuted the Experiment in the manner
above related, with this success: That upon the quick depressing of the Sucker,
the external Air burst the Body of the Viol into above an hundred pieces, many
of them exceeding small, and that with such violence, that we found a wide
rent, besides many holes, made in the Bladder it self.

And to evince that these Phenomenon were the effects of a limited and even
moderate force, and not of such an abhorrency of a Vacuum as that to avoid it,
many have been pleased to think that Nature must, upon occasion, exercise an
almost boundless power; we afterward purposely tried this Experiment with
several Glasses somewhat thicker than those Viols, and found the event to
verify our conjecture, that it would not succeed: For the Glasses were taken
out as entire as they were put in.

And here, My Lord, I hold it not unfit, upon occasion of the mention that has
been made of our having employed small Receivers, and one of them,
notwithstanding its being cracked, to annex these two Advertisements.

First then, besides the great Pneumatical Glass so often mentioned, and the
proportionate Stop-cock, we thought fit to provide our selves with some small
Receivers blown of Crystalline Glass, of several Shapes, and furnished with
smaller Stop-cocks purposely made; and this we did upon hopes, that when we had
surmounted the difficulties to be met with in Cementing the Glasses to the
Stop-cocks, and the Pneumatical Vessels to the Pump, so exquisitely as is
requisite for our purpose, we should from the smallness of our Receivers
receive a fourfold Advantage. The first, that by reason of the slenderness of
the Vessels, and their being made of much purer and clearer metal, (as the
Glass-men speak,) than the great Receiver, we might have a more perfect view of
every thing happening within them. The next, that such small Vessels might be
emptied with less labor and in much less time. The third, that this nimble
exsuction of the ambient Air would make many changes in the Bodies shut up in
these Glasses more sudden and conspicuous than otherwise they would prove. And
the last, that we should be able to draw and keep out the Air much more
perfectly from such small Vessels than from our large Receiver, But though we
were not much disappointed in the expectation of the three first advantages,
yet we were in our hopes of the fourth. For besides the great difficulty we
found in fitting together the Glasses, the Stop-cocks, and the Covers; besides
this I say, we found our selves seldom able to draw, and keep out the Air so
far as to make the remaining Air in these Receivers weaker than the remaining
Air in our great Receiver. For though sometimes the Leaks of some of these
little Receivers may be much (either fewer or smaller) than those of the larger
Vessel; yet a little Air getting into one of these, wherein it had but little
room to expand and display it self, might press as much upon all parts of the
internal surface of the Vessel, and upon the included Bodies, as a greater
quantity of the Air in a Vessel in whose capacity it might find more room to
expand it self.

The other thing that we were to advertise, is, That it is not every small crack
that can make such a Receiver as is of a roundish Figure altogether useless to
our Experiment, in regard that upon the exsuction of the internal Air, the
ambient Air on all sides pressing the Glass inwards or toward the middle, does
consequently thrust the Lips of the crack closer, and so rather close than
increase it.

This I mention partly because Receivers fit for our turn are more easily
cracked than procured, and therefore ought not to be unnecessarily thrown away
as unserviceable: And partly because I think it becomes one that professes
himself a faithful Relator of Experiments, not to conceal from Your Lordship,
that after a few of the foregoing Experiments were made, there happened in the
great Receiver a crack of about a Span long, beginning at the upper Orifice,
and occasioned, as it seemed, by the excessive heat of too large an Iron that
was employed to melt the Cement about that Orifice. But having laid upon this
crack a broad Plaster, (which in one of our Essays written some years since to
your ingenious and hopeful Cousin Jones, we extol for the mending of cracked
Receivers, and other Chemical Glasses;) and having afterward thickly overlaid
this Plaster with Diachylon, we neither could then, nor can yet perceive that
the Vessel leaks sensibly at that crack.

The Plaster was made of good quick Lime finely poudred, and nimbly ground
with a Pestle in a Mortar, with a quantity (I know not how much precisely, not
having those Essays in this place) of scrapings of Cheese and a little fair
Water, no more than is just necessary to bring the mixture to a somewhat soft
Paste, which when the Ingredients are exquisitely incorporated, will have a
strong and stinking smell: Then it must be immediately spread upon a Linen
Cloth of three or four fingers breadth, and presently applied, lest it begin
to harden. But if your Lordship had seen how we mended with it Receivers even
for the most subtle Chemical Spirits. You would scarce wonder at the service it
has done in our Pneumatical Glass.

EXPERIMENT X.
WE took a Tallow-candle of such a size that eight of them make about a pound,
and having in a very commodious Candlestick let it down into the Receiver, and
so suspended it, that the Flame burnt almost in the middle of the Vessel, we
did in some two minutes exactly close it up: and upon pumping very nimbly, we
found, that, within little more than half a minute after, the Flame went out,
though the Snuff had been purposely left of that length we judged the most
convenient for the lasting of the Flame.

But the second time having put in the same Candle into the Receiver, (after it
had by the blasts of a pair of Bellows been freed from Fumes) the Flame lasted
about two minutes from the time the Pumper began to draw out the Air; upon the
first exsuction whereof, the Flame seemed to contract it self in all its
dimensions. And these things were farther observable, that after the two or
three first exsuctions of the Air, the Flame (except at the very top) appeared
exceeding blew, and that the Flame still receded more and more from the Tallow,
till at length it appeared to posses only the very top of the Week, and there
it went out.

The same Candle being lighted again was shut into the Receiver, to try how it
would last there without drawing forth the Air, and we found that it lasted
much longer than formerly; and before it went out, receded from the Tallow
toward the top of the Week, but not near so much as in the former Experiment.

And having an intention to observe particularly what the motion of the Smoke
would be in these Experiments: We took notice that when the Air was not drawn
out, there did, upon the extinction of the Flame, a considerable part of the
Week remain kindled, which (probably by reason of the Circulation of the Air)
in the Vessel, occasioned by the heat) emitted a Steam, which ascended swiftly
and directly upwards in a slender and uninterrupted Cylinder of smoke, till it
came to the top, whence it manifestly recoiled by the sides to the lower part
of the Vessel. Whereas when the Flame went out upon the exsuction of the Air
one time (when the Flame retired very leasurely to the top) we perceived it not
to be followed by any smoke at all. And at another time the upper part of the
Week remaining kindled after the extinction of the Flame, the slender steam of
Fumes that did arise ascended but a very little way, and then after some
uncertain motions this and that way, did, for the most part, soon fall
downwards.

Being desirous also to try whether there would be any difference as well in
our Receiver, as there is wont to be elsewhere betwixt Candles made of Wax and
those made of Tallow, as to their duration; we took slender Tapers of white
Wax, (commonly called Virgins Wax) that being found to burn with much less
smoke than common yellow Wax. Six of these of like bigness, and each of them of
about the thickness of a Swan's Quill, we pressed together into one Candle: and
having lighted all the Weeks, we let in the abovementioned Wax-candle into the
Receiver, and made what haste we could to close it up with Cement. But, though
in the mean while we left open the Valve of the Cylinder, the hole of the
Stop-cock, and that in the Cover of the Receiver, that some Air might get in to
cherish the Flame, and the Smoke might have a vent; Yet for so great a Flame
the Air sufficed not so much as till the Cover could be perfectly luted on: So
that before we were quite ready to employ the Pump, the Candle was
extinguished. Wherefore we took but one of the above mentioned Tapers, and
having lighted it, closed it up in the Receiver, to try how long a small Flame
with a proportionable smoke would continue in such a quantity of Air: but we
found upon two several trials, that from the beginning of pumping, the Flame
went out in about a minute of an hour. It appeared indeed to us that the
swinging of the Wier to and fro (in the Engine shaken by pumping) hastened the
vanishing of the Flame, which seemed by that motion to be cast sometimes on one
side of the Week and sometimes on the other. But though once we purposely
refrained pumping after a very few exsuctions of the Air, that the Flame might
not be agitated, yet it lasted not much longer than the newly-mention'd time.
And lastly, closing up the same Taper, lighted again, to discover how long it
would last without drawing out of the Air, we found that it burnt for a while
vividly enough, but afterward began to be lessened more and more in all its
dimensions. And we observed that the Flame did not, as before, retire it self
by little and little toward the top, but toward the bottom of the Week (from
which yet it did a little withdraw upwards just before it went out) so that the
upper part of the Week-appear'd for a pretty while manifestly above the top of
the Flame, which having lasted about five minutes, was succeeded by a directly
ascending stream of Smoke.

EXPERIMENT XI.
THere was taken a Wier, which being bent almost in the form of a Screw,
constituted such an Instrument, to contain Coals and leave them every way
accessible to the Air, as the tenth Figure declares; the breadth of this
Vessel was no less than that it might with ease be conveyed into the Receiver:
And having filled it to the height of about five Inches with thoroughly kindled
Wood-coals, we let it down into the Glass; and speedily closing it, we caused
the Pumper to ply his work, and observed that upon the very first exsuction of
the Air (though perhaps not because of that only) the Fire in the Coals began
to grow very dim, and though the agitation of the Vessel did make them swing up
and down (which in the sree Air would have retarded the extinction of the Fire)
yet when we could no longer discern any redness at all in any of them, casting
our eyes upon a minute Watch we kept by us on this occasion, we found that from
the beginning of the Pumping (which might be about two minutes after the Coals
had been put in glowing) to the total dis-appearing of the Fire, there had
passed but three minutes.

Whereupon, to try the Experiment a little farther, we presently took out the
Coals, in which it seems there had remained some little parcels of Fire, rather
covered than totally quenched: For in the open Air the Coals began to be
re-kindled in several places, wherefore having by swinging them about in the
Wier, thoroughly lighted them the second time, we let them down again into the
Receiver, and closed it speedily as before; and then waiting till the Fire
seemed totally extinct without meddling with the Pump, we found that from the
time the Vessel was closed, till that no Fire at all could be perceived, there
had passed about four minutes: Whereby it seemed to appear that the drawing
away of the ambient Air made the Fire go out sooner than otherwise it would
have done; though that part of the Air that we drew out left the more room for
the stifling steams of the Coals to be received into.

Lastly, Having taken out the Wier and put other Coals into it, we did, in the
same Room where the Engine stood, let it hang quietly by a string in the open
Air, to try how long the Fire would last without agitation, when no Air was
kept from it, And we found that the Fire began to go out first at the top and
outsides of the Coals; but inwards and near the bottom the Fire continued
visible for above half an hour, a great part of the Coals, especially those
next the bottom, being burnt to ashes before the Fire went out.

We caused likewise a piece of Iron to be forged, of the bigness of a middle
sized Char-coal, and having made it red-hot throughout; we caused it in the
lately mentioned Wier, to be speedily conveyed and shut up into the Receiver,
being desirous to try what would become of a glowing Body, by reason of its
texture more vehemently hot than a burning Coal of the same bigness, and yet
unlike to send forth such copious and stifling Fumes: But we could not observe
any manifest change upon the exsuction of the Air. The Iron began indeed to
lose its fiery redness at the top, but that seemed to be because it was at the
upper end somewhat more slender than at the lower: The redness, though it were
in the day time, continued visible about four minutes; and then, before it did
quite disappear, we turned the Key of the Stop-cock, but could not discern any
change of the Iron upon the rushing in of the Air. Yet some little remainders
of Wax that stuck to the Wier, and were turned into Fumes by the heat of the
neighboring Iron, seemed to afford a more plentiful, or at least a much more
expanded Smoke when the Air was sucked out, than afterward; though allowance
was made for the decreasing heat of the Iron. And lastly, notwithstanding a
considerable exsuction of the ambient Air, though not by far so great a one as
might have been made by the Engine; and notwithstanding the inconsiderable
dissipation of the parts of the Iron; the surrounding sides of the Receiver
were sensibly, and almost offensively heated by it; insomuch that a pretty
while after the Iron was taken out, the sides of the Glass manifestly retained
a warmth: which would not be unfit to be considered by a Person at more leisure
than I am now.

EXPERIMENT XII.
BEing willing to try after this something that would not cherish much Fire at
once, and would keep Fire much longer than a Coal: We took a piece of Match,
such as Soldiers use, of the thickness of a Man's little Finger, or somewhat
thicker; and this being well lighted at one end, was by a string suspended with
that end downwards in the cavity of the Receiver which was immediately closed:
And yet by that time it could well be so, the copious Fumes of the Match had
near filled and darkened the Receiver. Wherefore, lest the Vessel should be
endangered, the Pump was nimbly plied, and a great deal of Air and Smoke mixed
together was drawn out, whereby the Receiver growing more clear, we could
discern the Fire in the Match to burn more and more languidly: and
notwithstanding that by the diligence used in pumping, it seemed to have room
enough allowed it to throw out Fumes; yet, after no long time, it ceased from
being discernable either by its Light or its Smoke. And, though by that we were
invited to suppose it quite extinguished, yet we continued pumping awhile, in
prosecution of another Experiment we were trying at the same time: And this we
did the more willingly, because of a suspicion, the Experiment about the Coals,
might easily suggest, and which the event declared not to have been altogether
groundless. For upon the admission of the external Air, the Fire, that seemed
to have gone out a pretty while before, did presently revive; and being as it
were refreshed by the new Air, and blown by the Wind made by that Air in
rushing in, it began again to shine and dissipate the neighboring Fuel into
Smoke as formally.

EXPERIMENT XIII.
A While after we let down into the Receiver together with a lighted piece of
Match, a great Bladder well tied at the Neck, but very lank, as not containing
actually much (if any thing) above a Pint of Air, but being capable of
containing ten or twelve times as much.

Our scope in this Experiment was partly to try whether or no the smoke of the
Match, replenishing the Receiver, would be able to hinder the dilatation of the
inward Air, upon the exsuction of the ambient: And partly to discover whether
the extinction of the Fire in the Match did proceed from want of Air, or barely
from the pressure of its own Fumes, which for want of room to expand themselves
in, might be supposed to recoyl upon the Fire, and so to stifle it.

The event of our trial was, That at the beginning of our pumping the Match
appeared well lighted, though it had almost filled the Receiver with its
plentiful Fumes: But by degrees it burnt more and more dimly, notwithstanding,
that by the nimble drawing out the Air and Smoke, the Vessel were made less
opacous, and less full of compressing matter; as appeared by this, That the
longer we pumped, the less Air and Smoke came out of the Cylinder at the
opening of the Valve, and consequently the less came into it before; yet the
Fire in the Match went but slowly out. And when afterward, to satisfy our
selves of its expiration, we had darkened the Room, and in vain endeavored to
discover any spark of Fire, (as we could not for some time before by the help
of Candles discern the least rising of Smoke,) we yet continued pumping six or
seven times; and after all that, letting in the Air, the seemingly dead Fire
quickly revived, and manifested its recovery by Light and store of Smoke, with
the latter of which it quickly began to replenish the Receiver. Then we fell to
pumping afresh, and continued that labor so long, till the re kindled Match
went out again: and thinking it then fit not to cease from pumping so soon as
before, we found that in less than half a quarter of an hour the Fire was got
out for good and all, and past the possibility of being recovered by the
readmitted Air.

Some Circumstances, besides those already mentioned, occurred in the making of
the Experiment, of which these are the principal.

First, When the Receiver was full of Smoke, if the Cylinder were emptied,
immediately upon the turning of the Stop-cock, the Receiver would appear
manifestly darkened to his eye that looked upon the light through it: and this
darkness was much less when the Receiver was much less filled with Fumes: It
was also instantaneous, and seemed to proceed from a sudden change of place and
situation in the exhalations, upon the vent suddenly afforded them and the Air
they were mixed with, out of the Receiver into the Cylinder.

The next thing we observed was, a kind of Halo that appeared a good while
about the Fire, and seemed to be produced by the surrounding Exhalations.

And lastly, it is remarkable, That even when the Fumes seemed most to
replenish the Receiver, they did not sensibly hinder the Air included in the
Bladder from dilating it self after the same manner (for ought we could
discern) as it would have otherwise done: So that before the Fire or the Match
was quite extinct, the Bladder appeared swelled at least to six or seven times
its former capacity.

Since the writing of these last Lines, we took a small Receiver, capable of
containing (by guess) about a pound and a half of Water; and in the midst of it
we suspended a lighted Match, but though within one minute of an hour (or there
abouts) from the putting in of the Match, we had cemented on the Cover, yet we
could not make such haste, but that before we began to pump, the Smoke had so
filled that small Receiver, as for ought we discerned, to choke the Fire. And
having again and again reiterated the Experiment, it seemed still as at first,
that we could not close up the Vessel, and pump out all the Fumes time enough
to rescue the Fire from extinction, whereupon we made use of this Expedient:
As Soon as we had pumped once or twice, we suddenly turned the Key, and thereby
gave access to the excluded Air, which rushing violently in, as if it had been
forced through a pair of Bellows, did both drive away the ashes, fill the Glass
with fresh Air, and by blowing the almost extinguished Fire, re-kindl'd it, as
appeared by the Matches beginning again to smoke, which before it had ceased to
do; we having by this means obtained a lighted Match in the Receiver, without
being reduced to spend time to close it up, commanded the Air to be immediately
pumped out, and found that upon the exsuction of it, the Match quickly left
smoking, as it seemed, by reason of the absence of the Air; and yet if some
urgent occasions had not hindered us, we would for greater security have tried,
whether or no the Match rekindled as formerly, would smoke much longer, in case
of no exsuction of the ambient Air.

EXPERIMENT XIV.
TO try diverse things at once, and particularly whether Fire, though we found
it would not long last, might not be produced in our evacuated Receiver: We
took a Pistol of about a foot in length, and having firmly tied it to a stick
almost as long as the Cavity of the Receiver, we very carefully prim'd it with
well dried Gunpowder, and then cocking it, we tied to the Tricker, one end of a
string, whose other end was fastened to the Key formerly mentioned to belong to
the Cover of our Receiver. This done, we conveyed the Pistol, together with the
annexed Staff, into the Vessel which being closed up, and emptied aster the
usual manner, we began to turn the Key in the Cover; and thereby shortning the
string that reached from it to the Pistol, we pulled aside the Tricker, and
observed, that according to our expectation the force of the Spring of the Lock
was not sensibly abated by the absence of the Air: (from whose impetus yet some
Modern Naturalists would derive the cause of the motion of Restitution in solid
Bodies) For the Cock falling with its wonted violence upon the Steel, struck
out of it as many, and as conspicuous parts of Fire, as, for ought we could
perceive, it would have done in the open Air. Repeating this Experiment diverse
times, we also observed whether or no there would appear any considerable
diversity in the Motion of the shining Sparks in a place where the remaining
Air was so much rarefied, but could not perceive but that they moved some of
them upwards, as well as some of them downwards, and some of them side-ways, as
they are wont to do, when upon such collisions they fly out in the open Air.

We likewise caused a piece of Steel to be made of the form and bigness of the
Flint, in whose place we put it, and then the Pistol being cocked and conveyed
into the Receiver, the Tricker was pulled after the Air was drawn out: And
though the place were purposely somewhat darkened, yet there appeared not upon
the striking of the two Steels against each other the least spark of Fire: Nor
did we expect any (having before in vain attempted to strike Fire this way in
the open Air) though we thought fit to make the Experiment, to undeceive those
who fancy in rarefied Air, I know not what strange disposition, to take fire
upon a much slighter occasion than this Experiment afforded. We have indeed
found, that by the dextrous Collision of two hardened pieces of Steel, store of
sparks may be struck out: But that was done with such vehement percussion of
the edges of the two Steels, as could not well be compassed in our Receiver.

But the chief thing we designed to do with our Pistol, was, To observe
whether Gunpowder would take Fire in our emptied and closely stopped Glass?
Whether the expansion of the Flame would be considerably varied by the absence
of so much of the ambient Air as was drawn out of the Receiver? And whether the
Flame would diffuse it self upward, as it is wont, notwithstanding its not
having about it the usual proportion of Air to force it up? And though most of
our Attempts to fire the Gunpowder in the Pan of the Pistol succeeded not,
because we were fain to let it hang almost perpendicular in the Receiver,
whereby the Powder was shaken down before the sparks could reach it: yet once
the Experiment succeeded, and the kindled Powder seemed to make a more expanded
Flame than it would have done in the open Air, but mounted upwards according to
its wont, whether by reason of that little portion of Air, which in spite of
our pumping remained in the Receiver, or for any other cause, we have not now
the leisure to consider. But we must not forget, that upon the extinction of
the Flame the Receiver appeared darkened with smoke, which seemed to move
freely up and down, and upon the letting in the Air at the Stop-cock began to
circulate much ^aster than before. We would have made more observations
concerning this Flame, but that of two or three attempts we afterward made to
repeat the kindling of the Powder, not any one succeeded; and we have not the
leisure to dwell long upon one kind of Trials.

EXPERIMENT XV.
TO these Experiments concerning Fire we added another, which though it
succeeded not, may perhaps without impertinency be recorded: partly, because
that (as we have in another Treatise amply declared) it is useful to recite
what Experiments miscarry as well as succeed. And partly also, because it is
very possible that what we endeavored in vain, may be performed by Your
Lordship, or some other Vertuoso that shall have stancher Tessels than we had,
and more Sunny days than the present Winter allows us.

We conveyed then into one of our small Receivers a piece of matter
combustible, dry and black (experience declaring things of that color to be
most easily kindled) and carefully closing the Vessel, we brought it to a
Window at which the Sun, not very far from the Meridian, shone in very freely:
then drawing out the Air with speed we united the Sun beams with a
Burning-glass upon the combustible matter, which began immediately to send
forth a smoke that quickly darkened the Receiver, but notwithstanding all our
care and diligence the external Air got in so fast, that after diverse trials we
were fain to leave off the Experiment in that Glass, and induced to make trial
of it in our great Receiver.

Having then after some difficulty lodged the combustible matter in the cavity
of this Vessel in such manner, as that it was almost contiguous to that side
thereof that was next the Sun, we did endeavor with a pretty large
Burning-glass to kindle it, but found, as we feared, That, by reason of the
thickness of the Glass, (which was also of a less pure and less Diaphanous
matter than the other) the Sunbeams thrown in by the Burning-glass, were in
their passage so dislocated and scattered (not now to mention those many that
being reflected, could not pierce into the cavity of the Receiver) that we
could not possibly unite enough of them to kindle the matter, nor so much as to
make it sensibly smoke. Yet we hope that the seeing whether Bodies (other than
Gunpowder) may be kindled, and what would happen to them when set on fire, in
a place in great measure devoid of Air, may prove so Lucilerous an Experiment,
that when the Season is more favorable we shall, God permitting, make farther
trial of it, and acquaint your Lordship with the Event, if it prove prosperous.
In the mean time we shall pass on to other Experiments, as soon as we have
advertised Your Lordship that we have forborne to make such Reflections upon the
several Experiments we have set down concerning Fire, as the matter would have
easily afforded, and Your Lordship may perhaps have expected. But I made the
less scruple to forbear the annexing of Speculations to these Recitals, because
Carneades and Eleutherius have in some Dialogues concerning Heat and Flame,
(which were last year seen by some Friends, and may be, when you please,
commanded by You,) mentioned diverse of my Thoughts and Experiments concerning
Fire,

EXPERIMENT XVI.
WE designed to try whether or no diverse Magnetical Experiments would exhibit
any unusual Phenomenon, being made in our Evacuated Receiver instead of the
open Air: But for want of leisure and convenience to prosecute such Trials, we
were induced to reserve the rest for another time, and to content our selves
with making that which follows. We conveyed into the Receiver a little Pedestal
of Wood, in the midst of which was perpendicularly erected a slender Iron, upon
whose sharp point an excited Needle of Steel purposely made, and of about five
Inches long, was so placed, that hanging in an AEquilibrium it could move
freely toward either hand. Then the Air being after the usual manner pumped
out, we applied a Lodestone moderately vigorous to the outside of the Glass,
and found that it attracted or repelled the ends of the Needle, according to
the Laws Magnetical, without any remarkable difference from what the same
Lodestone would have done, had none of the Air been drawn away from about the
Needle, which, when the Lodestone was removed, after some tremulous Vibrations
to and fro, rested in a position, wherein it looked North and South.

EXPERIMENT XVII.
PRoceed we now to the mention of that Experiment, whereof the satisfactory
trial was the principal fruit I promised my self from our Engine, It being then
fufficiently known, that, in the Experiment De Vacuo, the Quicksilver in the
Tube is wont to remain elevated, above the surface of that whereon it leans,
about 27 digits: I considered, that, if the true and only reason why the
Quicksilver falls no lower, be, that at that Altitude, the Mercurial Cylinder
in the Tube is in an AEquilibrium with the Cylinder of Air, supposed to reach
from the adjacent Mercury to the top of the Atmosphere: then if this Experiment
could be tried out of the Atmosphere, the Quicksilver in the Tube would fall
down to a level with that in the Vessel, since then there would be no pressure
upon the subjacent, to resist the weight of the Incumbent Mercury. Whence I
inferred (as easily I might) that if the Experiment could be tried in our
Engine, the Quicksilver would subside below 27 Digits, in proportion to the
exsuction of Air, that should be made out of the Receiver. For, as when the Air
is shut into the Receiver, it does (according to what has above been taught)
continue there as strongly compressed, as it did whilst all the incumbent
Cylinder of the Atmosphere leaned immediately upon it; because the Glass,
wherein it is penned up, hinders it to deliver it self, by an expansion of its
parts, from the pressure wherewith it was shut up. So if we could perfectly
draw the Air out of the Receiver, it would conduce as well to our purpose, as
if we were allowed to try the Experiment beyond the Atmosphere.

Wherefore (after having surmounted some little difficulties which occurred at
the beginning) the Experiment was made after this manner. We took a slender and
very curiously blown Cylinder of Glass, of near three foot in length, and whose
bore had in Diameter a quarter of an Inch, wanting a hairs breadth: This Pipe
being Hermetically sealed at one end, was, at the other, filled with
Quicksilver, care being taken in the filling, that as few bubbles as was
possible should be left in the Mercury: Then the Tube being stopped with the
Finger and inverted, was opened, according to the manner of the Experiment,
into a somewhat long and slender Cylindrical Box (instead of which we now are
wont to use a Glass of the same form) half filled with Quicksilver: And so,
the liquid metal being suffered to subside, and a piece of Paper being pasted
on level with its upper surface, the Box and Tube and all were by strings
carefully let down into the Receiver: And then, by means of the hole formerly
mentioned to be left in the Cover, the said Cover was slipped along as much of
the Tube as reached above the top of the Receiver; And the Interval, left
betwixt the sides of the Hole and those of the Tube, was very exquisitely
filled up with melted (but not over hot) Diachylon, and the round chink,
betwixt the Cover and the Receiver, was likewise very carefully closed up: Upon
which closure there appeared not any change in the height of the Mercurial
Cylinder; no more, than if the interposed Glass Receiver did not hinder the
immediate pressure of the ambient Atmosphere upon the enclosed Air; which
hereby appears to bear upon the Mercury, rather by virtue of its spring than of
its weight: since its weight cannot be supposed to amount to above two or three
Ounces, which is inconsiderable in comparison of such a Cylinder of Mercury as
it would keep from subsiding.

All things: being thus in a readiness, the Sucker was drawn down; and,
immediately upon the egress of a Cylinder of Air out of the Receiver, the Quick
silver in the Tube did, according to expectation, subside: And notice being
carefully taken (by a mark fastened to the outside) of the place where it
stopped, we caused him that managed the Pump to pump again, and marked how low
the Quicksilver fell at the second exsuction; but continuing this work, we
were quickly hindered from accurately marking the Stages made by the Mercury in
its descent, because it soon sunk below the top of the Receiver, so that we
could henceforward mark it no other ways than by the eye. And thus, continuing
the labor of pumping for about a quarter of an hour, we found our selves
unable to bring the Quicksilver in the Tube totally to subside; because, when
the Receiver was considerably emptyed of its Air, and consequently that little
that remained grown unable to resist the Irruption of the External, that Air
would (in spite of whatever we could do) press in at some little Avenue or
other; and though much could not thereat get in, yet a little was sufficient to
counterballance the pressure of so small a Cylinder of Quicksilver, as then
remained in the Tube.

Now (to satisfy our selves farther, that the falling of the Quicksilver in
the Tube to a determinate height, proceeds from the AEquilibrium, wherein it
is at that height with the external Air, the one gravitating, the other
pressing with equal force upon the subjacent Mercury) we returned the Key and
let in some new Air; upon which the Mercury immediately began to ascend (or
rather to be impelled upwards) in the Tube, and continued ascending, till
having returned the Key, it immediately rested at the height which it had then
attained: And so, by turning and returning the Key, we did several times at
pleasure impell it upwards, and check its ascent. And lastly, having given a
free egress at the Stop-cock to as much of the external Air as would come in,
the Quicksilver was impelled up almost to its first height: I say almost,
because it ftopt near a quarter of an Inch beneath the Paper mark formerly
mentioned; which we ascri^ed to this, That there was (as is usual in this
Experiment) some little Particles of Air engaged among those of the
Quicksilver; which Particles, upon the descent of the Quicksilver, did
manisestly rise up in bubbles toward the top of the Tube, and by their
pressure, as well as by lessening the Cylinder by as much room as they formerly
took up in it, hindered the Quicksilver from regaining its first height.

This Experiment was a few days after repeated in the presence of those
excellent and deservedly Famous Mathematick Professors, Dr. Wallis, Dr. Ward,
and Mr. Wren, who were pleased to honor it with their Presence: And whom I
name, both as justly counting it an Honor to be known to them, and as being
glad of such Judicious and illustrious Witnesses of our Experiment; and'twas by
their guess, that the top of the Quicksilver in the Tube was defined to be
brought within an Inch of the surface of that in the Vessel.

And here, for the Illustration of the foregoing Experiment, it will not be
amiss to mention some other particulars relating to it.

First then, When we endeavored to make the Experiment with the Tube closed at
one end with Diachylon instead of an Hermetical Seal; we perceived, that upon
the drawing of some of the Air out of the Receiver, the Mercury did indeed
begin to fall, but continued asterwards to subside, though we did not continue
pumping. When it appeared, that though the Diachylon that stopped the end of the
Tube, were so thick and strong, that the external Air could not press it in (as
experience taught us that it would have done, if there had been but little of
it) yet the subtler parts of it were able (though slowly) to insinuate
themselves through the very body of the Plaster, which it seems was not of so
close a Texture, as that which we mentioned our selves to have successfully
made use of in the Experiment De Vacuo some years ago. So that now we begin to
suspect, that perhaps one reason, why we cannot persectly pump out the Air, may
be, that when the Vessel is almost empty, some of the subtler parts of the
external Air may, by the pressure of the Atmosphere, be strained through the
very body of the Diachylon into the Receiver. But this is only conjecture.

Another Circumstance of our Experiment was this, That, if (when the
Quicksilver in the Tube was fallen low) too much ingress were, at the hole of
the Stop-cock, suddenly permitted to the external Air; it would rush in with
that violence, and bear so forcibly upon the surface of the subjacent
Quicksilver, that it would impell it up into the Tube rudely enough to
endanger the breaking of the Glass.

We formerly mentioned, that the Quicksilver did not in its descent fall as
much at a time after the two or three first exsuctions of the Air, as at the
beginning. For, having marked its several Stages upon the Tube, we found, that
at the first suck it descended an Inch and, and at the second an Inch and; and
when the Vessel was almost emptied, it would scarce at one exsuction be drawn
down above the breadth of a Barly-corn. And indeed we found it very difficult
to measure in what proportion these decrements of the Mercurial Cylinder did
proceed: Partly because (as we have already intimated) the Quicksilver wassoon
drawn below the top of the Receiver; and partly because, upon its descent at
each exsuction, it would immediately re-ascend a little upwards; either by
reason of the leaking of the Vessel at some imperceptible hole or other, or by
reason of the motion of restitution in the Air, which, being somewhat
compresled by the fall as well as weight of the Quicksilver, would repel it a
little upwards, and make it vibrate a little up and down, before they could
reduce each other to such an AEquilibrium as both might rest in. But though we
could not hitherto make observations accurate enough concerning the measures of
the Quick-silver's descent, to reduce them into any Hypothesis, yet would we
not discourage any from attempting it; since, if it could be reduced to a
certainty, it is probable that the discovery would not be unusefull.

And, to illustrate this matter a little more, we will add, That we made a
shift to try the Experiment in one of our abovementioned small Receivers, not
containing a Quart; but (agreeably to what we formerly observed) we found it as
difficult to bring this to be quite empty as to evacuate the greater; the least
external Air that could get in (and we could not possibly keep it all perfectly
out) sufficing in so small a Vessel to display a considerable pressure upon the
surface of the Mercury, and thereby hinder that in the Tube from falling to a
level with it. But this is remarkable, that having two or three times tried the
Experiment in a small Vessel, upon the very first Cylinder of Air that was
drawn out of the Receiver, the Mercury fell in the Tube 18 Inches and a half,
and at another trial 19 Inches and a half.

But on this occasion, I hold it not unfit to give your Lordship notice that I
hoped from the descent of the Quicksilver in the Tube upon the first suck, to
derive this advantage: that I should thence be enabled to give a near guess at
the proportion of force betwixt the pressure of the Air (according to its
various states, as to Density and Rarefraction) and the gravity of
Quicksilver, than hitherto has been done. For in our Experiment there are
diverse things given, that may be made use of toward such a discovery. For
first we may know the capacity of the Receiver wherein the Experiment is made,
since, by filling it with water, we may easily compute how many Quarts, or
Measures of any other denomination, it contains of Air; which Air, when shut
up in the Vessel may be supposed to have a pressure equal to that of the
Atmosphere; since it is able to keep the Quicksilver in the Tube from falling
any lower than it did in the free and open Air. Next here is given us the
capacity of the brass Cylinder emptied by the drawing down of the Sucker (its
bore and height being mentioned in the description of our Pump) whereby we may
come to know how much of the Air contained in the Receiver is drawn out at the
first-suck. And we may also easily define, either in weight or cubick measures,
the Cylinder of Quick silver that answers to the Cylinder of Air lately
mentioned (that Mercurial Cylinder being in our Engine computable by deducting
from the entire altitude of that Cylinder of Quicksilver, the altitude at
which it rests upon the first exsuction.) But though, if this Experiment were
very watchfully tried in Vessels of several sizes, and the various descents of
the Quicksilver compared among themselves, it is not improbable, that some such
things, as we hoped for, may thereby be discovered. Yet because not only the
solid contents of as much of the Glass-tube as remains within the concave
surface of the Receiver, and (which is more difficult) the varying contents of
the Vessel containing the Mercury, and of as much of the Mercury it self as is
not in the Tube, must be deducted out of the capacity of the Receiver, but
there must also an allowance be made for this, that the Cylinder that is
emptied by the drawing down of the Sucker, and comes to be filled upon the
letting of the Air out of the Receiver into it, is not so replenished with Air
as the Receiver it self at first was: because there passes no more Air out of
the Receiver into the Cylinder, than is requisite to reduce the Air in the
cavity of the Cylinder, and in that of the Receiver to the same measure of
dilatation. Because of these (I say) and some other difficulties that require
more skill in Mathematics than I pretend to, and much more leisure than my
present occasions would allow me, I was willing to refer the nicer
consideration of this matter to some of our Learned and accurate
Mathematicians, thinking it enough for me to have given the Hint already
suggested.

For farther confirmation of what has been delivered, we likewise tried the
Experiment in a Tube of less than two foot long: and, when there was so much
Air drawn out of the Vessel, that the remaining Air was not able to
counterballance the Mercurial Cylinder, the Quicksilver in the Tube subsided
so visibly, that (the Experiment being tried in the little Vessel lately
mentioned) at the first suck it fell above a span, and was afterward drawn
lower and lower for a little while; and the external Air being let in upon it,
impelled it up again almost to the top of the Tube: So little matters it how
heavy or light the Cylinder of Quicksilver to subside is, provided its gravity
overpower the pressure of as much external Air as bears upon the surface of
that Mercury into which it is to fall.

Lastly we also observed, That if (when the Mercury in the Tube had been drawn
down, and by an Ingress permitted to the external Air, impelled up again to its
former height) there were some more Air thrust up by the help of the Pump into
the Receiver, the Quicksilver in the Tube would ascend much above the wonted
height of 27 digits, and immediately upon the letting out of that Air would
fall again to the height it rested at before.

Your Lordship will here perhaps expect, that as those who have treated of the
Torricellian Experiment, have for the most part maintained the Affirmative, or
the Negative of that famous Question, Whether or no that Noble Experiment infer
a Vacuum? so I should on this occasion interpose my Opinion touching that
Controversy, or at least declare whether or no, in our Engine, the exsuction
of the Air do prove the place deserted by the Air sucked out, to be truly
empty, that is, devoid of all Corporeal Substance. But besides, that I have
neither the leisure, nor the ability, to enter into a solemn Debate of so nice
a Question; Your Lordship may, if you think it worth the trouble, in the
Dialogues not long since referred to, find the Difficulties on both sides
represented; which then made me yield but a very wavering assent to either of
the parties contending about the Question: Nor dare I yet take upon me to
determine so difficult a Controversy.

For on the one side it appears, that notwithstanding the exsuction of the Air,
our Receiver may not be destitute of all Bodies, since any thing placed in it,
may be seen there; which would not be, if it were not pervious to those beams
of Light which rebounding from the seen Object to our eyes, affect us with the
sense of it: And that either these Beams are Corporeal Emanations from some
lucid body, or else at least, the light they convey does result from the brisk
motion of some subtle Matter, I could, if I mistake not, sufficiently manifest
out of the Dialogues abovementioned, if I thought Your Lordship could
seriously imagine that Light could be conveyed without, at least, having, (if I
may so speak) a Body for its Vehicle.

By the sixteenth Experiment, it also appears that the closeness of our
Receiver hinders it not from admitting the Effluvia of the Lodestone; which
makes it very probable that it also freely admits the Magnetical steams of the
Earth; concerning which, we have in another Treatise endeavored to manifest
that numbers of them do always permeate our Air.

But on the other side it may be said, That as for the subtle Matter which
makes the-Objects enclosed in our evacuated Receiver, visible, and the
Magnetical Effluvia of the Earth that may be presumed to pass through it, though
we should grant our Vessel not to be quite devoid of them, yet we cannot so
reasonably affirm it to be replenished with them, as we may suppose, that if
they were gathered together into one place without Intervals between them, they
would fill but a small part of the whole Receiver. As in the thirteenth
Experiment, a piece of Match was inconsiderable for its bulk, whilst its parts
lay close together, that afterward (when the Fire had scattered them into
smoke) seemed to replenish all the Vessel. For (as elsewhere our Experiments
have demonstrated) both Light and the Effluvia of the Lodestone, may be
readily admitted into a Glass, Hermatically sealed, though before their
Admission, as full of Air as hollow Bodies here below are wont to be; so that
upon the exsuction of the Air, the large space deserted by it, may remain
empty, notwithstanding the pretense of those subtle Corpuscles, by which Lucid
and Magnetical Bodies produce their effects.

And as for the Allegations above mentioned, they seemed to prove but that the
Receiver devoid of Air, may be replenished with some Etherial matter, as some
Modern Naturalists write of but not that it really is so. And indeed to me it
yet seems, that as to those spaces which the Vacuists would have to be empty,
because they are manifestly devoid of Air; and all grosser Bodies the Plenists
(if I may so call them) do not prove that such spaces are replenished with such
a subtle matter as they speak of, by any sensible effects, or operations of it
(of which diverse new Trials purposely made, have not yet shown me any) but only
conclude that there must be such a Body, because there cannot be a Void. And
the reason why there cannot be a Void, being by them taken, not from any
Experiments, or Phenomenon of Nature, that clearly and particularly prove their
Hypothesis, but from their notion of a Body, whose Nature, according to them,
consisting only in extension (which indeed seems the property most essential
to, because inseparable from a Body) to say a space devoid of Body, is to speak
in the Schoolmens Phrase, a Contradiction in Adjecto. This reason I say, being
thus desum'd, seems to make the Controversy about a Vacuum, rather a
Metaphysical, than a Physiological Question; which therefore we shall here no
longer debate, finding it very difficult either to satisfy Naturalists with
this Cartesian Notion of a Body, or to manifest wherein it is erroneous, and
substitute a better in its stead.

But though we are unwilling to examine any farther the Inferences wont to be
made from the Torricellian Experiment, yet we think it not impertinent to
present Your Lordship with a couple of Advertisements concerning it.

First, then if in trying the Experiment here or elsewhere, you make use of the
English measures that Mathematicians and Tradesmen are here wont to employ, You
will, unless you be forewarned of it, be apt to suspect that those that have
written of the Experiment have been mistaken. For whereas men are wont
generally to talk of the Quick-silver's remaining suspended at the height of
between six or seven and twenty Inches; we commonly observed, when diverse years
since we first were solicitous about this Experiment, that the Quicksilver in
the Tube rested at about 29 Inches and a half above the surface of the
Restagnant Quicksilver in the Vessel, which did at first both amaze and
perplex us, because though we held it not improbable that the difference of the
grosser English Air, and that of Italy and France, might keep the Quicksilver
from falling quite as low in this colder, as in those warmer Climates; yet we
could not believe that that difference in the Air should alone be able to make
so great an one in the heights of the Mercurial Cylinders; and accordingly upon
enquiry we found, that though the various density of the Air be not to be
over-looked in this Experiment, yet the main Reason why we found the Cylinder
of Mercury to consist of so many Inches, was this, That our English Inches are
somewhat inferior in length to the digits made use of in Foreign Parts, by the
Writers of the Experiment.

The next thing I desire Your Lordship to take notice of, is, That the height
of the Mercurial Cylinder is not wont to be found altogether so great as really
it might prove, by reason of the negligence or incogitancy of most that make
the Experiment. For oftentimes upon the opening of the inverted Tube into the
Vessel'd Mercury, you may observe a bubble of Air to ascend from the bottom of
the Tube through the subsiding Quicksilver to the top; and almost always you
may, if you look narrowly, take notice of a multitude of small bubbles all
along the inside of the Tube betwixt the Quicksilver and the Glass: (not now
to mention the Particles of Air that lie concealed in the very Body of the
Mercury) Many of which, upon the Quicksilver's forsaking the upper part of the
Tube, do break into that deserted space where they find little or no resistance
to their expanding of themselves. Whether this be the reason that upon the
Application of warm Bodies to the emptied part of the Tube, the subjacent
Mercury would be depressed somewhat lower, we shall not determine; though it
seem very probable, especially since we found, that, upon the application of
Linen clothes dipped in Water, to the same part of the Tube, the Quicksilver
would somewhat ascend; as if the cold had condensed the imprisoned Air, (that
pressed upon it,) into a lesser room. But that the deserted space is not wont
to be totally devoid of Air, we were induced to think by several Circumstances.
For when an eminent Mathematician, and excellent Experimenter, had taken great
pains and spent much time in accurately filling up a Tube of Mercury, we found
that yet there remained store of inconspicuous bubbles, by inverting the Tube,
letting the Quicksilver fall to its wonted height; and by applying (by
degrees) a red hot Iron to the outside of the Tube, over against the upper part
of the Mercurial Cylinder, (for hereby the little unheeded bubbles, being
mightily expanded, ascended in such numbers, and so fast to the deserted space,
that the upper part of the Quicksilver seemed, to our wonder, to boil.) We
farther observed, That in the trials of the Torricellian Experiment we have
seen made by others, and (one excepted) all our own, we never found that upon
the inclining of the Tube the Quicksilver would fully reach to the very top of
the sealed end: Which argued, that there was some Air retreated thither that
kept the Mercury out of the unreplenished space.

If Your Lordship should now demand what are the best expedients to hinder the
intrusion of the Air in this Experiment; we must answer, That of those which
are easily intelligible without ocular demonstration, we can at present
suggest, upon our own trials, no better than these. First, at the open end of
the Tube the Glass must not only be made as even at the edges as you can, but
it is very convenient (especially if the Tube be large) that the bottom be
every way bent inwards, that so the Orifice, not much exceeding a quarter of an
Inch in Diameter, may be the more easily and exactly stopped by the
Experimenter's finger; between which and the Quicksilver, that there may be no
Air intercepted (as very often it happens that there is) it is requisite that
the Tube be filled as full as possibly it can be, that the finger which is to
stop it, pressing upon the accumulated and protuberant Mercury, may rather
throw down some, than not find enough exactly to keep out the Air. It is also
an useful and compendious way not to fill the Tube at first quite of Mercury,
but to leave near the top about a quarter of an Inch empty; for if you then
stop the open end with your finger, and invert the Tube, that quarter of an
Inch of Air will ascend in a great bubble to the top, and in its passage
thither, will gather up all the little bubbles, and unite them with it self
into one great one; so that if by reinverting the Tube, you let that bubble
return to the open end of it, you will have a much closer Mercurial Cylinder
than before, and need but to add a very little Quicksilver more to fill up the
Tube exactly. And lastly, as for those lesser and inconspicuous parcels of Air
which cannot this way begleaned up, You may endeavor before you invert the
Tube, to free the Quicksilver from them by shaking the Tube, and gently
knocking on the outside of it, after every little parcel of Quicksilver which
you pour in; and afterward, by forcing the small latitant bubbles of Air to
disclose themselves and break, by employing a hot Iron in such manner as we
lately mentioned. I remember that by carefully filling the Tube, though yet it
were not quite free from Air, we have made the Mercurial Cylinder reach to 30
Inches and above an eight, and this in a very short Tube: which we therefore
mention, because we have found, by Experience, that in short Tubes a little Air
is more prejudicial to the Experiment than in long ones, where the Air having
more room to expand it self, does less potently press upon the subjacent
Mercury.

And since we are fallen upon the consideration of the Altitude of the
Mercurial Cylinder, I must not conceal from Your Lordship an Experiment
relating thereunto, which perhaps will set both You and many of your Friends
the Vertuosi on thinking; and, by disclosing some things about the Air or
Atmosphere, that have scarce hitherto been taken notice of, may afford you some
hints conducive to a further discovery of the subject of this Epistle.

EXPERIMENT XVIII.
WE took a Glass Tube, which though it were not much above three Foot long, we
made choice of, because it was of a more than ordinarily even thickness. This
we filled with Mercury, though not with as much care as we could, yet with
somewhat more than is wont to be used in making the Torricellian Experiment.
Then, having according to the manner inverted the Tube, and opened the mouth of
it beneath the surface of some other Quicksilver, that in the Tube fell down
to the wonted height, leaving, as is usual, some little Particles of Air in the
space it deserted, as we guest by observing, that upon the Application of hot
Bodies to the upper part of the Tube, the Quicksilver would be a little
depressed. Lastly, having put both the Tube and the Vessel it leaned on into a
convenient Wooden frame to keep them from mischances: we placed that Frame in a
Window within my Bedchamber, that I might both keep the Mercury from being
stirred, and have opportunity to watch from time to time the Phenomenon it was
to exhibit. For the better discovery of which, when the Quicksilver both in
the Tube and subjacent Vessel was perfectly at rest, we took notice, by a mark
made on the outside of the Glass, how high the included Liquor then reached.

During several Weeks that the Tube was kept in that Windown (which was very
rarely opened) I had the opportunity to observe, that the Quicksilver did
sometimes faintly imitate the Liquor of a Weather-glass, subsiding a little in
warm, and rising a little in cold Weather, which we ascribed to the greater or
lesser pressure of that little Air that remained at the top of the Tube,
expanded or condensed by the heat or cold that affected the ambient Air. But
that which I was chiefly careful to observe, was this, That oftentimes the
Quicksilver did rise and fall in the Tube, and that very notably, without
conforming it self to what is usual in Weather-glasses, whose Air is at the
top, nay quite contrary thereunto: for sometimes I observed it in very cold
weather (such as this Winter has already afforded us good store of) to fall
down much lower than at other times, when by reason of the absence of both
Frost, Snow, and sharp Winds, the Air was comparatively much warmer. And I
farther observed, That sometimes the Quicksilver would for some days together
rest almost at the same height; and at other times again it would in the
compass of the same day considerably vary its altitude, though there appeared
no change either in the Air abroad, or in the temper of the Air within the Room
(wherein was constantly kept a good Fire) nor in any thing else, to which
either I, or some eminently Learned Men, whom I then acquainted with the
Experiment, could reasonably impute such a change: Especially considering that
the space wherein the Mercury wandered up and down, within about five Weeks,
amounted to full two Inches, of which we found by our several marks whereby we
had taken notice of its several removes, that it had descended about 9/16 of an
Inch from the place where it first settled, and the other Inch and 7/16 it had
ascended. And it seems probable that the height of the Mercurial Cylinder would
have varied yet more, if the Experiment had been made in the open Air, and in a
long Tube, where the Particles of the imprisoned Air by having more room to
display themselves in, might not have had so strong a Spring to work upon the
Quicksilver with. But for want both of time and of a competent quantity of
Mercury (which was not to be procured where we then happened to be) we were
unable to make any farther trials: which therefore chiefly troubled us, because
we would gladly have tried an ingenious Experiment which was suggested unto us
by that excellent Mathematician Mr. Wren, who being invited to name any thing
he would have us try touching the pressure of the Air, desired us to observe
whether or no the Quicksilver in a long Tube would not a little vary its
height according to the Tides, especially about the New and Full Moon; about
which times Mariners observe those great Flowings and Ebbs of the Sea, that
they call the Spring-Tides. For he sagaciously and plausibly conjectured that
such observations, accurately made, would discover the truth or erroneousness
of the Cartesian Hypothesis concerning the Ebbing and Flowing of the Sea: which
Des Carts ascribes to the greater pressure made upon the Air by the Moon, and
the Intercurrent Ethereal Substance at certain times (of the Day, and of the
Lunary Month) than at others. But in regard we found the Quicksilver in the
Tube to move up and down so uncertainly, by reason, as it seems, of accidental
mutation in the Air; I somewhat doubt: whether we shall find the Altitude of
the Quicksilver to vary as regularly as the Experiment is ingeniously
proposed. The success we shall (God permitting us to make trial of it) acquaint
your Lordship with; and in the mean time take notice, that when we had occasion
to take the Tube out of the Frame (after it had staid there part of November
and part of December) a good Fire being then in the room, because it was a
Snowy day, we found the Quicksilver in the Tube to be above the upper surface
of the subjacent Mercury 29 Inches three quarters.

If Your Lordship should now ask me what are the true causes of this varying
altitude of the Mercurial Cylinder; I should not undertake to answer so
difficult a question, and should venture to say no more, than that among diverse
possible causes to which it may be ascribed, it would not be, perhaps, absurd
to reckon these that follow.

First then we may consider, that the Air in the upper part of the Tube is much
more rarefied, and therefore more weak than the External Air, as may appear by
this among other things, That upon the inclining of the Tube, the Quicksilver
will readily ascend almost to the very top of it, and so take up eight or nine
tenth parts, and perhaps more of that space which it deserted before: which
would not happen, if that whole space had been full of unrarefied Air, since
that (as trial may easily satisfy you) would not have suffered it self to be
thrust into so narrow a room by so weak a pressure. So that although in our
Tube when the included Air, was heated, the Quicksilver was somewhat
depressed; yet there is this difference betwixt such a Tube and common
Weather-Glasses, that in these the included and the ambient Air are in an
AEquilibrium as to pressure, and the weight of the Water that keeps them
separate is scarce considerable. Whereas in such a Tube as we are speaking of,
the Air within, is very much more dilated than that without. And it is not so
much the spring or resistance of the included Air, as the weight of the
Mercurial Cylinder it self, that hinders the Quicksilver from ascending
higher: For if we should suppose that deserted part of the Tube perfectly
devoid of Air, yet would the Quicksilver rise but a little higher in it, and
be far from filling it; in regard the outward Air would not be able to impell
up such a weight much higher: whereas it may, by our former Experiments appear,
that if all the Air in the upper part of the Weather-Glass were away, the Water
would be impelled up to the very top of it, though the Pipe were above thirty
foot long.

We may next consider, that this rarefied: Air at the upper part of our Tube
being exactly shut up betwixt the Glass and the Quicksilver, it was scarce
subject to any discernable alterations, save those it received from heat and
cold.

And we may farther consider, that yet the external Air or Atmosphere is
subject to many alterations, besides them that proceed from either of those
Qualities.

For the Experiment that occasioned this Discourse, seems to make it probable
enough, that there may be strange Ebbings and Flowings, as it were, in the
Atmosphere, or at least, that it may admit great and sudden Mutations, either
as to its Altitude or its Density, from causes, as well unknown to us, as the
effects are unheeded by us. And that You may not think that there is nothing in
Nature but our Experiment that agrees with this our conjecture, we might put
Your Lordship in mind of the Pains and Aches that are often complained of by
those that have had great Wounds or Bruises, and that do presage great
Mutations in the Air oftentimes, whilst to strong and healthy Persons no sign
of any such thing appears. And that is also very memorable to this purpose,
which I remember I have somewhere read in a Book of the Ingenious Kircherus,
who giving a pertinent admonition concerning the various refractions that may
happen in the Air, relates, That during his stay in Malta, he often saw Mount
AEtna, though the next day, notwithstanding its being extremely clear, he could
not see it; adding, that Vintemillius, a very Learned Person, did oftentimes,
from a Hill he names, behold the whole Island he calls Luprica protuberant
above the Sea, though at other times, notwithstanding a clear Sky, he could not
see it. And though perhaps this may be in part ascribed to the various light
and position of the Sun, or to the various disposition of the Spectators eye,
or peradventure to some other cause; yet the most probable cause seems to be
the differing Density of the Air, occasioned by Exhalations capable to increase
the refraction, and consequently bring Beams to the Eye, which otherwise would
not fall on it. We have likewise, in another Treatise, mentioned our having
often observed with Telescopes a plenty of Steams in the Air, which without
such a help would not be taken notice of, and which, as they were not at all
times to be seen even through a Telescope, so they did sometimes, especially
after a shower of Rain, hastily disappear: and when we have visited those
places that abound with Mines, we have several times been told by the Diggers,
that even when the Sky seemed clear, there would, not seldom, suddenly arise,
and sometimes long continue, a certain Steam (which they usually call a damp)
so gross and thick that it would oftentimes put out their very Candels, if they
did not seasonably prevent it. And I think it will easily be granted, that the
ascension of such Steams into this or that part of the Air, and their mixing
with it, are very like to thicken it; as on the other side either heat or the
sudden condensation of the Air in another part of the Atmosphere (to mention
now no other causes) are capable of rarefying it.

Nor will it very much import the main scope of our Discourse, whether it be
supposed that the copious Steams the earth sends into the Air, thicken that
part of the Atmosphere that receives them, and make it more heavy: Or that
sometimes the Fumes may ascend with such celerity, that though the Air be
thickn'd yet they rather diminish than increase its gravitation, in regard that
the quickness of their ascent, not only keeps them from gravitating
themselves, but may hinder the pressing downwards of many Aerial Corpuscles
that they meet with in their way upwards. This I say, is of no great importance
to our present Discourse, since either way the Terrestrial Steam may here and
there considerably alter the gravity or pressure of the Atmosphere.

Your Lordship may also be pleased to remember, That by our seventeenth
Experiment it appeared, that, as when the Air in the Receiver was expanded more
than ordinarily, the Quicksilver in the Tube did proportionably subside; so
when the Air in the same Receiver was a little more than ordinarily compressed,
it did impell up the Quicksilver in the Tube, above the wonted height of
betwixt six and seven and twenty digits.

And if to these things we annex, that for ought we can find by trials
purposely made, the degree of rarity or density of the Air, shut up into our
Receiver, does not sensibly alter its temperature as to cold or heat. It will
not, I hope, appear absurd to conceive, That since the Air, included in the
Tube, could but very saintly hinder the ascent of the Quicksilver, or press it
downwards; Since too, that included Air could scarce immediately receive any
sensible alteration, save either by heat or cold; And since also, that
according to the bare density or rarity of the Air incumbent on the subjacent
Quicksilver in the Vessel, that in the Tube was impelled more or less high;
such changes happening in the neighboring part of the outward Air, either by
the ascension of gross or copious exhalations, or by any other cause (of which
there may be diverse) as were capable to make considerable alterations in the
consistence of the Air, as to rarity and density, may be able proportionably to
alter the height of the Quicksilver. I rather say, that such alterations may
be, than that they are the causes of our Phenomenon: because I think it
sufficient, if I have proposed conjectures not altogether irrational about a
new Mystery of Nature, touching which, the chief things I pretend to, is to
give occasion to the Curious to enquire farther into it, than I have been yet
able to do.

EXPERIMENT XIX.
THe same Reason that moved us to conclude, that by the drawing of the Air out
of the Receiver, the Mercury would descend in a Tube shorter than six and
twenty digits, induced us also to expect, that by the same means Water might be
brought to subside in Glass Tubes of a moderate length: Though by the noble
Experiment, said to have been accurately made in France, by Monsieur Paschal,
we are informed that a Tube of no less than about two and thirty Foot; was
found requisite to make the Experiment De vacuo succeed with Water instead of
Quicksilver: so tall a Cylinder of that lighter Liquor, being it seems,
requisite to equal the Weight of a Mercurial Cylinder of six or seven and
twenty digits, and surmount the pressure of the Atmosphere.

We took then a Tube of Glass, Hermetically sealed at one end, of about four
foot in length, and not very slender: This, at the open end, we filled with
common Water, and then stopped that end till we had inverted the Tube, and opened
it beneath the surface of a quantity of the like Water, contained in a somewhat
deep and slender Vessel. This Vessel, with the Tube in it, was let down into
the Receiver, and the Receiver being closed up after the accustomed manner, the
Pump was set on work.

As much of the event as concerns our present purpose, was this, That till a
considerable part of the Air was drawn out of the Receiver, the Tube continued
top-full of Water as when it was put in, it being requisite that a great part
of the Air, formerly contained in the Receiver, should be drawn out, to bring
the remaining Air to an AEquilibrium, with so short and light a Cylinder of
Water. But when once the Water began to fall in the Tube, then each exsuction
of Air made it descend a little lower, though nothing near so much as the
Quicksilver at the beginning did in the Experiment formerly mentioned. Nor did
there appear so much inequality in the spaces transmitted by the Water in its
descent, as there it did in those observed in the fall of the Quicksilver, of
which the cause will scarce seem abstruse to him that shall duly reflect upon
what has been already delivered. And whereas we drew down the Quicksilver in
the Tube so far as to bring it within an Inch of the surface of the other
Quicksilver into which it was to fall; the lowest we were able to draw down
the Water was, by our conjecture, to about a Foot or more above the surface of
that in the Vessel; of which I know not whether it will be needful to assign
so obvious a cause as that, though the little Air remaining in the Receiver
could not hinder a Cylinder of above on Inch high of Quicksilver from
subsiding; yet it might be very well able, by its pressure, to countervail the
weight of a Cylinder of a Foot long or more, of a Liquor so much less ponderous
than Quicksilver, as Water is. And in fine, to conclude our Experiment, when
the Water was drawn down thus low, we found, that by letting in the outward
Air, it might be immediately impelled up again to the higher parts of the Tube.

We will add no more concerning this Experiment, save that having tried it in
one of our small Receivers, we observed, That upon the first exsuction of the
Air the Water did usually subside diverse Inches, and at the second (exsuction)
fall down much lower, subsiding sometimes near two Foot; as also that upon the
letting in of the Air from without, the Water was impelled up with very great
celerity.

EXPERIMENT XX.
THat the Air has a notable Elastical power (whencesoever that proceeds) we
have, I suppose, abundantly evinced, and it Begins to be acknowledged by the
eminentest Modern Naturalists. But whether or no there be in Water so much as a
languid one, seems hitherto to have been scarce considered nor has been yet,
for ought I know, determined either way by any Writer, which invited us to make
the following Experiment.

There was taken a great Glass bubble, with a long neck; (such as Chemists are
wont to call a Philosophical Egg) which being filled with common Water till
the Liquor reached about a span above the bubble, and a piece of Paper being
there pasted on, was put unstop'd into the Receiver, and then the Air was
sucked out after the wonted manner. The event was this, that a considerable
part of the Air, penned up in the Receiver, was drawn out, before we discerned
any expansion of the Water; but, continuing the labor of pumping, the Water
manifestly began to ascend in the stem of the Glass, and diverse bubbles
loosening themselves from the lower parts of the Vessel, made their way through
the Body of the Water, to the top of it, and there brake into the Receiver: And
after the Water once appeared to swell, then at each time the Stop cock was
turned to let out the Air from the Receiver into the Pump, the Water in the
Neck of the Glass did suddenly rise about the breadth of a Barly-corn in the
Neck of the Glass and so attained by degrees, to a considerable height above
the mark formerly mentioned. And at length (to make the expansion of the Water
more evident) the outward Air was suddenly let in, and the Water immediately
subsided and deserted all the space it had newly gained in the Glass.

And, on this occasion, it will not perhaps be amiss to acquaint Your Lordship
here (though we have already mentioned it in another Paper, to another purpose)
with another Expedient that we made use of two or three years ago, to try
whether or no Water had a Spring in it. About that time then, That Great and
Learned Promoter of Experimental Philosophy Dr. Wilkins, doing me the Honor to
come himself, and bring some of his inquisitive Friends to my Lodging, we there
had in readiness a round and hollow Vessel of Pewter, great enough to contain
two pounds of Water, and exactly close every where, but at one little hole
where it was to be filled, then partly by sucking out the Air, and partly by
injecting Water with a Syringe, it was (not without some difficulty) filled up
to the top; and that hole being placed directly upwards, there was a little
more Water leisurely forced in by the Syringe. Upon which, though the Vessel
were permitted to rest, and the hole kept in its former posture, yet the
compressed Water leisurely swelled above the Orifice of the hole, and diverse
drops ran over along the sides of the Vessel. After this we caused a skillful
Pewterer (who had made the Globe) to close it up in our presence with Soder so
exquisitely, that none suspected there was any thing left in it besides Water.
And lastly, the Vessel thus soder'd up, was warily and often struck in diverse
places with a Wooden Mallet, and thereby was manifestly compressed, whereby the
enclosed Water was crowded into less room than it had before: And thereupon we
took a Needle, and with it and the Mallet perforated the Vessel, and drew out
the Needle again; the Water (but in a very slender Stream) was suddenly thrown
after it into the Air, to the height of two or three Feet. As for the other
Phenomenon of this Experiment, since they belong not to our present purpose,
and are partly mentioned in another of our Papers, we shall, instead of
recording them here, give this Advertisement: That as evidently as this
Experiment, and that made in our Receiver, seem to prove a power in the Water
to expand and restore it self after compression; yet for a reason to be met
with ere long, I judged it not safe, to infer that Conclusion from these
Premises, till I had made some of the following trials, to the mention of which
I will therefore hasten.

EXPERIMENT XXI.
TO discover whether the Expansion of the Water really proceeded from an
Elastical power in the parts of the Water it self, we thought it requisite to
try two things: The one, Whether or no the Atmosphere gravitates upon Bodies
under Water; and the other, Whether in case it do gravitate, the Intumescence
of the Water may not be ascribed to some substance subtler than it self,
residing in it. In order to the satisfying myself about the first of these, I
intended to let down into the Receiver a Vessel of Water, wherein should be
immersed a very small oiled Bladder, almost devoid of Air, but strongly tied up
at the Neck with a string, and detained a little under Water by such a weight
fastened to that string, as should just be able to keep the Bladder from
swimming, and no more. For I supposed, that if when all things were thus
ordered, the Receiver were emptied, in case there were any such pressure of the
Atmosphere upon Water, as I was inclined to believe, the Air within the
Bladder, being upon the exsuction of the Air within the Receiver, freed from
that pressure, and being pressed only by the small weight of the incumbent
Water, would considerably expand it self; but whilst we were preparing Bladders
for this Experiment, there occurred an easy way for the making at once both
the Discoveries I desired.

We took then a Glass Viol, containing by ghess a pound and some ounces of
Water, this we filled top full, and then we put into the Neck of it a Glass
Pipe a pretty deal bigger than a Goose Quill, open at both ends, and of diverse
Inches in length: One end of this Pipe was so put into the Neck of the Viol, as
to reach a little below it, and then was carefully cemented thereto that no Air
might get into the Viol, nor any Water get out of it, otherwise than through
the Pipe; and then the Pipe being warily filled, about half way up to the top,
with more Water, and a mark being pasted over aganst the upper surface of the
Liquor; the Viol thus fitted with the Pipe, was, by strings let down into the
Receiver, and according to the wonted manner exquisitely closed up in it.

This done, we began to pump out the Air, and when a pretty quantity of it had
been drawn away, the Water in the Pipe began to rise higher in the Pipe, at the
sides of which some little bubbles discovered themselves. After a little while
longer, the Water still swelling, there appeared at the bottom of the Pipe a
bubble about the bigness of a small Pea, which ascending through the Pipe to
the top of the Water, stayed there a while and then broke; but the Pump being
nimbly plied, the expansion of the Water so increased, that quickly, getting up
to the top of the Pipe, some drops of it began to run down along the outside
of it, which obliged us to forbear pumping a while, and give the Water leave to
subside within less than two Inches of the bottom of the Pipe. After this the
Pump being again set on work, the bubbles began to ascend from the bottom of
the Pipe, being not all of a size, but yet so big, that estimating one with
another, they appeared to be of the size of the smaller sort of Peace; and of
these we reckoned about sixty which came up one after another, besides store of
smaller ones, of which we made no reckoning: And at length, growing weary of
reckoning and pumping too (because we found, that in spite of all our pains
and industry, some undiscerned Leak or other in the Receiver hindered us from
being able to empty it altogether) we thought fit to desist for that time,
after trial made of what operation the external Air, being let in upon the
expanded Water, would have; and accordingly turning the Key to let in the Air,
we saw, as we expected, that the Water in the Pipe in a moment fell down almost
to the bottom of it.

Now of this Experiment there are two or three Circumstances yet to be
mentioned, which are no less, than those already recited, pertinent to our
present purpose.

In the first place then, when the greater part of the Air had been pumped out
of the Receiver, the rising bubbles ascended so very slowly in the Pipe, that
their Progress was scarce discernable; which seemed to proceed from this, That
their bigness was such, That they could not sufficiently extend themselves in
the cavity of the Glass, without pressing on both hands against the sides of
it, whereby they became of more difficult extrusion to the Water. And though it
may seem strange that these bubbles should be of any considerable bulk, since
it is like they consisted of lesser parcels of the Air lurking in the Water,
than those that were vigorous enough to make their way through, long before
them: yet they were commonly much larger than before, some of them being equal
in quantity to four or five Peace: whether this their increase of bulk proceeded
from the greater decrement of the pressure of the Air, or from the Union of two
or three of those numerous bubbles which were then generated below the bottom
of the Pipe, where we could not see what was done among them.

Another thing we noted in our bubbles was, That whereas in ordinary ones the
Air, together with the thin film of Water that invests and detains it, is wont
to swell above the surface of the Water it swims on, and commonly to constitute
Hemispherical Bodies with it, the little parcels of Air that came up after the
Receiver was pretty well emptied, did not make protuberant bubbles, but such
whose upper surface was either level with, or beneath that of the Water, so
that the upper surface being usually somewhat unequal, the less protuberant
parts of it had a pretty quantity of Water remaining above them.

We also farther observed, that whereas in the bubbles that first appeared in
the Pipe, the ascending Air did, as in other common bubbles, make its way
upwards, by dividing the Water through which it passed, in those bubbles that
appeared at the latter end of our Experiment, when the pressure of the little
external Air, remaining in the Receiver, was grown inconsiderable, the
ascending parcels of Air having how little more than the weight of the
incumbent Water to surmount, were able both so to expand themselves as to fill
up that part of the Pipe which they pervaded, and by pressing every way against
the sides of it, to lift upwards with them what Water they found above them,
without letting any considerable quantity glide down along the sides of the
Glass; So that sometimes we could see a bubble thrust on before it a whole
Cylinder of Water of perhaps an Inch high, and carry it up to the top of the
Pipe; though as we formerly noted, upon the letting in the external Air, these
tumid bubbles suddenly relapsed to their former inconspicuousness.

All these things laid together seemed sufficiently to confirm that, which the
consideration of the thing it self would easily enough persuade, namely, That
the Air, and such like Bodies being under Water, may be pressed upon as well by
the Atmosphere, as by the weight of the incumbent Water it self.

Hence likewise we may verify what we observed at the close of the foregoing
Experiment, namely, That from the sole swelling of Water there recorded, it
cannot be so safely concluded, that Water, when freed from compression, is
endowed with an Elastical power of expanding it self: since thereby it appears
that the Intumescence produced by that Experiment, may, (at least in great
part) be ascribed to the numerous little bubbles which are wont to be produced
in Water, from which the pressure of the Atmosphere is in great measure taken
off. So apt are we to be misled, even by Experiments themselves, into
Mistakes, when either we consider not that most Effects may proceed from
various Causes, or mind only those Circumstances of our Experiment, which seem
to comply with our preconceiv'd Hypothesis or Conjectures.

And hence it seems also probable, that in the Pores or invisible little
recesses of Water it self there lie commonly interspersed many parcels of
either Air, or at least something Analagous thereunto, although so very small,
that they have not been hitherto so much as suspected to lurk there. But if it
be demanded how it appears that there is interspersed through the Body of Water
any substance thinner than it self, and why that which produced the bubbles
abovementioned should not be resolutely said to be nothing else than a more
active and spirituous part of the Water, we shall, in order to the Elucidation
of this matter, subjoyn to what was formerly delivered the following Experiment.

EXPERIMENT XXII.
WE recited in our ninteenth Experiment, how by drawing most of the Air out of
the Receiver, we made the Water subside by degrees in a Glass not four Foot
long: We shall now add, that in the like Experiment made in such a Tube, or a
greater, it may be observed, That when the Water begins to fall, there will
appear store of bubbles fastened all along to the sides of the Glass; of which
bubbles, by the agitation of the Vessel consequent upon pumping, there will
arise good numbers to the top of the Water, and there break; and as the
Cylinder of Water is brought to be lower and lower, so the bubbles will appear
more numerous in that part of the Tube which the Water yet fills; and the
nearer the surface of the Water, in its descent, approaches to these bubbles,
the greater they will grow, because having the less weight and pressure upon
them, the expansion of that Air which makes them, can be the less resisted by
the pressure of the incumbent Water and Air; as seems probable from hence, that
upon the letting in a little external Air, those bubbles immediately shrink.

It may indeed, as we lately intimated, be conjectured, that these bubbles
proceed not so much from any Air pre-existent in the Water, and lurking in the
Pores of it, as from the more subtle parts of the Water it self; which by the
expansion allowed them upon the diminished pressure of the ambient Bodies may
generate such bubbles. And indeed, I am not yet so well satisfied that bubbles
may not (at least sometimes) have such an origination: but that which makes me
suspect that those in our trials contain real Air, formerly latitant in the
Pores of the Water, is this, That upon the inletting of the external Air, the
Water was not again impelled to the very top of the Tube whence it began to
fall, but was stopped in its ascent near an Inch beneath the top. And since, if
the upper part of the Tube had been devoid of any other than such Ethereal
matter as was subtle enough freely to penetrate the pores of the Glass, the
external Air would have been able to impel the Water to the top of a Tube seven
or eight times as long as ours was; The Phenomenon under consideration seemed
manifestly to argue, that the many bubbles that broke at the top of the Water,
did contain a real Air, which being collected into one place, and hindered by
the top of the Glass from receding, was able to with stand the pressure of the
outward Air. As we see that if never so little Air remain in the Tube upon the
making the Experiment De Vacuo with Quicksilver, no inclining of the Tube,
(though a long one, will enable a Man to impell the Mercury up to the very top,
by reason (as we formerly noted) of the resistance of the included Air, which
will not be compressed beyond a certain degree.

But in order to a farther discovery what our bubbles were, we will, on this
occafion, inform Your Lordship, that we tried the XIXth Experiment in one of
our small Receivers, and found, that upon the drawing down of the Water, so
many bubbles disclosed themselves, and broke into the upper part of the Tube,
that having afterward let in the external Air, the Water was not thereby
impelled to the top of the Tube (three Foot in length) within a little more
than half an Inch. And whether or no it were Air that possessed that space at
the top of the Tube which was not filled with Water, we took this course to
examine. We drew the second time the Air out of the Receiver, and found, that
by reason of the body that possessed the top of the Tube, we were able not
only to make the Water in the Tube fall to a level with the surface of the
Water in the Vessel; But also (by plying the Pump a little longer) a great way
beneath it: which, since it could not well be ascribed to the bare subsiding of
the Water, by reason of its own weight, argued that the Water was depressed by
the Air: which was confirmed by the Figure of the surface of the Water in the
Tube, which was much more concave than that of Water in Tubes of that bigness
uses to be. And this farther trial (to add that upon the bye) we made at the
same time, That when the Water in the Pipe was drawn down almost as low as the
Water without it, we observed, that (though we desisted from pumping) by the
bare application of a hand moderately warm to the deserted part of the Tube,
the remaining Water would be speedily and notably depressed. And having for a
while held a kindled Coal to the outside of the Tube, (the Pump being still
unimploy'd, because the Vessel chanced to hold extraordinarily well) the Air
was by the heat so far expanded, that it quickly drove the Water to the bottom
of the Tube, which was diverse Inches beneath the surface of the ambient Water.
Whereby it appears (by the same way by which we formerly measured the
dilatation of the Air) that the Air, even when it is expanded to between 90 and
100 times its extent, will yet readily admit of a much farther rarefaction by
heat.

I considered also that in case the Bubbles we have been speaking of, were
produced by the parcels of Air latitant in the Water, that Air being now got
together to the top of the Tube, though the Air were again drawn out of the
Receiver, the taking off its pressure would not disclose bubbles as before; and
accordingly, the Air being again pumped out, the Water in the Tube descended as
formerly: but for a great while we scarce saw one bubble appear, only when the
Receiver had been very much exhausted; and the Water was fallen very low, there
appeared near the bottom of the Tube, certain little bubbles, which seemed to
consist of such parcels of Air as had not, by reason of their smallness, got up
to the top of the Water, with the more bulky and vigorous ones. And that which
is not inconsiderable, is, That having, by letting in the Air, forced up the
Water into the Tube, we could not perceive that it ascended near the top,
though we permitted the Engine to remain unimploy'd for two or three Nights
together, and watched whether the Water would swell up and fill the Tube. And
on this occasion I remember, that having tried such an Experiment as this with
Quicksilver instead of Water, in a Tube of about a Foot and a half long,
wherein it might seem more hopeful to escape bubbles; yet upon the drawing
down the Quicksilver as low as we could, and letting in the external Air upon
it, we found that some lurking particles of Air were got up to the top of the
Tube, and hindered the Quicksilver from being forced up again so high. And
though the Quicksilver were by this means brought to appear a very close and
lovely Metalline Cylinder, not interrupted by interspersed bubbles as before;
yet having caused the Air to be again drawn out of the Receiver, I could
perceive several little bubbles to disclose themselves, fastened to the inside
of the Tube, near the bottom of it; and having purposely watched one or two of
the chiefest, I had the pleasure to observe, that though they grew bigger and
bigger as the surface of the Mercurial Cylinder fell nearer and nearer to them,
so as that at length they swelled into a conspicuous bulk; yet upon the wary
letting in the Air upon them, they did not break, but presently shrunk up into
a littleness that rendered them inconspicuous.

Whence it seems very probable, if not certain, that even in the closest and
most ponderous Liquors, and therefore much more in Water, there may lurk
undiscernable parcels of Air, capable, upon the removal of the pressure of the
ambient Air (though but in part) and that of the liquor wherein it lurks, to
produce conspicuous bubbles. And consequently, if it seem inconvenient to admit
an Elastical power in the Water, it may be said that the swelling of the
compressed Water in the Pewter Vessel lately mentioned, and the springing up of
the Water at the hole made by the Needle, were not the effects of any internal
Elater of the Water, but of the spring of the many little particles of Air
dispersed through that Water, and acting upon it in their sudden recovering
themselves to a greater extent, than that to which a violent compression had
reduced them to.

But though, from all these particulars, it seems manifest that the Bubbles we
have been all this while treating of, were produced by such a substance as may
be properly enough called Air; yet till we shall have had the opportunity of
making some farther trials concerning the nature of the Air, we shall not
resolutely determine whether or no Air be a Primogenial Body (if I may so
speak) that cannot now be generated or turned either into Water or any other
Body. Yet in the mean while (because it is an important Question, and if
rightly determined, may much conduce to the knowledge of the nature of the Air)
we think it not unfit to make a brief mention of some of the particulars which
at present occur to our thoughts in favor of either part of the Question.

First then, diverse Naturalists esteem the Air (as well as other Elements) to
be ingenerable and incorruptible. And reasons plausible enough may be drawn to
countenance this Opinion from the consideration of that permanency that ought
to belong to the corporeal Principles of other Bodies.

Next, Experience may be pleaded to the same purpose, for I have read of some
who in vain attempted to turn Air into Water, or Water into Air.

The diligent Schottus tells us, that amongst other rarities to be met with in
that great Repository of Schottus Mecham hydraulicopneumat. Part 3. Class. 1.
them, the Musaeum Kercherianum, there is a round Glass with a tapering neck
near half full (as one may guess by the Scheme he annexeth) of ordinary
Spring Water, which having been hermetically shut up there by Clavius the
famous Geometrician, the included Water is to this day preserved, not only
clear and pure, as if it were but newly put in: But (as it seems) without (in
the least) turning into Air, notwithstanding its having been kept there these
fifty years: For he tells us, That the Water has continued there all this
while without any diminution.

Nor does it appear in those Glasses, which for Chemical Experiments we usually
close with Hermes his Seal (as they call it) that the included Air does, during
its long imprisonment, notwithstanding the alteration it receives from various
degrees of heat, discernably alter its nature. Whereas we plainly perceive in
our Digestions and Distillations, that though Water may be rarefied into
invisible Vapors, yet it is not really changed into Air, but only divided by
heat, and scattered into very minute parts, which meeting together in the
Alembick or in the Receiver, do presently return into such Water as they
constituted before. And we also see, that even Spirit of Wine, and other subtle
and fugitive Spirits, though they easily fly into the Air, and mingle with it,
do yet in the Glasses of Chemists easily lay aside the disguise of Air, and
resume the divested form of Liquors. And so volatile Salts, as of Urine,
Hartshorn, etc. though they will readily disperse themselves through the Air,
and play up and down in the capacity of an Alembick or a Receiver: yet will
they, after a while, fasten themselves to the insides of such Glasses in the
form of Salts.

Besides, since Air is confessedly endowed with an Elastical power that
probably proceeds from its Texture, it appears not, what it is, that in such
light alterations of Water, as are by many presumed capable of turning it into
Air, can be reasonably supposed so to contrive the Particles of Water, as to
give them, (and that permanently,) the structure requisite to a Spring. I add
the word permanently, because the newly mentioned observations seem to argue
the Corpuscles of Air to be irreducible into Water, whereas the Aqueous
Particles may perhaps for a while be so vehemently agitated, as to press almost
like Springs upon other Bodies; yet upon the ceasing of the agitation, they
quickly, by relapsing into Water, disclcse themselves to have been nothing else
whilst they counterfeited the Air.

Lastly, The Experiment formerly made in our Engine with a piece of Match,
seems to evince, that even those light and subtle Fumes (for the most part not
aqueous neither) into which the Fire it self shatters dry Bodies, have no such
Spring in them as the Air, since they were unable to hinder or repress the
expansion of the Air included in the Bladder they surrounded.

I remember indeed that the Learned Josephus Acosta, in his History of the West
Indies, tells us, Natural and Moral Hist. of the Indies. Lib. 3. c. 9.
That he saw in those parts some Grates of Iron so rusted and consumed by the
Air, that the Metal being pressed between the Fingers, dissolved (to use his
words) to powder, as if it had been Hay or parched Straw. And I remember too,
that the Accurate Varenius Geogr. General. Lib. 1. cap. 19.
tells us, That in the Islands commonly called Azores, the Air (and Wind) is so
sharp, that in a short time it frets not only Iron Plates, but the very Tiles
upon the Roofs of Houses, and reduces them to dust. And I have elsewhere
mentioned some recent Observations of this kind. But it may be said, That the
abovementioned Authors ascribe the recited effects chiefly to the Winds, and
that, however the corrosion of the Iron and the Tiles may proceed not from the
Air it self, or any of its genuine parts, but from some saline Corpuscles
dispersed through the Air, and driven by the Winds against the Bodies it is
presumed to fret. And that such volatile Salts may copiously ascend into the
Air, and yet retain their nature, as does the more fixed Salt in the Seawater,
the sublimations of Sal-Armoniack may sufficiently evince. Not to mention, that
I have shown some Friends a secret kind of saline Substance incomparably
subtler than Sal-Armoniack, which did not only easily enough ascend it self,
but carried up with it (and that in a very great proportion) the solid and
ponderous Body even of uncalcin'd Gold in the form of subtle exhalations, which
did afterward fasten themselves to the upper parts of the Vessels, and yet
manifest themselves to continue Gold. We remember also, that to try whether
Water could be turned into Air, we once took an AEolipile, into which we had
before conveyed some Water, and placing it upon kindled Coals when the heat
forced out a vehement stream of aqueous Vapors; we tied about the Neck of it,
that of a Bladder, which we had before emptied of Air; and finding the
AEolipile after a while to blow up the Bladder, we carefully tied it again that
the included substance might not get away. Then slipping it off from the
AEolipile we conveyed it into our Receiver, to try whether or no that which in
part distended the Bladder would appear by its Spring to be true Air: whereby
we found that upon the exsuction of the ambient Air, the included substance
expanded it self and the Bladder, to a very much greater bulk than it was of
before. And for farther satisfaction, having again taken out the Bladder, we
suffered it to remain tied up till next Morning, to try whether time, and the
coldness of the Night, would make the contained substance relapse into Water:
But the next Morning we found it little less tumid than before. I remember, I
say, that I once made this Experiment; but I might say in answer to it, that
the chief reason of my mentioning it, is, To let Your Lordship see, how
requisite it is to be circumspect and considerate, when we are to make and to
build upon nice Experiments. For though I may seem to have used sufficient
caution, yet afterward considering with my self that the AEolipile I had
employed was a very large one, and that it required much more care than one
that has not tried it would imagine, to drive out all the Air from a large
AEolipile, I easily suspected that the distension of the Bladder in our
pneumatical Vessel, might proceed not from the watery steams that came out at
the narrow mouth of the AEolipile, and had very much wetted the Bladder, but
from the rarefied Air which in that sort of Vessels is wont for a good while
together to come out with the rarefied Water: and accordingly having reiterated
the Experiment, I found it very difficult (by reason of the thrinking of the
Bladders (upon their being heated) and of other impediments) to make it so
accurately as to deduce from it, that Water may be rarefied into true Air.

Against the other four abovementioned Considerations, we cannot spend time to
frame Objections, but must forthwith proceed to the mention of those things
that seem to argue that Air (at least such as produced our bubbles) may be
generated of Water and other Bodies.

First then we have found by Experience that a vapid Air, or Water rarefied
into Vapor, may at least for a while emulate the elastical power of that which
is generally acknowledged to be true Air. For if you take a good AEolipile,
with a moderately strong and slender Neck, and filling it with Water, lay it
upon quick Coals, you may after a while observe so great a pressure by some of
the parts contained in the AEolipile upon others, that the Water will sometimes
be thrown up into the Air above three or four Foot high; and if you then take
the AEolipile almost red hot from off the fire, you may perceive that the Water
will for a longer time than one would easily imagine continue to be spouted out
in a violent Stream. And if there remains but little Water in the AEolipile
when it is taken very hot from the Fire, immersing the Neck of it into cold
Water, you will find, that after it begins to suck in some Water, there will be
made from time to time store of large bubbles in that Water wherein the Neck
was plunged. Which bubbles seem manifestly to proceed from hence, that for a
while the heat in the AEolipile continues strong enough to rarefy part of the
Water that is sucked in, and expel it in the form of Vapors through the Water
incumbent on the Pipe. If also when the AEolipile is almost full of Water, and
therefore can contain but little Air; you hold a Coal or Brand in that stream
of Vapors that issues out of the narrow mouth of it, you will find this vapid
or rorid Air, (if I may so call it) to blow the Fire very strongly, and with a
roaring noise. And that it be not said that it is by the external Air which the
aqueous steams drive before them, and not by the Steams themselves, that the
Blast is made and the Flame excited; it has been observed, that by approaching
the Coal or Brand almost to the mouth of the AEolipile, the Wind appeared more
vehement, than if the Body to be kindled were held some Inches off.

But in regard the elastical power of the Stream, issuing out of an AEolipile,
seems manifestly due to the heat that expands and agitates the aqueous
Particles whereof that Stream consists, and that such rapid Winds seem to be
but water scattered into little parts and set a-moving; since we find, that
holding a Knife, or any solid, smooth, and close Body against the Stream that
issues out of the AEolipile, the Vapors condensing upon it, will presently
cover it with Water: It will be very pertinent to subjoyn a notable Experiment
that I remember I have met with in the description given us by the Industrious
Kircher, of several Musical Engines. And (though it may seem somewhat prolix)
we will resite what he delivers in his own words, which are these.

Cum eodem tempore quo haec scripsi, summi Pont. Innocentii Xmi mandato organi
hydraulici in horto Quirinali Kirch. Art. Mag. Con. and Disson. lib. 9. p. 309.
constituendi cura mihi commendata esset, AEoliam cameram insigni sane successu
construi jussimus, ea quae sequitur ratione.

Erat longitudo sive altitudo camerae AH 5 Pedum, Latitudine 3 fere ex
lateribus constructa; in See the fifteenth Figure.
medio duo tenebat Diaphragmata CD and OF in modum cribri pluribus foraminibus
pertusi. Paulo infra canalis G aquam advehens inserebatur in H eidem epistomium
parabat exitum. Aqua itaque per canalem G maximo impetu ruens vehementissimum
ventum mox intus excitabat; qui ventus nimia humiditate imbutus, ut purior
exiret sicciorque, Diaphragmata illa in cribri modum pertusa, ordinata sunt.
Intra haec enim aquae vehemens agitatio rupta fractaque Aerem puriorem per A
canalem subtilioremque emittebat: Verum cum postea inventum sit Aerem plus
aequo humidum interioribus Organi meatibus maximum detrimentum infer: Hinc,
ut Aer aquosus ficcissimam consistentiam acquireret, ordinavimus canalem
plumbeum QR in helicem contortum vasi S aliquantulum capaciori in modum Urnae
efformato, insertum. Intra Urnam enim plumbeam and canalem tortuosum illisus
Aer humidus, ita ab omni aquositate defaecabatur, ut ex furno in Organum
derivatus dici potuerit. Urna S canalis tortuosi QR ultimum orificium Z
inseritur anemothecae Organi. Et hunc modum Organis hydraulicis omnium
aptissimum reperi.

Debet autem camera illa situari in loco quantum fieri potest sicciori, ita ut
longo canali aqua intra eam derivetur, ne locus humiditate sua Organis officiat.

Thus far the Ingenious Kircherus, whom I the rather cite, because although I
have been informed of diverse Ventiducts (as they call them) by very knowing
Travelers that have observed them: yet this relation of our Author being very
punctual, and delivered upon his own particular Experience, has I confess,
made me with I had had the good fortune when I was at Rome, to take notice of
these Organs; or that I had now the opportunity of examining of such an
Experiment. For if upon a strict enquiry I should find that the breath that
blows the Organs does not really upon the ceasing of its unusual agitation by
little and little relapse into Water, I should strongly suspect that it is
possible for Water to be easily turh'd into Air. I remember indeed, that we
have formerly taught, that there lurks an interspersed Air in the pores of
ordinary Water, which may possibly be struck out by the breaking of the Water
in its fall into the AEolian Chamber, (as he calls it.) But in regard the
Scheme seems to represent that Chamber as closely shut, and thereby forbids us
to suppose that any Air is carried into it, but what is latitant in the Water,
it will scarce seem probable (to him who remembers how small a proportion of
Air, that appeared to be when its rarefication ceased, which was concealed in
the Water we freed from bubbles in our Receiver) that so little Air as is
commonly dispersed through Water, should be able, in so little Water as was
requisite for so small a room, to make so vehement a Wind as our Author here
tells us of. I have sometime therefore suspected, that in this case the Wind
may be produced by small particles of the Water it self, forcibly expelled out
of the Chamber into the Organs. And to the Objection, to which I foresaw this
ghess to be liable, namely, That, no heat intervening, there appeared nothing
that should raise the Water into exhalations, and give them an impulse. I
thought it might be said, that motion alone, if vehement enough, may, without
sensible heat, suffice to break Water into very minute parts, and make them
ascend upwards, if they can no where else more easily continue their agitation.
For I remember, that traveling betwixt Lions and Geneva, I saw, not very far
out of the way, a place where the River of Rhone, comeing suddenly to be
straightened betwixt two Rocks, so near each other, that a Man may, (if my Memory
fail me not) stand a stride upon both at once: that rapid Stream dashing with
great impetuosity against its Rocky Boundaries, does break part of its Water
into such minute Corpuscles, and put them into such a motion, that Passengers
observe at a good distance off, as it were a Mist arising from that place, and
ascending a good way up into the Air. Such, I say, was my suspicion touching
the Wind we have been considering, but it seems something odd that aqueous
Vapors should, like a dry Wind, pass through so long and tortuous a Pipe of
Lead, as that described by our Author, since we see in the Heads of Stills,
and the Necks of AEolipiles, how quickly such Vapors are even by a very little
cold recondensed into Water. But to this also something may be speciously
replied; wherefore contenting my self to have mentioned our Author's Experiment
as a plausible, though not demonstrative proof, that Water may be transmuted
into Air. We will pass on to mention in the third place another Experiment,
which we tried in order to the same enquiry.

We took a clear glass Bubble (capable of containing by guess about three
Ounces of Water) with a Neck somewhat long and wide, of a Cylindrical form;
this we filled with Oil of Vitriol and fair Water, of each almost a like
quantity, and casting in half a dozen small Iron Nails, we stopped the mouth of
the Glass (which was top full of Liquor) with a flat piece of Diapalma provided
for the purpose, that, accommodating it self to the surface of the Water, the
Air might be exquisitely excluded: and speedily inverting the Viol, we put the
Neck of it into a small wide-mouthed Glass that stood ready with more of the
same Liquor in it, to receive it. As soon as the Neck had reached the bottom of
the Liquor it was dipped into, there appeared at the upper part (which was
before the bottom) of the Viol a bubble, of about the bigness of a Pea, which
seemed rather to consist of small and recent Bubbles, produced by the action of
the dissolving Liquor upon the Iron, than any parcel of the external Air that
might be suspected to have got in upon the inversion of the Glass, especially
since we gave time to those little Particles of Air which were carried down
with the Nails into the Liquor to fly up again. But whence this first Bubble
was produced, is not so material to our Experiment, in regard it was so small:
For soon after we perceived the Bubbles produced by the action of the Menstruum
upon the Metal, ascending copiously to the Bubble already named, and breaking
into it, did soon exceedingly increase it, and by degrees depress the Water
lower and lower, till at length the substance contained in these Bubbles
possessed the whole cavity of the glass Viol, and almost of its Neck too,
reaching much lower in the Neck than the surface of the ambient Liquor, where
with the open-mouthed Glass was by this means almost replenished. And because
it might be suspected that the depression of the Liquor might proceed from the
agitation whereinto the exhaling and imprisoned Steams were put, by that heat
which is wont to result from that action of corrosive salts upon Metals, we
suffered both the Viol and the openmouth'd Glass to remain as they were, in a
Window, for three or four days and nights together; but looking upon them
several times during that while, as well as at the expiration of it, the whole
cavity of the glass Bubble, and most of its Neck, seemed to be possessed by
Air, since by its spring it was able for so long to hinder the expelled and
ambient Liquor from regaining its former place. And it was remarkable, that
just before we took the glass Bubble out of the other Glass, upon the
application of a warm hand to the unequal part of the Bubble; the imprisoned
substance readily dilated it self like Air, and broke through the Liquor in
diverse bubbles, succeeding one another.

Having also another time tried the like Experiment with a small Viol, and with
Nails dissolved in Aquafortis, we found nothing incongruous to what we have now
delivered. And this Circumstance we observed, that the newly generated Steams
did not only possess almost all the whole cavity of the Glass, but diverse
times without the assistance of the heat of my hand, broke away in large
bubbles through the ambient Liquor into the open Air: So that these Experiments
with corrosive Liquors, seemed manifestly enough to prove, though not that Air
may be generated out of the Water, yet that in general Air may be generated
anew.

Lastly, To the foregoing Arguments from Experience we might easily subjoyn the
Authority of Aristotle, and of (his Followers) the Schools who are known to
have taught, that Air and Water being symbolizing Elements (in the quality of
moisture) are easily transmutable into one another. But we shall rather to the
foregoing Argument add this, drawn from Reason, That if, as Leucippus,
Democritus, Epicurus and others, followed by diverse modern Naturalists, have
taught, that the difference of Bodies proceeds but from the various Magnitudes,
Figures, Motions, and Textures of the small parts they consist of, all the
qualities that make them differ, being deducible from thence) there appears no
reason why the minute parts of Water, and other Bodies, may not be so agitated
or connected as to deserve the name of Air. For if we allow the Cartesian
Hypothesis, according to which, as we noted at the beginning of this Letter,
the Air may consist of any terrene or aqueous Corpuscles, provided they be kept
swimming in the interfluent Celestial Matter; it is obvious that Air may be as
often generated as Terrestrial Particles, minute enough to be carried up and
down, by the Celestial Matter, ascend into the Atmosphere. And if we will have
the Air to be a congeries of little slender Springs, it seems not impossible,
though it be difficult, that the small parts of diverse Bodies may by a lucky
concourse of causes be so connected, as to constitute such little Springs,
since (as we note in another Treatise) Water in the Plants it nourishes is
usually contrived into springy Bodies, and even the bare altered position and
connection of the parts of a Body may suffice to give it a Spring that it had
not before, as may be seen in a thin and flexible Plate of Silver; unto which,
by some strokes of a Hammer, you may give a Spring, and by only heating it
redhot, you may make it again flexible as before.

These, My Lord, are some of the Considerations at present occurring to my
thoughts, by which it may be made probable, that Air may be generated anew. And
though it be not impossible to propose Objections against these, as well as
against what has been represented in favor of the contrary Doctrine; yet
having already almost tired my self, and I fear more than almost tired Your
Lordship with so troublesome an Enquiry after the nature of Bubbles, I shall
willingly leave Your Lordship to judge of the Arguments alleged on either
side, and I should scarce have ventured to entertain You so long concerning
such empty things as the Bubbles, which have occasioned all this Discourse, but
that I am willing to invite You to take notice with me of the obscurity of
things, or the dimness of our created Intellects (which yet of late too many so
far presume upon, as either to deny or censure the Almighty and Omniscient
Creator himself) and to learn hence this Lesson, That there are very many
Things in Nature that we disdainfully overlook as obvious or despicable, each
of which would exercise our Understandings, if not pose them too, if we would
but attentively enough consider it, and not superficially contemplate, but
attempt satisfactorily to explicate the nature of it.

EXPERIMENT XXIII.
SInce the writing of the twenty first and twenty second Experiments (and
notwithstanding all that has been on their occasion delivered concerning
Bubbles) we made some farther trials in prosecution of the same inquiry whereto
they were designed.

We chose then, amongst those Glasses which Chemists are wont to call
Philosophical Eggs, one that containing about nine Ounces of Water, had a Neck
of half an Inch in Diameter at the top, and as we guest, almost an Inch at the
bottom; which breadth we pitched upon for a reason that will by and by appear:
then filling it up with common Water to the height of about a Foot and an half,
so that the upper part remained empty, we shut it into the Receiver, and
watched what would follow upon pumping, which proved that a great part of the
Air being drawn out, the Bubbles began to discover themselves at the bottom and
sides of the Glass; and increasing, as the Air was more and more drawn away,
they did from time to time ascend copiously enough to the top of the Water, and
there quickly break: but by reason that the wideness of the Glass allowed them
free passage through the Water, they did not appear as in the former
Experiments to make it swell: The Water scarce ever rising at all above the
mark affixt to its upper surface, when it was put in, and upon the return
permitted to the outward Air, and consequently the shrinking in of the
remaining bubbles, the Water seemed to have lost of his first extent, by the
avolation of the formerly interspersed Air.

Being willing likewise to try whether distilled Water were, by having been
divided into minute parts, and then reunited, more or less disposed to expand
it self than Water not distilled: We took out of our Laboratory some carefully
distilled Rainwater, and put about two Ounces of it into a round Glass-bubble,
with a very small Neck (not exceeding the sixth part of an Inch in diameter)
which we filled half way to the top, and then conveyed it into the Receiver;
the issue was, that though we drew out more Air than ordinary, yet there
appeared not the least intumescence of the Water, nor any ascending bubbles.

But suspecting that either the small quantity of the Water or the figure of
the Vessel might have an interest in this odd Phenomenon, we took the lately
mentioned Philosophical Egg, and another not much differing from it; the former
we filled up with distilled Rainwater to the old mark, and into the latter we
put a long Cylinder or Rod of solid Glass to straiten the cavity of the Neck by
almost filling it up; and then pouring some distilled Water into that also,
till it reached within some Fingers breadth of the top, the Eggs were let down
into the Receiver. In this Experiment the Air was so far drawn forth, before
there appeared any bubble in either of the Glasses, that the disparity betwixt
this and common Water was manifest enough. But at length, when the Air was
almost quite pumped out, the bubbles began to disclose themselves, and to
increase as the pressure of the Air in the Receiver decreased. But whereas in
the first mentioned Philosophical Egg the bubbles were very small, and never
able to swell the Water, that we took notice of, at all above the mark: In the
other, whose Neck, as we lately said, was straightened, and their passage
obstructed, great numbers of them, and bigger, fastened themselves to the lower
end of the Glass-rammer (if we may so call it) and gathered in such numbers
between that and the sides of the Neek, that the Water swelled about a Finger's
breadth above the mark, though upon the admitting of the external Air it
relapsed to the former mark, or rather fell somewhat below it. And although
thereupon in the first named Vessel all the bubbles presently disappeared, yet
in the other we observed, that diverse remained fastened to the lower part of the
Glass-rammer, and continued there somewhat to our wonder, for above an hour
after, but contracted in their dimentions.

Moreover, having suffered the Glasses to remain above twenty four hours in the
Receiver, we asterwards repeated the Experiment, to try what change the
exsuction of the external Air would produce in the Water, after the internal
and latitant Air had (as is above recited) in great measure got away in
bubbles, and whether or no the Water would by standing re admit any new
particles of Air in the room of those that had forsaken it. But though we
exhausted the Receiver very diligently, yet we scarce saw a bubble in either of
the Glasses, not with standing which, we perceived the Water to rise about the
breadth of a Barly-corn, or more, in the Neck of that Glass wherein the solid
Cylinder had been put; the Liquor in the other Glass not sensibly swelling.

And lastly upon the letting in of the Air, the Water in the straightened Neck
soon subsided to the mark above which it had swollen, which whether it ought to
be ascribed to the same small expansion of the parts of the Water it self, or
to the rarifaction of some yet latitant Air broken into such small particles,
as to escape our observation, seems not easily determinable, without such
farther trials, as would perhaps prove tedious to be recited as well as to be
made; though I was content to set down those already mentioned, that it might
appear how requisite it is in nice Experiments to consider variety of
Circumstances.

EXPERIMENT XXIV.
AFter having thus discovered what operation the exsuction of the ambient Air
had upon Water, we thought good to try also what changes would happen in other
Liquors upon the like taking off the pressure of the external Air. We took then
a glass Egg, somewhat bigger than a Turkey Egg, which had a long Neck or Stem
of about a part of an Inch in diameter; and filling it up with Sallet-oyl
until it reached above half way to the top of the Neck, we enclosed it in the
Receiver together with common Water in a resembling Vessel; that we might the
better compare together the operation of the exsuction of the Air upon those
two Liquors. The Pump being set on work, there began to appear bubbles in the
Oil much sooner than in the Water, and afterward they also ascended much more
copiously in the former Liquor than in the latter: Nay, and when by having
quite tired the Pumper, and almost our own Patience, we gave over, the Bubbles
rose almost (if not altogether) in as great numbers as ever, insomuch that none
of the various Liquors we tried either before or since, seemed to abound more
with Aerial Particles than did this Oil. In which it was farther remarkable,
that between the time it was set into the Receiver, and that, at which we could
get ready to pump, it subsided notably (by ghess about half an Inch) below the
mark it reached before it was put in.

After this expressed Oil, we made trial of a distilled one, and for that
purpose made choice of the common Oil or Spirit (for in the Shops where it is
sold, the same Liquor is promiscuously called by either name) of Turpentine,
because 'twas only of that Chemical Oil, we had a sufficient quantity: which,
being put into a small glass Bubble with a slender Neck, so as to fill it about
two Inches from the top, did, upon the evacuating of the Receiver, present us
with great store of bubbles, most of which rising from the bottom, expanded
themselves exceedingly in their ascent, and made the Liquor in the Neck to
swell so much by degrees, that at length it diverse times ran over at the top:
by which means, we were hindered from being able to discern upon the letting in
of the Air, how much the subsidence of the Oil below the first mark was due to
the recess of the Bubbles.

Having likewise a mind to try whether, as strong a solution of Salt of Tartar
in fair Water as could be made (we having then no Oil of Tartar per deliquium
at hand) though it be accounted, Quicksilver excepted, the heaviest of
Liquors, would afford us any bubbles; we put in a glass Egg full of it at the
same time, with other Liquors, and found that they did long yield store of
bubbles before any discovered themselves in the Liquor of Tartar; and having
pursued the Experiment, it appeared, That of all the Liquors we made trial of,
this afforded the fewest and smallest bubbles.

Spirit of Vinegar being tried after the same manner, exhibited a moderate
number of bubbles, but scarce any thing else worth the mentioning.

Nor could we in Red Wine, tried in a glass Egg, take notice of any thing very
observable. For though upon the exsuction of the Air the bubbles ascended in
this Liquor, as it were in sholes, and shifted places among themselves in their
ascent; yet the intumescence of the whole bulk of the Liquor was scarce at all
sensible, the bubbles most commonly breaking very soon after their arrival at
the top, where during their stay, they composed a kind of shallow froth, which
alone appeared higher in the Neck of the Glass, than was the Wine when it was
let down. Neither yet did Milk, conveyed into our Pneumatical Vessel, present
us with any thing memorable save that (as it seemed by reason of some
unctuousness of the Liquor) the bubbles not easily breaking at the top, and
thrusting up one another, made the Intumescence appear much greater than that
of common Water.

We likewise conveyed Hens Eggs into the Receiver, but after the exsuction of
the Air, took them out whole again. That which invited us to put them in, was,
That (as perhaps we mention in other papers) we had among other Experiments of
cold, made Eggs burst, by freezing them within doors with Snow and Salt: The
Ice, into which the aqueous parts of the Egg were turned by the cold, so
distending (probably by reason of the numerous bubbles wont to be observable in
Ice) the outward parts of the Egg, that it usually cracked the Shell, though
the inner Membrane that involved the several Liquors of the Egg, because it
would stretch and yield, remained unbroken. And hereupon we imagined that in
our Engine it might appear, whether or no there were any considerable Spring,
either in any of the Liquors, or in any other more spirituous substance
included in the Egg.

We took also some Spirit of Urine, carelessly enough deflegmed, and put it into
the same Glass (first carefully scoured and cleansed) wherein we had put the
Oil olive abovementioned We took also another Glass, differing from a Glass
egg, only in that its bottom was flat, and filled it up to about of the Neck
(which was wider than that of the Egg) with rectified Spirit of Wine.

We took also another Glass egg, and having filled it with common Water till it
reached to the middle of the Neck, we poured to it of the same Spirit of Wine,
till it reached about an Inch higher.

These three Glasses having marks set on them, over against the edges of the
contained Liquors were put into the Receiver, and that beginning to be
evacuated, the bubbles in all the three Liquors began to appear. The mixture of
the Spirit of Wine and Water disclosed a great store of bubbles, especially
toward the top; but scarce afforded us any thing worth the remembering. The
Spirit of Urine appeared to swell near an Inch and an half above the mark; and
besides that, sent forth store of bubbles, which made a kind of froth at the
upper part of it. And above that spume, there appeared eight or ten great
bubbles one above another, in a very decent order, each of them constituting,
as it were, a Cylinder of about half an Inch high, and as broad as the internal
cavity of the Neck: So that all the upper part of the Neck (for these bubbles
reached to the top) seemed to be divided into almost equal parts by certain
Diaphragmes, consisting of the coats of the bubbles, whose edges appeared like
so many Rings suspended one above another.

In the Spirit of Wine there did arise a great multitude of bubbles, even till
weariness did make us give over the Experiment. And in these bubbles two or
three things were remarkable; as first, That they ascended with a very notable
celerity: Next, That being arrived at the top, they made no stay there: and
yet, notwithstanding the great thinness and spirituousness of the Liquor, did,
before they broke, lift up the upper surface of it, and for a moment or two
form thereof a thin film or skin which appeared protuberant above the rest of
the superficies like a small Hemisphere. Thirdly, That they ascended straight
up, whereas those produced at the lower part of the Vessel, containing the
mixture of the Water and Spirit of Wine, ascended with a wavering or wrigling
motion, whereby they described an indented Line. Lastly, it was observable in
the Spirit of Wine (and we took notice of the like in the Oil of Turpentine
lately mentioned) that not only the bubbles seemed to rise from certain
determinate places at the bottom of the Glass, but that in their ascension they
kept an almost equal distance from each other, and followed one another in a
certain order, whereby they seemed part of small Bracelets, consisting of
equally little incontiguous Beads: the lower end of each Bracelet, being as it
were, fastened to a certain point at the bottom of the Glass.

The Air being sparingly let into the Receiver, the great bubbles formerly
mentioned as incumbent upon one another, in that Glass that contained the
Spirit of Urine, were by orderly degrees lessened, till at length they wholly
subsided. Notwithstanding the recess of so many bubbles as broke on the top of
the Spirit of Urine, during all the time of the Experiment; yet it scarcely
appeared at all to be sunk below the mark: Nor did the mixture of Spirit of
Wine and Water considerably subside. But that is nothing to what we observed in
the Spirit of Wine, for not only it conspicuously expanded it self in the Neck
of the Vessel that contained it; notwithstanding the largeness of it, and that
the Bubbles were wont to break at the top of it almost as soon as they arrived
there: But upon the readmission of the external Air, the Spirit of Wine
retained its newly acquired expansion. And though we let it alone for near an
hour together, in expectation that it might subside; yet when we took it out,
we found it still swelled between a quarter and half an Inch above the mark;
and although it was not easily imaginable how this Phenomenon could proceed
from any mistake in trying the Experiment, yet the strangeness of it invited me
to repeat it with fresh Spirit of Wine. Which, swelling in the Neck as
formerly, I left all night in the Receiver, allowing free access to the
external Air at the Stop-cock, and the next day found it still expanded as
before, save that it seemed a little lower: which decrement perhaps proceeded
from the avolation of some of the fugitive parts of so voiatile a Liquor. And
for better satisfaction having taken out the Glass, and considered it in the
open Air, and at a Window, I could not find that there was any remaining
bubbles that could occasion the persevering and admired expansion.

EXPERIMENT XXV.
BEing desirous to discover what difference there might be as to gravity and
levity, between Air expanded under Water, and it self before such expansion; we
took two very small Viols, such as Chemical Essences (as they call them) are
wont to be kept in, and of the size and shape expressed by the eighth Figure:
into one of these we put so much of a certain ponderous Mercurial mixture
(happening to be then at hand) that the mouth being stopped with a little soft Wax,
the Glass would just sink in Water and no more; this we let fall to the bottom
of a widemouth'd Crystal Jar, filled with about half a pint of common Water,
and into the same Vessel we sunk the other Essenceglass unstop'd, with as much
water in it as was more than sufficient to make it subside. Both these sunk
with their mouths downwards, the former being about three quarters full of Air,
the latter containing in it a bubble of Air that was guessed to be of the
bigness of half a Pea: This done, the wide mouthed Glass was let down into the
Receiver, and the way of employing the Engine was carefully made use of.

The success was, That having drawn out a pretty quantity of Air, the bubbles
began to disclose themselves in the Water, as in the former Experiments; and
though for a good while after the bubbles ascended in swarms from the lower
parts of the Water, and hastily broke at the top; yet we prosecuted the
Experiment so long without seeing any effect wrought upon the Essence-bottles,
that we began to despair of seeing of them rise. But continuing to ply the
Pump, that little Glass, whose mouth was opened, came to the top of the Water,
being, as it were, boy'd up thither by a great number of bubbles that had
fastened themselves to the sides of it; swimming thus with the mouth downward,
we could easily perceive that the internal Air abovementioned had much dilated
it self, and thereby seemed to have contributed to the emerging of the Glass,
which remained floating, notwithstanding the breaking and vanishing of most of
the contiguous bubbles: being hereby encouraged to persist in pumping, we
observed with some pleasure, that at each time we turned the Key, the Air in
the little Glass did manifestly expand it self and thrust out the Water,
generally retaining a very protuberant surface where it was contiguous to the
remaining Water. And when after diverse exsuctions of the Air in the Receiver,
that in the Viol so dilated it self as to expel almost all the Water, it turned
up its mouth toward the surface of the Water in the Jar, and there delivered a
large bubble, and then relapsed into its former floating posture. And this
Experiment taught us, among other things, that it was a work of more time and
labor than we imagined, to exhaust our Engine as much as it may be exhausted:
for although before the emerging of the small Viol, we did (as has been
touched already) think we had very considerably emptied the Receiver, because
there seemed to come out but very little or almost no sensible Air at each
exsuction into, and out of the Cylinder; yet afterward, at each drawing down
the Sucker, the Air included in the Viol did manifestly dilate it self, so
long, that it did no less than nine times turn its mouth upwards, and discharge
a bubble by conjecture about the bigness of a Pea, after the manner newly
recited. But as for that Viol which had the weight in it, it rose not at all.
So that being not able by quick pumping to gain another bubble from the Air in
the swimming Glass, which proceeded from some small leak in the Vessel, though
it held in this Experiment more stanch than was usual, we thought fit to let in
leasurely the Air from without, upon whose admission that within the Viol
shrinking into a very narrow compass, the Glass did, as we expected, fall down
to the bottom of the Jar.

But being desirous before we proceed to any new Experiment, to try once more
whether the little Glass, that had the weight in it, might not also be raised:
After we had suffered the Engine to remain closed as it was, for five or six
hours, the Pump was again plied with so much obstinacy, that not only about
the upper part of the Jar there appeared a good number of bubbles (but very
much smaller than those we saw the first time) but afterward, there came from
the bottom of the Jar, bubbles about the bigness of small Peace: which the Pump
being still kept going, followed one another to the number of forty, coming
from the stopped Viol; whose mouth, it seems, had not been shut so strongly and
closely, but that the included Air, dilating it self by its own spring, made it
self some little passage betwixt the Wax and the Glass, and got away in these
bubbles; after which, the unstopt Glass began to float again, the Air shut up
in it being manifestly so dilated as to expel a good part of the Water, but not
so much as to break quite thorough. And at length, when our expectation of it
was almost tired out, the heavier of the two Viols began to come alost, and
immediately to subside again; which appeared to be occasioned by the Air within
it, whose bulk and spring being weakened by the recess of the forty bubbles
beforementioned, it was no longer able, as formerly, to break forcibly through
the incumbent Water; but forming a bubble at the mouth of the Glass, boyed it
up toward the top; and there getting away, left it to sink again till the
pressure of the Air in the Receiver being farther taken off, the Air in the
Viol was permitted to expand it self farther, and to create another bubble, by
which it was again for a while carried up. And it was remarkable, that though
after having emptied the Receiver as far as well we could, we ceased from
pumping; yet the Vessel continuing more stanch than it was wont, this ascent
and fall of the Viol was repeated to the ninth time; the included Air, by
reason of the smallness of the vent at which it must pass out, being not able
to get away otherwise than by little and little; and consequently, in diverse
such parcels as were able to constitute bubbles, each of them big enough to
raise the Viol and keep it alost until the avolation of that bubble. Whereby
it may appear, that the grand rule in Hydrostaticks, That a Body will swim in
the Water, in case it be lighter than as much of the Water as equals it in
bulk, will hold likewise when the pressure of the Atmosphere is in very great
measure, if not when it is totally taken off from the Liquor and the Body:
though it were worth inquiring what it is that so plentifully concurs to fill
the bubbles made in our Experiment by the so much expanded Air. For to say with
the old Peripatetick Schools, That the Air in rarefaction, may acquire a new
extent, without the admission of any new substance, would be an account of the
Phenomenon very much out of date, and which, I suppose, our Modern Naturalists
would neither give nor acquiesce in.

I know not whether it may be requisite to add, that in this Experiment, as in
the former, the outward Air, being let in, did soon precipitate the floating
Viol. But I think it will not be amiss to note, that (congruously to what has
been above recorded of the vast expansion of the Air) the Water which in the
heavier Viol, succeeded in the room of those forty odd, if not fifty great
bubbles of Air, which at several times got out of it, amounted but to a very
inconsiderable bigness.

EXPERIMENT XXVI.
IT having been observed by those that have considered what belongs to
Pendulums (a Speculation that may, in my poor judgment, be highly useful to
the Naturalists) that their Vibrations are more slowly made, and that their
motion lasts less in a thicker, than in a thinner Medium: We thought it not
amiss to try if a Pendulum would swing faster, or continue swinging longer in
our Receiver, in case of exsuction of the Air, than otherwise. Wherefore we
took a couple of round and polished Pendulums of Iron or Steel, of equal
bigness, as near as we could get the Artificer to make them, and weighing each
of them twenty Drachmes, wanting as many Grains. One of these we suspended in
the cavity of the Receiver by a very slender silken string, of about seven
Inches and a half in length from the Cover of the Receiver to which it is
fastened. Then (by inclining the Engine) we made the Pendulum swing to and fro
in it, and describe as long Arches as in the capacity of so brittle a Vessel we
thought safe and convenient. And one of the Assistants telling the recursions
of the other Pendulum hanging in the free Air, by a string of about the same
length, we shortened and lengthned this other Pendulum, till it appeared to keep
the same pace in its Vibrations, with that shut up in the Receiver. Then having
carefully drawn away the Air, we did again set the Pendulum in the Receiver a
vibrating; and giving the other Pendulum such a motion as made it describe an
Arch, according to ones ghess, equal to that of the included Pendulum; we
reckoned, one of us, the Recursions of that Pendulum which was swinging within
the Receiver; and another of us, that which was moving in (that which one would
think a much more resisting medium) the Air. But once, one of us reckoned near
two and twenty Recursions of the included Pendulum, whilst the other reckoned
but twenty of the Pendulum that vibrated without. And another time also, the
former of these Pendula was reckoned to have made one and twenty Recursions,
wherein the other made but twenty; Yet this Experiment seemed to teach us
little, save that the difference betwixt the motion of such a Pendulum in the
common Air, and in one exceedingly rarefied, is scarce sensible in Vessels no
bigger than our Receiver; especially, since though during this Experiment it
held very well, yet we could not suppose it to be altogether devoid of Air. We
observed also, that when the Receiver was full of Air, the included Pendulum
continued its Recursions about fifteen minutes (or a quarter of an hour) before
it left off swinging; and that after the exsuction of the Air, the vibration of
the same Pendulum (being fresh put into motion) appeared not (by a minutes
Watch) to last sensibly longer. So that the event of this Experiment being
other than we expected, scarce afforded us any other satisfaction, than that of
our not having omitted to try it. And whether, in case the trial be made with a
Pendulum much less disproportionate to the Air than Steel is, the event will
much better answer expectation, experience may be consulted.

EXPERIMENT XXVII.
THAT the Air is the medium whereby sounds are conveyed to the Ear, has been
for many Ages, and is yet the common Doctrine of the Schools. But this Received
Opinion has been of late opposed by some Philosophers upon the account of an
Experiment made by the Industrious Kircher, and other Learned Men: who have (as
they assure us) observed, That if a Bell, with a Steel Clapper, be so fastened
to the inside of a Tube, that upon the making the Experiment De Vacuo with that
Tube, the Bell remained suspended in the deferted space at the upper end of the
Tube: And if also a vigorous Lodestone be applied on the outside of the Tube
to the Bell, it will attract the Clapper, which upon the removal of the
Lodestone falling back, will strike against the opposite side of the Bell, and
thereby produce a very audible sound; Whence diverse have concluded, That it is
not the Air, but some more subtle Body that is the medium of sounds. But
because we conceived that, to invalidate such a consequence fro m this
ingenious Experiment (though the most luciferous, that could well be made
without some such Engine as ours) some things might be speciously enough
alleged; we thought fit to make a trial or two, in order to the discovery of
what the Air does in conveying of sounds, reserving diverse other Experiments
triable in our Engine concerning sounds, till we can obtain more leisure to
prosecute them. Conceiving it then the best way to make our trial with such a
noise as might not be loud enough to make it difficult to discern slighter
variations in it; but rather might be, both lasting, (that we might take notice
by what degrees it decreased;) and so small, that it could not grow much weaker
without becoming imperceptible. We took a Watch, whose Case we opened, that the
contained Air might have free egress into that of the Receiver. And this Watch
was suspended in the cavity of the Vessel only by a Pack-thread, as the
unlikeliest thing to convey a sound to the top of the Receiver: And then
closing up the Vessel with melted Plaster, we listened near the sides of it,
and plainly enough heard the noise made by the balance. Those also of us, that
watched for that Circumstance, observed, that the noise seemed to come directly
in a straight Line, from the Watch unto the Ear. And it was observable to this
purpose, that we found a manifest disparity of noice, by holding our Ears near
the sides of the Receiver, and near the Cover of it: which difference seemed to
proceed from that of the Texture of the Glass, from the structure of the Cover
(and the Cement) through which the sound was propagated from the Watch to the
Ear. But let us prosecute our Experiment. The Pump after this being employed,
it seemed that from time to time the sound grew fainter and fainter; so that
when the Receiver was emptied as much as it used to be for the foregoing
Experiments, neither we, nor some Strangers that chanced to be then in the
Room, could, by applying our Ears to the very sides, hear any noise from
within; though we could easily perceive that by the moving of the hand which
marked the second minutes, and by that of the balance, that the Watch neither
stood still, nor remarkably varied from its wonted motion. And to satisfy our
selves farther that it was indeed the absence of the Air about the Watch that
hindered us from hearing it, we let in the external Air at the Stop-cock, and
then, though we turned the Key and stopped the Valve, yet we could plainly hear
the noise made by the balance, though we held our Ears sometimes at two Foot
distance from the outside of the Receiver. And this Experiment being reiterated
into another place, succeeded after the like manner. Which seems to prove, that
whether or no the Air be the only, it is at least, the principal medium of
Sounds. And by the way it is very well worth noting, that in a Vessel so well
closed as our Receiver, so weak a pulse as that of the balance of a Watch
should propagate a motion to the Ear in a Physically straight Line,
notwithstanding the interposition of so close a Body as Glass, especially Glass
of such thickness as that of our Receiver: since by this it seems that the Air
imprisoned in the Glass, must, by the motion of the balance, be made to beat
against the concave part of the Receiver, strongly enough to make its unequal
part beat upon the contiguous Air, and so propagate the motion to the Listners
Ears. I know this cannot but seem strange to those, who, with an eminent Modern
Philosopher, will not allow that a Sound, made in the cavity of a Room, or
other place so closed, that there is no intercourse betwixt the external and
internal Air, can be heard by those without, unless the sounding Body do
immediately strike against some part of the enclosing Body. But not having now
time to handle Controversies, we shall only annex, That after the foregoing
Experiment, we took a Bell of about two Inches in Diameter at the bottom, which
was supported in the midst of the cavity of the Receiver by a bent stick,
which by reason of its Spring pressed with its two ends against the opposite
parts of the inside of the Vessel: in which, when it was closed up, we observed
that the Bell seemed to sound more dead than it did when just before it sounded
in the open Air. And yet, when afterward we had (as formerly) emptyed the
Receiver, we could not discern any considerable change (for some said they
observed a small one) in the loudness of the sound. Whereby it seemed that
though the Air be the principal medium of sound, yet either a more subtle
matter may be also a medium of it, or else an ambient Body that contains but
very few particles of Air, in comparison of those it is easily capable of, is
sufficient for that purpose. And this, among other things, invited us to
consider, whether in the abovementioned Experiment made with the Bell and the
Lodestone, there might not in the deserted part of the Tube remain Air enough
to produce a sound: since the Tubes for the Experiment De Vacuo (not to mention
the usual thinness of the Glass) being seldom made greater than is requisite, a
little Air might bear a not inconsiderable proportion to the deserted space:
And that also, in the Experiment De Vacuo, as it is wont to be made, there is
generally some little Air that gets in from without; or at least store of
bubbles that arise from the Body of the Quicksilver, or other Liquor it self,
Observations heedfully made have frequently informed us: And it may also
appear, by what has been formerly delivered concerning the Torricellian
Experiment.

On the occasion of this Experiment concerning sounds, we may add in this
place, That when we tried the Experiment formerly mentioned, of firing
Gunpowder with a Pistol in our evacuated Receiver, the noise made by the
striking of the Flint against the Steel, was exceeding languid in comparison of
what it would have been in the open Air. And on diverse other occasions it
appeared that the sounds created within our exhausted Glass, if they were not
lost before they reached the Ear, seemed at least to arrive there very much
weakened. We intended to try whether or no the Wire-string of an Instrument
shut up into our Receiver, would, when the ambient Air was sucked out, at all
tremble, if in another Instrument held close to it, but with out the Receiver,
a string tuned (as Musicians speak, how properly I now examine not) to an
Unison with it, were briskly touched, and set a Vibrating. This, I say, we
purposed to try to see how the motion made in the Air without, would be
propagated through the cavity of our evacuated Receiver. But when the
Instrument wherewith the trial was to be made came to be employed, it proved
too big to go into the Pneumatical Vessel: and we have not now the convenience
to have a fitter made.

We thought likewise to convey into the Receiver a long and slender pair of
Bellows, made after the fashion of those usually employed to blow Organs, and
furnished with a small Musical instead of an ordinary Pipe. For we hoped, that
by means of a string fastened to the upper part of the Bellows, and to the
moveable stopple that makes a part of the Cover of our Receiver, we should, by
frequently turning round that stopple, and the annexed string, after the manner
already often recited, be able to lift up and distend the Bellows; and by the
help of a competent weight fastened to the same upper part of the Bellows, we
should likewise be able, at pleasure, to compress them: and by consequence, try
whether that subtler matter than Air (which, according to those that deny a
Vacuum, must be supposed to fill the exhausted Receiver) would be able to
produce a sound in the Musical Pipe; or in a Pipe like that of ordinary
Bellows, to beget a Wind capable to turn or set on moving some very light
matter, either shaped like the Sails of a Windmill, or of some other
convenient form, and exposed to its Orifice. This Experiment, I say, we thought
to make, but have not yet actually made it for want of an Artificer to make us
such a pair of Bellows as it requires.

We had thoughts also of trying whether or no, as Sounds made by the Bodies in
our Receiver become much more languid than ordinary, by reason of the want of
Air: so they would grow stronger, in case there were an unusual quantity of Air
crowded and shut up in the same Vessel. Which may be done (though not without
some difficulty) by the help of the Pump, provided the Cover and Stopple be so
firmly fastened (by binding and Cement, or otherwise) to the Glass and to each
other, that there be no danger of the condensed Airs blowing of either of them
away, or its breaking through the junctures. These thoughts, My Lord, as I was
saying, we entertained; but for want of leisure, as, of as good Receivers as
ours, to substitute in its place, in case we should break it before we learned
the skill of condensing the Air in it, we durst not put them in practice: Yet,
on this occasion, give me leave to advertise Your Lordship once for all, That
though for the reasons newly intimated, we have, Only in the seventeenth
Experiment, taken notice, that by the help of our Engine the Air may be
condensed as well as rarefied; yet there are diverse other of our Experiments,
whose Phenomenon it were worth while to try to vary, by means of the
compression of the Air.

EXPERIMENT XXVIII.
WE taught, among diverse other things, when we discoursed of our first
Experiment, That the Air shut up in our Receiver, presses as strongly upon the
Bodies shut up with it, as if they were exposed to the pressure of the whole
Atmosphere. That this was not inconsiderately propounded, we hope Your Lordship
has gathered from diverse of the things already recited: But yet perhaps it
will not be amiss to subjoin, by way of farther confirmation of the same truth,
the following Experiment: which would have accompanied the 20th, but the Paper
wherein the one was written chanced not to be at hand, when the other was sent
away.

We conveyed into the Receiver a new Glass Viol, capable of holding about 6 or
7 ounces of Water, into which we had before put 2 or 3 Spoonfulls of that
Liquor, and stopped it close with a fit Cork. The Pneumatical Vessel being
emptyed, there appeared not any change in the enclosed Water, the Air
imprisoned with it, not having the force to blow out the stopple. Which event,
though it were no other than we expected, was differing from what we desired.
For we would gladly have seen what change would have appeared in the Water upon
the Bottles being suddenly unstopp'd, in a place where the ambient Body was so
differing from our common Air. Wherefore we did again put in the Viol, but less
strongly closed than formerly, though as strongly stopped as seemed requisite on
ordinary occasions: But when the Air was pumped out of the Receiver, that
within the Viol did quickly, as we expected, find or make it self little
passages to get out at: as we argued, from this, That whereas when the Viol was
put in the time before, the Water remained all the while perfectly free from
bubbles; at this time the bottom of the Glass appeared all covered with them,
and they, upon the egress of the excluded Air into the Receiver, did presently
flag and shrink up.

From these trials it seemed deducible enough, that whilst the Viol continued
to be well stopped, the included Water did, from the Air, shut up with it,
sustain a pressure equal to that of the Atmosphere; since till the Air could
get out of the Glass, there appeared no bubbles in the Water, notwithstanding
the want of pressure in the ambient Body.

But to be sure to reach the chief end of our Experiment, we made use of this
other expedient: We caused a convenient quantity of Water to be put, and
Hermetically shut up into a Glass Egg, whose long Neck (which was purposely
made of an unequal thickness) was fastened to one end of a string, whose other
end was tied to the Cover of our Receiver, after the manner elsewhere mentioned
already: Then the Egg being conveyed into the Pneumatical Vessel, and that
being evacuated, we did, by turning the brass Stopple formerly described
amongst the parts of our Engine, so shorten the string as to break the Glass;
whereby liberty being given to the Air imprisoned in the Egg, to pass into the
cavity of the Receiver, the sudden recess of the Air made the bubbles in a
trice appear so numerous, and ascend so swiftly in the Water, that their motion
looked like that of a violent shower of Rain; save that the bubbles did not,
like the drops of Rain, tend downwards, but upwards. Which made me resemble
this Phenomenon to what I have seen happen in the dissolution of Seed-Pearl in
some acid Menstruum, inwhich, if a good quantity of the little Pearls be cast
whole, they will at first, if the Menstruum be sharp enough, be carried in
swarms from the bottom to the top of the Liquor. We will add, that without
sealing up the Glass, this Experiment may be tried in one of our smallest
Receivers. For there the exsuction of the ambient Air may be performed so
nimbly, that immediately the bubbles lurking in the Water are allowed to
display themselves, and ascend in throngs; insomuch, as having in such a
Receiver tried the Experiment with Wine as a more spirituous Liquor) instead of
Water, the Red-Wine appeared all covered, with a copious, but vanishing white
Froth, almost as if a Vessel full of bottl'd drink had been unwarily opened.

EXPERIMENT XXIX.
IT may not a little conduce to the clearer explication of diverse Points in the
Doctrine of Meteors, and perhaps of some other Physiological difficulties, to
discover what the Air does to the motion of those Steams or Exhalations that
ascend into it, namely, Whether they mount upwards by virtue of any such
positive levity (as some Peripateticks speak) acquired together with their
Aerial nature, as inables them to pierce through part of the Atmosphere, and
overcome its resistance. Or else, whether these steams being once raised above
the Earth by their agitation, have their ascent and sustentation aloft, rather
promoted than hindered by the Air: as the inferior parts of that, being thicker
and heavier than the superior, the steams can more easily continue for a while
their agitation upwards than downwards; And afterward are by the same fluidity
and thickness of the Air, carried to and fro in it, and kept from relapsing to
the Earth: as in the Seawater the saline parts are kept from subsiding by
those aqueous ones wherewith they are associated.

We hoped to illustrate this matter, by observing the motion of the smoke,
proceeding from kindled or flaming Bodies in our exhausted Receiver. But as we
formerly noted, upon the exsuction of the Air, the smoking of those Bodies
presently ceased. We had thoughts also of conveying into our Pneumatical Glass
a hot Iron, with some Body easy to be dissipated into smoke set upon it, but
considered, that neither was that way free from inconveniences; especially
this, that the hot Body would make the Imprisoned Air circulate within the
Receiver, and consequently make it questionable whether the ascent of the
steams would not be due to the new and acquired motion of the Air.

Wherefore I bethought my self of another way to satisfy in some measure my
curiosity, to wit, by means of a certain Liquor, which I called to mind that
some years ago I had (for a design that belongs not to our present purpose)
prepared; which, I suppose, I showed Your Lordship, and which had the luck to
be taken notice of by diverse very Ingenious and Famous Men. For this Liquor,
though most of its Ingredients be Metals, and all of them ponderous enough, is
yet of that nature, that whilst the Viol wherein it is kept is stopped (how
slight a Cover soever) both the Liquor and the Glass are transparent; and so is
that upper half of the Glass to which the Liquor reaches not: But as soon as
ever the stopple is taken out, and full access is given to the external Air,
both the inward part of the Cork, and the Liquor it self, do presently send
upwards, and scatter abroad asume as thick and white, as if there were a
quantity of Alabaster-dust thrown up into the Air: And this smoking of the
Liquor lasts till my unwillingness to waste it invites me to stop it again, and
then the ascension of the fumes suddenly cease, till the Viol be again
unstop'd.

This fuming Liquor then I thought would much conduce to the discovery I
desired to make, since it saved me the need of conveying any hot Body with it
into the Receiver, and would not darken it with fumes before the time.
Wherefore having tied to the Viol a great weight of Lead, to keep it from being
lifted up by the drawing out of the Cork; and having tied to the stopple one
end of a string, of which the other end was made fast to the Cover of the
Pneumatical Glass, the Liquor was carefully closed up after the wonted manner;
then the Air being diligently pumped out, the Viol was unstop'd in the emptied
Receiver. And though immediately, upon the drawing out of the Cork, there
appeared to be as it were thrown up some white fumes, which seemed to proceed
from the Air before imprisoned in the Viol, and diffusing it self suddenly into
the capacity of the Receiver: Yet we afterward observed, as we expected, That
the fumes did not amount and disperse themselves as they used to do in the open
Air; but that, when by reason of the agitation of the Corpuscles of the Liquor,
which could not continue their motion in so narrow a space as the Viol afforded
them, and were therefore reduced to thrust one another out of it; when, I say,
by these assistances the fumes were ascended to the lip of the Viol, they
mounted no higher, but ran down along the outside of the Viol to the bottom of
it; and thence along, a long and inclining piece of Lead, on which the Viol
rested, like a little Stream (not very much bigger than a Swans Quill) whose
nature they seemed to emulate so well, that it quitted not the Viol till it was
come to the bottom of it, and then forsook it in such a manner'a as stream of
Water of the same bigness would have done. And this stream lasted a pretty
while, and would probably have lasted longer, but that being loath to waste my
Liquor, I let in at the Stop-cock a pretty deal of the external Air;
notwithstanding which, finding after a while that the stream did run afresh,
though, as it seemed not altogether so copious as before; I let as much more
Air, as would come in: and found (somewhat to my wonder) that though the stream
formerly mentioned dis-appear'd, yet there appeared not any white fumes to
arise, either from the Cork, or out of the Viol it self, no not when the Cover
was removed from the Receiver; though not only after a while there ascended
white fumes from the Receiver: but having forthwith taken out the Viol into the
open Air, it emitted white exhalations as before; and having presently after
unstopp'd it in an open Window, we found both it and the Cork immediately to
send forth a yet much more plentiful smoke: Though it be now diverse years
since this Numerical Liquor was prepared, after the manner mentioned either by
Carneiades or Eleutherius (for I do not well remember which) in those Dialogues
concerning Heat and Flame that have above been mentioned.

More circumstances concerning these Fumes we might have observed, had we not
been deterred by an Indisposition in point of health, from having much to do
with steams of so dangerous a nature, as by that of the Ingredients of this
Liquor these seem likely to be of.

The reflections that may be made upon this Experiment, we have not now the
leisure to prosecute, and therefore shall content our selves to recommend the
several circumstances of it to Your Lordship's serious consideration; and to
take notice ( en passant) that steams in an ambient Body, or a medium thinner
than themselves, may both tend downwards, and otherwise emulate the nature of a
Liquor; which I therefore point at, that it may appear the less strange, if we
sometimes speak of the Atmosphere as of a kind of Liquor, in comparison of that
more thin and subtle Celestial matter that surrounds it.

And though it might perchance suffice to have on this occasion intimated thus
much; yet, lest this way of speaking of the Atmosphere should be thought too
bold and extravagant, I am content to borrow an Experiment of the discourse
formerly mentioned (touching fluidity and firmness) and subjoyn it here with
alterations suitable to the contrivance of our Engine; and this the rather,
because I hope it may conduce to the discovery of the nature of the Atmosphere:
for which reason it might have been annexed to what has been noted either upon
the first, or eighteenth Experiment, but that when they were written and sent
away, it came not into my mind. The Experiment then as we tried in our Engine,
was as follows.

EXPERIMENT XXX.
WE took one of the small Receivers, often mentioned already, and into it we
conveyed a piece of well lighted Match; and letting it remain there till it had
filled the Receiver with smoke, we took it out and hastily closed again the
Receiver, that the smoke might not get away. Then staying awhile to let these
fumes leisurely subside, we found, as we expected, that after some time they
settled themselves in the lower half of the Receiver; in a darkish Body, leaving
the upper half of the Receiver transparent, and as to sight, full of naught but
clear Air. Now to manifest that this smoke thus settled emulated a Liquor, we
inclined the Engine that contained it, sometimes to one side, and sometimes to
the other; and observed the smoke to keep its surface almost Horizontal,
notwithstanding the stooping of the Vessel that held it, as Water, or another
liquor would in the like case have done. And if by a quicker rocking of the
Engine the smoke were more swiftly shaken, it would, like Water, either vibrate
to and fro from one side to the other of the Glass, or else have its surface
manifestly curled with Waves, but preserve its self in an entire and distinct
Body from the incumbent Air; and being permitted to rest a while, would soon
recover its former smooth and level Superficies. If also the Key were turned
and the Valve unstopp'd, so that there was a free, though but a narrow passage
opened betwixt the external Air and the cavity of the Receiver, then would some
of this smoke fall down, as it were, in a stream into the subjacent Cylinder,
and a proportionate quantity of the outward Air, would manifestly ascend
through it into the incumbent Air, much after the same manner as if you invert
a Viol with a long neck, and well filled with Red-Wine, into a Glass full of
fair Water, you shall see the Water and Wine by degrees mingle with one
another; the one falling down as it were in little colored streams, and the
other ascending in its room in the like curled streams, sometimes preceded by
round parcels of Water, which, by reason of their transparency, look almost
like bubbles. The other circumstances of this Experiment, belonging not all of
them to our present purpose, we shall content our selves with taking notice of
one which seems the most important, and may illustrate and confirm some things
formerly delivered. And it was, That if, when the superficies of our smoke lay
smooth and Horizontal, a hot Iron were held near the outside of the Receiver,
the neighboring part of the included fumes (for the rest did not very much
alter their former superficies) being rarefied by the heat, would readily
ascend in a large Pillar of smoke to the very top of the Receiver, yet without
seeming to lose a distinct superficies, or to be confounded with Air; below
which, upon the recess of the adventitious heat that by agitating it impelled
it upward, it would again subside.

All which being added to the late Experiment of the smoking Liquor, and to
what may be from that which has been elsewhere said, gathered to the same
purpose, will, I hope, keep it at least from appearing absurd. If, since we
see that there is so great an inequality in the density and weight of Liquors,
that Water is near fourteen times thinner or lighter than Quicksilver of the
same bulk; and well dephlegm'd spirit of Wine, yet much lighter than Water, we
venture to speak sometimes of the Atmosphere, as if it were a peculiar kind of
thin and halitious Liquor (if I may so call it) much lighter than Spirit of
Wine.

To these things I know not whether it will be requisite to add, That as we
lately took notice of conspicuous Waves that appeared upon the superficies of
our agitated smoke: So some such thing may not absurdly be conjectured to
happen on the superficies of the Atmosphere, by those strange ruggednesses that
appear (especially in the Spring and Fall, when Exhalations and Vapors are
wont to ascend most plentifully) upon the limb or edge of the Rising and
Setting Sun. I speak thus disfidently upon this occasion, because I know, that
by the Fluctuation or Boiling of the Suns own superficies, diverse eminent
Mathematicians have plausibly enough (but how truly, I leave Your Lordship to
judge) endeavored to give an account of it. But if we will join with those
that have ascribed of late this Phenomenon, to the refraction the Sunbeams
suffer in our vapid air, we may, as has been intimated, promote their
Doctrine, by deducing from it, That probably the surface of the Atmosphere is
oftentimes (if not always) exceedingly curled or waved. And certainly it is
somewhat wonderful, as well as very pleasant to behold, how, to him that looks
upon the setting Sun through a long and excellent Telescope, there will not
only appear strange inequalities in the edge of it (insomuch that I have often
seen it more indented than a Saw) but those inequalities will vanish in one
place, and presently appear in another, and seem perfectly to move like Waves
succeeding and destroying one another, save that their motion oftentimes seems
to be quickest; as if in that vast Sea they were carried on by a Current, or at
least by a Tide. And this (as we elsewhere note) appears to the Eye, not only
when it looks directly through the Telescope upon the Sun; but also when a
large and well defined Image of the Sun is by the same Telescope brought into a
Room and cast upon a sheet of white Paper. But to insist on this were to
digress: and therefore I will proceed to Experiments of another kind.

EXPERIMENT XXXI.
IT has been admired by very ingenious Men, that if the exquisitely polished
surfaces of two flat pieces of Marble, be so congruous to each other, that from
their mutual application there will result an immediate contact, they will
stick so fast together, that he that lifts up the uppermost, shall, if the
undermost be not exceeding heavy, lift up that too, and sustain it alost in the
free Air. A probable cause of this so close adhesion, we have elsewhere
endeavored to deduce from the unequal pressure of the Air upon the undermost
stone; For the lower superficies of that stone being freely exposed to the Air,
is pressed upon by it, whereas the uppermost surface, being contiguous to the
superior stone, is thereby defended from the pressure of the Air; which
consequently pressing the lower stone against the upper, hinders it from
falling, as we have elsewhere more fully declared. Upon these grounds we
conjectured, that in case we could procure two Marbles exactly ground to one
another, and in case we could also sufficiently evacuate our Receiver; the
lower stone would, for want of the wonted and sustaining pressure of the Air,
fall from the upper. But the farther trial of this Experiment we must, unless
Your Lordship think it worth Your making at Paris, put off till a fitter
opportunity. For where we now are, we cannot procure Marbles so exactly ground,
that they will sustain one another in the Air above a minute or two, which is a
much shorter time than the emptying of our Receiver requires. We did indeed try
to make our Marbles stick close together, by moistening their polished surfaces
with rectified spirit of Wine, in regard that liquor, by its sudden avolation
from Marble, if poured thereon, without leaving it moist or less smooth, seemed
unable to sustain them together after the manner of a glutinous Body, and yet
seemed sufficient to exclude and keep out the Air. But this we tried to little
purpose, for having conveyed into the Receiver two black square Marbles (the
one of two Inches and a third in length or breadth, and somewhat more than half
an Inch in thickness: The other of the same extent, but not much above half so
thick) fastened together by the intervention of pure spirit of Wine; and having
suspended the thicker by a string from the cover, we found not that the
exsuction of the ambient Air would separate them, though a weight amounting to
four Ounces were fastened to the lowermost Marble to facilitate its falling of.

I would gladly have the Experiment tried with Marble, so well polished, as to
need no Liquor whatsoever to make them cohere, and in a Vessel out of which the
Air may be more persectly drawn than it was out of ours. But in the mean time,
though we will not determine whether the spirit of Wine did contribute to the
strong cohesion of these stones, otherwise than by keeping even the subtlest
parts of the Air from getting in between them: yet it seemed that the not
falling down of the lowermost Marble, might, without improbability, be ascribed
to the pressure of the Air remaining in the Receiver; which, as we formerly
noted, having been able to keep a Cylinder of Water, of above a Foot in height,
from falling to the bottom of the Tube, may well enough be supposed capable of
keeping so broad a flat Marble from descending. And though this may seem a
strange proof of the strength of the spring of the Air, even when rarefied, yet
it will scarce seem incredible to him that has observed how exceeding strong a
cohesion may be made betwixt broad Bodies, only by their immediate touching one
another. A notable instance of which, I met with in this short Narrative of the
Learned Zucchius. Juveni (says he) lacertorum suorum robur jactanti proposit a
P. Nic. Zucchius apud Scbot. part. 1. Mec. Hydraulopneum.
semel est lamina aerea, per ansam in medio extantem apprehensam elevanda e
tabula marmorea, cui optime congruebat: qui primo tanquam rem ludicram puero
committendam contempsit: tum instantibus amicis manum utramque admovens, cum
luctatus diu haerentem non removisset, excusavit impotentiam, objecta peregrini
and potentissimi glutinis interpositione, quo fortissime copulante nequiret
divelli; donec vidit ab alio per tabulam facilime laminam deduci, and ad
extrema productam, and actam in transversum inde deportari. But that we may
learn from our, own Engine, that two Bodies, though they touch each other but
in a small part of their surfaces, may be made to cohere very strongly, only by
this, That the Air presses much more forcibly upon the inferior superficies of
the lowermost Body, than upon the upper surface of the same: We will hereunto
annex the following Experiment, though out of the order wherein they were made.

EXPERIMENT XXXII.
I Remember I have, in a Discourse touching Fluidity and Firmness, made mention
of my having, by the exsuction of the Air out of a Glass Vessel, made that
Vessel take up, or suck up (to speak in the common Language) a Body weighing
diverse Ounces; but our Engine affording us the opportunity of making
considerabler Experiments of that kind, We thought fit to make a further trial
of the force of the Atmosphere's pressure upwards, after the following manner.

The Receiver having been exquisitely closed as we have often taught already,
and the Air being in a good measure drawn out of it, it was removed from off
the Pump: and to the lower branch of the Stop-cock, there was speedily applied
a tapering Valve of brass, such as is described in the 9th Figure, made fit to
go with its narrower end into the cavity of the branch, and to fill the Orifice
of that cavity with its broader part. And that the Air might not get in at the
little intervals, left here and there between the unequal surface of the stopple
and the internal edge of the branch, those intervals were stopped with a little
Diachylon. And to the door, or, (if you please) that part of the Valve which
was to move to and fro, and in this Experiment hung perpendicular to the
Horizon, there was, at a button of brass belonging to the Valve, fastened a
broad scale wherein weights were to be put. This done, the Key of the Stop-cock
was turned, and the external Air beating like a forcible stream upon the Valve
to get in there, it did suddenly both shut the Valve and keep it shut so
strongly, that we had time to cast in diverse weights one after another into the
Scale; till at length the weight overpowering the pressure of the Atmosphere,
drew down the Valve by the strings that tied the Scale to it, and gave liberty
to the outward Air to rush into the Receiver. Though another time, when the
Valve had but little weight hanging at it, being, by I know not what accident,
drawn down beneath its former place, it was by the impetuous current of the
outward Air suddenly impelled up into it again, and kept there. But in the
former Experiment it is remarkable, That though the Receiver were not well
exhausted, and though it leak'd whilst the rest of the Experiment was in
prosecution: and though the Valve whereon the Cylinder of the Atmosphere could
press, were not above an Inch and a half in Diameter, yet the weight kept up by
suction, or rather supported by the Air, (namely the Valve, the Scale and what
was cast out of it,) being sent to be weighed, amounted to about ten of our
common Pounds, consisting of sixteen Ounces a piece: So that we doubted not but
that, had the Experiment been made with favorable circumstances, the Air
endeavoring to press in at the Orifice of the Stop-cock, would have kept a
very much greater weight from falling out of it; I say the Air, because we
found, by trial purposely made, that neither the imperfect contact of the Valve
and the Stop-cock, nor the Diachylon that was employed to fill up the little
Crannies left betwixt them, were considerable in this Experiment. By which it
may, among other things, appear, that I did not without cause in the
abovenamed Discourse touching Fluidity and Firmness, ascribe a great force,
even to such Pillars of. Air as may be supposed to begin at the top of the
Atmosphere, and recoyling from the ground, to terminate on the Bodies on which
they press: since in the present Experiment such a weight was supported by so
slender a Cylinder of Air, rebounding from the Earth to the Valve whereon it
did bear.

EXPERIMENT XXXIII.
BUt in regard we have not yet been able to empty so great a Vessel as our
Receiver, so well as we can the Cylinder it self; our Pump alone may afford us
a nobler instance of the force of the Air we live in, insomuch, that by help of
this part of our Engine, we may give a pretty near ghess at the strength of the
Atmosphere, computed as a weight. And the way may be this; First, the Sucker
being brought to move easily up and down the Cylinder, is to be impelled to the
top of it: Then the Receiver must be taken off from the Pump, that the upper
Orifice of the Cylinder remaining open, the Air may freely succeed the Sucker,
and therefore readily yield to its motion downwards. This done, there must be
fastened to one of the Iron Teeth of the Sucker, such a weight as may just
suffice to draw it to the bottom of the Cylinder. And having thus examined what
weight is necessary to draw down the Sucker, when the Atmosphere makes no other
than the ordinary resistance of the Air against its descent; the Sucker must be
again forced to the top of the Cylinder, whose upper Orifice must now be
exactly closed; and then (the first weight remaining) we easily may, by hanging
a Scale to the abovementioned Iron (that makes part of the Sucker) cast in
known weights so long, till in spite of the reluctance of the Atmosphere the
Sucker be drawn down. For to these weights in the Scale, that of the Scale it
self being added, the sum will give us the weight of a Column of Air, equal in
Diameter to the Sucker, or to the cavity of the Cylinder, and in length to the
height of the Atmosphere.

According to this method we did, since the writing of the last Experiment,
attempt to measure the pressure of the Atmosphere, but found it more difficult
than we expected, to persorm it with any accurateness; for though by the help
of the Manubrium the Sucker moved up and down with so much ease, that one would
have thought that both its unequal surface, and the concave one of the Cylinder
were exquisitely smooth, and as it were slippery; yet when the Sucker came to
be moved only with a dead weight or pressure (that was not (like the force of
him that pumped) intended as occasion required) we found that the little
rufnesses or other inequalities, and perhaps too, the unequal pressure of the
Leather against the cavity of the Cylinder, were able, now and then, to put a
stop to the descent or ascent of the Sucker, though a very little external help
would easily surmount that impediment; and then the Sucker would, for a while,
continue its formerly interrupted motion, though that assistance were
withdrawn. But this discouragement did not deter us from prosecuting our
Experiment, and endeavoring, by a careful trial, to make it as instructive as
we could. We found then that a Leaden Weight, of 28 pounds (each consisting of
sixteen Ounces) being fastened to one of the teeth of the Sucker, drew it down
closely enough, when the upper Orifice of the Cylinder was left open: though by
the help of Oil and Water, and by the frequent moving the Sucker up and down
with the Manubrium, its motion in the Cylinder had been before purposely
facilitated. This done, the upper Orifice of the Cylinder was very carefully
and closely stopped, the Valve being likewise shut with its wonted Stopple well
oiled, after the Sucker had been again impelled up to the top of the Cylinder.
Then to the precedent twenty eight pound, we added a hundred and twelve pounds
more; which forcing down the Sucker, though but leisurely, we took off the
twenty eight pound weight; and being unable to procure just such weights as we
would have had, we hung on, instead of it, one of fourteen pound: but found
that, with the rest, unable to carry down the Sucker. And to satisfy our
selves, and the Spectators, that it was the resistance of the ambient Air that
hindered the descent of so great a weight, after that we had tried that upon
unstopping the Valve, and thereby opening an access to the external Air, the
Sucker would be immediately drawn down. After this, I say, we made this farther
Experiment, That having by a Man's strength forcibly depressed the Sucker to
the bottom of the Cylinder, and then fastened weights, to the abovenamed Iron
that makes part of that Sucker, the pressure of the external Air finding little
or nothing in the cavity of the evacuated Cylinder to resist it, did presently
begin to impell the Sucker, with the weights that clogged it, toward the upper
part of the Cylinder; till some such accidental Impediment, as we formerly
mentioned, checked its course. And when that rub, (which easily might be,) was
taken out of the way, it would continue its ascent to the top, to the no small
wonder of those Bystanders, that could not comprehend how such a weight could
ascend, as it were, of it self; that is, without any invisible force, or so
much as Suction to list it up. And indeed it is very considerable, that though
possibly there might remain some particles of Air in the Cylinder, after the
drawing down of the Sucker; yet the pressure of a Cylinder of the Atmosphere,
somewhat less than three Inches in Diameter (for, as it was said in the
description of our Engine, the cavity of the Cylinder was no broader) was able,
uncompress'd, not only to sustain, but even to drive up a weight of an hundred
and odd pounds: for besides the weight of the whole Sucker it self, which
amounts to some pounds, the weights annexed to it made up an hundred and three
pounds, besides an Iron Bar, that by conjecture weighed two pounds more; and
yet all these together fall somewhat short of the weight which we lately
mentioned, the resistance of the Air, to have held suspended in the cavity of
the Cylinder.

And though (as has been already acknowledged (we cannot peradventure, obtain
by the recited means so exact an account as were to be wished, of what we would
discover: Yet, if it serve us to ground conjectures more approaching to the
Truth, than we have hitherto met with, I hope it will be considered (which a
famous Poet judiciously says)

Est quoddam prodire tenus, si non datur ultra.

Peradventure it will not be impertinent to annex to the other circumstances
that have been already set down concerning this Experiment, That it was made in
Winter, in Weather neither Frosty nor Rainy, about the change of the Moon, and
at a place whose latitude is near about 51 degrees and a half: For perhaps the
force or pressure of the Air may vary, according to the Seasons of the Year,
the temperature of the Weather, the elevation of the Pole, or the phases of the
Moon; all, or even any of them seeming capable to alter either the height or
consistence of the incumbent Atmosphere: And therefore it would not be amiss if
this Experiment were carefully tried at several times and places, with variety
of circumstances. It might also be tried with Cylinders of several Diameters,
exquisitely fitted with Suckers, that we might know what proportion several
Pillars of the Atmosphere bear to the weights they are able to sustain or lift
up; and consequently, whether the increase or decrement of the resistance of
the ambient Air, can be reduced to any regular proportion to the Diameters of
the Suckers: These, and diverse other such things which may be tried with this
Cylinder, might most of them be more exactly tried by the Torricellian
Experiments, if we could get Tubes so accurately blown and drawn, that the
cavity were perfectly Cylindrical.

To dwell upon all the several Reflections, that a speculative Wit might make
upon this and the foregoing Experiment, (I mean the thirty third and thirty
second) would require almost a Volume; whereas our occasions will scarce allow
us time to touch upon three or four of the chief Inferences that seem deducible
from them, and therefore we shall content our selves to point at those few.

And first, as many other Phenomenon of our Engine, so especially, the two
lately mentioned Experiments, seem very much to call in question the received
Opinion of the nature or cause of Suction. For it is true indeed, that when men
suck, they commonly use some manifest endeavor by a peculiar motion of their
Mouths, Chests, and some other conspiring parts, to convey to them the body to
be sucked in. And hence perhaps they have taken occasion, to think that in all
Suction there must be some endeavor or motion in the sucking to attract the
sucked Body. But in our last Experiment it appears not at all how the upper
part of the emptied Cylinder that remains moveless all the while, or any part
of it, does at all endeavor to draw to it the depressed Sucker and the annexed
weights. And yet those that behold the ascension of the Sucker, without
seriously considering the cause of it, do readily conclude it to be raised by
something that powerfully Sucks or attracts it, though they see not what that
may be or where it lurks. So that it seems not absolutely necessary to Suction,
that there be in the Body, which is said to suck, an endeavor or motion in
order thereunto, but rather that Suction may be at least for the most part
reduced to Pulsion, and its effects ascribed to such a pressure of the
neighboring Air upon those Bodies (whether Aerial, or of other natures) that
are contiguous to the Body that is said to attract them, as is stronger, than
that substance, which possesses the cavity of that sucking Body, is able to
resist. To object here, that it was some particles of Air remaining in the
emptied Cylinder that attracted this weight to obviate a Vacuum, will scarce be
satisfactory; unless it can be clearly made out by what little hooks, or other
grappling Instruments, the internal Air could take hold of the Sucker; how so
little of it obtained the force to lift up so great a weight; and why also,
upon the letting in of a little more Air into one of our evacuated Vessels, the
attraction is, instead of being strengthened, much weakened; though, if there
were danger of a Vacuum before, it would remain, notwithstanding this ingress
of a little Air. For that still there remained in the capacity of the exhausted
Cylinder store of little rooms, or spaces empty or devoid of Air, may appear by
the great violence wherewith the Air rusheth in, if any way be opened to it.
And that it is not so much the decrement of the Vacuum within the cavity of the
vessel that debilitates the attraction, as the Spring of the included Air
(whose presence makes the decrement) that does it by resisting the pressure of
the external Air, seems probable, partly from the Disability of vacuities,
whether greater or lesser, to resist the pressure of the Air; and partly by
some of the Phenomenon of our Experiments, and particularly by this
Circumstance of the Three and Thirtieth, that the Sucker was, by the pressure
of the Ambient Air, impelled upwards with its weight hanging at it, not only
when it was in the bottom of the Cylinder, and consequently left a great Vacuum
in the cavity of it; but when the Sucker had been already impelled almost to
the top of the Cylinder, and consequently, when the Vacuum that remained was
become very little in comparison of that which preceded the beginning of the
Sucker's ascension.

In the next place, these Experiments may teach us, what to judge of the vulgar
Axiom received for so many Ages as an undoubted Truth in the Peripatetick
Schools; That Nature abhors and flies a Vacuum, and that to such a degree,
that no humane power (to go no higher) is able to make one in the Universe;
wherein Heaven and Earth would change places, and all its other Bodies rather
act contrary to their own Nature, than suffer it. For, if by a Vacuum we will
understand a place perfectly devoid of all corporeal Substance, it may indeed
then, as we formerly noted, be plausibly enough maintained that there is no
such thing in the world; but that the generality of the Plenists, (especially
till of late years some of them grew more wary) did not take a Vacuum in so
strict a sense, may appear by the Experiments formerly, and even to this day
employed by the Deniers of a Vacuum, to prove it impossible that there can be
any made. For when they allege (for Instance) that when a man sucks Water
through a long Pipe, that heavy Liquor, contrary to its Nature, ascends into
the Sucker's mouth, only, to fill up that room made by the Dilatation of his
Breast and Lungs, which otherwise will in part be empty. And when they tell us,
that the reason why if a long Pipe exactly closed at one end be filled top-full
of Water, and then inverted, no Liquor will fall out of the open Orifice; Or,
to use a more samiliar Example, when they teach, that the cause, why in a
Gardiner's watering Pot shaped conically, or like a Sugar Loaf, filled with
Water, no Liquor falls down through the numerous holes at the bottom, whilst
the Gardener keeps his Thumb upon the Orifice of the little hole at the top,
and no longer; must be that if in the case proposed the Water should descend,
the Air being unable to succeed it, there would be le^t at the upper and
deserted part of the Vessel a Vacuum, that would be avoided if the hole at the
top were opened. When (I say) they allege such Experiments, the tendency of
them seems plainly to import, that they mean, by a Vacuum, any space here below
that is not filled with a visible body, or at least with Air though it be not
quite devoy'd of all Body whatsoever. For why should Nature, out of her
detestation of a Vacuum, make Bodies act contrary to their own tendency, that a
place may be filled with Air, if its being so were not necessary to the
avoiding of a Vacuum.

Taking then a Vacuum in this vulgar and obvious sense, the common opinion
about it seems liable to several Exceptions, whereof some of the chief are
suggested to us by our Engine.

It will not easily then be intelligibly made out, how hatred or aversation,
which is a passion of the Soul, can either for a Vacuum, or any other object,
be supposed to be in Water, or such like inanimate Body, which cannot be
presumed to know when a Vacuum would ensue; if they did not bestir themselves
to prevent it: nor to be so generous as to act contrary to what is most
conducive to their own particular preservation for the public good of the
Universe. As much then of intelligible and probable Truth, as is contained in
this Metaphorical Expression, seems to amount but to this; That by the Wise
Author of Nature (who is justly said to have made all things in number, weight
and measure,) the Universe, and the parts of it, are so contrived, that it is
as hard to make a Vacuum in it, as if they studiously conspired to prevent it.
And how far this it self may be granted, deserves to be farther considered.

For in the next place, our Experiments seem to teach, that the supposed
Aversation of Nature to a Vacuum is but accidental, or in consequence, partly
of the Weight and Fluidity, or, at least, Fluxility of the Bodies here below;
and partly, and perhaps principally, of the spring of the Air, whose restless
endeavor to expand it self every way, makes it either rush in it self, or
compel the interposed Bodies into all spaces, where it finds no greater
resistance than it can surmount. And that in those motions which are made ob
fugam Vacui (as the common phrase is) Bodies act without such generosity and
consideration, as is wont to be ascribed to them, is apparent enough in our 32d
Experiment, where the torrent of Air, that seemed to strive to get into the
emptied Receiver, did plainly prevent its own design by so impelling the Valve,
as to make it shut the only Orifice the Air was to get out at. And if
afterward either Nature, or the internal Air, had a design the external Air
should be attracted, they seemed to prosecute very unwisely by continuing to
suck the Valve so strongly; when they found that by that Suction the Valve it
self could not be drawn in: Whereas by forbearing to suck, the Valve would by
its own weight have fallen down, and suffered the excluded Air to return
freely, and to fill again the exhausted Vessel.

And this minds me to take notice of another deficiency, pointed at by our
Experiments in the common Doctrine of those Plenists we reason with; for many
of those unusual motions in Bodies, that are said to be made to escape a
Vacuum, seem rather made to fill it. For why, to instance in our newly
mentioned Experiment, as soon as the Valve was depressed by the weight we hung
at it, should the Air so impetuously and copiously rush into the cavity of the
Receiver; if there were before no vacant room there to receive it? and if there
were, then all the while the Valve kept out the Air, those little spaces in the
Receiver, which the corpuscles of that Air afterward filled, may be concluded
to have remained empty. So that the seeming violence, employed by Nature on the
occasion of the evacuating of the Vessel, seems to have come too late to hinder
the making of Vacuities in the Receiver, and only to have, as soon as we
permitted, filled up with Air those that were already made.

And as for the care of the public good of the Universe ascribed to dead and
stupid Bodies, we shall only demand, why in our 19th Experiment, upon the
Exsuction of the ambient Air, the Water deserted the upper half of the
Glass-Tube; and did not ascend to fill it up, till the external Air was let in
upon it: whereas by its easy and sudden regaining that upper part of the Tube,
it appeared both that there was there much space devoid of Air, and that the
Water might with small or no resistance have ascended into it, if it could have
done so without the impulsion of the readmitted Air; which, it seems, was
necessary to mind the Water of its formerly neglected Duty to the Universe.

Nay, for ought appears, even when the excluded Air, as soon as 'twas
permitted, rushed violently into our exhausted Receiver, that flowing in of the
Air proceeded rather from the determinate Force of the Spring of the
neighboring Air, than from any endeavor to fill up, much less to prevent
vacuity's. For though when as much Air as will, is gotten into our Receiver our
present Opponents take it for granted that it is full of Air; yet if it be
remembered that when we made our 17th Experiment we crowded in more Air to our
Receiver than it usually holds; and if we also consider (which is much more)
that the Air of the same consistence with that in our Receiver may in
Wind-guns, as is known, and as we have tried, be compressed at least into half
its wonted room (I say at least, because some affirm, that the Air may be
thrust into an 8th, or a yet smaller part of its ordinary extent) it seems
necessary to admit either a notion of condensation and rarefaction that is not
intelligible, or that in the capacity of our Receiver when presumed to be full
of Air, there yet remained as much of space as was taken up by all the Aerial
corpuscles, unpossessed by the Air. Which seems plainly, to infer that the Air
that rushed into our emptied vessel did not do it precisely to fill up the
Vacuities of it, since it left so many unfill'd, but rather was thrust in by
the pressure of the contiguous Air: which as it could not, but be always ready
to expand it self, where it found least resistance, so was it unable to fill
the Receiver any more, than until the Air within was reduced to the same
measure of Compactness with that without.

We may also from our two already often mentioned Experiments farther deduce,
that, (since Natures hatred of a Vacuum is but Metaphorical and Accidental,
being but a consequence or result of the pressure of the Air and of the
Gravity, and partly also of the Fluxility of some other Bodies) The power she
makes use of to hinder a Vacuum, is not (as we have elsewhere also noted) any
such boundless thing as men have been pleased to imagine. And the reasons why
in the former Experiments, mentioned in favor of the Plenists, Bodies seem to
forget their own Natures to shun a Vacuum, seems to be but this; That in the
alleged cases the weight of that Water that was either kept from falling or
impelled up, was not great enough to surmount the pressure of the contiguous
Air; which, if it had been, the Water would have subsided, though no Air could
have succeeded. For not to repeat that Experiment of Monsieur Paschal (formerly
mentioned to have been tried in a Glass exceeding 32. Foot) wherein the
inverted Pipe being long enough to contain a competent-weight of Water, that
Liquor freely ran out at the lower Orifice: Not to mention this (I say) we saw
in our nineteenth Experiment, that when the pressure of the ambient Air was
sufficiently weakn'd, the Water would fall out apace at the Orifice even of a
short Pipe, though the Air could not succeed into the room deserted by it. And
it were not amiss if trial were made on the tops of very high Mountains, to
discover with what case a Vacuum could be made near the confines of the
Atmosphere, where the Air is probably but light in comparison of what it is
here below. But our present (three and thirtieth) Experiment seems to manifest,
not only that the power, exercised by Nature, to shun or replenish a Vacuum,
is limited, but that it may be determined even to Pounds and Ounces: Insomuch
that we might say, such a weight Nature will sustain or will lift up to resist
a Vacuum in our Engine; but if an Ounce more be added to that weight, it will
surmount Her so much magnified detestation of Vacuities. And thus, My Lord, our
Experiments may not only answer those of the Plenists, but enable us to retort
their Arguments against themselves: since, if that be true which they allege,
that, when Water falls not down according to its nature, in a Body wherein no
Air can succeed to fill up the place it must leave, the suspension of the
Liquor is made Ne detur Vacuum, (as they speak) it will follow, that if the
Water can be brought to subside in such a case, that deserted space may be
deemed empty, according to their own Doctrine; especially, since Nature (as
they would persuade us) bestirs her self so mightily to keep it from being
deserted.

I hope I shall not need to remind Your Lordship, that I have all this while
been speaking of a Vacuum, not in the strict and Philosophical sense, but in
that more obvious and familiar one that has been formerly declared.

And therefore I shall now proceed to observe in the last place, that our 33d
Experiment affords us a notable proof of the unheeded strength of that pressure
which is sustained by the Corpuscles of what we call the free Air, and presume
to be uncompressed. For, as fluid and yielding a Body as it is, our Experiment
teaches us, That even in our Climate, and without any other compression than
what is (at least here below) Natural, or (to speak more properly) ordinary to
it, it bears so strongly upon the Bodies whereunto it is contiguous, that a
Cylinder of this free Air, not exceeding three Inches in Diameter is able to
raise and carry up a weight, amounting to between sixteen and seventeen hundred
Ounces. I said even in our Climate, because that is temperate enough; Aere
frigido existente tardius moventar Automata quam aere calido, adeo quidem at
Automaton quod Belgae in Nova Zembla agentes in aedibus suis collocaverunt
omnino a motu cessaverit etsimulto majus pondus ei addidissent quam antea serre
solebat. Varenius Geo: General. lib. 111. Propo: 7. page 648.
and as far as my observations assist me to conjecture, the Air in many other
more Northern Countries may be much thicker, and able to support a greater
weight: which is not to be doubted of, if there be no mistake in what is
Recorded concerning the Hollanders, that were forced by the Ice to Winter in
Nova Zembla, namely, That they found there so condensed an Air, that they could
not make their Clock go, even by a very great addition to the weights that
were wont to move it.

I suppose Your Lordship will readily take notice, that I might very easily
have discoursed much more fully and accurately than I have done, against the
common opinion touching Suction, and touching natures hatred of a Vacuum. But I
was willing to keep my self to those considerations touching these matters,
that might be verified by our engine it self, especially, since, as I said at
first, it would take up too much time to insist particularly upon all the
Reflections that may be made even upon our two last Experiments. And therefore
passing to the next, I shall leave it to Your Lordship to consider how far
these trials of ours will either confirm or disfavour the new Doctrine of
several eminent Naturalists, who teach, That in all motion there is necessarily
a Circle of Bodies, as they speak, moving together; and whether the Circles in
such motion be an Accidental or Consequential thing or no.

EXPERIMENT XXXIIII.
It Is a known thing to those that are conversant in the Hydrostaticks, That two
Bodies which in the Air are of equal weight, but of unequal bulk, as Gold, for
instance and Iron, being afterward weighed in Water, will lose their
AEquilibrium upon the change of the ambient Body: so that the Gold will sink
lower than the Iron; which, by reason of its greater bulk, has more Water to
lift or displace, that it may sink. By Analogy to this Experiment, it seemed
probable, that if two weights did in our Engine balance each other, when the
Glass was full of Air; upon the exsuction of a great part of that Air, so
notable a change in the consistence of the ambient Body, would make them lose
their AEquilibrium.

But being desirous at the same time to make a trial, for a certain Design that
needs not here be mentioned, we took for one of our weights a dry Bladder,
strongly tied at the Neck, and about half filled with Air (that being a weight
both slight, and that would expand it self in the evacuated Glass) and fastening
that to one part of our formerly mentioned exact balance (which turns with the
32d part of a Grain) we put a Metalline counterpoise into the opposite Scale;
and so the two weights being brought to an AEquilibrium, the balance was
conveyed into the Receiver, and suspended from the Cover of it.

But before we proceed farther, we must note, That presently after the laying
on of the Cover, the Bladder appeared to preponderate, whereupon the Scales
being taken out, and reduced very near to an AEquilibrium, yet so, that a little
advantage remained on that side to which the Metalline weight belonged; they
were again let down into the Receiver, which was presently made fast with
Plaster, and a hot Iron: Soon after which before the Pump was employed, the
Bladder seemed again a little to preponderate. Afterward the Air in the Glass
being begun to be drawn out, the Bladder began (according to the formerly
mentioned Observations) to expand it self, and manifestly to outweigh the
opposite weight, drawing down the Scale to which it was fastened very much
beneath the other, especially when the Air had swelled it to its full extent.

This done, we very leisurely let in the external Air; and observed, that upon
the flagging of the Bladder, the Scale whereto it was fastened, not only by
degrees returned to an AEquilibrium with the other, but at length was a little
outweighed by it.

But because we suspected there might have intervened some unheeded
Circumstance in this last part of the Experiment we would not presently take
out the Scales, nor meddle with the Cover, but leaving things as they were, we
perceived, that after a little while the Bladder began again to preponderate,
and by degrees to sink lower and lower for diverse hours, wherefore, leaving the
Vessel closed up all night, we repaired to it next Morning, and found the
Bladder fallen yet lower. As if the very substance of it, had imbibed some of
the moisture wherewith the Air (the Season being very rainy) did then abound:
As Lutestrings, which are made likewise of the Membranous parts of Guts,
strongly wreathed, are known to swell so much oftentimes as to break in rainy
and wet weather. Which conjecture is the more to be regarded, because
congruously unto it one of the company having a little warmed the Bladder,
found it then lighter than the opposite weight. But this must be looked upon as
a bare conjecture, till we can gain time to make farther trials about it. In
the mean while we shall add, that without removing the Scales or the Cover of
the Receiver, we again caused the Air to be drawn out (the weather continuing
very moist) but found not any manifest alteration in the balance; whether
because the AEquilibrium was too far lost to let a small change appear, we
determine not.

But to make the Experiment with a Body less apt to be altered by the
temperature of the Air, than was the Bladder; we brought the Scales again to an
AEquilibrium with two weights, whereof the one was of Lead, the other of Cork.
And having evacuated the Receiver, we observed, that both upon the exsuction,
and after the return of the Air, the Cork did manifestly preponderate, and much
more, a while after the Air had been let in again, than whilst it was kept out.
Wherefore, in the room of the Cork, we substituted a piece of Char-coal, as
less likely to imbibe any moisture from the Air, but the event proved much the
same with that newly related: So that this Experiment seems more liable to
Casualties than any, excepting one we have made in our Engine. And as it is
difficult to prevent them, so it seems not very easy to discover the causes of
them, whereof we shall therefore at present forbear mentioning our Conjectures.

EXPERIMENT XXXV.
SOme Learned Mathematicians have of late ingeniously endeavored to reduce
Filtres to Siphons; but still the true cause of the ascension of Water, and
other Liquors both in Siphons and in Filtration, needing (for ought we have yet
found) a clearer Discovery and Explication, we were desirous to try whether or
no the pressure of the Air might reasonably be supposed to have either the
principal, or at least a considerable Interest in the raising of those Liquors.
But because we found that we could not yet so evacuate our Receiver, but that
the remaining Air though but little in comparison of the exhausted, would be
able to impell the Water to a greater height than is usual in ordinary
Filtrations: we resolved instead of a List of Cotton, or the like Filtre, to
make use of a Siphon of Glass, delineated in the third Figure, consisting of
three pieces, two straight, and the third crooked to join them together; whose
Junctures were diligently closed that no Air might find entrance at them. One
of the Legs of this Siphon was (as it should be) somewhat longer than the
other, and was pervious at the bottom of it only, by a hole almost as slender
as a hair, that the Water might but very leasurely drop out of it, lest it
should all run out before the Experiment were completed. The other and shorter
Leg of the Siphon was quite open at the end, and the same wideness with the
rest of the Pipe, whose bore was about of an Inch. The whole Siphon made up of
these several pieces put together, was designed to be about a Foot and a half
long; that the remaining Air, when the Vessel was exhausted after the wonted
manner, might not be able to impell the Water to the top of the Siphon; which
being inverted, was filled with Water, and of which the Shorter leg being let
down two or three Inches deep into a Glass Vessel full of Water, and the upper
parts of it being fastened to the inside of the Cover of the Receiver, we
proceeded to close first, and then to empty the Vessel.

The effect of the trial was this, That till a pretty quantity of Air had been
drawn out, the Water dropped freely out at the lower end of the lower leg of
the Siphon, as if the Experiment had been performed in the free Air. But
afterward, the Bubbles (as had been apprehended) began to disclose themselves
in the Water, and ascending to the top of the Siphon, imbodyed themselves there
into one, which was augmented by little and little, by the rising of other
bubbles that from time to time broke into it, but much more by its own
dilatation, which increased proportionably to the exsuction that was made of
the Air out of the Receiver. So that at length the Water in the shorter Leg of
the Siphon was reduced, partly by the extraction of the ambient Air, and partly
by the expansion of the great Bubble at the upper part of the Siphon, to be but
about a Foot high, if so much; whereby it came to pass, that the course of the
Water in the Siphon was interrupted, and that which remained in the longer Leg
of it, continued suspended there without dropping any longer. But upon the
turning of the Stop-cock, the outward Air (being let into the Receiver) got
into the Siphon, by the little hole at which the Water formerly dropped out; and
traversing all the incumbent Cylinder of Water, in the form of Bubbles, joynd
it self with that Air that before possessed the top of the Siphon.

To prevent the inconveniences arising from these Bubbles, two Glass Pipes,
like the former, were so placed, as to terminate together in the midst of the
Belly of a Glass Viol, into whose Neck they were carefully fastened with
Cement; and then both the Viol and the Pipes being (which was not done without
difficulty) totally filled with Water, the Siphon described in the fifth
Figure, was placed with its shorter Leg in the Glass of Water as formerly; and
the Experiment being prosecuted after the same manner, much more Air than
formerly was drawn out, before the bubbles, disclosing themselves in the water,
were able to disturb the Experiment; because that in the capacity of the Viol
there was room enough for them to stretch themselves, without depressing the
Water below the ends of the Pipes; and during this time, the Water continued to
drop out of the propending Leg of the Siphon. But at length the Receiver being
very much emptied, the passage of the Water through the Siphon ceased, the
upper ends of the Pipes beginning to appear a little above theremaining Water
in the Viol, whose dilated Air appeared likewise to press down the Water in the
Pipes, and fill the upper part of them.

And hereby the continuity of the Water, and so the Experiment it self being
interrupted we were invited to let in the Air again, which, according to its
various proportions of pressure to that of the Air in the Viol and the Pipes,
did for a good while exhibit a pleasing variety of Phenomenon, which we have
not now the leisure to recite. And though upon the whole matter there seemed
little or no cause to doubt, but that, if the Bubbles had not disturbed the
Experiment, it would manifestly enough have appeared that the course of Water
through Siphons depends upon the pressure of the Air: yet we resolved, at our
next leisure and convenience, to try the Experiment again, with a quantity of
Water before freed from Bubbles by the help of the same Engine.

This occasion I have had to take notice of Siphons, puts me in mind of an odd
kind of Siphon that I caused to be made a^ pretty while ago; and which has
been since, by an Ingenious Man of Your acquaintance, communicated to diverse
others. The occasion was this: An eminent Mathematician told me one day, that
some inquisitive French Men (whose Names I know not) had observed, That in case
one end of a slender and perforated Pipe of Glass be dipped in Water, the liquor
will ascend to some height in the Pipe, though held perpendicular to the plain
of the Water. And, to satisfy me that he mis-related not the Experiment, he
soon after brought two or three small Pipes of Glass, which gave me the
opportunity of trying it: though I had the less reason to distrust it, because
I remember I had often, in the long and slender Pipes of some weather Glasses,
which I had caused to be made after a somewhat peculiar fashion, taken notice
of the like ascension of the Liquor, though (presuming it might be casual) I
had made but little reflection upon it. But after this trial, beginning to
suppose, that though the Water in these Pipes that were brought me, rise not
above a quarter of an Inch, (if near so high) yet, if the Pipes were made
slender enough, the Water might rise to a very much greater height; I caused
several of them to be, by a dexterous Hand, drawn out at the flame of a Lamp,
in one of which that was almost incredibly slender we found that the Water
ascended (as it were of it self) five Inches by measure, to the no small wonder
of some famous Mathematicians, who were Spectators of some of these
Experiments. And this height the Water reached to, though the Pipe were held in
as erected a posture as we could: For if it were inclined, the Water would fill
a greater part of it, though not rise higher in it. And we also found, that
when the inside of the Pipe was wetted beforehand, the Water would rise much
better than otherways: But we caused not all our slender Pipes to be made
straight, but some of them crooked, like Siphons: And having immersed the
shorter Leg of one of these into a Glass that held some fair Water, we found,
as we expected, that the Water arising to the top of the Siphon, though that
were high enough, did of it self run down the longer Leg, and continue running
like an ordinary Siphon. The cause of this ascension of the Water, appeared to
all that were present so difficult, that I must not stay to enumerate the
various Conjectures that were made at it, much less to examine them; especially
having nothing but bare Conjectures to substitute in the room of those I do not
approve. We tried indeed, by conveying a very slender Pipe and a small Vessel
of Water into our Engine, whether or no the exsuction of the ambient Air would
assist us to find the cause of the ascension we have been speaking of: But
though we employed red Wine instead of Water, yet we could scarce certainly
perceive through so much Glass, as was interposed betwixt our eyes and the
Liquor, what happened in a Pipe so slender that the redness of the Wine was
scarce sensible in it. But as far as we could discern, there happened no great
alteration to the Liquor: which seemed the less strange, because the spring of
that Air that might depress the Water in the Pipe, was equally debilitated with
that which remained to press upon the surface of the Water in the little Glass.
Wherefore, in favor of his Ingenious Conjecture who ascribed the Phenomenon
under consideration, to the greater pressure made upon the water by the Air
without the Pipe, than by that within it, (where so much of the Water
(consisting perhaps of Corpuscles more pliant to the internal surfaces of the
Air) was contiguous to the Glass) it was shown, that in case the little Glass
Vessel that held the water, of which a part ascended into the slender Pipe,
were so closed, that a Man might with his mouth suck the Air out of it, the
water would immediately subside in the small Pipe. And this would indeed infer,
that it ascended before only by the pressure of the incumbent Air; But that it
may (how justly I know not) be objected, That peradventure this would not
happen, in case the upper end of the Pipe were in a Vacuum: And that it is very
probable the water may subside, not because the pressure of the internal Air is
taken off by Exsuction, but by reason of the spring of the external Air, which
impels the Water it finds in its way to the cavity deserted by the other Air,
and would as well impel the same water upwards, as make it subside, if it were
not for the accidental posture of the Glasses. However, having not now leisure
to examine any farther this Matter, I shall only mind Your Lordship, that if
You will prosecute this Speculation, it will be pertinent to find out likewise,
Why the surface of water (as is manifest in Pipes) uses to be concave, being
depressed in the middle, and higher on every side? and why in Quicksilver on
the contrary, not only the surface is wont to be very unequal, or swelling, in
the middle; but if you dip the end of a slender Pipe in it, the surface of the
Liquor (as it is called) will be lower within the Pipe, than without. Which
Phenomenon, whether, and how far, they may be deduced from the Figure of the
mercurial Corpuscles, and the Shape of the springy Particles of the Air, I
willingly leave to be considered.

EXPERIMENT XXXVI.
SEveral ways we have met with proposed, partly by the excellent Galileo, and
partly by other ingenious Writers, to manifest that the Air is not devoid of
weight; some of these require the previous absence of the Air to be weighed;
and others, the violent condensation of it. But if we could list a pair of
Scales above the Atmosphere, or place them in a Vacuum, we might there weigh a
parcel of Air it self, as here we do other Bodies in the Air, because it would
there be heavier than that which surrounds it, as are grosser Bodies we
commonly weigh, than the medium or ambient Air. Wherefore, though we have above
declined to affirm, that our Receiver, when emptyed, deserves the name of a
true Vacuum, and though we cannot yet perfectly free it from Air it self, yet
we thought fit to try how far the Air would manifest its gravity in so thin a
medium, as we could make in our. Receiver, by evacuating it. We caused then to
be blown at the Flame of a Lamp, a Glass bubble of about the bigness of a small
Hen-egge, and of an Oval form, save that at one end there was drawn out an
exceeding slender Pipe, that the Bubble might be sealed up, with as little
rarefaction as might be, of the Air included in the great or Oval Cavity of it.
This Glass being sealed, was fastened to one of the Scales of the exact pair of
Balances formerly mentioned; and being counterpois'd with a weight of Lead,
was conveyed into the Receiver, and closed up in it. The Beam appearing to
continue Horizontal, the Pump was set on work, and there scarce past above two
or three Exsuctions of the Air, before the Balance lost its Equilibrium, and
began to incline to that side on which the Bubble was; which, as the Air was
farther and farther drawn out, did manifestly more and more preponderate, till
he that pumped began to grow weary of his Employment: after which the Air being
leisurely let in again, the Scales by degrees returned to their former
Equilibrium. After that we took them out, and casting into that Scale to which
the lead belonged three quarters of a grain, we conveyed the balance into the
Receiver, which being closed up, and exhausted as before, we observed, that as
the Air was drawn out more and more, so the Glass bubble came nearer and nearer
to an Equilibrium with the other weight, till at length the Beam was drawn to
hang Horizontal; which (as we had found by another trial) we could not bring it
to do, when a quarter of a Grain more was added to the Scale, to which the Lead
belonged: though it seemed questionless, that if we could have perfectly
emptied the Receiver of the contained Air, that included in the bubble would
have weighed above a Grain, notwithstanding its having been probably somewhat
rarefied by the flame, by the help of which, the bubble was sealed up. Let us
add, That on the regress of the excluded Air, the Lead, and the weight cast
into the same scale, did again very much preponderate.

We likewise conveyed into the Receiver, the same bubble, opened at the end of
the slender Pipe abovementioned, but having drawn out the Air, after the
accustomed manner, we found not as before, the bubble to outweigh the opposite
Lead: so that by the help of our Engine we can weigh the Air, as we weigh other
Bodies, in its natural or ordinary consistence, without at all condensing it:
Nay, which is remarkable, having conveyed a Lambs bladder about half full of
Air into the Receiver, we observed, that though upon the drawing out of the
ambient Air, the imprisoned Air so expanded it self, as to distend the Bladder
so, as to seem ready to Break it; yet this rarefied Air did manifestly depress
the Scale whereunto it was annexed.

Another thing we must not forget to mention, that happened to us, whilst we
were making trials concerning the weight of the Air; namely, that having once
caused the Pump to be somewhat obstinately plied, to discover the better what
may be expected from the thinness of the medium in this Experiment; the
Imprisoned Air broke its brittle Prison, and throwing the greatest part of it
against the side of the Receiver, dashed it against that thick Glass into a
multitude of pieces. Which accident I mention, partly that it may confirm what
we delivered in our Reflections, upon the first Experiment, where we considered
what would probably be done by the spring of the Air Imprisoned in such
Glasses, in case the ballancing pressure of the ambient Air were withdrawn; and
partly, that we may thence discern of how close a Texture Glass is, since so
very thin a film of Glass (if I may so call it) proved so impervious to the
Air, that it could not get away through the Pores, but was forced to break the
Glass in pieces to free it self; and this, notwithstanding the time and
advantage it had to try to get out at the Pores. And this I mention, that
neither our Experiments, nor those of diverse Learned Men, might receive any
prejudice from an Experiment which I happened to make diverse years ago, and
which, having been so much taken notice of by curious Men, may be drawn to
countenance their erroneous Opinion, who would fain persuade us, That Glass is
penetrable by Air properly so called. Our Experiment was briefly this: We were
distilling a certain Substance, that much abounded with subtle Spirits and
volatile Salt, in a strong Earthen vessel of an unusual shape, to which was
luted a large Receiver, made of the course sort of Glass (which the Tradesmen
are wont to call green Glass) but in our absence, the Fire, though it were to
be very strong, was, by the negligence or mistake of those we appointed to
attend it, so excessively increased, that when we came back to the Furnace, we
found the spirituous and saline Corpuscles poured out (if I may so call it) so
hot, and so copiously into the Receiver, that they made it all opacous, and
more likely to fly in pieces, than fit to be touched. Yet, being curious to
observe the effects of a Distillation, prosecuted with so intense and unusual a
degree of heat, we ventured to come near, and observed, among other things,
that on the outside of the Receiver, at a great distance from the juncture,
there was settled a round whitish Spot or two, which at first we thought might
be some stain upon the Glass; but after, finding it to be in diverse Qualities
like the Oil and Salt of the Concrete we were Distilling, we began to suspect
that the most subtle and fugitive parts of the impetuously ascending Steams,
had penetrated the substance (as they speak) of the Glass, and by the cold of
the ambient Air were condensed on the surface of it. And though we were very
backward to credit this suspicion, and therefore called in an Ingenious Person
or two, both to assist us in the Observation, and have Witness of its event, we
continued a while longer to watch the escape of such unctuous Fumes; and upon
the whole matter unanimously concluded that (all things considered) the subtle
parts of the distilled matter being violently agitated, by the excessive heat
that passed through the Pores of the Glass, widn'd by the same heat. But this
having never happened but once in any of the Distillations we have either made
or seen, though these be not a few, it is much more reasonable to suppose, that
the perviousness of our Receiver to a Body much more subtle than Air, proceeded
partly from the looser Texture of that particular parcel of Glass the Receiver
was made of (for Experience has taught us, that all Glass is not of the same
compactness and solidity) and partly from the enormous heat, which, together
with the vehement agitation of the penetrant Spirits, opened the Pores of the
Glass; than to imagine that such a substance as Air, should be able to permeate
the Body of Glass contrary to the testimony of a thousand Chemical and
Mechanical Experiments, and of many of those made in our Engine, especially
that newly recited: Nay, by our fifth Experiment it appears that a thin Bladder
will not at its Pores give passage even to rarefied Air. And on this occasion
we will annex an Experiment, which has made some of those we have acquainted
with it, doubt, whether the Corpuscles of the Air be not less subtle than those
of Water.

But without examining here the reasonableness of that doubt, we will proceed
to recite the Experiment it self, which seems to teach, That though Air, when
sufficiently compressed, may perchance get entrance into narrower holes and
crannies than Water; yet unless the Air be forced in at such very little holes,
it will not get in at them, though they may be big enough to let Water pass
through them.

The Experiment then was this: I took a fair Glass Siphon, the lower end of
whose longest Leg was drawn by degrees to such a slenderness, that the Orifice,
at which the Water was to fall out, would hardly admit a very small Pin: This
Siphon being inverted, the matter was so ordered, that a little Bubble of Air
was intercepted in the slenderest part of the Siphon, betwixt the little hole
newly mentioned, and the incumbent Water, upon which it came to pass, that the
Air being not to be forced through so narrow a passage, by so light a Cylinder
of Water, (though amounting to the length of diverse Inches,) as leaned upon it,
hindered the farther efflux of the Water, as long as I pleased to let it stay
in that narrow place: whereas, when by blowing a little at the wider end of the
Siphon, that little parcel of Air was forced out with some Water, the remaining
Water, that before continued suspended, began freely to drop down again as
formerly. And if you take a Glass Pipe, whether it be in the form of a Siphon,
or no, that being for the most part of the thickness of a Man's Finger, is yet
toward one end so slender, as to terminate in a hole almost as small as a
Horse-hair; and if you fill this Pipe with Water, you will find that Liquor to
drop down freely enough through the slender Extreme: But if you then invert the
Pipe, you will find that the Air will not easily get in at the same hole
through which the Water passed. For in the sharp end of the Pipe, some Inches
of water will remain suspended, which, it is probable, would not happen, if the
Air could get in to succeed it, since if the hole were a little wider, the
Water would immediately subside. And though it be true, that if the Pipe be of
the length of many Inches, a great part of the Water will run down at the wider
Orifice: yet that seems to happen for some other reason, than because the Air
succeeds it at the upper and narrow Orifice, since all the slender part of the
Pipe, and perhaps some Inches more, will continue full of Water.

And on this occasion I remember, that whereas it appears by our fifth
Experiment, That the Aerial Corpuscles (except perhaps some that are
extraordinarily fine) will not pass through the Pores of a Lambs Bladder, yet
Particles of Water will, as we have long since observed, and as may be easily
tried, by very closely tying a little Alcalizate Salt (we used the Calx of
Tartar made with Nitre) in a fine Bladder, and dipping the lower end of the
Bladder in Water; for if you hold it there for a competent while, you will find
that there will strain through the Pores of the Bladder, Water enough to
dissolve the Salt into a Liquor.

But I see I am slipped into a Digression, wherefore I will not examine,
whether, the Experiment I have related, proceeded from hence, That the springy
Texture of the Corpuscles of the Air, makes them less apt to yield and
accommodate themselves easily to the narrow Pores of Bodies, than the more
flexible Particles of Water; or whether it may more probably be ascribed to
some other Cause. Nor will I stay to consider how far we may hence be assisted
to ghess at the cause of the ascension of Water in the slender Pipes, and
Siphons formerly mentioned, but will return to our Bubble; and take notice,
That we thought fit also to endeavor to measure the capacity of the Bubble we
had made use of, by filling it with Water, that we might the better know how
much Water answered in weight to of a Grain of Air, but notwithstanding all the
diligence that was used to preserve so brittle a Vessel, it broke before we
could perfect that we were about, and we were not then provided of another
Bubble fit for our turn.

The haste I was in, My Lord, when I sent away the last Sheet, made me forget
to take notice to you of a Problem that occurred to my thoughts, upon the
occasion of the slow breaking of the Glass Bubble in our evacuated Receiver.
For it may seem strange, since by our sixth Experiment it appears, that the
Air, when permitted, will by its own internal Spring expand it self twice as
much as Mersennus was able to expand it, by the heat even of a candent
AEolipile: Yet the Elater of the Air was scarce able to break a very thin Glass
Bubble, and utterly unable to break one somewhat thicker, within whose cavity
it was imprisoned; whereas Air penned up and agitated by heat is able to perform
so much more considerable effects, that (not to mention those of Rarefaction
that are more obvious) the Learned Jesuit Cabaeus (he that writ of the
Lodestone) relates, That he saw a Marble Pillar (so vast, that three men
together P: Nicol: Cab: lib: 4. Meteor: Aristot:
with displayed arms could not embrace it, and that 1000 Yoke of Oxen drawing
it several ways with all their strength, could not have torn it assunder) quite
broken off in the midst, by reason of some Wood, which happening to be burnt
just by the Pillar the heat proceeding from the neighboring Fir, so rarefied
some Air or Spirituous Matter which was shut up in the cavities of the Marble,
that it broke through the solid Body of the Stone to obtain room to expand it
self.

I remember I have taken notice that probably the reason why the included Air
did not break the hermetically sealed Bubbles that remained entire in our
emptyed Receiver, was, That the Air, being somewhat rarefied by the flame
employed to close the Glass, its Spring, upon the recess of the heat, grew
weaker than before. But though we reject not that ghess, yet it will not in the
present case serve the turn, because that much smaller Glass bubbles exactly
closed, will, by the included Air (though agitated by the heat of a very
moderate Fire) be made to fly in pieces. Whether we may be assisted to salve
this Problem, by considering that the heat does from within vehemently agitate
the Corpuscles of the Air, and add its assistance to the Spring they had
before, I shall not now examine: since I here but propose a Problem, and that
chiefly that by this memorable Story of Cabaeus, notice may be taken of the
prodigious power of Rarefaction, which hereby appears capable of performing
stranger things than any of our Experiments have hitherto ascribed to it.

We should hence, My Lord, immediately proceed to the next Experiment, but that
we think it fit, on this occasion, to acquaint You with what some former trials
(though not made in our Engine) have taught us, concerning what we would have
discovered by the newly mentioned Bubble that broke. And this the rather,
because (a great part of this Letter supposing the gravity of the Air) it will
not be impertinent to determine more particularly than hitherto we have done,
what gravity we ascribe to it.

We took then an AEolipile made of Copper, weighing six ounces, five drachms,
and eight and forty grains: this being made as hot as we durst make it, (for
fear of melting the mettle, or at least the Sodar) was removed from the fire
and immediately stopped with hard Wax that no Air at all might get in at the
little hole, wont to be left in AEolipiles for the fumes to issue out at: Then
the AEolipile being suffered leasurely to cool, was again weighed together with
the Wax that stopped it, and was found to weigh (by reason of the additional
weight of the Wax) six ounces, six drachms, and 39 grains. Lastly, the Wax
being perforated without taking any of it out of the Scale, the external Air
was suffered to rush in (which it did with some noise) and then the AEolipile
and Wax, being again weighed amounted to six ounces, six drachms, and 50
grains. So that the AEolipile freed as far as our fire could free it, from its
Air, weighed less than it self when replenished with Air, full eleven grains.
That is, the Air containable within the cavity of the AEolipile amounted to
eleven grains and somewhat more; I say somewhat more, because of the particles
of Air, that were not driven by the fire out of the AEolipile. And by the Way
(if there be no mistake in the observations of the diligent Mersennus) it may
seem strange that it should so much differ from 2 or 3 of ours; in none of
which we could rarefie the Air in our AEolipile (though made red hot almost all
over, and so immediately plunged into cold Water) to half that degree which he
mentions, namely to 70 times its natural extent, unless it were that the
AEolipile he employed was able to sustain a more vehement heat than ours (which
yet we kept in so great an one, that once the Soder melting, it fell asunder
into the two Hemispheres it consists of.)

The forementioned way of weighing the Air by the help of an AEolipile, seems
somewhat more exact than that which Mersennus used, In that in ours the
AEolipile was not weighed, till it was cold; whereas in his, being weighed red
hot, it is subject to lose of its substance in the cooling, for (as we have
elsewhere noted on another occasion) Copper heated red hot, is wont in the
cooling to throw off little thin seals in such plenty, that having purposely
watched a Copper AEolipile during its refrigeration, we have seen the place
round about it almost covered with those little scales it had every way
scattered: which, however they amount not to much, ought not to be over-looked,
when it is so light a Body as Air, that is to be weighed. We will not examine
whether, the AEolipile in cooling may not receive some little increment of
weight, either from the vapid or saline Steams that wander up and down in the
Air: But we will rather mention, that (for the greater exactness) we employed
to weigh our AElipile, both when filled only with Air and when replenished with
Water, a pair of Scales that would turn (as they speak) with the fourth part of
a grain.

As to the proportion of weight betwixt Air and Water, some learned men have
attempted it by ways so unaccurate that they seem to have much mistaken it. For
(not to mention the improbable accounts of Kepler and others.) The learned and
diligent Ricciolus, having purposely endeavored to investigate this proportion
by means of a thin bladder, estimates the weight of the Air to that of the
Water to be as one to ten thousand, or there abouts. And indeed I remember that
having formerly, on a certain occasion, weighed a large bladder full of Air,
and found it when the Air was all squeesed out, to have contained fourteen
grains of Air. I found the same bladder afterward filled with Water to contain
very near 14 pound of that liquor: according to which account, the proportion
of Air to Water was almost as a grain to a pound, that is, as one, to above
7600. To this we may add, that on the other side, Galileo himself using
another, (but an unaccurate way too,) defined the Air to be in weight to Water,
but as one to 4 hundred. But the way formerly proposed of weighing the Air by
an AEolipile, seems by great odds more exact; and (as far as we could ghess)
seemed to agree well enough with the Experiment made in our Receiver. Wherefore
it will be best to trust our AEolipile in the enquiry we are about. And
according to our observations the water it contained amounting to one and
twenty ounces and an half, and as much Air as was requisite to fill it weighing
eleven grains, the proportion in gravity of Air to Water of the same bulk will
be as one to 938. And though we could not fill the AEolipile with water, so
exactly as we would, yet in regard we could not neither as perfectly as we
would, drive the Air out of it by heat, we think the proportion may well enough
hold: but those that are delighted with round numbers (as the phrase is) will
not be much mistaken if they reckon Water to be near a thousand times heavier
than Air. And (for farther proof that we have made the proportion betwixt these
two Bodies rather greater than lesser than indeed it is: and also to confirm
our former observation of the weight of the Air) we will add, That, having
another time put some Water into the AEolipile before we set it on the fire,
that the copious vapors of the rarefied liquor might the better drive out the
Air, we found, upon trial carefully made, that when the AEolipile was
refrigerated, and the included vapors were by the cold turned again into Water
(which could not have happened to the Air, that the preceding Steams expelled)
the Air, when it was let in, increased the weight of the AEolipile as much as
before, namely, Eleven Grains; though there were already in it twelve Drachms
and a half, besides a couple of Grains of Water, which remained of that we had
formerly put into it to drive out the Air.

Mersennus indeed tells us, that by his account Air is in weight to Water, as 1
to 1356. And adds, that we may, without any danger, believe that the gravity of
Water to that of Air of a like bulk, is not less than of 1300 to 1. And
consequently that the quantity of Air to a quantity of Water equiponderant
thereto, is as 1300 to 1. But why we should relinquish our own carefully
repeated trials, I see not. Yet I am unwilling to reject those of so accurate
and useful a Writer: And therefore shall propose a way of reconciling our
differing Observations, by presenting, that the discrepance between them may
probably arise from the differing consistence of the Air at London and at
Paris: For our Air being more cold and moist, than that which Your Lordship now
breaths, may be supposed also to be a fourth or fifth part more heavy. I leave
it to be considered, whether it be of any moment that our Observations were
made in the midst of Winter, whereas his were perhaps made in some warmer time
of the Year. But I think it were not amiss, that, by the method formerly
proposed, the gravity of the Air were observed both in several Countries, and
in the same Country, in the several Seasons of the Year and differing
Temperatures of the Weather. And I would give something of value to know the
weight of such an AEolipile as ours full of Air, in the midst of Winter in Nova
Zembla, if that be true which we formerly ^ook notice of, namely, That the
Hollanders, who Wintered there, found that Air so thick that their Clock would
not go.

If Your Lordship should now ask me, if I could not by the help of these, and
our other Observations, decide the Controversies of our Modern Mathematicians
about the height of the Air or Atmosphere, by determining how high it does
indeed reach: I should answer, That though it seems easy enough to show that
diverse Famous and Applauded Writers have been mistaken in assigning the height
of the Atmosphere: Yet it seems very difficult precisely to define of what
height it is. And because we have hitherto but lightly touched upon a matter of
such importance, we presume it will not be thought impertinent, upon this
occasion, to annex something toward the Elucidation of it.

What we have already tried and newly set down, allows us to take it for
granted, that (at least about London) the proportion of gravity betwixt Water
and Air, of equal bulk, is as of a thousand to one.

The next thing therefore that we are to enquire after, in order to our present
design, is the difference in weight betwixt Water and Quicksilver: And though
this has been defined already by the Illustrious Verulam, and some other
inquisitive Persons, that have compared the weight of several Bodies, and cast
their Observations into Tables, yet we shall not scruple to annex our own
trials about it: Partly, because we find Authors considerably to disagree;
partly, because we used exacter Scales, and a somewhat more wary method than
others seem to have done: And partly also, because having prosecuted our
inquiry by two or three several ways; the small difference between the events
may assure us that we were not much mistaken.

We took then a Glass Pipe, of the form of an inverted Siphon, whose shape is
delineated in the sixteenth Figure: And pouring into it a quantity of
Quicksilver, we held it so, that the superficies of the Liquor, both in the
longer and shorter leg, lay in a Horizontal Line, denoted in the Scheme by the
pricked Line E F; then pouring Water into the longer Leg of the Siphon, till
that was almost filled, we observed the surface of the Quicksilver in that Leg
to be, by the weight of the Water, depressed, as from E to B; and in the
shorter Leg, to be as much impelled upwards as from F to C: Whereupon having
formerly stuck marks, as well at the point B, as at the opposite point D, we
measured both the distance D C to have the height of the Cylinder of
Quicksilver, which was raised above the point D (level with the surface of the
Quicksilver in the other Leg) by the weight of the Water, and the distance B A
which gave us the height of the Cylinder of Water. So that the distance D C
amounting to 2 13\54 Inches, and the height of the Water amounting 30 45\54
Inches; and the whole numbers on both sides, which the annexed Fractions being
reduced to improper Fractions of the same denomination, the proportion,
appeared to be (the denominators being left out as equal on both sides) as 121
to 1665; or by reduction, as one to 92/121.

Besides this unusual way of determining the gravity of some things, we
measured the proportion betwixt Quicksilver and Water, by the help of so exact
a balance, as loses its AEquilibrium by the hundredth part of a Grain. But
because there is wont to be committed an oversight in weighing Quicksilver and
Water, especially if the Orifice of the Vessel wherein they are put be any
thing wide, in regard that men heed not that the surface of Water in Vessels
will be concave, but that of Quicksilver notably unequal or protuberant: To
avoid this usual oversight (I say) we made use of a Glass bubble, blown very
thin at the Flame of a Lamp, that it might not be too heavy for the Balance,
and terminating in a very slender neck wherein the concavity or convexity of a
Liquor could not be considerable: This Glass weighing 23 Grains, we filled
almost with Quicksilver, and fastening a mark over against the middle of the
protuberant Superficies as near as our Eyes could judge, we found that the
Quicksilver alone weighed 299 7/12 Grains; Then the Quicksilver being poured
out, and the same Glass being filled as full of common Water, we found the
Liquor to weigh 21 Grains. Whereby it appeared the weight of Water to
Quicksilver, is as one to 13 19/28: Though our Illustrious Verulam
(questionless not for want of Judgment or Care, but of exact Instruments) Makes
the proportion betwixt those two Liquors to be greater than of 1 to 17. And to
add, that upon the bye, since Quicksilver and well rectified Spirit of Wine,
are (how justly I say not) accounted, the one the heaviest, and the other the
lightest of Liquors; we thought to fill the same Glass, and with the same
Scales to observe the difference betwixt them, which we found to be as of 1 to
16 641/1084; whereby it appeared, That the difference betwixt Spirit of Wine,
that may be made to burn all away, (such as was ours) and common Water, is as
betwixt 1 and 1 44/171.

We might here take occasion to admire, that though Water (as appeared by the
Experiment formerly mentioned of the Pewter Vessel) seems not capable of any
considerable condensation, and seems not to have interspersed in it any store
of Air; yet Quicksilver, of no greater bulk than Water, should weigh near
fourteen times as much. But having only pointed at this as a thing worthy of
consideration, we will proceed in our inquiry after the height of the
Atmosphere: And to avoid the trouble of Fractions, we will assume, that
Quicksilver is fourteen times as heavy as Water, since it wants so little of
being so.

Wherefore, having now given us the proportion of Air to Water, and Water to
Quicksilver, it will be very easy to find the proportion betwixt Air and
Quicksilver, in case we will suppose the Atmosphere to be uniformly of such a
consistence as the Air we weighed here below. For since our Engine has
sufficiently manifested that it is the AEquilibrium with the external Air, that
in the Torricellian Experiment keeps the Quicksilver from subsiding; And
since, by our accurate Experiment formerly mentioned, it appears that a
Cylinder of Mercury, able to balance a Cylinder of the whole Atmosphere,
amounted to near about thirty Inches; and since, consequently we may assume the
proportion of Quicksilver to Air to be as fourteen thousand to one; it will
follow, that a Cylinder of Air, capable to maintain an AEquilibrium, with a
Mercurial Cylinder of two Foot and an half in height, must amount to 35000 Feet
of our English measure; and consequently (reckoning five Foot to a Geometrical
Pace, and one thousand such Paces to a Mile) to seven full Miles.

But this (as we lately intimated) proceeds upon the supposition, that the Air
is every where of the same consistence that we found it near the surface of the
Earth; but that cannot with any safety be concluded, not only for the reason I
find to have been taken notice of by the Ancients, and thus expressed in Seneca.
Omnis Aer (says he) quo propior est terris hoc crassior; quemadmodum in aqua
and in omni humore faex Senec. Not. quest. lib. 4. cap. 10.
ima est, ita in Aere spississima-quaeque desidunt, but much more, because the
springy Texture of the Aerial Corpuscles; makes them capable of a very great
compression, which the weight of the incumbent part of the Atmosphere is very
sufficient to give those that be undermost and near the surface of the Earth.
And if we recall to mind those former Experiments, whereby we have manifested,
That Air, much rarefied without heat, may easily admit a farther rarefaction
from heat, and that the Air, even without being expanded by heat, is capable of
being rarefied to above one hundred and fifty times the extent it usually
possesses here below; How can it be demonstrated that the Atmosphere may not,
for ought we know, or at least for ought can be determined by our Statical and
Mechanical Experiments, rise to the height of Five and twenty German Leagues,
if not of some hundred of common Miles?

And this conjecture it self may appear very injurious to the height whereunto
Exhalations may ascend, if we will allow that there was no mistake in that
strange Observation made at Tolouse in a clear Night in August, by the diligent
Mathematician Emamuel Magnan, and thus Recorded by Ricciolus, for I have not at
hand the Author's own Book: Vidit (says he) ab hora undecima post meridiem
Ricciol. Alma. Nov. Tom. 2. lib. 10. sect. 6. prop. 50. Ex Magnan. lib. 1.
Perspectivae horariae prop. 38.
usque ad mediam noctem Luna infra horizontem posita, nubeculam quandam lucidam
prope Meridianum fere usque ad Zenith diffusam quae consideratis omnibus non
poterat nisi a sole illuminari; ideoque altior esse debuit tota umbra terrae.
Addit (continues Ricciolus) simile quid evenisse Michaeli Angelo Riccio apud
Sabinos versanti nempe viro in Mathesi eruditissimo.

Various Observations made at the feet, tops, and interjacent parts of high
Mountains, might perchance somewhat assist us to make an estimate in what
proportion, if in any certain one, the higher Air is thicker than the lower,
and ghess at the difform consistence, as to laxity and compactness of the Air
at several distances from us. And if the difficulties about the refractions of
the Celestial Lights, were satisfactorily determined, that might also much
conduce to the placing due limits to the Atmosphere (whose, Dimensions those
Observations about Refractions seem hitherto much to contract.) But for the
present we dare not pronounce any thing peremptorily concerning the height of
it, but leave it to farther inquiry: contenting our selves to have manifested
the mistake of diverse eminent Modern Writers, who will not allow the Atmosphere
to exceed above two or three Miles in height (as the Famous Kepler will not the
Aer refractivus) and to have rendered a reason why in the mention we made in the
Notes upon the first Experiment touching the height of the Atmosphere, we
scrupled not to speak of it, as if it might be many Miles high.

EXPERIMENT XXXVII.
WE will now proceed to recite a Phenomenon, which, though made amongst the
first, we thought fit not to mention till after many others, that we might have
the opportunity to observe as many Circumstances of it as we could, and so
present Your Lordship at once, most of what we at several times have taken
notice of concerning so odd a Phenomenon.

Our Engine had not been long finished, when, at the first leisure we could
steal from our occasions to make trial of it, we caused the Air to be pumped
out of the Receiver; and whilst I was busied in entertaining a Learned Friend
that just then came to visit me, an Ingenious By-stander, thought he perceived
some new kind of Light in the Receiver, of which giving me hastily notice, my
Friend and I presently observed, that when the Sucker was drawn down,
immediately upon the turning of the Key, there appeared a kind of Light in the
Receiver, almost like a faint flash of Lightning in the Daytime, and almost as
suddenly did it appear and vanish. Having, not without some amazement, observed
diverse of these apparitions of Light, we took notice that the Day was clear,
the hour about ten in the Morning, that the only Window in the Room faced the
North; and also, that by interposing a Cloak, or any opacous Body between the
Receiver and the Window, though the rest of the Room were sufficiently
enlightened, yet the flashes did not appear as before, unless the opacous Body
were removed. But not being able on all these Circumstances to ground any firm
Conjecture at the cause of this surprising Phenomenon, as soon as Night was
come, we made the Room very dark; and plying the Pump, as in the Morning, we
could not, though we often tried, find, upon the turning of the Key, so much as
the least glimmering of Light; whence we inferred, that the flash appearing in
the Receiver, did not proceed from any new Light generated there, but from some
reflections of the light of the Sun, or other Luminous Bodies placed without it;
though whence the Reflection should proceed, it posed us to conjecture.

Wherefore the next Morning, hoping to inform our selves better, we went about
to repeat the Experiment, but though we could as well as formerly exhaust the
Receiver, though the place wherein we made the trial was the very same; and
though other Circumstances were resembling, yet we could not discover the least
appearance of Light all that Day, nor on diverse others on which trial was again
fruitlesly made; nor can we to this very time be sure a Day beforehand that
these Flashes will be to be seen in our great Receiver. Nay, having once found
the Engine in a good humor (if I may so speak) to show this trick, and sent
notice of it to our Learned Friend Dr. Wallis, who expressed a great desire to
see this Phenomenon, though he were not then above a Bow-shoot off, and made
haste to fatisfie his Curiosity; yet by that time he was come, the thing he
came for was no longer to be seen; so that having vainly endeavored to exhibit
again the Phenomenon in his prefence, I began to apprehend what he might think
of me, when unexpectedly the Engine presented us a flash, and after that a
second, and as many more, as sufficed to satisfy him that we might very well
confidently relate, that we have our selves seen this Phenomenon, though not
confidently promise to show it others.

And this unsuccessfulness whereto our Experiment is liable, being such, that
by all our watchfulness and trials, we could never reduce it to any certain
Rules or Observations; since in all constitutions of the Weather, times of the
Day, etc. It will sometimes answer, and sometimes disappoint our expectations;
We are much discouraged from venturing to frame an Hypothesis to give an
account of it: which if the Experiment did constantly succeed, might the more
hopefully be attempted; by the help of the following Phenomenon laid together:
some of them produced upon trials purposely made to examine the validity of the
conjectures, other trials had suggested.

First then we observed, that the Apparition of Light may be made as well by
Candlelight, as by Daylight; and in whatever position the Candle be held, in
reference to the Receiver, as on this or that hand of it, above it, beneath it,
or any other way, provided the beams of Light be not hindered from falling upon
the Vessel.

Next, we noted that the flash appears immediately upon the turning of the Key,
to let the Air out of the Receiver into the emptied Cylinder, in so much that I
remember not that when at any time in our great Receiver, the Stop-cock was
opened before the Cylinder was exhausted (whereby it came to pass that the Air
did rather descend, than rush into the Cylinder) the often mentioned flash
appeared to our eyes.

Yet, we farther observed, that when instead of the great Receiver we made use
of a small Glass, not containing above a pound and a half of Water, the
Phenomenon might be exhibited though the Stop-cock were open, provided the
Sucker were drawn nimbly down.

We noted too, that when we began to empty the Receiver, the appearances of
Light were much more conspicuous than toward the latter end, when little Air
at a time could pass out of the Receiver.

We observed also, that when the Sucker had not been long before well Oiled,
and instead of the great Receiver, the smaller Vessel abovementioned was
emptied; We observed, I say, that then, upon the opening of the Stop-cock, as
the Air descended out of the Glass into the emptied Cylinder, so at the same
time there ascended out of the Cylinder into the Vessel a certain steam, which
seemed to consist of very little Bubbles, or other minute Corpuscles thrown up
from the Oil, rarefied by the attrition it suffered in the Cylinder. For at the
same time that these Steams ascended into the Glass, some of the same kind
manifestly issued out like a little Pillar of Smoke at the Orifice of the
Valve, when that was occasionally opened. And these Steams frequently enough
presenting themselves to our view, we found, by exposing the Glass to a clear
Light, that they were wont to play up and down in it, and so by their
whitishness, to emulate in some measure the apparition of Light.

For we likewise sometimes found, by watchful observation, that when the Flash
was great, not only at the very instant the Receiver lost of its transparency,
by appearing full of some kind of whitish substance; but that for some short
time after the sides of the Glass continued somewhat opacous, and seemed to be
darkened, as if some whitish Steam adhered to the inside of them.

He that would render a Reason of the Phenomenon, whereof all these are not
all the Circumstances, must do two things; whereof the one is difficult, and
the other little less than impossible: For he must give an account not only
whence the appearing whiteness proceeds, but wherefore that whiteness does
sometimes appear, and sometimes not.

For our part, we freely confess our selves at a loss about rendering a Reason
of the less difficult part of the Problem: And though Your Lordship should even
press us to declare what Conjecture it was, that the above recited
Circumstances suggested to us, we should propose the thoughts we then had, no
otherwise than as bare Conjectures.

In case then our Phenomenon had constantly and uniformly appeared, we should
have suspected it to have been produced after some such manner as follows.

First, we observed that, thought that which we saw in our Receiver seemed to
be some kind of Light, yet it was indeed but a whiteness which did (as has
already been noted) opacate (as some speak) the inside of the Glass.

Next we considered, that our common Air abounds with Particles, or little
Bodies, capable to reflect the beams of Light. Of this we might easily give
diverse proofs, but we shall name but two: The one, that vulgar observation of
the Motes that appear in multitudes swimming up and down in the Air, when the
Sunbeams shooting into a Room, or any other shady place, discover them, though
otherwise the Eye cannot distinguish them from the rest of the Air: The other
proof we will take from what we (and no doubt very many others) have observed,
touching the Illumination of the Air in the Night. And we particularly
remember, that, being at some distance from London one Night, that the People,
upon a very welcome occasion, testified their Joy by numerous Bon-fires;
though, by reason of the Interposition of the Houses, we could not see the
Fires themselves, yet we could plainly see the Air all enlightened over and
near the City; which argued, that the lucid Beams shot upwards from the fires,
met in the Air with Corpuscles opacous enough to reflect them to our Eyes.

A third thing that we considered, was, That white may be produced (without
excluding otherways, or denying invisible Pores in the solidest Bodies) when
the continuity of a Diaphanous Body happens to be interrupted by a great number
of surfaces, which, like so many little Looking-glasses, do confusedly
represent a multitude of little and seemingly contiguous Images of the lucid
Body. We shall not insist on the explanation of this, but refer You for it to
what we have said in another Paper (touching Colors.) But the Instances that
seem to prove it are obvious: For Water or whites of Eggs beaten to froth, do
lose their transparency and appear white. And having out of one of our lessers
Receivers carefully drawn out the Air, and so ordered it, that the hole by
which the Water was to get in, was exceeding small, that the Liquor might be
the more broken in its passage through it, we observed with pleasure, That, the
Neck being held under Water, and the little hole newly mentioned being opened,
the Water that rushed in was so broken, and acquired such a multitude of new
Surfaces, that the Receiver seemed to be full rather of Milk than Water. We
have likewise found out, That by heating a lump of Crystal to a certain degree,
and quenching it in fair Water, it would be discontinu'd by such a multitude of
Cracks, (which created new Surfaces within it) that though it would not fall
asunder, but retain its former shape, yet it would lose its transparency, and
appear white.

Upon these Considerations, My Lord, and some others, it seemed not absurd to
imagine, That upon the rushing of the Air out of the Receiver into the emptied
Cylinder, the Air in the Receiver being suddenly and vehemently expanded, the
Texture of it was as suddenly altered, and the parts made so to shift places
(and perhaps some of them to change postures) as during their new and vehement
motion and their varied situation, to disturb the wonted continuity, and so the
Diaphaneity of the Air; which (as we have already noted) upon its ceasing to be
a transparent Body, without the interposition of colored things, must easily
degenerate into white.

Several things there were that made this Conjecture seem the less improbable.
As first, That the whiteness always appeared greater when the exsuction began
to be made, whilst there was store of Air in the Receiver, than when the Air
was in great part drawn out. And next, That, having exhausted the Receiver, and
applied to the hole in the Stop-cock a large bubble of clear Glass, in such a
manner, that we could at pleasure let the Air pass out at the small Glass into
the great one, and easily fill the small one with Air again, We observed with
pleasure, That, upon the opening the passage betwixt the two Glasses, the Air
in the smaller having so much room in the greater to receive it, the
Dissilition of that Air was so great, that the small Viol seemed to be full of
Milk; and this Experiment we repeated several times. To which we may add, That,
having provided a small Receiver, whose upper Orifice was so narrow that I
could stop it with my Thumb, I observed, that when, upon the exsuction of the
Air, the capacity of the Glass appeared white, if, by a sudden removal of my
Thumb, I let in the outward Air, that whiteness would immediately vanish. And
whereas it may be objected, That in the Instance formerly mentioned, Water
turning from perspicuous to white, there intervenes the Air, which is a Body of
a Heterogeneous nature, and must turn it into Bubbles to make it lose its
transparency. We may borrow an Answer from an Experiment we deliver in another
Treatise, where we teach, how to make two very volatile Liquors, which being
gently put together, are clear as Rock-water, and yet will almost in a moment,
without the sub-ingression of Air to turn them into Bubbles, so alter the
disposition of their insensible parts, as to become a white and consistent
Body. And this happens not as in the precipitation of Benjamin, and some other
Resinous Bodies, which being dissolved in spirit of Wine, may, by the effusion
of fair Water, be turned into a seemingly Milky substance. For this whiteness
belongs not to the whole Liquor, but to the Corpuscles of the dissolved Gum,
which after a while subsiding leave the Liquor transparent, themselves only
remaining white: Whereas in our case, it is from the varied texture of the whole
formerly transparent fluid Body, and not from this or that part, that this
whiteness results: For the Body is white throughout, and will long continue so;
and yet may, in process of time, without any addition, be totally reduced into
a transparent Body as before.

But besides the Conjecture insisted on all this while, we grounded another
upon the following Observation, which was, That having conveyed some smoke into
our Receiver placed against a Window, we observed, that upon the exsuction of
the Air, the Corpuscles that were swimming in it, did manifestly enough make
the Receiver seem more opacous at the very moment of the rushing out of the
Air: For considering that the whiteness, whose cause we enquire of, did but
sometimes appear, it seemed not impossible but that at such times the Air in
the Receiver might abound with Particles, capable of reflecting the Light in
the manner requisite to exhibit a white color, by their being put into a
certain unusual Motion. As may be in some measure illustrated by this, That the
new motion of the freshly mentioned Fumes, made the inside of the Receiver
appear somewhat darker than before: And partly by the nature of our formerly
mentioned smoking Liquor, whose parts, though they seemed transparent whilst
they composed a Liquor, yet when the same Corpuscles, upon the unstopping of
the Glass, were put into a new motion, and disposed after a new manner, they
did opacate that part of the Air they moved in, and exhibited a greater
whiteness than that which sometimes appears in our Pneumatical Vessel. Nor
should we content our selves with this single Instance, to manifest, That
little Bodies, which being ranged after one manner, are Diaphanous and
Colour-less, may, by being barely agitated, dispersed, and consequently
otherways ranged, exhibit a color, if we were not unwilling to rob our
Collection of Experiments concerning Colors.

But, My Lord, I foresee You may make some Objections against our proposed
ghess, which perhaps I shall scarce be able to answer, especially, if You
insist upon having me render a Reason why our Phenomenon appears not
constantly.

I might indeed answer, that probably it would do so, if instead of our great
Receiver we use such a small Viol as we have lately mentioned, wherein the
Dissilition of the Air being much greater, is like to be the more conspicuous:
Since I remember not that we ever made our trial with such small Vessels,
without finding the expected whiteness to appear. But it would remain to be
explicated, why in our great Receiver the Phenomenon should sometimes be seen,
and oftentimes not appear. And though that Conjecture which we last made should
not be rejected, yet if we were farther pressed to assign a reason why the Air
should abound with such Particles, as we there suppose, more at one time than
another, we are not yet provided of any better Answer, than this general one,
That the Air about us, (and much more that within the Receiver,) may be much
altered by such causes as few are aware of: For, not to repeat those probable
Arguments of this Assertion which we have occasionally mentioned here and there
in the former part of this Epistle, we will here set down two or three
Instances to verify the same Proposition. First, I find that the Learned
Josephus Acosta, among other Judicious Observations he made in America, has
this concerning the effects of some Joseph. Acosta's Not. and Mor. Hyst. of the
Indies, jib. 3. cap. 9.
Winds: There are (says he) Winds which naturally trouble the Water of the
Sea, and make it green, and black; others, clear as Crystal. Next, we have
observed, That though we conveyed into the Receiver our Scales, and the Pendula
formerly mentioned, clean and bright; yet aster the Receiver had been emptied,
and the Air let in again, the gloss or luster both of the one, and of the
other, appeared tarnish'd by a beginning rust. And in the last place, we will
subjoyn an Observation we made some Years ago, which has been heard of by
diverse Ingenious Men, and seen by some of them: We had, with pure Spirit of
Wine, drawn a Tincture out of a certain Concrete which uses to be reckoned
among Mineral Bodies; And this Tincture being very pure and transparent, we
did, because we put a great value upon it, put into a Crystal Viol which we
carefully stopped, and locked up in a Press among some other things that we
specially prized. This Liquor being a Chemical Rarity, and besides very
defecate, and of a pleasing Golden color; we had often occasion to look upon
it, and so to take notice, that one time it seemed to be very much troubled,
and not clear as it was wont to be: Whereupon we imagined, that though it would
be something strange, yet it was not impossible, that some Precipitation of the
Mineral Corpuscles was then happening, and that thence the Liquor was opacated.
But, finding after some days that though the expected Precipitation had not
been made, yet the Liquor, retaining its former vivid Color, was grown clear
again as before; we somewhat wondered at it, and locking it up again in the
same Press, we resolved to observe, both whether the like changes would again
appear in our Tincture; and whether in case they should appear, they would be
ascribable to the alterations of the Weather. But though, during the greatest
part of a Winter and a Spring, we took pleasure to observe, how the Liquor
would often grow turbid, and after a while clear again: Yet we could not find
that these Mutations depended upon any that were manifest in the Air, which
would be often dark and clouded, when the Tincture was clear and transparent;
as on the other side, in clear Weather the Liquor would appear sometimes
troubled, and more opacous. So that being unable to give an account of these
odd changes in our Tincture (which we suppose we have not yet lost, though we
know not whether it has lost its fickle Nature) either by those of the Air, or
any thing else that occurred to our thoughts; we could not but suspect, that
there may be in diverse Bodies, as it were Spontaneous Mutations, that is, such
changes as depend not upon manifest Causes. But, My Lord, what has been all
this while said concerning our Phenomenon, is offered to You, not as
containing a satisfactory account of it, but to assist You to give Your self
one.

EXPERIMENT XXXVIII.
WE took a Glass Vessel, open at the top, and into it we put a mixture of Snow
and common Salt, (such a mixture as we have in another Treatise largely
discoursed of) and into the midst of this mixture we set a Glass, of a
Cylindrical form, closely stopped at the lower end with Plaster, and open at
the upper, at which we filled it with common Water. These things being let down
into the Receiver, and the Pump being set on work, the Snow began to melt
somewhat faster than we expected; Whether upon the account of the exsuction of
the Air, or because there was but little of the Snow, or whether for any other
Reason, it appeared doubtful. But however, by that time the Receiver had been
considerably exhausted, which was done in less than of an hour, we perceived
the Water near the bottom of the Glass Cylinder to Freeze, and the Ice by a
little longer stay, seemed to increase, and to rise somewhat higher than the
surface of the surrounding Liquor, whereinto almost all the Snow and Salt were
resolved. The Glass being taken out, it appeared that the Ice was as thick as
the inside of the Glass it filled, though into that I could put my Thumb. The
upper surface of the Ice was very concave, which whether it were due to any
unheeded accident, or to the exsuction of the Air, we leave to be determined by
farther trial. And lastly, the Ice held against the Light, appeared not
destitute of Bubbles, though some Bystanders thought they were fewer than
would have been found if the Water had been frozen in the open Air. The like
Experiment we tried also another time in one of our small Receivers, with not
unlike success.

And on this occasion, My Lord, give me leave to propose a Problem, which shall
be this: Whence proceeds that strange force that we may sometimes observe in
frozen Water, to break the Bodies that imprison it, though hard and solid? That
there is such a force in Water exposed to Congelation, may be gathered not only
from what may be often observed in Winter, of the bursting of Glasses too close
stopped, filled with Water or aqueous Liquors, but by Instances as much more
considerable as less obvious. For I remember, that an Ingenious Stone-cutter
not long since complained to me, That sometimes, through the negligence of
Servants, the Rain being suffered to soak into Marble Stones, the supervening
violent Frosts would burst the Stones, to the Possessour's no small damage. And
I remember another Tradesman, in whose House I had Lodgings, was last Winter
complaining, that even Implements made of Bellmetal, being carelessly exposed to
the wet, have been broken and spoiled by the Water, which, having gotten into
the little Cavities and Crannies of the Metal, was there afterward frozen and
expanded into Ice. And to these Relations, we can add one of the formerly
mentioned Cabaeus's, whereby In lib. 4. Meleor. Arist.
they not only may be confirmed; but are surpassed: For he tells us, That he
saw a huge Vessel of exceeding hard Marble, split asunder by congealed Water,
whose rarefaction, says our Author, proved so vehement, that the hardness of
the Stone yielded to it; and so a vessel was broken, which would not have been
so by 100 Yoke of Oxen drawing it several ways. I know, My Lord, that to solve
this Problem, it will be said, That Congelation does not (as is commonly, but
erroneously presumed) reduce Water into less room than it possessed before, but
rather makes it take up more. And I have elsewhere proved by particular
Experiments, That whether or no Ice may be truly said to be Water rarefi'd (for
that seems questionable) it may be said to take up more room than the Water did
before Glaciation. But though we grant that freezing makes Water swell, yet,
how cold (which in Weather-Glasses manifestly condenseth the Air) should expand
either the Water, or the intercepted Air so forcibly, as to perform such things
as we have newly related, will yet remain a Problem.

EXPERIMENT XXXIX.
WE took an Oval Glass, clear and (lest it should break) pretty strong, with a
short Neck at the obtuser end; through this Neck, we thrust almost to the
bottom, a Pipe of Glass, which was closely cemented to the newly mentioned
Neck, the upper part of which Pipe, was drawn in some places more slender than
a Crows Quill, that the changes of the Air in that Glass Egg might be the more
conspicuous; Then there was conveyed into the Glass five or six Spoon-fulls of
Water, part of which, by blowing Air into the Egg, was raised into the
abovementioned slender part of the Pipe, so that the Water was interposed
between the external Air, and that included in the Egg. This Weather glass
(delineated in the fourteenth Figure) was so placed, and closed up in the
cavity of one of our small Receivers, that only the slender part of the Pipe,
to the height of four or five Inches, passing through a hole in the Cover
remained exposed to the open Air.

The Pump being set a work, upon the exsuction of the Air, the Water in the
Pipe descended about a quarter of an Inch, and this upon two or three
reiterated trials; which seemed sufficiently to argue, that there was no heat
produced in the Receiver upon the exsuction of the Air: For even a little heat
would probably have been discovered by that Weather-glass, since upon the bare
application of my hand to the outside of the Receiver, the warmth having after
some time been communicated or propagated through both the Glasses, and the
interval betwixt them, to the imprisoned Air, did so rarefie that, as to enable
it, by pressing upon the subjacent Water, to impel that in the Pipe very many
times as far as it had fallen downwards upon the exsuction of the Air.

Yet shall not we conclude, that in the cavity of the Receiver the cold was
greater after the exsuction of the Air than before.

For if it be demanded what then could cause the forementioned subsiding of
the Water? it may be answered, That probably it was the reaching of the Glass
Egg, which, upon the exsuction of the ambient Air, was unable to resist
altogether as much as formerly the pressure of the included Air, and of the
Atmosphere, which, by the intervention of the Water, pressed upon its concave
surface: Which seemed probable, as well by what was above delivered, in the
Experiment about the breaking of the Glass by the force of the Atmosphere; as
by this notable Circumstance (which we diverse times observed) That when by
drawing the Air out of the Receiver, the Water in the Pipe was subsided, upon
the readmission of the external Air, to press against the unequal surface of
the Egg, the Water was presently re-impell'd to its former height: Which would
perhaps appear less strange to Your Lordship, if You had yet seen, what we have
heretofore taught in another Treatise, concerning the Spring that may be
discovered in Glass, as rigid and inflexible a Body as it is generally
esteemed. And in the mean while it may serve the turn, to cause a Glass Egg to
be blown exceeding thin; and then, having broken it, try how far you can by
degrees bend some narrow parts of it; and how readily, upon the removal of what
kept it bent, it will restore it self to its former state or posture. But to
return to our Experiment: From thence it seems probable, either that there
succeeds no Body in the room of the Air drawn out of our Receiver; or that it
is not every Matter that is suotle enough readily to pass through the Pores of
Glass, that is always agitated enough to produce Heat where ever it is
plentifully found. So that if no Vacuum be to be admitted, this Experiment
seems to invite us to allow a great disparity, either as to bulk, or as to
agitation, or as to both, betwixt some parts of the Etherial substance, and
those that are wont here below to produce Heat and Fire.

We tried also what Operation the drawing out of the Air would have upon
Camphire, that being a Body, which, though not a Liquor, consists of such
Volatile or Fugitive parts, that without any greater agitation than that of the
open Air it self, they will copiously fly away. But we sound not that even
this loose Body was sensibly altered by the exsuction of the ambient Air.

EXPERIMENT XL.
IT may seem well worth trying, whether or no in our exhausted Glass the want
of an ambient Body, of the wonted thickness of Air, would disable even light
and little Animals, as Bees, and other winged Insects, to fly. But though we
easily foresaw how difficult it would be to make such an Experiment; yet not to
omit our endeavors: We procured a large Flesh Fly, which we conveyed into a
small Receiver. We also another time shut into a great Receiver a Humming Be,
that appeared strong and lively, though we had rather have made the trial with
a Butter-fly, if the cold Season would have permitted us to find any. Since the
writing of this XLth Experiment, we procured a white Butter-Fly, and enclosed
it in one of our smaller Receivers, where, though at first he fluttered up and
down, yet presently, upon the exsuction of the Air, he fell down as in a swoon,
retaining no other motion than some little trembling of the Wings.
The Fly, after some exsuctions of the Air, dropped down from the side of the
Glass whereon she was walking: But, that the Experiment with the Be might be
the more instructive, we conveyed in with her a bundle of Flowers, which
remained suspended by a string near the upper part of the Receiver: And having
provoked the Be, we excited her to fly up and down, the capacity of the
Vessel, till at length, as we desired, she lighted upon the Flowers; whereupon
we presently began to draw out the Air, and observed, That though for some time
the Be seemed to take no notice of it, yet within a while after she did not
fly, but fall down from the Flowers; without appearing to make any use of her
Wings to help her self. But whether this fall of the Be, and the other Insect,
proceeded from the mediums being too thin for them to fly in, or barely from
the weakness, and as it were swooning of the Animals themselves, you will
easily gather from the following Experiment.

EXPERIMENT XLI.
TO satisfy our selves in some measure, about the account upon which
Respiration is so necessary to the Animals, that Nature has furnished with
Lungs, we took (being then unable to procure any other lively Bird, small
enough to be put into the Receiver) a Lark, one of whose Wings had been broken
by a shot, of a Man that we had sent to provide us some Birds for our
Experiment; but notwithstanding this hurt, the Lark was very lively, and did,
being put into the Receiver, diverse times spring up in it to a good height. The
Vessel being hastily, but carefully closed, the Pump was diligently plied, and
the Bird for a while appeared lively enough; but upon a greater exsuction of
the Air, she began manifestly to droop and appear sick, and very soon after was
taken with as violent and irregular Convulsions, as are wont to be observed in
Poultry, when their heads are wrung off: For the Bird threw her self over and
over two or three times, and dyed with her Breast upward, her Head downwards,
and her Neck awry. And though upon the appearing of these Convulsions, we
turned the Stop-cock, and let in the Air upon her, yet it came too late;
whereupon casting our Eyes upon one of those accurate Dyals that go with a
Pendulum, and were of late ingeniously invented by the Noble and Learned
Hugenius, we found that the whole Tragedy had been concluded within ten Minutes
of an hour, part of which time had been employed in cementing the Cover to the
Receiver. Soon after we got a Hen-sparrow which being caught with Bird-lime was
not at all hurt; when we put her into the Receiver, almost to the top of which
she would briskly raise her self, the Experiment being tried with this Bird, as
it was with the former, she seemed to be dead within seven minutes, one of
which were employed in cementing on the Cover: But upon the speedy turning of
the Key, the fresh Air flowing in, began slowly to revive her, so that aster
some pantings she opened her eyes, and regained her feet, and in about a of an
hour after, threatened to make an escape at the top of the Glass, which had been
unstopped to let in the fresh Air upon her: But the Receiver being closed the
second time, she was killed with violent Convulsions, within five Minutes from
the beginning of the Pumping.

A while after we put in a Mouse, newly taken, in such a Trap as had rather
affrighted than hurt him; whilst he was leaping up very high in the Receiver,
we fastened the Cover to it, expecting that an Animal used to live in narrow
holes with very little fresh Air, would endure the want of it better than the
lately mentioned Birds: But though, for a while after the Pump was set a work,
he continued leaping up as before; yet, 'twas not long ere he began to appear
sick and giddy, and to stagger: after which he fell down as dead, but without
such violent Convulsions as the Bird died with. Wherepon, hastily turning the
Key, we let in some fresh Air upon him, by which he recovered, after a while,
his senses and his feet, but seemed to continue weak and sick: But at length,
growing able to skip as formerly, the Pump was plied again for eight minutes,
about the middle of which space, if not before a very little Air by a mischance
got in at the Stop-cock; and about two minutes after that, the Mouse diverse
times leaped up lively enough, though after about two minutes more he fell down
quite dead, yet with Convulsions far milder than those wherewith the two Birds
expired. This alacrity so little before his death, and his not dying sooner
than at the end of the eighth minute, seemed ascribable to the Air (how little
soever) that slipped into the Receiver. For the first time, those Convulsions
(that, if they had not been suddenly remedied, had immediately dispatched him)
seized on him in six minutes after the Pump began to be set a work. These
Experiments seemed the more strange, in regard that during a great part of
those few minutes the Engine could but considerably rarefie the Air (and that
too, but by degrees) and at the end of them there remained in the Receiver no
inconsiderable quantity; as may appear by what we have formerly said of our not
being able to draw down Water in a Tube, within much less than a Foot of the
bottom: With which we likewise considered, that by the exsuction of the Air and
interspersed Vapors, there was left in the Receiver a space some hundreds of
times exceeding the bigness of the Animal, to receive the fuliginous Steams,
from which, expiration discharges the Lungs; and, which in the other cases
hitherto known, may be suspected, for want of room, to stifle those Animals
that are closely penned up in too narrow Receptacles.

I forgot to mention, that having caused these three Creatures to be opened, I
could, in such small Bodies, discover little of what we sought for, and what we
might possibly have found in larger Animals; for though the Lungs of the Birds
appeared very red, and as it were inflamed, yet that color being usual enough
in the Lungs of such winged Creatures, deserves not so much our notice, as it
does, That in almost all the destructive Experiments made in our Engine, the
Animals appeared to die with violent Convulsive motions: From which, whether
Physicians can gather any thing toward the discovery of the Nature of
Convulsive Distempers, I leave to them to consider.

Having proceeded thus far, though (as we have partly intimated already) there
appeared not much cause to doubt, but that the death of the forementioned
Animals proceeded rather from the want of Air, than that the Air was
overclogg'd by the steams of their Bodies, exquisitely penned up in the Glass;
yet I, that love not to believe any thing upon Conjectures, when by a not
over-difficult Experiment I can try whether it be true or no, thought it the
safest way to obviate Objections, and remove Scruples, by shutting up another
Mouse as close as I could in the Receiver, wherein it lived about three
quarters of an hour; and might probably have done so much longer, had not a
Virtuoso of quality, who in the mean while chanced to make me a Visit, desired
to see whether or no the Mouse could be killed by the exsuction of the ambient
Air whereupon we thought fit to open, for a little while, an intercourse
betwixt the Air in the Receiver, and that without it, that the Mouse might
thereby (if it were needful for him) be refreshed, and yet we did this without
uncementing the Cover at the top, that it might not be objected, that perhaps
the Vessel was more closely stopped for the exsuction of the Air than before.

The Experiment had this event, that after the Mouse had lived ten Minutes,
(which we ascribed to this that the Pump, for want of having been lately Oyled,
could move but slowly, and could not by him that managed it, be made to work as
nimbly as it was wont) at the end of that time he died with Convulsive Fits,
wherein he made two or three bounds into the Air, before he fell down dead.

Nor was I content with this, but for Your Lordships farther satisfaction, and
my own, I caused a Mouse, that was very hungry, to be shut in all Night, with a
Bed of Paper for him to rest upon: And to be sure that the Receiver was well
closed, I caused some Air to be drawn out of it, whereby, perceiving that there
was no sensible leak, I presently readmitted the Air at the Stop-cock, lest the
want of it should harm the little Animal; and then I caused the Engine to be
kept all Night by the Fire side, to keep him from being destroyed by the
immoderate cold of the Frosty Night. And this care succeeded so well, that the
next Morning I found that the Mouse not only was alive, but had devoured a good
part of the Cheese that had been put in with him. And having thus kept him
alive full twelve hours, or better, we did, by sucking out part of the Air,
bring him to droop, and to appear swelled; and by letting in the Air again, we
soon reduced him to his former liveliness.

A Digression containing some Doubts touching Respiration.
I Fear Your Lordship will now expect, that to these Experiments I should add
my Reflections on them, and attempt, by their assistence, to resolve the
difficulties that occur about Respiration; since at the beginning I
acknowledged a farther enquiry into the Nature of that, to have been my design
in the related Trials. But I have yet, because of the inconvenient season of
the Year, made so few Experiments, and have been so little satisfied by those I
have been able to make, that they have hitherto made Respiration appear to me
rather a more, than a less Mysterious thing, than it did before. But yet, since
they have furnished me with some such new Considerations, concerning the use of
the Air, as confirms me in my Diffidence of the truth of what is commonly
believed touching that matter; That I may not appear sullen or lazy, I am
content not to decline employing a few hours in setting down my Doubts, in
presenting Your Lordship some Hints, and in considering whether the Trials made
in our Engine, will at least assist us to discover wherein the Deficiency lies
that needs to be supplied.

And this, My Lord, being all my present Design, I suppose You will not expect
that (as if You knew not, or had forgotten what Anatomists are wont to teach) I
should entertain You with a needless Discourse of the Organs of Respiration,
and the variety of their Structure in several Animals; though if it were
necessary, and had not been performed by others I should think, with Galen,
that by treating of the Fabrics of living Bodies, I might compose Hymns to the
wise Author of Nature, who, in the excellent contrivance of the Lungs, and
other parts of (those admirable Engines) Animals, manifests himself to be
indeed what the Eloquent Prophet most justly speaks him, Wonderful in Council,
and excellent in working.

Nor shall we any farther meddle with those Controversies so much agitated
among the Moderns, namely, Whether the motion of the Lungs in Respiration be
their own, or but consequent to the motion of the Thorax, Diaphragme, and (as
some Learned Men would have it) the Abdomen; And, Whence it is that the Air
swells the Lungs in Inspiration, any farther than they may receive light from
our Engine: But that it may appear what kind of service it is that may be
expected from it on this occasion, we must premise a few Words to show wherein
the strength of the Objection we are to answer, lies: In favor then of those
that would have the Lungs rather passive than active in the business of
Respiration, it may against the common opinion be alleged, That as the Lungs
being destitute of Muscles and of Fibers, are unfit to dilate themselves; so it
appears, that without the motion of the Thorax they would not be filled with
Air. Since as our Learned Friend Dr. Highmore has well (and congruously, to
what our selves have purposely tried) observed, if a live Dog have a great
wound made in his Chest, the Lobes of the Lungs on that side of the Mediastinum
will subside and lie still; the Thorax and the Lobes on the other side of the
Mediastinum, continuing their former motion. And if suddenly at once the
Muscles of the Chest be on both sides dissected, upon the Ingress of the Air,
the whole Lungs, though untouched, will remain moveless, at least, as to any
expansion or contraction of their substance.

To which we may add the Observation of the diligent Bartholinus, who affirms
the like of the Diaphragme also, namely, That it being wounded, the Lungs will
fall together, and the Respiration cease, which my Experiments oppose not,
provided the Wound be any thing great. And indeed the Diaphragme seems the
principal Instrument of ordinary and gentle Respiration, although to restrained
Respiration (if I may so call it) the intercostal Muscles, and perhaps some
others may be allowed eminently to concur. But the chief of the Controversies
formerly pointed at, is not yet decided, namely, what it is that conveys the
Air into the Lungs. For when, to counterballance all that has been alleged,
those that plead for the Lungs demand what it is that should bring the Air into
the Lungs, if themselves do not attract it, their Antagonists disagree about
the Reply. For when to this question some of the best Modern Philosophers
answer, That by the dilatation of the Chest the contiguous Air is thrust away,
and that pressing upon the next Air to it, and so onwards, the Propulsion it
continued till the Air be driven into the Lungs, and so dilate them: When this
(I say) is answered, it is Objected even by Bartholine himself, as a convincing
Reply, that, according to this Doctrine, a Man could not fetch his Breath from
a great Vessel full of Air, with a slender Neck, because, that when his Mouth
covers the Orifice of the Neck, the dilatation of his Thorax could not propell
the Air in the Vessel into his Lungs, by reason of its being separated by the
enclosing Vessel from the ambient Air; and yet, say they, Experience
witnesses, that out of such a Vessel a Man may suck Air. But of this
difficulty our Engine furnishes us with an easy Solution, since many of: the
former Experiments have manifested, That in the case proposed, there needs not
be made any (though it is true that in ordinary Respiration there is wont to be
made some) propulsion of the Air by the swelling Thorax or Abdomen into the
Lungs; since upon the bare Dilatation of the Thorax, the Spring of that
internal Air, or halituous substance that is wont to possess as much of the
cavity of the Chest as the Lungs fill not up, being much weakened, the external
and contiguous Air must necessarily press in at the open Wind pipe into the
Lungs, as finding there less resistance than any where else about it.

And hence (by the way) we may derive a new assistance to judge of that famous
Controversy disputed among Naturalists and Physicians, ever since Galen's
time, some maintaining that the Chest, with the contained Lungs, may be
resembled to a pair of Bellows, which comes therefore to be filled because it
was dilated: And others pleading to have the comparison made to a Bladder,
which is therefore dilated because it is filled. For as to the Thorax, it seems
evident from what has been lately said, that it, like a pair of Bellows,
happens to be partly filled with Air, but because it was dilated: But as for
the Lungs themselves, who want Fibers to distend them, they may fitly enough be
compared to a Bladder; since they are dilated by being filled, namely, by that
Air which rusheth into them upon the dilatation of the Chest, in whose
increased cavity it finds (as we freshly noted) less resistance to its Spring
than elsewhere. And this brings into my mind that strange Observation of
Nicolaus Fontanus, a Physician at Amsterdam, who testifies, That in a Boy of
the same Town, four years old, there was found, instead of Lungs, a certain
Membranous Bladder; which being filled with Wind, and furnished with little
Veins, had its origination from the Windpipe it self; which being supposed
true, how well it will agree with most of the Opinions touching Respiration, I
leave to be considered.

And thus may the grand Objection of Bartholine, and others, be answered: But I
leave to Anatomists to consider what is to be said to some Observations that
seem to contradict those Anatomical Experiments already mentioned: Such was
particularly that which I remember I have read in Sennertus (from the
observation of his Father-in-law Schato) of a Melancholy Student, who having
stabbed himself, and pierced the Diaphragme in the thinner or tendonous part
(called by many the Nervous Circle) lived seven Months after he had wounded
himself, though after his death (preceded by violent Vomitings) the Wound
(perchance dilated by those strainings) appeared so great, that the whole
Stomach was found to have got in by it into the left side of the Thorax. And
such also was the accident that happened to a Noble Man, whom I remember I have
seen, and who is yet alive, in whose Chest there has, for these many years,
remained a hole so great, that the motion of his Heart may be perceived by it.
These (I say) and some other Observations, I shall now forbear to insist on,
because I hold it not unfit, before we come to consider the use of Respiration,
that we acquaint Your Lordship with an Ingenious Conjecture, that was made at
the cause of the hasty death of the Animals our Engine killed: namely, That it
was not the want of Air that destroyed them, but the Pressure of the innate Air
in the cavity of the Chest; as if the spring of the Air being no longer
counterballanc'd by the ambient Air, was thereby become so strong, that it kept
the Thorax forcibly distended, and hindered its wonted contraction; and so
compressed the Lungs and their Vessels, as to obstruct the circulation of the
Blood. And this Conjecture, as it is specious enough, so I might have admitted
it for true; but that I considered, that (not to mention that one, especially
of the Animals killed in our Engine, seemed manifestly for a pretty while, and
not long before he died, to move his Thorax, as if he exercised Respiration)
the diligent Wallaeus relates, that he diverse times observed, in the dissection
of live Bodies, that the Membrane that invests the Lungs, had Pores in it as
big as the larger sort of Peace, which agrees with the Observations of
Chyrurgions and Physicians, viz. That Matter collected in the Thorax, has
penetrated into the Lungs, and been discharged by coughing. And I remember too,
that most of the Animals we killed in our Engine were Birds, of whose Lungs
Harvey somewhere informs us, That he observed them very manifestly to open at
their extremities into the Abdomen: And by such perforitions we may
well'suppose the passage free betwixt the external Air, and that in the
Abdomen: But this Conjecture may be farther considered. Besides, to show that
the Animals that died in our Glasses, need not be supposed to have been killed
by the want of Air, we foresee another Argument that we must deal so
ingeniously with Your Lordship, as not to conceal. You very well know, that
besides the generality of the Schools, there are many new Philosophers who,
though they dissent from the old Peripateticks in other things, do, as they,
deny the possibility of a Vacuum; and hold, that those spaces which are devoid
of Air, and other grosser Bodies, are all of them exactly replenished with a
certain Etherial Matter, so thin and subtle, that it can freely permeate the
Pores of the compactedst and closest Bodies, and even of Glass it self. Now
some of those Naturalists that are of this persuasion may object, That the
Animals that died in our Receiver, did so, not so much for lack of Air, as by
reason that the Air that was pumped out was necessarily succeeded by an
Etherial substance; which consisting of parts vehemently agitated, and so very
small, as without resistance to pass in and out through the very Pores of
Glass; it may well be supposed, that a considerable quantity of this restless
and subtle Matter, meeting together in the Receiver, with the excessive heat of
it, may be quickly able to destroy a little Animal, or at least, make the Air
too intemperately hot to be fit for Respiration.

But though this be a Difficulty not so easily to be resolved without the
assistance of our Engine, yet I suppose we have already answered the Objection
by our 38th and 39th Experiments; which, though we made partly for other
purposes, yet we premised them only to clear up the difficulty proposed.

Another suspicion we should have entertained concerning the death of our
Animals, namely, That upon the sudden removal of the wonted pressure of the
ambient Air, the warm blood of those Animals was brought to an Effervescence or
Ebullition, or at least so vehemently expanded, as to disturb the circulation
of the Blood, and so disorder the whole Economy of the Body. (This (I say) I
should have had some suspicion of) but that Animals of a hot Constitution are
not the sole ones that cannot in our exhausted Engine exercise the Function of
Life. But I must not now dwell upon matters of this nature, because I think it
high time to proceed to the consideration of the principal subject of our
Engine, namely, the use of Respiration; or rather, The use of the Air in
Respiration. For whereas of the diverse uses of it mentioned by Anatomists the
most, such as the Production and Modulation of the Voice by the Elision of the
Air, the Larynx, etc. the expulsion of Excrements by Coughing, the conveying in
of Odours by Inspiration, and some others, rather convenient for the well being
of an Animal, than absolutely necessary to his Life: Whereas (I say) the other
uses are such as we have said, The great Hippocrates himself gives this notable
Testimony to the use of the Air, as to Animals endowed with Lungs: Mortalibus
(says he) hic (spiritus) tum vitae, tum morborum aegrotis causa est. Tantaque
corporibus omnibus spiritus inest necessitas, ut fiquidem aliis omnibus and
cibis and potionibus, quis abstineat, duos tamen aut tres, vel plures dies
possit vitam ducere: At si quis spiritus in corpus vias intercipiat, vel exigua
diei part, homini pereundum fit; Adeo necessarius est usus spiritus in
corpore. Ad haec quoque, quum omnibus aliis actionibus homines quiescant, quod
mutationibus innumeris vita sit exposita, ab hac tamen sola action nunquam
desistant animantia, quin aut spiritum adducant, aut reddant.

But touching the account upon which the Inspiration and Exspiration of Air
(both which are comprehended in (...), Respiration) is so necessary to Life,
both Naturalists and Physicians do so disagree, that it will be very difficult
either to reconcile their Opinions, or determine their Controversies.

For first, Many there are who think the chief (if not sole) use of Respiration
to be the cooling and tempering of that Heat in the Heart and Blood, which
otherwise would be immoderate: And this Opinion, not only seems to be most
received amongst Scholastic Writers, but diverse of the new Philosophers,
Cartesians, and others, admitted with some variation; teaching. That the Air is
necessary, by its coldness, to condense the Blood that passes out of the right
Ventricle of the Heart into the Lungs, that thereby it may contain such a
consistence, as is requisite to make it fit Fuel for the vital fire or flame,
in the left Ventricle of the Heart. And this Opinion seems favored by this,
That Fishes, and other cold Creatures, whose Hearts have but one cavity, are
also unprovided of Lungs, and by some other considerations. But though it need
not be denied, that the inspired Air may sometimes be of use by refrigerating
the Heart; yet (against the Opinion that makes this Refrigeration, the most
genuine and constant use of the Air) it may be Objected, That diverse cold
Creatures (some of which, as particularly Frogs, live in the Water) have yet
need of Respiration, which seems not likely to be needed for Refrigeration by
them that are destitute of any sensible heat, and besides, live in the cold
Water: That even decrepid old Men, whose natural Heat is made very languid, and
almost extinguished by reason of Age, have yet a necessity of frequent
Respiration: That a temperate Air is fittest for the generality of breathing
Creatures; and as an Air too hot, so also an Air too cold, may be inconvenient
for them (especially, if they be troubled with an immoderate degree of the same
quality which is predominant in the Air:) That in some Diseases the natural
heat is so weakened, that in case the use of Respiratic were to cool, it would
be more hurtful than beneficial to Breath; and the suspending of the
Respiration, may supply the place of those very hot Medicines that are wont to
be employed in such Distempers: That Nature might much better have given the
Heart but a moderate heat, than such an excessive one, as needs to be
perpetually cooled, to keep it from growing destructive; which the gentle, and
not the burning heat of an Animal's Heart,. seems not intense enough so
indispensably to require. These, and other Objections, might be opposed, and
pressed against the recited Opinion: But we shall not insist on them, but only
add to them, That it appears not by our foregoing Experiments (I mean the 38th
and 39th) that in our exhausted Receiver, where yet Animals die so suddenly for
want of Respiration, the ambient Body is sensibly hotter than the common Air.

Other Learned Men there are, who will have the very substance of the Air to
get in by the Vessels of the Lungs, to the left Ventricle of the Heart, not
only to temper its heat, but to provide for the generation of Spirits. And
these allege for themselves the authority of the Ancients, among whom
Hippocrates seems manifestly to favor their Opinion; and both Aristotle and
Galen do sometimes (for methinks they speak doubtfully enough) appear
inclineable to it. But for ought ever I could see in Dissections, it is very
difficult to make out, how the Air is conveyed into the left Ventricle of the
Heart, especially the Systole and Diastole of the Heart and Lungs being very
far from being Synchronical: Besides, that the Spirits seeming to be but the
most subtle and unctuous Particles of the Blood, appear to be of a very
differing Nature from that of the lean and incombustible Corpuscles of Air.
Other Objections against this Opinion have been proposed, and pressed by that
excellent Anatomist, and my Industrious Friend, Dr. Highmore, to whom I shall
therefore refer you.

Another Opinion there is touching Respiration, which makes the genuine use of
it to be Ventilation not of the Heart, but of the Blood, in its passage through
the Lungs; in which passage, it is dis-burthened of those Excrementitious
Steams proceeding, for the most part, from the superfluous Serosities, of the
Blood, (we may add) and of the Chyle too, which (by those new Conduits of late
very happily detected by the Famous Pecquet) has been newly mixed with it in
the Heart.) And this Opinion is that of the Industrious Maebius, and is said to
have been that of that excellent Philosopher Gassendus; and has been in part
an Opinion almost vulgar: But this Hypothesis may be explicated two ways: For
first, The necessity of the Air in Respiration, may be supposed to proceed from
hence; That as a Flame cannot long burn in a narrow and close place, because
the Fuliginous Steams it uncessantly throws out, cannot be long received into
the ambient Body; which, after a while, growing too full of them to admit any
more, stifles the flame: So that the vital Fire in the Heart requires an
ambient Body, of a yielding nature, to receive into it the superfluous
Serosities, and other Recrements of the Blood, whose seasonable Expulsion is
requisite to depurate the Mass of Blood, and make it fit both to circulate, and
to maintain the vital heat residing in the Heart. The other way of explicating
the abovementioned Hypothesis, is, by supposing, that the Air does not only, as
a Receptacle, admit into its Pores the Excrementitious vapors of the Blood,
when they are expelled through the Windpipe, but does also convey them out of
the Lungs, in regard that the inspired Air, reaching to all the ends of the
Aspera Ateria, does there associate it self with the exhalations of the
circulating Blood, and when it is exploded, carries them away with it self: as
we see that Winds speedily dry up the surfaces of wet Bodies, not to say any
thing of what we formerly observed touching our Liquor, whose fumes were
strangely elevated upon the ingress of the Air.

Now of these two ways of Explicating the use of Respiration, our Engine
affords us this Objection against the first; That upon the exsuction of the
Air, the Animals die a great deal sooner than if it were left in the Vessel;
though by that exsuction the ambient space is left much more free to receive
the Steams that are either breathed out of the Lungs of the Animal, or
discharged by insensible Transpiration through the Pores of his Skin.

But if the Hypothesis proposed, be taken in the other sense, it seems
congruous enough to that grand observation, which partly the Phenomenon of our
Engine, and partly the relations of Travelers, have suggested to us: namely,
That there is a certain consistence of Air requisite to Respiration; so that if
it be too thick, and already overcharged with Vapors, it will be unfit to
unite with, and carry off those of the Blood, as Water will dissolve, and
associate to it self but a certain proportion of saline Corpuscles; and if it
be too thin or rarefied, the number or size of the Aerial Particles is too
small to be able to assume and carry off the halituous Excrements of the Blood,
in such plenty as is requisite.

Now that Air too much thickened (and as it were clogged) with Steams, is unfit
for Respiration, may appear by what is wont to happen in the Lead-Mines of
Devonshire, (and for ought I know, in those too of other Countries, though I
have seen Mines where no such thing was complained of) for I have been informed
by more than one credible Person (and particularly by an Ingenious Man, that
has often, for curiosity, dug in those Mines, and been employed about them)
that there often rises Damps, as retaining the Germane Word by which we call
them) which does so thicken the Air, that unless the Workmen speedily make
signs to them that are above, they would (which also sometimes happens) be
presently stifled for want of Breath, and though their Companions do make haste
to draw them up, yet frequently, by that time they come to the free Air, they
are, as it were in a swoon, and are a good while before they come to themselves
again. And that this swooning seems not to proceed from any Arsenical or
Poisonous Exhalation contained in the Damp, as from its overmuch condensing the
Air, seems probable from hence; That the same Damps oftentimes leisurely
extinguish the flames of their Candles or Lamps; and from hence also that it
appears (by many Relations of Authentical Authors) that in those Cellars where
great store of new Wine is set to work, Men have been suffocated by the too
great plenty of the Steams exhaling from the Must, and too much thickning the
Air: As may be gathered from the custom that is now used in some hot Countries,
where those that have occasion to go into such Cellars, carry with them a
quantity of well kindled Coals, which they hold near their Faces; whereby it
comes to pass, that the Fire discussing the Fumes, and rarefying the Air,
reduces the ambient Body to a consistence fit for Respiration.

We will add (by way of Confirmation) the following Experiment: In such a small
Receiver, as those wherein we killed diverse Birds, we carefully closed up one,
who, though for a quarter of an hour he seemed not much prejudiced by the
closeness of his Prison, afterward be^^n first to pant very vehemently, and
keep his Bill very open, and then to appear very sick; and last of all, after
some long and violent strainings, to cast up some little matter out of his
Stomach: which he did several times, till growing so sick, that he staggered
and gasp'd, as being just ready to die. We perceived, that within about three
quarters of an hour from the time that he was put in, he had so thickened and
tainted the Air with the Steams of his Body, that it was become altogether
unfit for the use of Respiration: Which he will not much wonder at, who has
taken notice in Sanctorius his Statica Medicina, how much that part of our
Aliments, which goes off by insensible Transpiration, exceeds in weight all
the visible and grosser Excrements both solid and liquid.

That (on the other side) an Air too much dilated is not serviceable for the
ends of Respiration, the hasty death of the Animal we killed in our exhausted
Receiver, seems sufficiently to manifest. And it may not irrationally be
doubted, whether or no, if a Man were raised to the very top of the Atmosphere,
he would be able to live many minutes, and would not quickly dye for want of
such Air as we are wont to breath here below. And that this Conjecture may not
appear extravagant, I shall on this occasion subjoyn a memorable Relation that
I have met with in the Learned Josephus Acosta, who tells us, That when he
himself past the high Mountains of Peru, (which they call Pariacaca) to which,
he says, That the Alps themselves seemed to them but as ordinary Houses, in
regard of high Towers, he and his Companions were surprised with such extreme
Pangs of Straining and Vomiting, (not without casting up Blood too) and with so
violent a Distemper, that he concludes he should undoubtedly have died, but
that this lasted not above three or four hours, before they came into a more
convenient and natural temperature of Air: To which our Learned Author adds an
Inference, which being the principal thing I designed in mentioning, the
Narrative I shall set down in his own words: I therefore (says he) persuade my
self, That the Element of the Air is there so subtle and delicate, as it is not
proportionable with the breathing of Man, which req^^^es a more gross and
temperate Air; and I believe it is the cause that does so much alter the
Stomach, and trouble all the Disposition. Thus far our Author, whose Words I
mention, that we may ghess by what happens somewhat near the Confines of the
Atmosphere (though probably far from the surface of it) what would happen
beyond the Atmosphere. That, which some of those that treat of the height of
Mountains, relate out of Aristotle, namely, That those that ascend to the top
of the Mountain Olympus, could not keep themselves alive, without carrying with
them wet Spunges, by whose assistance they could respire in that Air, otherwise
too thin for Respiration: (That Relation (I say) concerning this Mountain)
would much confirm what has been newly recited out of Acosta, if we had
sufficient reason to believe it: But I confess, I am very diffident of the
truth of it; partly because cause when I passed the Alps, I took notice of no
notable change betwixt the consistence of the Air at the top and the bottom of
the Mountain; partly because in a punctual Relation made by an English
Gentleman, of his ascension to the top of the Pike of Tenariff (which is by
great odds higher than Olympus) I find no mention of any such difficulty of
breathing; and partly also because the same Author tells us out of Aristotle,
That upon the top of Olympus there is no motion of the Air, insomuch, that
Letters traced upon the dust, have been, after many years, found legible and
not discomposed; whereas that Inquisitive Busbequius (who was Ambassador from
the German to the Turkish Emperor) in one of his eloquent Epistles, Epist. 3.
tells us, upon his own knowledge, That Olympus may be seen from
Constantinople, blanched with perpetual Snow; which seems to argue, That the
top of that, as well as of diverse other tall Hills, is not above that Region of
the Air wherein Meteors are formed. Though otherwise, in that memorable
Narrative which David Fraelichius, made of his ascent to the top of the
prodigiously high Fraelichius' apud Varen. Geogra. Gener. lib. 1. cap. 19.
Hungarian Mountain Carpathus: He tells us, That when, having passed through
very thick Clouds, he came to the very top of the Hill, he found the Air so
calm and subtle, that not a hair of his head moved, whereas in the lower Stages
of the Mountain he felt a vehement Wind. But this might well be casual, as was
his, having a clear Air where he was, though there were Clouds, not only
beneath him, but above him.

But (though what has been hitherto discoursed, incline us to look upon the
Ventilation and Depuration of the Blood, as one of the principal and constant
uses of Respiration; yet) methinks it may be suspected that the Air does
something more than barely help to carry off what is thrown out of the Blood in
its passage through the Lungs, from the right Ventricle of the Heart to the
left. For we see, in Phlegmatic Constitutions and Diseases, that the Blood
will circulate tolerably well, notwithstanding its being excessively ferous:
And in Asthmatical Persons, we often see, that though the Lungs be very much
stuffed with tough Phlegm, yet the Patient may live some Months, if not some
Years. So that it seems scarce probable, that either the want of throwing out
the supefluous Serum of the Blood for a few moments, or the detaining it,
during so short a while, in the Lungs, should be able to kill a perfectly sound
and lively Animal: I say, for a few moments, because, that having diverse times
tried the Experiment of killing Birds in a small Receiver, we commonly found,
that within half a minute of an hour; or thereabout, the Bird would be
surprised by mortal Convulsions, and within about a minute more would be stark
dead, beyond the recovery of the Air, though never so hastily let in. Which
sort of Experiments seem so strange, that we were obliged to make it several
times, which gained it the advantage of having Persons of differing Qualities,
Professions and Sexes, (as not only Ladies and Lords, but Doctors and
Mathematicians) to witness it. And to satisfy Your Lordship, that it was not
the narrowness of the Vessel, but the sudden exsuction of the Air that
dispatched these Creatures so soon; we will add, That we once enclosed one of
these Birds in one of these small Receivers, where, for a while, he was so
little sensible of his Imprisonment, that he eat very cheerfully certain seeds
that we conveyed in with him, and not only lived ten minutes, but had probably
lived much longer, had not a great Person, that was Spectator of some of these
Experiments, rescued him from the prosecution of the Trial. Another Bird being
within about half a minute, cast into violent Convulsions, and reduced into a
sprawling condition, upon the exsuction of the Air, by the pity of some fair
Lady's related to Your Lordship) who made me hastily let in some Air at the
Stop-cock, the gasping Animal was presently recovered, and in a condition to
enjoy the benefit of the Lady's compassion. And another time also, being
resolved not to be interrupted in our Experiment, we did, at night, shut up a
Bird in one of our small Receivers, and observed that for a good while he so
little felt thealteration of the Air, that he fell asleep with his Head under
his Wing; and though he afterward awaked sick, yet he continued upon his legs
between forty minutes and three quarters of an hour; after which, seeming ready
to expire; we took him out, and soon found him able to make use of the liberty
we gave him for a compensation of his sufferings.

If to the foregoing Instances of the sudden destruction of Animals, by the
removal of the ambient Air, we should now annex some, that we think fitter to
reserve till anon; perhaps Your Lordship would suspect, with me, that there is
some use of the Air which we do not yet so well understand, that makes it so
continually needful to the Life of Animals, Paracelsus indeed tells us, That
as the Stomach concocts Meat, and makes part of it useful to the Body,
rejecting the other part, so the Lungs consume part of the Air, and proscribe
the rest. So that according to our Hermetick Philosopher (as his followers
would have him styled) it seems we may suppose that there is in the Air a
little vital Quintessence (if I may so call it) which serves to the refreshment
and restoration of our vital Spirits, for which use the grosser and
incomparably greater part of the Air being unserviceable, it need not seem
strange that an Animal stands in need of almost incessantly drawing in fresh
Air. But though this Opinion is not (as some of the same Author) absurd, yet
besides that, it should not be barely asserted, but explicated and proved; and
besides that, some Objections may be framed against it, out of what has been
already argued against the Transmutation of Air into vital Spirits: Besides
these things, it seems not probable, that the bare want of the Generation of
the wonted quantity of vital Spirits, for less than one minute, should within
that time be able to kill a lively Animal, without the help of any external
violence at all.

But yet, on occasion of this Opinion of Paracelsus, perhaps it will not be
impertinent, if before I proceed, I acquaint Your Lordship with a Conceit of
that deservedly Famous Mechanician and Chemist, Cornelius Drebell, who among
other strange things that he performed, is affirmed (by more than a few
credible Persons) to have contrived for the late Learned King James, a Vessel
to go under Water; of which, trial was made in the Thames, with admired
success, the Vessel carrying twelve Rowers, besides Passengers; one of which is
yet alive, and related it to an excellent Mathematician that informed me of it.
Now that for which I mention this Story, is, That having had the curiosity and
opportunity to make particular enquiries among the Relations of Drebell, and
especially of an Ingenious Physician that married his Daughter, concerning the
grounds upon which he conceived it feasible to make men unaccustomed to
continue so long under Water without suffocation, or (as the lately mentioned
Person that went in the Vessel affirms) without inconvenience. I was answered
that Drebell conceived, that it is not the whole body of the Air, but a certain
Quintessence (as Chemists speak) or spirituous part of it, that makes it fit
for Respiration, which being spent, the remaining grosser body, or carcass (if
I may so call it) of the Air, is unable to cherish the vital flame residing in
the Heart: So that (for ought I could gather) besides the Mechanical
contrivance of his Vessel he had a Chemical liquor, which he accounted the
chief Secret of his submarine Navigation. For when from time to time he
perceived, that the finer and purer part of the Air was consumed, or
over-clogg'd by the Respiration, and steams of those that went in his Ship, he
would, by unstopping a Vessel full of this Liquor, speedily restore to the
troubled Air such a proportion of Vital parts, as would make it again for a
good while fit for Respiration, whether by dissipating, or precipitating the
grosser Exhalations, or by some other intelligible way, I must not now stay to
examine, contenting my self to add, that having had the opportunity to do some
service to those of his Relations, that were most Intimate with him, and having
made it my business to learn what this strange Liquor might be, they constantly
affirmed that Drebell would never disclose the Liquor unto any, nor so much as
tell the matter whereof he had made it, to above one Person, who himself
assured me what it was.

This account of Drebell's performance, I mention, not that I any farther
assent to his opinion than I have already intimated, but because the Man, and
the Invention being extraordinary, I suppose Your Lordship will not be
displeased to know the utmost I could learn about it; especially not having
found it mentioned by any Writer. Wherefore I have been sometimes inclined to
favorable thoughts of their opinion, who would have the Air necessary to
ventilate, and cherish the vital slame, which they do suppose to be continually
burning in the Heart. For we see, that in our Engine the flame of a Lamp will
last almost as little after the exsuction of the Air, as the life of an Animal:
Nay, I remember, that though I devised a more promising way, to make a fire
last in our exhausted Receiver, yet it would not succeed: We took a hard body
made in the form of a Clove, but twice as long, and proportionably thick, this
body being made of such a Composition, that if it be kindled at the upper end,
it will most certainly burn away to the very bottom, much better than a Match;
we conveyed it diverse times kindled at the upper end, into one of our small
Receivers, but still found, that though presently upon the exsuction of the
Air, it would leave smoking, and seem quite gone out, and again begin to smoke
as soon as the Air was let in upon it; yet if the Air were kept out but four or
five minutes, the fire would be totally, and irrevocably extinguished. To which
we will add, that though we conveyed into a great Receiver, a small lamp with
rectified spirit of Wine, that being so pure as not to smut the Cotton week, or
so much as a piece of white Paper held over it; yet we could not by diverse
trials make the flame last a couple of minutes after the Air was begun to be
drawn out. But though our Engine thus shows us a new kind of resemblance
betwixt Fire and Life: Yet the opinion we have last mentioned is not free from
Difficulties. For, though in the hearts of many Animals, Blood be a warm
liquor, and in some even a hot one; yet it is not easy to conceive either how
the Air (in substance) can get thither, or how, in case it could, it were able
to increase the heat. Since, however, the Air may increase the heat of a Coal
by blowing off the ashes, and making the active Corpuscles pierce farther into
the kindled body, and shatter it the more, yet we see hot Liquors have their
heat allayed, and not augmented, by having Air blown on them. And whereas some
Eminent Naturalists think it not inconvenient, to make the heat residing in the
Heart to be a true flame, provided they add, that it is such a temperate, and
almost insensible fire, as the flame of spirit of Wine, which will long burn
upon fine white Linen or Paper without consuming either: Give me leave to wish
that they had been more curious to make differing trials with that liquor. For
(as we observe in another Treatise) the reason why a Linen cloth, dipped in
common Spirit of Wine, is not burnt by the flame of it, is, because the Phlegm
of the Liquor defends the Cloth: And the Flame of Spirit of Wine is so far from
being too weak to burn a piece of Paper, or of Linen, that I have used it in
Lamps to distill Liquors out of tall Cucurbites, and found that the Spirit
burned away indeed much faster than Sallet Oil, but gave at least as great a
heat: Nay, I have, for curiosity sake, melted crude Gold, and that readily
enough, with the bare Flame of pure Spirit of Wine.

But not to press this any farther, we will, on this occasion, venture to
subjoyn an odd Observation, which may perhaps invite to a farther Enquiry into
the Opinion we have for Discourse sake opposed. Our English Democritus, Dr.
Harvey, proposes this difficult and noble Problem to Anatomists, Why a foetus,
even out of the Womb, if involved in the secundines, may live a good while
without Respiration; but in case after having once began to breath, its
Respiration be stopped, it will presently die. We are far from pretending to
solve so hard a Problem, but this we tried in relation to it; We took a Bitch
that was said to be almost ready to whelp, and having caused her to be hanged,
we presently opened her Abdomen, and found four Puppeys in her Womb; one of
these we took out, and having freed him from the Teguments that involved him,
and from the Liquor he swam in, we observed that he quickly opened his Mouth
very wide, moved his Tongue, and exercised Respiration; then we opened both his
Abdomen and his Chest, and cut assunder the Diaphragme, notwithstanding which,
he seemed often to endeavor Respiring, and moved in a notable manner, both the
Inter costal Muscles, part of the Diaphragme, the Mouth and the Tongue: But
that which we mention this Puppy for, was this, That being desirous to try
whether the other young ones that had not yet breathed at all, would long
survive this or no; we took them also out of the Womb, and having opened them
found none of them so much alive, as to have any perceptible motion in his
heart, whereas the heart of that Puppy which had once enjoyed the benefit of
Respiration, continued beating so long, that we our selves observed the Auricle
to beat, after five or six hours; and a Servant that staid-up and watched it
after we were gone to Bed, affirmed, That he saw the Pulsation continue about
two hours longer. I shall leave it to others to make Reflections upon this
Observation, compared with Dr. Harvey's Problem.

It is much doubted, whether Fishes breath under Water, and we shall not take
upon us, as yet, to determine the Question either way, because we have not yet
been able to procure little Fishes alive to make Experiments upon: That such as
are not Setaceous (for such manifestly breath) have not Respiration, properly
so called, such as is exercised by four footed Beasts, and Birds, may be argued
from their having no cavity in their Hearts, and from their want of Lungs,
whence they are observed to be Mute; unless we say, what is not altogether
absurd, That their Gills seem somewhat Analogous (as to their use) to Lungs.
But that on the other side, Air is necessary to the Lives even of Fishes, and
that therefore it is probable they have some obscure kind of Respiration, seems
manifest by two or three Observations and Experiments, mentioned by diverse
Authors, who tell us, That Fishes soon die in Ponds and Glasses quite filled
with Water; if the one be so frozen over, and the other so closely stopped,
that the Fishes cannot enjoy the benefit of the Air, if we allow them to be
true. But because these Relations are not wont to be delivered by Writers upon
their own Knowledge; as I shall not reject them, so I dare not build upon them,
till I have opportunity to examine them by experience. In the mean time, we
will add, That our Engine has taught us two things that may illustrate the
matter in hand: The one, That there is wont to lurk in Water, many little
parcels of interspersed Air, whereof it seems not impossible that Fishes may
make some use, either by separating it, when they strain the Water through their
Gills, or by some other way: The other, what may be collected from the
following Experiment.

We took a large Eel, (being able to procure no other Fish alive) and removing
it out of the vessel of Water, wherein it was brought us, into our great
Receiver, we caused the Air to be pumped out; and observed, That the Eel, after
some motion to and fro in the Glass, seemed somewhat discomposed; and that when
we had prosecuted the exsuction of the Air somewhat obstinately, she turned up
her belly, as dying Fishes are wont to do, and from thence-forward lay
altogether moveless, just as if she were stark dead; and though I did not think
her so, yet the continuing in that posture, even after the Cover of the
Receiver was taken off (whereby the Air was let in) I should have been of the
opinion of the Bystanders, if the Diffidence I am wont to exercise in trying
Experiments (especially such as are not usual) had not invited me to take the
Fish out of the Receiver, upon which she showed her self, by her vivid motions,
as much alive as before.

But that is most strange which we observed of a great, gray, House-Snail (as
they call it) which being closed up in one of our small Receivers, did not only
not fall down from the side of the Glass, upon the drawing out of the Air. (For
that may be ascribed to the tenacity of the Liquor wherewith Snails use to
stick themselves, even to the smoothest Bodies) but was not so much as deprived
of progressive motion by the recess of the Air: Though, except this Snail, we
never put any living Creature into our Receiver, whom it did not kill, or at
least reduce to seem ready to die. But as we shall not here examine what
interest the glutinous, and uneasily dissipable nature of the Juices of Snails,
may have on this event; so whether this escape of our Eel be ascribed to the
particular and vivacious nature of this sort of Fishes; or to this, That the
Air is not indeed necessary to the life of Fishes; or finally to this, That
though these Animals need some Air, yet they need so little, that that which
could not be drawn out of the Receiver, might (at least for a while) suffice
them, we will not now determine.

Nor are we at leisure to examine that Paradox of Hippocrates, which some
Learned Physicians have of late revived, namely, That the Foetus respires in
the Womb: For on the one side it seems very difficult to conceive, how Air
should traverse the Body of the Mother, and the Teguments of the Child: And
since Nature has, in newborn Babes, contrived peculiar and Temporary Vessels,
that the Blood may circulate through other Passages, than it is wont to do in
the same Individuals when they come to have the free use of their Lungs, it
seems unlikely, that Infants in the Womb do properly respire: But then since
our Experiments have manifested, That almost all kind of Liquors do, as well as
Water, abound with interspersed Corpuscles of Air, it seems not altogether
absurd to say, That when the Foetus is grown big, he may (especially the upper
part of the involving Amnios, being destitute of Liquor, and filled only with
an halituous substance) exercise some obscure Respiration; especially, since
it is not (as many wise Men think it) a Fable, That Children have been heard to
cry in the Mothers Womb: For though it happens exceeding rarely, yet sometimes
it has been observed. And I know a young Lady, whose Friends, when she was
some years since with Child, complained to me, that she was several times much
frighted with the Cries of her Infant, which, till I disabus'd her, she and her
Friends looked upon as Portentous. And such Observations are the more credible,
because not only Houswives, but more judicious Persons, mention it as no very
unfrequent thing to hear the Chick pip and cry in the Egg, before the Shell be
broken. But this I mention but as a probable, not a cogent Argument, till I can
discover whether an Elision of an halituous Substance, though no true Air, may
not at the top of the Larynx produce a Sound, since I find that the Blade of a
Knife, held in several postures in the stream of Vapors (or rarefied Water)
that issues out of an AEolipile, will afford various and very audible Sounds.

I had thoughts of conveying into our Receiver young ones, ripped out of the
Womb of their Dams, with their involving Coats entire, but could not procure
them And I have also had thoughts of trying whether it be not practicable, to
make a Receiver, though not of Glass, yet with little Glass windows, so placed,
that one may freely look into it, capacious enough to hold a Man, who may
observe several things, both touching Respiration, and diverse other matters;
and who, in case of fainting, may, by giving a sign of his weakness, be
immediately relieved, by having Air let in upon him. And it seems not
impossible, but that by accustomance, some Men may bring themselves to support
the want of Air a pretty while, since we see that diverse will live, so much
longer than other Men, under Water: that those that dive for Pearls in the West
Indies are said to be able to stay a whole hour under Water. And Cardan tells
us of one Colanus a Diver in Sicily, who was able to continue (if Cardan
neither mistake nor impose upon us) three or four times as long. Not to mind
Your Lordship, that You have Your self oftentimes seen in England, a corpulent
Man, who is wont to descend to the bottom of the Thames, and bring out of deep
holes at the bottom of the Banks, large Fishes alive in his hands. And Acosta
tells us, he saw in Peru the like manner of fishing, but more difficult,
practiced by the Indians.

I made mention of some Men, and of Accustomance: because there are but very
few, who, though they use themselves to it by degrees, are fit to support, for
many minutes, the want of Air. Insomuch that an ingenious Man of my
acquaintance, who is very famous for the useful skill of drawing Goods, and
even Ordnance, out of sunk Ships, being asked by me how long he was able to
continue at the depth of 50 or 60 foot under Water, without the use of
Respiration, confessed to me, that he cannot continue above two minutes of an
hour, without resorting to the Air, which he carries down with him in a certain
Engine (whereof I can show Your Lordship a description.) Another thing I also
learned of him by enquiry, that was not despicable: For asking him, whether he
found any use of chawing little Sponges, dipped in Oil, in his mouth, when he was
perfectly under Water, and at a distance from his Engine; he told me, that by
the help of these Sponges he could much longer support the want of his wonted
Respiration, than he was able to do without them. The true cause of which,
would perhaps, if discovered, teach us some thing pertinent to the Problem
touching the Respiration of Fishes.

But the necessity of Air to the most part of Animals unaccustomed to the want
of it, may best be judged of, by the following Experiments, which we tried in
our Engine, to discover, whether Insects themselves have not, either
Respiration, or some other use of the Air equivalent thereunto.

We took then an humble Be, one of those common flies that are called
Flesh-flies, and one of those hairy Worms that resemble Caterpillars, and are
wont to be called Palmer-worms: These three we conveyed into one of our small
Receivers, and observed, to the great wonder of the Beholders, that not only
the Be, and the Fly fell down, and lay with their Bellies upwards; but the
Worm it self seemed to be suddenly struck dead: All of them being reduced to
lie without motion, or any other discernable sign of life, within somewhat less
(if we mistake not) than one minute of an hour: And this, notwithstanding the
smallness of the Animals in proportion to the capacity of the Vessels: Which
circumstance we the rather mention, because we found that the Vessel was not
free from leaks. And to satisfy the Spectators, that't was the absence of the
Air that caused this great and sudden change: We had no sooner readmitted the
Air at the Stop-cock, than all the three Insects began to show signs of life,
and by little and little to recover. But when we had again drawn out the Air,
their motions presently ceased, and they fell down seemingly dead as before,
continuing moveless, as long as, by continuing to pump, the vessel was kept
exhausted. This invited us thankfully to reflect upon the wise goodness of the
Creator, who by giving the Air a spring, has made it so very difficult, as Men
find it, to exclude a thing so necessary to Animals: And it gave us also
occasion to suspect, that if Insects have no Lungs, nor any part analogous
thereunto, the ambient Air afsects them, and relieves them at the Pores of
their skin, it not being irrational to extend to these Creatures that of
Hippocrates; who says, That a living Body is throughout perspirable; or to use
his expression, (...), disposed to admit and part with what is Spirituous:
Which may be somewhat illustrated by what we have elsewhere noted, That the
moister parts of the Air readily insinuate themselves into, and recede from the
pores of the Beards of wild Oats, and those of diverse other wild Plants; which
almost continually wreath and unwreath themselves according to, even, the light
variations of the temperature of the ambient Air.

This Circumstance of our Experiment we particularly took notice of, that when
at any time, upon the ingress of the Air, the Be began to recover, the first
sign of Life she gave, was a vehemen panting, which appeared near the Tail:
Which we therefore mention, because we have observed the like in Bees drowned
in Water, when they first come to be revived by a convenient heat: As if the
Air were in the one case as proper to set the Spirits, and Alimental Juice
moving, as heat is in the other; and this may, perchance, deserve a farther
consideration.

We may add, That we scarce ever saw any thing that seemed so much as this
Experiment, to manifest, That even living Creatures (Man always excepted) are a
kind of curious Engines, framed and contrived by nature (or rather the Author
of it) much more skilfully than our gross Tools and imperfect Wits can reach
to. For in our present Instance we see Animals, vivid and perfectly sound,
deprived immediately of motion, and any discernable signs of life, and reduced
to a condition that dissers from death, but in that it is not absolutely
irrecoverable. This (I say) we see performed without any, so much as the least
external violence offered to the Engine; unless it be such as is offered to a
Windmill, when the Wind ceasing to blow on the Sails, all the several parts
remain moveless and useless, till a new Breath put them into motion again.

And this was farther very notable in this Experiment; That whereas it is known
that Bees and Flies will not only walk, but fly for a great while, after their
heads are off; and sometimes one half of the Body will, for diverse hours, walk
up and down, when it is severed from the other: Yet, upon the exsuction of the
Air, not only the progressive motion of the whole Body, but the very motions of
the Limbs do forthwith cease; as if the presence of the Air were more necessary
to these Animals, than the presence of their own Heads.

But it seems, that in these Insects, that fluid Body (whether it be a Juice or
Flame) wherein Life chiefly resides, is nothing nea so easily dissipable, as in
perfect Animals. For whereas we have above-recited, That the Birds we conveyed
into our small Receiver were within two minutes brought to be past recovery, we
were unable (though by trying him that pumped) to kill our Insects by the
exsuction of the Air: For though, as long as the Pump was kept moving, they
continued immovable; yet when he desisted from pumping, the Air that pressed in
at the unperceived Leaks (did though slowly) restore them to the free exercise
of functions of Life.

But, My Lord, I grow troublesome, and therefore shall pass on to other
Experiments: Yet without despairing of your pardon for having entertained you
so long about the use of Respiration, because it is a subject of that
difficulty to be explained, and yet of that importance to humane Life, that I
shall not regret the trouble my Experiments have cost me, if they be found in
any degree serviceable to the purposes to which they were designed. And though
I despair not but that hereafter our Engine may furnish us with diverse
Phenomenon useful to illustrate the Doctrine of Respiration; yet having not,
as yet, had the opportunity to make the other trials, of various kinds, that I
judge requisite for my Information: I must confess to Your Lordship, that in
what I have hitherto said, I pretend not so much to establish, or overthrow
this or that Hypothesis, as to lay together diverse of the Particulars that
occurred to me, in order to a future inquiry. I say, diverse of the Particulars,
because I could add many others, but that I want time, and fear that I shall
need Your Lordship's pardon, for having been so prolix in writing; and that of
Physicians (which perhaps I shall more easily obtain) for having invaded
Anatomy, a Discipline which they challenge to themselves, and indeed have been
the almost sole Improvers of. Without denying then that the inspired and
exspir'd Air may be sometimes very useful, by condensing and cooling the Blood
that passes through the Lungs; I hold that the depuration of the Blood in that
passage, is not only one of the ordinary, but one of the principal uses of
Respiration. But I am apt also to suspect, that the Air does something else in
Respiration, which has not yet been sufficiently explained; and therefore,
till I have examined the matter more deliberately, I shall not scruple to
answer the Questions that may be asked me, touching the genuine use of
Respiration, in the excellent Words employed by the acute St. Austin, to one
that asked him hard Questions: Mallem quidem (says he) eorum quae a me
quaesivisti, habere scientiam quam ignorantiam: sed quia id nondum potui, magis
eligo cautam ignorantiam confiteri, quam falsam scientiam profiteri.

EXPERIMENT XLII.
HAving (partly upon the consideration of some of the foregoing Experiments,
and partly upon grounds not now to be insisted on) entertained a suspicion,
that the action of Corrosive Liquors in the dissolving of Bodies, may be
considerably varied by the gravitation or pressure of the incumbent Air, and
the removal of it; I thought fit to examine my Conjecture by the following
Experiment.

I took whole pieces of red Coral, and cast them into as much spirit of
Vinegar, as sufficed to swim above an Inch over them: These substances I made
choice of, that the Ebullition upon the Solution might not be too great, and
that the operation might last the longer.

Having then put about half a score sprigs of Coral, together with the
Menstruum, into a somewhat long neck'd Viol, whereof they seemed scarce to fill
a third part, we conveyed that Viol into one of our small Pneumatical Glasses,
containing by ghess about a Quart of Water; and having fastened on the Cover,
after the accustomed manner, we suffered the Liquor to remain unmoved a while,
to observe whether the Menslruum would work upon the Coral otherwise than
besore. But sinding there did only arise, as formerly, a pretty number of small
Bubbles, that made there no sensible froth upon the surface of the distilled
Vinegar, there were made two or three exsuctions of the Air; upon which, there
emerg'd from the Coral such a multitude of Bubbles, as made the whole Body of
the Menstruum appear white; and soon aster a Froth, as big as all the rest of
the Liquor, was seen to swim upon it: And the Menstruum plainly appeared to
boil in the Glass, like a seething Pot. And though, if we desisted but one
minute from pumping, the decrement of the Froth and Ebullition, upon the
getting in of a little Air, at some leak or other, seemed to argue, that the
removal of the pressure of the external Air was the cause, or, at least, the
occasion of this Effervescence: Yet to evince this the more clearly, we turned
the Key, and let in the external Air at the Stop-cock; immediately upon whose
entrance the Froth vanished, and so many of the Bubbles within the body of the
Liquor disappeared, that it lost its whiteness, and grew transparent again: The
Menstruum also working as languidly upon the Coral, as it did before they were
put into the Receiver: But when we had again drawn out the Air, first the
whiteness re-appear'd, then the Ebullition was renewed, which, (the pumping
being a while longer and nimbly pursued,) grew so great, that for 3 or 4 times
one aster another, when ever the Air was let out of the Receiver into the
emptied Cylinder, the frothy liquor overflowed the Glass, and ran down by the
sides of it: And yet, upon the readmitting of the excluded Air, the boiling
Liquor grew immediately as calm and as transparent as at first: As if indeed
the operation of it, upon the Coral, had been facilitated by the exsuction of
the incumbent Air, which on its recess, lest it more easy sor the more active
parts of the liquor to show themselves such, than it was whilst the wonted
pressure of the Air continued unremoved. It may indeed be suspected, that those
vast and numerous Bubbles proceeded, not from the action of the Menstruum upon
the Coral, but from the sudden emersion of those many little parcels of Air
that (as we formerly observed) are wont to be dispersed in Liquors, without
excluding Spirit of Vinegar; but having had this suspicion before we tried the
Experiment, we conveyed our distilled Vinegar alone into the Receiver, and kept
it a while there, to free it from its Bubbles (which were but very small)
before ever we put the Coral into it. It may be suspected likewise, that the
agitation of the Liquor, necessary following upon the shaking of the Glass, by
pumping, might occasion the recited Ebullition; but upon trial made, there
appeared not any notable change in the Liquor, or its operation, though the
containing Vessel were shaken, provided no Air were sucked out of it. The
former Experiment was another time tried in another small Receiver, with Coral
grossly powdered, and the success was very much alike, scarce differing in any
thing, but that the Coral being reduced to smaller parts, upon the ebullition
of the Liquor, so many little lumps of Coral would be carried and Boy'd up by
the emerging Bubbles, as sometimes to darken the Viol, though the same Coraline
Corpuscles would be let fall again upon the letting in of the Air.

Some thing also we tried in our great Receiver, concerning the solution of
Metals in Aqua fortis, and other Corrosive Liquors; but partly the stink, and
partly some accidents, kept us from observing any thing peculiar and remarkable
about those Solutions.

One thing we must not omit, that when the Spirit of Vinegar was boiling upon
the Coral, we took off the Cover of the Receiver, and took out the Viol, but
could not find, that notwithstanding so very late an Ebullition, the Liquor had
any heat great enough to be at all sensible to our hands.

EXPERIMENT XLIII.
WE will now subjoyn an Experiment, which, if the former did not lessen, the
wonder of it would probably appear very strange to Your Lordship, as it did to
the first Spectators of it.

The Experiment was this: We caused Water to be boiled a pretty while, that by
the heat it might be freed from the latitant Air, so often already taken notice
of in common Water: Then almost filling with it a Glass Viol, capable of
containing near four Ounces of that Liquor; we conveyed it, whilst the Water
was yet hot, into one of our small Receivers (big enough to hold about a pound
of Water) and having luted on the Cover, we caused the Air to be drawn out:
Upon the two first exsuctions, there scarce appeared any change in the Liquor,
nor was there any notable alteration made by the third; but at the fourth, and
afterward, the Water appeared to boil in the Viol, as if it had stood over a
very quick Fire; for the Bubbles were much greater than are usually found upon
the Ebullition of very much more Water than was contained in our Viol. And this
Effervescence was so great in the upper part of the Water, that the Liquor
boiling over the top of the Neck, a pretty deal of it ran down into the
Receiver, and sometimes continued (though more languidly) boiling there.
Prosecuting this Experiment, we observed, that sometimes, after the first
Ebullition, we were reduced to make diverse exsuctions of the Air, before the
Liquor would be brought to boil again. But at other times, as often as the Key
was turned to let the Air pass from the Receiver into the Pump, the
Effervescence would begin afresh, though the Pump were plied for a pretty while
together; which seemed to argue, that the boiling of the Water proceeded from
hence, That upon the withdrawing the pressure of the incumbent Air, either the
fiery Corpuscles, or rather the Vapors agitated by the heat in the Water (which
last, what we have formerly noted touching the raresied Water of an AEolipile,
manifest to be capable of an Elastical Power) were permitted to expand
themselves mightily in the evacuated Receiver; and did, in their tumultuous
Dilatation, list up (as the Air is wont to do) the uppermost part of the Water,
and turning it into Bubbles, made the Water appear boiling. This conjecture was
farther confirmed by these additional Circumstances: First, The Effervescence
was confined to the upper part of the Water, the lower remaining quiet, unless
the Liquor were but shallow. Next, although sometimes (as is already noted) the
Ebullition began again, after it had ceased a pretty while, which seemed to
infer, That some concurrent cause (whatever that were) did a little modifie the
operation of heat; yet, when the Water in the Viol could by no pumping be
brought to boil any more, the self-same Water, being in the very same Viol
warmed again, and reconvey'd into the Pneumatical Glass, was quickly brought to
boil afresh, and that vehemently and long enough; not to mention, that a new
parcel, taken out of the same parcel of the boiled Water with the former, and
put in cold, could by no pumping be brought to the least show of Effervescence.
Besides, having tried the Experiment in hot Sallet Oil, being a much more
tenacious Liquor, and requiring a stronger heat to make it boil, could not be
brought to an Effervescence in our Receiver; whereas the Chemical Oil of
Turpentine, being thinner and more volatile, was presently made to boil up,
till it reached four or five times the former height in the Viol, in whose
bottom it lay, and continued boiling till it was almost reduced to be but
lukewarm. Wine also being a more thin and spirituous Liquor than Water, being
conveyed in hot, instead of the Oil, did, as I remember, at the very first
exsuction begin to boil so vehemently, that, in a short time that the Pump was
kept moving, four parts of five, by our ghess, boiled over out of the Viol,
though it had a pretty long Neck. On which occasion we will add, that even the
Water it self, near one half, would sometimes boil over into the Receiver
before it became lukewarm. And it was also remarkable, that once, when the Air
had been drawn out, the Liquor did, upon a single Exsuction, boil so long with
prodigiously vast Bubbles, that the Effervescence lasted almost as long as was
requisite for the rehearsing of a Pater Noster. Now the Experiment having been
tried more than once, and found to succeed as to the main, seems much to
countenance the Conjecture we made at the beginning of this Letter, where we
told Your Lordship, That perhaps the pressure of the Air might have an interest
in more Phenomenon than Men have hitherto thought. For as we had not then made
this Experiment, so now we have made it, it seems to teach, That the Air, by
its stronger or weaker pressure, may very much Modefie (as the Schoolmen
speak) diverse of the Operations of that vehement and tumultuous Agitation of
the small parts of Bodies, wherein the nature of heat seems chiefly, if not
solely, to consist. Insomuch that if a heated Body were conveyed above the
Atmosphere, it is probable that the heat may have a differing operation, as to
the power of dissipating the parts of it, from what it has here below.

To conclude, This Experiment might have been farther prosecuted, but our want
of leisure makes us content our selves to add at present; That perhaps it would
not be lost labor if this were tried, not only with other Liquors, but with
variety of heated, and especially soft or melted Bodies: But in such cases the
Receiver ought to be shaped, as is most proper to preserve the Cement where
with the Cover must be fastened on, from being melted by the heat of the
included Matter; the inconvenience to be hereby avoided, having befallen us in
the use of a Receiver too shallow, though otherwise capacious enough.

The CONCLUSION.
BEing come thus far, My dear Lord, not without thoughts of proceeding farther:
The unwelcome Importunity of my occasions becomes so prevalent, that it quite
hinders, for the present, my designed Progress; and reduces me, not only to
reserve for another opportunity that kind of Experiments, which, at some
distance from the beginning of this Letter, I called (as Your Lordship may
remember) Experiments of the second sort; but to leave unessay'd some of the
first sort, which I might try in the Engine, as it now is, were it not that my
Avocations are grown so urgent, for my remove from the place where the Engine
was set up, that I am put to write Your Lordship this Excuse; Weary, and in an
Inn which I take in my way to my Dearest Brother Cork: Who being at length
arrived in England, after I have for diverse years been deprived of his Company,
and wished for it as long; what ever my other Occasions may be, my first
Business must be to wait on Him and Your excellent Mother; in whose grateful
Company I may hope to forget a while those public Calamities that distress
this too unhappy Nation, Since that is indear'd to me, both by their personal
Merit; by the near Relation which Nature gives me to Him, Affinity to Her, and
Friendship to both; and also by their many Favors, especially that of my owing
them My Lord of Dungarvan. But I suffer my self to be transported too far with
these delightful thoughts; To return therefore to our Engine. Though I find
this Letter is beyond my expectation swelled, not only into a Book, but almost
into a Volume; yet the Experiments already mentioned in it, are so far from
comprising all those that may be tried by the help of our Engine, that I have
not yet been able to try all those, which, presently occurring to my thoughts,
upon my first seeing the working of it, I caused to be set down in a Catalogue
within less than half an hour. But I doubt I have but too much cause to
apprehend that the Affairs, and other things I complain of, have made it
needful for me to Apologize, as well for the things I have set down, as for
those I am necessitated to omit. For as partial as Men use to be to the
Children of their own Brains, as well as to those of their Loins, I must not
deny that the foregoing Trials are not altogether free from such
unaccuratenesses, nor the recital of them from such Imperfections, as I my self
can now discern, and could, perhaps, partly mend, if I had the leisure to
repeat the Experiments, with the Circumstances that have since offered
themselves to my Thoughts, as things that might have been worth Observation or
Enquiry. But the truth is, that I was reduced to make these Experiments, when
my Thoughts had things that more concerned me to employ them, and the same
avocations made me set them down, for the most part, as soon as I had made
them, and in the same order, and that so fast, that I had not overfrequently
the opportunity to mind any more than the bare Truth of what I set down;
without allowing it any of those advantages that Method, Style, and decent
Embellishments, are wont to confer on the Composures they are employed to adorn.

But, My Lord, though to invite and encourage You and Your learned Friends at
Paris, to make a farther use of this Engine, than I have yet been able to do,
I am thus free to acknowledge the Imperfections of the foregoing Letter: Yet,
if some Intelligent Persons mistake not, by what has been done, such as it is,
there is a way opened, whereby Sagacious Wits will be assisted to make such
farther Discoveries in some points of Natural Philosophy, as are yet scarce
dreamed of. And I am the more desirous to engage You to that Employment,
because I am apt to think, that if the making and writing of such Experiments
shall cost You as much trouble as they have me, You will be inclined to excuse
me; and if the Discoveries give You as much pleasure as they gave me, You will
(perhaps) be invited to thank me. However, I think (My Lord) I may justly
pretend, that the things I have set down have been faithfully Recorded, though
not elaborately Written; and, I suppose, my former Papers may have long since
satisfied You, that though many devise Experiments better than Your Servant,
none perhaps has related them more carefully and more truly: And particularly
of These; sometimes one, sometimes another, has been performed in the presence
of Persons, diverse of them eminent for their Writings, and all for their
Learning. Wherefore, having in the foregoing Narratives made it my business to
enoble them with the chief Requisites of Historical Composures, Candor, and
Truth, I cannot despair that You will either excuse their Imperfections, or, at
least, forgive them: Especially, considering that this unpolished Letter is as
well a Production of Your Lordship's Commands and my Obedience, as a Testimony
of my desire to make others beholden to My Lord of Dungarvan, by the same way
which I endeavor to express my Self

Beconsfield, this 20th of December, 1659. His Lordship's Most obedient
Servant, and Most affectionate Uncle, ROBERT BOTLE.

A DEFENSE OF THE DOCTRINE Touching the Spring and Weight Of the AIR, Proposed
by Mr. R. BOIL in his New Physico-Mechanical Experiments; Against the
OBJECTIONS of FRANCISCVS LINVS.

Wherewith the Objector's FUNICULAR HYPOTHESIS is also Examined.

By the Author of those Experiments.

LONDON, Printed by M. Flesher, for Richard Davis Bookseller in Oxford, 1682.

The Publisher TO THE READER. Friendly Reader,
You may possibly in this Volume have expected the Appendix which the Author
heretofore promised, and has intended shall contain some additional Experiments
to those which were formerly published, and are here now reprinted in this
Second Edition. These following Answers to Franciscus Linus and Mr. Hobbs are
presented in compensation of the delay, and for your forbearance of that
Appendix, which ere long you may expect in kind. For the Author having hinted
the Promise seems thereby to acknowledge the Debt, and to be content to
continue the Obligation to see it performed. And these ought the rather to be
his excuse, because the writing these Answers, and publishing the Skeptical
Chemist, and some other Discourses, have been the principal hindrances to that
Piece; which is really so near a readiness, that part of it has lain at the
Press these six Months: But yet it being not all perfected, the Stationer was
loath to delay any longer the Publication of these, for which he has been so
frequently called upon. And they (though a Latin Edition is intended) appear
now the rather in English, that they may accompany the Second Edition of the
Original Experiments, which were printed first in that Language in Octavo; and
that instead of the promised Appendix they may complete the bulk of the Quarto
Volume.

As for that part of this Piece that concerns Mr. Hobbs, it might have been
larger: but the information that the Author had that the Learned Dr. Wallis was
writing against some passages in Mr. Hobbs his Dialogues (as well that
concerning the Air as the rest) was the occasion why his H. would make no
Animadversion on some passages therein, and thought it not fit to enlarge upon
others. And for the Errata of the Press I hope they will not be many: However
the Author as to these is to be excused, who never (in regard to his Eyes and
Impediments on other occasions) gives himself the trouble of Corrections and
Revises; neither could the Publisher much attend the Press, it being printed in
a distant place from his usual Adobe. If, as I wish, you shall find this
jealousy of mine to have been causless, you will have reason to give the Piece
that is so kindly offered, and leads you such rare and untrodden paths in the
best way of Natural Philosophy, the fairer entertainment and acceptance.
Farewell.

To. Sh.

THE Author's PREFACE AND DECLARATION.
THEY that know how indisposed I naturally am to Contentiousness, will, I
presume, wonder to see me publicly engaged in two Controversies at once. But
that I am still as averse as ever from entering into Disputes that may
handsomely be declined, the way wherein I have managed the following
Controversies will, I hope, evince. And the Inducements I now have to appear in
public are such, that it would be hard for me to resist the being prevailed on
by them.

For, in the first place, I was (by Name, as it were) challenged by a person,
who undertook to disprove not one or two of my Conjectures, but as much of the
whole Body of my Treatise as concerned the Spring of the Air, which most of my
Explications suppose. And this being done by a Learned Man, who writes very
confidently of the goodness of his Hypothesis and Arguments, and his Book being
soon after followed by another written by Mr. Hobbs, a man of Name in the
World; there seemed to be some danger that so early an Opposition might oppress
the Doctrine I had proposed, before it was well understood and duly pondered.
Wherefore I feared I might be wanting to the Truth and my self, if I should at
such a time be altogether silent; especially since I might probably divert many
who would otherwise be forward to appear against us, by letting them see how
defensible our Doctrine is even against such Adversaries as those I have
replied to. And this course I the rather chose, that in case I should
henceforward comply with those who would have me forbear to write any further
of these Controversies, it might not be presently inferred from my silence,
that a good Cause cannot enable a Pen no better than mine to defend it.

But I scarce doubt but that intelligent Readers, especially those that are
imbued with the Principles of the Corpuscularian Philosophy, will be much more
apt to think that I had reason to write the following Discourses, than to think
that I had any to make them so prolix: And especially ingenious men, that are
accustomed to admit nothing that either is not intelligible, or is precarious,
will think diverse of the Objections I reply to have needed no Answers, or at
least no solemn ones. But to these I have four things to represent.

And First, That which not a little swells the bulk of the following Treatises,
is the incerting those passages of my Adversaries that I examine in their own
words: which being a Practice that I expect from any that shall think fit to
animadvert upon any Opinion or Argument of mine; I thought it but equitable to
do what I desired to have done to me, though oftentimes I could not do it in a
little room.

Next, I was the more willing to prosecute some of Franciscus Linus his
Objections, because the fear of being reduced to grant a Vacuum has so
prevailed with many eminent persons bred up in the received Philosophy of the
Schools, that though they disagree both with him and among themselves about the
particular manner of solving the Phenomenon of the Torricellian Experiment; yet
they agree in ascribing them to some extremelyrarefi'd substance that fills up
the space deserted by the Quicksilver. So that this Opinion, as to the main,
being approved by many eminent Scholars, especially of that most learned Order
of the Jesuits, (to whom perhaps its Congruity to some Articles of their
Religion chiefly recommends it) I was willing to pay them that respect, as not
to dissent from persons, diverse of whom for their eminence in Mathematics and
other Learning I much esteem, without showing that I do it not but upon
Considerations that I think weighty.

Thirdly, though the Examiners Hypothesis have but few, and not very
considerable, Arguments to countenance it; yet his Objections against our
Doctrine (the Reply to which takes up the first Part of the following Treatise)
are such, as though they may be solidly answered by any that thoroughly
understands our Hypothesis, yet they may chance puzzle such Readers as do not,
and these possibly will prove more than a few

And, Lastly, because that sometimes when the Argument objected did not perhaps
deserve to be much insisted on, the Argument treated of deserved to be
considered; I thought it not amiss to make use now and then of some such
opportunities to illustrate the matter it self under consideration: Which I the
rather did for these two Reasons;

First, because I find that, except by some able Mathematicians and very few
other contemplative men, the Doctrine of the Spring of the Air, at least as I
have proposed it, is not yet sufficiently apprehended, (and therefore needs to
be inculcated.) Insomuch that through a great part of some late Discourses of
men otherwise eminently learned, (written against other Elaterists, not me)
there seems to run so great and clear a mistake, perhaps for want of skill in
the Hydrostaticks, that I can scarce impute it to any thing, but to their not
thoroughly understanding the Hypothesis they would confute.

And, Next, because I was willing to lay down in my Answer to the Objections I
examined, the grounds of answering such other Arguments as may be built upon
the same or the like Principles. And perhaps I may truly enough say, that in
the following Treatise I have already in effect answered several discourses,
written some before and some since mine, by learned men, about the Torricellian
and other new Experiments relating to a Vacuum, though I forbore to mention the
names or words of the Authors, because I found not that my Writings or
Experiments were as yet known to them. To these things I may add, that I
thought the Discourses of Linus the fitter to be insisted on, because he seems
to have more diligently than some others, (who yet venture to dispute against
it) enquired into our Doctrine. And I shall not scruple to say thus much of an
Adversary, (and one to whom I gave no provocation to be so) that though I dare
not speak in general of those that have written either about the Weight of the
Air, or else For or Against a Vacuum, because (as I acknowledge in the first
Chapter following) I cannot yet procure the Books of diverse learned men,
especially of those great Personages, Robervall, Balianus and Casatus; yet
among the Writers I have hitherto met with, who have recourse to the
Aristotelean Rarefaction and Condensation in the Controversies under debate,
scarce any seems to have contrived his Hypothesis better than our Linus. Not
that I think his Principle is either true, or (at least to such as I)
intelligible; but that the Funiculus he assumes being allowed him, he may, for
a Reason to be touched a little below, make out, though not all the Phenomenon
of my Experiments, yet many more of them than most other Plenists, that deny
the Spring of the Air, can deduce from their Hypotheses if granted. And in
regard that, whereas we ascribe to the Air a Motion of Restitution outward, he
attributes to it the like Motion inwards, it cannot but happen that, though the
Principles cannot both be true yet many of the Phenomenon may be explicable by
which of them soever is granted: because of this, I say, it is not so easy as
many ingenious Readers may be apt to think, to draw pertinent Objections from
Experience against the Adversary I have to deal with. Which I represent, lest,
as some may think I have employed more Arguments than I needed, so others
should think I have omitted many; as indeed I have omitted some, that I might
pertinently have employed.

But there is another sort of Persons besides those I mentioned at the
beginning of this Preface, to whom I must address the remaining part of it;
namely, to those who seem troubled, that I suffer my self to be diverted either
by Linus or Mr. Hobbs from perfecting those Experimental About the History of
Flame of Heat, of Colors, of the Origin of Qualities and Forms, etc.
Treatises that are lying by me, almost promised by the learned Publisher of
the Latin Edition of my Essays; and from prosecuting those ways of enquiry
into the Nature of things, wherein they are pleased to think I may be more
serviceable to real Learning and the Lovers of it. And I confess that these
Men's Reasons and Persuasions have so far prevailed with me, that after what I
have done in the two following Treatises, to Vindicate my Writings from the
Objections made against them by two Learned men of very differing Hypotheses,
and thereby to show in some measure that I am not altogether unacquainted with
the way of defending opposed Truths, I have laid aside the thoughts of writing
any more distinct or entire Polemical Treatises about the Subjects already
disputed of. And to this I am invited by several other Reasons (besides what I
have newly intimated.)

For first, as I elsewhere declare, it was not my chief Design to establish
Theories and Principles, but to devise Experiments, and to enrich the History
of Nature with Observations faithfully made and delivered; that by these, and
the like Contributions, made by others, men may in time be furnished with a
sufficient stock of Experiments to ground Hypotheses and Theories on. And
though in my Physico-Mechanical Epistle and my Specimens I have ventured some
Conjectures also at the Causes of the Phenomenon I relate, lest the Discourse
should appear to inquisitive Readers too jejune; yet (as I formerly said) I
proposed my Thoughts but as Conjectures designed (though not only, yet
chiefly) to excite the Curiosity of the Ingenious, and afford some hints and
assistance to the Disquisitions of the Speculative. And accordingly I have not
forborne to mention diverse things, which judicious Readers may easily perceive I
foresaw that many would think unfavourable to the Opinions I inclined to. So
that for me to leave Experimental for Controversial Studies, were a course
unsuitable to the principal scope of my Writings.

Next, though I have adventured to improve the Doctrine of the Spring and
Weight of the Air by some Supplements where I found it deficient, and to
recommend it by some new Illustrations and Arguments deduced from my
Experiments: yet the Hypotheses themselves (for the main) being the Opinions
also of far learneder Men than I, it might be thought injurious both to them
and to our common Cause, if I should needlessly go about to hinder them from the
Honor of Vindicating the Truths we agree in; especially, some of them being
Excellent Mathematicians, and others Eminent Naturalists, whose Concern to
maintain the Hypotheses against Objections, if any shall arise, is equal to
mine, and whose leisure and abilities far exceed those of a Person who both is
sickly, and has other employments enough, and who (if he were far better
skilled in Geometry than he pretends to be) has such a weakness in his Eyes, as
makes him both unwilling and unfit to engage in any Study where the conversing
with Mathematical Schemes is necessary.

Thirdly, nor do I see much cause to doubt that the things I have delivered
will notwithstanding my silence be left undefended: The forwardness I have
already observed in diverse Vertuosi to Vindicate those Writings, which they are
pleased to say have convinced them, and to save me the labor of penning the
following Treatises, scarce permitting me such an Apprehension. Especially
since there are some things that will much facilitate their Task, if not keep
men from putting them upon it. For though Mr. Hobbs and Linus have examined my
Writings upon Principles wherein they differ as much from each other as from
me; yet neither have they seen cause to deny any thing that I deliver as
Experiment, nor have their Objections been considerable, whether as to Number
or to Weight, against the Applications I have made of my Principles to solve
the Phenomenon. So that usually without objecting any Incongruity to my
particular Explications, they are fain to fall upon the Hypotheses themselves:
in whose Defense I think I may with the more Reason expect to be seconded,
because not only I have endeavored, as I formerly noted, to lay the grounds
of answering such Objections as I foresaw might arise; but I have also, to
prevent or ease their labor, written the two first Parts of my Defense against
Linus, without being obliged to do so for the Vindicating of my Explications,
which are particularly maintained in the third Part.

I know not whether I may venture to add on this occasion, That those who have
taken notice of the usefulness of Experiments to true Philosophy, and have
observed that nevertheless the Difficulty, Trouble, and Charge of making them
is such, that even in this Learned Age of ours there are very few Bacon's or
Mersennus's to be met with, and those who have either made themselves, or at
least seen others make Experiments, even such as those I have published, with
the care I am wont to think my self obliged to employ on such Occasions; will
perhaps not only believe that they cost me far more time and pains than they
that have not made nor seen such trials are apt to imagine, but will possibly
think it enough for a Person that is not by Profession a Scholar, to make them
carefully, and set them down faithfully, and will allow him to let others
Vindicate the Truths he may have the good fortune to discover, especially, when
there are so many fitter for it than he, who have (as well as his Adversaries)
more leisure to write Disputations than opportunity to prosecute Experiments;
the latter of which to be performed as it ought to be, does in many cases,
besides some Dexterity scarce to be gained but by practice, require sometimes
more Diligence, and oftentimes too more Cost, than most are willing, or than
many are able, to bestow upon them.

To be short, though if any thing very worthy to be taken notice of by me be
suggested against any of my chief opinions or Explications, I may either take
an occasion to say somewhat to it elsewhere, or at least have an opportunity to
consider it in a Review, wherein I may alter, mend, supply, vindicate or
retract diverse Passages of my other Writings: yet I would not have it expected
that I should exchange a Book with every one that is at leisure to write one
against a Vacuum, or about the Air. Which Declaration I make, not that I think
it will or ought to hinder any man from making use of his liberty to express a
dissent, if he sees cause; but for these two Reasons.

The one, That my silence might not injure either the Truth or my self, by
tempting men to think, that whatever I do not answer, I cannot; but might give
unbiased and judicious Readers a Caution to allow as little of Advantage to
the Writings of my adversaries upon the account of their being unanswered by
me, as if I were no longer in the World. And the other, That I may not hinder
those who would reply to such Adversaries by leaveing them an apprehension that
either I may prevent them, or they me. To conclude, I see no cause to despair,
that whether or no my Writings be protected, the Truths they hold forth will in
time in spite of opposition establish themselves in the Minds of men, as the
Circulation of the Blood, and other formerly much contested Truths have already
done. My Humor has naturally made me too careful not to offend those I dissent
from, to make it necessary for any man to be my Adversary upon the account of
Personal Injuries or Provocations. And as for any whom either Judgment or Envy
may invite to contend, that the things I have communicated to the World
deserved not so much Applause as they have had the luck to be entertained with;
that shall make no Quarrel betwixt us: For perhaps I am my self as much of that
mind as he; and however I shall not scruple to profess my self one of those who
is more desirous to spend his time usefully, than to have the Glory of leaving
nothing that was ever written against him unanswered; and who is more
solicitous to pursue the ways of discovering Truth, than to have it thought
that he never was so much subject to Humane Frailties as to miss it.

A DEFENSE Of Mr. R. BOYLE's EXPLICATIONS of his Physico-Mechanical
EXPERIMENTS, against FRANCISCUS LINUS.
The I. Part. Wherein the Adversaries Objections against the Elaterists are
examined.
CHAP. I.
A Newly-published Treatise, De Corporum inseparabilitate, being brought to my
Hands, I find several Chapters of it employed to oppose the Explications I
ventured to give of some of my new Experiments touching the Spring of the Air.
Wherefore though I am very little delighted to be engaged in Controversies, and
though I be not at present without Employments enough (of a private, and of a
public Nature) to make it unseasonable for me, to be by a Work of this sort
diverted from them; yet for the Reasons specified in the Preface, I hold it not
amiss to examine briefly what is objected against the thing I have delivered:
and the rather, partly, because the learned Author, whoever he be (for it is the
Title Page of his Book that first acquainted me with the name of Franciscus
Linus) having forborne provoking Language in his Objections, allows me in
answering them to comply with my Inclinations and Custom of exercising
Civility, even where I most dissent in point of Judgment. Besides, the Author
himself has somewhat facilitated my Reply to him, by directing me in the ninth
Page to some Books and Passages that I had not, when I published my Epistle,
either seen or taken notice of. As indeed there are besides some of these
several other Discourses that treat of the Torrecellian Experiments, which
though by the names of their Authors I guess to be learnedly written, I have
not to this day had opportunity to peruse, my stay in the remoter part of
Ireland (whither Philosophical Books were not, in that time of public
Confusion, brought) having kept me from hearing of diverse of them, till they
were all bought up. Which I here mention, to excuse my self if I have not taken
notice of some things or passages to be met with in these Writings, which their
Learned Authors or Inquisitive Readers might justly perhaps expect I should
take some notice of, in case those Writings had fallen into my hands. But to
digress no further.

It Is true indeed, and it somewhat troubles me that it is so, that I can scarce
promise my self to make my Adversary a Proselyte, since he without scruple
assumes those very things as Principles, that to me seem almost as great
Inconveniences as I would desire to show any Opinion I dislike, to be liable
unto. But since whatever Operation the following Discourse may have upon the
Person that occasioned it, I hope it may bring some satisfaction to those
Philosophers who can as little as I understand the Aristotelean Rarefaction,
and who will as well as I be backward to admit what they cannot understand; it
shall suffice me to defend the Truths I have delivered, if I cannot be so happy
as to convince my acute Adversary of them; and I shall not believe my labor
lost, if this Discourse can contribute to the Establishment of some Notions in
Philosophy that I think not inconsiderable in the minds of those whose clear
Principles make me the most respect their Judgments, and for whose sakes I
principally write.

Now though I be not in strictness obliged to defend any more than such of my
own Explications as the Examiner has thought fit to question, and those
Particulars which I have added by way of Improvement to the two Hypotheses of
the Spring and Weight of the Air; yet that I may the more effectually prosecute
what I lately intimated I aim at in this Writing, and may as well illustrate my
Doctrine as defend it, I shall divide the ensuing Treatise into three Parts;
whereof the first is designed to answer my Adversaries Objections against our
Principles; the second shall examine the Funicular Hypothesis he would
substitute in their stead; and the third shall contain particular Replies to
what he alleges against some of my particular Explications.

CHAP. II.
ALthough our Author confesses in his second Chapter, that the Air has a Spring
as well as a Weight, yet he resolutely denies that Spring to be near great
enough to perform those things which his Adversaries (whom for brevities sake
we will venture to call Elaterists) ascribe to it. And his whole fourth
Chapter, as the Title declares, is employed to prove that the Spring of the Air
is unable in a close place to keep the Mercury suspended in the Torrecellian
Experiment. The proof of this Assertion he says is easy: But alleges two or
three Arguments for it, which I think will be more easily answered than his
Assertion evinced.

In the First he says that those Experiments concerning the Adhesion of ones
finger, etc. which he had mentioned in the foregoing Chapter, eodem modo se
habent in loco clauso ac in aperto. But the answering of this we shall suspend
till anon; partly, because it may then be more conveniently examined, and
partly, because our Author seems not to build much upon it, his chief Argument
being that which he proposes in these words, Cum tota vis hujus Elaterii
pendeat a refutato jam aeris aequipondio cum digitis 29 argenti vivi, it a ut
nec plus, nec Page. 20.
minus faciat hoc elaterium in loco occluso, quam fit per illud aequipondium in
loco aperto; manifestum est, cum jam ostensum sit fictitium plane esse
hujusmodi aequipondium, fictitium quoque esse tale elaterium. Wherefore since
all the validity of his Objection against the Spring of the Air depends upon
his former Chapter, wherein he thinks he has disproved the Weight of the Air;
it will behove us to look back into the former Chapter, and examine the four
Arguments which he there proposes. But I must crave leave to vary from his
method, and consider the third in the first place, because the removal of that
Objection will facilitate and shorten the answer to the rest. His Third
Argument therefore is thus set down. Nam si Tubus viginti tantum digitorum (quo
usi sumus in primo Argumento) non totus impleatur argento, ut prius, sed
spacium aliquod inter Page 16.
digitum superiorem and argentum relinquatur in quo sit solus aer; videbimus
subtracto inferiore digito superiorem non solum deorsum trahi, ut prius, sed
etiam argentum jam descendere, idque notabiliter, quantum nimirum extendi
potest exiguailla aeris particula a tali pondere descendente. Unde st loco
illius aeris ponatur aqua, aliusve liquor qui non tam facile extenditur,
descensus nullus erit.

Hinc, inquam, contra hanc sententiam formatur argumentum: nam st externus ille
aer nequeat vel hos viginti digitos argenti a lapsu sustentare, uti jam
vidimus, quomodo quaeso sustentabit 29? Certe haec nullatenus reconciliari
possunt.

But to this Argument, which he thinks so irreconcilable with his Adversaries
Hypothesis he has himself furnished them with an Answer in these words, Dices
forte ideo argentum in hoc casu descendere, quia deorsum truditur ab aere illo
sese per suum Elaterium dilatante. Which Anfwer I think sufficient for the
Objection, notwithstanding the two exceptions he takes at it.

For first, whereas he says, that sic deberet digitus potius a tubo repelli,
quam eidem affigi, cum non minus sursum quam deorsum fiat bujusmodi dilatatio:
He considers not, that though the endeavor of the included Air to expand it
self be at first every way alike, yet the expansion it self in our case must
necessarily be made downward, and not upward; because the Finger that stops the
Tube being exposed on the upper parts and the sides to the external Air, has
the whole Weight and pressure of the Atmosphere upon it; and consequently
cannot be thrust away but by a force capable to surmount that pressure: whereas
on the lower side of the Included Air there is the Weight of the whole
Mercurial Cylinder to assist the Spring of the Air, to surmount the Weight of
the Atmosphere that gravitates upon the restagnant Mercury. So that the Air
included and endeavoring to expand it self, finding no assistance to expand it
self upward, and a considerable one to expand it self downward, it is very
natural that it should expand it self that way whence it finds less resistance.
As accordingly it will happen, till the Spring of the Air be so far debilitated
by its Expansion, that its pressure, together with the weight of the Mercury
that remains suspended, will but counter-balance, not overcome, the pressure of
the outward Air upon the restagnant Mercury. And this explication may be
confirmed by this trial that I have purposely made, namely, that if in stead of
Quicksilver you employ Water, and leave as before in the Tube an Inch of Air,
and then inverting it, open it under Water, you will perceive the included Inch
of Air not to dilate it self any thing near (for I need not here define the
Proportion) half so far as it did when the Tube was almost filled with Mercury;
because the Weight of so short a Cylinder of Water does but equal that of
between an Inch and an Inch and an half only of Quicksilver, and consequently
the inward Air is far less assisted to dilate it self and surmount the pressure
of the outward Air by the Cylinder of Water than by that of Mercury. And as for
what our Author says, that if instead of Air, Water or some other Liquor be
left at the top of the Tube, the Quicksilver will not descend: the Elaterists
can readily solve that Phenomenon, by saying that Water has either no Spring
at all, or but an exceeding weak one; and so scarce presses but by its Weight,
which in so short a Cylinder is inconsiderable. Now the same solution we have
given of our Examiners Objection, gives us also an account why the Finger is so
strongly fastened to the upper part of the Orifice of the Tube it stops; for the
included Air being so far dilated that an Inch, for example, left at first in
the upper Part of the Tube, reaches twice or thrice as far as it did before the
descent of the Quicksilver, its spring must be proportionably weakened. And
consequently that part of the Finger that is within the Tube will have much les
pressure against it from the dilated Air within, than the upper part of the
same Finger will have from the unrarefi'd Air without. By which means the Pulp
of the Finger will be thrust in (which our Author is pleased to call sucked in)
as we shall ere long have occasion to declare in our Answer to his second
Argument.

And having said thus much to our Authors first exception against the solution
he foresaw we would give of his third Argument; we have not much to say at
present to this second. For whereas he says, Concipi non posse quomodo aer
ille sic se dilatet, argentumque deorsum trudat, nisi occupando Page 17.
majorem locum: Quod tamen hi Authors quam maxim refugiunt, asserentes
rarefactionem non aliter fieri, quam per corpuscula aut vacuitates: I wish he
had more clearly expressed himself, since as his words are couched I cannot
easily guess what he means, and much less easily discern how they make an
Argument against his Adversaries. For, sure he thinks them not so absurd, as to
imagine that the Air can dilate it self, and thrust down the Mercury, without
in some sense taking up more room than it did before: For the very word
Dilatation, and the effect they ascribe to the included Air, clearly imply as
much; so that I see not why he should say that they are so averse from granting
the Air to take up more Place than before, especially since he takes notice in
the former Chapter, that we compare the Expansion of the Air to that of
compressed Wool; and since he here also annexes that we explicate Rarefaction
either by Corpuscles or Vacuities. But this later Clause makes me suspect his
meaning to be, that the Elaterists do not admit that the same Air may
adequately fill more of Place at one time than at another; which I believe to
be as true as that the self-same lock of compressed Wool has no more Hairs in
it, nor does adequately fill more Place with them, when it is permitted to
expand it self, than whilst it remained compressed. But against this way of
Rarefaction our Author here has not any Objection, unless it be intimated in
these words, Concipi non potest: Which if it be, I shall need only to mind him
in this place, that whereas many of the chiefest Philosophers, both of Ancient
and our own times, have professed they thought not the Aristotelean way of
Rarefaction conceivable; and he acknowledges (as we shall see anon) that it is
not clear; what the ablest of his Party (the modern Plenists) are wont to
object against the way of Rarefaction he dislikes, is, that it is not true, not
that it is not intelligible.

CHAP. III.
OUR Authors Second Objection (for so I reckon it) is thus proposed by him. Si
sumatur tubus utrinque apert us sed longior, puta digitorum 40. Argentoque
impleatur, eique Page 15.
digitus superne applicatur ut prius, videbimus subtracto inferiore digito,
argentum quidem descendere usque ad consuetam suam stationem; Digitum autem
superiorem fortiter intra tubum trahi, eique firmissime, ut prius, adhaerere.
Ex quo rursum evidenter concluditur, argentum, in sua statione constitutum, non
ibidem sustentari ab externo aere, sed a funiculo quodam interno suspendi,
cujus superior extremitas, digito affixa, eum sic intra tubum trahit, eique
affigit. But this Argument being much of the same nature with that drawn from
his third Experiment, the Answer made to that and to his first may be easily
applied, and will be sufficient for this also; especially because in our
present case there is less Pressure against the Pulp of the Finger in the
inside of the Tube than in the third Experiment (where some Air is inoluded,
though much expanded and weakened;) the Pressure of the Atmosphere being in the
present case kept off from it by the subjacent Mercury, whereas there is
nothing of that Pressure abated against the other parts of the Finger that kept
it off from the deserted Cavity of the Tube, save only that from the Pulp that
is contiguous to the Tube, there may be somewhat of that Pressure taken off by
the Weight of the Glass it self. But as for that Part of the Finger which
immediately covers the hole, whether or no there be any Spring in its own
fibers, or other constituent substances, which finding no resistance in the
place deserted by the Quicksilver, may contribute to its swelling (for that we
will not now examine) he that has duly considered the account already given of
this Intrusion of the Pulp into the Glass, will find no need of our Authors
internal Funiculus, which to some seems more difficult to conceive, than any of
the Phenomenon in Controversy is to be explained without it.

CHAP. IV.
BY what we have already said against our Examiners Third Argument, we may be
assisted to answer his first, though he propose it as a very clear
Demonstration; and though it be indeed the principal thing in his Book. Sumatur
(says he) tubus brevior digitis 29 puta digitorum 20. non tamen clausus altero
extremo, (ut hactenus) sed utrinque apertus: Page 12.
Hic Tubus, immerso ejus orificio Argento restagnanti, suppositoque digito, ne
effluat Argentum Tubo infundendum, impleatur Argento vivo: aliusque deinde
digitus orificio quoque applicetur, illudque been claudat. Quo facto, si
subtrahatur inferior digitus, sentietur superior vehementer trahi ac sugi intra
tubum, tamque pertinaciter ei (vel argento potius, ut postea) adhaerere, ut
ipsum tubum cum toto argento incluso facile elevet teneatque in vase pendulum.

Ex quo sane experimento clarissime refellitur haec sententia: Cum enim, juxta
eam, Argentum in tubo hujusmodi 20. tantum digitorum, sursum trudatur a
praeponderante aere externo: nunquam profecto per eam explicabitur, quomodo
digitus ille sic trahatur deorsum, tuboque tam vehementer adhaereat; non enim a
trudente sursum potest sic deorsum trahi.

Thus far our Authors objection, in answer whereunto I have diverse things to
represent, to show, that a good account may be given of this Experiment in the
Hypothesis of the Elaterists, which is sufficient to manifest how far the
argument is from being so unanswerable as the proposer of it would persuade his
Reader.

I deny then that the Finger is drawn downward, or made by suction to adhere to
the Tube; but I explicate that which he calls the suction of the Finger, as I
lately did in answer to his third Argument, as we shall more particularly see
anon.

He says indeed, that the Air which thrust up the Quicksilver cannot so
strongly draw down the Finger. As if the Air were not a fluid body, but a
single and entire pillar of some solid matter. But to shorten our Reply to his
Objections, the best way perhaps will be briefly to explicate the Phenomenon
thus:

When the Tube is filled with Quicksilver, the Finger that stops the upper
Orifice is almost equally pressed above and at the sides by the contiguous Air;
but when the lower Finger is removed, then the Cylinder of Mercury, which
before gravitated upon the Finger, comes to gravitate upon the restagnant
Mercury, and by its intervention to press against the outward Air: so that
against those parts of the Finger that are contiguous to the Air there is all
the wonted pressure of the outward Air; whereas against that Pulp that is
contiguous to the Mercury there is not so much pressure as against the other
parts of the Finger by two thirds. I say by two thirds, or thereabout, because
the Mercurial Cylinder in this Experiment is supposed to be twenty Inches high;
and if it were but a little more than thirty Inches high, (which is a third
more) then the weight of the Quicksilver would take off not two thirds only,
but the whole pressure of the outward Air, from the abovementioned pulp of the
Finger. For in that case the Quicksilver would quite desert it, and settle
beneath it. Wherefore since it has appeared by our Answer to the Examiner's
third Argument, That the pressure of the outward Air is taken off from the body
that remains in the upper part of the Tube, according to the weight of the
Liquor suspended in the Tube; and since in our Hypothesis the pressure of the
outward Air is able to keep thirty Inches of Quicksilver, or two or three and
thirty foot of Water, suspended in a Tube; it need be no great wonder, if a
pressure of the ambient Air, equal to the weight of a Cylinder of Water of near
twenty two foot long, should be able to thrust in the pulp of the Finger at the
upper Orifice of the Tube, and make it stick closely enough to the lip of it.

I know the Examiner affirms, That no thrusting or pressure from without can
ever effect such an adhesion of the Finger to the Tube. But this should be as
well proved as said. But, first, though I am willing to think the Examiner
would not knowingly relate any thing he is not persuaded of; yet as far as I
and another person very well versed in these Experiments have purposely tried,
I could not find the Adhesion of the Finger to the Tube to be near so strong as
our Author has related. Secondly, if you carefully endeavor by pressure and
otherwise to thrust the pulp of your Finger into the Orifice of the Tube, you
may through the Glass perceive it to be manifestly tumid in the cavity of the
Pipe. And if by pressing your Finger against the Orifice of the Tube, you
should not make the pulp adhere quite so strongly to the Tube, nor swell quite
so much within it, as may happen in some Mercurial Experiments; it is to be
considered, that the Air being a fluid as well as a heavy body, it does not (as
grosser Weights would) press only against the upper part of the Finger, but
pressing as much of the finger as is exposed to it almost every where, and
almost uniformly, as well as strongly, it does by its lateral pressure on every
side thrust in the Pulp of the Finger into the hole where there is not any
resistance at all, or at least near so much pressure against the Pulp as that
of the ambient Air against the parts of the Finger contiguous to it.

By this it may appear that we need not borrow the Objection our Author offers
to lend us; namely, that in the Experiment under consideration the Quicksilver
is pressed downward by the Spring of some Air lurking betwixt it and the
Finger. (Though I am prone to think that unless the Experiment be made with a
great deal of care, such a thing may easily happen, and contribute to the
stronger Adhesion of the Finger to the Tube.) This I say may appear not
withstanding what our Author Objects, that the Air expanding it self will
thrust away the Finger upwards, since the contrary of that pretense we have
lately manifested in the Answer to his Third Argument. And as for what he adds
to confirm his Argumentation in these words, Quod vel inde confirmatur, Quia
cum praeponderans ille aer succedat (uti asseritur) loco sublati inferioris
Page 14.
digiti, id est, eodem modo nunc sustentet Argentum quo ante ab applicato
digito inferiore sustentabatur; manifestum est, non debere, juxta hanc
sententiam, magis deorsum trahi digitum superiorem post sublatam inferiorem
quam ante. Cum itaque contrarium plane doceat experientia, satis liquet
sententiam illam esse falsam. We must consider that the Tube being supposed
perfectly full of Mercury, the Finger that stops the lower Orifice is wont to
be kept strongly pressed against it, lest any of that ponderous Liquor should
get out between the Tube and the Finger. So that although both the lower Finger
do indeed keep up the Mercury in the Tube, and the pressure of the outward Air
would do so too; yet there is this difference, that the pressure of the
Atmosphere depending upon its Weight, cannot be intended and weakened as we
please, as can that of the undermost Finger. And therefore whereas the
Atmospherical Cylinder will not keep up a Cylinder of Quicksilver of above
thirty Inches high, those that make the Torricellian Experiment do often, upon
one occasion or other, keep up with the Finger a Mercurial Cylinder of perhaps
forty or fifty Inches or far more: So that whereas in our case, before the
removal of the undermost Finger, the Pulp of the uppermost must have about the
same pressure against it where it is contiguous to the Mercury, as there is
against the other part of the same Finger; after the removal of the undermost
Finger, there is as much of the Atmospherical Pressure, if I may so speak,
taken off from the newly mentioned Pulp as counter-balances a Cylinder of
Quicksilver of twenty Inches long.

CHAP. V.
THe Examiners Fourth and last Experiment is thus proposed. Quarto denique
(says he) impugnatur: Quia ex eo sequeretur, Argentum vivum per similem Tubum e
vasculo exugi posse eadem prorsus facilitate qua ex eodem exugeretur Page 18.
aqua: quod tamen experientiae repugnat, qua docemur aquam in os sugentis
facillime attrahi; quo tamen Argentum vivum ne toto quidem adhibito conatu
perduci queat, imo vix ad Tubi medietatem.

Sequelam autem sic ostendo: Quia cum in hac sententia nihil aliud agendum sit
quam hoc, ut per Tubum sic ascendat subject us Liquor, sive Aqua fuerit, sive
Argentum, nisi ut sugendo sur sum trahatur aer Tubo inclusus, quo sic attracto
ascendit illico subject us Liquor, protrusus nimirum ab externo aere jam
praeponderante (uti docet Pecquettus in dissertatione Anatomica page 63.)
manifestum est, eadem plane facilitate exugendum sic Argentum vivum qua
exugitur Aqua: Quod quum Experientiae tam aperte repugnat, necesse est
sententiam ex qua sequitur falsam esse.

This Experiment I remember I made some years ago, accordingly it is alleged in
the fourth Essay of the Treatise (I was then writing) to prove against the
Vulgar Opinion, that Liquors do not to prevent a Vacuum spontaneously ascend,
which I presume will be so far allowed of by our Author, who would have Liquors
supposed to be raised by Suction violently drawn up by the contraction of his
Funiculus. But to examine this Experiment, as it concerns the present
Controversy, we may recall to mind that we formerly showed in the Answer to our
Author's Third Argument, That when the Mercurial Cylinder that leans upon the
restagnant Mercury has at the other end of it Air, kept from any intercourse
with the Atmosphere, that included Air has so much of the Pressure of the
external Air taken off from it as counterpoises the Mercurial Cylinder. And the
Finger that is exposed to the whole Pressure of the ambient Air in some of its
Parts, and in others but to the much fainter Pressure of the included Air,
endures an unusal Pressure from the preponderating power of the Atmosphere.

We may consider also that there is against the Thorax and those Muscles of the
Abdomen that are subservient to Respiration the Pressure of the whole ambient
Air. Which Pressure, notwithstanding, The Muscles designed for the use of
Respiration, are able without any considerable resistance to dilate the Thorax
at pleasure; because, as fast as they open the Chest, and by dilating it weaken
the Spring of that Air which is then within the Body, the external Air by
flowing in, for want of finding the usual resistance there, keeps that within
the Thorax in an AEquilibrium of force with that without. These things
premised, it is not Difficult in our Hypothesis to give an Answer to our
Examiner's Experiment. For we say when a Cylinder of Mercury is raised in the
Tube to any considerable height, the Pressure of the Air in the Thorax is
lessened by the whole weight of that Mercurial Cylinder, and consequently the
Respiratory Muscles are thereby disabled to dilate the Chest as freely as they
were wont, by reason of the prevalency of the undiminish'd Pressure of the
external Air against the weakened Pressure of the internal: But if instead of
Mercury you substitute Water, so short a Cylinder of that comparatively light
Liquor takes off so little of the Pressure of the included Air, that it comes
into the Lungs with almost its usual strength, and consequently with almost as
much force as the outward Air presses with against the Thorax.

And on this occasion there occurs to my thoughts a noble Experiment of the
most Ingenious Monsieur Paschal, which clearly shows, that if we could free the
upper part of such a Tube as we are now considering from the Pressure of all
internal Air, it would follow, as the Examiner says it should, that the
Quicksilyer would by the Pressure of the outward Air be impelled up into the
Tube as well as Water, till it had attained a height great enough to make its
Weight not inferior but equal to that of the Atmosphere. The Experiment it
self being so pertinent and considerable, we shall annex it in the same words
wherein it is related by his Countryman and Acquaintance, the Learned and
Candid Gassendus. Neque hoc vero solum, sed insuper vitreo Gass Phys. Sect. 1.
Lib. 2. Page 204. De nupero Inanis Experimento.
Diabete Clystereve ea qua par fuerit longitudine confecto, and post embolum ad
orificium usque compulsum, immisso ad normam in subjectum Hydrargyrum,
deprehendit, ubi embolum sensim deinde educitur, consequi Hydrargvrum
ascendereque ad eandem usque duorum pedum and digitorum trium eum semisse
altitudinem. To which he immediately subjoyns a Circumstance very considerable
to the present Controversy in the following Clause. Ac ubi deinceps, adhibita
licet non majore vi, Embolum altius educitur, consistere Hydrargyrum, neque
amplius consequi, ac fieri interim Inane quod spatium intercipitur ab ipso ad
Embolum usque. Thus far he. So that as to the Examiner's Experiment, we may
well explicate it in our Hypothesis, by saying, that agreeably to it it
happens, that in a more forcible Respiration the Mercurial Cylinder is raised
higher than in a more languid; because, in the former Case, the Chest being
more dilated, the included Air is also more expanded; whereby its debilitated
Spring cannot as before enable the Mercurial Cylinder to counterpoise
altogether the Pressure of the ambient Air. And that the reason why the
Quicksilver is not by Respiration raised as high as it is kept suspended in the
Torricellian Experiment, is not, that the Pressure of the outward Air is unable
to raise it so high, but because, as we have already declared, the free
Dilatation of the Thorax is opposed by the Pressure of the ambient Air; which
Pressure being against so great a Superficies, and being but imperfectly
resisted by the debilitated Pressure of the Air within the Thorax, will be
easily imagined to be very considerable by him who considers that in our
Engine, the Pressure of the external Air against the Sucker of less than three
inches Diameter was, as we relate in the 33. Experiment, able to thrust up a
Weight of above a hundred pound. And here we may observe upon the By in
confirmation of our former Doctrine, that when we strongly suck up Quicksilver
in a Glass Tube, though the Elevation of the Quicksilver be according to our
Author performed likewise by his Funiculus contracting it self every way, and
though there be a Communication betwixt the internal surface of the Lungs, and
the cavity of the Tube; yet we feel not in our Lungs any endeavor of the
shrinking Funiculus to tear off that Membrane they are lined with.

And thus we have examined our Author's four Arguments, to prove that in the
Torricellian Experiment the Quicksilver cannot be kept suspended by the
counterpoise of the external Air: Against which Opinion he tells us indeed,
that other Arguments might be alleged) but as it is not probable that if he
had thought them better than those he has Page 19.
elected to insist on, he would have omitted them; so it is not unlikely that
Answers might be as well found for them as for the others; especially since
that which he singles out for a Specimen is, that from his Adversaries
Hypothesis it would follow, that the Quicksilver would descend much more (I
suppose it is a mistake of the Press, for much less) in cold Weather than in
hot, because the Air is then thicker and heavier, and therefore ought to impel
up the Quicksilver higher. For besides that we shall in its due place question
the validity of our Author's Consequence; it will be here sufficient to Reply,
that the Observation on which he grounds it does not constantly hold, as his
Objection supposes: Which may appear by that part of our 18. Experiment whence
the matter of fact is desum'd, as we shall have occasion to take further notice
of when we shall come to the Defense of that Experiment. So that what has been
hitherto Discoursed on both sides being duly considered, the Reader is left to
judge what ground the Examiner had for the (...) wherewith he is pleased to
conclude his Third Chapter, Maneat igitur tot Argumentis comprobatum, quorum
quodlibet se solo sufficit, Argentum (facto Page 19.
Experimento in loco aperto) per externi aeris gravitatem a lapsu minime
sustentari.

CHAP. VI.
HIs fourth Chapter, wherein the Title promises that he will prove, Argentum in
loco occluso non sustentari a lapsu per ipsum aeris Elaterium, is very short,
and does not require that we should dwell long upon it. For the proof he brings
of his Assertion being this, Cumtota vis hujus Elaterii pendeat a refutato jam
aeris aequipondio cum digitis 29 Argenti Page 20.
vivi, ita ut nec plus nec minus faciat hoc elaterium in loco occluso quam fit
per illud aequipondium in loco aperto; manifestum est, cum jam ostensum sit
fictitium plane esse hujusmodi aequipondium, fictitium quoque esse tale
elaterium: This being no new Argument, but an Inference from those he had set
down in the former Chapter, by our Answers to them it is become needless for us
to make any distinct Reply to this. We shall rather desire the Reader to take
notice, that whereas our Author says that according to his Adversaries, Nec
plus nec minus faciat hoc Elaterium in loco occluso quam fit per illud
AEquipondium in loco aperto; whatever others may have written, we for our part
allow of this Opinion but in some Cases; for in others we have performed much
more by the Spring of the Air, which we can within certain limits increase at
pleasure, than can be performed by the bare weight, which for ought we know
remains always somewhat near the same. And of this advantage that the spring of
the Air may have in point of force above the weight of it, we have formerly
given an Instance in our 17. Experiment, (where, by compressing the Air in the
Receiver, we impelled the Mercurial Cylinder higher than the station at which
the counterpoise of the Air is wont to sustain it) and shall hereafter have
occasion to give yet more considerable proofs. To the lately recited words our
Examiner subjoyns these; Add, cum allata jam capite praecedente experimenta de
adhaesione digiti, etc. eodem modo se habent in loco Page 21.
clauso ac in aperto, necessarium esse facta ex eis argumenta contra
aequipondium, eadem quoque contra elaterium vim habere. But though he propose
this as a new Argument, yet since it is built but upon the adhesion of the
Finger (of which we have already given an account in our Hypothesis) I see not
how it requires any new and particular Answer. And whereas he says, that the
Experiments he had mentioned concerning the adhesion of ones Finger, etc. eodem
modo se habent in loco clauso ac in aperto; I could wish he had added what way
he took to make the Trials. For he gives no intimation that he did them any
other ways than in ordinary rooms. And in such there scarce ever wants a
communication betwixt the inward and outward Air, either at the Chimney, or
Window, or Door not exactly shut, or at some hole or crevice or other, by means
of which the weight of the Atmosphere has its operation within the room.

To his second Argument our Author adds not a third, unless we take that for an
Argument which he immediately annexes to his last recited words: Et profecto
(says he) si secum expenderent hi Authors, quanta sit difficultas explicandi
Page 21.
hujusmodi aeris elaterium, nisi idem aer se solo occupet majorem locum (ut
paulo ante) credo eos sententiam facile mutaturos. But this being said gratis,
does not exact an Answer; and he must make it more intelligible than any man
that I know of has yet done, how the same Air can adequately fill more space at
one time than at another, before he persuade me to change my opinion about the
Spring of the Air: Especially since he himself allows that the Air has a
Spring, Page 11.
whereby it is able, when it has been violently compressed, to recover its due
extension; the manner whereof if he will intelligibly explicate, his
Adversaries will have no great difficulty to make out the spring of the Air.
But whether his Hypothesis, or ours, be the more intelligible, will be more
properly considered in the second part of our Discourse, to which we will
therefore now proceed.

The II. Part. Wherein the Adversaries Funicular Hypothesis is examined
CHAP. I. What is alleged to prove the Funiculus is considered; and some
Difficulties are proposed against the Hypothesis.
THE Hypothesis that the Examiner would, as a better, substitute in the place
of ours, is, if I mistake it not, briefly this; That the things we ascribe to
the weight or spring of the Air are really performed by neither, but by a
certain Funiculus, or extremely thin substance, provided in such cases by
Nature, ne detur vacuum, which being exceedingly rarefied by a forcible
distension, does perpetually and strongly endeavor to contract it self into
dimensions more agreeable to the nature of the distended body; and consequently
does violently attract all the bodies whereunto it is contiguous, if they be
not too heavy to be removed by it.

But this Hypothesis of our Authors does to me, I confess, appear liable to
such Exceptions, that though I disliked that of his Adversaries yet I should
not embrace his, but rather wait till time and further Speculations or trials
should suggest some other Theory, fitter to be acquiesc'd in than this; which
seems to be partly precarious, partly unintelligible, and partly insufficient,
and besides needless: though it will not be so convenient to prove each of
these apart, because diverse of my Objections tend to prove the Doctrine,
against which they are alleged, obnoxious to more than one of the imputed
Imperfections.

First, then, the Arguments by which our Author endeavors to evince his
Funiculus, are incompetent for that end. The Arguments which he proposes in his
sixth Chapter, (where he undertakes to make good his Assertion) I there find to
be three.

The first he sets down in these words, Constat hoc primo exjam dict is Capite
praecedente: nequit enim argentum descendens sic digitum deorsum trahere,
tuboque affigere, nisi Page 24.
a tali Funiculo suspendatur, eumque suo pondere vehementer extendat, ut per se
patet. But to this proof answer has been made already in the former Part of
this Discourse: only whereas the Author seems to refer us to the foregoing
Chapter, we will look back to it, and take notice of what I find there against
the Vacuists. For though I neither am bound, nor intend, in this Discourse to
declare my self for, or against a Vacuum; yet since I am now writing against
the Funicular Hypothesis, it will much conduce to show that it is not firmly
grounded, if I examine what he here alleges against the Assertors of a Vacuum.

In the next place therefore I consider that according to the Examiner, there
can be no Vacuum; and that he makes to be the main reason why Nature in the
Torricellian and our Experiments does act after so extraordinary a manner, as
is requisite to the production of his Funiculus. For in the 47 th. Page, having
in his Adversaries name demanded what need there is at the descent of the
Quicksilver, that before it falls a superficies should be separated from it,
and extended; Respondeo (says he) ideo hoc fieri, ne detur vacuum; cum nihil
aliud ibi adsit quod loco argenti descendentis possit succedere. To which he
immediately subjoyns, (with what cogency I will not now examine) Atque hinc
plane confirmatur commune illud per tot jam elapsa secula usurpatum in Scholis
axioma, viz. Naturam a vacuo abhorrere. And though he seem to make his
Funiculus the immediate cause of the Phenomenon occurring in the Torricellian
and our Experiments: yet that, if you pursue the inquiry a little higher, he
resolves them into Natures abhorrency of a Vacuum, himself plainly informs us
in the next page; Nam licet (says he) immediata ratio cur aqua v. g. ex hydria
hortulana superne clausa (quo exemplo utuntur) non descendat, non sit metus va.
ui, Page 48.
sed ea quam modo diximus, nempe quod non detur sufficiens pondus ad solvendum
illum nexum quo adhaereat aqua clausae hydriae summitati; ad eam tamen rationem
tandem necessario veniendum est. But, though as well our Author's Funiculus, as
the other scarce conceivable Hypotheses that learned men have devised, to
account for the suspension of the Quicksilver otherwise than by the resistance
of the external Air, seem to have been excogitated only to shun the necessity
of admitting a Vacuum: yet I see not how our Examiner cogently proves, either
that there can be none in rerum natura, or that De facto there is none produced
in these Experiments. For in his fifth Chapter (where he professedly undertakes
that task) he has but these two incompetent Arguments. The first is drawn from
the attraction, as he supposes, of the Finger into the deserted cavity of the
Tube in the Torricellian Experiment: Quae quidem (says he) tam vehemens
tractio and adhaesio, cum non nisi a reali aliquo corpore inter digitum and
argentum Page. 22.
constitutum queat provenire, manifestum est spatium illud vacuum non esse, sed
vera aliqua substantia repletum. But to this Argument having already given an
Answer, let us (without staying to urge, that the Vacuists will perhaps object,
that they see not a Necessity, though they should admit of Traction in the
case, that the internal substance must therefore perfectly replenish the
deserted Cavity; without pressing this, I say, let us) consider his other,
which he draws from the Diaphaneity of the deserted part of the Tube, which
space (he says) were it empty, would appear like a little black Pillar, Eo
quod nullae species visuales neque ab eo neque per illud possunt ad oculum
pervenire. But (not to engage our selves in Optical Speculations and
Controversies) if we grant him somewhat more than perhaps he can prove; yet as
the Experiment will not demonstrate that there is nothing of body in any part
of the space deserted by the Mercury, so neither will the Argument conclude (as
the Proposer of it does twice in this Chapter) That space ver a aliqua
substantia repleri. For according to the Hypothesis of the Epicureans and other
Atomists, who make Light to be a corporeal Effluvium from lucid bodies, and to
consist of Atoms so minute, as freely to get in at the narrow Pores of Glass,
there will be no cause to deny interspersed Vacuities in the upper part of the
Tube. For the Corpuscles of Light that permeate that space may be so numerous,
as to leave no sensible part of it un-inlightned; and yet may have so many
little empty Intervals betwixt them, that, if all that is corporeal in the
space we speak of were united into one lump, it would not perhaps adequately
fill the one half (not to say the tenth, or even the hundredth part) of the
whole space: According to what we have noted in the 17. Experiment, that a Room
my appear full of the smoke of a Perfume, though if all the Corpuscles that
compose that smoke were reunited, they would again make up but a small Pastil.
To which purpose I remember I have taken Camphire, of which a little will fill
a Room with its odor, and having in well-clos'd distillatory Glasses caught
the Fumes driven over by heat, I thereby reduced them to re-conjoyn into true
Camphire, whose bulk is very inconsiderable in comparison of the space it fills
as to sense, when the odorous Corpuscles are scattered through the free Air.

To which I might add, that the Torricellian Experiment being made in a dark
night, or in a Room perfectly darkn'd, if it succeed (as there is little cause
to suspect it will not) it may well be doubted whether our Authors Argument
will there take place. For if he endeavor to prove that the place in question
was full in the dark, because upon the letting in of the Day, or the bringing
in of a Candle, the light appears within it; the Vacuists may reply according
to their Hypothesis, That that light is a new one, flowing from the lucid body
that darts its corporeal beams quite through the Glass and Space we dispute
about, which for want of such Corpuscles were not just before visible.

And supposing light not to be made by a trajection of Atoms through Diaphanous
bodies, but a propagation of the impulse of lucid bodies through them; yet it
will not thence necessarily follow, that the deserted part of the Tube must be
full: As in our 27. Experiment (though many of those gross Aerial Particles
that appeared necessary to convey a languid sound were drawn out of our
Receiver at the first and second Exsuction; yet there remained so many of the
like Corpuscles, that those that were wanting were not missed by the sense,
though afterward, when a far greater number was drawn out, they were) so there
may be matter enough remaining to transmit the impulse of light; though betwixt
the Particles of that matter there should be store of vacuities intercepted.
Whereas our Author pretends to prove, not only that there is no coacervate
Vacuity in the space so often mentioned, but absolutely that there is none. For
it is in this last sense, as well as the other, that the Schools and our Author,
who defends their Opinion, deny a V^cuum.

But notwithstanding what we have now discoursed, as in our 17. Experiment we
declined determining whether there be a Vacuum or no; so now what we have said
to the Examiners Argument, has not been to declare our whole sense of the
Controversy, but only to show, that though his Hypothesis supposes there is
no Vacuum, yet his Arguments do not sufficiently prove it: which may help to
show his Doctrine to be precarious; for otherwise the Cartesians, though
Plenists, may plausibly enough (whether truly or no I now dispute not) decline
the necessity of admitting a Vacuum in the deserted space of the Tube, by
supposing it filled with their second and first Element, whose Particles they
imagine to be minute enough freely to pass in and out through the Pores of
Glass. But then they must allow the pressure of the outward Air to be the cause
of the suspension of the Quicksilver: for though the materia caelestis may
readily fill the spaces the Mercury deserts; yet that within the Tube cannot
hinder so ponderous a liquor from subsiding as low as the restagnant Mercury;
since all the parts of the Tube, as well the lowermost as the uppermost, being
pervious to that subtle matter, it may with like facility succeed in whatever
part of the Tube shall be forsaken by the Quicksilver.

The Examiners second Argument in the same place is, That since the Mercurial
Cylinder is not sustained by the outward Air it must necessarily be, that it be
kept suspended by his internal string. But since for the proof of this he is
content to refer us to the third Chapter; our having already examined that,
allows us to proceed to his third Argument, which is, That the Mercurial
Cylinder, resting in its wonted station, does not gravitate: as may appear by
applying the Finger to the immersed or lower Orifice of the Tube. Whence he
infers, that it must of necessity be suspended from within the Tube. And indeed
if you dexterously apply your Finger to the open end of the Tube, when you have
almost, but not quite, lifted it out of the restagnant Mercury, (which
circumstance must not be neglected, though our Author have omitted it) that so
you may shut up no more Quicksilver than the Mercurial Cylinder is wont to
consist of, you will find the Experiment to succeed well enough: (Which makes
me somewhat wonder to find it affirmed, that the learned Maignan denies it) not
but that you will feel upon your Finger a gravitation or pressure of the
Glass-Tube, and the contained Mercury as of one body; but that you will not
feel any sensible pressure of the Mercury apart, as if it endeavored to thrust
away your Finger from the Tube. But the reason of this is not hard to give in
our Hypothesis; for according to that, the Mercurial Cylinder and the Air
counterpoising one another, the Finger sustains not any sensibly-differing
pressure from the ambient Air that presses against the Nail and fides of it,
and from the included Quicksilver that presses against the Pulp. But if the
Mercurial Cylinder should exceed the usual length, then the Finger would feel
some pressure from that surplusage of Quicksilver, which the Air does not
assist the Finger to sustain. So that this pleasant Phenomenon may be as well
solved in our Hypothesis, as in the Examiners: in which if we had time to clear
an Objection, which we foresee might be made, but might be answered too, we
would demand why, when the Mercury included in the Tube is but of a due
altitude, it should run out upon the removal of the Finger that stops it
beneath, in case it be sustained only by the internal Funiculus, and do,
according to his Doctrine, when the Funiculus sustains it, emulate a solid
body, if the pressure of the external Air has not (as our Author teaches it not
to have) any thing to do in this matter.

And if some inquisitive person shall here object, That certainly the Finger
must feel much pain by being squeezed betwixt two such pressures, as that of a
Pillar of thirty Inches of Quicksilver on the one side, and an equivalent
pressure from the Atmospherical Pillar on the other, it may readily be
represented, that in fluid bodies (such as are those concerned in our
Difficulty) a solid body has no such sense of pressure from the ambient bodies
as (unless Experience had otherwise instructed us) we should perhaps imagine.
For, not to mention that having inquired of a famous Diver, whether he found
himself sensibly compressed by the Water at the bottom of the Sea; he agreed
with the generality of Diverse in the Negative: I am informed that the learned
Maignan did purposely try, that his hand being thrust three or four Palms deep
into Quicksilver, his fingers were not sensible, either of any weight from the
incumbent, or of any pressure from the ambient, Quicksilver. The reason of
which (whether that inquisitive man have given it or no) is not necessary in
our present Controversy to be looked after.

To these three Arguments the Examiner adds not a fourth, unless he design to
present it us in this concluding passage: Huc etiam faciunt insignes
librationes quibus argentum subito descendens agitatur: Idem enim hic fit quod
in aliis Pendulis Page 25.
and ab alto demissis fieri solet. But of this Phenomenon also it is easy to
give an account in our Hypothesis by two several ways; whereof the First
(which is proper chiefly when the Experiment is made in a close place, as our
Receiver) is, That the Quicksilver by its sudden descent acquires an impetus
superadded to the pressure it has upon the score of its wonted gravity; whereby
it for a while falls below its station, and thereby compresses the Air that
leans upon the restagnant Mercury. Which Air by its own Spring again forcibly
dilating it self to recover its former extension, and (as is usual in Springs)
hastily flying open, expands it self beyond it, and thereby impells up the
Quicksilver somewhat above its wonted station, in its fall from whence it again
acquires somewhat (though not so much as before) of impetus or power, to force
the Corpuscles of the Air to a Sub-ingression; and this reciprocation of
pressure betwixt the Quicksilver and the outward Air decreasing by degrees,
does at length wholly cease, when the Mercury has lost that superadded
pressure, which it acquired by its falling from parts of the Tube higher than
its due station. But this first way of Explicating these Vibrations is not
necessary in the free Air: For if we consider the ambient Air only as a
weight, and remember what we have newly said of the impetus acquired by
descent; this Phenomenon may be easily enough explained, by taking notice of
what happens in a Balance, when one of the equiponde rant Scales chancing to be
depressed, they do not till after many Vibrations settle in aequilibrio.

And on this occasion I shall add this Experiment: I took a Glass Pipe, whose
two legs (very unequal in length) were parallel enough, and both perpendicular
to that part of the Pipe that connected them; (such a Siphon is described in
our 36. Experiment, to find the proportion of the gravity of Mercury and Water)
into this Quicksilver was poured till 'twas some Inches high, and equally high
in both legs: then the Pipe being inclined till the most part of the
Quicksilver was fallen into one of the legs, I stopped the Orifice of the other
leg with my Finger, and erecting again the Pipe, though the Quicksilver were
forced to ascend a little in that stopped leg; yet by reason my Finger kept the
Air from getting away, the Quicksilver was kept lower by a good deal in that
stopped leg than in the other; but if by suddenly removing my Finger I gave
passage to the included and somewhat comprest Air, the preponderant Quicksilver
in the other leg would with the Mercury in this unstopt leg, make diverse
undulations before that liquor did in both legs come to rest in an
aequilibrium. Of which the Reason may be easily deduced from what has been
newly delivered; and yet in this case there is no pretense to be made of a
Funiculus of violently distended Air to effect the Vibrations of the Mercury.

CHAP. II Diverse other Difficulties are objected against the Funicular
Hypothesis
THirdly, But though our Examiner have not sufficiently proved his Hypothesis,
yet perhaps it may be in its own nature so like to be true, as to deserve to be
embraced as such. Wherefore we will now take notice of some of those many
things that to our apprehension render it very improbable.

And first, whereas our Author acknowledges that Quicksilver, Water, Wine, and
other Liquors, will, as well one as another, descend in Tubes exactly sealed at
the top, in case the Cylinder of liquor exceed the weight of a Mercurial
Cylinder of 29. Inches; and will subside no longer than till it is come to
equiponderate a Cylinder of Quicksilver of that height; whereas, I say, the
Examiner is by the ingenious Monsieur Paschall's, and other Experiments,
induced to admit this; it cannot but seem strange that, whatever the liquor be,
there should be just the same weight or strength to extend them into a
Funiculus: though Water, for instance, and Quicksilver be near fourteen times
as heavy one as the other, and be otherwise of very distant natures; and though
diverse other liquors, as Oil and Water, be likewise of Textures very
differing. And this may somewhat the more be wondered at, because our Author (in
his Animadversions upon our 31. Experiment) is pleased to make so great a
difference betwixt the disposition of bodies of various consistences, as fluid
and firm, to be extenuated into a Funiculus, that he will not allow any humane
force to be able to produce one, by the divulsion of two flat Marbles, in case
the contact of their Surfaces were so exquisite as quite to exclude all Air;
though in the same place his Ratiocination plainly enough teaches (which
Experience however does) that adhering Marbles, though with extraordinary
difficulty, may be forcibly severed, and according to him the superficial parts
may be distended into a Funiculus, that prevents a Vacuum.

But now the Hypothesis of his Adversaries is not at all encumbered with this
difficulty. For the weight of the outward Air being that which keeps liquors
suspended in Tubes sealed at the top; it matters not of what nature or texture
the suspended liquor is, provided its weight be the same with that of a
Mercurial Cylinder equiponderant to the Aerial one: As if there be a pound of
Lead in one Scale, it will not destroy the aequilibrium, whether what be put in
the other be Gold, or Quicksilver, or Wool, or Feathers, provided its weight
be just a pound.

In the next place we may take notice, That the account our Examiner gives us
of his Funiculus in the tenth Chapter, (where he takes upon him to Explicate
it) is much more strange than satisfactory, and not made out by any such
parallel operations of Nature, as his Adversaries will not (and may not well do
it) dispute the truth of. Whereas the weight and Spring of the Air may be
inferred from such unquestioned Experiments as are nor concerned in our present
Controversy. For the gravity of the Air may be manifested by a pair of Scales,
and the Spring of it discloses it self so clearly in wind guns and other
Instruments, that our Adversary (as we have already had occasion to inculcate)
does not deny it. But to consider his explication of his Funiculus, he would
have us note two things: First, Argentum dum replet totum tubum, non mere
tangere ejus summitatem (ut primo aspectu videtur) Page 38.
sed eidem quoque firmiter adhaerere. Patet hoc (subjoyns he) experimento illo
in primo argumento capitis tertii de tubo utrinque aperto. But what is to be
answered to this proof may be easily gathered from what we have replied to that
Argument. And to what our Author adds to prove, That the adhesion of the
Finger is to the subjacent Mercury, not to the Tube; namely, That Licet illud
tubi orificium oleo, aliave materia adhaesionem impediente, inungatur, non
minus tamen firmiter Page. 38.
adhaerebit digitus quam prius; an Answer may be drawn from the same place: nor
perhaps will his reasoning much satisfy those who consider that bodies by
trusion may easily enough be made stick together, as much as in our case the
Tube and Finger do, notwithstanding one of them is anointed with Oil, and that
this adhesion of the Finger to the Tube is to be met with in cases where the
Surface of the included Quicksilver is not contiguous to the Finger, but many
Inches below. As for what he adds concerning the reason why Water and
Quicksilver ascend by suction, we have already taught what is to be answered to
it, by ascribing that ascension to the pressure of the external Air: without
any need of having recourse to a Funiculus; or imagining with him in this
place, That because nothing besides the Water or Quicksilver can insuch cases
succeed the Air, (which yet is not easy to be proved in reference to a thin
Ethereal substance) therefore, Parts ipsius aeris (to use his expression) sic
tubo inclusae (quae alias tam facile Page 40.
separantur) nunc tam fortiter sibi invicem agglutinentur, ut validissimam (uti
videmus) conficiunt catenam, qua non solum aqua, sed ponderosum illud argentum
sic in altum trahatur. Which way of wreathing a little rarefied Air into so
strong a rope, how probable it is, I will for a while leave the Reader to
judge, and advance to our Author's second Notandum, which he thus proposes:
Rarefactionem sive extensionem corporis ad occupandum majorem locum fieri non
solo calore, sed etiam distensione Page 40, 41.
seu vi divulsiva: sicut e contra condensatio non solo frigore perficitur,
sedetiam compressione, uti innumea passim docent exempla. And it is true and
obvious, that the condensation of bodies, taking that word in a large sense,
may be made as well by compression as cold. But I wish he had more clearly
expressed what he means in this place by that Rarefaction, which he says is to
be made by distension, or a vis divulsiva, whereof he tells us there are
innumerable instances. For, as far as may be gathered from the three Examples
he subjoyns, it is only the Air that is capable of being so extended as his
Hypothesis requires Quicksilver and even Stones must be. And I know not how it
will be proved, that even Air may be thus extended so far, as in the Magdeburg
Experiment, to fill a place more than two thousand times as big as that it
filled before. For that the same Air in this and his two foregoing Instances
does adequately fill more space at one time than another, he proves but by the
rushing in of water into the evacuated Glass, and filling it within a little
quite full, which he says, is done by the distended Air that contracting it
self draws up the water with it. Which Explication how much less likely it is,
than that the water is in such cases impelled up by the pressure of the
Atmosphere, we shall anon (when we come to discuss his way of Rarefaction and
condensation) have occasion to examine. In the mean time let us consider with
him the Explication which, after having promised the two above recited
Observations, he gives us of his Funiculus; Cum per primum Notandum argentum it
a adhaereat tubi vertici, and per secundum, rarefactio Page 41.
fiat per meram corporis distensionem, it a rem se habere, ut argentum
descendens a vertice tubi affixam eirelinquat superficiem suam extimam sive
supremam, eamque eousque suo pondere extendat extenuetque, donec facilius sit
aliam superficiem similiter relinquere quam priorem illam ulterius extendere:
Secundam igitur relinquit, eamque eodem modo descendendo extendit, donec
facilius sit tertiam adhuc separari quam illam secundam extendere ulterius: and
sic deinceps, donec tandem vires amplius non habeat superficies sic separandi
and extendendi; nempe donec perveniat ad altitudinem digitorum duntaxat 29. ubi
quiescit, ut capite primo dictum est. Thus far our Examiners Explication: By
which it is easy to discern, that he is fain to assign his Funiculus a way of
being produced strange and unparalled enough. For, not to repeat our
Animadversions upon the first of the two Notandum's, on which the Explication
is grounded, I must demand by what force, upon the bare separation of the
Quicksilver and the top of the Tube, the new body he mentions comes to be
produced; or at least how it appears that the Mercury leaves any such thing as
he speaks of behind it. For the sense perceives no such matter at the top of
the Tube, nor is it necessary to explicate the Phenomenon as we have formerly
seen. It may also be marvell'd at, that the bare weight of the descending
Mercury should be able to extend a Surface into a Body. And besides, it seems
precariously affirmed, that there is such a successive leaving behind of one
Surface after another as is here imagined: Nor does it at all appear how,
though some of the Quicksilver were turned into a thin subtle substance, yet
that substance comes to be contrived into a Funiculus of so strange a nature,
that scarce any weight (for ought appears by his Doctrine) can be able to break
it; that contrary to all other strings it may be stretched without being made
more slender; and that it has other very odd properties, some of which we
shall anon have occasion to mention. As for what our Author subjoyns in these
words, Eodem itaque fere modo separari videntur hae superficies ab argento
descendente, and in tenuissimum quendam funiculum Page 43, 44.
per descendens pondus extendi, quo per calorem in accensa candela separantur
hujusmodi superficies a subject a cera aut sevo, and in subtilissimam flammam
extenuantur. Vbinotatu dignum, quemadmodum flamma illaplusquam millies sine
dubio majus spatium occupat, quam antea occupaverat pars illa cerae ex qua
conficitur; ita prorsus and hic existimandum Funiculum illum plusquam millies
majus spatium occupare quam prius occupaverat illa argenti particula ex qua sit
exortus: Vti etiam sine dubio contingit, quando talis particula a subjecto igne
in vaporem convertitur. Though it be the only Example whereby he endeavors to
illustrate the generation of his Funiculus, yet (I presume) he scarce expects
we should think it an apposite one. For besides that there here intervenes a
conspicuous and powerful Agent, namely, an actual Fire to sever and agitate the
parts of the Candle; and besides that there is a manifest wasting of the Wax or
Tallow turned into flame; besides these things, I say, we must not admit that
the Fuel when turned into a flame does really fill (I say, not, with our
Author) more than a thousand times, but so much as twice more of genuine space
than the Wax 'twas made of. For it may be said that the flame is little or
nothing else than an aggregate of those Corpuscles which before lay upon the
upper superficies of the Candle, and by the violent heat were divided into
minuter particles, vehemently agitated and brought from lying as it were upon a
flat to beat off one another, and make up about the Wiek such a figure as is
usual in the flame of Candles burning in the free Air. Nor will it necessarily
follow, that the space which the flame seems to take up should contain neither
Air nor Ether, nor any thing else, save the parts of that flame, because the
eye cannot discern any other body there: For even the smoke ascending from the
snuff of a newly-extinguish'd Candle appears a dark pillar, which to the eye at
some distance seems to consist of smoke; when as yet there are so many Aerial
and other invisible Corpuscles mingled with it, as if all those parts of smoke
that make a great show in the Air were collected and contiguous, they would not
perhaps amount to the bigness of a Pins head, as may appear by the great
quantity of streams that in Chemical Vessels are wont to go to the making up of
one drop of Spirit. And therefore it does not ill fall out for our turn, that
the Examiner, to enforce his former Example, alleges the turning of a particle
of Quicksilver into vapor, by putting fire under it: for if such be the
Rarefaction of Mercury, it is not at all like to make such a Funiculus as he
talks of, since those Mercurial Fumes appear by diverse Experiments to be
Mercury divided and thrown abroad into minute parts, whereby though the body
obtain more of Surface than it had before, yet it really fills no more of true
and genuine space, since if all the particular little spaces filled by these
scattered Corpuscles were reduced into one, (as the Corpuscles themselves often
are in Chemical Operations) they would amount but to one total space, equal to
that of the whole Mercury before rarefaction. But these Objections against this
Explication are not all that I have to say against our Adversaries Funiculus it
self.

For I farther demand how the Funiculus comes by such hooks or graple-irons, or
parts of the like shape, to take fast hold of all contiguous bodies, and even
the smoothest, such as Glass, and the calm surface of Quicksilver, Water, Oil,
and other fluids: And how these slender and invisible hooks cannot only in the
tersest bodies find an innumerable company of ears or loops to take hold on,
but hold so strongly that they are able not alone to lift up a tall Cylinder of
that very ponderous metal of Quicksilver, but to draw inwards the sides of
strong Glasses so forcibly, as to break them all to pieces. And it is also
somewhat strange, that Water and other fluid bodies (whose parts are wont to be
so easily separable) should, when the Funiculus once lays hold on the
superficial Corpuscles, presently emulate the nature of consistent bodies, and
be drawn up like Masses each of them of an entire piece; though even in the
exhausted Receiver they appear by their undulation (when they are stirred by
Bubbles that pass freely through them) and many other signs to continue fluid
bodies.

It seems also very difficult to conceive how this extenuated substance should
require so strong a spring inward as the Examiner all along his books ascribes
to it. Nor will it serve his turn to require of us in exchange an Explication
of the Airs spring outward, since he acknowledges, as well as we, that it has
such a spring. I know, that by calling this extenuated substance a Funiculus,
he seems plainly to intimate that it has its spring inward, upon the same
account that Lute-strings and Ropes forcibly stretched have theirs. But there
is no small disparity betwixt them: for whereas in strings there is required
either wreathing, or some peculiar and artificial texture of the component
parts; a rarefaction of Air (were it granted) does not include or infer any
such contrivance of parts as is requisite to make bodies Elastical. And if the
Cartesian Notion of the cause of Springiness be admitted, then our extenuated
substance having no Pores to be pervaded by the materia subtilis (to which
besides our Author also makes Glass impervious) will be destitute of
Springiness. And however, since Lute-strings, Ropes, etc. must, when they
shrink inwards, either fill up or lessen their Pores, and increase in thickness
as they diminish in length; our Examiners Funiculus must differ very much from
them, since it has no Pores to receive the shrinking parts, and contracts it
self as to length, without increasing its thickness. Nor can it well be
pretended that this self contraction is done ob fugam vacui, since though it
should not be made, a Vacuum would not ensue. And if it be said that it is made
that the preternaturally stretched Body might restore it self to its natural
dimensions: I answer, That I am not very forward to allow acting for ends to
Bodies inanimate, and consequently devoid of knowledge; and therefore should
gladly see some unquestionable Examples produced of Operations of that nature.
And however to me, who in Physical enquiries of this nature look for efficient
rather than final causes, it is not easy to conceive how Air by being expanded
(in which case its force (like that of other rarefi'd Bodies) seems principally
to tend outward, as we see in fired Gunpowder, in AEolipiles, in warmed
Weather-glasses, etc.) should acquire so prodigious a force of moving
contiguous Bodies inwards. Nor does it to me seem very probable, that, when for
instance part of a polished Marble is extended into a Funiculus, that Funiculus
does so strongly aspire to turn into Marble again. I might likewise wish our
Author had more clearly explicated, how it comes to pass (which he all along
takes for granted) that the access of the outward Air does so much and so
suddenly relax the tension of his Funiculus; since that being (according to
him) a real and Poreless body, it is not so obvious how the presence of another
can so easily and to so strange a degree make it shrink. But I will rather
observe, that it is very unlikely that the space which our Adversary would have
replenished with his Funicular substance, should be full of little
highly-stretcht strings, that lay fast hold of the surfaces of all contiguous
Bodies, and always violently endeavor to pull them inwards. For we have
related in our 26. Experiment, that a Pendulum being set a moving in our
exhausted Receiver, did swing to and fro as freely, and with the string
stretched as straight, as for ought we could perceive it would have done in the
common Air. Nay, the Balance of a Watch did there move freely and nimbly to and
fro; which it is hard to conceive those Bodies could do, if they were to break
through a medium consisting of innumerable exceedingly-stretched strings. On
which occasion we might add, that it is somewhat strange that these strings,
thus cut or broken by the passage of these bodies through them, could so
readily have their parts reunited, and without any more ado be made entire
again. And we might also take notice of this as another strange peculiarity in
our Author's Funiculus, That in this case the two divided parts of each small
string that is broken do not, like those of other broken strings, shrink and
fly back from one another; but (as we just now said) immediately redintegrate
themselves: Whereas, when in the Torricellian Experiment the Tube and contained
Mercury is suddenly lifted up out of the restagnant Quicksilver into the Air,
the Funiculus does so strangely contract it self, that it quite vanishes;
insomuch that the ascending Mercury may rise to the very top of the Tube.
These, I say, and diverse other difficulties might on this occasion be insisted
on; but that, supposing our selves to have mentioned enough of them for once,
we think it now more seasonable to proceed to the remaining part of our
Discourse.

CHAP. III. The Aristotelean Rarefaction (proposed by the Adversary) examined.
BUt this is not all that renders the Examiner's Hypothesis improbable: For,
besides those already mentioned particulars, upon whose score it is very
difficult to be understood; it necessarily supposes such a Rarefaction and
Condensation, as is, I confess, to me, as well as to many other considering
persons, unintelligible.

For the better discernment of the force of this Objection we must briefly
premise, That a Body is commonly said to be rarefi'd or dilated, (for I take
the word in a larger sense than, I know, many others do, for a reason that will
quickly appear) when it acquires greater dimensions than the same Body had
before; and to be condensed, when it is reduced into less dimensions, that is,
into a lesser space than it contained before: (as when a dry Sponge being first
dipped in water swells to a far greater bulk, and then being strongly squeezed
and held compressed, is not only reduced into less room than it had before it
was squeezed, but into less than it had even before it was wetted.) And I must
further premise, That Rarefaction (as also Condensation) being amongst the most
obvious Phenomenon of Nature, there are three (and for ought we know but three)
ways of explicating it: For, either we must say with the Atomists and Vacuists,
that the Corpuscles whereof the rarefied Body consists do so depart from each
other, that no other substance comes in between them to fill up the deserted
spaces that come to be left betwixt the incontiguous Corpuscles; or else we
must say with diverse of the ancient Philosophers, and many of the Moderns,
especially the Cartesians, that these new Intervals produced betwixt the
Particles of the raresied Body are but dilated Pores, replenished, in like
manner as those of the tumid Sponge are by the imbibed water, by some subtle
Ethereal substance, that insinuates it self betwixt the disjoined Particles:
Or, lastly, we must imagine with Aristotle and most of his followers, that the
self-same Body does not only obtain a greater space in Rarefaction, and a
lesser in Condensation, but adequately and exactly fill it, and so when
rarefied acquires larger dimensions without either leaving any vacuities
betwixt its component Corpuscles, or admitting between them any new or
extraneous substance whatsoever.

Now it is to this last (and, as some call it, rigorous) way of Rarefaction that
our Adversary has recourse in his Hypothesis: Though this, I confess, appear to
me so difficult to be conceived, that I make a doubt whether any Phenomenon
can be explained by it; since to explain a thing is to deduce it from something
or other in Nature more known than it self.

He that would meet with full Discussions of this Aristotelean Rarefaction, may
resort to the learned writings of Gassendus, Cartesius and Maignan, who have
accused it of diverse great absurdities: But for my part, I shall at present
content my self to make use to my purpose of two or three passages that I meet
with (though not together) in our Author himself.

Let us then suppose, that in the Magdeburg Experiment he so often (though I
think causlesly enough) urges to prove his Hypothesis; let us (I say) for
easier considerations sake suppose, that the undilated Air, which (as he tells
us) possessed about half an inch of space, consisted of a hundred Corpuscles,
Page 42.
or (if that name be in this case disliked) a hundred parts; (for it matters
not what number we pitch upon) and 'twill not be denied, but that as the whole
parcel of Air, or the Aggregate of this hundred Corpuscles, is adequate to the
whole space it fills, so each of the hundred parts, that make it up, is
likewise adequately commensurate to its peculiar space, which we here suppose
to be a hundredth part of the whole space. This premised, our Author having
elsewhere this passage, Corpore occupante locum verbi gratia duplo majorem,
necesse est ut Page 160.
quaelibet ejus pars locum quoque duplo majorem occupet; prompts us to subjoyn,
that in the whole capacity of the Globe (which according to him was two
thousand times as great as the room possessed by the unexpanded Air) there must
likewise be two hundred thousand parts of space commensurate each of them to
one of the forementioned hundredth parts of Air; and consequently, when he
affirms that that half Inch of Air possessed the whole cavity of the Globe, if
we will not admit (as he does not) either Vacuities or some intervening subtle
substance in the Interval of the Aerial parts, he must give us leave to
conclude, that each part of Air does adequately fill two thousand parts of
space. Now that this should be resolutely taught to be not only naturally
possible, (for we dispute not here of what the Divine Omnipotence can do) but
to be really and regularly done in this Magdeburg Experiment, will questionless
appear very absurd to the Cartesians and those other Philosophers, who take
Extension to be but notionally different from Body, and consequently impossible
to be acquired or lost without the addition or detraction of Matter; and will,
I doubt not, appear strange to those other Readers, who consider how generally
Naturalists have looked upon Extension as inseparable, and as immediately
flowing from matter; and upon Bodies, as having necessary relation to a
commensurate space. Nor do I see, if one portion of Air may so easily be
brought exactly to fill up a space two thousand times as big as that which it
did but fill before without the addition of any new substance; I see not (I
say) why the matter contained in every of these two thousand parts of space may
not be further brought to fill two thousand more, and so onwards, since each of
these newly-replenished spaces is presumed to be exactly filled with Body, and
no Space, nor consequently that which the unrarefied Air replenished, can be
more than adequately full. And since, according to our Adversary, not only
fluid Bodies, as Air and Quicksilver, but even solid and hard ones, as Marble,
are capable of such a Distension as we speak of, why may not the World be made
I know not how many thousand times bigger than it is, without either admitting
any thing of Vacuity betwixt its parts, or being increased with the addition of
one Atome of new matter? Which to me is so difficult to conceive, that I have
sometimes doubted, whether in case it could be proved, that in the exhausted
Globe we speak of there were no Vacuities within, nor any subtle matter
permitted to enter from without, it were not more intelligible to suppose that
God had created a new matter to join with the Air in filling up the Cavity,
than that the self-same Air should adequately fill two thousand spaces, whereof
one was exactly commensurate to it even when it was uncompressed. For diverse
eminent Naturalists, both ancient and modern, believing upon a Physical account
the Souls of men to be created and infused, will admit it as intelligible that
God does frequently create substances on certain emergent occasions. But I know
that many of them will not likewise think it conceivable, that without his
immediate interposition an accession of new, real Dimensions should be had
without either vacuities or accession of matter.

And indeed when I considered these difficulties and others, that attend the
Rarefaction our Examiner throughout his whole Book supposes, and when I found
that ever and anon he remits us to what he teaches concerning Rarefaction; I
could not but with some greediness resort to the Chapters he addressed me to.
But when I had perused them, I found the Difficulties remained such still, and
that 'twas very hard even for a witty man to make more of a subject than the
nature of it does bear. Which I say, that by professing my self unsatisfied
with what he writes, I may not be thought to find fault with a man for not
doing what perhaps is not to be done, and for not making such abstruse Notions
plain, as are scarcely (if at all) so much as intelligible. And indeed as he
has handled this subject modestly enough, so in some places his Expressions are
to me somewhat dark; which I mention, not to impute it as a Crime in him, that
he wrote in a diffident and doubtful strain of so difficult a matter, but to
excuse my self if I have not always guessed aright at his meaning.

The things he alleges in favor of the Rarefaction he would persuade are two:
The one, That the Phenomenon of Rarefaction cannot be explicated either by
Vacuities or the subingression of an Ethereal substance; and the other, That
there are two ways of explicating the rigorous Rarefaction he contends for.

His Objections against the Epicurean and Cartesian ways of making out
Rarefaction are some of them more plausible than most of those that are wont to
be urged against them; yet not such as are not capable enough of Answers. But
whilst some of the passages appeared easy to be replied to by the Favorers of
the Hypothesis they oppose, before I had fully examined the rest, chancing to
mention these Chapters to an ingenious Man, hereafter to be further mentioned
in this Treatise; he told me he had so far considered them more than the rest
of the book, that he had thought upon some Hypotheses, whereby the Phenomenon
of Rarefaction might be made out either according to the Vacuists, or according
to the Cartesians, adding, that he had also examined the Instance our Adversary
pretends to be afforded him of his Rarefaction by what happens in the Rota
Aristotelica. Wherefore being sufficiently distressed by Avocations of several
sorts, and being willing to reserve the Declaration of my own thoughts
concerning the manner of Rarefaction and Condensation for another Treatise, I
shall refer the Reader to the ingenious Conjectures about this Subject, which
the Writer of them intends to annex to the present Discourse; and only add in
general, That whereas the Examiner's Argument on this occasion is, That his way
of Rarefaction must be admitted, because neither of the other two can be well
made out, his Adversaries may with the same reason, argue that one of theirs is
to be allowed, since his is encumbered with such manifest difficulties. And they
may enforce what they say by representing, that the inconveniences that attend
his Hypothesis about Rarefaction are insuperable, arising from the
unintelligible nature of the thing it self; whereas those to which the other
ways are obnoxious, may seem to spring but from men's not having yet discovered
what kind of Figures and Motions of the small Particles may best qualify them
to make the Body that consists of them capable of a competent expansion.

After our Author's Objections against the two ways of Rarefaction proposed,
the one by the Vacuists, and the other by the Cartesians and others, that admit
the solidest Bodies, and even Glass it self, to be pervious to an Ethereal or
subtle matter; he attempts to explicate the manner by which that rigorous
Rarefaction he teaches is performed: and having premised, that the Explication
of the way how each part of the rarefy'd Body becomes extended, depends upon
the quality of the parts into which the Body is ultimately resolved; and having
truly observed, that they must necessarily be either really indivisible, or
still endlesly divisible; he endeavors to explicate the Aristotelean
Rarefaction according to those two Hypotheses. But, though he thus propose two
ways of making out his Rarefaction; yet besides that they are irreconcilable,
he speaks of them so darkly and doubtfully, that it seems less easy to discern
which of the two he would be content to stick to, than that he himself scarce
acquiesces in either of them.

And, first, having told us how Rarefaction may be explained, in case we admit
Bodies to be divisible in infinitum, he does himself make such an Objection
against the infinity of parts in a continuum, as he is fain to give so obscure
an Answer to, that I confess I do not understand it; and presume, that not only
the most part of unprejudiced Readers will as little acquiesce in the Answer as
I do; but even the Author himself will not marvel at my confession, since in
the same place he acknowledges the Answer to be somewhat obscure, and
endeavors to excuse its being so, because in that Hypothesis it can scarce be
otherwise.

Wherefore I shall only add on this occasion, that it is not clear to me, that
even such a divisibility of a continuum as is here supposed would make out the
Rarefaction he contends for. For, let the integrant parts of a continuum be
more or less finite or infinite in number, yet still each part, being a
corporeal substance, must have some Particle of space commensurate to it; and
if the whole Body be rarefied, for instance, to twice its former bigness, then
will each part be likewise extended to double its former dimensions, and fill
both the place it took up before, and another equal to it, and so two places.

The second Argument alleged to recommend the hitherto-mentioned way of
explicating Rarefaction is, That many learned Men, amongst whom he names two,
Aquinas and Suarez, have taught that the same corporeal thing may naturally be,
and de facto often is, in the souls of Brutes really indivisible and virtually
extended. But, though I pay those two Authors a just respect for their great
skill in Scholastical and Metaphysical learning; yet the Examiner cannot
ignore, that I could make a long Catalogue of Writers, both ancient and modern,
at least as well versed in natural Philosophy as Saint Thomas and Suarez, who
have some of them in express words denied this to be naturally possible; and
others have declared themselves of the same judgment by establishing
principles, with which this Conceit of the virtual extension of the indivisible
Corpuscles is absolutely inconsistent. And though no Author had hitherto
opposed it, yet I, that dispute not what this or that man thought, but what'tis
rational to think, should nevertheless not scruple to reject it now; and should
not doubt to find store of the best Naturalists of the same opinion with me,
and perhaps among them the Examiner himself, who (however this acknowledgment
may agree with the three following Chapters of his book) tells us, ( page 160.)
that Juxta probabiliorem sententiam hujusmodi virtualis extensio rei corporeae
concedenda non est, utpote soli rei spirituali propria.

But to conclude at length this tedious Enquiry into the Aristotelean way of
Rarefaction, (which is of so obscure a nature that it can scarce be either
proposed or examined in few words) I will not take upon me resolutely to affirm
which of the two ways of explicating it (by Atoms or by Parts infinitely
divisible) our Author declares himself for. But which of them soever it be, I
think I have shown that he has not intelligibly made it out: And I make the
less scruple to do so, because he himself is so ingenuous as (at the close of
his discourse of the two ways) to speak thus of the Opinion he prefers;
Praestat communi and receptae hactenus in Scholis sententiae insistere, quae
licet Page 169.
difficultates quidem non clare solvat, iis tamen aperte non succumbit. So that
in this discourse of Rarefaction, to which our Author has so often in the
foregoing part of the Book referred us, as that which should make good what
there seemed the most improbable; he has but instead of a probable Hypothesis
needlessly rejected, substituted a Doctrine which himself dares not pretend
capable of being well freed from the difficulties with which it may be charged;
though I doubt not but other Readers, especially Naturalists, will think he has
been very civil to this obscure Doctrine, in saying that Difficultatibus non
aperte succumbit.

As for the other way of explicating Rarefaction, namely, by supposing that a
body is made up of parts indivisible; he will not I presume, deny, but that the
Objections we formerly made against it are weighty. For according to this
Hypothesis (which one would think he prefers, since he makes use of it in the
three or four last Chapters of his Book) Necessario fatendum est (says he) unam
eandemque partem poni Page 163.
in duplici loco adaequate: Cum enim indivisibilis sit, locumque occupet
majorem quam prius, necesse est ut tota sit in quolibet punato totius lici,
sive ut per totum illud spatium virtualiter extendatur. So that when hein the
very next Page affirms, that by this virtual extention of the parts, the
Difficulties that have for so many Ages troubled Philosophers may be easily
solved, he must give me leave (who love to speak intelligibly, and not to admit
what I cannot understand) to desire he would explain to me what this extensto
virtualis is, and how it will remove the Difficulties that I formerly charged
upon the Aristotelean Rarefaction. For the easier consideration of this matter,
let us resume what we lately supposed, namely, that in the Magdeburgick
Experiment the half Inch of undilated Air consisted of a hundred Corpuscles; I
demand how the indivisibility of these Corpuscles will qualify them to make
out such a Rarefaction as the Author imagines. For what does their being
indivisible do in this case, but make it the less intelligible how they can
fill above a hundred parts of space? It Is easy to foresee he will answer, That
they are virtually extended. But not here to question how their indivisibility
makes them capable of being so; I demand, whether by an Atoms being virtually
extended, its corporeal substance do really (I mean adequately) fill more space
than it did before, or whether it do not: (for one of the two is necessary.) If
it do, then it is a true and real, and not barely a virtual extension. And that
such an extension will not serve the turn, what we have formerly argued against
the Peripatetick Rarefaction will evince; and our Adversary seems to consess as
much, by devising this virtual extension to avoid the inconveniences to which
he saw his Doctrine of Rarefaction would otherwise plainly appear exposed. But
if it be said, That when an Atome is virtually extended, its corporeal
substance fills no more space than before: This is but a Verbal shift, that may
perhaps amuse an unwary Reader, but it will scarce satisfy a considering one.
For I demand how that which is not a substance can fill place; and how this
improper and but Metaphorical Extension will salve the Phenomenon of
Rarefaction: as how the half Inch of Air at the top of the forementioned Globe
shall without a corporeal extension fill the whole Globe of two thousand times
its bigness when the water is sucked out of it, and act at the lower part of
the Globe. Which last Clause I therefore add, because not only our Author
teaches ( page 91. and 92.) that the whole Globe was filled with a certain thin
substance, which by its contraction violently snatched up the water into which
the neck of the Glass was immersed; but in a parallel case he makes it his
grand Argument to prove, that there is no Vacuum in the deserted part of the
Tube in the Torricellian Experiment, That the attraction of the Finger cannot
be performed Chap. 5.
but by some real Body. Wherefore till the Examiner do intelligibly explain how
a virtual Extension, as it is opposed to a corporeal, can make an Atome fill
twice, nay, two thousand times more space than it did before; I suppose this
device of virtual extension will appear to unbiased Naturalists but a very
unsatisfactory evasion.

Two Arguments indeed there are which our Adversary offers as proofs of what he
teaches. The first is, That they commonly teach in the Schools, that at least
divinitus (as he speaks) such a thing as is pleaded for may be done, and that
consequently it is not repugnant to the nature of a body. But, though they that
either know me, or have read what I have written about matters Theological,
will, I hope, readily believe, that none is more willing to acknowledge and
venerate Divine Omnipotence; yet in some famous Schools they teach, that it is
contrary to the nature of the thing. And that men who think so, and
consequently look not upon it as an object of Divine Omnipotence, may (whatever
he here say) without impiety be of a differing mind from him about the
possibility of such a Rarefaction as he would here have, our Author may
perchance think fit to grant, if he remember that he himself says a few Pages
after, Cum tempus sit Ens essentialiter successivum, it a ut ne divinitus Page
175.
quidem possint duae ejus parts simul existere, etc. But, not now to dispute
of a power that I am more willing to adore than question, I say, that our
Controversy is not what God can do, but about what can be done by Natural
Agents, not elevated above the sphere of Nature. For though God can both create
and annihilate, yet Nature can do neither: and in the judgment of true
Philosophers I suppose our Hypothesis would need no other advantage to make it
be preferred before our Adversaries, than that in ours things are explicated by
the ordinary course of Nature, whereas in the other recourse must be had to
miracles.

But though our Author's way of explicating Rarefaction be thus improbable, yet
I must not here omit to take notice, that his Funiculus supposes a Condensation
that to me appears encumbered with no less manifest difficulties. For, since he
teaches that a body may be condensed without either having any vacuities for
the comprest parts to retire into, or having Pores filled with any subtle and
yielding matter that may be squeezed out of them; it will follow, that the
parts of the Body to be condensed do immediately touch each other: which
supposed, I demand how Bodies that are already contiguous can be brought to
farther Approximations without penetrating each other, at least in some of
their part. So that I see not how the Examiners Condensation can be performed
without penetration of dimensions. A thing that Philosophers of all Ages have
looked upon as by no means to be admitted in Nature. And our Author himself
speaks somewhere at the same rate, where to the Question, Why the walls that
enclose fired Gunpowder must be blown asunder? Respondeo (says he) haec omnia
inde accidere, quod pulvis ille sic accensus and in flammam conversus, Page 159.
long majus spatium nunc occupet quam prius. Vnde fit, ut cum totum cubiculum
antea fuerit plenissimum, disrumpantur sic parietes, ne detur corporum
penetratio. In the Magdeburgick Experiment he tells us (as we have heard
already) that the whole capacity of the Globe is filled with an extremely-thin
body. But not now to examine how properly he calls that a rare body, which
according to him intercepts neither Pores nor any heterogeneous substance, the
greater or lesser absence of which makes men call a Body more or less dense;
not to insist on this, I say, let us consider, that before the admission of
water into the exhausted Globe there was, according to him, two thousand half
Inches of a substance, which, however it was produced or got thither, was a
true and real Body; and that after the admission of the water there remained in
the same Globe, besides the water that came in, no more than one half Inch of
body. Since then our Author does not pretend (which if he did, might be easily
disproved) that the one thousand nine hundred ninety nine half Inches of
Matter, that now appear no more, traversed the body of Water; since he will not
allow that it gets away through the Pores of the Glass, I demand, what becomes
of so great a quantity of Matter? For that it is annihilated I suppose he is too
rational a man to pretend, (nor, if he should, would it be at all believed) and
to say, that a thousand and so many hundred parts of Matter should be retired
into that one part of space that contains the one half Inch of Air, is little
less incredible: For that space was supposed perfectly full of body before, and
how a thing can be more than perfectly full, who can conceive? To dispatch:
According to our Author's way of Condensation, two, or perhaps two thousand,
Bodies may be crowded into a space that is adequately filled by one of them
apart. And if this be not penetration of Dimensions, I desire to be informed
what is so; and till then I shall leave it to any unprepossess'd Naturalist to
judge, whether an Hypothesis that needs suppose a thing so generally concluded
to be impossible to Nature, be probable or not; and whether to tell us that the
very same parcel of Air, that is now without violence contained in half an Inch
of space, shall by and by fill two thousand times as much room, and presently
after shrink again into the two thousandth part of the space it newly
possessed, be not to turn a Body into a Spirit, and, confounding their Notions,
attribute to the former the discriminating and least easily conceivable
properties of the later. And this Argument is, I confess, with me of that
weight, that this alone would keep me from admitting the Examiners Hypothesis:
Yet if any happier Contemplator shall prove so sharp-sighted, as to devise and
clearly propose a way of making the Rarefaction and Condensation hitherto
argued against, intelligible to me, he is not like to find me obstinate. Nor
indeed is there sufficient cause why his succeeding in that attempt should make
our Adversaries Hypothesis preferrable to ours, since that would not prove it
either necessary, or so much as sufficient, but only answer some of the
Arguments that tend to prove 'its not intelligible. And that we have other
Arguments on our side than those that relate to Rarefaction and Condensation,
may appear partly by what has been discoursed already, and partly by what we
have now to subjoyn.

CHAP. IV. A Consideration (pertinent to the present Controversy) of what
happens in trying the Torricellian and other Experiments, at the tops and feet
of Hills.
THere remain then yet a couple of Considerations to be opposed against the
Examiners Hypothesis, which, though the past Discourse may make them be looked
upon as needless, we must not pretermit, because they contain such Arguments as
may not only be employed against our Adversaries Doctrine, but will very much
tend to the confirmation of ours.

I consider then further, that the Hypothesis I am opposing, being but a kind
of Inversion of ours, and supposing the spring or motion of Restitution in the
Air to tend inwards, as according to us it tends outward; it cannot be, that
if the supposition it self were (what I think I have proved it is not) true,
many of the Phenomenon would be plausibly enough explicable by it: the same
motions in an intermediate body being in many cases producible alike, whether
we suppose it to be thrust or drawn; provided both the endeavors tend the same
way. But then we may be satisfied whether the effect be to be ascribed to
Pulsion or to Traction, (as they commonly speak, though indeed the later seems
reducible to the former) if we can find out an Experiment wherein there is
reason such an effect should follow, in case Pulsion be the cause inquired
after, and not in case it be Traction. And such an Experimentum Crucis (to
speak with our Illustrious Verulam) is afforded us by that noble Observation of
Monsieur Paschal, mentioned by the famous Pecquet, and out of him by our
Author: namely, that the Torricellian Experiment Page 66.
being made at the foot and in diverse places of a very high Mountain, (of the
altitude of five hundred fathom or three thousand foot) he found, that after he
had ascended a hundred and fifty Fathom, the Quicksilver was fallen two Inches
and a quarter below its station at the Mountains foot; and that at the very top
of the Hill it had descended above three Inches below the same wonted station.
Whence it appears that the Quicksilver being carried up toward the top of the
Atmosphere, falls down the lower, the higher the place is wherein the
observation is made: of which the reason is plain in our Hypothesis, namely,
that the nearer we come to the top of the Atmosphere, the shorter and lighter
is the Cylinder of Air incumbent upon the restagnant Mercury; and consequently
the less weight of Cylindrical Mercury will that Air be able to counterpoise
and keep suspended. And since this notable Phenomenon does thus clearly follow
upon ours, and not upon our Adversaries Hypothesis; this Experiment seems to
determine the controversy betwixt them: because in this case the Examiner
cannot pretend, as he does in the seventeenth and diverse other of our
Experiments, that the descent of the Quicksilver in the Tube is caused, not by
the diminution of the external Airs pressure, but from the preternatural
Rarefaction or Distension of that external Air (in the Receiver) when by
seeking to restore it self, it endeavors to draw up the restagnant Mercury:
For in our present case there appears no such forcible Dilatation of that Air,
as in many of the Phenomenon of our Engine he is pleased to imagine.

It need therefore be no great wonder, if his Adversaries do, as he observes,
make a great account of this Experiment, to prove that the Mercury is kept up
in the Tube by the resistance of the external Air. Nor do I think his Answers
to the Argument drawn from hence will keep them from thinking it cogent. For to
an Objection upon which he takes notice that they lay so much stress, he
replies but two things; which neither singly nor together will near amount to a
satisfactory Answer.

And, First, he questions the truth of the Observation it self; because having
made trial in a low Hill, the event did no ways answer his expectation. But
though, in stead of disapproving, I am willing to commend his Curiosity, to
make the Experiment himself, and especially since 'twas both new and important;
and though also I like his Modesty, in rather suspecting some mistake in the
manner of the Observation, than that the Experimenters did not sincerely
deliver it: yet, since there must be an Error somewhere, I must rather charge
it upon the Examiners observation (I say his Observation, not his want of
sincerity) than upon Monsieur Paschal's. For besides the commendations that the
learned Gassendus, who relates the Experiment, gives to that ingenious
Gentleman (Monsieur Paschal) by whose direction he supposes it to have been
tried: the same Gassendus relates, that the like Observation was five times
repeated, partim intra sacellum, partimaere Gassendus Tomo. 1. page 211.
libero, and nunc quidem flante, nunc silente vento. Which circumstances
sufficiently argue the Diligence where with the Experiment was tried in
Auvergne. Especially since I can confirm these Observations by two more made on
distant Hills in England: the one of which I procured from that known Virtuoso
Mr. J. Ball, whom I desired to make the Experiment at a Mountain in Devonshire,
on the side whereof he dwelt; and the other made in Lancashire by that
ingenious Gentleman Mr. Rich. Townley. Both which Observations, since I have
mentioned them at large in the Appendix to the Physico Mechanical Treatise,
shall not now repeat; contenting my self to observe to our present purpose,
that however the proportion of the Descent of the Quicksilver may vary,
according to the differing consistence and other accidents of the neighboring
Air, in the particular places and times of the Experiments being made, yet all
Observations agree in this, That nearer the top of the Atmosphere the
Quicksilver falls lower than it does further from it. To all this I shall add
two things that will very much confirm our Hypothesis. The one is, that the
freshly-nam'd Mr. Townley, and diverse ingenious Persons that assisted at the
Trial, bethought themselves of so making the Torricellian Experiment at the top
of the Hill, as to leave a determinate quantity of Air in the Tube, before the
mouth of it was opened under the vessell'd Mercury; and taking notice how low
such a quantity of that Air depressed the Mercurial Cylinder, they likewise
observed, that at the Mountains foot the included Air was not able to depress
the Quicksilver so much. Whence we infer, that the Cylinder of Air at the top
of the Hill being shorter and lighter, did not so strongly press against the
included Air, as did the ambient Air at the bottom of the Hill, where the
Aereal Cylinder was longer and heavier.

But because that though Experiments made in very elevated places are noble
ones, and of great importance in the Controversies about the Air, yet there are
but very few of those that are qualified to make Experiments of that Nature,
who have the opportunity of making them upon high Mountains; we did with the
assistance of an ingenious man attempt a Trial, wherein we hoped to find a
sensibly-differing Weight of the Atmosphere, in a far less height than that of
an ordinary Hill. But in stead of a common Tube we made use of a kind of
Weather-glass, that the included Air might help to make the event notable, for
a reason to be mentioned ere long; and in stead of Quicksilver we employed
common Water in the Pipe belonging to the Weather-glass, that small changes in
the Weight or resistance of the Atmosphere in opposition of the included Air
might be the more discernable. The Instrument we made use of consisted only of
a Glass with a broad Foot and a narrow Neck (AB) and a slender Glass-Pipe (CD)
open at both ends: which Pipe was so placed, that the bottom of it did almost,
but not quite, reach to the bottom of the bigger Glass (AB) within whose Neck
(A) it was fastened with a close cement, that both kept the Pipe in its place,
and hindered all communication betwixt the inward (II) and ou^ward (KK) Air,
save by the cavity of the Pipe (CD). Now we chose this Glass (AB) more than
ordinary capacious, that the effect of the dilatation of the included Air (II)
might be the more conspicuous. Then conveying a convenient quantity of Water
(HH) into this Glass, we carried it to the Leads of the lofty Abby-Church at
Westminster, and there blew in a little Air to raise the Water to the upper
part of the Pipe, that being above the Vessel (AB) we might more precisely mark
the several stations of the Water than otherwise we could. Afterward having
suffered the Glass to rest a pretty while upon the Lead, that the Air (II)
within might be reduced to the same state, both as to coldness and as to
pressure, with (KK) that without, having marked the station of the Water (F),
we gently let down the Vessel by a long string to the foot of the Wall, where
one attended to receive it; who having suffered it to rest upon the ground,
cried to us that it was subsided about an Inch below the mark (F) we had put:
whereupon having ordered him to put a mark at his second station of it (E), we
drew up the Vessel again; and suffering it to rest a while, we observed the
Water to be re-ascended to or near the first mark (F), which was indeed about
an Inch above (E) the other. And this we did that Evening a second time with
almost a like success: though two or three days after, the wind blowing
strongly upon the Leads, we found not the Experiment to succeed quite so
regularly as before; yet the Water always manifestly fell lower at the foot of
the Wall than it was at the top: which I see no cause to ascribe barely to the
differing temperature of the Air above and below, as to Heat and Cold, since
according to the general estimate, the more elevated Region of the Air is,
caeteris paribus, colder than that below, which would rather check the greater
expansion of the included Air at the top of the Leads than promote it. But the
better to avoid mistakes and prevent Objections, we thought fit to try the
Experiment within the Church, and got into a Galery of the same height with the
Leads: but the upper part of the Pipe being casually broken off, we thought fit
to order the matter so, that the surface (G) of the remaining Water in the Pipe
should be about an Inch higher than the surface of the Water in the Vessel. And
then my abovementioned Correspondent letting down the Glass, almost as soon as
it was settled upon the pavement, kneeling down to see how far it was subsided,
I found that not only it was fallen as low as the other Water, but that the
outward Air deprest it so far, as whilst I was looking on, to break in beneath
the bottom of the Pipe, and ascend through the Water in bubbles; after which
the Glass being drawn up again, my Correspondent affirmed, that the Water was
very manifestly re-ascended. But because by the unlucky breaking of a Glass, we
were hindered to observe, as we designed, what would happen as well in a
Weather-glass, so contrived that the weight or pressure of the Atmosphere
should make no change in it, as in another whose included Air was at the top,
(whereas in that we employed the included Air was in the lower part,) and
because there happened in our Trials a Circumstance or two that seemed not so
devoid of difficulties, but that we think it may require further examination,
we design to set down a more particular account of this Experiment, (as how it
succeeds with Quicksilver instead of Water, together with the capacity of the
Vessel (AB) and the bore of the Pipe (CD) with some other variety of
Circumstances) together with the event of the curiosity we had (which seemed
very successful) to try the Torricellian Experiment upon the abovementioned
Leads, and then let down the Tube together with the restagnant Mercury to the
ground, to observe the increasing altitude of the Quicksilver, in the
formerly-mentioned Appendix to the Epistle we have been defending. And it shall
suffice us in the mean time that the Trials already mentioned seem to make it
evident enough that the Atmosphere gravitates more, caeteris paribus, near the
surface of the Earth, than in the more elevated parts of the Air. For the Leads
on which we made our Trials were found by measure to be in perpendicular height
but threescore and fifteen Foot from the ground. To which we shall only add
this at present, that once being desirous to observe what we could touching the
proportions of the subsidence of the Water to the height of its several
stations from the ground, purposely carrying down the Vessel so as not
considerably to heat it, from the Leads down the stairs to a little window that
we guest to be almost half way to the bottom, we there perceived the water to
have already subsided about a Barly-Corns length, notwithstanding that probably
in spite of our care, the Vessel were a little warmed by the heat of his body
that carried it, since by that time we were come to the foot of the Wall, the
Water stood almost at the highest mark; but after the Vessel was suffered to
rest a while, it relapsed by degrees to the lowest. And thus much for the first
of the things I had to represent in favor of our Doctrine.

The other Particular I shall mention for confirmation of our Hypothesis, is
that Experiment (which, though it be needless, seems yet more cogent and proper
to prevent Evasions) made by the same Mousieur Paschal, of carrying a
weakly-blown Football from the bottom to the top of an high Mountain. For that
Football swelled more and more, the higher it was carried, so that it appeared
as if it were full blown at the top of the Mountain, and gradually growing lank
again, as it was carried downwards; so that at the foot of the Hill it was
flaccid as before. This, I say, having thus happened, we have here an
Experiment to prove our Hypothesis, wherein recourse cannot be had to any
forcibly and preternaturally distended Body, such as that is pretended to be
which remains in the deserted space of the Tube in the Torricellian Experiment.

The other thing which the Examiner alleges against our Argument from Monsieur
Paschal's Trials, is, that supposing it to be true, yet it cannot thence be
inferred, that the subsidence of the Mercury at the top of the Hill proceeded
from the Atmospherical Cylinder's being there lighter and less able to sustain
the Quicksilver. Sed dici potest (says he) ideo sic in vertice Montis magis
descendisse, quod ibidem esset Page 63.
Aura frigidior, aut ex alio Temperamento hujusmodi descensum causante. But
this solution will not serve the turn: For the coldness, of the ambient Air
(which yet the Experimenters take not notice of) would rather contract the
rarefied substance within the Tube, and so draw up the Mercury higher, as our
Author himself teaches us, that it is from the shrinking of the Funiculus
occasioned by the cold that the Water in Thermometers ascends in cold weather.
And whereas the only Page 50.
proof he adds of so improbable an Explication is taken from our eighteenth
Experiment, wherein we relate, that sometimes the Quicksilver did sensibly fall
lower in colder than in far less cold weather: I answer, that this eighteenth
Experiment will scarce make more for him than against him: For, as I there take
notice that the Quicksilver descended in cold weather, so it sometimes
descended likewise in hot weather, and rose in cold. And it is very strange,
that in all the Observations made, in differing Countries and at diffe ing
times, it should still so happen that the Mercurial Cylinder should be shorter
near the top of the Atmosphere than further from it; if the resistance of the
outward Air have nothing to do with the keeping it suspended. And it is yet more
strange, that the football should in like manner grow turgid and flaccid,
according as it is carried into places where it has a shorter or longer Pillar
of Air incumbent on it.

I was going to proceed to what remains of this second Part of our Treatise,
But that since I begun this Chapter casually meeting with an Experiment lately
sent in a Letter to a very Ingenious Mr. Croon one of the learned Professors of
Gresham College.
Acquaintance of his and mine by a very Industrious Physician Dr. Hen. Power.
(who is said to have had the curiosity to try over again many of the
Experiments of our Engine) and finding it very proper to confirm our newly
related Experiment made at Westminster, and to be of such a nature as we have
not in this part of England the opportunity to try the like, for want of Hills
high enough, I shall (according to the permission given me) insert it in this
place. And the rather, that as the Mountains have by the Trials made on them of
the Torricellian Experiment, afforded us a noble proof of the weight of the
Air; so they may afford us one of its Spring: wherein I hope the Phenomenon of
the Waters descent will not be ascribed to any attraction made of the Water by
the violentlydistended outward Air. And because the Experiment was not made by
us, but by another, we will set it down in his words, which are these: This
fifteenth of October 1661. we took a Weather glass A B, of about two See the
second Figure.
foot in length, and carrying it to the bottom of Hallifax Hill, the Water
stood in the shank at thirteen Inches above the Water in the Vessel: Thence
carrying it thus filled, with the whole frame, immediately to the top of the
said Hill, the Water fell down to the point D, viz. an Inch and a quarter lower
than it was at the bottom of the said Hill; which (as he rightly inferrs)
proves the Elasticity of the Air: for the internal Air A C, which was of the
same power and extension with the external at the bottom of the Hill, did
manifest a greater Elasticity than the Mountain-Air there Probably these or the
like words, did manifest Pressure, are here omitted, for the Mountain-Air there
seems to have acted rather by its Weight than Elasticity.
, and so extended it self further by C D.

The like Experiment, I hear, the same Ingenious Doctor has very lately
repeated, and found the descent of the Water to be greater than before. And
though some Virtuosi have thought it strange, that in an Hill far inferior to
the Alps and Appennines, so short a Cylinder of so light a liquor as Water
should fall so much; yet I see not any reason to distrust upon this ground
either His Experiment or Ours (lately mentioned to have been made at
Westminster;) but rather to wonder the Water fell not more (if the Hill be
considerably high:) for their suspicion seems grounded upon a mistake, as if
because the Quicksilver in the Torricellian Experiment made without purposely
leaving any Air in the Tube, would not, at the top of the mentioned Hill, have
subsided above an Inch, if so much, the Water, that is near fourteen times
lighter, should not fall above a sourteenth part of that space; whereas in the
Torricellian Experiment, the upper and deserted space of the Tube has little or
no Air left in it, but the Correspondent part of the Weather-glass was
furnished with Air, whose pressure was little less than that of the Atmosphere
at the bottom of the Hill; and consequently must be much greater than the
pressure of the Atmosphere at the top of the Hill, where the Atmospherical
Cylinder's gravity (upon whose account it presses) must be much diminished by
its being made much shorter, and by its consisting of an Air less comprest. And
thus much for the first of the two Considerations wherewith I promised to
conclude this second part of the present Tract. Only before I proceed I must
in a word desire the Reader to take notice, that though I have here singled out
but one of the nine Experiments which the Examiner in the 11. and 12. Chapters
reckons up as urged by his Adversaries; yet do not thereby declare my
acquiescing in his Explications of those Phenomenon, but only leave both them
and some other things he delivers about Siphons and the Magdeburg Experiments,
to be discoursed by those that are more concerned to examine them, contenting
my self to have sufficiently disproved the Funiculus which his Expositions
suppose, and cleared the grounds of explicating such Experiments aright.

CHAP. V. Two new Experiments touching the measure of the Force of the Spring
of Air compressed and dilated.
THE other thing that I would have considered touching our Adversaries
Hypothesis is, That it is needless. For whereas he denies not that the Air has
some Weight and Spring, but affirms that it is very insufficient to perform
Page 11.
such great matters as the counterpoising of a Mercurial Cylinder of 29.
Inches, as we teach that it may: We shall now endeavor to manifest by
Experiments purposely made, that the Spring of the Air is capable of doing far
more than it is necessary for us to ascribe to it, to salve the Phenomenon of
the Torricellian Experiment.

We took then a long Glass-Tube, which by a dexterous hand and the help of a
Lamp was in such a manner crooked at the bottom, that the part turned up was
almost parallel to the rest of the Tube, and the Orifice of this shorter leg of
the Siphon (if I may so call the whole Instrument) being Hermetically sealed,
the length of it was divided into Inches, (each of which was subdivided into
eight parts) by a straight list of paper, which containing those Divisions was
carefully pasted all along it: then putting in as much Quicksilver as served to
fill the Arch or bended part of the Siphon, that the Mercury standing in a
level might reach in the one leg to the bottom of the divided paper, and just
to the same height or Horizontal line in the other; we took care, by frequently
inclining the Tube, so that the Air might freely pass from one leg into the
other by the sides of the Mercury, (we took (I say) care) that the Air at last
included in the shorter Cylinder should be of the same laxity with the rest of
the Air about it. This done, we began to pour Quicksilver into the longer leg
of the Siphon, which by its weight pressing up that in the shorter leg, did by
degrees streighten the included Air: and continuing this pouring in of
Quicksilver till the Air in the shorter leg was by condensation reduced to take
up but half the space it possessed (I say, possessed, not filled) before; we
cast our eyes upon the longer leg of the Glass, on which was likewise pasted a
list of paper carefully divided into Inches and parts, and we observed, not
without delight and satisfaction, that the Quicksilver in that longer part of
the Tube was 29. Inches higher than the other. Now that this Observation does
both very well agree with and confirm our Hypothesis, will be easily discerned
by him that takes notice what we teach, and Monsieur Paschal and our English
friends Experiments prove, that the greater the weight is that leans upon the
Air, the more forcible is its endeavor of Dilatation, and consequently its
power of resistance, (as other Springs are stronger when bent by greater
weights.) For this being considered, it will appear to agree rarely-well with
the Hypothesis, that as according to it the Air in that degree of density and
correspondent measure of resistance to which the weight of the incumbent
Atmosphere had brought it, was able to counterbalance and resist the pressure
of a Mercurial Cylinder of about 29. Inches, as we are taught by the
Torricellian Experiment; so here the same Air being brought to a degree of
density about twice as great as that it had before, obtains a Spring twice as
strong as formerly. As may appear by its being able to sustain or resist a
Cylinder of 29 Inches in the longer Tube, together with the weight of the
Atmospherical Cylinder, that leaned upon those 29 Inches of Mercury; and, as we
just now inferred from the Torricellian Experiment, was equivalent to them.

We were hindered from prosecuting the trial at that time by the casual
breaking of the Tube. But because an accurate Experiment of this nature would
be of great importance to the Doctrine of the Spring of the Air, and has not
yet been made (that I know) by any man; and because also it is more uneasy to
be made than one would think, in regard of the difficulty as well of procuring
crooked Tubes fit for the purpose, as of making a just estimate of the true
place of the Protuberant Mercury's surface; I suppose it will not be unwelcome
to the Reader, to be informed that after some other trials, one of which we
made in a Tube whose longer leg was perpendicular, and the other, that
contained the Air, parallel to the Horizon, we at last procured a Tube of the
Figure expressed in the Scheme; which Tube, though See the 5. Figure.
of a pretty bigness, was so long, that the Cylinder whereof the shorter leg of
it consisted admitted a list of Paper, which had before been divided into 12
Inches and their quarters, and the longer leg admitted another list of Paper of
diverse foot in length, and divided after the same manner: then Quicksilver
being poured in to fill up the bended part of the Glass, that the surface of it
in either leg might rest in the same Horizontal line, as we lately taught,
there was more and more Quicksilver poured into the longer Tube; and notice
being watchfully taken how far the Mercury was risen in that longer Tube, when
it appeared to have ascended to any of the divisions in the shorter Tube, the
several Observations that were thus successively made, and as they were made
set down, afforded us the ensuing Table.

A Table of the Condensation of the Air
A A B C D E 48 12 00 Added to 29 makes 29 2/16 29 2/16 46 11 01 7/16 30 9/16
30 6/16 44 11 02 13/16 31 15/16 31 12/16 42 10 04 6/16 33 8/16 33 1/7 40 10 06
3/16 35 5/16 35 -- 38 9 07 14/16 37 -- 36 15/19 36 9 10 2/16 39 5/16 38 34 8 12
8/16 41 10/16 41 2/17 32 8 15 1/16 44 3/16 43 11/16 30 7 17 15/16 47 1/16 46 28
7 21 3/16 50 5/16 50 -- 26 6 25 3/16 54 5/16 53 10/13 24 6 29 11/16 58 13/16 58
2/8 23 5 32 3/16 61 5/16 60 18/23 22 5 34 15/16 64 1/16 63 6/11 21 5 37 15/16
67 1/16 66 4/7 20 5 41 9/16 70 11/16 70 -- 19 4 45 -- 74 2/16 73 11/19 18 4 48
12/16 77 14/16 77 17 4 53 11/16 82 12/16 82 4/17 16 4 58 2/16 87 14/16 87 15 3
63 15/16 93 1/16 93 14 3 71 5/16 100 7/16 99 6/7 13 3 78 11/16 107 13/16 107
7/13 12 3 88 7/16 117 9/16 116 4/8

AA. The number of equal spaces in the shorter leg, that contained the same
parcel of Air diversely extended.

B. The height of the Mercurial Cylinder in the longer leg, that compressed the
Air into those dimensions.

C. The height of a Mercurial Cylinder that counterbalanc'd the pressure of the
Atmosphere.

D. The Aggregate of the two last Columns B and C, exhibiting the pressure
sustained by the included Air.

E. What that pressure should be according to the Hypothesis, that supposes the
pressures and expansions to be in reciprocal proportion.

For the better understanding of this Experiment it may not be amiss to take
notice of the following particulars:

1. That the Tube being so tall that we could not conveniently make use of it
in a Chamber, we were fain to use it on a pair of Stairs, which yet were very
lightsome, the Tube being for preservations sake by strings so suspended, that
it did scarce touch the Box presently to be mentioned.

2. The lower and crooked part of the Pipe was placed in a square wooden Box,
of a good largness and depth, to prevent the loss of the Quicksilver that might
fall aside in the transfusion from the Vessel into the Pipe, and to receive the
whole Quicksilver in case the Tube should break.

3. That we were two to make the Observation together, the one to take notice
at the bottom how the Quicksilver rose in the shorter Cylinder, and the other
to pour in at the top of the longer, it being very hard and troublesome for one
man alone to do both accurately.

4. That the Quicksilver was poured in but by little and little, according to
the direction of him that observed below, it being, far easier to pour in more,
than to take out any in case too much at once had been poured in.

5. That at the beginning of the Operation, that we might the more truly
discern where the Quicksilver rested from time to time, we made use of a small
Looking-glass, held in a convenient posture to reflect to the eye what we
desired to discern.

6. That when the Air was so compressed, as to be crowded into less than a
quarter of the space it possessed before, we tried whether the cold of a Linen
Cloth dipped in Water would then condense it. And it sometimes seemed a little
to shrink, but not so manifestly as that we dare build any thing upon it. We
then tried likewise whether heat would notwithstanding so forcible a
compressure dilate it, and approaching the flame of a Candle to that part where
the Air was pent up, the heat had a more sensible operation than the cold had
before; so that we scarce doubted but that the expansion of the Air would,
notwithstanding the weight that oppressed it, have been made conspicuous, if the
fear of unseasonably breaking the Glass had not kept us from increasing the
heat.

Now although we deny not but that in our Table some particulars do not so
exactly answer to what our formerly-intimated Hypothesis might perchance invite
the Reader to expect; yet the Variations are not so considerable, but that they
may probably enough be ascribed to some such want of exactness as in such nice
Experiments is scarce avoidable. But for all that, till further trial has more
clearly informed me, I shall not venture to determine whether or no the
intimated Theory will hold universally and precisely, either in Condensation of
Air, or Rarefaction: All that I shall now urge being, That however, the trial
already made sufficiently proves the main thing for which I here allege it;
since by it it is evident, that as common Air when reduced to half its wonted
extent, obtained near about twice as forcible a Spring as it had before; so
this thus comprest Air being further thrust into half this narrow room,
obtained thereby a Spring about as strong again as that it last had, and
consequently four times as strong as that of the common Air. And there is no
cause to doubt, that if we had been here furnished with a greater quantity of
Quicksilver and a very strong Tube, we might by a further compression of the
included Air have made it counterbalance the pressure of a far taller and
heavier Cylinder of Mercury. For no man perhaps yet knows how near to an
infinite compression the Air may be capable of, if the compressing force be
competently increased. So that here our Adversary may plainly see that the
Spring of the Air, which he makes so light of, may not only be able to resist
the weight of 29 Inches, but in some cases of above an hundred Inches of
Quicksilver, and that without the assistance of his Funiculus, which in our
present case has nothing to do. And to let you see that we did not (a little
above) inconsiderately mention the weight of the incumbent Atmospherical
Cylinder as a part of the weight resisted by the imprisoned Air, we will here
annex, that we took care, when the Mercurial Cylinder in the longer leg of the
Pipe was about an hundred Inches high, to cause one to suck at the open
Orifice; whereupon (as we expected) the Mercury in the Tube did notably ascend.
Which considerable Phenomenon cannot be ascribed to our Examiners Funiculus,
since by his own confession that cannot pull up the Mercury, if the Mercurial
Cylinder be above 29 or 30 Inches of Mercury. And therefore we shall render
this reason of it, That the pressure of the incumbent Air being in part taken
off by its expanding itself into the Suckers dilated Chest; the' imprisoned Air
was thereby enabled to dilate it self manifestly, and repel the Mercury that
comprest it, till there was an equality of force betwixt the strong Spring of
that comprest Air on the one part, and the tall Mercurial Cylinder, together
with the contiguous dilated Air, on the other part.

Now, if to what we have thus delivered concerning the compression of Air we
add some Observations concerning its spontaneous Expansion, it will the better
appear how much the Phenomenon of these Mercurial Experiments depend upon the
differing measures of strength to be met with in the Air's Spring, according to
its various degrees of compression and Laxity. But, before I enter upon this
subject, I shall readily acknowledge that I had not reduced the trials I had
made about measuring the Expansion of the Air to any certain Hypothesis, when
that ingenious Gentleman Mr. Richard Townley was pleased to inform me, that
having by the perusal of my Physico-Mechanical Experiments been satisfied that
the Spring of the Air was the cause of it, he had endeavored (and I wish in
such attempts other ingenious men would follow his example) to supply what I
had omitted concerning the reducing to a precise estimate how much Air dilated
of it self loses of its Elastical force, according to the measures of its
Dilatation. He added, that he had begun to set down what occurred to him to
this purpose in a short Discourse, whereof he afterward did me the favor to
show me the beginning, which gives me a just Curiosity to see it perfected.
But, because I neither know, nor (by reason of the great distance betwixt our
places of residence) have at present the opportunity to enquire, whether he
will think fit to annex his Discourse to our Appendix, or to publish it by it
self, or at all; and because he has not yet, for ought I know, met with fit
Glasses to make an any-thing-accurate Table of the Decrement of the force of
dilated Air; our present design invites us to present the Reader with that
which follows, wherein I had the assistance of the same person that I took
notice of in the former Chapter, as having written something about Rarefaction:
whom I the rather make mention of on this occasion, because when he first heard
me speak of Mr. Townley's suppositions about the proportion wherein Air loses
of its Spring by Dilatation, he told me he had the year before (and not long
after the publication of my Pneumatical Treatise) made Observations to the same
purpose, which he acknowledged to agree well enough with Mr. Townley's Theory:
And so did (as their Author was pleased to tell me) some Trials made about the
same time by that Noble Virtuoso and eminent Mathematician the Lord Brouncker,
from whose further Enquiries into this matter, if his occasions will allow him
to make them, the Curious may well hope for something very accurate.

A Table of the Rarefaction of the Air.
A B C D E 1 00 0/0 Subtracted from 29 leaves. 29 29 1 10 19 19 2 15 14 14 3 20
2/8 9 4/8 9 15/12 4 22 7 7 7/16 5 24 5 5 19/20 6 24 4 4 23/24 7 25 4/8 4 2/8 4
8 26 0/0 3 6/8 3 23/32 9 26 3 3 11/36 10 26 6/8 3 0/0 2 39/40 12 27 2 2 23/48
14 27 4/8 2 2/8 2 16 27 6/8 2 0/0 1 55/64 18 27 1 1 47/72 20 28^ 1 6/8 1 9/80
24 28 2/8 1 4/8 1 23/96 28 28 1 1 1/16 32 28 4/8 1 2/8 0 119/128

A. The number of equal spaces at the top of the Tube, that contained the same
parcel of Air.

B. The height of the Mercurial Cylinder, that together with the Spring of the
included Air counterbalanced the pressure of the Atmosphere.

C. The pressure of the Atmosphere.

D. The Complement of B to C, exhibiting the pressure sustained by the included
Air.

E. What that pressure should be according to the Hypothesis.

To make the Experiment of the debilitated force of expanded Air the plainer,
'twill not be amiss to note some particulars, especially touching the manner of
making the Trial; which (for the reasons lately mentioned) we made on a
lightsome pair of Stairs, and with a Box also lined with Paper to receive the
Mercury that might be spilt. And in regard it would require a vast and in few
places procurable quantity of Quicksilver, to employ vessels of such kind as
are ordinary in the Torricellian Experiment, we made use of a Glass-Tube of
about six foot long, for that being Hermetically sealed at one end, served out
turn as well as if we could have made the Experiment in a Tub or Pond of
seventy Inches deep.

Secondly, We also provided a slender Glass-Pipe of about the bigness of a
Swans Quill, and open at both ends: All along which was pasted a narrow list of
Paper divided into Inches and half quarters.

Thirdly, This slender Pipe being thrust down into the greater Tube almost
filled with Quicksilver, the Glass helped to make it swell to the top of the
Tube, and the Quicksilver getting in at the lower orifice of the Pipe, filled
it up till the Mercury included in that was near about a level with the surface
of the surrounding Mercury in the Tube.

Fourthly, there being, as near as we could guess, little more than an Inch of
the slender Pipe left above the surface of the restagnant Mercury, and
consequently unfill'd therewith, the prominent orifice was carefully closed
with sealing Wax melted; after which the Pipe was let alone for a while, that
the Air dilated a little by the heat of the Wax, might upon refrigeration be
reduced to its wonted density. And then we observed by the help of the
abovementioned list of Paper, whether we had not included somewhat more or
somewhat less than an Inch of Air, and in either case we were fain to rectify
the error by a small hole made (with a heated Pin) in the Wax, and afterward
closed up again.

Fifthly, Having thus included a just Inch of Air, we lifted up the slender
Pipe by degrees, till the Air was dilated to an Inch, an Inch and an half, two
Inches, etc. and observed in Inches and Eighths, the length of the Mercurial
Cylinder, which at each degree of the Air's expansion was impelled above the
surface of the restagnant Mercury in the Tube.

Sixthly, The Observations being ended, we presently made the Torricellian
Experiment with the abovementioned great Tube of six foot long, that we might
know the height of the Mercurial Cylinder, for that particular day and hour;
which height we found to be 29 Inches.

Seventhly, Our Observations made after this manner furnished us with the
preceding Table, in which there would not probably have been found the
difference here set down betwixt the force of the Air when expanded to double
its former dimensions, and what that force should have been precisely according
to the Theory, but that the included Inch of Air received some little accession
during the Trial; which this newly-mention'd difference making us suspect, we
found by replunging the Pipe into the Quicksilver, that the included Air had
gained about half an eighth, which we guest to have come from some little
Aereal bubbles in the Quicksilver, contained in the Pipe (so easy is it in
such nice Experiments to miss of exactness.) We tried also with 12 Inches of
Air shut up to be dilated; but being then hindered by some unwelcome avocations
to prosecute those Experiments, we shall elsewhere, out of other Notes and
Trials (God permitting) set down some other accurate Tables concerning this
matter. By which possibly we may be assisted to resolve whether the Atmosphere
should be looked upon (as it usually is) as a limited and bounded Portion of
the Air; or whether we should in a stricter sense than we did before, use the
Atmosphere and Aereal part of the World for almost equivalent terms; or else
whether we should allow the word Atmosphere some other notion in relation to
its Extent and Limits; (for as to its Spring and Weight, these Experiments do
not question, but evince them.) But we are willing, as we said, to refer these
matters to our Appendix, and till then to retain our wonted manner of speaking
of the Air and Atmosphere. In the mean time (to return to our last-mention'd
Experiments) besides that so little a variation may be in great part imputed to
the difficulty of making Experiments of this nature exactly, and perhaps a good
part of it to something of inequality in the cavity of the Pipe, or even in the
thickness of the Glass; besides this, I say, the proportion betwixt the several
pressures of the included Air undilated and expanded, especially when the
Dilatation was great (for when the Air swelled but to four times its first
extent, the Mercurial Cylinder, though of near 23 Inches, differed not a
quarter of an Inch from what it should have been according to Mathematical
exactness) the proportion, I say, was suitable enough to what might be expected,
to allow us to make this reflection upon the whole, That whether or no the
intimated Theory will hold exactly, (for about that, as I said above, I dare
determine nothing resolutely till I have further considered the matter) yet
since the Inch of Air when it was first included was shut up with no other
pressure than that which it had from the weight of the incumbent Air, and was
no more comprest than the rest of the Air we breathed and moved in; and since
also this Inch of Air, when expanded to twice its former dimensions, was able
with the help of a Mercurial Cylinder of about 15 Inches to counterpoise the
weight of the Atmosphere, which the weight of the external Air gravitating upon
the restagnant Mercury was able to impell up into the Pipe, and sustain above
twenty eight Inches of Mercury when the internal Air by its great expansion had
its Spring too far debilitated to make any considerable (I say considerable,
for it was not yet so dilated as not to make some) resistance: Since, I say,
these things are so, the free Air here below appears to be almost as strongly
comprest by the weight of the incumbent Air as it would be by the Weight of a
Mercurial Cylinder of twenty eight or thirty Inches; and consequently is not in
such a state of laxity and freedom as men are wont to imagine; and acts like
some mechanical Agent, the decrement of whose force holds a stricter proportion
to its increase of dimension, than has been hitherto taken notice of.

I must not now stand to propose the several reflections that may be made upon
the foregoing Observations touching the Compression and Expansion of Air;
partly because we could scarce avoid making the Historical part somewhat
prolix; and partly because I suppose we have already said enough to show what
was intended, namely, that to solve the Phenomenon there is not of our
Adversaries Hypothesis any need: the evincing of which will appear to be of no
small moment in our present Controversy, to him that considers, that the two
main things that induced the Learned Examiner to reject our Hypothesis are,
that Nature abhors a Vacuum, and that though the Air have some Weight and
Spring, yet these are insufficient to make out the known Phenomenon; for which
we must therefore have recourse to his Funiculus. Now as we have formerly seen,
that he has not so satisfactorily disproved as resolutely rejected a Vacuum, so
we have now manifested that the Spring of the Air may suffice to perform
greater things than what our Explication of the Torricellian Experiments and
those of our Engine obliges us to ascribe to it. Wherefore since besides the
several difficulties that incumber the Hypothesis we oppose, and especially its
being scarce, if at all, intelligible, we can add that it is unnecessary; we
dare expect that such Readers as are not biased by their reverence for
Aristotle or the Peripatetick Schools, will hardly reject an Hypothesis which,
besides that it is very intelligible, is now proved to be sufficient, only to
embrace a Doctrine that supposes such a rarefaction and condensation, as many
famous Naturalists rejected for its not being comprehensible, even when they
knew of no other way (that was probable) of solving the Phenomenon wont to be
explicated by it.

The III. Part. Wherein what is objected against Mr. Boyle's Explications of
particular Experiments, is answered.
AND now we are come to the third and last Part of our Defense; wherein we are
to consider what our Examiner is pleased to object against some passages of our
Physico-Mechanical Treatise. But though this may seem the only part wherein I
am particularly concerned; yet perhaps we shall find it, if not the shortest,
at least the easiest, part of our Task. Partly, because our Author takes no
exceptions at the Experiments themselves, as we have recorded them (which from
an Adversary, who in some places speaks of them as an Eyewitness, is no
contemptible testimony that the matters of fact have been rightly delivered:)
and partly, because there are diverse Experiments which, together with their
Explications, the Examiner has thought fit to leave untoucht, and thereby
allows us to do so too: and partly also, because that (as to diverse of those
Experiments upon which he animadverts) he does not pretend to show that our
Explications are ill deduced or incongruous to our Principles; but only that
the Phenomenon may be explained either better or as well by his Hypothesis,
whereof he supposes himself to have demonstrated the truth, together with the
erroneousness of ours, in the other parts of his Book, especially the third,
fourth and fifth Chapters. So that after what we have said to vindicate the
Hypothesis we maintain, and take away our Author's imaginary Funiculus; it will
not be requisite for us on such occasions to examine his particular Assertions
and Explications. Which Advertisement we hope the Reader will be pleased to
bear in mind, and thereby save himself and us the trouble of a great deal of
unnecessary repetition. Wherefore presuming he will do so, we shall not stay to
examine the first and second Corollaries, which in his 17 Chapter he annexes to
the manner of emptying our Receiver by our Pump. Neither should we say any
thing as to his third and last Corollary, but that we think fit to desire the
Reader to take notice, that according to what he teaches in that place, the
more the Air is rarefied, the more forcibly it is able to contract it self.

A defense of our 1. and 2. Experiments.
And to proceed now to his 18 Chapter, which he intitles De Experimentis
Boylianis, we shall find according to what we lately noted, that against the
first Experiment he objects nothing save that, if one of the Fingers be applied
to the Orifice of the Valve when the Pump is freed from Air, the Experimenter
shall feel to his pain that the Sucker is not thrust inward by the external
Air, but, as the Finger, drawn inward by the internal. But this Phenomenon of
the intrusion of the Finger into a Cavity, where it finds no resistance, having
been formerly accounted for according to our Hypothesis, we shall not need to
repeat our Explication of it; though this mistaken Phenomenon supplies our
Adversary with diverse of his following Animadversions, and indeed with a great
part of his Book. And accordingly his Objection against our Second Experiment
being of the same nature with that against the first, requires but the same
Answer: For it will not alter the case that he adds upon this Experiment, Hoc
esse discrimen manifestum inter pressionem and suctionem, quod suctio efficiat
hujusmodi adhaesionem, pressio autem minime; since to say so is but to affirm,
not to prove.

The 3. Experiment.
What our Author would except against the 3. Experiment he ought to have more
intelligibly expressed: For whereas of a Discourse wherein I deliver several
particulars, he only says that Nullatenus satisfacit, ut legenti constabit; I
would not do the Reader the injury to suspect him of taking this proofless
Assertion for a rational Confutation; especially since upon the review of that
third Experiment I find nothing that agrees not with my Hypothesis, however it
may disagree with the Examiners. But, to consider the Explication he
substitutes in the room of our Doctrine, which he rejects, he gives it us in
these words; Hoc quoque Experimentum principiis nostris optime convenit: Cum
enim per illam Emboli depressionem aer in cavitate brachii inclusus separetur
ab eodem brachio, descendatque simul cum Embolo (uti de aqua simul cum argento
vivo descendente capite decimo tertio vidimus) fit ut in tota illa depressione,
novae semper ab aere illo descendente superficies deripiantur simul and
extendantur, ut ibidem de aqua est explicatum: cum itaque aeque facile
diripiantur and extendantur hujusmodi superficies in fine depressionis ac
initio, mirum non est quod eadem utrobique sentiatur deprimendi difficultas.

By which though he seems to intend an Opposition to that part of the third
Experiment which I opposed not against his Opinion, but that of some learned
Vacuists: Yet (not to mention that he seems to have somewhat mistaken my sense)
he offers nothing at all to invalidate my inference against them; but instead
of that proposes a defense of his own Opinion, which supposes the truth of his
disproved Hypothesis, and is either unsatisfactory even according to that, or
else disagrees with what himself has taught us but a little before. For it is
evident that the more the Sucker is depressed, the more the Cylinder is
exhausted of Air. And in his third Corollary (which we lately desired the
Reader to observe) speaking of the Air in the Receiver (and the case is the
same with the Air in the Cylinder) he affirms more than once, Eo magis extendi
ac rarefieri aerem relictum, quo plus inde exhauritur, majoremque proinde
acquirere vim sese contrahendi. Whereas here he would have us believe, that the
little internal Air that was in the Cavity of the shank of the Stop-cock, does
as strongly retract the Sucker, or, which in our case is all one, resist its
depression, when the Sucker is yet near the top of the Cylinder, (and
consequently when the included Air is but a little dilated) as when the same
Sucker being forced down to the lower part of the Cylinder, the same portion of
remaining Air must be exceedingly more distended.

The 4. Experiment.
In the Fourth Experiment, touching the swelling of a Bladder upon the removal
of the ambient Air; and proportionably to that removal: Our Author objects
nothing against the Explication we give of it by the Spring of the Air included
in the Bladder, and distending it according as the pressure of the ambient Air
is weakened. But he endeavors also to explicate it his way, to which he says
this circumstance does excellently agree, that upon the regress of the external
Air into the Receiver, the tumid Bladder immediately shrinks, because (says
he) by such ingress of the external Air, the Air in the Receiver, which drew
the sides of the Bladder outward from the middle of it, is relaxed. Which
Explication whether it be more natural than ours (that ascribes the shrinking
of the Bladder to the pressure of the Air that is let into the Receiver) let
the Reader judge, who has considered what we have formerly objected against the
Examiners Funiculus, and the Relaxation of it upon the admission of Air.

As for the reason likewise he adds, why a perforated Bladder does not also
swell, namely, that by the hole, how little soever, the included Air is sucked
out by the rarefi'd ambient, we leave it to the impartial Reader to consider
whether is the more genuine Explication, either ours (against which he has
nothing to object) or his, which to make clearly out he ought (according to
what we formerly noted disputing against his Funiculus) to show us what kind of
strings they are; which though, according to him, strongly fastened to the
inside of the Receiver and the superficies of the Bladder, must draw just as
forcibly one as another, how long soever they be without the Bladder in
comparison of those that within the Bladder draw so as to hinder the diduction
of its sides. For Experience shows, that in a perforated Bladder the wrinkles
continue as if there were no drawing at all.

And though he could describe how such a string may be context, yet our
Explication will have this advantage in point of probability above his, That
whereas he denies not that the Air has Spring and Weight, as we deny his
Funiculus to have any other than an imaginary existence; and whereas he
acknowledges that by the Instrument the Air about the Bladder is exhausted; to
show that there needs no more than that, and consequently no Funiculus, to draw
asunder the sides of the Bladder, we can confirm our Explication by the
formerlymentioned Experiment of the ingenious Paschal, who carrying a flaccid
Football from the bottom to the top of an high Mountain, found it to swell
proportionably as he ascended, and as the weight and pressure of the ambient
Air decreased, and likewise to shrink again as he descended. And yet in this
case there is no recourse to be had to a Funiculus of violently-rarefi'd Air to
draw asunder every way the sides of the Football. But however the Examiner
will be able to defend his Explication, it may suffice us that he has objected
nothing against ours.

The 5. Experiment.
Against the cause we assign of the fifth Experiment he likewise objects
nothing, but only ascribes the breaking of the Bladder to the self-contraction
of the rarefi'd Air in the Receiver. And therefore referring the Reader to what
we have newly said about the last Experiment, we will with our Author pass over
the sixth and seventh, to which he has no quarrel, and proceed to the eighth.

The 8. Experiment.
This is that wherein we mention our having broke a GlassReceiver, which was
not globular, by the exhaustion of most of the inward Air, whereby its
debilitated pressure became unable to resist the unweakned pressure of the
outward Air. But this Explication the Examiner confidently rejects in these
words, At profect non videtur credibile, mollissimum hunc aerem tam vehementer
vitrum (tantae praesertim crassitudinis quantae ibidem dicitur) undique sic
comprimere ut illud perfringat: as if it were more credible that the little Air
within (which, according to him, is so much thinner than common Air) should be
able to act more powerfully upon the Glass than the Air without, which himself
confesses to be a heavy body, and which not only reaches from the surface of
the Earth to the top of the highest Mountains, but which (as may not improbably
be argued from what we have elsewhere delivered) may, for ought we know to the
contrary, be heaped upon the Receiver to the height of some hundreds of Miles,
nay, to I know not how many thousands, in case the Atmosphere See Part 2. C. 5.
be not a bounded portion of the Air, but reach as high as It.

As for the Explication he substitutes in these words, Verius itaque
respondetur, ideo sic fractum esse illud vitrum, quia per exhaustionem illam
later a ejus vehementius introrsum sint attracta, quam ut (ob figuram illam
resistendo minus idoneam) resistere potuerint. Cum enim inclusus aer lateribus
vitri firmissime adhaereat, nihil aliud erit aerem illum sic exhaurire, quam
satagere latera vitri introrsum flectere: By what we have already discoursed
about the Funiculus, the Reader may easily discern what is to be answered. Nor
does our Author here show us any way by which his imaginary strings should take
such fast hold of the sides of the Glass, as to be able to draw them together
notwithstanding the resistance they find from the close texture of the Body to
be broken.

The 9. Experiment.
Our Explication of the ninth Experiment he handles very severely: for having
briefly recited it, he proposes his Objection against it thus, Sed profecto
nimis long videtur hoc a veritate recedere: potestque vel inde solum satis
refutari; quia si tanta sit pressura aeris sic per tubum illum in phialam
descendentis, ut ipsam phialam perfringat, deberet profecto inclusam aquam, cui
immergitur ille tubus, valde quoque ante fractionem phialae commovere,
bullulasque in eadem excitare, etc. ut constat, siquis, insufflando per illum
tubulum, aquam vel mediocriter sic premat. At certum est aquam, antequam
frangatur sic phiala, nec tantillum moveri: ut experienti constabit.

But, I do confess, I do for all this think our Explication more true, than
well considered by our Author. For the putting of water into the Vial that was
broken, was done (as is clearly intimated in the beginning of our Narrative)
upon a particular design (as indeed we tried diverse other things with our
Engine, not so much with immediate reference to the Spring of the Air, as to
make use of such Trials in some other of our Writings.) And accordingly in the
second Trial mentioned in the same Experiment the water was omitted. But,
notwithstanding this water, the sides of the Glass being exposed to the
pressure of the Atmosphere, had that whole pressure against them before the
exhaustion of the Receiver; so that there needed no such blowing in of the Air
afresh as our Author imagines, to effect the breaking of the Vial, it being
sufficient for that purpose, that the pressure against the unequal superficies
of it was taken off by the exhaustion of the Receiver, the pressure against the
concave superficies remaining as great as ever. And therefore we need not
altogether deny what the Examiner says that Licet clausus superne fuisset
tubulus ille, eodem tamen modo fract a sine dubio fuisset phiala. For, since in
such cases the Air (as we have often taught) is shut up with the whole pressure
of the Atmosphere upon it, it may almost as easily break the Glass as if it
were unstopt. And accordingly we mention in the 36. Experiment the breaking of
a thin Glass Hermetically sealed upon the recess of the ambient Air. But, how
confidently soever our Author speaks, I thought fit to add the word almost,
because we observed in the 39 Experiment, that such thin Vials (and thick ones
will not break) are subject upon the withdrawing of the ambient, Air to retch a
little, whereby the Spring of the Air within the Vial might in some cases (I
say, in some) be so far weakened as not to be able to break it, unless assisted
by the pressure of the Atmosphere wherewith it communicates, and which leans
upon it. And when the Vial does actually begin to break, then the pursuing
pressure of the outward Air upon the yielding Air within the Vial may help to
throw the parts of the Glass more forcibly asunder.

All the Experiments from the 9. to the 17. exclusively our Examiner leaving
uncensured, we may with him advance to the consideration of the 17.

The 17 Experiment defended.
In this we relate how, when we made the Torricellian Experiment, we shut up
the restagnant Mercury together with the Tube and the suspended Mercurial
Cylinder (of about 29. Inches) in our Receiver, that by drawing off and letting
in the Air at pleasure upon the restagnant Mercury, and consequently weakening
and increasing its pressure, we might make it more clearly appear than hitherto
had been done by Experiment, that the suspension of the Mercurial Cylinder, and
the height of it, depended upon the greater or lesser pressure of the Air. But
against our Explication of this Experiment (which has had the good fortune to
convince and satisfy many ingenious men) the Examiner objects nothing in
particular, contenting himself to have recourse here also to his Funiculus. Yet
two observations of ours he is pleased to take notice of.

The first is, that though the Quicksilver were exactly shut up into our
Receiver after the manner newly declared, yet the suspended Quicksilver did not
descend: whence having said that I argue, that it is now sustained not by the
Counterpoise of the Atmosphere, but by the Spring of the Air shut up in the
Receiver, he subjoyns only this, Sed rectius sane infertur, Cylindrum illum
nihil ibidem antea praestitisse. But whether this be not gratis dictum we leave
the Reader to collect from what we have formerly discourst in the second Part
of this Defense of the Spring of the Air; especially from that Experiment; by
which it appears, that Spring may sustain a far higher Cylinder of Quicksilver.

In the second Observation he mentions of ours, he summarily recites our
Explication of the descent and ascent of the Mercury in the Tube, by the
debilitated and strengthened Spring of the Air. But without finding fault with
our application of that principle to the Phenomenon, he says that he has
sufficiently refuted the principle it self in the fourth Chapter, (which how
well he has done we have already seen) and therefore explicates the matter
thus; Dico igitur (says he) argentum per illam exhaustionem sic in tubo
descendere, quod deorsum trahatur ab aere qui incumbit argento restagnanti:
siquidem incumbens ille aer jam per exhaustionem valde rarefact us and
extensus, sese vehementer contrahit, and contrahendo conatur etiam subjectum
sibi argentum restagnans e suo vasculo elevare, unde fit ut (argento illo
restagnante minus. jam gravitante in fundum sui vasculi) argentum quod est in
tubo descendat; ut per se patet. Adeoque mirum non est, quod, ingrediente
postea aere externo, rursum argentum ascendat, cum per illum ingressum vis illa
sic elevans argentum restagnans debilitetur. But this Explication supposing
such a Funiculus as we have already shown to be but fictitious, the Reader will
easily gather what is to be judged of it from what has been already delivered.
Wherefore I shall only subjoyn, that by this Explication, were it admitted,
there is only an account given of that part of our seventeenth Experiment
which relates to the descent of the Mercury below its wonted height, and its
re-ascent to it. But as for our having by the forcing in some more Air into the
Receiver, impelled the Quicksilver to a considerably-greater height than it is
wont to be sustained at in the Torricellian Experiment, I confess I understand
not how the Examiner gives an account of it in the following words, (which are
immediately annexed to those we last recited of his, and which are all that he
employes to explicate this notable Phenomenon) Atque hinc etiam redditur ratio
alterius quod ibidem quoque notatur, nempe quod per violentam intrusionem aeris
externi in Recipientem, ascenderit argentum notabiliter supra digitos 29. Nam
sicut per extractionem aeris argentum infra stationem detrahitur, sic etiam per
intrusionem novi supra eandem elevabitur. For in this passage I see not how he
himself does not rather repeat the matter of fact, than give any account how it
is performed. And if it be alleged on his behalf, That according to his
principles it may be said that, upon the pressure of adventitious Air upon the
restagnant Mercury, the Funiculus in the Tube, that was not able before to draw
it up above 29 Inches, is now enabled to draw it up higher; I demand upon what
account this new Air does thus press against the restagnant Mercury, and impell
up and sustain that in the Tube. It will not be said that it is by its weight;
for as much Mercury as may be thus impelled up above the usual station will
weigh a great many times more than the Air forced into the Receiver. And
therefore it remains that the additional Air counterpoises the additional
Mercury by its Spring. And if we consider withal, that there is no reason to
doubt, (especially considering what we have formerly delivered upon trial
touching the power of comprest Air to impell up Quicksilver) but that, had we
not been afraid of breaking our Vessel we might by forcing more Air into the
Receiver have impelled it up to the top of the Tube, and kept it there; we
shall scarce deny but that, supposing there could be no such Funiculus as our
Examiner's in rerum natura, the pressure of the incumbent Air alone might
suffice to keep a correspondent Cylinder of Mercury suspended: and that without
any attraction of the restagnant Mercury by a Funiculus of violently-distended
Air in the Receiver, the Quicksilver in the Tube may be made to rest at any
height greater or lesser, provided it exceed 30 Inches, only because its
weight is just able to counterbalance the pressure of the contiguous Air.

I know not whether I may not add (to express an unwillingness to omit what
some may think proper to do my Adversary right) that it may be said for the
Examiner, that he in the 11 page acknowledging with us a power in the Air to
recover its due extension if it be crowded into less room than its disposition
requires; a man may from that principle solve the Phenomenon in question by
saying, that the Air in the Receiver being forcibly comprest by the intrusion
of fresh Air into the same vessel, does by its endeavor to recover its due
expansion press upon the restagnant Mercury, and force up some of it into the
Tube. But this Explication, though it agree with what the Author teaches in a
place very distant from his Notes upon our 17 Experiment, now under debate; yet
still it is not clear to me how, by what he says in these Notes, the
Phenomenon is accounted for as the word Hinc imports it to be. But otherwise I
need not quarrel with the Explication, since without recurring to the Funiculus
for the sustaining of the additional Mercury, the solution of the Phenomenon
is given upon the same principle that I employ.

The 18 Experiment.
Our Examiner in his Animadversion upon the 18 Experiment, having recited my
Conjecture as the cause why a Cylinder of Mercury did in Winter rise and fall
in the Tube, sometimes as Water is wont to do in a Weather-glass, according to
the laws of heat and cold, and sometimes quite contrary thereunto; adds, that
this Experiment does strongly enough overthrow our Hypothesis of the
Atmospherical Cylinder, and clearly show that the Quicksilver is not sustained
by it: Nam (says he) si hic ab eo sustentatum fuisset, debuisset potius
frigidiore tempore ascendere quam descendere, eo quod aer tunc multo densior
esset and gravior. Itaque non sustentatur argentum ab aeris aequipondio, ut
asseritur. And by the same Argument he concludes against the Mercury's being
sustained by the Spring of the Air. But in his Animadversions upon this
Experiment he seems to have been too forward to reprehend; for he neither well
confutes my Conjecture, nor substitutes so much as a plausible one in the stead
of it. And as to his Objection I answer,

First, That it does not conclude: because that as sometimes the Quicksilver in
the Tube did rise in warmer, and fall in colder, weather; so at other times it
did rather emulate the ascent and descent of water in a Weather-glass.

Secondly, Though it be true, that Cold is wont to condense this or that parcel
of Air, and that a parcel of Air may be made heavier by Condensation; yet that
is in regard of the ambient Air that retains its wonted laxity, in which the
condensed Air is weighed. But our Author has not yet proved, that in case the
cold of the Winter should condense the whole incumbent Atmosphere, it would
then gravitate sensibly more upon the restagnant Quicksilver than before. As a
Pound of Wool will not sensibly vary its weight, though the hairs whereof it
is composed be made to lie sometimes in a looser, sometimes in a closer, order.

And, thirdly, this Objection does as little agree with his Doctrine as with my
Conjecture: For in the 50. page, where he gives us an account according to his
principles of the rising and falling of water in a Weather-glass, and compares
it with the suspension of Quicksilver, he tells us, Hinc fit quod, contracto
hoc funiculo per frigus, aqua illa tempore frigido ascendat, descendat autem
tempore calido, eo quod per calorem funiculus ille dilatetur. So that,
according to the Examiner himself, the Quicksilver ought to have ascended in
colder, and descended in warmer, weather. Now, although I proposed my thoughts
of the difficult Phenomenon under consideration but as a Conjecture, and
therefore shall be ready to alter them, either upon further discovery, or
better information; yet I see not why it should be post-posed to the
Examiner's, who, though he rejects our Explication, substitutes no other than
what may be gathered from these words, Ego certe non dubito quin dentur
hujusmodi occultae causae, quibus funiculus ille subtilis, quo in tubo
suspenditur argentum (ut dictum est capite decimo) modo producatur, modo
abbrevietur, etc. sicque argentum nunc demittat, nunc elevet. For, since we
have made it probable that the copious Fumes sometimes suddenly ascending into
the Air, and rolling up and down in it, sometimes sensibly altering (if good
Authors may be credited) the refraction of it, and since some other causes,
mentioned in our eighteenth Experiment, may alter the density and gravity of
the Air that leans upon the restagnant Mercury; I suppose the Reader will think
it more intelligible, and probable that alterations, other than those produced
by heat and cold may happen to the incumbent Atmosphere, which freely
communicates with the neighboring Air, and may thereby become sometimes more
stufft, and sometimes more destitute of adventitious Exhalations; than that
such changes should happen to a Funiculus included in Glass, which according to
our Author is impervious to the subtilest steams that are, and concerning which
he offers not so much as a Conjecture upon what other account it can happen to
be sometimes contracted, and sometimes stretched.

The 19 Experiment.
Upon this the Examiner has only this short Animadversion, In decimo nono
ostendit aquam eodem modo per exhaustionem Recipientis descendere, quo in
praecedente descendere ostenderat argentum vivum; cujus cum eadem sit ratio,
non est cur amplius ei insistamus. In which words since he offers nothing new
or peculiar to show any incongruity in our Explication to our principles, which
agree very well with the new Phenomenon of the Experiment; we are content to
leave the Reader to judge of the Hypotheses themselves, which of the two is the
more probable, either ours, that only requires that the Air in the Receiver
should equally resist a Cylinder of Water and of Quicksilver, when their weight
is but the same, though their altitudes be not; or the Examiner's, which exacts
that (according to what we formerly elsewhere noted) Bodies of such differing
nature and texture as Quicksilver and Water should need but just the same
weight or strength to rarefie them into a Funiculus.

The 20 Experiment.
In his Examen of this Experiment our Author makes me infer from the Phenomenon
he repeats, that not only the Air, but the Water also has a Spring. But though
I suspect not that he does wilfully mistake my sense, yet by what I write in
this and the following Experiments the Reader may well enough perceive, that I
spoke but very doubtfully of a Spring in the water; nay, and that I did in the
154 page expressly teach, That the intumescence of it might (at least in great
part) proceed from that of the small parcels of Air, which I thought to be
usually harbored in the body of that liquor.

But whereas I ascribe the appearance of the Bubbles in the water to this, that
upon the exhaustion of some of the Air incumbent on the water, the pressure of
what remains is much debilitated, whereby the little Particles of Air lurking
in the Water are allowed to expand themselves into bubbles; he rejects this
Explication as manifestly false: Nam Sed contra manifest.
(says he) si ita fieret, deberent profecto hujusmodi bullulae non e fundo
vasis sic ascendere, (uti tam in hoc quam in sequentibus experimentis in quibus
de istis bullis agitur semper asseritur) sed e superiore part aquae, ubi minus
premuntur, ut per se est manifestum. But why he should be here so peremptory I
confess I do not, for all this Objection, yet see: For in the bottom of the
next page he says, he will not deny but that Aerial Particles latitant in the
other parts of the water (he had before spoken of the bottom of it) may be
extended into bubbles by his way of Rarefaction. And that we particularly
mentioned the rising of bubbles, even from the bottom of the water, was because
that circumstance seemed to deserve a peculiar note; and not (as he seems to
imagine) as if the bubbles did not also rise from the superior parts of the
liquor, since we did take notice of it about the middle of the 149 page. And we
often in this and the following See also in the 43 Experim. these passages, --
And this Effervescence was so great in the upper part of the water, etc. As
also, -- The Effervescence was confined to the upper part of the water, unless,
etc.
Experiments observed, that the ascending bubbles grew bigger the nearer they
came to the top. Which agrees more clearly with our Hypothesis wherein their
conspicuous swelling as they ascend is attributed more to the lessening of the
pressure of the incumbent Air than to the decrement of the weight of the
incumbent water, (since when the surface of this liquor is leaned upon by the
Atmosphere, the ascending bubbles scarce sensibly increase in Vessels no deeper
than ours) then with the Explication which the Examiner gives in these words,
Respondeo, aquam per illant aeris exhaustionem non sponte sic ascendere, sed
sursum violenter trahi, ac elevari a rare facto illo aere sese contrahente.
Quemadmodum enim aqua aliqualem patitur compressionem (ut experientia constat)
it a and aliqualem quoque hic patitur distentionem. Atque hinc clare patet, cur
potius a fundo vasts quam a part aquae superiore oriantur hujusmodi bullae.
Cum enim vehemens illa suctio conetur aquam a fundo phialae elevare, nascitur
ibidem subtilis quaedam materia quae in bullas conversa sic ascendit, uti
capite decimo quinto in quarto Experimento dictum est. For, whatever he may
think, it does not hence so clearly appear how the endeavor only of the
Funiculus to draw up the Water from the bottom of the Vial, to which, that
endeavor notwithstanding, it remains contiguous, should generate in some parts
of the bottom of the Glass, and not in others, such a subtle matter as he
tells us of. And I suppose the Reader will, as well as I, wish he had more
intelligibly declared how this strange generation of subtle matter comes to be
effected. And I presume it will likewise be expected that he also declare, why
both in our case and in the Torricellian Experiment the bubbles grow so much
larger by being nearer the top of the liquor; if, as he rejects our Explication
of this Circumstance, the effect of the suction he speaks of be greater upon
the lower part of the liquor than the upper, to which alone nevertheless his
Funiculus, that is said so to draw the liquor, is contiguous.

Our Author making no particular Objection against the 10 following
Experiments, we also shall pass them by, and fall with him upon the
consideration of the 31 Experiment.

The 31 Experiment.
Upon this our Author having recited our Conjecture as the cause why two very
flat and smooth Marbles stick so closely together, that by lifting up the
uppermost you may take up also the lowermost, approves my way of examining that
Conjecture. But whereas I say that the reason why, though the Marbles were kept
together by the pressure of the ambient Air, yet they did not fall asunder in
our exhausted Receiver, no not though a weight of 4 Ounces were hung at the
lower stone, might be, that by reason of some small leak in the Receiver the
Air could not be sufficiently drawn out: yet he tells us with his wonted
confidence, Certum esse, sententiam illam vel hoc solo Experimento satis
refelli. But possibly he would have spoken less resolutely, if he had made all
the trials about the adhesion of Maibles that we relate our selves to have made
in the short History we have published of Fluidity and Firmness. For our
Examiner speaks as if all that we ascribe to the Air in such Experiments were
to sustain the lower Marble with the weight perhaps of a few Ounces: Whereas in
case the Air be kept from getting in at all between the stones, it may
(according to our Hypothesis) sustain a Weight either altogether or well-nigh
equal to that of a pillar of Air as broad as the Basis of thelower Marble, and
as long as the Atmosphere is high, or to the weight of a pillar of Quicksilver
of the same thickness, and about 30 Inches long; these two pillars appearing by
the Torricellian Experiment to counterpoise each other. And therefore since in
the seventeenth Experiment, when we had exhausted our Receiver as far as we
could, there remained Air enough to keep up in the Tube a Cylinder of about an
Inch long of Quicksilver; and since the broader the contiguous Marbles are, the
greater weight fastened to the lowermost may be sustained by the resistance of
the Air, (as is obvious to him that considers the Hypothesis, and as we have
proved by Experiment in the forementioned Tract) it need be no wonder that the
Air remaining in the Receiver should be able to support the lowermost Marble,
whose Diameter was near two Inches, and a weight of four Ounces, those two
Weights being inferior to that of a Mercurial Cylinder of that Diameter and an
Inch in length. And though it were not, yet we are not sure that the Receiver
was as well emptied when we made the 31 Experiment, as when we made the 17. And
(if my Memory does not much misinform me) 'twas with the same pair of Marbles
that in the presence of an illustrious Assembly of Virtuosi (who were
Spectators of the Experiment) the uppermost Marble drew up the lowermost,
though that were clogged with a weight of above 430 Ounces.

As for the account the Examiner substitutes of our Phenomenon, I know not
whether many Readers will acquiesce in it: For, not to insist upon the
Objection which himself takes notice of, that according to him the distended
Air in the Receiver should draw asunder the adhering Marbles; his Explication
supposes that there cannot naturally be a Vacuum, whence he infers that,
Necesse erat ut lapis ille non aliter descenderet, quam relinquendo post se
tenuem bujusmodi substantiam, qualis ab argento vivo aut aqua sic
descendentibus relinqui solet. But whereas he adds, that the cause of the
obstinate adhesion we meet with in our case is, that such a substance is far
more difficult to be separated from Marble than from Qucksilver or any other
kind of Body; that Assertion is precarious. And though I have tried Experiments
of this nature with stones of several sizes, perhaps an hundred times, yet I
never could find that by their cohesion they would sustain a weight greater
than that of a Pillar of the Atmosphere that pressed against the lowermost: Which
is a considerable Circumstance, that much better agrees with our Explication
than our Adversaries. And whereas he further says, Vnde existimo plane, si
perfect complan at a fuerint duo marmora sic conjunct a, it a ut nullus omnino
aer inter utrumque mediaret, non posse ea ullis humanis viribus ab invicem
divelli: I hope I need not tell the Reader, that whether or no this agree with
what he had immediately before taught of the separableness of a subtle
substance even from Marble, so bold and improbable an Assertion requires the
being countenanced with a much better proof than the only one he subjoyns in
these words, Vti etiam confirmat exemplum quod ibidem adducit Author de lamina
aenea, tabulae cuidam marmoreae it a adhaerente, ut a lacertoso juvene, de suis
viribus gloriante, non potuerit per annulum centro ejus affixum inde elevari.
For sure there is great odds betwixt the strength of a man unassisted by any
Engine, and the utmost extent of Humane Power. And indeed accor ing to our
Hypothesis, and without having recourse to Natures dreading of a Vacuum, the
case is clear enough: For, supposing the Plate to be of any considerable
breadth, the Pillar of the Atmosphere that leaned upon it, and must at the
instant of its deserting the superficies of the Table all at once be lifted up
with it, may well exceed the force of a single man, especially in an
inconvenient posture; since by the cohesion of a pair of Marbles of about three
Inches Diameter, I did with my own hands take up above a thousand and three
hundred Ounces.

The 32 and 33 Experiments.
Against our Explication of these two, which our Author examines together, he
objects nothing peculiar, but contents himself to explicate them by his
Funiculus: Wherefore neither shall we need to frame any peculiar defense for
it, especially if the Reader will be pleased to refer hither as much of what we
opposed to his Animadversion on the third Experiment as is justly applicable to
our present Controversy. Our Author indeed endeavors to prove his Explication
by saying, that the distended Air in the exhausted Cylinder draws up the Sucker
with the annexed weight, Eodem fere modo quo videmus in cueurbitulis dorso
aegrotantis applicatis, in quibus, extincta jam flamma, rarefact us aer se
contrahens carnem tam vehementer, uti videmus, elevat attrahitque intra
cucurbitulam. But that Phenomenon is easily enough explicable in our
Hypothesis, by saying, that upon the vanishing of that heat which strengthened
the pressure of the included Air, the Spring of it grows too weak to resist any
longer the pressure of the ambient Air; which thereupon thrusts the flesh and
neighboring blood of the Patient into the Cupping-glass, almost after the same
manner as we formerly taught the Pulp of the Finger to be thrust into the
deserted Cavity of the Glass-Tube in the Torricellian Experiment.

The 34, 35 and 36 Experiments.
To these our Author saying nothing but this, In his tribus nihil peculiariter
occurrit hic explicandum, cujus ratio ex jam dictis non facile pateat; we also
may be allowed to pretermit them, and pass on to

The 37 Experiment.
Of the appearance of Light or Whiteness, mentioned in this Experiment, the
Examiner confesses that we have assigned a cause probable enough, by referring
it to the vehement and sudden commotion of the included Air. And indeed though
I do still look upon some of the things that I hesitantly proposed about this
difficult Phenomenon but as mere Conjectures, and though he annexes his
Explication of it; yet I see not but that it is coincident with ours, or not
better than it. For, to what I had said of the Commotion of the parts of the
Air, he adds only in two or three several places their being violently
distended; which how it improves the Explication of the Phenomenon I do not
readily see. And whereas he subjoyns, Existimo autem dicendum potius candorem
illum esse lumen quoddam reflexum, quam innatum, eo quod (ut testatur Author)
in tenebris non appareat, sed solum de die aut accensa candela: I presume the
attentive Reader will easily discern that his Opinion is much-what the same
that I proposed and grounded on the same reason. But the chief difficulty in
this abstruse Phenomenon, namely why we meet with it but sometimes, our
Examiner's Explication leaves untouched.

The 38 and 39 Experiments.
Against these our Author makes no peculiar Objections.

The 40 and 41 Experiments.
But in his Animadversions upon these, having told the Reader that I seem to
ascribe the sudden extinction of the included Animals to the excessive thinness
of the Air remaining in the Receiver, made by the recess of what was drawn out,
unfit for Respiration; he adds resolutely enough, Verum impossible videtur, ut
hujusmodi animalcula ob solum defectum crassioris aeris tam cito moriantur: But
gives no other reason than that they dye so soon, which is no more than what he
said in the newly-cited words, and besides is grounded upon something of
mistake. For the Creatures he mentions were a Be, a Fly, and a Caterpillar,
and those included too in a small Receiver, which could be suddenly exhausted:
and these indeed became moveless within a minute of an hour; but that minute
was not (as the word is often used to signify in English) a Moment, but the
Sixtieth part of an Hour. And though these Insects did in so short a time grow
moveless, yet they were not so soon killed; as appears by the Narrative. The
sanguineous Animals that did indeed dye, were killed more slowly. And I
remember that having purposely inquired of a man (used to go under water by the
help of an Engine wherein he could carry Air with him to the bottom of the Sea)
how long he could endure, before he was accustomed to dive, without breathing
or the use of a Sponge; See more concerning this Objection in the Answer to it
as it is proposed by Mr. Hobbs.
he told me, that at first he could hold out about two or three Minutes at a
time: Which made me think that Diverse become able to continue under Water so
long, either by a peculiarly-convenient Constitution of body, or by a gradual
exercise. And I am apt to think that he did, as men are wont to do, when he
said two or three Minutes, mean what is indeed a much shorter time than that
when exactly measured amounts to. For, having purposely made trial upon a
couple of Moles that were brought me together alive, one of them included in a
small, though not very small, Receiver was between two and three Minutes in
killing; whereas the other being immediately after detained under Water did not
there continue full a Minute and a quarter, before it finally ceased from
giving any sign at all of life. By which trial it may appear, that it is not
impossible that the want of Respiration should dispatch an Animal in as little
time as is mentioned in the Experiment I am now defending. And indeed our
Author either should have proved that it is not possible for the want of Air to
destroy Animals so soon, or should have given us some better account of the
Phenomenon. For whereas he teaches us, that according to his Doctrine the
little Animals above mentioned were so soon killed, quia per rarefactumillum
aerem sese contrahentem extractus sit little halitus: I see not that hereby, if
he explicate the Phenomenon otherwise than we, he explains it better; for he
seems to speak as if he thought this halitus to be some peculiar part of the
Animal in which his life resides. And besides he seems not to consider, that
whereas, according to me as well as according to him, the Air contained in the
Lungs (supposing these Animalcula have any) must in great part pass thence into
the Receiver, (for whether that be done by the Spring of the Air it self, that
was harbored in the Lungs, or the traction of the more rarefi'd Air in the
Receiver, is not material in our present case) the Examiner must, as well as I,
render a reason why the extenuation or recess of the halitus should cause the
hasty death of the included Animals; and condemning my Conjecture he ought to
have substituted another reason: and though he subjoyns these words, and
concludes with them, Atque hinc quoque ortae sunt vehementes illae
convulsiones, quas ante mortem passas esse aviculas quasdam memorat ibidem
Author; yet I doubt not but the Reader will think it had not been amiss that
the Author had more intelligibly reduced these Tragic Symptoms from his
Assumption, for the sake of those that are not Anatomists and Physicians enough
to discern how his Funiculus could produce these effects.

For my part, as in the 41 Experiment I tendered my thoughts concerning
Respiration but doubtingly, so I am yet unwilling to determine resolvedly in a
matter of that difficulty.

The 42 and 43 Experiments.
In his Examen of these two last of our Physico-Mechanical Experiments, the
Author contents himself to endeavor to explicate the Phenomenon recited in
them by the contraction of the rarefi'd Air; which, according to him,
endeavors to draw up the subjacent water out of the Vial, whereby it
vehemently distends the parts of that water, as he taught in the like case upon
the 20 Experiment. But since we have already considered his Animadversion upon
that, although this presumed distension of the water is not visible that we
have observed, when cold water, that has been first freed from his interspersed
Air, is put into the Receiver, notwithstanding that the Funiculus should in
that case also distend it; we are so afraid of tiring out the Readers patience
by the frequent repetition of the same things, that we will leave it to him to
judge which of the two Explications, the Examiner's or ours, is to be
preferred, without troubling him and our selves with defense of Accounts
against which our Adversary does not here make any peculiar Objections.

And thus have we by God's assistance considered what the Examiner has been
pleased to oppose either against our particular Explications, or against the
Hypotheses that diverse of them suppose: Wherein I have been the more particular
and prolix, because I would willingly excuse my self and others from the
trouble of any more Disputes of this kind. I hope there is not in my Answers
any thing of Asperity to be met with; for I have no quarrel to the Person of
the Author, or his just reputation; nor did I intend to use any more freedom of
Speech in the answering his Objections, than his resolute way of proposing
diverse of them made it on those occasions needful for the Caution of those
Readers who are not acquainted with our differing ways of writing, and perhaps
have not observed that some men are wont to consider as much what they propose
but with a Perhaps, or some such expression of diffidence, as others do what
they deliver far more resolutely. And though being very far from being wedded
to my Opinions, I am still ready to exchange them for better, if they shall be
duly made out to me, (which I think it possible enough they may hereafter be;)
yet peradventure the Reader will think with me, that the Examiner has not given
me cause to renounce any of them, since the Objections he has proposed against
me have been sufficiently answered, and since the Hypothesis he would
substitute in the room of ours (besides that it is partly precarious) supposes
things which diverse of the eminentest Wits of our Age (otherwise of differing
Opinions) profess they cannot admit or so much as understand: Whereas the
Weight and Spring of the Air are not denied by our Author himself, and are
demonstrable by Experiments that are not controverted betwixt us. Which things
I represent for the defense of what I think the Truth, and not to offend my
learned Adversary, who shall have my free consent to be thought to have failed
rather in the Choice than in the Management of the Controversy. Though since
this passes for his first Book, and since consequently he is not like to have
been provoked, or engaged in point of Reputation, to challenge me or any of
those far more eminent Persons he has named among his Adversaries, I am induced
by the severity wherewith I have known eminent Virtuosi speak of his Attempts,
and particularly of his Funiculus, to fear that some of those he has needlessly
opposed, will be apt to apply to him that of St. Austin against some of his
Adversaries, that had disputed against him with much more Subtilty than Reason,
In mala causa non possunt aliter, at malam causam quis eos coegit habere? But
this notwithstanding I am, as I was going to say, content my Adversary should
be thought to have said for his Principles as much as the Subject will bear;
nor would I have it made his Disparagement, that I have declared that his whole
Book has not made me depart from any of my Opinions or Explications, since his
Hypothesis and mine being inconsistent, it may be looked upon as a sign rather
that each of us have, than that either of us have not, reasoned closely to his
own Principles, that the things we infer from our contrary Suppositions do so
generally disagree.

FINIS.
AN EXPLICATION OF RAREFACTION.
THE chief Arguments of the Author of a certain Treatise De Corporum
inseparabilitate, whereby he endeavors to invalidate the Hypothesis of the
Weight and Spring of the Air, and to set up and establish instead thereof an
unintelligible Hypothesis of Attraction, performed by I know not what strange
imaginary Funiculus, are only Five, two against the former, and three for the
later. The first of which is, That the Weight and Spring of the Air are not
sufficient to perform the Effects ascribed to them: The second, that could they
be performed by that Hypothesis granted, yet the way of this strange Spring it
self is not intelligibly explained or explicable by the Defenders of it. Now
the former of these being little else but a bare Affirmation, and the later
bearing some show of Demonstration, I shall endeavor to examine it as I find
it set down in his 20, 21, 22, 23 and 24 Chapters, to which (especially the 23)
he very often in his Book refers the Reader for satisfaction, pretending there
to evince that Rarefaction cannot be made out any otherwise than by supposing a
body to be in 2, 3, 4, 10, 100, 1000, 1000000 of places at the same instant,
and adequately to fill all and every one of those places.

First therefore, we will examine his Negative, and next his Affirmative,
Arguments for this strange Hypothesis.

His Negative I find in the 20 Chapter, where he endeavors to confute the two
ways of explicating the Rarefaction and Spring of the Air, namely, that of the
Vacuists and that of the Plenists.

Concerning the first of these we find him conclude it impossible, first,
because he had before proved that there can be no Vacuum, which being done by a
Circle ( viz. There is no Vacuum in the Tube because Nature abhors a Vacuum,
and we see Nature abhors a Vacuum because she will not suffer a Vacuum in the
Tube above the Mercury, but to prevent it will continually spin the Quicksilver
into superficies, and never diminish the body of it) will suffer me to pass to
his next, which is, That this way is false, because in the Experiment of the
Carp's Bladder the Air is rarefi'd a 1000 times bigger; nay, in respect of the
body of Gold it has 1000000 times less matter in equal spaces. And this, says
he, is a Phenomenon that is impossible ever to be made out by interspersed
Vacuities. Now that the Vacuists cannot presently, by so bold an assertion as
this, be made to forsake their Principles, he may perceive by these following
Solutions which I shall give of all the Phenomenon he recites, flowing
naturally from an Hypothesis that I shall for the present assume. Let us
suppose then the Particles of Bodies, at least those of the Air, to be of the
form of a piece of Ribond, that is, to be very long, slender, thin and flexible
laminae, coyled or wound up together as a Cable, piece of Ribond, Spring of a
Watch, Hoop, or the like, are: We will suppose these to have all of them the
same length, but some to have a stronger, others a weaker Spring: We will
further suppose each of these so coyled up to have such an innate circular
motion, as that thereby they may describe a Sphere equal in Diameter to their
own, much after the manner that a Meridian turned about the Poles of a Globe
will describe by its revolution a Sphere of the same Diameter with its own in
the Air. By this Circular motion the parts of the laminae endeavoring to
recede from the Center or Axis of their motion, acquire a Springiness outward
like that of a Watch-Spring, and would naturally fly abroad until they were
stretched out at length, but that being incompast with the like on every side,
they cannot do it without the removal of them, as not having room sufficient
for such a motion. And the faster this circular motion is, the more do the
parts endeavor to recede from the Axis, and consequently the stronger is their
Spring or endeavor outward. These springy Bodies thus shaped and thus moved
are sufficient to produce all the Phenomenon he names as impossible to be
explicated. And, first, for the business of Expansion, it will very naturally
be explained by it: As let us suppose for instance the Diameter of these small
coyled Particles of the Air (which being next the Earth are pressed upon by all
those numerous incumbent Particles that make up the Atmosphere, and are thereby
so crowded that they can but very little untwist themselves; let us suppose, I
say, the Diameter of these Particles) to be 1/1000000000000 of an Inch; and
then to be much of the form of those represented in the 4 Figure by ABCD: and
that these Particles, when a considerable quantity of the pressure of the
ambient parts is taken away, will fly abroad into a Coil or Zone ten times as
big in Diameter as before; that is, they will now be 10/1000000000000 of an
Inch in Diameter, and appear in the form of those in the Figure expressed by
EFGH: these Zones whirled round as the former will describe a Sphere 1000 times
as big in bulk, and thereby fence that space from being entered by any of the
like Zones: this it would do, supposing. those Spheres did immediately always
touch each other; but because of their circular motion, whenever they meet they
must necessarily be beaten, and fly off from one another, and so require a yet
greater space to perform their motion in. This supposed, there are no
Phenomenon of Rarefaction (which is enough at present to answer what he
objects) but may be naturally and intelligibly made out. As first, for that of
the swelling of a Carp's Bladder, if we suppose some small parcels of the
former comprest laminae to lie latitant within the folds of it, and being much
coyled up together scarce to take any sensible room, this Bladder in the Air
will appear to contain very little or nothing within it; whereas when the
pressure of the Air is taken off in good part from the outsides of it, then
those formerly latitant Particles disclose themselves by flying open into much
bigger Zones, so as perhaps to be able to defend a thousand times bigger space
from being entered into by their like or any other gross Particles, such as
those of the Bladder. Now because the Pores of a Bladder are such as are not
easily permeable by the Particles of Air, therefore these lurking Particles so
expanding themselves must necessarily plump out the sides of the Bladder, and
so keep them turgid until the pressure of the Air that at first coyled them be
readmitted to do the same thing for them again.

Next, as for Rarefaction by heat, that will as naturally follow as the former
from this Hypothesis. For the Atoms of fire flowing in in great numbers, and
passing through with a very rapid motion, must needs accelerate the motion of
these Particles, from which acceleration their Spring or endeavor outward will
be augmented, that is, those Zones will have a strong nitency to fly wider
open, (for we know that the swifter any body is moved circularly, the more do
the parts of it endeavor to recede from the Center of that motion) from whence
if it has room will follow a Rarefaction. As for the conveyance of Light, that
being according to Epicurus performed by the local motion of peculiar Atoms,
their motions to and fro through this medium will be less impeded by the
rarefi'd Air than by the condensed; as indeed upon Experiment we shall really
find them.

As for his third Objection drawn from his supposed attractive virtue of the
thus-rarefi'd Air, that is quickly answered, by denying it to have any power at
all of attraction; and by showing (which is already done) that what effects he
would have to be performed by the attraction of the included, is really done by
the pressure of the ambient, Air.

And, lastly, the Phenomenon of my Lord Bacon's Experiment are sufficiently
obvious and easy to be deduced.

So then, by granting Epicurus his Principles, that the Atoms or Particles of
bodies have an innate motion; and granting our Supposition of the determinate
motion and figure of the Aerial Particles, all the Phenomenon of Rarefaction
and Condensation, of Light, Sound, Heat, etc. will naturally and necessarily
follow: and the Author's Objections against this first way of Rarefaction will
signify very little.

As to the second way of Rarefactiore by the intrusion or intervention of some
subtle matter or Ether into the spaces deserted by the rarefying Particles,
which is that proposed by the Assertors of a Plenum, this also is by the Author
condemned, and branded with Impossibility. And why? First, because it is (he
says) impossible that the abovementioned Phenomenon of the Carp's Bladder can
be explained by it. Secondly, because it is impossible to give a reason from it
of the impetuous ascent of Water admitted into an exhausted Receiver. And,
Thirdly, because it is impossible to explicate the Phenomenon of Gunpowder. His
Reasons to confirm which three Impossibilities, because drawn from a mere
mistake, or ignorance of those Hypotheses which have been invented by the
Assertors of that Opinion, I shall pass over, and content my self to explain a
way how these Impossibilities may become Possibilities, if not Probabilities.

And the way that I shall take, shall be that of the most acute Modern
Philosopher Monsieur Des Carts, published in his Philosophical Works: Which is
this, That the Air is a Body consisting of long, slender, flexible Particles,
agitated or whirled round by the rapid motion of the Globuli Caelestes, and the
subtle Matter of his first Element, whereby they are each of them enabled to
drive or force out of their Vortice all such other agitated Particles. Now the
swifter these Bodies are whirled round, the more do their flexible parts fly
asunder and stretch themselves out, and the more forcibly do they resist the
ingress of any other so agitated particles into their Vortice, and consequently
the slower their motion is, the less will be their resistance. And because
there is a vast number of these whirled Particles lying one above another, and
each Particle having its peculiar gravity; it will necessarily follow that the
undermost (which to maintain their Vortice must resist so great a pressure)
must very much be hindered from expanding themselves so far as otherwise they
would, were there none of those incompassing agitated Particles that lay in
their way: And that those being by any means removed, or they themselves by a
more rapid motion of the Particles of their Vehicles, the first and second
Element, (which is according to that Hypothesis an effect of Heat) more swiftly
and strongly whirled round, they presently begin to expand themselves, and
maintain a bigger Vortice than before. Now to perform what I just now promised,
I shall endeavor to give a possible, if not a probable, cause of the objected
Phenomenon. And, First, for that of the Carp's Bladder, where the Air is
rarefi'd (says the Author) 1000 times, it will easily be explained by supposing
the few Particles of the Air, which (whilst they sustain the pressure of all
the incumbent Atmosphere) inconspicuously lurk within the Bladder, (each of
them being able to maintain but a very small Vortice) to be by the subsiding
Mercury in the Torricellian Experiment freed from the pressure of the Air, and
their motion continuing the same (by reason that the Transcursion of their
Vehicles is not at all or very little hindered either by the Glass or Bladder)
their parts having room to expand themselves, will fly abroad to such
Extensions as may perhaps make a Vortice 1000 times as big in bulk as what they
were not able just before to exceed. Hence the Particles of the Air (being so
gross as not easily to pervade the Pores of the Bladder) must necessarily drive
out the sides of the Bladder to its utmost extent, and serve to fill the
Receiver in the Magdeburgick Experiment. Now, whereas these Particles will by
the same pressure of the Air be reduced to the same state they were in at
first, that is, to be thronged into a very little room, and thereby be able to
maintain a very small Vortice; the Air let in in the Torricellian Experiment
reduces the Air in the Bladder to its former inconspicuousness, as the
admission of the Water in the Magdeburg Experiment does that Receiver full of
rarefi'd Air into the bigness of a Hazel Nut. Now the Water in this
last-mention'd Experiment enters with a great impetuosity, because driven on
with the whole pressure of the Atmosphere, and resisted only by the small force
of the so-far. rarefi'd Air.

As for the Author's Objection against this way of Rarefaction drawn from the
Phenomenon of Gunpowder, I shall endeavor to answer it by showing them
possibly explicable by a Cartesian Hypothesis. For supposing those Terrestrial
parts of the Gunpowder to be first at rest, and afterward agitated by the
rapid motion of his first Element, there will be sufficient difference of the
former and later condition in respect of Extension; and supposing the
particular constitution of Gunpowder (arising partly from the Specific forms
of the Particles of its ingredients, Nitre, Sulphur and Char-coal, and partly
from their proportionate commistion) to be such as will readily yield to the
motion of his Materia subtilis, so soon as an ingress is admitted to it by the
firing of any particular parcel of it, the Expansion will be speedy enough.

So then let us suppose a Barrel of Gunpowder placed in some close room, to
some grains of which we will suppose some actual fire to be applied, by which
actual fire (the Texture of the Powder being such) those grains are suddenly
fired, that is, many Millions of parts, which before lay still and at rest, are
by the action of the burning Coals shattered, as it were, and put into a
posture ready to be agitated by the rapid motion of the Materia subtilis: into
which posture they are no sooner put, than agitated and whirled sufficiently by
it; whence follows a vast Expansion of that part of Gunpowder so fired. For
each of its parts being thus whirled and hurried round, expel and beat off with
great violence all the contiguous Particles, so as that each Particle takes up
now 1000 times as much Elbow-room (if I may so speak) as just before served its
turn, and consequently those that are outermost take every one their way
directly from the parcel or Corn they had lain quiet in, being hurried away by
the sudden Expansion of the Particles that lay next within them; so that
whatever grain or parcel of Gunpowder they chance to meet with, before they
have lost their motion, they presently shiver and put into such a motion as
makes them fit to receive the action of the Materia subtilis. Which subtle
Matter being every where present, and nothing slow in performing its office,
immediately agitates those also like the former; so that in a trice the
Particles of the whole Barrel of Gunpowder are thus disordered, and by the
motion the Materia subtilis must needs be hurried away with so great an
impetuosity on all sides, as not only to break in pieces its slight wooden
prison, and remove the lighter Particles of the ambient Air, but huge Beams,
nay, vast accumulated Masses of the most compacted Structures of Stone, and
even shake the very Earth it self, or whatever else stands in its way, whose
Texture is so close as not to give its Particles free passage through its
Pores. This understood, I see not, first, what the Author's three Arguments
brought to prove his Objection signify, for there are no more Corpuscles in
the room before the Gunpowder is fired than after, nor is there any more
matter or substance before the sides of the room by yielding give place for the
external fluid Bodies to succeed, and the only change is this, that the Globuli
secundi Elementi (as he calls them) are expelled out of the room, and the
Materia primi Elementi succeeds in the place of it. Nor do I see, secondly,
what great reason he had for his grand Conclusion, Haeo abunde demonstrant,
rarefactionem per hujusmodi corpuscula nullatenus posse explicari.

Having thus examined the Author's first Arguments, that Rarefaction cannot be
made out by any other way than his; we shall find his other, which he brings to
establish his own Hypothesis, much of the same kind. As, First, that his way of
Rarefaction implies no Contradiction: For if the affirming a body to be really
and totally in this place, and at the same time to be really and wholly in
another, that is, to be in this place, and not to be in this place, be not a
Contradiction, I know not what is. Next, that some learned Schoolmen have
thought so; to which I answer, more learned men have thought otherwise. And,
lastly, that there are very plain Examples of the like nature to be found in
other things; of which he only brings one, viz. that of the Rota Aristotelica,
which upon examination we shall find to make as little to the purpose as any of
the other.

An Explication of the Rota Aristotelica.
THe great Problem of the Rota Aristotelica, by his explication of which he
pretends not only to solve all the difficulties concerning Local motion, quae
Philosophorum ingenia bactenus valde exercuerunt, but to give an instance for
the confirmation of his unintelligible Hypothesis of Rarefaction, wherein there
is extensio seu correspondentia ejusdem rei ad locum nunc majorem, nunc
minorem; we may upon examination find to be either a Paralogism, or else
nothing but what those Philosophers said whom he accounts gravel'd with it. Of
this Subject he begins in his 25th Chapter, where after he has set down a
description of it, he makes an instance in a Cart-wheel; Rem ante oculos ponit
rota alicujus currus, ejusque umbo seu lignum illudcrassum and rotundum cui
infiguntur radii; siquidem dum progrediente curru ipsa rota circumduct a
describit in subject a terra orbitam sibi aequalem, umbo ille describit in
subjecto aere orbitam (I suppose both here and before he means Lineam) se multo
longiorem, utpote aequalem orbitae totius rotae, licet ipse non nist semel
quoque fuerit circumvolutus. (Asfor what he says, that the Nave must be
supposed to pass through the Air, and not to touch a solid Plain, I do not yet
understand the force of his Reason, nor why he fets it down, making nothing to
his present purpose, unless it were because he did not well understand the
thing) In which, says he, the great difficulty is to explain how the Nave
should be so turned about its Axis, ut parts suas successive applicet lineae
duplo plures parts habenti, idque motu perpetuo ac uniformi ne vel ad oculum
instar interrupto. Which how true, and what great occasion he had to wonder at
the solution of that Problem by the Example of a man standing still and another
walking, we shall find by and by, when we come to explain the Problem: But
first I shall examine his Hypothesis and Explication. And First, he supposes
Time to consist of a determinate number of Indivisibles, (that is, such as have
neither prius nor posterius included in them) which he calls Instants. And next
he supposes the praesentiam localem seu ubicationem cujuslibet partis
indivisibilis and virtualiter extensae esse quoque indivisibilem and
virtualiter extensam: Which supposition so strangely expressed is no more than
this, that the extension or space of his Indivisibles is also indivisible. But
as for his Virtual Extension, I confess I understand as little what it is as I
verily believe he did; and therefore I will proceed to his following
supposition. His Third therefore is, That by how much more rare a body is, by
so much the more are its Indivisibles virtually extended. Hence his Fourth is,
That though these Indivisibles be really indisivible, yet they are virtually in
quotvis parts divisibiles. Whence he deduces his Fifth Principle, That since
these Indivisibles are really indivisible and virtually extended, they must
necessarily be moved after the same manner that other indivisible and
virtually-extended things are. His Instances are in the motions of an Angel and
an indivisible piece of wood, which, he says, are both of the same kind. As for
that of Angels, having no immediate Revelation, and a Spirit and its actions
not falling under sense, and not having any third way by which to be informed,
I shall leave him there to enjoy his fancies. But as for that of his piece of
wood, we shall find it sufficiently full of absurdities and contradictions. And
first, he calls it indivisible, but why I know not; for it is neither really nor
yet mentally so: not mentally so by his fourth Principle, where he says
that'tis virtualiter in quotvis parts divisibiles, by which word virtualiter
he means the same thing with mentaliter, or nothing. Nor, secondly, is it
really so: for then (according to the main business of his Book, as may be
gathered from the first words of his Title Page. Tractatus de Corporum
Inseparabilitate) it would be impossible that any thing in the world should be
divisible; for he making an inseparable continuity, and that Bodies will rather
be (I cannot tell how) stretched beyond their own dimension in infinitum, than
part from one another; a body may as soon pass through the dimensions of any
one Indivisible, as pass between two. Next, he grants in the strange stretching
or rarefaction of these Indivisibles a temporary motion of the condensed
Dimension; whence there will follow that there must be distinct places or
Ubi's, it must be terminus a quo, terminus ad quem, and medium. And next, it
were impossible to divide a line into two parts, supposing it consisted of an
unequal number of Indivisibles; as if 101 Indivisibles of exceedingly-rarefi'd
Air should be extended in length an Inch, it were impossible to divide that
Inch into two equal parts. I might run over many more, but it would be too
tedious to be here recited. As for his indivisible parts of Time, those also
must necessarily be in quotvis parts divisibiles; for else the same body or
Indivisible must necessarily be in diverse places at the same instant. But
because he can swallow, nay confidently affirm, this and many other such like
contradictions and absurdities, I am not willing to mention them; and I think
it would have made more for the Author's reputation if he had done so too. As
for his last Chapter, where he applies these Principles to the Explication of
the Rota Aristotelica, I have not here time to set down all the absurdities
that any one that has but a smattering in the Mathematics may observe: as,
sometimes half an indivisible part of a Circumference may touch an indivisible
of a Line; sometimes one may touch half, a quarter, a hundredth part, a whole
one, two, ten, a hundred, etc. at the same instant; nay, an indivisible of a
Circle may be all of it in a thousand places together, and the like. And this
he brings as a great Argument to establish his Hypothesis of Rarefaction,
pretending it to comprise many AEnigma's and very great difficulties; whereas
the thing is very plain and easy, and contains no such obscurities. For if,
for example, we suppose a Wheel ABCD to be moved in a direct motion from AIC to
KLM, every point of it retaining the same position to that line that they had
at the beginning of their motion, each of the points AEIGC will on a Plain, or
in the Medium it pervades, pass through or describe a line equal to the line
IL, and not only all the points lying in the line AIC, but all and every point
of the whole Area of the Circle; this must necessarily happen if the Diameter
AIC be moved parallel to it self: But if whilst it be thus moved with an equal
progression, it be likewise moved with an equal circulation, the case will be
altered. For then, first, each point will by this compound motion describe on
the Plain or Medium either a perfect Cyclorid, as when the Wheel makes one
perfect revolution, whilst the whole is progressively moved from I to L; or
some Piece, as when the Wheel has not perfected its revolution; or more than a
whole one, as when the Circle has made more than one whole revolution whilst it
is moved in its determinate length. I shall here only consider the first, as
pertaining more especially to my present purpose, and in regard the two later
on occasion may be easily explicated by it. Next, each point of this Circle
acquires from its compounded motion various degrees of Celerity as to its
progression, according to its various position to a point which is always found
in some part of the line drawn through the Center of the circular motion
perpendicular to the progressive. And it is found thus, as the Circumference to
the Radius, so is the line of the progressive motion to the distance of the
point from the Center. And this happens because the line of Progression is
equal to the Circle described on that distance as Radius; each point therefore
of this smaller Circle, when it comes to touch the Perpendicular, must, as to
its progressive motion, stand still: This point therefore will be the Center of
this compounded motion. Now because for the explication of the Rota
Aristotelica we need not consider any other than those Points which are
transient through or cross the Perpendicular line, we shall only examine them.
Let then in our Example A be the Center or immovable point, the Circumference
therefore ABCD will be equal to IL or AK by our Hypothesis. Now because the
point I, which is the Center of the Rotation, has only one motion, viz. that of
Lation, its celerity will be equal to the single celerity of the Lation; we
will therefore put it to have one degree, C, because it is moved with two
motions, both tending the same way, and each equal to the velocity of I, must
needs have two degrees of velocity. The point F, because moved with two
motions, both tending the same way, the one ( viz. its Lation) being equal to
that of I, and the other (because it is but half as far distant from the Center
of Rotation as C, and therefore is moved but with half the celerity of C, which
was equal to that of I) but half as quick, we will put to have one degree and
an half. By the like method we might find the velocity of all the points in the
Perpendicular, viz. such as we have there marked some of them; but it would be
too tedious, we needing not to consider more than the two points A and E. The
point at E being moved forward by its progression with the same velocity that
I, but by its rotation (which is but half as swift as that of the Circle ABCD,
that is double the Circle EFGH) being moved the contrary way or backwards with
half the velocity, loses half of its progression forwards. The point in A
being by its progression moved forwards equally swift with I, and by its
rotation (the Circle ABCD being equal to the line IL) being carried backwards
with equal velocity, must necessarily stand still as to its progression. Now
having shown that the point A (being by reason of its two equal opposite
motions at rest) does only touch a point of the line AK, and is not at all
moved on it; and that the point E (being carried forward twice as fast by its
progression as it is carried backward by its rotation, and thereby moved half
as fast as the point I) does not only touch the line EK, but whilst it touches
it is moved on it with a progressive motion half as swift as that of I: It will
necessarily follow, that each point situate in E must necessarily describe a
small line, which is a part of the whole EC. Now both the contact of the
former, and the contact and progression of the later, being performed by an
infinite succession of points in the space of an infinite succession of
Instants; I see not any one difficulty of this Problem but may satisfactorily
be given an account of by it, without having recourse to the Hypothesis of the
determinate number of indivisibles of space and time, which at best will only
come to this, that In such a determinate moment or minute space of time, (which
consists of an infinite consecution of Instants, and has prius and posterius in
it; though yet he will call it an Instant, and have it to have the same
proprieties with an Instant used in the common Philosophical sense) such a
determinate minute Corpuscle (which, though it have extension in length,
breadth and thickness, yet will he not admit it to be divisible or have parts,
no not though, according to his Hypothesis, the indivisible of one body may be
rarefied to be as big in bulk as a million of the indivisibles of another, but
will have it to be called and to be a real indivisible) will successively pass
over such a determinate space or length (which yet he will not admit to be
divisible, though according to his Principles it may equalize the length of
millions of his other Indivisibles, nor admit a successive motion, but
instantaneous, though that does necessarily put a body into two, three, ten, a
hundred, etc. places at once; but will have these also to be indivisible.)
Haste makes me pass over the absurdities about the contact of a Circle and a
Line, and to comprise in short all that great Explication he has given of this
and other intricate (as he calls them) Problems, which is this, That the reason
of the celerity of the motion of some one of these indivisibles above another
is, that it passes through a greater part of an Indivisible in the same instant
than the slower; that is in plain sense no more than this, One body is swifter
than another because it is moved faster. From whence he draws several
Corollaries, as that Hence may be given a reason why an Eagle is swifter than a
Tortoise, viz. because it moves saster. I should have solved several Objections
which may be brought against the divisibility of Quantity in infinitum; but
that as all the Scholastic Writers are full of them, so it is a Subject which
we are least able to dispute of having very little information of the nature of
Infinity from the Senses.

FINIS.
The Citations Englished.
CHap. 2. Page 3. Cum tota vis, etc. Being the whole power of the Spring of the
Air depends upon the AEquilibrium of its weight with twenty nine Inches and an
half of Quicksilver, so that this Spring does neither more nor less in a shut
place, than is done by that AEquilibrium in an open place: It is manifest,
seeing we have showed the AEquilibrium to be plainly fictitious and imaginary,
that the Spring ascribed to the Air is so likewise.

P. 4. Nam si Tubus, etc. For if a Tube but twenty Inches long (such as we used
in our first Argument) be not quite filled with Quicksilver, as before, but a
little space be left betwixt the Mercury and the Finger on the top of the Tube,
in which Air only may abide: We shall find that the Finger below being removed,
the Finger on the top will not only be drawn downwards, as before, but the
Quicksilver shall descend also, and that notably, viz. as much as so small a
parcel of Air can be extended by such a descending weight. So that if instead
of Air, Water or any other Liquor which is not so easily extended be put in its
place, there will be no descent at all.

Hence, I say, against this Opinion an Argument is framed: For if the external
Air cannot keep up those twenty Inches of Quicksilver from descending, as we
have proved; how shall it keep up twenty nine Inches and an half? Assuredly
these can no way be reconciled.

Ibid. Dices forte, etc. You will perchance say, that the Quicksilver therefore
does in the alleged case descend, because it is thrust down by that parcel of
Air which dilates its self by its own Spring.

Ibid. Sic deberet, etc. So should the Finger be rather thrust from the top of
the Tube, than thereby fastened to it; because this Dilatation must be made as
well upwards as downwards.

P. 6. Concipi, etc. It cannot be conceived how that Air should dilate it self,
or thrust down the Mercury, unless by taking up a greater place; which thing
these Authors are much against, asserting that Rarefaction can be made no
otherways than by Corpuscles or Vacuities.

Chap. 3. p. 7. Si, etc. If you take a Tube open at both ends of a good length,
suppose forty Inches long, and fill it with Mercury, and place your Finger on
the top as before, taking away your lower Finger you will find the Mercury to
descend even to its wonted station, and your Finger on the top to be strongly
drawn within the Tube, and to stick close unto it. Whence again it is evidently
concluded that the Mercury placed in its own station is not there upheld by the
external Air, but suspended by a certain internal Cord, whose upper end being
fastened to the Finger draws and fastens it after this manner into the Tube.

Chap. 4. p. 8. Sumatur, etc. Take a Tube shorter than twenty nine Inches and
an half, for instance of twenty Digits, not shut, as hitherto, at one end, but
with both ends open: let this Tube, its Orifice being immersed in restagnant
Mercury, and one Finger being placed underneath, that the Mercury to be poured
in run not through, be filled with Mercury; and then another Finger be applied
to its Orifice, to close it well: Which being done, if you draw away your lower
Finger, the upper will be found to be strongly drawn and sucked into the Tube,
and so stiffly to adhere to it, (or rather to the Quicksilver, as I shall
hereafter show) that it will elevate the Tube it self with all the Quicksilver,
and make it continue to hang pendulous in the Vessel.

From which Experiment this Opinion is most clearly refuted: For, seeing
according to it the Quicksilver in such a Tube but twenty Inches long must be
thrust upwards by the preponderating Air; it will never by it be explained how
this Finger is so drawn downwards, and made so strongly to stick to the Tube.
For it cannot by the Air thrusting upwards be thus drawn downwards.

p. 10, 11. Quod vel, etc. Which is thence confirmed, Because if that
preponderating Air succeeds, as is asserted, in the place of the lower Finger
which was withdrawn, that is, if it uphold the Quicksilver after the same
manner which it was upheld by the lower Finger applied under it; it is
manifest, according to this Opinion, that the Finger on the top ought not to be
more drawn downwards after the lower Finger is removed than before. Seeing then
that Experience teaches the contrary, it is manifest that Opinion must be
false.

Chap. 5. p. 11, 12. Quarto, etc. In the fourth place it is impugn'd, Because
thence it would follow that Quicksilver through a like Tube might be sucked
with the same easiness out of a Vessel that Water is sucked out of the same.
Which notwithstanding is contrary to Experience, by which we are taught that
Water is easily drawn into the mouth of him that sucks, whereas Quicksilver
cannot be drawn thither by his utmost endeavor, nay, scarce unto the middle of
the Tube.

The sequel I thus manifest: Because seeing, according to this Opinion, that
the Liquor underneath, whether it be Water or Mercury, may so ascend, no more
is required but that the Air shut in the Tube may be drawn upwards by sucking;
which being drawn up, the Liquor underneath will immediately ascend, being
thrust thither by the external Air now preponderating, (as Pecquet declares in
his Anatomical Discourse, p. 63.) It is manifest that the Mercury may be sucked
out with the same easiness that Water is sucked out with. Which being so
evidently against Experience, the Opinion from whence it is deduced must needs
be false.

p. 13. Neque hoc, etc. And not only this, but over and above, if a Glass
Diabetes or Syringe be made of a sufficient length, and after that the Sucker
is thrust into the utmost Orifice, it be placed according to use in the Mercury
underneath; he finds that as soon as the Sucker is drawn out, the Mercury
follows, and ascends to the same height of two Feet and three Inches and an
half. And when afterward, although no greater force be added, the Sucker is
drawn higher, he finds that the Mercury stands, and follows no further, and so
that space is made empty which remains between the Mercury and the Sucker.

p. 15. Maneat igitur, etc. Be it therefore confirmed by so many Arguments, of
which every one is sufficient in it self, that Quicksilver (the Experiment
being made in an open place) is not upheld from falling by the weight of the
external Air.

Cap. 6. Ibid. Argentum, etc. That Quicksilver in a close place is not upheld
from falling by the Elater or Spring of the Air.

Ibid. Cum tota, etc. Seeing the whole power of this Spring depends upon the
already-confuted AEquilibrium of the Air with 29 Inches and an half of
Quicksilver, so that this Spring does neither more nor less in a close place
than is done by that AEquilibrium in an open place; it is manifest, seeing this
AEquilibrium is already shown to be plainly fictitious and imaginary, that the
Spring of the Air is so likewise.

p. 16. Nec plus, etc. And that this Spring does neither more nor less in a
close place, than is done by that AEquilibrium in an open place.

Ibid. Add, etc. Add, that seeing the Experiments brought in the Chapter above
of the adhesion of the Finger, etc. are alike in a close and an open place: it
is necessary and certain that the same Arguments made against the AEquilibrium
have force against the Spring of the Air.

p. 17. Et profecto, etc. And really if these Authors would consider how great
a difficulty there is in explaining this Spring of the Air, unless the same Air
by it self alone may take up a greater place, I believe they would readily
alter their Opinion.

Part 2. Chap. 1. p. 19. Constet hoc, etc. This appears from what has been
already spoken in the preceding Chapter: For the Quicksilver descending cannot
so draw the Finger downwards, and fasten it unto the Tube, unless it be hung
upon the Finger by such a Cord, which by its weight it vehemently stretches, as
is manifest by it self.

Ibid. Respondeo, etc. I answer, That this comes to pass that there may be no
Vaculty, seeing there is nothing else there that can succeed into the place of
the descending Quicksilver.

Ibid. And hence is confirmed that common Axiom used in the Schools for so many
Ages past, that Nature does abhor a Vacuum.

Ibid. Nam licet, etc. For though the immediate cause why Water (for instance)
does not descend from a Gardener's Watering-pot (for that Example they use)
stopped on the top, is not the fear of a Vacuum, but the reason now mentioned,
namely, That there is not weight sufficient to loose that conjuncture by which
the Water does adhere to the top of the closed Water-pot: Nevertheless in the
end we must of necessity come to that Cause.

p. 20. Quae quidem, etc. Which traction and adhesion when it cannot proceed
but from some real Body placed between the Finger and the Mercury, it is
manifest that that space is not empty, but filled with some true substance.

Ibid. Eo quod, ande. Because no visual species's could proceed either from it,
or through it, unto the eye.

Ibid. Vera, etc. To be filled with any true substance.

p. 24. Huc etiam, etc. And to this purpose make those considerable Vibrations
with which Quicksilver is stirred in its descent: For the same thing happens
here that befalls other Pendula in their fall from on high.

p. 27. Argenium dum, etc. Quicksilver while it fills the whole Tube does not
only touch its top, (as you would think at the first sight) but does firmly
stick unto it also; as it is manifest from the Experiment mentioned in the
first Argument of the third Chapter, concerning the Tube open at both ends.

Ibid. Licet illud, etc. Though that Orifice of the Tube be anointed with Oil,
or any other matter that will hinder adhesion, nevertheless the Finger will no
less firmly stick than before.

p. 28. Parts, etc. That the parts of Air it self so shut up in the Tube
(which otherwise are so easily severed) are now so firmly glued to one another,
that they make (as we see) a strong Chain, by which not only Water but even
weighty Quicksilver is drawn on high.

Ibid. Rarefactionem, etc. That the Rarefaction or Extension of a Body so as to
make it take up more space is not only made by Heat, but by distension or a
certain disjoyning power; as on the contrary Condensation is not only made by
Cold, but also by Compression, as infinite Examples bear us witness.

p. 29. Cum per, etc. Seeing by the first Note it is manifest that the
Quicksilver does so stick to the top of the Tube, and by the second Note the
Rarefaction is made only by the mere distension of the body; it so comes to
pass that the descending Quicksilver leaves its external or upper superficies
fixed unto the top of the Tube, and by its weight does so stretch and extenuate
it, until it becomes easier to leave another superficies in like manner, than
to extend that any further. It leaves therefore a second, and does by its
descent extend that a little further, until it becomes easier to separate a
third than to extend that any further: And so forwards, until at length it has
no power to separate or extend any more superficies, namely, until it comes
unto the height of 29 Inches and an half; where it acquiesces, as we have
declared in the first Chapter.

p. 30. These Surfaces seem to be separated from the Quicksilver, and to be
extended into a most slender string by the weight that falls down, after the
same manner that in a lighted Candle surfaces of like sort are separated from
the Wax or Tallow underneath by the heat above, and are extenuated into a most
subtle flame. In which it is worth observation, that as that flame does
doubtless take up more than a thousand times a greater space than the part of
the Wax of which the flame was made took up: So is it here to be thought, that
that string does take up a space more than a thousand times as big as that
which the small particle of Mercury, from whence it arose, did before take up.
As also it doubtless happens when such a particle by a fire underneath is
turned into a vapor.

p. 36. Corpore, etc. A body taking up a place, for instance, twice as big as
it self; it is of necessity that every part of it must likewise take up a place
twice as big as it self.

p. 41. Juxta, etc. According to the more probable Opinion such a virtual
extension of a corporeal Being is not to be granted, as being only proper to
such as are Spiritual.

Ibid. Praestat, etc. It is better to continue in the common Opinion, which
has been hitherto received in the Schools: which although it does not clearly
resolve all difficulties, yet it does not openly lie under them.

Ibid. Necessario, etc. We must needs confess that one and the same part must
be in two places adequately. For seeing it is indivisible, and takes up a
greater place than before, it must of necessity be all in every point of that
place, or that be virtually extended through all that space.

p. 43. Cumtempus, etc. Seeing Time is a Being esfentially successive, so that
neither by divine power can two of its parts exist together.

p. 44. Respondeo, etc. I answer, that all these things happen because the Gun
powder so kindled and turned into flame takes up a much greater space than
before. Whence it comes to pass that seeing the Chamber was before quite full,
by this means the walls are broken that there may be no penetration of bodies.

p. 48. Partim, etc. Sometimes within the Chapel, sometimes in the open Air;
the wind sometimes blowing, and sometimes being still.

p. 52. Sed dici, etc. But it may be said, that on the top of the Mountain it
therefore descended after that manner, because the Air was more cold there, or
of some other temperature, such as might cause this descent.

p. 68. Hoc esse, etc. That this is the difference between Pression and
Suction, that Suction makes such an adhesion, and Pression does not.

p. 69. Hoc quoque etc. And even this Experiment does very well agree with our
Principles: For seeing by this depression of the Sucker, the Air shut up in the
cavity of the Cylinder is separated from the Cylinder, and does descend
together with the Sucket, (as we have, Chap. 13. observed of Water descending
together with Quicksilver) it comes to pass that in that whole depression new
surfaces are taken from that descending Air, and stretched out, as we have
there explained it in the case of descending water. Since therefore such
surfaces are as easily slipped of and extended in the end of the depression as in
the beginning; it is no wonder that there is found the same difficulty of
depressing it at both times.

Ibid. Eo magis, etc. That the Air is so much the more extended and rarefied,
by how much the more is thence exhausted, and so does acquire a greater force
of contracting it self.

p. 71. At profecto, etc. But truly it seems not credible that this most soft
Air should so vehemently compress a Glass on all sides (especially one of that
thickness there mentioned) as to break it.

p. 72. Verius, etc. It is therefore more truly answered, that the Glass is
therefore so broken, because by that exsuction its sides are more vehemently
drawn inwards than (by reason of the figure unfit for resistency) they were
able to resist. For seeing the included Air does most firmly stick to the sides
of the Glass, to draw out the Air will be nothing elst but to endeavor to bend
the fides of the Glass inwards.

Ibid. Sed profecto, etc. But truly this seems too far removed from Truth, and
may be by this alone sufficiently refuted. Because if the pressure of the Air
which descends by that Tube into the Vial be so great as to break the Vial it
self, it ought certainly, before the breaking of the Vial, very much to move
the water in which the Tube is immersed, and to excite bubbles in it, etc. as
appears, if any one blowing through that Tube does make but an ordinary
pressure upon the water. But it is sure that the water before the Vial is
broken does not move at all: as the Experimenter will find.

p. 73. Licet, etc. Though the Tube had been shut at the top, the Vial had
doubtless been broken after the same manner.

p. 74. Sed rectius, etc. But it is more rightly thence inferred that that
Cylinder did nothing there before.

p. 75. Dice, etc. I say then that the Quicksilver does by that exhaustion so
descend in the Tube, because it is drawn downwards by the Air incumbent upon
the restagnant Quicksilver. For that incumbent Air, being by its exhaustion
greatly rarefied and extended, vehemently contracts its self, and by this
contraction does endeavor to lift the restagnant Mercury out of its Vessel;
whence it comes to pass that (the restagnant Mercury now less gravitating upon
the bottom of its Vessel) the Quicksilver in the Tube must descend, as is
manifest in it self: So that it is no wonder that, the external Air afterward
entering, the Quicksilver again ascends, seeing by that ingress the force which
elevates the restagnant Quicksilver is weakened.

Ibid. Atque hinc, etc. And hence is a reason also given of another thing which
is there noted, namely, that by the violent intrusion of the external Air into
the Receiver the Quicksilver ascended considerably above 29 Inches and an half.
For as by the extraction of the Air the Quicksilver is deprest below its
station, so by the intrusion of new Air it is elevated above it.

p. 77. Nam si, etc. For if it were kept up by that, it ought rather to ascend
than descend in colder weather, because the Air then would be more dense and
heavy. Therefore the Quicksilver is not upheld by the AEquilibrium of Air, as
is asserted.

p. 78. Hinc fit, etc. Hence it comes to pass, that this Funicle being
contracted by the cold, the water does ascend in cold weather; but does descend
in hot, because by heat the Funicle is dilated.

Ibid. Ego certe, etc. I truly do not doubt but there are some such occult
causes, by which the slender Funicle that suspends (as we mentioned in the 10.
Chapter) the Quicksilver in the Tube is sometimes lengthned, sometimes
shortened, and so does sometimes let down, and sometimes lift up the Quicksilver.

p. 79. In decimo nono, etc. In the 19. he shows that water does in the same
manner descend upon the exhausting the Receiver, as he had shown Quicksilver in
the foregoing Chapter to descend. Of both which seeing there is the same cause,
there is no reason we should any longer insist on this.

p. 80. Nam fi, etc. For if it were done so, these bubbles ought not so to have
ascended from the bottom of the Vessel, (as it is asserted they did, both in
this and the following Experiments that treat of bubbles) but from the upper
part of the water, where they are less comprest; as it is apparently manifest.

p. 81. Respondeo, etc. I answer that the water, upon that exhaustion of the
Air, does not so ascend of its own accord, but is violently drawn or lifted
upwards by that rarefied Air contracting it self. For as water does suffer some
compression (as appears by experience) so here also it suffers some distension.
And hence it is clearly manifest why these bubbles should arise rather from the
bottom of the Vessel, than from the upper part of the water. For when that
vehement suction does endeavor to elevate the water from the bottom of the
Vial, there arises there a certain subtle matter, which being turned into
bubbles does so ascend as is mentioned in the 15. Chapter and the 4. Experiment.

p. 82. Certum esse, etc. It is certain that that Opinion is sufficiently
refuted by this single Experiment.

p. 83. Necesse, etc. It must needs be that that stone could not otherwise
descend, than by leaving behind it such a thin substance as is left by
Quicksilver or Water descending in like manner.

Ibid. Vnde, etc. Whence I plainly conceive that if two perfectlypolish'd
Marbles were so joined that no Air at all were left between them, they could
not be drawn asunder by all the power of Man.

Ibid. Vti etiam, etc. Which also is confirmed by the Example the Author there
brings of a Brass Plate sticking so close to a Marble Table, that by a lusty
Youth, who boasted of his own strength, it could not be lifted off by a Ring
fixed to its Center.

p. 84. Eodem, etc. Almost the same manner as we see in Cupping-glasses applied
to a Patients back, in which the flame being extinct, the rarefied Air
contracting it self does so vehemently (as we see) lift up, and draw the flesh
within the Glass.

p. 85. In his, etc. In these three there is nothing occurs to be peculiarly
here explicated, the account of which is not easy from what is already
delivered.

Ibid. Existimo, etc. But I think that Whiteness should be rather called a
reflex than an innate light, because, as the Author bears witness, it appears
not in the dark, but only in the day, or by Candlelight.

p. 86. Verum, etc. But it seems impossible that such Animals should dye so
soon only for want of a thicker Air.

p. 87. Quia per, etc. Because by the self-contraction of the rarefied Air
their breath is drawn out of their bodies.

Ibid. Atque hinc, etc. And thence also arose those vehement Convulsions, which
the Author there mentions certain small Birds to have endured before their
death.

p. 89. In mala, etc. In a bad Cause they can do no other; but who compelled
them to undertake a bad Cause?

A Summary of the Contents of the several Chapters.
PART I.
WHerein the Adversaries Objections against the Elaterists are examined.

CHAP. I.
The occasion of this Writing, page 1. Franciscus Linus his civility in writing
obliges the Author to the like, p. 2. Books concerning the Torricellian
Experiment wherewith the Author was formerly unacquainted, ibid. The
Inconvenience of Linus's Principles, ibid. The division of the ensuing Treatise
into three parts.

CHAP. II.
A repetition of the Adversary's Opinion and Arguments. His Arguments against
the Weight of the Air examined, p. 4. An Experiment of his to prove that the
external Air cannot keep up twenty Inches of Quicksilver from descending in a
Tube twenty Inches long, ibid. The Author's answer and reconciliation of the
Experiment to his Hypothesis, p. 5. and the relation of an Experiment of the
Author's, wherein only water being employed instead of Quick silver, without
other alteration of the Adversaries Experiment, it agrees well with and
confirms the Author's Hypothesis, and his Explication of the mentioned
Experiments, ibid. That Water has no Spring at all, or a very weak one, p. 6.
The second Argument examined, ib. Whether the same quantity of Air can
adequately fill a greater space, p. 7. The conceivableness of both Hypotheses
compared, ibid.

CHAP. III.
Another Argument of the Adversaries, from an Experiment wherein the Mercury
sinking draws the Finger into the Tube, examined. Q. Whether the Mercury placed
in its own station is upheld by the external Air, or suspended there by an
internal Cord? p. 7, 8.

CHAP. IV.
A repetition of Franciscus Linus his principal Experiment, wherein in a Tube
of twenty Inches long the Finger on the top is supposed to be strongly drawn
and sucked into the Tube, p. 8. The Experiment explicated without the
assistance of Suction, by the pressure of the external Air upon the outside of
the Finger, thrust, not sucked in, p. 9. Franciscus Linus his argumentation
considered, p. 10.

CHAP. V.
The Eximiners last Experiment considered, in which he argues against the
Author's Hypothesis, because Mercury is not sucked out of a Vessel through a
Tube so easily as Water is, p. 11, 12. An Experiment of Monsieur Paschall
showing, that if the upper part of a Tube could be freed from the pressure of
all internal Air, the Mercury would by the pressure of the outward Air be
carried up into the Tube as well as Water, till it had attained a height great
enough to make its weight equal to that of the Atmosphere, p. 13. Why in a more
forcible respiration the Mercurial Cylinder is raised higher than in a more
languid, p. 14. A Remark by the bie, That the contraction of the Adversaries
supposed Funiculus is not felt upon the Lungs, p. 15.

CHAP. VI.
The examination of the Adversaries 4th Chapter, p. 15. That the Spring of the
Air may have some advantage in point of force above the Weight of it, p. 16.
That it is unintelligible how the same Air can adequately fill more space at
one time than at another, p. 17.

PART II.
Wherein the Adversaries Funicular Hypothesis is examined.

CHAP. I.
Wherein what is alleged to prove the Funiculus is considered; and some
Difficulties are proposed against the Hypothesis.

The nature of this supposed Funiculus described, p. 18. That according to the
Adversaries Opinion this Funiculus is produced by Nature only to binder a
Vacuum, p. 19, 20. The Adversaries proofs that there is no Vacuum examined, p.
20, 21. That where no sensible part is un-enlightned, the place may not be full
of light, p. 21. The same true in Odours, ibid. That there may be matter enough
to transmit the impulse of Light, though betwixt the Particles of that matter
there should be store of Vacuities intercepted, p. 22. That a solid Body bath
no considerable sense of pressure from fluid bodies, p. 24. Of the causes of
the Vibrations of Quicksilver in its descent, p. 24, 25.

CHAP. II.
Wherein diverse other Difficulties are objected against the Funicular
Hypothesis. As that in Liquors of diverse weights and natures, as Water, Wine
and Quicksilver, there should be just the same weight or strength to extend
them into a Funiculus, p. 27. That whereas the Weight and Spring of the Air is
inferred from unquestioned Experiments, the account of that Hypothesis is
strange and unsatisfactory. As that the Quicksilver does not only touch the
top of the Glass, but stick to it; That Nature wreaths a little rarefied Air
into a strong rope even able to draw up Quicksilver, p. 27, 28. That
Rarefaction is performed by a certain unknown force, or vis divulsiva, ibid.
That thin Surfaces are left successively one after another, that these Surfaces
are contrived into strings, that may be stretched without being made more
slender, etc. p. 29. The illustration of the manner how his Funiculus is made,
from the rarefaction of Wax or Tallow in a lighted Candle, is considered, p.
30. and showed not to be apposite, ibid. Diverse other difficulties and
improbabilities manifested in the Funicular Hypothesis, p. 31. Of the inward
Spring necessary to the contraction of his Funiculus, p. 31, 32. An Argument
from a Pendulum's moving freely in an exhausted Receiver, that the medium it
moves in does not consist of innumerable exceedingly-stretch'd strings, p. 35.

CHAP. III.
The Aristotelean Rarefaction proposed by the Adversary examined. What
Rarefaction and Condensation is, p. 34. Three ways of explicating how
Rarefaction is made, p. 34, 35. Absurdities in resolving the Magdeburg
Experiment by the Aristotelean way of Rarefaction, p. 36. The inconveniences of
the several Hypotheses compared, p. 37. The difficulties in the Adversaries
explaining Rarefaction by Bodies infinitely divisible, ibid. The difficulties
of explaining it by supposing Bodies made up of parts indivisible, p. 39, 40.
The difficulties wherewith his Condensation is encumbered, as that it infers
Penetration of Dimensions, etc. p. 41.

CHAP. IV.
A Consideration pertinent to the present Controversy, of what happens in
trying the Torricellian and other Experiments at the top and feet of Hills.
That the Funicular Hypothesis is but an Inversion of the Elastical, one
supposing a Spring inwards, the other outward; one performing its effects by
Pulsion, the other by Traction, p. 46. That these trials on the tops and feet
of Hills determine the case for the Author's Hypothesis, p. 47. The truth of
the Observation of Monsieur Paschall confirmed, p. 48. and the several trials
that have been made of it related, ibid. A trial of the Author's from the Leads
of the Abbey-Church at Westminster, p. 50, 51, 52. That the subsidence of the
Mercury at the top of a Hill proceeds from the lightness of the Atmospherical
Cylinder there, p. 53. The relation of an Experiment lately made at Hallifax
Hill in confirmation of the former, p. 54.

CHAP. V.
Two new Experiments touching the measure of the force of the Spring of the Air
compressed and dilated. That it is capable of doing far more than the necessity
of the Author's Hypothesis requires, p. 55. The first Experiment, of
compressing Air by pouring Mercury into a crooked Tube, related, ibid. Wherein
the same Air being brought to a degree of density twice as great, obtains a
Spring twice as strong as before, p. 57. A Table of the Condensation of the Air
according to this Experiment, p. 58. Particular Circumstances observed in the
making the Experiment, ibid. How far the Spring of the Air may be increased, p.
60. Of the decrement of the force of dilated Air, p. 61. A Table of the
Rarefaction of the Air, p. 62. Particular Circumstances in making the
Experiment whence this Table was drawn, p. 63, etc. That the free Air here
below appears to be near as strongly comprest by the weight of the incumbent
Air as it would be by the weight of a Mercurial Cylinder of 28 or 30 Inches, p.
65.

PART III.
Wherein what is objected against Mr. Boyle's Explications of particular
Experiments is answered.

The entrance into this Part of the Discourse, with an advertisement how far
only it will be requisite to examine the Adversaries assertions and
explications, the Hypothesis on both sides being before considered, p. 67.

A defense of the first and second Experiments, concerning the intrusion of the
Finger into the Orifice of the Valve of the evacuated Receiver, p. 68.

A defense of the third Experiment, why the Sucker being drawn down there is no
greater difficulty in the end than in the beginning of the depression, ibid.

Of the fourth Experiment, touching the swelling of a Bladder upon the
exhaustion of the ambient Air, and proportionably to that exhaustion, p. 70,
71. The Author's and the Funicular Hypothesis in the explication of this
Phenomenon compared, ibid.

Of the fifth Experiment, ibid.

Of the eighth Experiment, about the breaking of a Glass-Receiver which was not
globular upon the exhaustion of the inward Air, p. 71. Whether it were more
likely to be broken by the pressure of the Atmosphere without, or a contraction
of a string of Air witbin, p. 72.

Of the ninth Experiment, ibid. Whether the breaking of the Vial outward in
the exhausted Receiver, was caused by the pressure of the Atmosphere through
the Tube which was open to the ambient Air, p. 73.

Of the 17. Experiment, p. 74, 75, 76. The Torricellian Experiment being made
within the Receiver, whether the descent and ascent of the Mercury in the Tube,
under and above its wonted station, be caused by the debilitated and
strengthened Spring of the Air, ibid.

Of the 18. Experiment, p. 77, 78. Whether the Authors or the Funicular
Hypothesis assign the more probable cause why a Cylinder of Mercury did in
Winter rise and fall in the Tube, sometimes as Water in a weather-glass
according to the laws of Heat and Cold, and sometimes contrary thereunto, ibid.

Of the 19. Experiment, p. 79.

Of the 20. Experiment, p. 79, 80. Some mistakes in the Adversary of the
Author's meaning about the Spring of the Water, and the places whence the
bubbles arose, ibid. The Hypotheses compared, ibid.

Of the 31. Experiment, p. 81, 82, 83. Of the cause why the Marbles fell not
asunder in the exhausted Receiver, though a weight of four Ounces were hung at
the lower stone, ibid. Whether the account of the Author or Adversary be more
satisfactory, ibid.

Of the 32. and 33. Experiments, of the re-ascent of the Sucker and its
carrying up a great weight with it upon the exhaustion of the Receiver, p. 84.
How the flesh and neighboring blood of a Patient is thrust up into a
Cupping-glass, ibid.

Of the 37. Experiment, and the cause of the appearance of light or whiteness
therein, p. 85.

Of the 40. and 41. Experiments, concerning the cause of the sudden death of
Animals in the exhausted Receiver, p. 85, 86.

Of the 42. and 43. Experiments, p. 87.

The Conclusion, p. 91, 92.

FINIS.
AN EXAMEN OF Mr. T. HOBBS his Dialogus Physicus De Natura Aeris.

As far as it concerns Mr. BOYLE's Book of New Experiments touching the Spring
of the Air, etc.

With an APPENDIX touching Mr. Hobbs's Doctrine of Fluidity and Firmness.

By the Author of those Experiments.

LONDON, Printed by M. Flesher, for Richard Davis Bookseller in Oxford, 1682.

THE PREFACE.
HAVING, soon after I had begun the following Examen of Mr. Hobbs's Dialogue,
been diverted for a good while by diverse urgent Avocations from pursuing it; I
was in the mean time informed by learned men (some of whom keep great
Correspondences with the Virtuosi abroad) that my publishing any thing against
his Objections would not be necessary, nor was much expected: Whereupon I
should perhaps have declined resuming an Employment, that to a person of my
humor could not be delightful; but that besides those Inducements mentioned
at the beginning of the following Treatise, it came into my mind that my
Adversary, not content to fall upon the Explications of my Experiments, has (by
an Attempt, for ought I know, unexampled) endeavored to disparage unobvious
Experiments themselves, and to discourage others from making them. Which if he
could by his Dialogue effect, I dare be bold to say, he would far more
prejudice Philosophy by this one Tract, than He (and that it may not seem said
to undervalue him, I shall add, or any Man else) can promote it by all his
other Writings. Wherefore, though his disparaging of Experiments would probably
have much more Authority (especially with considering men) if he had been the
Author of considerable ones, or did appear to be more than ordinarily skilled
in them: yet lest for all this his Fame and Confident way of writing might
prejudice Experimental Philosophy in the minds of those who are yet strangers
to it, I thought it not amiss, both to go on with the Discourse I had begun,
and to enlarge it beyond what I first designed; and accordingly, to the
intended Vindication of the main points of our Doctrine, The Weight and Spring
of the Air, which (if I mistake not) we have firmly established, we have added
an Examen, that otherwise we should scarce have made, of the greatest part of
the Physiological passages in Mr. Hobbs's book, most of which I thought might
be rationally questioned, and many of them clearly disproved. And in pursuance
of this, though I did not perhaps always think my self obliged to prosecute
things further than the nature of my Design required, or to forget that the
Matters in dispute were not all of an equal weight; yet the Reflections I have
employed will, I presume, be found sufficient to show both that it is easy even
for a great Wit frequently enough to mistake, and much more frequently to miss
of clearly demonstrating what he pretends in matters Physical, for want of
having sufficiently considered the Experiments he would be thought to despise;
and that Mr. Hobbs's Adversaries need not be much ashamed of the Name he is
pleased to give them of Experimentarian Philosophers. It was also suggested to
me, that the dangerous Opinions about some important, if not fundamental,
Articles of Religion I had met within his Leviathan, and some other of his
Writings, having made but too great Impressions upon diverse persons, (who,
though said to be for the most part either of greater Quality, or of greater
Wit than Learning, do yet diverse of them deserve better Principles) these
Errors being chiefly recommended by the Opinion they had of Mr. Hobbs's
demonstrative way of Philosophy; it might possibly prove some service to higher
Truths than those in Controversy between him and me, to show that in the
Physics themselves his Opinions, and even his Ratiocinations, have no such
great advantage over those of some Orthodox Christian Naturalists. But for all
this, as little as I would grudge to write a much longer than the following
Discourse to do Religion the least service; yet thinking it fit to leave
Controversies of this kind to those whom they more particularly concern, I
should scarce in the Introduction to a Dispute about the Air have at all
mentioned any thing of this nature, but that Mr. Hobbs in the Preface to his
Dialogue is pleased (though I know not to what purpose in that place) to speak
without limitation or distinction (and consequently unwarily enough at least)
of the things said in the Books of Naturalists concerning immaterial
substances, (and sure some things true, (at least That there are such Beings)
as well as some things erroneous, are there said:) though he has been by the
learned Dr. More and others publicly accused to have taught, That it is absurd
to believe that there either are or can be any. Which yet methinks he should
not do, since elsewhere -- Neque hominis Philosophi esse censeo corporum
quorundam, ut solis and stellarum, mirabiles supponere magnitudines, contra
vero mirabiles exiguitates non admittere, cum Virtutis ejusdem infinitae sit
utraque creare tam maxima quam minima. Mr. Hobbs in his Dialogue of the Air,
page 11. See also page 5. and elsewhere.
and in this very Dialogue he builds several things in his Philosophy upon the
Creation of the World, and an Infinite Power: And how a thing material can
create matter and have an Infinite Power, I confess I do not understand.

I doubt not but Critical Readers will think I might have excepted against many
more particulars in Mr. Hobbs's Book than I have Examined; and indeed about
this I dare not contend with them. For besides that I may through haste and
indisposedness to quarrel, have over-seen several things which an Eye either
severer or more attentive would have observed; I purposely past by diverse
things I did not altogether overlook; partly, because I thought it needless to
question them (having no want of other Objections) and partly, because I could
not do so in few words, and was loath to engage in needless and long-winded
Disputes: And perhaps I was too weary of my Employment to be willing to spend
many words when I could safely spare them. And though others will possibly
think it strange, that a Member of the Society he is so severe to should not
take notice of such passages as these, Nam conveniant (says he, speaking of
the Virtuosi that meet at Gresham College) Studia conferant, Experimenta
faciant quantum volunt, nisi and principiis utantur meis, nihil proficient; and
again, Nae illi quae dicerent non videntur cogitasse, sed sortitos esse; and
elsewhere, Conjicere hinc licet, quam sint boni ratiocinatores, and quae sit ab
illis expect and a Philosophia Naturalis; and (to trouble you no more) Ad
causas autem propter quas proficere ne paululum quidem potuistis nec poteritis,
accedunt etiam alia, ut odium Hobbii, quia nimium libere scripserat de
Academiis veritatem: Nam ex eo tempore irati Physici and Mathematici veritatem
ab eo venientem non recepturos se palam professi sunt: Though, as I said, some
may wonder I should silently pretermit such passages as these; yet besides what
I elsewhere say by way of Account of my so doing, I shall here tell them, that
I presume some sorts of Readers will more easily pardon me for neglecting such
Expressions, than they will Mr. Hobbs for using them. And I confess, I thought
I should find it more easy to say nothing at all to such passages, than say
any thing without saying somewhat that would offend a Person that could allow
himself to say such things. Though I ignore not that diverse Readers will much
the less relish the following Discourse, for my having, perchance not
altogether for want of knowing how to write otherwise, forborne to furnish it
with quick and smart Expressions, which are wont to be employed in Disputes, to
expose or depreciate an Adversaries Person or Cause, and which are usually not
the least things that serve to amuse such Readers, and engage their attention.
But I fear I have much less need to make Excuses for my Omissions, than for
having in the following Examen been reduced by the Nature of my Task, to say so
many things which Intelligent Readers need not be taught by me. And therefore
such shall have my consent to skip, if they please, the whole Discourse; which
though I could scarce upon such an Occasion make a very Instructive one, yet if
they will be pleased to forgive me its Barrenness, I hope hereafter to avoid
the like Temptations of writing again at the like rate.

And having said thus much as to the Reasons of my penning the following
Discourse, I must add something, though but little, touching the Manner of it;
Wherein I hope I have not much, if at all, swerved from what I proposed to my
self, namely, to give an Example of Disputing in Print against a Provoking,
though unprovoked, Adversary, without Bitterness and Incivility, and without
pursuing those things which how much more soever they belong to the Person of
an Antagonist than to his Cause, are wont to make up a great part (if not the
greatest) of Books divulged on such Occasions. But since I intend what I write
for Intelligent and Ingenious Readers, I dare expect that my forbearing to
insist on such things as I judged wholly extrinsecal to the Opinions and
Arguments I examine will be ascribed to the true Cause, That my Discourse will
not be thought to have the less of Reason for having the less of Passion; and
(especially) That my silence as to those things that are spoken to the
Disparagement of the Illustrious Company that meets at Gresham College, will be
looked upon only as an effect of my judging it fit to leave them the full
Liberty to right themselves, if they think it worth while, by some better Pen
than mine. And if Mr. Hobbs think fit to say any thing to the following
Discourse, it will not be amiss that his Reply be as inoffensive as I have
endeavored to make my Examen. For having dispatched as much as I think
requisite to say of this Controversy my self, and having other (and I hope
better) Employments for my leisure hours, if I can get any; I must leave the
further Disputes, if any shall arise, to be managed by others, who, if Mr.
Hobbs refuse to imitate my way of writing, will possibly make no seruple to
imitate his, and put him in mind of that Law of Vespasian, upon which himself
would be thought to ground that heap of strange Titles he bestows upon the two
Learned Savilian So go your ways (speaking to Doctor J. Wallis and Doctor S.
Ward) you uncivil Ecclesiastics, Inhumane Divines, Dedoctors of Morality,
unasinous Colleagues, Egregious pair of Isachar's, most wretched Vindices and
Indices Academiarum; and remember Vespasians Law, etc. Mr. Hobbs Lesson 6. page
64.
Professors, That it is unlawful to give ill Language first, but civil and
lawful to return it. I have but one thing more to add; which is, that I would
not be so far mistaken, as to be upon the Account of what I have written
against my two Adversaries, looked upon as a Person wedded to his Opinions: For
not having hitherto learned that either of their Books has yet made Proselytes,
I presume it will not be wondered at that they have not made me one. And though
the two Learned Authors I have answered, have given me no Cause to retract any
of my Opinions; yet as it is not improbable that others reasoning upon better
Principles may do what these have not done, so I am still of the same temper I
was of when I used to propose my Thoughts but as Conjectures.

AN EXAMEN Of the greatest Part of Mr. HOBBS's DIALOGUS PHYSICUS De Natura
Aeris.
CHAP. I. The Occasion and Scope of the present Treatise.
MEeting the other day with a Treatise then newly published by Mr. Hobbs, and
entitled Dialogus Physicus De Natura Aeris; The Name of the Author, the
Subject of the Book, and the Information I had a good while before received
from his Friends that he was writing against me, invited me to peruse it as a
Discourse wherein I might probably find my self concerned: nor was I deceived
in my Expectation. For having cursorily passed through it, I readily found,
that though I be not expressly named there, and though some things in the
Title Page, and some others in the Book it self, seem to make the chief Design
of it to be the Disparagement of the Society that is wont to meet at Gresham
College; yet the Arguments are for the most part levelled at some Writings of
mine, published some of them the year before, and some of them this last
Spring; As the Experiments, whose Explications he is pleased to censure, do all
along declare. I confess I was somewhat surpised to find that Mr. Hobbs, whom
if my Books have at all mentioned, it has been with respect, should fall upon a
person that had not provoked him, whilst such Mathematicians as Dr. Wallis, Dr.
Ward, Tacquet, and Moranus (Men much too famous to be despicable Adversaries)
having a good while since professedly and unchalleng'd written against him, he
has yet, the whole Discourses of some, and so great a part of the Objections
of the others, to reply to. And it somewhat added to my wonder, that a Writer
of Politics should causelessly and needlessly, for ought I can learn, fall upon
a Society, whereof, besides many other Persons of Quality and men of Parts, his
own great Patron, and my highly Honored and Learned Friend, The Earl of
Devonshire himself, is an Illustrious Member. And as for me, I shall not
scruple to confess, that I could have been well enough contented Mr. Hobbs had
spared this Dialogue, partly because I have a natural Indispos'dness to
Contention, partly because I am at present distracted by store of other
Employments both of a Public and a Private nature, (and particularly by the
publishing of three or four Books of differing Subjects, and Printed in several
places) partly because Mr. Hobbs's Objections are of such a Nature, that
perhaps my Replies, though as short as (my Design mentioned in the Preface
considered) I can conveniently make them, will amount to a longer Discourse
than most Readers will think the Objections needed; and partly too, because Mr.
Hobbs is pleased to write of diverse Worthy and Learned-Men in so depreciating,
and of himself in so differing, a way, that I fear I shall find it somewhat
uneasy to retain (under such Provocations to decline it) the Civility I am
wont, and am desirous to write with; and that I must almost despair of
dissenting without an absolute Rupture from a Person, whose way of Discoursing
is such, that though I shall not give it any Epithete, yet I confess it leaves
me but little hope that I can oppose him without angering him.

But however, because if I can (as I intend to do) so far comply with my
Inclinations and my Custom, as to wave personal and extrinsick Matters, and
restrain my self to the Examen of the Argumentative part of his Discourse; My
Reply will not need to be prolix; and because he has vouchsafed rather to
single out a young Writer, whose Books (at least of Matters Philosophical) do
but begin to appear in the World, than to defend himself against those
Illustrious Enemies, upon whom he might expect to gain much more Honor; and
because Mr. Hobbs's Name may with some Readers give his Arguments an Efficacy
which their own Nature could not confer on them; I must resolve to submit to
what he and my Concern for the Truths he rejects impose upon me. But to shorten
as much as I can a Work to Which I can allow but very little time, it will be
expedient before I descend to the Examination of Particulars, to premise three
or four Advertisements touching the Occasion and the Nature of the
Controversy, that I might not be reduced to a frequent and unwelcome
Inculcation of the same things.

CHAP. II. Of some mistakes of Mr. Hobbs touching matters of fact, and the
Author's Doctrine.
ANd first, whereas Mr. Hobbs is pleased to write as if the Explications and
Experiments to be met with in the Physico-Mechanical Treatise he censures, were
those of the whole Society at Gresham College; I must do them that Right to
declare, that this way of Proceeding is manifestly grounded upon a Mistake. I
will not affirm that the Mistake was wilsull, that Mr Hobbs might give himself
a pretense to Quarrel with them, (who have hitherto suspended the Declaring
themselves as a Society) in the controverted Points. But there are some that
think Mr. Hobbs might very easily have avoided this mistake: since the Book he
censures was published (and perhaps taken notice of by most of the Virtuosi
here) some Months before the Society was begun. And the Experiments themselves
had been long before the Book came sorth, not only seen and discoursed of by
diverse Learned Men and Illustrious Persons, but had the Honor to have our
great Monarch of the Virtuost, as well as of Great Britain, for a Spectator.
And though possibly diverse of the Learned Members of our Assembly may have no
unfavourable opinion of what I have delivered in that Book; yet the Assembly,
as such, has been so far from Adopting or Owning my Opinions as theirs, that it
has with Approbation been proposed among them, to repeat the Experiments, and
take a review of the Explications, that upon a strict Examen of the several
Opinions, and the Objections that could be brought in against them, they might
see what Judgment will be fit to be past on them. And although there be very
few Philosophers whose Parts may make their Judgment more formidable to me;
yet to comply with their Design, whatsoever the event might be, I presented
them the Engine it self, I had made use of and described in my Book; choosing
rather to undergo their Censures, than want their Instructions. By which it may
appear, upon how little ground Mr. Hobbs has thought fit to impute to the
Society those Opinions which (how Erroneous soever he is pleased to think
them,) I must own to be mine. And this Justice I the rather do It, because it is
all that I am to do in this Treatise on their Behalf, not only for the Reasons
above intimated, but because the Vindication of such an Assembly against Mr.
Hobbs deserves a better Pen than mine, though it does not need it.

Secondly, undertaking then the Defense of my own Cause, without Interessing
them in my Quarrel, I must next admonish the Reader, that whereas Mr. Hobbs
writes, as if the new Experiments were devised or at least employed, to prove a
Vacuum; he is in this likewise mistaken. For neither has the Society declared
either for or against a Vacuum, nor have I: Nay I have not only forborne to
profess my self a Vacuist, or a Plenist, but I have in a fit place of my
Epistle expressly said, that I reserved the declaring of my own Opinion
touching that Point to another Discourse (which as yet is not published.)
Wherefore Mr. Hobbs either injures or mistakes those, whom he will needs make
his Adversaries, when he represents the new Experiments as Demonstrations
alleged by professed Vacuists to disprove the Fullness of the World. And though
I shall be obliged in the following Discourse to reject Mr. Hobbs's Supposition
of a Plenum; yet I intend not thereby to declare whether or no I do absolutely
allow a Vacuum. But that which I drive at, and which alone my present Work
exacts, is to show that I may reasonably oppose the Hypothesis of a Plenum, as
it is stated by Mr. Hobbs: and consequently, unless he had better proved it, I
may very well refuse to let Him take it for demonstrated. But I intend not to
question whether or no other Plenists may not have better Arguments than his
Principles have suggested to him: nor to deny but that the Cartesians, may
without granting a Vacuum, give a more plausible Account (whether true or no)
of diverse of the Phenomenon of our Engine, if they will add, as some of them of
late have done the Spring of the Air to their Hypothesis, That the Celestial
Matter of which the Air does in great part consist, is subtle enough freely to
pass through the Pores of the closest Bodies, and even Glass it self.

As for the Assertion Non dari vacuum, though, as I said, I need not in this
place declare my self either for or against it, yet I confess I do not find
that Mr. Hobbs, though all along this Discourse he argues from this Principle
against those he thinks Vacuists, has demonstrated it. For in his Book De
Corpore (though a main part of it depend Cap. 26. Sect. 2.
upon the Plenitude of the World) He has that I remember, but one positive
Argument (indeed he thinks that unanswerable) to evince it. And that is drawn
from this Experiment: That if a Gardeners Watering-Pot be filled with Water,
the hole at the top being stopped, the Water will not flow out at any of the
holes in the bottom: But if the finger be removed to let in the Air above, it
will run out at them all; and, as soon as the finger is applied to it again,
the Water will suddenly and totallay be stayed again srom running out. The
cause whereof (subjoyns he) seems to be no other but this, that the Water
cannot by its natural endeavor to descend drive down the Air below it, because
there is no place for it to go into; unless either by thrusting away the next
contiguous Air it proceed by continual endeavor to the hole at the top, where
it may enter and succeed in the place of the Water that flows out; or else by
resisting the endeavor of the Water downwards penetrate the same, and pass up
through it.

But this Experiment, as an obvious one, and without dreaming that Mr. Hobbs
had laid such stress upon it, I have incidentally answered in what I say in two
or three passages on the thirty third Experiment of my Epistle. But after found
that it had been more fully answered (but upon Grounds some of which I do not
need) by my Learned Friend Dr. Ward, with whom I thus take Mr. Hobbs his
Argument to pieces. The Cause, according to Mr. Hobbs, of the Suspension of the
Water in the Vessel is, that the Water cannot thrust away the Air. 2. And it
cannot thrust that away unless Air succeed in its place. 3. But Air cannot
succeed in its place, unless either by getting in at the upper Orifice, or at
the Holes that perforate the bottom. By which view of the Argument it appears
that the main force of it lies in the second Proposition; but neither does he
demonstrate that (which omission might excuse us from any further Answer) nor
indeed do I think it true. For if the Watering Pot were tall enough, what
Reason is there, why the Water should not run out at the Holes of it? as
Monsieur Paschall's Experiment mentioned in my Epistle manifests; That though
in a Glass-Tube Hermetically sealed at one end, and several times as long as a
Watering-Pot, the Water will not fall down; yet it will, if the Tube exceed two
or three and thirty foot, or thereabouts. And indeed the Suspension or Descent
of the Water depends upon the Proportion betwixt the weight of the Aqueous
Pillar that tends downwards, and the Resistance or Pressure of the Air that can
come to bear against it. For as on the one side, when the height of that Pillar
is so increased, as that it can outweigh the Atmospherical Cylinder that
opposes its Descent, 'twill flow out till those two Cylinders come to an
AEquilibrium: so on the other side if instead of increasing the length of the
Cylinder of the Water, you lessen the pressure and resistance of the Air, the
Water will likewise descend, though the Pillar be very short, as I have shown
in the nineteenth Experiment; where by withdrawing some of the Air, in the
Receiver, and thereby weakening its Spring, the Water in a Tube Hermetically
sealed at one end of but about four foot long subsided about three foot, though
That the space relinquished by the Water was not full of Air, as Mr. Hobbs his
Argumentation requires it should be, may be proved by what is there added, That
by letting in the outward Air when the Water was sunk so low it was immediately
impelled up again to the higher parts of the Tube.

And indeed (as I elsewhere discourse) it seems In some Dialogues of Heat and
Flame.
to me a difficult matter for those that reject, as Mr. Hobbs justly does, that
Conceit of Natures Abhorring a Vacuum, and making it, as it were, her business
to hinder it, to prove there can be no Vacuum at all by any particular
Experiment. For if the Fullness of the World be not made necessary either by the
Nature of Body in general, or by the Design of the Author of the Universe, it
can scarce be easy to prove by a particular Experiment, that no Humane Force
or Art can contrive a way of overcoming at least for some time, and as to some
space, either the Gravity of fluid Bodies or whatever other Quality of the Air
or Water it is by which the Contiguity of the neighboring Parts of the World
is wont to be maintained. As we see the Water that will not descendeven in a
Tube of thirty foot, (and thereby has made men think it will never descend
whilst the Air is not permitted to succeed it,) may by our Engine be brought to
subside in a Tube of about a foot long. And I shall here add this out of my
(yet unpublisht) Dialogues of Flame and Heat: That whilst only particular
Experiments are brought to assert the Impossibility of a Vacuum, perhaps the
Vacuists will have the Advantage on their side. For a thousand Experiments are
not of that force to prove universally that a thing cannot be effected, as one
that shows it may be, is to prove the contrary. And the Vacuists have as well
as the Plenists store of Experiments on their side that seem to favor their
Hypothesis, according to which, were it true, I see not why they may not solve
the Objections drawn from either the ascension of Liquors upon Suction, or the
non-descension of Liquors in Watering-Pots closed at the top, or from any of
the like Experiments I have yet met with, in case the Weight and Spring of the
Air be taken in to solve the Phenomenon. And the Vacuists will have this
Advantage, that if Mr. Hobbs shall say that it it as lawful for him to assume
a Plenum as for others to assume a Vacuum; not only it may be answered, it is
also as lawful for them to assume the contrary; and he but Barely Assuming,
not Proving a Plenum, his Doctrine will still remain questionable. But I think
I could say more in favor of the Vacuists Experiments; namely, That whereas in
some Phenomenon of the Torrecellian Experiment, and in many of those of our
Engine, Mr. Hobbs proves the space deserted by the Quicksilver or the Air to
have no Vacuity, because according to his Supposition the World is full; and
not by any sensible Phenomenon that prove the Space in Question to be perfectly
full:) For no less Fullness is requisite to the truth of his Hypothesis:) The
Vacuists on the other side need not go about to prove that those Spaces are not
full by their Hypothesis. But they prove it by this, that it appears by
sensible Phenomenon, that the Quicksilver deserts the upper part of the Tube;
and that much Air is pumped out of our Receiver. (The first of which is evident
to the Eye; and so is the other too, when the Pump is kept under Water.) But it
does not appear by the like Phenomenon, that the Air (as Mr. Hobbs would have
it in is Elements) does Succeed to fill, I say, perfectly to fill the deserted
space; which also they will confirm from hence, that in the Torrecellian
Experiment by inclining the Tube the relinquished space may be again readily
filled with Mercury; and if our exhausted Receiver be plunged under Water, that
Liquor, when access is given it to the Cavity, violently rushes into it, and
almost fills it up.

From all which it seems probably deducible, That it is a very hard thing, by.
Mr Hobbs's way of managing the Controversy, to prove that there can be no
Vacuum, But as for the Cartesian's more subtle and plausible way of asserting
a Plenum, it concerns me not here to Dispute against it, or Declare for it.

I will add this, and but this, on the occasion of Mr. Hobbs's Building a great
part of his Philosophy upon no surer a ground, That we may hence learn how
little Reason there is to blame me as he is pleased to do, for making elaborate
Experiments; and that though (as I have elsewhere purposely and amply
discoursed) obvious Experiments are by no means to be despised; yet it is not
safe in all Cases to content ones self with such: Especially when there is
Reason to suspect that the Phenomenon they exhibit may proceed from more
Causes than one, and to expect that a more Artificial Trial may determine which
of them is the true.

Thirdly, whereas Mr. Hobbs is pleased to find much sault with the Society, and
me, for not assigning the Case of Springs in general; that Omission seeming to
him very unworthy of Philosophers: I answer, that the Society having hitherto,
for weighty Reasons, forborne to determine the particular Causes of Things,
there was no Reason they should alter their Method, for Experiments that were
not made or published by Them or by their Order And as for me, the Title of my
Book promises some Experiments touching the Spring of the Air and its Effects,
not Speculations of the Causes of Springs in general. My avowed Intention was
heartily to communicate with the Curious some Experiments which I thought their
Novelty would render acceptable to them, wherein I have the good luck not to
have been mistaken; nor can I be justly censured for not performing what I did
not undertake, nor was obliged to. And perhaps Mr. Hobbs would more prejudice
the Commonwealth of Learning by his severity, than he has yet Advantaged it by
any other way, if he could obtain, that none should publish an Experiment or
Observation that cannot by deduction from the First and Catholic Principles of
Philosophy assign the true Cause of it. But when I take upon me to write, as
Mr. Hobbs has done, Elements of Philosophy, then perhaps I shall be able to
give an Account of Springs, not much more unsatisfactory than others think his.
For though he refer us to his Explication given of the Motion of Restitution
in his Book De Corpore; yet in the 22 Chapter and 30. Section, which
professedly contains his Theory of it, after having premised, (what rightly
interpreted may be true enough,) that the Cause of the Restitution proceeds not
from the taking away the force by which they were compressed or extended the
(removing of Impediments not having the Efficacy of a Cause) that which follows
to the end of the Section is only this: The Cause therefore of their
Restitution is some Motion either of the Parts of the Ambient, or of the Parts
of the Body compressed or extended. But the Parts of the Ambient have no
endeavor which contributes to their Compression or Extention, nor to the
setting them at Liberty or Restitution. It remains therefore, that from the
time of their Compression or Extension, there be left some endeavor (or
Motion) by which the Impediment being removed, every Part resumes its former
place; that is to say, the Whole restores it self. Now this notwithstanding, I
am so dull, or so wary, that though I had met with this passage, and all the
Praises the Author in his Dialogue gives it, yet I should have made some
scruple to undertake the assigning the true Cause of Springs in general. For
first, the Learned Gassendus, and the Epicureans both Ancient and Modern,
together with diverse other Naturalists, do not admit what Mr. Hobbs supposes a
few lines before, that That which is at rest cannot be moved but by a moved and
contiguous Movent. For they think Motion, or at least conatus ad motum, an
unlooseable Property, congenit to Matter. And, by the way, whatever exceptions
I have to this Opinion, yet I am not satisfied with that Principle of Mr.
Hobbs, though it be the Fundamental one of his Philosophy; unless it be more
warily proposed. For to assert universally and without exception, as he does in
his Elements, that nothing can be moved but by a Body contiguous and moved; I
do not take to be true, nor consistent with his other Assumptions. This I
elsewhere (in a Discourse against another than Mr. Hobbs, about the Christian
Religion) prove more at large: But now it will suffice to represent that Mr.
Hobbs not only admitting, but making use in his Philosophy of the Creation of
the World, either he must allow that Motion is Natural to some, if not all
Parts of Matter; or that God put them into a Motion not included in their
Nature. From which it will necessarily follow, that at least some Bodies may
have Motion though it be not given them by any Body contiguous and moved, as an
attentive considerer may easily discern. But to return to the Cause of Springs.
Secondly, whereas Mr. Hobbs assumes that the Parts of the Ambient have no
endeavor which contributes to their Compression or Extention, nor to the
setting of them at Liberty or Restitution: He says this indeed, But does not go
about to prove it. And I should the less have made this precarious Assertion,
because that after the celebrated Des Carts himself, the Cartesian
Philosophers generally ascribed the Motion of Restitution to the passage of a
subtle Ethereal Substance (and an Ether Mr. Hobbs also admits) through the
Pores of the Springy Body, which striving to obtain its wonted Freedom of
passage, restores them to the shape and bigness from which they were forced.
Nay, I shall have occasion to show anon that Mr. Hobbs himself, whatever he say
in this place, does elsewhere ascribe a Motion of their own to multitudes of
Terrestrial Corpuscles. And I might add, that elsewhere he speaks of the
re-kindling of the Fire taken out of the Receiver after this manner.

Quanquam vis illius motus in Recipiente (ut loquimini) Page 18.
evacuato diminuta sit, oppressa ab Aeris intus commoti consistentia, non tamen
extinguitur; and propterealevata oppressione, satis habebit virium ad
excitandum phantasiam lucis quanquan debiliorem. But I shall rather subjoyn,
That yet, Thirdly, I do not think it improbable what the Learned Gassendus had
taught, and what Mr. Hobbs here teaches, that the Restitution of bent Springs
may proceed from a certain Endeavor or Motion in their internal Parts (left
from the time of their Compression or Extension) which when the Impediment is
removed, makes every Part resume its former place, and thereby makes the Whole
restore it self. But this notwithstanding, I feared others might be as
Inquisitive as my self, and might expect from him that would undertake to
settle a general Theory of the Motion of Restitution, the clear and distinct
Explication of several Phenomenon that I had met with, which are not touched,
nor perhaps were, some of them, thought upon, by Mr. Hobbs. As first, why such
a de^^rminate Temper of Iron and Steel is requisite to make it Elastical; so
that if after having been hardened and gradually heated it be suddenly cooled at
an inconvenient point of time, it will be brittle, and fit to make Gravers and
other rigid Tools, not Springs. Next, why Bows and other Elastical Bodies, if
they be kept too long bent, lose in process of time almost all their Elastical
Power, and continue crooked. Thirdly why not only diverse solid Bodies as well
as Lead and Gold, which before trial, one would think as likely as many Springy
ones to have their Parts put into a due Motion by the force that bends them,
should be devoid of an Elastical Power. Fourthly, what kind of Motion, and what
kind of Texture it is, by virtue whereof, the Parts of a Body being for a very
short time put into Motion, do some Months, perhaps some Years, retain in great
part a smart Motion, without in so long a time communicating it to the Ambient
Bodies, to some or other of which multitudes of them are perpetually
contiguous, and thereby losing it themselves. Why upon such a bare and
inartificial change made in the Texture of a Body as is scarce at all
discernable to the Eye, it should acquire a strong Spring that it had not
before (as I have tried upon Silver and Copper, which though flexible before
they were hammered, yet being beaten into thin Plates obtained a notable
Spring:) And why (which may seem more strange, upon another light change of
Texture) the acquired Spring may presently be lost again; as I have tried in
Silver, that Chemists teach us loses nothing in the fire, which having by being
hammered acquired a strong Spring, we have presently made flexible again as
before, by only heating it red-hot, without so much as melting it; which argues
that in Springs, Texture is as well to be considered as Motion. To these I
might add other Particulars that I had either made or observed (and mention in
another Treatise) concerning Springs; all which Phenomenon perhaps every one
that has read what we have lately recited out of Mr. Hobbs, will not presently
be able satisfactorily to explicate. So that I hope the equitable Reader will
not think it a fault that (contenting my self to propose the two Explications
of Springs, I saw most liked among the Curious; to which I should have added
Mr. Hobbs's, if I had found it as much esteemed) I declined engaging my self in
Controversies about the Origin of Motion, and such other high Speculations, as
had my Abilities enabled me, neither my Design exacted, nor my leisure
permitted that I should prosecute. And though Mr. Hobbs be pleased to speak
thus of his Notion concerning the Restitution of Bodies; Sine qua Hypothest
quantuscunque labor, ars, sumptus, ad rerum naturalium invisibiles causas
inveniendas adhibetur frustra erit: Yet whether that Page 8.
bold Assertion should pass for an Argument, for an Hyperbole, or for a
Complement to himself, I am content to let the Reader judge.

Fourthly, Mr Hobbs in diverse passages wherein he disputes against me, seems to
have misapprehended my Notion of the Air. For when I say, that the Air has
Gravity and an Elastical Power, or that the Air is, in great part, pumped out
of the Receiver, it is plain enough that I take the Air in the obvious Acception
of the word, for part of the Atmosphere which we breath, and wherein we move.
Nor do I find that any other of my Readers do otherwise understand me. But Mr.
Hobbs seems to think he has sufficiently confuted me, if in some cases he have
proved (which whether he have done well or no is not here to be examined) that
there is a subtle substance, which he calls Ether (but which I wish he had
better explained) in some places which I take not to be filled with Air; and
that the Ether has or has not some Accidents which I deny or ascribe to the
Air. Whereas I deny not but that the Atmosphere or fluid Body that surrounds
the terraqueous Globe, may, besides the grosser and more solid Corpuscles
wherewith it abounds, consist of a thinner Matter, which for distinction sake I
also now and then call Ethereal. And therefore though I did not think my self
obliged to declare against either the Atomical or the Cartesian Hypothests
touching the Nature of the Air, yet I proposed the later too as probable (which
as it excludes a Vacuum, so it makes the Air consist in great part of a
Celestial Matter.) And my incidental Explications of the Rarefaction and
Condensation of the Air, together with my comparing it to a Fleece of Wool,
sufficiently declare that I take it not to be a Homogeneous Body; and though
there be Air intercepted betwixt the Hairs of Wool, yet in case I should prove
that a Box were not so full of Wool as before, because the most part of the
Hairs had been taken out, I should not think he argued well against me, that
should only prove that the Box contained as much of Matter, consisting of Air
and Wool together, afterward as before. Nor do I think Mr. Hobbs has in
diverse passages, wherein he supposes he disputes against me, much more directly
contradicted what I teach concerning the Air, if that word be rightly and in my
sense understood. And on this occasion I must crave leave to add, that whereas
he is pleased to intimate that I misrepresent the Cartestan Hypothests,
ascribing that to the Air which Des Carts does to Water; If the Reader think
it worth while to compare the Summary Account I give of that Hypothests, with
what Des Carts himself has taught in his 45, 46, and 47. Articles of the
fourth Part of his Principles, wherein that Author comprises his Doctrine of
the Nature of the Air, he will quickly find, that whether or on Mr. Hobbs be
mistaken, I am not unless it be in estimating his Hypothests by what he teaches
in his Principles, which were published after his Meteors, and more elaborately
written. And as for that particular, which alone Mr. Hobbs alleges, namely,
that he makes not the Parts of Air but of Water so flexible: Des Cartes's Words
in the 46. Article are these; Cum ejus Particulae fere omnes sint flexiles in
star mollium plumularum veltenuium funiculorum, etc. And as for what Mr. Hobbs
subjoyns, Sed quisquis talis supposition is Author fuit, parum refert. Nam ipsa
Hypothesis, in qua motus supponitur materiae subtilis sine causa velocissimus,
and praeterea Corpusculorum innumer abiles vertigines diversae ab illius
Materiae unico motu generatae, vix sani hominis est. I cannot but in Gratitude
to such a Personage declare my dislike, to find him upon so slight an Occasion
so coursly used for an Opinion the Censurer of it does no better confute, and
Which is thought to be in some particulars not so unlike his own. And perhaps I
should be afear'd that Mr. Hobbs's speaking so severely of one that was at
least a famous Geometrician, might reflect upon the English Civility in the
opinion of Strangers, if I did not hope that those who have read Doctor Ward's
Exercitation will look upon this censure of the Cartesian Doctrine by Mr.
Hobbs, as provoked by that severe Judgment of Des Carts mentioned by the
Doctor in these words; Nempe hoc est quod alicubi admiratus est Wardi Exer. in
Philosoph. Hobbian. page 188.
magnus Cartesius; nusquam eum, sive verum, sive falsum posuerit, recte aliquid
ex suppositionibus, ratiocinando infer.

CHAP. III. Wherein the Weight and Spring of the Air are asserted against Mr.
Hobbs.
HAving thus dispatched those general Considerations I thought expedient to
premise, my proposed Method leads me in the next place to consider that Mr.
Hobbs does not, that I remember, deny the truth of any of the matters of fact I
have delivered. Nor does he, if my memory fail me not, labor to prove that the
Explications I have given of my Experiments, are not agreeable to the Doctrine
I proposed: But rather thinks fit to reject our two grand Hypotheses
themselves, The Weight, and the Spring of the Air. And therefore it will
suffice us in this Chapter briefly, but not slightly, to prove what he is
unwilling to grant.

And first, that the Air (in the sense wherein we take the word) is not devoid
of Weight, we have proved by diverse Experiments: which having more fully
delivered in the Book it self, it may in this place suffice now to name them.

One then of these Experiments that prove the Air's Gravity, is, that we found
a blown Bladder carefully weighed in an exact pair of Scales, manifestly
heavier when full of Air, than when the Air was let out.

Next it has been observed in our 36. Experiment, that an AEolipile, being well
heated, and the little hole left at the top of the Pipe being stopped, when it
was thus hot; upon the opening of that hole, when the AEolipile was grown cold
again, the external Air rushing in with a wistling noise at the forementioned
Orifice, made the AEolipile weigh so much more than it did just before the
external Air got in, that it amounted, by computation, to near a thousandth
part of the Weight of an equal bulk of Water. And though some difficulty may
perhaps be moved touching the accurateness of the proportion this way found
out, betwixt the gravities of those Bodies; yet that the one as well as the
other is actually heavy (which is all that we here need contend for) the
Experiment sufficiently manifests.

Thirdly, in the Magdeburgick Experiment, (mentioned at the beginning of our
Epistle) the ingenious makers of it found, that, having before weighed the
great Receiver they were to exhaust, and having done the like after the
extraction of the Air, they found it to weigh one whole Exper. Magdeburgicum
apud Schotum, page 446.
Ounce and 3/10; quod sane (says the learned Publisher, though a Peripatetick)
luculentissimum est argumentum gravitatis aeris.

Fourthly, in our 36. Experiment we relate our having weighed the Air, and that
shut up in Bodies in our exhausted Receiver, wherein of two Bodies of differing
Natures (the one a blown Bladder, and the other a Glass Bubble) that were
aequiponderant each to a more solid Weight before the Air was pumpt out, that
which included a good quantity of Air did manifestly preponderate after the
exhaustion.

And to these four we might add other proofs to the same purpose; But that
these contain in them such a variety of Cases, that I think it would be
superfluous.

But now let us see what Mr. Hobbs objects against the newlymention'd
Experiment of the Bladder weighed in the exhausted Receiver, (for the others he
quarrels not with,) Quod quidem lanx (says he) in qua est vesica, magis
deprimitur Page 15.
quam altera, certi esse possunt, oculis testibus: Quod autem id a gravitate
aeris naturali accidit, certi esse non possunt; praesertim si quae sit
gravitatis causa efficiens nesciunt. But I know not whom Mr. Hobbs will
persuade, that a man cannot be sure that Lead is in Specie heavier than Cork,
unless he knows what is the efficient cause of Gravity. And Mr. Hobbs speaks in
his 30. Chapter (where he expressly treats of that Subject) as if that had not
been explained by any man, and consequently not by any Writer of Staticks: (and
perhaps I am therein somewhat of his mind) And yet sure all these Writers,
treating of the Proportion of Heavy Bodies, did not write they knew not what.
And, though he mentions his own Hypothesis, as that than which nothing is more
likely; yet I think I could frame Objections against it, that would not easily
be answered, if my present task required it; or if I found his opinion, in this
point, embraced, as yet, by men of Note. Wherefore I shall now say no more of
it than he himself does namely, that according to his Doctrine, It may well be
thought to determine (for it is a certain consequent) that heavy Bodies descend
with less and less velocity, as they are Elem. of Phil. Chapter 30. Sect. 4.
more and more remote from the Equator; and that at the Poles themselves they
will either not descend at all, or not descend by the Axis: which whether it be
true or false, Experience must determine. Which till it have done in his favor
(an event I do not expect) I hope he will allow me to distrust his Hypothesis.

But to return to our Experiment. The Account he gives why the Bladder does
propend (for so he loves to speak) is this, Quod vesica sive follibus sive
flatu oris Page 16.
distenta sit, gravior sit quam eadem vesica non distenta, negarenolo, propter
majorem quantitatem Atomorum follibus, vel Corpusculorum fuligineorum ab halitu
inflatorum. Ab experimento autem quod fit a vesica inflata nihil colligunt quod
sit satis certum. Oportuit lancibus imponere duo vasa pondere aequalia, quorum
alterum esset accurate clausum, alterum apertum: Sic enim non inflatus sed
inclusus tantum aer ponderatus esset. Quando igitur aerem sic ponderatum
videbis, meditabimur postea quid dicendum sit de Phaenomeno quod retuleris.
But, as to the First part of this passage, it does not deny the gravity of what
we call the Air; but only endeavors to show what Parts they are that make it
heavy. And as to the Second, he seems to mistake the present Case. For, there
is no need that the Air in the Bladder be, before the exhaustion of the
Receiver, (in which the foregoing (fifteenth) Page declares he Supposes the
Experiment to be made) heavier than the outward Air. Wherefore when he subjoyns
that from this Experiment we collect nothing quod sit satis certum, the
Affirmation is not an Inference, but Precarious. And as for the annexed way
whereby he would wish to have an Experiment made fit to infer the gravity of
the Air, if he had not. overlooked what I have delivered in the beginning of
the 36. Experiment, he would easily have perceived that we did make a Trial
much of the same nature with that he desires. For we weighed in our Receiver
the Air, in a Glass Hermetically sealed; wherein it was not (to use his
Expression) inflated, but only included. This is what he here objects against
the gravity of the Air in the other place ( Page 8. and 9.) where he says
something to this Controversy; he inculcates also that we should first
explicate what is Gravity, and then adds, Quod Atmosphaerae insunt permistae
corpori AEthereo multae tum aquae tum etiam terrae particulae, facile
persuadeor; Page 9.
sed quod in medio AEthere, sursum, deorsum, quaquaversum motae, nec semper
alterae alteris innitentes gravitent, inconceptibile est. To which he adds two
or three Reflections, whose Examen being here unnecessary, would require more
time than perhaps it would (in reference to the present Controversy) deserve:
for we are now enquiring not how the Air comes to gravitate, but whether or no
it have gravity. And since in his Elements of Philosophy he grants, and gives
Chap. 30. Sect. 10.
his Reason for it, That if Air be blown into a hollow Cylinder, or into a
Bladder, it will increase the Weight of either of them a little: and since here
he likewise confesses (as we have just now seen) that there are mingled with
the Ether many aqueous and earthly (and consequently heavy) Particles: he
confesses that which we labor to evince; namely, that the Air is not devoid of
Weight. And it concerns us no more than himself, to show how the Corpuscles,
upon whose account the Air is heavy, make it so. And this being what Mr. Hobbs
in several places thinks fit to object against the Gravity of the Air; the
Reader will, I suppose, easily take notice that he has left the Experiment of
the AEolipile, and some others, unanswered. Though these alone prove that the
Air is a manifest Weight even when it is not comprest, but retains its laxity.
Having said thus much to evince against Mr. Hobbs the Gravity of the Air, let
us now examine whether it have not also a Spring (in the sense we take that
word in.) This though Mr. Hobbs be pleased Utraque enim illa phant sia tum
gravitatis Atmosphaerae, tum vis Elasticae sive antitupiae aeris, somnium erat.
Dial. p. 21.
to call (as he also does the weight of the Air) a Dream; yet he does himself
grant, in effect, as much as is requisite to prove the Spring of the Air, in
the sense I contend for it. For taking upon him to give account (how good an
one we shall see anon) of that known Experiment wherein the Air is comprest in
a Glass Bottle by the forcible injection of Water, which Water, when the Glass
is unstop't, the Air does again throw out in recovering its former Dimensions;
of this Experiment (I say) he gives this account (Page 24.) Aer quo ab initio
Sphaera plenus erat a Corpusculis illis terreis motus motu circulari simplice,
vi injectionis coactus, qui quidem purus est exit (aquam injectam penetrans) in
aerem extrinsecum, locum relinquens aquae; sequitur ergo Corpusculis illis
terreis minus relinqui loci in quo motum suum naturalen exercere possint:
itaque in se mutuo impingentes aquam urgent ad egressum; egredientem aer
externus (quia universum supponitur esse plenum) penetrat, locumque egredientis
aeris successive occupat, donec Corpuscula, quantitate aeris eadem restituta,
libertatem motui suo naturalem recipiant.

But how little this comes short of granting as much Spring to the Air as the
Cartesians do, and as I need require, may easily be judged by diverse passages
in our Book; and particularly by our proposing as not improbable, the Cartesian
way of explicating the Spring of the Air; according to which the Corpuscles
that swim in the Ether, being each hindered by the neighboring ones from the
freedom of its motion, they beat off one another (which Mr. Hobbs would have
them do:) whence it comes to pass that, in any assigned portion of Air here
below, the Corpuscles that compose that portion, beaten off by one another, do
make the whole portion tend to obtain (though not exactly to fill up) more
room, and consequently to emulate a Spring, like that which we scruple not to
ascribe to a comprest Fleece of Wool, because of a like endeavor to expand it
self.

We may enforce this by another passage of Mr. Hobbs's, that speaks expressly
enough to our present purpose, where he gives this Reason of one of the
Phenomenon of our Engine, Quoniam per suctoris retractionem aer purus impulsus
Page 11.
erat, parts autem terreae impulsae non erant; major erat ratio particularum
terrearum quae extra Cylindrum suctori contiguae erant, ad aerem purum, in quo
motum suum exercebant, post revulsionem The Motions therefore of those small
Bodies (speaking of the Earthy Particles in the Air) will be less and less
free, by how much the quantity of the injected Water is greater and greater: so
that by their Motion falling upon one another, the same Bodies will mutually
compress each other, and have a perpetual endeavor of regaining their liberty,
and of depressing the Water that hinders them. Elem. Chap. 30. Sect. 9.
quam ante: quare particulae illae motae minus habentes loci ad motum suum
naturalem exercendum, aliae aliis impingebant, and propellebant: necesse ergo
erat, ut particulae quae suctoris superficiei contiguae erant suctorem
propellerent. To which we may add, that Mr. Hobbs himself seems rather to
reject other men's ways of proposing the Spring of the Air, than resolutely to
deny the thing it self. For, Vidisti (says he) jam Elastrum illud aeris quod
supponunt, aut impossible esse, aut recurrendum esse ad Hypothesin Hobbianam.
Page 8.


But besides Mr. Hobbs's Concessions in the passages newly recited, and some
others; we can prove the Spring of the Air by many of the Phenomenon of our
Engine, which we have deduced from it, and of which he does not offer any other
way of Explication. Wherefore we shall now content our selves to prove the
Spring of the Air by two Experiments: The one not mentioned in our Epistle, and
the other much opposed by Mr. Hobbs.

And first, if you make the Torrecellian Experiment in a Tube of between two
foot and half and three foot in length, and if, when the Mercury rests at its
wonted Station, you dexterously stop the Orifice of the Tube with your Finger
(that Orifice being lifted up as near the surface of the restagnant Mercury as
it can be, without giving admission to the external Air) and if then you quite
lift up the Tube thus stopped into the free Air you shall feel upon your Finger
little or no gravitation or pressure from the Weight of the Mercurial Cylinder,
distinct from the Weight of the Tube: because (as we have more fully explicated
this Phenomenon elsewhere) the gravity of the Quicksilver In our Defense
against Linus.
is balanced by that of the outward Air that thrusts the Finger against it. But
if you invert the Tube, and having let in the Air at the Orifice, stop it again
with your Finger, and again let the Mercurial Cylinder lean upon that Finger;
you shall then find your Finger strongly pressed, and endeavored to be thrust
away: which new pressure, since it cannot come from the Mercury, that being the
very same that was in the Tubebefore, nor from the Weight of the admitted Air,
which perhaps may not amount to so much as a grain, to what can we rationally
ascribe it but to the Spring of the included Air, whose force will be as well
manifest to the Eye as the Finger, if the Tube be unstopt under the surface of
the restagnant Mercury; for then that in the Glass will not rest as before at
the usual Station, but be deprest beneath it a good way, perhaps some Inches?
And if you make the Torrecellian Experiment in a short Tube sealed at neither
end, but stopped above and below with your Fingers, you shall find, upon the
unstopping of the upper Orifice a new and forcible pressure upon the Finger
that keeps the lower Orifice stopped, made by the gravitation of the external
Air, which was before kept off from leaning upon the Mercurial Cylinder by the
upper Finger; the Pulp of which Finger by that gravitating Air was before
thrust into the deserted Cavity of the Tube (as we have elsewhere discourst, in
a fuller measure, of these Experiments.) Which will evince against Mr. Hobbs,
both the Spring of the Air and Gravity of the Atmosphere; since he is as little
as I for ascribing these Phenomenon to the efficacy or absence of my other
Antagonist's imaginary Funiculus.

The other Experiment I shall mention is the Fourth in our Epistle; namely,
that of the swelling and shrinking of a Bladder hung in our Receiver, according
as the ambient Air, and consequently its pressure, is withdrawn or suffered to
return. But though this Experiment be so congruous to our Hypothesis, that it is
generally acquiesc'd in by those Ingenious men that have hitherto seen it; yet
Mr. Hobbs is pleased to reject our Explication, and substitute another in these
Words, which are all he has concerning this matter. Quia Cuticula omnis ex
filiculis constat, quae propter figuras, contactum Page 19.
per omnia punct a accuratum habere non possunt, pervia ergo est vesica, cum
sit cuticula, nec aeri tantum, sed etiam aquae, qualis est sudor. Eadem ergo
aeris per vim incussi est compressio intra vesicam quae extra, cujus conatus,
propter viam motuum undiquaque decussatam, tendit undiquaque ad superficiem
vesicae concavam. Quare necessarium est ut undiquaque intumescat, and crescente
conatus vehementia tandem laceretur. But, if this be a sufficient Answer to
such an Experiment, I confess I fear it will be harder than we are yet aware of
to prove any thing by Experiments.

For first, how unlike is it to be true what he affirms, and what his Reply
supposes, namely, that such Bladders as we used are readily pervious to the
Air; when easy Experience shows us, that by leasurely compressing such blown
bladders betwixt our hands, we shall rather break them (as we have tried) than
squeeze out the Air at the Pores? So that the rest of his Answer being built
upon what is so repugnant to common Experience, will not need a particular
Consutation: but however ex abundanti we will add, that in our 36. Experiment,
we relate that by the exhaustion of the Air we likewise broke a Glass
Hermetically sealed; and to say that Glass also is pervious to Air, were to
affirm what the greatest part of his Book supposes to be false. Besides,
whereas there is not any sensible and unquestionable Phenomenon to prove that
the Receiver is full of any such aer per vim incussus as he would have, we see
plainly that when the Air does manifestly get into the Receiver, the Bladder is
not thereby made to swell, but strangely to shrink. Moreover since (according
to Mr. Hobbs) the Bladder is pervious to the Air, and the Air within the
Receiver is universally comprest, as well that which is within the Bladder as
that which is without it; how comes it to pass, that the Air that bears against
the Unequal Surface of the Bladder does not resist that which is contiguous to
the Concave Superficies of the same; And at least how comes the Bladder to be
broken by the Air, which, according to Mr. Hobbs, can get in and out at
pleasure? And lastly, to show that to the swelling of the Bladder there needs
nothing but the Spring of the included Air, and not such vehement agitation of
the ambient Air as Mr. Hobbs supposes to be made in our Engine; It appears by
the elsewhere-mention'd Experiment of Monsieur Paschal, that in the free and
ordinary Air a Football half blown up will swell more and more the nearer it
is carried to the top of an high Mountain; where the incumbent Cylinder of the
Atmosphere is shorter, and its Weight lighter: and will, for the contrary
Reason, grow more and more flag'd, the nearer it approaches again to the foot
of the Mountain.

Though I doubt not but the Arguments employed in this Chapter will be
sufficient to convince impartial Readers; yet I shall add by way of
Inforcement, that whereas Mr. Hobbs ascribes the Weight of the Air in Bladders
to the earthy Corpuscles intruded by him that blows them up; and attributes the
Spring of the Air in the Wind gun and in the Phenomenon of our Engine, to the
violent Motion the Air is put into by the vehement impulses of the Rammer or
Sucker: our Doctrine may be evinced by Experiment, wherein the Air in its
natural and wonted state operates without being forcibly comprest or put into
motion by us. This may appear by the two sorts of Experiments to be made upon
high Mountains, which we have mentioned and urged in the Second Part of our
Defense against the Learned Linus. Wherefore referring the Reader thither, we
shall now only in very few words mention the substance of them.

The First Experiment is, That it has been found upon Trial, both formerly in
France and since in England, that the Quicksilver in the Torricellian
Experiment falls notably lower at the top of a Mountain than at the foot, (by
Monsieur Paschal's observation upon a Hill (far higher than those the
Experiment was tried on here) the difference was so great, as to amount, as the
most ingenious Pecquet, a happy promoter of Experimental Learning, informs us,
to above three Inches) which we say is caused by this, that the Atmospherical
Cylinder is much lighter, as well as shorter, at the top of the Mountain than
at the bottom: and Mr Hobbs disallows not the Experiment, but yet gives only
this account of it, Sed and particulae illae quae interspersae aeri it a
moventur ut supposuimus, Page 12.
magis confertae sunt ad radicem montis quam in summo, nam hoc quoque
supposuimus. But what then? how does the plenty of these interspersed Particles
hinder the Mercurial Cylinder from descending at the bottom of the Hill as much
as at the top, unless by their gravity or pressure? And it is very unlikely that
the Earthy Atoms, contiguous to the restagnant Mercury at the bottom of the
Hill, should be able by their weight to keep suspended a Cylinder of Mercury of
above three Inches, unless the contiguous Air were gravitated upon by the
weight of other incumbent parts of the Atmosphere.

The other of the two mentioned Experiments is briefly this, That a Termoscope
being carried from the bottom to the top of a Hill, the included Air, instead
of shrinking in that colder Region, manifestly dilated it self, and notably
depressed the water. An effect which I see not to what it can well be
attributed but to the spring of the included Air, which having not near so
great a pressure against it from the Atmosphere incumbent on the restagnant and
suspended water, was able to make it self more room than before it could; and
since that pressure of the Atmosphere depends for ought appears upon its
gravity, the same Experiment may argue both the spring of the Air and its
weight.

And this may suffice for our third Chapter, wherein having evinced against Mr.
Hobbs our grand Hypothesis of the weight and Spring of the Air, I hope we have
dispatched the chief part of our work; since as for the particular Explications
we deduce from these Hypotheses, there are but very few, if any, that he
endeavors to prove incongruous to them. Yet after we shall have (in the
following Chapter) considered upon what grounds he prefers his Doctrine before
ours, we shall (God permitting) in two or three other Chapters gather up the
things that he objects against some particular Opinions and Explications by us
delivered, and examine them.

CHAP. IV. Wherein Mr. Hobbs's principal Explications of the Phenomenon of the
Authors Engine are Examined.
OF the Hypotheses that Mr. Hobbs assumes to explicate the Phenomenon of our
Engine, himself gives us a summary in this passage, ( page 10.) intellextiergo
Hypotheses meas, 1. Quod aeri interspersae sunt particulae multae terreae
praeditae motu circulari simplice, naturae congenito. 2. Quod major est
quantitas earum particularum in aere prope adterram quam in aere a terra
remotiore.

Now here I might at the beginning take notice, that there are other things
which he takes for granted. As, first, Non dari Vacuum, which as we have
already seen he has not well evinced, nor I think easily will upon the grounds
he proceeds on. Next, that our common Air is chiefly composed of an Ethereal
substance, which methinks he should have proved; since for the most part the
Vacuists (and such he will needs have his Adversaries to be) admit not that
pure Air of his. Thirdly, that the Air, at least the pure Air, is easily
divisible into parts always fluid and always Air. Indeed he says of this
Assumption, Page 4.
Nec suppono tantum, sed credo; but neither to suppose nor to believe, is to
prove. And what he adds, Ioid.
Neque est qui hactenus ullam adduxit rationem, quare ita esse non potest; if
it were true, would conclude little, since many things have not been, and
perhaps cannot be, proved to be true; of whose not being possible no proof has
been given. We might, I say, mention and examine these other Assumptions of our
Author, but for brevities sake we will consider those two lately recited from
him.

And as for the second of them, bateing the peculiar motion he is pleased to
ascribe to the earthy Particles, I shall not contend with him about that
Hypothesis; and therefore shall now only consider the other. The Motus
circularis simplex it self, which he imagines in the Sun and the terrestrial
Globe, I shall not need to examine, since Dr. Ward (a person whom, wthout
disparagement to a famous man, I may affirm to be ati least as esteemed for
Astronomy as Mr. Hobbs) has expressly endeavored to confute it, and that not
without some derision, (which yet I willingly forbear to imitate) by Arguments
that I cannot learn Mr. Hobbs has yet answered. And I am informed that the
learned Dr. Wallis, and others intend, some Animadversions on this Motion. But
restraining our present consideration to what this Dialogue suggests to me,
This Assumption to me seems very precarious, since I know not any
unquestionable Example or Experiment whereby it can be made out, that any small
parcel of matter has such a motus circularis simplex as he ascribes to each of
these innumerable earthy and (as himself adds in the same page) aqueous
Particles. The only Argument he brings in that page to prove that each Atome
would have this motion, if all the rest of the earth were annihilated, does not
to me seem clear. For, not to mention that it is still by many learned men
doubted whether the Terrestrial Globe it self have it; nor to examine whether
or no he assigns a good Natural cause of it; it is not always true, that each
minute part of a Homogeneous body (which yet 'twill be hard to prove the
Terrestrial Globe to be) has in every respect the same qualities with the
whole; As the roundness which a small drop of Water or Quicksilver is commonly
observed to have when it leans upon a dry or greasy plain, is not to be met
with in great portions of either of those Liquors, though placed upon the same
plain. And Mr. Hobbs as well as we makes the terrene Atoms in the Air to have
gravity, which yet is a quality that does not properly belong to the whole
Globe of the Earth; nor is it manifest why, because the Terrestrial Globe moves
in a vast Circle about the Sun, each particular Atom of it must describe a
small Circle in the Air about I know not what Center. And since he teaches in
his second Hypothesis, and a few lines before it, That the Air, near the Earth
abounds with such Terrene Corpuscles, it is not likely they should be permitted
to exercise such a regular motion as he attributes to them; but hitting against
one another, they must in probability be put into almost as various and
confused a motion as Des Carts ascribes to his Terrestrial Particles swimming
in the Atmosphere. That which some will, I doubt not, peculiarly wonder at in
Mr. Hobbs's Hypothesis is, that he makes this regular motion of each Atom
naturae suae congenitus: For Philosophers that are known to wish very well to
Religion, and to have done it good service, have been very shie of having
recourse, as he has, to Creation, for the explaining of particular Phenomenon.
And the Cartesians will think it at least as allowable for them to suppose the
Motion he will not grant in their Materia subtilis, as for Mr. Hobbs to assume
it in his Particulae terreae: especially since he seems to make each such Atom
put into and kept in a regular motion; whereas they assume but the having of
one general impulse given to the whole mass of Matter. Those likewise that
fancy a Spring properly so called in particular Aerial Corpuscles, will hence
perhaps take occasion to think they may suppose an ingenite motion fit for
their turn, as well as he an ingenite motus circularis simplex. How well like
wise this Hypothesis will agree with his Fundamental Doctrine, That Nihil
movetur nisi a corpore contiguo and moto, I leave to him to consider. As also
whether or no Gassendus, and those other Atomists that admit Creation, may not
hence countenance their grand supposition of the congenite motion of Atoms,
which granted would destroy the best part of Mr. Hobbs's Philosophy. But
whatever becomes of this motus circularis simplex, I need not be much
solicitous, having formerly shown, that the admission of it would not disprove
what I have delivered concerning the Spring of the Air: and therefore leaving
Mr. Hobbs to dispute it out, if he think fit, with his other Adversaries, I
will proceed to the main Explications, wherein Mr. Hobbs endeavors to prefer
his Doctrine about the Phenomenon of our Engine before ours. And these I find
to be the four that ensue.

The first and principal of these is that wherein he strives to prove, That by
the Exhaustion of our Cylinder no Vacuum is produced, and to give of the
Experiment it self a very differing account from ours. This he does in the
following passage; which, by reason of its importance in our present
Controversy, we shall set down verbatim: Dum Suctor (says he) retrahitur,
quanto relict us locus major fit, tanto minus loci relinquitur aeri externo,
qui retrusus Page 5.
a Suctore moto versus externa, proximum sibi aerem similiter movet, and hic
alium, and sic continue, ita ut necesse sit aerem tandem compelli in locum
desertum a Suctore, and intrare inter superficiem Suctoris convexam and
Cylindri concavam: supposito enim aeris parts esse infinite subtiles,
impossible est ut via illa qua retrahitur Suctor, illae non se insinuent.
Primo enim, contactus superficierum istarum per omnia puncta perfectus esse non
potest, quia ipsae superficies fieri infinite laeves nonpossunt. Deinde vis
illa quae ad Suctorem revellendum adhibetur, cavitatem Cylindri aliquantulum
distendit. Postremo, si in confinio duarum dictarum superficierum ingrediatur
una tantum atomus dura, aer purus ea via ingreditur conatu quantumvis debili..
Poteram etiam computasse aerem illum qui propter eandem causam insinuasset se
per Cylindri valvulam. Sublatam ergo vides consequentiam a retractione Suctoris
ad locum vacuum. Sequuturum hoc quoque est, aeremillum qui est in locum a
Suctore desertum impulsus, quia magna vi impulsus est, motu valde celeri and
per circuitum inter summum and imum in Cylindro moveri; cum nondum sit quod
motum ejus possit debilitare: Scis autem nihil esse quod sibi motum aut
impertiri possit aut diminuere. But this Ratiocination contains diverse things
liable to exceptions; and in order to the examining of it I must premise, That
I know not why Mr. Hobbs should here confine his discourse to the Pump without
taking notice of the Glass, for whose evacuation 'twas designed. Wherefore for
easier considerations sake we will consider, how this discourse will account
for the Exhaustion of the Receiver, as well as for the Cylinder; for we usually
empty them both in the same trials. And he being obliged to explicate the
Exhaustion of the one as well as the other, it will be convenient to take into
consideration the Receiver also, because that being of Glass and transparent,
we can better see what happens in it than in the opacous Cylinder. This
premised, we may now proceed to the Exceptions themselves. And, first, I do not
clearly see by this Explication how he avoids a Vacuum: For, according to his
first words, the external Air is displaced by the motion of the Sucker outward,
and this displaced Air must move that which is next to it, and that the next,
and so onward, (whether in infinitum or no he declares not;) so that at length
( tandem) the Air must be compelled into the place deserted by the Sucker: so
that till this returning Air get in betwixt the Sucker and the Cylinder, how
appears it from this Discourse, that the deserted space was not empty for some
little while? For, certainly, all these motions of the Air forward and backward
could not be performed in an instant; as may appear by the motion of Sounds and
Echo's, whose Velocity is reducible to measure. Secondly, though he takes his
Adversaries to be Vacuists, yet (to give an account of these Phenomenon) he
supposes the Plenitude of the World; as may appear both by express passages in
his Dialogue, and by his here rendering no other probable cause of the Airs
getting into the room relinquished by the Sucker. But, because I have not here
taken upon me the person of a Vacuist, I shall offer some other Considerations.
I wish then, thirdly, that Mr. Hobbs had declared from whence the regress of
the Airs impulsion should begin; for that may well be required from one that,
making the World full, and for ought appears (the Celestial Globes excepted)
fluid, allows us to believe it infinite, if the Magistrate shall please to
enjoin us that belief. Fourthly, I demand what necessity there is there should
be such a forcible return of the impulse, as is requisite to thrust in the Air
at so narrow a passage as that between the Sucker and Cylinder. For, why may
not that impulse when diffused in the vast ambient Medium, be so communicated
and blended among the differing motions of the other parts of it, as not to
return again from whence it begun? As we see that a Voice, though strong, will
not move the Air beyond a certain distance smartly enough to be reflected in an
Echo to the Speaker: and a stone cast into a Lake will have the Waves it makes
diverted from returning to the place they began at. Fifthly, I do not likewise
see that it is proved, or probable, what Mr. Hobbs affirms of so thick a
Cylinder as ours, that it should be distended by the depressing of the Sucker.
But this I insist not on; for the main thing that is peculiar in Mr. Hobbs's
Explication is, That as much Air as is driven away by the Sucker, gets
presently in again betwixt it and the Cylinder: wherefore let us examine that a
little. I say then, that by the Air which is so supposed to get in, he either
means, in the usual sense and in ours, the Common Air, such as we live and
breathe in; or he does not.

If he do speak of such Air, I can plainly prove by several Experiments, that
our Engine is in great part devoid of it.

For, first, if there be a contrivance made, whereby the whole Pump may be
covered with Water, one may, as we have tried, plainly see the Air that is
drawn out of the Receiver, at each reciprocation of the Sucker, pass in great
bubbles out of the Valve through the water.

Next, it appears by the Magdeburg Experiment formerly mentioned, that by
reason of the recess of the Air, the Globe of Glass, whence it went out, was
diminished in weight above an Ounce. Thirdly the same truth may be proved by
the Experiments formerly mentioned of the swelling of a Bladder, and the
breaking of an Hermetically-seal'd Glass upon the recess of the ambient Air:
these Experiments having been already vindicated from Mr. Hobbs's very
improbable Explications of them. Fourthly, the same may be proved by the
breaking of weak or ill-figur'd Receivers inwards; of which in our Hypothesis
the reason is clear, but not in Mr Hobbs's. But, fifthly, (not to multiply
Instances, though that were easy for me) what I contend for may be
sufficiently proved by this one Phenomenon, That though, if the Receiver being
full of common Air the Key be turned under water, the water will not at all be
spurted up at the open Orifice: yet the like being done after the Exhaustion of
the Receiver, we have had diverse Gallons of water violently impelled into the
cavity of the Glass; which could not happen if it were full of Air, both in
regard there can be no probable cause assigned why the water should be thus
spurted up; and because the Receiver being already full of Air, either two
bodies must be contained in one place, and so we must allow Penetration of
Dimensions; or else common Air, to which Glass is impervious, must pass through
the water, which we conclude it does not, because no such bubbles are made in
the external water as would appear if common Air past through it: Nay, so
little of this common Air was sometimes left in the Globe used at Magdeburg,
that when the water was suffered to rush in, it reduced the Air into less by
the beholders estimate than the thousandth part of the capacity of the Globe:
And even if our Receiver be unstopt, not under water, but in the open Air, the
ambient Air will violently press in with a noise great and lasting enough to
argue that the Glass was far from being full of such Air before.

And thus we may argue against Mr. Hobbs, if he would have the Engine, when we
call it exhausted, filled with common Air, as his words in the recited passage
(where he talks of the external Air, and that impelled into the Cylinder,
without differencing them) seem to intimate. But because by some other passages
of this Dialogue he may be favorably thought to mean, that the pure Air (as he
speaks) is that which gets in by the sides of the Sucker into the Pump, and so
into the Receiver; let us consider his Explication in this sense also. And not
to urge, that it had not been amiss if, to avoid ambiguity, he had more clearly
expressed himself, and named that Other here, as well as he elsewhere calls it
so: not to urge this, I say, I desire it may be taken notice of that if Mr.
Hobbs take the Air in this Second Notion, he opposes not what I have delivered;
the Air I pretend to be pumpt out of the Receiver being the common Air, which
consists in great part of grosser Corpuscles than the Ethereal substance; and
therefore I might safely pass on to another subject. But I consider further,
that even this explication of Mr. Hobbs's will be liable to the two first
Inconveniences lately objected against the other in favor of the Vacuists; and
to diverse of those things besides, that are objected in the following parts of
that Discourse. Next I observe again, that though the Pump be all the while
kept under water, yet the Exhaustion of the Cylinder and Receiver will be made
as well as in the open Air: I demand then of Mr. Hobbs, how the pure Air gets
in by the sides of the Sucker that is immersed in water? I presume that for
want of a more plausible Answer he will here say, (as he elsewhere does in an
almost parallel case) That the Air passes through the body of the water to fill
up that deserted space, that must otherwise be void: But then I appeal to any
rational man, whether I am obliged to believe so unlikely a thing upon Mr.
Hobbs's bare affirmation. If I be, I must almost despair to prove things by
Experiments; and if he will allow me to expect from him as much as he seems to
do from me, I shall scarce despair to maintain almost any Hypothesis I please:
For, besides that he does not so much as pretend by any Phenomenon to
countenance this bold assertion, there are Phenomenon that make against it. For
I know not how many Experiments show us, that when Air passes through Water, it
makes bubbles there, which in our case do not appear. And besides, I see not
why the outward Air should not rather impell the water (as we see it frequently
does in such cases) than be supposed to dive so strangely and unperceivedly
through it. When also the diligently-exhausted Receiver is unstopt under water,
he that observes how the water rushes in with a stream as big as the passage
will give leave, will hardly imagine that at the self-same time as much Air as
there gets in water can pass through the same hole without being perceived. But
it may by Plenists be said in Mr. Hobbs's behalf, and it seems the most that
can be said, that either his Explication or a Vacuum must be admitted. To which
I reply, First, that he has not evinced there can be no Vacuum; having
endeavored to prove it but by a single Experiment, which at best does not more
strongly plead against a Vacuum than this does for it. Next that we have lately
made it probable, that by his Explication he does not avoid the necessity of a
Vacuum. And thirdly, that a Plenist without having recourse to Mr. Hobbs's
precarious diving of the Air, may more probably decline the necessity of
yielding a Vacuum by saying, according to the Principles of the Cartesians,
(the subtilest and wariest Champions for a Plenum I have yet met with) that the
Ether is by the impulse of the depressed Sucker and the resistance of the
ambient Bodies squeezed in at the pores of the Glass or Cylinder into the
cavity of the vessel, as fast as room is there made for it. And I confess, I
somewhat wonder at Mr. Hobbs's being averse to this way of salving the objected
Difficulty, since (a little above the middle of that passage of his we have so
long been examining) he supposes the parts of the Air to be infinitely subtle;
which if they are, I know not what pores can be too narrow for them to
insinuate themselves into. But, to press this no further, I must here take
notice, that whether the cavity of the Receiver be resolved to be (totally or
in part) empty or full of Mr. Hobbs's AEtherial Body, or the Cartesians
Celestial matter; the violent rushing in of the water, when the vessel is
unstopt under that Liquor, and diverse other Phenomenon which will not be
ascribed to the subtle matter within (to which they attribute not any
attraction) sufficiently argue that there is in the External Air a far greater
power of pressing inwards, than there is within of resisting; and consequently
such a Weight or Spring in that Air as my Epistle challenges to it. I had
almost forgot to Answer the last lines of Mr. Hobbs's so often mentioned
passage, where he would have the Air that he supposes to be impelled into the
Sucker, to move very swiftly betwixt the top and bottom of it. And so elsewhere
he would have the same Air, when it gets into the cavity of the Receiver. But
having tired my self, as I fear I have you, by dwelling so long upon one
passage; I will skip somewhat that I here approve not in the Ratiocination, and
only say, that when a light Bladder is suspended in the cavity of the
Receiver, it betrays no such motion as is here imagined; nay, the flame of a
Taper, as our Epistle mentions, was not blown out, nor (for ought appeared)
stirred by this supposed wind: to which I shall add, that Smoke produced in the
Receiver whilst it remained exhausted, was not by this vehement motion of the
Air blown about the Receiver, as is particularly set down in our Appendix,
promised by the Translator of the newly-mentioned Treatise. But if you let in
the Common external Air at the Stop-cock, that indeed will rush in with Noise
and Violence, and whirle about the Bladder that hung quietly enough before.

Having thus examined Mr. Hobbs's First solemn Explication, I now proceed to
the next, wherein he undertakes to give an account by his Hypothesis of the
Reason, Why in our Engine, if the Manubrium of the deprest Sucker happens to
slip out of the Pumpers hand, the Sucker is carried up again toward the top of
the Cylinder. But since this Explication is such, that though he mentions it as
his first, presently after the Recital of his two Hypotheses, he himself is
pleased to confess in the last page of his Book, that it is Erroneous; I shall
forbear to vex it, thinking such acknowledgments more fit to be imitated
whenever there is the like occasion, than to be discouraged. But as for the
Explication which at the end of his Dialogues he substitutes for his Retracted
one, I confess to me it is so obscure, that I know not well what to make of it.
But, as far as upon consideration I can understand it, it is coincident with
that, which in our Method will be called his Fourth Explication; with which
that it may the better agree, seems one of the chief Reasons of his altering it
from what we had proposed at first. Wherefore we should presently fall upon
examining them both together; but that between them I meet with an Explication
(which in our reckoning is the Third) of the Torricellian Experiment.

And here he spends many words to prove the Opinion he had whether proposed or
adopted in his Elements of Philosophy; namely, that the place deserted by the
suspended Mercury is not empty, but full of Air. But because this Exposition
assumes what he has not yet Demonstrated, viz. Non dari Vacuum, and because the
Torricellian Experiment as it is wont to be made is none of the Phenomenon of
our Engine; I shall refer you to what those Learned men Doctor Ward and Moranus
have prosessedly, and the first of them largely enough, written against Mr.
Hobbs's Explication, (yet without making all that either of them teaches mine:)
Because, for my part, it will suffice me to argue, as I did before, that if he
takes the Air in the common sense of the Word (and that wherein his Readers
generally understand him) his conceit is manifestly Repugnant to several such
Phenomenon as these. That if the Experiment be very well made, we may by
inclining the Tube impell the Mercury from its wonted station to the top of the
Tube; which will not happen in case the Air were before Inclination let into
that deserted space. That if when the Mercury is settled at its wonted station,
the Tube be lifted up out of the Restagnant Quicksilver, the outward Air will
drive up the heavy Mercurial Cylinder oftentimes with force enough to beat out
the sealed end. To which we shall add only this Experiment: The Quicksilver
resting at its wonted station, if you carefully stop the lower Orifice under
the Surface of the Restagnant Quicksilver, and then lifting up the Tube (that
which we used was about three or four foot long) into the Air, keep it well
stopped, if, I say, you first depress one end and then the other, you shall find
the Quicksilver fall against the deprest extreme of the Tube with such
swiftness and force, as will perhaps surprise you, and make you apprehend that
the Tube will be either beaten out of your hand or broken: Whereas if
unstopping the Tube whilst the self-same quantity of Mercury remains in it, you
let the outward Air into the cavity unpossest by the Mercury, and then if you
again stop the Orifice with your finger, and proceed as formerly, you shall
perceive the motion of the included Liquor to be very much slower and less
violent than formerly, by reason of the resistance of the admitted Air: which
will also manifestly disclose it self by the conflict and bubbles that will be
produced betwixt the Air and Quicksilver in their hasty passing by one another
to the opposite ends of the Tube.

If any friend of Mr. Hobbs's seeing the manifest inconveniences of this
opinion, shall on his behalf pretend that it is what he calls the pure Air, that
passes through the body of the Quicksilver to the deserted part of the Glass
Cane; the answer is ready, that Mr. Hobbs's expressions look so much another
way, that his Readers (for ought I have found) do generally understand him of
such common Air as is displaced by the descent of the Mercury. And therefore I
had reason enough to argue against what he wrote, as I have newly done; and
however, this assertion is clearly precarious, and liable to the Objections
formerly alleged against the passing of the Air through the water. To which we
may add this circumstance, that in our present case it must descend into a far
heavier and closer Liquor than water. But perhaps it will be thought, I have
already said more than needed against an opinion which has been rejected as
well by Plenists as Vacuists; and though mentioned as to the main by several
Writers, as well before Mr. Hobbs asserted it as afterward, has been thought
so unlikely, as not to have been (that I know of) approved by any man, even
before the discovery of the Phenomenon of our Engine. Which last words I add,
because that Mr. Hobbs not pretending that any attraction intervenes in the
case, I see not how he can possibly make out, to omit other Phenomenon, the
descent of the Mercury in the Tube further and further beneath its wonted
station, upon the Exhaustion of the Receiver, and the re-ascension of the same
Mercury in the same Tube, as we please to let in more or less of the outward
Air; without admitting as much of Spring or Pressure in the Air as I need
contend to have here allowed me. The weight of the Terrene Particles, by which,
at the end of the third Exposition, he is reduced to endeavor the Solution of
the Quicksilvers falling lower at the top than at the bottom of a Hill, (for I
am willing to think that is his meaning, and that it is by the Transcribers
fault rather than his, that resolutely affirms the quite contrary) will by no
means serve his turn: It being utterly improbable to imagine, that the
contained in so little a vessel as one of our Receivers can by its weight
counter-balance so ponderous a Cylinder of Quicksilver: Whence we may be
allowed to argue that the Air sustains it by such a Pressure or Spring as we
plead for, whether that proceed from the Texture of the Aerial Particles, or
from their Motion, or from both.

The Fourth and last of Mr. Hobbs's principal Expositions is of that Experiment
of ours, wherein 100. and odd pound weight being hung at the depressed Sucker,
the Sucker was notwithstanding impelled up again by the Air to the top of the
Cylinder. Of this Phenomenon (which has not hitherto proved unwellcome to the
Virtuous) Mr Hobbs gives us the following account.

Haerent hic nostri: (which why he says I know not) quomodo haec expedies tu?
Page 22.


A. Expedivi ante. Aer enim a retractione Suctoris retro pulsus, nec locum in
mundo (ut supponimus pleno) quo se recipiat inveniens, nisi quem ipse, corpora
contigua suis locis pellens, sibi faceret, perpetua pulsione in Cylindrum
tandem cogitur, tanta velocitate inter Cylindri concavam and Suctoris convexam
superficiem, quant a respondere solet viribus illis magnis quas ad Suctorem
revellendum necessarias expertt estis. Aer autem ille, qua velocitate
ingreditur, eandem ingressus retinet, simulque latera Cylindri aenei (vi
elastica praediti) undiquaque distinet. Conatur ergo Aer in Cylindro vehementer
motus contra omnes parts superficiei Cylindri concavae; srustra quidem dum
Suctor retrahitur: sed quamprimum Suctor manu emissus Aerem impellere cessat,
Aer ille qui ante incussus erat, propter conatum in omne punctum superficiei
Cylindri internae and vim Aeris elasticam, insinuabit se inter easdem
superficies eadem velocitate qua impulsus fuerat, id est, ea velocitate quae
respondet viribus impulsionis. Si ergo tanta ponderis vis Suctori appendatur
quanta manuum vis erat qua impellebatur, velocitas qua idem Aer e Cylindro
exit, locum in mundo pleno nullum habens quo se recipiat, Suctorem rursus ad
Cylindri summitatem impellet, propter eandem causam quae effecit ut Suctor
paulo ante impulerit Aerem. Thus far our Authors passage: against whose
solution it is easy to draw diverse Arguments from what we have discourst
against the first of his four Explications. But though we refer you thither,
yet we will here also observe, that this whole conceit of the Aires running in
and out with strange velocity between the Sucker and the Cylinder is
precarious; nor does he propose any one Phenomenon to countenance it. To which
general Advertisement I shall add the three following particulars. First, that
in an Engine so contrived, that the Pump lay covered with water, when the
Sucker was retracted, the Atmosphere would strongly press the water against it;
and if the Manubrium were let go, would swiftly enough repel up the Sucker
into the deserted cavity of the Cylinder. Which being a case Parallel to that
under consideration, let any unbiased Person judge how likely it is, that the
Air could perform all these Excursions without exciting bubbles,
notwithstanding the Waters constant interposition betwixt it and the Cylinder.
Secondly, that there is as little probability in what our Author teaches in
those words Conatur ergo Aer, etc. I might here repeat what we formerly
mentioned of the breaking of our Receivers inwards, not outward; and I might
add, that I see no reason why the Conatus of the Included Air, if its Conatus
were granted, should be frustraneous, when the Sucker is deprest. But I will
rather demand, Why, if the Air within have so strong an endeavor outward, as
to stretch the thick sides of the Bras. Cylinder, as Mr. Hobbs (with what
probability, let any man judge) would have it; I demand, I say, why this Air
does not throw out the Wooden Peg or Valve, which we have often to our trouble
seen thrown out with great force and noise, when the deprest Sucker being
thrust up again whiles there was Air in the Cylinder, we forgot to leave the
Valve open; though in this case the Air that drove out the Peg was far enough
from stretching the Cylinder. And I further demand, how it comes to pass, that,
if having stopped the hole of the Cylinder with your finger instead of the Peg,
you swiftly depress the Sucker, you shall be so far from feeling a Pressure
outward against the Pulp of the finger from any thing contained in the cavity
of the Cylinder, that your finger will be strongly, and perhaps not without
some pain, pressed in by the ambient Air; in so much that 'twas this Phenomenon,
and one somewhat like it in the Torricellian Experiment, that seem to have
engaged my other Adversary, the Learned Linus, to maintain a conceit quite
contrary to Mr. Hobbs's, and imagine in the deserted cavity of the Cylinder,
not a distending, but violently contracting substance. Thirdly. That as to the
last part of the passage under consideration, beginning at si ergo, etc. which
seems to me somewhat intricate, I do not so clearly understand why the Air that
is impelled in so swiftly betwixt the Cylinder and the Sucker, should not
resist the swift Egress Mr. Hobbs ascribes to the included Air by the same
passage: nor why this impelled Air, that has so strong an endeavor outward,
should never depress the Sucker (against whose upper part it must bear as well
as against the Cylinder) as well as the same Air diffusing its Motion through
the vast ambient Medium, can enable the external Air to thrust up the Sucker
again; especially, since during such a depression of the Sucker (as we have
mentioned not to happen) made by the Rebound of the Air, forcibly impelled in
from the close bottom of the Cylinder, the Air from without may all the while,
with congruity enough to Mr. Hobbs's principles, get in between the said Sucker
and the Cylinder. But not to insist upon these niceties: I say, that the
lifting up of the Sucker either is not necessary to prevent a Vacuum, or that
in some cases it will be hard to show how a Vacuum can by Mr. Hobbs be avoided.
For when the deprest Sucker is ready to be thurst up again, if you hang a
somewhat greater weight at it than an hundred and odd pounds, it shall not be
lifted up at all. And I shall make this further improvement of the Experiment
under consideration, that whereas this progress and regression of the impulse
of the external Air cannot reasonably be supposed to be very lasting, you may
by a competent weight detain the Sucker deprest, till the ambient Air is as
quiet as it uses to be; and yet if then you take off the overplus of weight,
and perhaps a little more, in case the Pump have been very stanch, the Sucker
and the great weight appended will notwithstanding be carried up: which it is no
way likely it could be by the impulse of the outward Air, which had time to
decay and be confounded. And as for the inward Air, beside that we have proved,
that it has no such conatus outward as Mr. Hobbs pretends, why should not
that, were it granted, throw out the Sucker rather than cause it to be impelled
inward; it being no way likely, that in case some Air should get out of the
cavity of the Cylinder, it could so move the outward Air, as that the reflex of
that impulse should make that free outward Air bear more strongly against the
outside of the Sucker than the inside of the same Sucker is pressed against by
the included Air, whose impetus is incomparably less diffused? But not to be
thought a more nice and diligent Opponent than the matter requires, I shall
drive this Discourse no further: but rather desire it may be observed in
general, that whatever be resolved to be in the Cavity of the Cylinder when the
Sucker is deprest; yet since it is manifest, that it is at least in great part
devoid of common Air, and since the Sucker with the appended weight may, if the
Instrument leak not, be impelled up, when in all probability those forced
Undulations of the Air, that may be supposed to have been made by the Sucker,
have ceast; the Cartesians, Mr. Hobbs, and those others that will not have
recourse to the un-intelligible attraction of some rarefied substance within,
must ascribe so strange a Phenomenon to the pressure of the Air without. But I
shall no further press this Fourth Objection, partly because it is added to the
other three only ex abundanti, and partly because this Chapter is grown so
long already

I know indeed that after the Exposition last recited out of Mr. Hobbs, he
makes the Academian Dialogist confess, that the rest of the Phenomenon of our
Engine may also not uneasily be reduced to his principles. But perhaps they
that take notice of the variety of those Phenomenon we have set down in our
Treatise, will scarce be of his mind; and those that have considered what has
been discoursed in this Chapter against his four principal Explications, and
what I am about to subjoyn in the following part of this Treatise, concerning
diverse other Solutions that he gives, Will perhaps be inclined to think that
others may be like these, without being therefore necessarily true.

CHAP. V. In which diverse scattered Explications and other passages in Mr.
Hobbs's Dialogue are examined.
I Proceed then to the Fifth Chapter, in which and the next I glean up and
examine diverse scattered passages, wherein he offers at somewhat by way of
Argument against some things we had delivered in our Epistolical Treatise: I
say, what he offers by way of Argument; for as to those passages that do but
either praise himself or disparage his Adversaries, I have almost as little
leisure as inclination to take notice of them, and do not much apprehend that
the Virtuosi (especially such as know us both) will think what I write the less
rational for being civil; or will let me suffer in their Opinions for
neglecting to trouble them in aPhilosophical Controversy, with matters that do
but very little belong to it.

To skip then what Mr. Hobbs is pleased to say in the first Page of his
Dialogue, concerning some disputable discoveries about Sensation, which he
challenges to himself; and to pass by diverse other things in the second or
third following pages, which relate to him, or to the Society he writes
against, rather than to the nature of the Air; we should begin with the Opinion
he thinks fit in the fifth page to impute to us, as if we distinguished what is
fluid from what is not so, only (for so his Ratiocination imports) by the
bigness of the parts of which a Body consists: But designing in an Appendix to
be subjoyned to this Discourse to examine what I find in this Dialogue
dispersed touching Fluidity, I shall now only say, that he does very much
mistake and mis-represent my Doctrine of Fluidity; wherein I expressly teach,
That the principal cause or condition of it is not the size, but the motion of
the small parts that compose the fluid body.

To take up then the particulars we are to examine, in the order (as far as
conveniently may be) wherein I find them lie in the Authors Dialogue, and
passing by at present those things which either we have considered already, or
are not to consider in this place; The first particular that offers it self to
be taken notice of, is this passage at the bottom of the twelfth page;

B. In vas apertum infudimus aquam, in aqua fistulam Page 12.
statuimus erectam, longam, exilissimam; observavimus autem aquam e vase
subjecto in erectam fistulam ascendisse.

A. Nec mirum; nam superficiem aquae, particulae aeri interspersae aquaeque
contiguae motu suo verberabant, ita ut aqua non potuit in fistulam non
ascendere, and sensibiliter quidem in fistulam valde angustam.

To this I say, that it is manifest by what I write in my Epistle, that I did
not then take upon me, nor do I undertake in this place, to assign the true
reason of the proposed Phenomenon. An Attempt of this kind has been since
addressed to me, which being ingenious, if not also true, may be consulted. In
the mean time I cannot but declare that I am no way satisfied with Mr. Hobbs's
Exposition: For, to say nothing of the motion he ascribes to the particles
dispersed through the Air, he leaves the difficulty unsolved, since there being
common Air as well within the Cavity of the slender Pipes as without it, he
neither shows, nor so much as offers at, a reason why the pressure of the Air
within should not resist the pressure of the same kind of Air without; as we
see it does in greater Pipes. And possibly he would have past by this
particular, if he had not overlooked the Advertisement I gave toward the close
of the 35. Experiment, That it would concern those who should undertake to show
the causes of this Phenomenon to bethink themselves also of a reason why, if
the Experiment be tried with Quicksilver instead of Water, the Surface of the
Liquor will instead of being higher, be lower within the Pipe than without it:
Whereas if Mr. Hobbs's Explication be sufficient, why should not the contrary
happen in Quicksilver as well as in Water?

The next passage I have to consider is in the 13. page thus set down; Siquis
post impulsionem revulsionemque Suctoris aliquoties repetitam, Epistomium
superni Page 13.
orificii Recipientis conetur extrahere, inveniet illud valde gravitare,
tanquam si multarum librarum pondus ab eo penderet. Vnde contingit hoc?

A. Ab aeris qui est in Recipiente fortissimo conatu circulari facto a violento
ingressu aeris inter superficiem Suctoris convexam and Cylindri concavam,
generato per iteratam illam impulsionem revulsionemque Suctoris, quam vos
perperam vocatis exuctionem aeris. Nam propter naturae plenitudinem, Epistomium
extrahi non potest, quin aer qui est in Recipiente (Epistomio contiguus) una
extrahendus sit. Qui quidem aer, si quiesceret, facillime Epistomium
sequeretur: sed dum velocissime circuit, satis difficulter sequitur; id est,
videtur esse valde gravis.

B. Verisimile est: Nam ut aer novus in Recipiens paulatim admittitur, etiam
apparentem illam gravitatem paulatim perdit.

But, I do not much fear that this Explication will keep the Experiment from
continuing to be thought by ingenious men, a notable Confirmation of our
Hypothesis. For, to pass by something that, though I am no way satisfied with,
cannot well be examined in few words; I answer, First, that if there be such a
vehement circular endeavor as he imagines of the Air in the Receiver, by which
motion he elsewhere teaches (as we have seen above) that the Air rushes out
with violence enough to make the Atmosphere lift up in our Cylinder above an
hundred pound weight; I see not why it should not rather throw out the stopple
under consideration, than hinder its extraction. And I see not why, when the
external Air is readmitted at the stop-cock into the exhausted Receiver, and
thereupon there does sensibly follow for a little while a whirling about of the
included Air, the stopple, that just before seemed so much to resist the being
drawn out, should cease to make any such resistance. Nor do I see how the
plenitude of Nature should, as is here intimated, hinder the extraction of the
stopple: For, according to the Plenists, the World and the Receiver must be at
all times equally full. And if the contiguous Air must for Mr Hobbs's reason
necessarily be extracted with the stopple in one case, I see not why the like
should not happen in another. But since Mr. Hobbs is pleased to call us
Experimentarian Philosophers, let us show that such Explications as these of
his need not make us ashamed of the name. I say then, that it appears by our
Experiments that there is no such Fortissimus conatus circularis in the
exhausted Receiver as he pretends; but that there is indeed an endeavor of the
Ambient Atmosphere to press inwards the parts of the Glass and Cover that are
contiguous to it. For, as I have also noted already, a light Bladder suspended
in the cavity of the Receiver betrayed no such motion as Mr. Hobbs here
supposes. To which I shall now add, that neither were a pair of Scales
suspended within the same Cavity; nor was a long Magnetical Needle that rested
upon the point of another Needle, at all whirled about by this imaginary motion
of the Air. Besides, if you leisurely loosen the Brass stopple, so that it may
be very near, but not contiguous, to the sides of the Socket, you shall
manifestly perceive a strong current of Air to flow into the Receiver at that
passage: And more than once, when instead of that piece of Brass we stopped the
hole in the Cover with our Cement, one might observe sometimes whilst we were
pumping, sometimes after we had done pumping, that the outward Air by degrees
depressed the superficies of the Cement exposed to it, and made it concave, and
now and then would break through it, thrusting it inward with great violence
and noise.

In the same page our Author rectifies, after his way, another of our
Explications in these words; Vidimus item aquam demissam in Recipiens post
Suctoris aliquot Page 13.
reciprocationes ita bullire, ac st supposito igne fervesceret.

A. Id quoque accidit propter velocitatem aeris, ut dictum est, in Recipiente
circumeuntis; nisi forte aquam illam dum bullit calidam quoque esse
deprehendatis. Nam si certi essemus illam calescere, alia causa Phaenomeni
excogitanda esset.

B. Imo certi sumus quod non calescit sensibiliter.

A. Quid ergo tali aquae motui confer posse putas majorem vel minorem
Atmosphaerae gravitatem?

B. Neque illum motum attribuunt, puto, Atmosphaerae.

But, I confess, I see not how the circular motion of the Air within the
Receiver could in a Vial with a long neck produce such effects as in my Epistle
are recited: especially I see not how such a wind passing along the Surface of
the Water could raise so many and so strangely-big bubbles, which seemed many
of them to rise from the lower parts of the Water, and swelled notably as they
ascended; and how such a wind should carry up the most part of the Water
through the long neck of the Vial, and as it were spout into the Receiver.

As for what he says about the gravity of the Atmosphere, it is plain enough
that my conjecture ascribes the Phenomenon to the taking off, not the gravity
of the external Air, but of the pressure of the Air within the Receiver; though
I see not why the removal of the weight of the Atmosphere, if it could be out
of the Engine effected, should not have a like operation.

And (to answer Mr. Hobbs's Question as it should have been put) that which I
think the greater or lesser pressure of the Air confers to this Phenomenon is
this, That whereas common Experience shows us, that water by being heated is
expanded, and has bubbles generated in it; and whereas our former Experiments,
especially the 28. have made it appear, that there is wont to be in water and
other liquors Aerial Particles, which tend to expand themselves, and do
actually do so, in numerous bubbles, when the pressure of the incumbent Air is
considerably lessened: In the present Phenomenon that pressure being by the
exhaustion of the Receiver taken off, the Aerial particles and agitated Vapors
that abound in the hot water are allowed to expand themselves, as before they
could not, and to make such numerous and great bubbles, that thereby a good
part of the water is carried out of the Vial. So that I somewhat wonder what
makes Mr. Hobbs speak as if there were no sensible heat of the water under
consideration, since it is expressly said that it was put in hot; and if it were
put in cold, could by no pumping be brought to the least show of Effervescence.
And as for his Explication of the Phenomenon, the Experimentarian Philosophers
need not the Objection lately made against it; For I have already evinced by
Experiments, that there is in our exhausted Receivers no such peculiar motion
of the Air as he ascribes the Phenomenon to; nay, when there is manifestly a
whirling about the Air in the Glass upon the admission of the external Air, the
production of numerous bubbles in the water presently cease. And therefore I
see not why Mr. Hobbs might not have let alone my Conjecture, (for I proposed
it, and look upon it, as no more) unless he could either have disproved it
better, or substituted a more probable one than he has in its place.

As for what he-adds in these words, Ab hoc experimenta manifestum est, quod
Recipiens per exuctionem hanc quam vocatis Aeris, non sit vacuum. Nam moveri
Page 3.
aqua non potuit nisi a movente aliquo moto and contiguo. Itaque
Phaenomenum hoc demonstrationem suppositionis meae continere videtur non
infirmam. I am not obliged to answer it, but leave that to those that are
professed Vacuists; against whom I must doubt whether his Ratiocination will
conclude, though the consequence be not manifest to me. For himself allows his
Terrestrial Atoms an innate circular motion, which consequently needs not
depend upon some body contiguous and moved; and the Vacuists will say, that the
particles of the water being strongly agitated when it was put into the
Receiver, (whether by fiery Corpuscles swarming in it, or otherwise) and the
resistance of the incumbent Air being taken off, the Phenomenon would be
produced just as it is, though we should suppose no other body to succeed in
the room of the exhausted Air. And besides, though some subtle particles of
active matter should get in to agitate the Aqueous and Aerial Corpuscles, yet
(they may say) there is no necessity that such minute particles should be
numerous enough to fill up exactly all the little spaces deserted by the Air.
And even upon this supposition, as it would not follow that such relinquished
spaces were all of them quite empty; so would not the Phenomenon at all prove,
much less manifestly prove, that they were quite full. And since an actual
heat, that is, a brisk and various Agitation of its small parts, is requisite
to the boiling of the water in this Experiment; perhaps others will not think
it more absurd, that the removal of the pressure of the Air should occasion
this expansive motion in the water, than that which Mr. Hobbs must allow, that
in Air comprest by Quicksilver, or some other weight, the removal of that
pressure is sufficient to make that Air expand it self by the flying abroad of
its parts.

And whereas Mr. Hobbs urges this other Argument against the Vacuists,
Praeterea dic mihi, bullientem aquam potuistin' conspicere? Page 13, 14.


B. Quidni?

A. Nonne visionem fieri concedunt vestri per actionem continuam ab objecto ad
oculum? Nonne etiam putant actionem esse motum, and omnem motum esse corporis?
Quomodo ergo potuit ab objecto, nempe aqua, ad oculos tuos motus per vacuum (id
est, per non corpus) derivare?

B. Non affirmant nostri it a vacuum esse Recipiens, ut nullus omnino aer
relict us sit.

A. Nil refert an totum Recipiens vacuum sit, an magna ejus pars; nam utrumvis
supponatur, derivatio motus ab objecto ad oculum intercipietur.

B. Ita videtur, nec habeo quod respondeam. The Vacuists will perhaps answer
him as I answered Franciseus Linus to an almost like Objection. And those of
them (which make far the greatest number) who plead but for an interspersed
Vacuum, will perhaps tell him, that they take Vision to be made not by such a
Propagation of Impulse as he does, but by a Trajection of Effluvia, that
issuing out of the Sun, and traversing the Diaphanous bodies interposed,
rebound from the object to the eye. And according to this Doctrine they may ask
Mr. Hobbs, why a motion may not be made through a Vacuum or non corpus? nay,
how it can naturally be stopped in vacuo where there is nothing to resist it? But
Controversies of this nature it lies not upon me to prosecute.

In the 14. page Mr. Hobbs having recited that Experiment of ours, of killing
Animals included in our Receiver by the exhaustion of the Air in two or three
minutes of an hour, subjoyns these words, Credin'tu animalia istatam cito
interempta esse eo quod carerent aere? Quomodo Page. 14.
ergo sub aquam vivunt Urinatores, quorum aliqui (assueti a pueritia) caruere
aere per horam integram? Inclusa in Recipiente animalia occidit motus ille idem
vehementissimus, quo distenduntur rumpunturque inclusae vesicae. But, though he
says no more in this place concerning this matter, yet it seems he either much
liked his own Conjectures, or greatly disliked mine, since in his Epistle
Dedicatory to the learned. Sorberius he singles out this sole Phenomenon to
explicate; Ego contra (says he there) neque aerem exugi posse, neque inclusum
animal (etsi exuctus esset) tam cito moriturum esse existimo. Actio quidem quam
mors illa sequitur videri potest vel suctio quaedam (and propterea exuctione
conclusi aeris interfici animal, respiratione sublata) vel etim compulsio aeris
ab omni part versus caentrum sphaerae cui animal includitur; and sic videri
potest mori a tenacitate compressi aeris, quast aqua suffocatum; nimirum
haustum in intima pulmonum aerem solito tenaciorem, inter arteriam and venam
pulmonis, cursum sanguinis intercipiendo sistere. But, as I proposed my
Conjecture doubtingly, and profess my self to be in a further enquiry about the
use of the Air and of Respiration; so I must still think, that we want some
further or clearer discovery about that matter, notwithstanding what has been
delivered concerning it by Mr. Hobbs. For his Argument against my Conjecture is
in the passage that propose, it answered by himself: for he plainly intimates
that Diverse who can live without Air (which yet I might question, if he means
without any Air at all) for a whole hour, are accustomed to it from their
Childhood. Wherefore, unless the Animals that dyed in my Engine had been for a
long time framed by degrees to live without Air, it will not follow that the
want of it could not dispatch them in a short time, as ordinary men may be
drowned in a few minutes. And having purposely let down some Mice and small
Birds into a deep Glass filled with water, and kept them from emerging by a
Weight tied to their legs or tayls, though some lived longer than others, yet I
observed them to be killed fast enough to keep my Conjecture from being
incredible: especially the last we made trial of, though a large and lusty
Mouse, appeared to be quite dead within somewhat less than one minute, measured
by the Vibrations of a Pendulum. And we particularly took notice, that before
drowning diverse bubbles, which seemed to be the respired Air, came out of their
mouths, and ascended through the water.

And as for the Explication that Mr. Hobbs would recommend instead of mine, not
to urge that I could wish he had been pleased to show us how the tenacious Air
he imagines to be inspired comes to produce those strange Convulsions and other
Symptoms mentioned in my Epistle; not to urge this, I say, we have already
disproved the supposition his Opinion is built on, namely, that there is in the
exhausted Receiver such a motus vehementissimus as he pretends: besides that he
shows not how this motion comes to kill the included Animals which I was wont
to keep, not near the Center of the Receiver, where he seems to think this
motion most operative, but near the bottom of it, that the included Animal
might have something firm under his feet. Nor does it at all clear the
difficulty, that he would have this motion the same whereby included Bladders
are distended and broken. For, besides that it is very hard to conceive how the
tenacity of the Air, or its beating from all parts upon the unequal Surface of
an almost quite empty Bladder, (for in such also the Experiment he refers to
will succeed) should make it burst outward; besides this (I say) we have
already proved that the distension and breaking of Bladders in our Receiver
proceeds not from any such motion of the neighboring Air as is here presumed,
but from a quite differing, if not from a contrary cause.

In the same page our Author makes a digression from the Engine, and discourses
of another Experiment which I have long since often made: but though his
Explication be liable enough to just Exceptions, (as I can make good if it be
required) yet because the Experiment is none of those I delivered, I shall
leave it to be examined by others: and for the same reason I forbear to meddle
with that he has in the next page concerning the Wind-gun, as to what he has in
the same 16. page in these words, Placet mihi tua magis Hypothesis quam illa de
vi aeris elastica: nam Page 16.
video quod a veritate illius veritas dependet vel vacui vel pleni; sed a
veritate hujus nihil sequitur in neutram partem quaestionis. Aeris, inquit,
structura similis est compressae lanae. Been est. Lana fit ex filis. Recte. Sed
cujus figurae? Si Parallelopipedi, nulla potestesse compressio partium: si non
Parallelopipedi, erunt inter fila illa spatia quaedam relicta; quae si vacua
sunt, supponunt Vacuum, ad probandum quod Vacuum est possibile; si plena,
plenum dicunt quod vacuum putant. To this passage, I say, I cannot but
represent, that the Question is not, whether from the Hypothesis that ascribes
a Spring to the Air, depends the proof of a Vacuum or a Plenum, but whether the
Hypothesis it self be true or no. For, sure there are many things certain in
Natural Philosophy, from whose truth that of a Plenum or a Vacuum cannot be
deduced. And to what he adds concerning the structure of the Aerial Particles,
the Vacuists may tell him, that they make no such Argument as he is pleased to
make for them; and do not commonly employ the Figure of the Aerial Particles to
prove a Vacuum, but other Arguments, such as Mr. Hobbs has not yet well
answered: and having by them, as they judge, proved interspersed Vacuities,
they might without inconvenience suppose in an Aerial Corpuscle little empty
Pores, upon whose account it may be capable of compression, in case they should
think fit (which I know not that any of them does) to assign it the Figure of a
Parallelopipedon. But this Controversy the Vacuists may, if they please,
prosecute. In the same page Mr. Hobbs begins, and in the next he continues, a
long discourse concerning the going out of fire in our Receiver upon the
exhaustion of the Air: the passage is too prolix, and does too little concern
the Spring of the Air to be here totally transcribed, or examined Period by
Period. In sum, he endeavors to do two things: the one is to reduce what
happens to kindled Coals placed in our Engine to what happens in certain Mines,
wherein when some thick damps ascend, both Charcoals and Candles are soon
extinguished thereby: the other is to show, that by the Reciprocation of the
Sucker, the Air impelled first into the Cylinder, and then into the Receiver,
is put into such a motion as gives it a certain middle consistence, as he
speaks, betwixt the consistence of pure Air and that of Water. But I shall not
need to examine this second part of his discourse, because I deny the first;
and being able to disprove the thing it self, namely, the thickness of the Air
in the exhausted Receiver, I need not spend time about what he teaches de modo.

To examine then only the first of the above mentioned particulars, I shall
begin with observing that his story of the damp to be met with in Mines is more
largely set down by Mr. Hobbs in that Chapter of his Elements of Philosophy,
where he treats of Gravity; in which place he seems to mention it (to use his
own Expression) as a story of doubtful credit, which it is not like he would
have done if had then seen it. Which I mention, not that I deny the story for
the main, nor that I would bring Mr. Hobbs into a suspicion of relating things
untrue as matters of fact, his enemies themselves having not accused him of
such a meanness; but because, if he have not since observed the thing himself,
there may easily be a mistake in some of the circumstances: as for instance,
the number of Minutes wherein the thick Air choaks the fire; and it is upon that
circumstance that the validity of what he deduces from the observation chiefly
depends. But, however the matter fare with these subterraneal Damps, we have
already proved by several of the Experiments of our Engine, that in the
exhausted Receiver there is no such motion of the Air as is here supposed. And
it may be sufficiently proved, that whatever remains in the Receiver is not
such a substance as Mr. Hobbs would have it: for that, he here tells us, is of
a consistence betwixt Air and Water; and in the above cited place of his
Elements he says, that it is not much lighter than Water. But by the
Magdeburgick Experiment (we have already had occasion to mention two or three
times) it is evident that the Receiver by being exhausted of common Air is so
far from growing heavier, much less so much heavier as it must if it were
filled with a substance not much lighter than Water, that it lost above an
Ounce of its former weight. And to this agrees what we see happen in
AEolipiles, that grow lighter when the Air is expelled. Besides, if the
Receiver be in our present case filled with a substance whose consistence is so
much nearer that of Water than is our common Air, as Mr. Hobbs would have it;
how chance a Pendulum should not move very sensibly slower in it, when in Water
the Diadromes are so exceedingly much more slow? And the breaking of an
Hermetically-seal'd bubble in our Receiver outward, when the Air was much
exhausted, and not before, together with diverse other Experiments that might be
easily applied to this purpose, in our Epistle, do sufficiently evince, that
it is not a thicker and far heavier Air, but a more yielding and lighter, that
remains after Pumping in the Cavity of our Receiver. And thus much as to Mr.
Hobbs's discourse upon our Experiment. But as for the thing it self, it appears
that when I related it I thought it might admit a further enquiry: And indeed
there may be so many ways of extinguishing Fire (as we see that the flame of a
Candle may be blown out by the wind, or quenched in water, or put out by the
compression of a pair of Snuffers, or suffocated for want of Air to receive its
fuliginous steams, or (if that be a different way) stifled by the thick
Exhalations of deep Mines or of new Wine) that as it is not in all cases so
easy to assign the true cause of the extinction of fire, so it is unsafe to
conclude with Mr. Hobbs, that because a Candle or a live Coal may a great way
under ground be extinguished by a thick Damp, therefore the effect must proceed
from the like cause in our Receiver, where there is no sign of any Damp or
unusual thickness of the Air, but of the contrary.

But let us follow Mr. Hobbs to the next passage, wherein he seems fond enough
of playing the Censor. For, speaking of our 11. Experiment, wherein the Coals
that seemed almost dead in our exhausted Receiver, being taken out into the Air
began to shine again, having made his Academian Dialogist say, Fuere eorum
aliqui qui remansisse dixerunt in carbonibus illis (quanquam extincti
videbantur) particulas quasdam igneas, quae admisso aere ventilate caeteram
Page 18.
molem denuo accenderent: The other (by whom Mr. Hobbs is meant) answers him,
Nae illi quae dicerent non videntur cogitasse, sed sortitos esse. This is very
severe. But let us see what weighty reason he has to be so: Credin' tu in
carbone ignito partem aliquam non carbonem, sed ignem Page 18.
esse; aut in candente ferro partem inesse quod ferrum non sit sed ignis? But
some will think that by these words he does rather propose than prove his
Opinion: wherefore let us hear his Ratiocination, which he annexes in the
following words, Ab unica scintilla magnae urbis incendium nasci potest. Atqui
si ignis corpus ab ignito diversum sit, Page 1^.
non plures potuere esse parts igneae in toto incendio quam in una illa
scintillula. Videmus corpora diversorum generum a luce Solis tam per
refractionem quam reflexionem factam in speculis comburentibus accendi posse:
neque tamen quenquam esse credo qui putet particul is igneas a Sole eject as
transire posse per substantiam globuli crystallini. In aere intermedio ignis
nullus est. But I doubt his Adversaries will say, that he is so far from having
in this passage well confuted their Opinions, that he seems not to have well
understood them: For they will tell him, that they teach not that the fire is
materially different from every part of the fuel; but that the igneous
Corpuscles, whilst they are divided, blended and oppressed with the others, have
not the power to shine or burn, till being by some spark or other body actually
burning, or by some other equivalent cause extricated, they flock together in
swarms, and then are able to burn and shine, that is, to appear fire: Which
fire is yet but a part of the fuel; as appears by the Phlegm, Ashes, and
perhaps other incombustible parts of the Coal or other fuel. So that the
Atomists and diverse others will not allow what Mr. Hobbs infers about an
incendium. And whereas he tells us he believes that no body thinks, Particulas
igneas a Sole eject as transire posse per substantiam globuli crystallini; he
seems to me to have very little heeded the Epicurean Hypothesis. For, not only
the learned Gassendus, but I know not how many other Atomists (besides other
Naturalists) Ancient and Modern, expressly teach the Sunbeams to consist of
fiery Corpuscles, trajected through the Air, and capable of passing through
Glass; whereby these Authors give an account of those specula ustoria that burn
by reflection. These things I represent, not that I intend here to adopt the
Atomists Opinion of the nature of Fire, of which I am not obliged to declare my
thoughts here, and have done it elsewhere; but to show that Mr. Hobbs's
Arguments are not a sufficient ground for so heavy a Censure. And if a Coal be
kindled at one end, though Mr. Hobbs would have the kindled end a Coal, not
Fire; yet if he please to hold it in his naked hand, he may find that differs
enough from the other end to deserve another name. And I, that but related a
Phenomenon, did not perhaps express my self much less warily, if not more so,
than Mr. Hobbs himself. For whereas my words are these, We presently took out
the Coals, in which it seems there had remained some little Parcels of fire,
rather covered than totally Page 79.
quenched: for in the open air the Coals began to be rekindled in several
places: Mr. Hobbs even in his Elements of Philosophy speaks thus upon a
somewhat-like occasion, If a Grate filled with Coals thoroughly kindled, and
burning never so brightly, be let down, as soon as ever it is below Chap. 30.
Sect. 14.
C. the fire will begin to grow pale, and shortly after (loosing its light) be
extinguished, no otherwise than if it were quenched in water: but if the Grate be
drawn up again presently, while the Coals are still very hot, the fire will by
little and little be kindled again, and shine as before.

As for the reason Mr. Hobbs assigns of our Experiment in the lately mentioned
passage of his Dialogue, being grounded upon such a thickness of the Air in the
Page 18.
Receiver as we have already disproved, it needs not to be examined. And
lastly, as to what he subjoynes in these words, Quando autem est quod de homine
vere pronunciare possumus quod est mortuus, sive (quod idem Page. 18.
est) animam expiravit. Cognitum enim est homines nonnullos pro mortuis
habitos, postridie elatos revixisse.

A. De puncto temporis quo anima a corpore separatur difficile est statuere.
Perge igitur ad experimenta alia.

I confess I see not why that needless Question might not have been well
spared, if he designed to give it no better Answer.

CHAP. VI. Wherein other passages of Mr. Hobbs's Dialogue that concern the
Author are examined
WHat our Author has in the 19. page concerning a Bladder has been already
examined, wherefore I proceed to the next passage in the same page, which is
this; B. Si acus magnete excitus libere pendeat intra Recipiens, sequetur tamen
ille motum ferri quod circumducitur extra Recipiens. Item object a intus posita
ab iis qui extra sunt videbuntur, and soni intus facti audientur, omnia haec
aeque post atque ante exuctionem aeris, nisi quod soni sunt aliquanto post quam
ante debiliores.

A. Manifestissima haec sunt signa Recipientis semper pleni, nec posse inde
exugi aerem. Quod autem soni inde sentiantur debiliores, signum est
consistentiae aeris. Consistentia autem aeris a motu ejus est per lineas
diametraliter oppositas. But I meet with few of the Vacuists, who, even in the
Torricellian Experiment, think the place relinquished by the Quicksilver to be
perfectly void, most of them allowing, that though it be not quite full of
body, yet it may contain some of the Earth's magnetical steams, or of those
igneous Corpuscles that flow from the Sun, or both of them. Now against these
who would from our Experiments deduce but only an interspersed Vacuum, I see
not that the Phenomenon mentioned by Mr. Hobbs do conclude half so manifestly
as he pretends: For, as to the motion of the Needle within the Receiver, it is
known that they are wont to ascribe Magnetical Attraction to certain Effluvia,
that issuing out of the Loadstone are subtle enough to pass through the Pores
of the closest bodies without excepting Glass; so that although the Receiver
were quite emptied before, the Needle might be wrought upon by Magnetical
Corpuscles, that need not be supposed to fill the 10th. part of the Receiver. I
know indeed that Mr. Hobbs has another Hypothesis of the Phenomenon of the
Loadstone, but I know that diverse learned Writers have absolutely rejected it,
and not one such that I have heard of has approved it. And as for the other two
Phenomenon here mentioned by Mr. Hobbs, the Atomists may answer, That the first
(touching Objects seen in the Receiver) has been shown already not to overthrow
their Doctrine: and that the other (concerning the Debilitation of Sounds)
makes against him, not for him; since we have already disproved that
consistence of the Air whereto he ascribes it. And the same Arguments that
overthrow that Opinion may make it seem somewhat strange, that he should
subjoyn our Experiment of two like Pendula, whose Vibrations we found not
manifestly to differ within and without our exhausted Receiver. For the former
should move far slower than the other according to Mr. Hobbs's Conceit, that
the Receiver, when we say it is exhausted, is filled with a substance of a
middle consistence betwixt Compare that in the 30. Chap. 14. Sect. of his
Physics with that of his Dialogue, page 15, 16.
pure Air and Water, and not much lighter than Water. But whether the Receiver
be in such cases adequately full or no, the Vacuists may further consider. For
its being granted to be full would not overthrow either of my Hypotheses,
namely, the Weight and Spring of the Air.

In the same 19. and some following pages Mr. Hobbs, has a long Discourse
against my Conjecture at the reason I propose in my 31. Experiment, why (as I
there express it) if the exquisitely polisht Surfaces of two flat pieces of
Marble be so congruous to each other, that upon their mutual application there
results an immediate contact, they will stick so fast together, that he that
lifts up the uppermost shall, if the undermost be not exceeding heavy, lift up
that too, and sustain it aloft in the free Air. The Conjecture it self is in
the same page thus set down, That the lower superficies of that (undermost)
stone being freely exposed to the Air, is pressed Page 6.
upon by it; whereas the uppermost surface being contiguous to the superior
stone, is thereby defended from the pressure of the Air, which consequently
pressing the lower stone against the upper hinders it from falling, as we have
elsewhere more fully declared. Which last words I therefore omit not, because
they show that I handle this matter in this place but incidentally, and may
make use of what I have delivered where I treat of it more expressly; as I have
since done in Print in the History of Fluidity and Firmness, which Mr. Hobbs
appears to have seen by those censures of some passages of it that I shall
hereafter examine.

His whole Discourse concerning my Conjecture, and his Scheme, would be too
prolix to be entirely inserted. But the thing his Discourse drives at is to
show, that neither the Spring nor Weight of the Air have any thing to do with
this Phenomenon: and therefore when he had made his Academian relate, that two
coherent Marbles suspended in our Receiver did not fall asunder upon the
exhaustion of it, he subjoyns that it was, Quia nihil istic erat quod ageret
Atmosphaerae pondus; and annexes, Experimento hoc excogitari contra opinionem
eorum qui Vacuum asserunt aliud argumentum Page 10.
fortius aut evidentius non potuit. Nam si duorum cohaerentium alterutrum
secundum eam viam in qua jacent ipsae contiguae superficies propulsum esset,
facile separarentur, aere proximo in locum relictum successive semper
influente; sed illa ita divellere, ut simul totum amitterent contactum,
impossible est, mundo pleno. Oporteret enim aut motum fieri ab uno termino ad
alium in instante, aut duo corpora eodem tempore in eodem esse loco: quorum
utrumvis dicere est absurdum. But how this should be so cogent and manifest an
Argument against the Vacuists I confess I do not well discern. For that which
it proves (if it prove any thing) seems to be, That in case the cohering
Marbles could be so severed as to lose at once their whole contact, the world
might be concluded not to be full: But I see not how it thence follows, that
therefore there can be no Vacuum. For my part I would demand, whether the so
strong cohesion of the Marbles be necessary or not to the plenitude of the
world. If it be, how chance a sufficient weight hung to the lower Marble can
immediatley draw them asunder? and if it be not, why does not Mr. Hobbs assign
some other cause of their so strong adhesion, if it depend neither upon the
Spring nor Weight of the Air? As for the non-separation of the two Marbles in
our Receiver, I have said in the same 31. Experiment, that the cause may
probably be the pressure of the Air remaining in the Receiver not sufficiently
exhausted. And this Conjecture I have more fully defended in what I have
written about it against Franciscus Linus, where I show, that it is no way
unlikely the remaining Air should be able to sustain a weight of four or five
Ounces hanging at the lower Marble, since the free Air was able to support
between 400. and 500. Ounces hanging at the same.

But Mr. Hobbs tells us, that the cause I assign of the cohesion of our Marbles
is liable to huge inconveniences; of the greatness of which we may judge by the
first of them Confitentur (says he) tum ipsi tum alii omnes, ponderationem
omnem conatum esse per lineas rectas undiquaque ad Page. 20.
centrum terrae; and proinde non Cylindrum vel Columnam fieri, sed per
Pyramidem, cujus vertex est centrum terrae, basis pars superficiei
Atmosphaerae. As if it were much material whether a body whose Basis is scarce
two Inches Diameter, and whose length amounts to some thousands of Miles, be
considered as a Cylinder or a Piramid. Certainly Stevinus and other learned
Writers of the Hydrostaticks would scarce have made this an Objection, since
they scruple not to make it a postulatum, that all not very distant
Perpendiculars be looked upon as parallel, though they allow such
Perpendiculars would meet in the Center of the Earth. What he adds partly in
these words, Conatus ergo punctorum omnium ponderantium propagabitur ad
superficiem Marmoris superioris Page 20.
antequam possit propagari ulterius (puta) ad terram, and partly in the
following lines, to prove that the whole endeavor of the Pyramid that leans
upon the upper Marble is terminated there, and that there is no endeavor of
the Atmosphere against the under-superficies of the lowermost Marble; This
Ratiocination seems grounded, partly upon a Conceit of his about the nature of
Gravity, according to which I see not why any Body placed between the sides of
that Pyramid or rather Cone, whereof the upper-superficies of the higher Marble
is the Basis, should descend upon the account of gravity; and partly from a
mistake of my Opinion: for I do no where, that I know of, speak as if I thought
this sustentation of the lower Marble were performed by little Globules or
other minute bodies protruding one another directly toward the Center of the
Earth, and rebounding from a perfectly smooth superficies; nor need I say, that
the lower stone is sustained by the pressure of the self-same pillar of the
Atmosphere that is incumbent on the upper, since other parts of the Atmosphere,
some on the one hand and some on the other, pressing obliquely upon the uneven
surface of the Earth, may have their pressure upward terminated against the
lower surface of the undermost Marble. And in the mentioned History of Fluidity
and Firmness, speaking ( page 187.) of the adhesion of flat Glasses, (and the
reason is the same in our flat Marbles) I plainly deduce it from the pressure
of the fluid Air, which, like a liquor, diffusing it self upon the surface of
the Terrestrial Globe, because its descent is there resisted, does, like water
and other liquors, press almost equally every way, and strongly endeavor to
thrust away any body against which it can bear; so that wherever the pressure
is taken off from one part of a body and not from the opposite, that body will
be pressed toward that part, whether it be downwards, or sidewards, or upwards,
where that formerly-equal resistance is removed. And this Explication I do in
that Discourse back with Considerations and Experiments, which Mr. Hobbs is not
pleased to take any notice of; wherefore I hold it not amiss to add here two
or three other experiments to one of those mentioned there.

First then, an AEolipile being by heat freed from Air as much as you can, if
the little hole at the extremity of the neck, by which the Air gets in and out,
be presently and carefully stopped with Wax, and afterward suffered to cool,
there will not be in the Cavity of the AEolipile a resistance any thing near
equal to the pressure of the outward Air. And therefore if you perforate the
Wax, that Air will violently be impelled in at the unstopt Orifice, whether the
neck be held parallel or perpendicular to the Horizon, or in any other
situation in respect of the Center of the Earth. And the like will happen if
the AEolipile be unstopt under water.

Next, I relate in the mentioned History, that having drawn some of the Air out
of a large Glass with a narrow mouth, and thereby destroyed the equality of
force betwixt the weight of the outward Air, and the now weakened spring of the
inward; I found that by immediately applying a flat body to the Orifice of the
Vessel, that body was readily lifted up and sustained in the Air as long as I
pleased, though the weight of it exceeded 20. Ounces.

Thirdly, I lately met with the relation of an Experiment which does abundantly
make out the power of the ambient Atmosphere to press bodies against each
other, when it cannot get between their internal surfaces. For the ingenious
Author of the Magdeburgick Experiment writes to the industrious Schottus, that
having caused two Copper Plates to be made almost in the form of Scales a
little above half an Ell in Diameter, and exactly congruous if laid upon one
another; Has (says our Jesuit) si mutuo sibi imponit, and aerem extrahit,
adeo ab externi aeris gravitate Schot. Mech. Hyd. Pneumat. page 461.
compressae atque unitae tenentur, ut sex viri robusti eas divellere non
possint. Quod si tandem adhibito omni conatu divellantur, crepitum edunt
sclopeti aut Musquetae explosioni non minorem; quamprimum vero per claviculum
feu Epistomium apertum vel minimus aditus laxatur aeri, sponte separantur.

And, Fourthly, if a Glass Vial (such as will be anon more fully described)
have a Pipe open at both ends so fitted into it, that no Air can get in or out
betwixt the neck and it; and if the Vial be so far filled with water, that the
lower end of the Pipe be well immersed therein; if then you suck at the upper
end of the Pipe, the water will ascend to a good height; which argues its being
forced upwards by the oblique pressure of the Air in the Vial; for it is only
in the Pipe and not in the Vial that there is any Air in the same Perpendicular
with the Water that is impelled up.

But let us follow Mr. Hobbs a little further. Having asked this Question, Sed
vis illa elastica quam in aere esse dicunt, nihilne ad marmor sustinendum
confer potest? he answers, Nihil omnino; non enim conatus in aere est Page
20, 21.
ullus ad centrum terrae magis quam ad aliud quodvis punctum Universi. Quoniam
enim gravia omnia tendunt a circumferentia Atmosphaerae ad centrum terrae, and
inde rursus ad circumferentiam Atmosphaerae per easdem lineas reflexas, conatus
sursum conatui deorsum aequalis erit, and proinde mutuo se perimentes neutra
conabuntur via. But that the Spring of the Air may perform somewhat in the case
proposed, I hope the newly-mention'd Experiments have evinced. And the reason
he annexes to his Negative, as also the difficult Example he subjoyns, of a man
lying in the bottom of the Sea, seem rather opposed to the Weight than the
Spring of the Air. But we have already both by Experiments and by his own
Concessions sufficiently proved that the Air is not devoid of gravity; and that
it likewise gravitates upon the terraqueous Globe, which in this page he seems
to deny, we have proved by diverse reasons, and particularly in our 25.
Experiment by the vast expansion of Air under Water, when the pressure of the
incumbent Air was taken off from the Water.

As for the Scheme he annexes, I confess I do not well see what he drives at in
it; at least if it be intended for a Confutation of the Conjecture I have been
defending: nor am I the only person that complain of his writing often enough
obscurely. And as far as we can judge by the conclusion couched in these words
Non potest ergo pars, BC. (which in the Explication of the Scheme he calls,
Pars Atmosphaerae intra totam posita ubicunque) (propter magnitudinem)
quantumvis gravis sit descendere, neque ergo premere sive gravitare; his
Notions about Gravity are somewhat strange, and probably either do not concern
us, or will be found repugnant to those Experiments on which our Conjecture is
grounded.

And as for what he adds, Si possibile esse negarem, ut diligentia and art
humana duae superficies corporum Page 22.
duorum inter se per omnia puncta ita accurate congruae fiant, ut ne minimo
quidem corpusculo creabili transitus permittatur, non video quomodo illi aut
suam Hypothesim tueri, aut negationem nostram improbitatis arguere jure
possent: I confess I do not see how this Argumentation proves any thing against
the Interest, either of the Weight, or so much as of the Spring of the Air in
the cohesion of our Marbles. For, provided that the Corpuscles of the Air get
not in between the two stones, the pressure of the Air may well suffice to keep
them together. And, lastly, as for that modest passage (that immediately
precedes the words newly recited) wherein he says, Vtraque illa phantasia, tum
gravitatis Atmosphaerae, tum vis Elasticae sive Antitupiae aeris, Page 21, 22.
somnium erat. Siquidem autem illis concederetur esse aliquam in filiculis
aeris Antitupiam, quaeretque aliquis, unde illa curvata quidem sed quiescentia
moverentur rursus ad rectitudinem, deberent illi, si Physici haberi volunt,
causam ejus aliquam possibilem assignare: We have already given an account why
we forbore to assign a cause of the motion of Restitution; but methinks Mr.
Hobbs might have, for the speaking so, chosen a fitter place than this, where
he gives me so far an opportunity to tell him again, that he should, if he
would be thought a Naturalist, have assigned some cause of the Phenomenon
about which he had all this while been desputing: which since even he himself
has declined to do, perhaps the Phenomenon will be thought somewhat difficult,
and my attempt at discovering the cause of it will be at least excused.

But after having so long dwelt upon the consideration of our Marbles, it is
high time to proceed to what remains.

In the 24. page Mr. Hobbs has that passage I formerly recited touching the
Glass-Fountains, out of which water is thrown up by compressed Air. But though
I as well as others have made use of such Fountains, invented by Vincenzo
Vincenti of Urbin, and was unsatisfied with the account he gives of their
Phenomenon; yet in regatd some learned men, and particularly Dr. Ward, have
already examined his Explication, and I am not obliged to do so; I shall only
take notice of what our Author objects to prove that this Phenomenon cannot be
solved by the Spring of the Air, in these words:

B. Cur non potest aqua, quae cum injiceretur particulas aeris comprimebat, ab
iisdem particulis se explicantibus Page 24.
rursus rejici?

A. Quia locum explicatae majorem non requirunt quam compressae. Quemadmodum in
vase aqua pleno, in qua esset multitudo anguillarum, anguillas sive in se
volutas sive explicatas idem semper capit locum. Propellere ergo aquam per vim
Elasticam, quae alia non est quam motus corporum se explicantium, non possunt.

B. Comparatio illa aeris cum aqua anguillis plena, nostris, credo, non
displicebit.

But the Elaterists will answer, that neither can his earthly Atoms, to whom he
ascribes the Rejection of the water forced in, truly fill up more parts of
space at one time than at another; and therefore the Objection might have been
spared: but indeed it reaches us not. For we, as Mr. Hobbs knows well, are not
wont to compare the Air to Eels, but to Wool: and though each hair that makes
up a compressed lock of wool, do not really fill more space with wool when
extended than when crumpl'd; yet when there is a congeries of these hairs
compressed together, the whole fleece or congeries does by its spring endeavor
to thrust away those contiguous bodies by which it is penned up, as I have more
fully explained in my Epistle; so that these Aerial Corpuscles, being pent up
by the water forced into the Glass, still endeavor to expand themselves by
throwing it out.

What our Author adds in the same page, as if they were mistaken that think
the Experiments of the Plenists tended (especially till of late) to prove that
the generality of them did not always mean by a Vacuum a space perfectly devoid
of all corporeal substance, but any space here below that is not filled with a
visible body, or at least with Air, (for these are my words to which I suppose
Mr. Hobbs alludes) To this, I say, it is scarce worth while to make answer, the
Controversy being of such small moment, (though I think I could easily enough
do it) especially since he rather excuses those that may have negligently
expressed themselves, than disproves what I said. And since I spoke chiefly and
by name of the Peripatetick Schools, he may well allow that their Expressions
concerning this matter were not always so accurate, whilst in this very
passage he concludes with these words, Vides quam ineptum sit ad explicationem
effectuum talium advocare verba Metaphorica, ut fugam vacui, horrorem naturae,
etc. Page 25.
quibus olim ad existimationem suam tuendam usae sunt Scholae. Nor is what he
adds concerning the Vacuum to be attributed to Democritus and Epicurus either
clear enough, or of concernment enough to our Dispute, to be insisted on by us;
especially since I see not to what purpose he brings it in.

But there are in this page two particulars, which, though they make little or
nothing against what I said of the Plenists, may deserve to be taken notice of.

The second (for I think it expedient to dispatch that first) is couched in
these words, In Hydriis perforatis ideo haeret aqua, quia quae per tantillum
foramen exiturit, adeo exigua est, Page 25.
ut non posset ita in longitudinem se diffundere, ut descendendo aditum aeri
faciat per foraminum circumferentias; neque aer ab exeunte aqua pulsus locum
alium (in mundo pleno) habere potest praeterquam quem aqua deseret.

But this Experiment I have already examined as it is proposed in his Elements
of Philosophy; and therefore I shall now only say to the light variation I
find of it here, that the reason here assigned why the water in Gardeners pots
closed at the top does not descend, is not rightly assigned, since (to omit
other objections) by Monsieur Paschall's Experiment it appears, that though in
Pipes of no great length the water will not run out, yet if the Pipe be long
enough, though the Orifice be no wider, the water will descend without giving
passage to the Air at the circumference of it.

But the other particular here mentioned by Mr. Hobbs, who thus proposes it,
Qui per fistulam ore aquam sugit, aerem medium prius sugit, quo distentum aerem
externum removet; qui remotus locum (in pleno) habere nisi Page 25.
proximum removendo non potest, and sic continua pulsione aqua tandem pellitur
in fistulam, succeditque aeri qui exugitur; deserves a more particular
consideration. For this account of the ascension of Liquors by suction is not
only here given by Mr. Hobbs, but for the main by the learned Gassendus
himself, and other Atomists, and is generally acquiesc'd in by the modern
Philosophers; perhaps the rather, because it seems not to establish or
overthrow a Vacuum. But though I shall not deny but that many Phenomenon of
Nature may be probably explicated by this Propagation and return of Motion; yet
there are some Phenomenon here below, which I see not how the Cartesians, or
the Atomists, or Mr. Hobbs can explicate without admitting the Spring of the
Air, and which perhaps by the Spring of the Air may be explicated without the
recurring to such a propagation and return of impulse. Diverse instances to this
purpose I elsewhere consider, but at present I shall propose only one
Experiment purposely devised to show that both Vacuists and Plenists should
admit an Elastical power in the Air. I took then a Glass-Vessel consisting of
two parts; the one was a Vial capable of containing about a pound of water, and
the other a Pipe open at both ends, the lower of which reached within two
Inches of the bottom of the Vial: this Pipe was by the Glass-man fastened into
the neck of the Vial, not by any Cement, lest, it should be pretended that the
Air might undiscernedly get in or out, but with melted Glass of a good
thickness: into this Vessel by the open Pipe I at length (for it is somewhat
difficult) poured water enough to swim a pretty way above the lower extreme of
the pipe, and then often inclined the Vessel, to give a free intercourse
betwixt the Air within the Vial and that without it, that if the internal Air
were comprest by the affusion of the water it might free it self, as it readily
did by ascending in bubbles along the inclined Pipe, till the outward and
inward Air were reduced to an equality of pressure. Now if all Suction were
produced by the pressure of the Air, thrust away by the dilated Chest of him
that sucks, and so thrusting the water or other liquor into the Pipe at which
he sucks, it seems evident, in our case, that the water would not ascend by
suction: since by the contrivance of the Vessel, the Air thrust away by him
that sucks cannot at all come to bear or press upon the water. And yet, whether
the Pipe were inclined or erected, the water did according to my expectation
easily enough ascend, upon suction, to the top of the Pipe, and ran over into
my mouth. I say, easily enough, because that though the Spring of the Air pent
up in the Vial were able, upon the decrease of the pressure of the outward Air,
occasioned by my sucking, to impell the water strongly enough into the Pipe;
yet, when a pretty quantity of water had been so impelled up, the included Air
gaining thereby more room to expand it self, its spring was thereby so far
weakened, that the water ascended far less easily than in ordinary suction. The
other circumstances worth noting in this Experiment belong not to this place;
and what has been delivered may, I hope, suffice for the purpose it is alleged
for. Only one particular I shall here add, by way of confirmation of what I
said touching the weakn'd Spring of the Air, and it is this; That partly to
show some, who yet embrace the Opinion of the Schools, that the ascension of
the water in the Pipe did not proceed from any such tendency in the water it
self to ascend for prevention of a Vacuum, and partly for other reasons that
concern not this place, I did carefully take out the water by degrees, till the
lower end of the Pipe was but very little under the surface of the water,
though in the cavity of the Pipe the water, as it usually will be in Pipes that
are not wide, was a pretty deal higher: then suffering the Vessel to rest, and
sucking at the upper end of the Pipe, the water (as I foresaw it would be) was
impelled up, yet without reaching near the top, till the surface of it was
fallen a little below the bottom of the Pipe. But then, though I continued
sucking, no more water ascended into the Pipe, but the Air passing through it
toward my mouth, did in its passage toss up the water that was already in the
Pipe, and turn it into bubbles, (of a strong bigness when the cavity of the
Pipe would permit it) which broke (not without noise) one after another: and
thus the ascending Air for a pretty while kept the water in the Pipe from
falling back to that in the Vial. But when I removed my mouth, the Spring of
the Air remaining in the Cavity of the Vial, being debilitated by the recess of
the Air I had (as men are wont to speak) sucked out, it was not able to resist
the pressure of the outward Air, and accordingly the water in the Pipe was not
only depressed into the Vial, but the outward Air forced its way in many
bubbles, and not without some noise, through the water contiguous to the bottom
of the Pipe, till the pressure of the included Air and that of the Atmosphere
were reduced to an equality.

But in the same 25. page our Author tells us, that the Society he writes
against would have the cause of Filtration, and that of the passage of water
through Siphons, to be the same. To which he annexes, this peremptory passage,
Id vero impossible est. Nam in Siphone nisi ambo crura aqua impleantur, aqua e
pelvi non ascendet. Ascensionis causa in pannum est motus ille terrearum
atomorum quae aquae contiguae sunt, motus (inquam) circularis simplex, aeri in
quo moventur communicatus; quae atomi aquam ferientes in materiam laneam
incutiunt, incussae autem magis magisque madefaciunt, donec madida tota sit.
Cum vero madida tota sit, etc. Thus far he; but the passage in my Epistle, upon
which he seems to have grounded his Opposition, is but this (wherewith I begin
my 35. Experiment) Some learned Mathematicians (I meant the industrious
Schottus and some Cartesians) have of late ingeniously endeavored to reduce
Filtres to Siphons; but still the cause of the ascension of water and other
liquor both in Siphons and in Filtration needing (for ought we have yet found)
a clearer discovery and explication, we were desirous to try, etc. So that
neither did I ascribe this reduction (of Filtres to Siphons) to a Society which
was not then in being, nor perhaps so much as designed; nor did I adopt it my
self; but expressed a desire to have it further examined. But as for the cause
of Filtration it self, I may take a fitter opportunity to discourse of it; in
the mean time I doubt whether the reason here assigned by Mr. Hobbs will not
seem as well precarious, as the motus circularis simplex of earthly Atoms,
whereon it is grounded. Nor does his Explication render a reason why
Quicksilver will not ascend the 14. part as high in the Filtre, though in part
immersed into it, as water, nay, will not reach so high where it is contiguous
to the Filtre, as where it is not: nor why it should begin to ascend, since, for
ought he shows to the contrary, the pressure of the Air, even in the sense he
takes the Air, ought to be the same on that part of the Surface of the Liquor
which is contiguous to the Filtre, and on any other part of the same Surface.
To which I shall only add, that as resolutely as Mr. Hobbs says it is
impossible for the water to ascend out of the Vessel into a Siphon, unless both
the legs be filled with that Liquor, he would probably have spoken more warily,
and distinguished betwixt Siphons, if he had been pleased to take notice of
what I relate in the-forementioned 35. Experiment, of a small Glass-Siphon I
devised, whereof when the shorter leg was but dipped in water, the Liquor did
presently as it were of it self run down the longer leg. Which Experiment,
besides other considerations, may induce us to suspect that the nature of
Siphons and of Filtration may not yet be so thoroughly understood, as not to
deserve a further enquiry.

But to draw at length toward a Conclusion of our troublesome Examen; it
remains only that I take some notice of the general Corollary that Mr. Hobbs
is pleased to deduce from his whole Discourse, of the Experiments exhibited in
our Engine.

A. Fateris ergo (says he) nihil hactenus a Collegis tuis promotam esse
scientiam causarum naturalium, Page. 23.
nisi quod unus eorum machinam invenerit qua motus excitari aeris possit talis,
ut parts sphaerae simul undiquaque tendant ad centrum, and ut Hypotheses
Hobbianae, ante quidem satis probabiles, hinc reddantur probabiliores.

B. Nec fateri pudet; nam, Est aliquid prodire tenus, si non datur ultra.

A. Quid tenus; Quorsum autem tantus apparatus and sumptus machinarum factu
difficilium, ut eatenus tantum prodiretis quantum ante prodierat Hobbius? cur
non inde potius incepistis ubi ille desiit? cur principiis ab eo positis non
estis usi? Cumque Aristoteles recte dixisset, Ignorato motu ignorari naturam,
quomodo tantum in vos suscipere onus ausi estis, etc.

As to what he says to the disparagement of the Assembly, and in his own
praise, the laws I prescribed my self at the beginning of this Discourse forbid
me to reply to what is more likely, amongst civil and judicious Readers, to
prejudice his own reputation than theirs he is so displeased with. And as for
that which he assigns to be the use of our Engine, I shall very willingly leave
it to the ingenious to judge what use may be made of it. But as for this
mentioned by Mr. Hobbs, if he means here, as he elsewhere teaches ( page 13.
and 19.) that the Motion he speaks of is produced by that of the Air impelled
betwixt the sides of the Sucker and the Cylinder; perhaps it will be thought I
have sufficiently proved, that it is not any of its uses, so far is it from
being its chief or only use. But I consess I somewhat wonder Mr. Hobbs should
quarrel with me, (for it is I that in my Epistle employ the following Verse) for
saying,

Est aliquid prodire tenus, si non datur ultra.

And this not, as some would perhaps suspect, because I do not imitate him, in
speaking of my self, as he does of himself, but because he thinks the
expression too arrogant. For since he here confesses that his Hypotheses are by
this Engine rendered more probable, some will perchance think that to be enough
to entitle my Experiment to some degree of usefulness, unless Mr. Hobbs's
Doctrine of the Air had found more embracers than before these seasonable,
though despised, Experiments it was observed to have. But, since either of us
may be partial in his own case, I am very well content to leave others to judge
both whether my Expression have been guilty of Arrogance, and how much he has
done more than prodire tenus in all the past long Discourse against me, when
they have considered what new Experiment or matter of fact Mr. Hobbs has
therein added to enrich the History of Nature, what new Truths he has
discovered, or what Errors (except one of his own in the last page) he has well
confuted. These things, I say, I am very well content to leave to be judged of
by all dis-interessed persons, without being much discouraged by the differing
strain wherein Mr. Hobbs thinks fit to speak of his own performances and mine,
or invited to imitate him in that way of writing, my Endeavors (such as they
are) having hitherto been favored with such a Reception among the Virtuosi,
that possibly I may have almost as little need as reason to commend them.

But it is somewhat trouble some work to argue long with a man that is angry with
an Expression, which perhaps none but he would have found fault with for want
of modesty; and therefore as I have lest un-recited several provoking and very
undeserved Expressions he emploies in the same page, and even that passage,
where to prove our Naturalists and Mathematicians professed they would not
receive Truth coming from him, he alleges only a saying (whether true or no I
examine not) of Dr. Owen, who, besides that his profession was Divinity, not
Philosophy or Mathematics, neither is nor ever was of our Society; as, I say,
I have (for the reason newly intimated) declined taking notice of matters of
this nature; so I will not now stay to enquire why he urges us, whom he would
have men take for Vacuists, with the Authority of Aristotle, whom on other
occasions he is wont to use with as little respect as if he were a Member of
our Society. Nor shall I now examine, why here and elsewhere he sends us to his
own Writings for the Doctrine of Motion, as if, to omit ancienter Authors, such
great Personages as Galilaeo, Mersennus, Verulam, Descartes, Gassendus,
Balianus, Foannes Marcus Marci, Honoratus Fabris, (not to mention other
Moderns, nor those of our own assembly, as the eminently learned Sir Kenelme
Digby, and the others, whom their Modesty forbids me here to name) had not most
of them learnedly, and some of them copiously, written of Local Motion before
Mr. Hobbs's Books, where he treats of it, came abroad into the World. This, I
say, I shall not insist on, because I would hasten to a Conclusion. Only one
thing I must add, that whereas he accuses us of devising elaborate and
sumptuous Engines, I do not fear to find so many Readers of his mind, that I
need make them Excuses for what perhaps will obtain their Thanks. And whatever
Mr. Hobbs may think, for my part I freely confess, that I love Truth so well,
that I do not think, no only my Pains and Charges, but even what I rate much
higher, my Time it self, too much for the discovery of Truth; or (that Mr.
Hobbs may not think me partial) even for the establishment of such Truths as,
though discovered by some, are yet as far more generally opposed than embraced.

There remain yet some other pages of Mr. Hobbs's. Dialogue, wherein he speaks
of Fire, and Cold, and Ice, and Light, and Colors, and Fluidity, and Hardness,
and Thickness, and Ethics, and Politics, and the Duplication of the Cube, and
the Quadrature of the Circle, and several other Subjects. But these I forbear
to meddle with, not that I approve them all, or the greatest part, but partly,
because I am too much tired already to be fond of engaging in Controversies
that I am not tied to meddle with, (except what concerns Fluidity and Firmness,
which I shall, God willing, examine by it self;) partly, because diverse
passages relate to Persons, not Things: partly, because I do not much fear that
Mr. Hobbs will find every Reader so easy and complaisant as he makes his
Academian, who in many passages of the Dialogue speaks not unsutably to what he
does in the last page ofit, where he excepts but one particular (and that is
neither the Duplication of the Cube, nor the Squaring of the Circle) when he
tells Mr. Hobbs, Discedo jam multo (ut mihi videor) quam ante certior, and quae
dixifti omnia teneo and probo: and partly, because Mr. Hobbs has some things,
as about Fire, and certain Colors, which I am not forward to reject, though
the Considerations that incline me to some such Opinions be perhaps very
differing from the Grounds on which he proposes them. And indeed as well my
Nature as my Custom forbids me to scruple to learn, if I can, of Persons much
less famous than Mr. Hobbs. It Is far from my humor to write against all that
every man says, that (how causlesly soever) writes against me; and I am almost
as much indisposed to reject as to embrace, without distinction, whatever it be
that this or that man teaches.

CHAP. VII. (Being an APPENDIX to the past Discourse) Wherein is examined what
Mr. Hobbs teaches concerning Fluidity and Firmness.
ALthough Mr. Hobbs do not name me for the Maintainer of the Opinions which I
have proposed in the History of Fluidity and Firmness, and which he censures:
yet since that History, after having been mentioned in the Book I have hitherto
been defending, was published a good while before Mr. Hobbs's Dialogue; and
since some of the chief particulars he censures or takes notice of, are
delivered there, and some of them perchance no where else; I think it may
concern me to examine what he says either against my Opinions, or in favor of
his own, touching Fluidity and Firmness. And if it be said that he meant not
his Objections particularly against me, but rather against some other person,
who may have liked such Opinions: I shall answer, That I am content to leave to
others the defense of their particular Opinions, and to have as much of the
following Discourse as is concerned in this Allegation, looked upon as written
only upon this supposition, that my writings are those he designs to oppose.
But there being other things in what he discourses about Fluidity and Firmness,
which for the reasons freshly intimated I think fit here to consider, I choose
to gather up together the passages touching these subjects which I find
scattered in his Dialogue, that I may have the better opportunity to clear up
the matter it self under debate.

But, before I go further, I must at the very entrance of this Discourse take
notice, that in the fifth page, where Mr. Hobbs begins to dispute against our
Notion of Fluidity, he very much mistakes my Opinion, as may appear by these
words, which he puts into the mouth of his Academian, Sed plerique nostrum
naturam fluidam a non fluida distinguimus Page 5.
magnitudine partium ex quibus corpus aliquod constat, and quasi compingitur:
Itaque non modo aerem; aquam and liquorum omnem, sed etiam cinerem and
pulverem, tanquam fluida contemplamur. Et fluida ex non fluidis composita esse
posse non negamus; nam divisibilitatem illam infinitam non concoquimus. To
which he answers, Divisio quidem infinita concipi non potest, divisibilitas
autem facile. Ego contra, distinctionem non capio intra fluida and non fluida
quam sumitis a magnitudine partium; nam si caperem, ruina illa sive rudera illa
quae jacent in Ecclesia Paulina mibi dicenda essent fluida: sin propter nimiam
lapidum magnitudinem fluida illa esse negaveritis, defini mihi magnitudinem
illam quam habens pars ruentis muri, propter eam sit dicenda fluida. Tu vero
qui divisibilitatem infinitam non capis, dic mihi quae tibi apparet causa,
quare Deo omnipotenti difficilius esse putem creare corpus fluidum, and cujus
parts actu diffluant, omni data atomo minus, quam creare Oceanum. Itaque
desperare me facis omnem conventus vestri fructum, dicendo quod putant aerem,
aquam, and caetera fluida constare ex non fluidis, tanquam si murum, cujus
ruentes lapides aliquousque discurrunt, dicerent esse fluidum. Si sic loquendum
est, nihil non est fluidum; nam etiam marmor comminui potest in parts omni
atomo Epicureana minores. Thus he. But in my History, though I make the
smalness of the parts whereof a body consists one of the requisites to its
being fluid; yet at the end of the 13. Section I call the various agitation of
those Particles the principal qualification of all, and in the beginning of the
14. Section I call it the chief condition of a fluid body. And therefore he
much mistakes, if he thinks that we always consider Ashes and Dust as fluids
absolutely speaking. But as he Hobbs de Corp. chapter 27.
somewhere tells us, that by Fire he understands the combustible matter it
self, not simply and always, but then only when, etc. So neither do I look
upon the Dust of Alabaster, (to my words about which, I suppose, he has a
respect in the passage under consideration) as a fluid body simply and always;
for I clearly teach the contrary, but only when and whilst its parts are not
alone reduced to a competent smallness, but are also actually put into such a
various agitation as makes the body they compose (even according to Mr. Hobbs's
own Definition, which is, That Fluid bodies are those whose parts may by very
weak endeavor be Mr. Hobbs de Corpore, cap. 26. part. 4.
separated from one another) emulate a fluid body by the very easy Cession of
its component Corpuscles, and by its boiling like a liquor. By this the Reader
may discern how little that makes against me which Mr. Hobbs talks, and seems
to do it seriously, of the Ruins of Paul's; as if according to my Opinion,
Ruina illa sive rudera a quae jacent in Ecclesia Paulina dicenda essent fluida.
For it is most evident that I require in the parts of a fluid body both
minuteness and such a motion along each other as makes them easily yield to the
touch: which qualifications how well they belong to the ruins of Paul's, is, I
think not very difficult to determine; though in the same passage Mr. Hobbs do
again make use of the like example, to which he subjoyns. Si sic loquendum est,
nihil non est fluidum; which how little it follows from my Doctrine about
Fluidity there needs not a quick-sighted Reader to discern. As for the Reason
he annexes in these words, Nam etiam marmor comminui potest in parts omni
atomo Epicureana minores; I would gladly know by what art Mr. Hobbs can divide
Marble into lesser Particles than such as are naturally indivisible, (for such
Epicurus makes his Atoms to be:) nor do I see how, in case this could be done,
it proves, that there is not any thing that is not fluid. For I say that the
blocks of Marble before Comminution are not fluid, either according to him or
according to me; nay, the greatest Comminution imaginable would not, according
to my Doctrine, make a lump of Marble fluid, unless the heap composed of the
parts, how minute soever, were actually and variously set a moving amongst
themselves. But he would perhaps have spoken more warily, if he had considered
the difference there is betwixt saying that all things are fluid, and saying,
as I do, that there are many bodies that are now solid, which by Comminution,
Motion, and other requisite alterations, may be made parts of a fluid body: As
hard Ice may be turned into fluid Water, and Quicksilver precipitated per se
into a red Powder, may be reduced to running Mercury. As for what he says of
an infinite divisibility of body, it is scarce in this place worth while to
examine it.

For I have shown in the History of Firmness, that this Divisibility (which I
had then considered) does no way overthrow my Doctrine of Fluidity; nor does
Mr. Hobbs here answer what I there discourse. Besides that indeed I donot so
well understand what he means and drives at, when he says that Divisio quidem
infinita concipi non potest, Divisibilitas autem facile. For since in this very
passage and within a very few lines he has recourse in this matter to God's
Omnipotence, I see not why an infinite division cannot be as well conceived as
an infinite divisibility, since sure an Omnipotent Agent is able to do what is
possible to be done; and why else should a body be called infinitely divisible?
Besides, when Mr. Hobbs has recourse to what God can do, (whose Omnipotence we
have both great reason to acknowledge) it imports not to the Controversy about
Fluidity to determine what the Almighty Creator can do, but what he actually
has done. And, lastly, whereas my Adversary requires to have the magnitude
defined which a part of a falling Wall ought to have to deserve the name of
fluid; first, he should have clearly proved that Fluidity belongs to any one
single part of matter how minute soever, and not rather to an aggregate of
Particles. And next I say those Corpuscles that compose a fluid body may be of
several sizes, as those of Water, Oil, and Quicksilver, provided they be little
enough to be put into the agitation requisite to give the aggregate they make
up the qualities that are wont to denominate bodies fluid; and it is no more
requisite for me to define precisely the magnitudes of the parts of a fluid
body, than for Mr. Hobbs in his Definition above-recited to define (which he
will not easily do) what precise degree of endeavor must be signified by that
very weak endeavor, by which if the parts of a body can be separated from one
another, he thinks fit to call them fluid. But though I thought it not amiss to
make these Animadversions upon Mr. Hobbs's Ratiocination, yet as to the Opinion
it self, for whose sake he speaks so severely and so despairingly of our
Society, if it be considered as I proposed it, he shows me as yet no cause at
all to renounce it. For that which I taught is this, That if a solid body be
reduced into parts minute enough, those solid Corpuscles, whilst they are put
into a convenient motion, may become parts of a fluid body. And against this
Mr. Hobbs's indignation seems stronger than his Argument: For that which he
objects being as we have lately seen, that at this rate all bodies must be
fluid; it is evident by what I have already argued, that he infers this
Absurdity not from my Opinion, but his own mistake of it: nor did I content my
self with the proofless proposal of my Conjecture, but I delivered in several
parts of the often mentioned History particular Experiments to evince what I
taught: As that a consistent coagulum of pure spirits of Urine and Wine may by
bare digestion be turned into a permanent liquor; and that the fluid body of
Quicksilver may without any sensible addition be turned into a permanent dry
Powder, and may again in a trice by bare heat be turned into a lastingly fluid
body. Whereto I added other Experiments, which together with these Mr. Hobbs
would possibly have thought fit to answer, if he had found it easy for him to
do so.

After this passage extant in Mr. Hobbs's fifth page that I have all this while
been examining, I remember nothing in his Dialogue that requires to be insisted
on about Fluidity and Firmness, till we come to the 29. page, where having
asked what cause the Academians assign of Hardness, it is answered that some of
them assign three: to which Mr. Hobbs so far agrees as to say, Quin corpuscula
(qualia sunt atomi quas supponit Page 29.
Lucretius atque etiam Hobbius) jam ante dur a facile possint ab aliqua dict
arum causaram compingi, it a ut totum ex illis factum durum fiat, dubitandum
non est. But then he would have us assign the cause of that he calls durum
primum. But after some discourse, wherein he is pleased to approve an Objection
of mine against some learned men that ascribe all Cohesion of bodies to a
certain Glue, he answers himself the Objection he frames against my Doctrine
about Hardness, and thereby allowed me to proceed to what he further presses in
these words, Si dura ex primis duris fieri dicant, quare non and fluida fieri
putant ex primis fluidis? An creari fluida maxima potuere, ut ether, minima
Page 30.
non potuere? Qui Corpusculum durum aut fluidum primus fecit, potuit, si
libuisset, illud fecisse tum majus, tum minus quocunque corpore dato. Quod si
fluidum fiat ex non fluidis, ut vos dicitis, and durum ex duris tantum, nonne
sequitur ex fluidis primis neque fluidum fieri neque durum? But against this
passage I have diverse things to represent. For, first, (not now to mention that
it may be questioned with what propriety one part of matter more than another
may be called primum durum) he should have told us what he means by his prima
fluida, and how he proves that there are any such; which since he has not done,
'twill be at least as hard for a considering man to acquiesce in his Question
as to answer it. For my part, I know no fluid body upon whose account, as of an
Ingredient, all others are fluid. And, I think, 'twill be hard for Mr. Hobbs to
show that Water, Quicksilver, and purely-rectifi'd Chemical Oils (to name now
no other liquors) do consist of such fluida prima as he teaches, whereto they
owe all their Fluidity. And it is plain by several Experiments delivered in our
History, and even by the obvious changes of Water and Ice into one another,
that it is the motion, rest, and the texture of the Corpuscles which compose a
Body, that make it firm or fluid. As for what Mr. Hobbs demands, whether the
smallest Fluids imaginable could not as well have been created as the Ether,
it proves nothing against me, the Question not being, what might have been
made, but what is so. And he should have answered the Arguments I History of.
Firmness, page, 227. and elsewhere.
allege to make it improbable that a fluid body is, as he would persuade us in
his Book Chap. 16. Sect. 4.
De Corpore, always divisible into bodies equally fluid, as Quantity into
Quantities. It Is true, he there tells us that, though many others do not, He
understands by Fluidity that which is made such by Nature equally in every part
of the fluid body, in such manner as water seems fluid, and to divide it self
into parts perpetually fluid. But whether others will take this for a clear
Notion of Fluidity I think may well be doubted; and he should not barely say,
but prove, (which, I think he will find hard to do) that the Corpuscles of
water divide themselves so as he teaches, since we see, that not only they
cannot penetrate Glass, but are unable to be driven in at the Pores of more
open bodies, which other liquors easily pierce into. And, lastly, as to Mr.
Hobbs's Question, Quod si fluidum fiat etc. it is easy to foresee what
according to my Doctrine I may answer: For, not to mention that the
Argumentation is invalid, unless by Fluidum he mean Omne fluidum, I reply, That
till he have explained what he means by his Fluida prima, and proved that there
are such, the Question needs no Answer. Besides that whatever he upon mistakes
strives to infer, my Doctrine is so far from affirming that there are many
parts of matter of which neither fluid nor hard bodies can be made, that I
teach, as we have lately seen, that there are multitudes of parts that may, by
being reduced to a sufficient smalness and put into a convenient motion, or by
being brought to a mutual contact and rest, be made to constitute either a
fluid body or a firm one: as may be exemplified in the formerly-mentioned
instances of two subtle liquors that immediately composed a consistent body;
and of Quicksilver, which without additaments was made sometimes a Powder, and
sometimes a liquor. What Mr. Hobbs adds in the next page about the difficulty
of explaining the Diaphaneity of Glass or Crystal, in case they Page 31.
consisted of Corpuscles hard and implicated, or having their Pores in any way
whatsoever disjoined, I must not now insist on; since besides that such a
disquisition would require almost a Volume, the true and general cause of
Transparency in bodies is in my poor Opinion one of the abstrusest things in
Natural Philosophy; and Mr. Hobbs's Explication of it (though none of his worst
Conceits) has for ought I can find fallen short of satisfying the Curious, as
well as those of other men have done. But to me, that have not taken upon me to
write Elements of Philosophy, it is enough that I have by competent Experiments
and other Proofs confirmed the truth of my Doctrine about the cause of
Firmness; though I attempt not to explicate the other qualities of the same
bodies, whose Explication my undertaking does not exact. Wherefore I hope I may
now hasten to conclude this Appendix, with spending a few words on the Notion
of Fluidity and Firmness Mr. Hobbs would substitute instead of mine. For,
having now (perhaps but too prolixly) examined what he has been pleased to
object against my doctrine, I shall not need spend time to vindicate the
Experiments and Considerations whereon I built it, Mr. Hobbs, for reasons best
known to himself, not having thought fit to take notice of them.

Mr. Hobbs's Theory of Fluidity and Firmness is thus delivered by himself;

B. Quaenam duri and fluidi sunt principia?

A. Quid aliud nisi fluidi quidem, Quies, duri autem, Page 30.
Motus quidam ad illum effectum producendum idoneus? Per Quietem intelligo duar
am partium inter se quietem cum se mutuo tangunt quidem, sed non premunt: Nam
and fluida moveri tota possunt retenta fluiditate, and dura quiescere, ut tamen
parts eorum moveantur.

I doubt not but this will to most Readers seem a Paradox. And as for his
Ratiocination contained in the two last lines, I shall readily allow him that
Fluida moveri tota possunt retent a fluiditate, since that I think agrees at
least as well with my Hypothesis as his: but whereas he adds that hard bodies
may rest, and yet their parts be moved, that may in one case be conceived, and
in another not. For indeed the implicated parts of a firm body may be made to
tremble or a little vibrate as it were to and fro, as those of a sounding Bell
do, or as in a Hedge the branches and twigs may be shaken by the wind, whilst
the trees and bushes themselves continue rooted in the ground. But that in a
body the constituent Corpuscles should all or most of them be moved quite out
of their places in respect of one another, as was lately shown to happen in
fluids, and yet the body continue hard, is more requisite than easy to be
proved.

But Mr. Hobbs contents himself to allege in favor of his strange Notion
touching Fluidity and Firmness three particulars, which, I confess, afford me
not the least satisfaction.

The first is drawn from what he formerly taught touching the swift motion of
the Air in our Cylinder; which example (as he calls it) having repeated, he
adds, Atque hinc manifestum est vehementem esse in aere it a moto and clauso
compressionem, Page 30.
quantam scilicet efficere potest vis illa qua incussus erat; atque etiam a
tanta compressione aliquem gradum consistentiae fieri, quanquam consistentia
aquae minorem. Quod si esset in iisdem particulis aeris omnibus, praeter motum
illum quo alter a alteram premit, motus ille circularis simplex, isque satis
vehemens, impossible fere esset unam earum a suo circello dimoveri, quin
reliquis particulis resistentibus, totus simul premeretur, idest, totum durum
esset: durum enimest totumillud, cujus nulla cedit parsnisi cedente toto. Vides
ergoposse fieri duritiem in fluidissimo aere per motum hunc circularem
simplicem particularem, quibus duo motus contrarii ante dederant vertiginem.

But, I confess, I do not see how the Motus circularis simplex he talks of
should give such a hardness to the fluid Air: nor is it manifest to me how the
Air that perfectly fills the Cylinder can be by motion compressed, especially
so far as to obtain thereby a degree of consistence fit to be mentioned, as he
speaks of it, when (without adding the word much, or any other equivalent term)
he says that yet it is less than the consistence of water. For the Cylinder
being, according to him, perfectly full of Air, I see not how the Pumping can
make the Cavity (to use his own expression elsewhere) fuller than full; nor
consequently can compress the Air to a consistence any thing near that of
water, without penetration of Dimensions. But these things were mentioned only
ex abundanti, for the violent motion it self of the Air in the Cylinder (which
motion the Argument supposes) has been already, in the Examen of one of the
former passages of his Dialogue, sufficiently manifested to be contrary to
Experience.

The second thing Mr. Hobbs alleges is his Conceit of the Generation of Flesh
within the Muscles of the humane body. But besides that he takes for granted
two or three things which many learned Anatomists and Physicians, even among
the Moderns, will scarce allow him, and which he does not prove: besides this,
I say, (which I may elsewhere have occasion to consider further) the account he
gives of the Generation of Flesh from these suppositions, is far from being
evidently enough deduced to vie for clearness with many of those Experiments
which I have alleged in favor of the Opinion he opposes. And whereas he adds,
Atque talis quidem esse potest causa efficiens Duri primi, Duri autem secundi,
id est, Duri a cohaesione Page. 31.
durorum primorum, causa potest esse motus ille idem circularis simplex
conjunctus cum contactu eorundem superficiali, vel etiam intricatione: Not
again to say any thing to his durum primum, I confess I do not see how the
motus circularis simplex should need to be superadded to the Contact or
Intrication of the cohering firm Corpuscles, to procure a Cohesion, to
which'tis needless, and which in diverse cases may be rather hindered than
furthered by it.

The third thing that Mr. Hobbs alleges is not so much a confirmation of his
own Doctrine, as an Objection, as he seems to think, against that of his
Adversaries. For, Si supponamus (says he presently after his last-recited
words) Page. 31.
cum illis, duritiei causam esse magnitudinem aut crassitiem partium, quam
rationem reddere poterimus, cur durior vel firmior sit aqua congelata, quam est
eadem aqua ante congelationem? But it may easily be replied, That we make not
the bigness or grosness of the parts of a body the only or chief cause of its
hardness, but their rest by one another, which the parts of frozen water have;
whereas those of unfrozen water have it not, but are in a state of Fluidity,
and consequently not of Firmness. Which may be illustrated by what I In the
History of Fluidity and Firmness.
elsewhere relate of pure Oil of Aniseeds, and a substance I distilled out of
Benzoin, both which bodies were sometimes fluid and sometimes consistent, as
the greater or lesser warmth of the Air kept their parts in a due motion or
suffered them to rest.

But in exchange of these few and unconcluding arguments, which are all that
Mr. Hobbs alleges to countenance his Paradox, how many Experiments and Reasons
mightwe transcribe out of our History of Fluidity and Firmness in favor of the
contrary Truth?

And as Critical as Mr. Hobbs appears in laying down the requisites of a good
Hypothesis, I must make bold to the two conditions he mentions (page 11.) Vt
sit conceptibilis (idest, non absurda) (which whether it be enough I now
dispute not) and Vt ab ea concessa inferri possit Phaenomeni necessitas, to
add a third, namely, That it be not inconsistent with any other Truth or
Phenomenon of Nature. Which third condition whether diverse of Mr. Hobbs's
Hypotheses (which himself in this place calls mirandae) do not want, we have in
part already considered in the Treatise to which this is an Appendix; and (as I
newly intimated) I might further show as to his Notion of Fluidity and
Firmness, if I would here repeat all the Experiments mentioned in my History of
them, though they be not all that I have made ready to the same purpose against
another opportunity: but partly weariness, and partly a natural unwillingness
to repeat, induces me rather to refer my Reader thither. Which when I do, I do
not forget that Mr. Hobbs appears offended at me and others for troubling our
selves to make un-obvious Experiments. But that I may not repeat what in diverse
Treatises I represent concerning the Usefulness of such Experiments, I shall
now only oppose to the Authority of Mr. Hobbs in this Dialogue, wherein he has
been pleased to choose those he calls the Experimentarian Philosophers for his
Adversaries, the Authority and Reason of the same Mr. Hobbs in another Dialogue
(published but the year before) where one of his two Discoursers having said,
Qui corpora corporibus admovendo, nova and mirabilia ostendunt Naturae opera,
mirum in modum incendunt animos hominum Mr. Hobbs in Examinat. and Emendatione,
etc. Dialog. 6.
amore Philosophiae, and ad causas investigandas non parum instigant, eoque
nomine laud digni sunt: the other confirms it by adding, It a est; nam
historiam Naturalem (sine qua scientia Naturalis frustra quaeritur)
locupletant. And howsoever Mr. Hobbs needed not have recourse to such
Experiments as he would be thought to disapprove, (I mean Elaborate ones) to
discern that his Notions do not over-well agree with the Phenomenon. For, if
there be not a various motion in the small parts of Water and such liquors,
whence is it that a lump of common Salt being thrown into a pot of water is
there dissolved into minute bodies, whereof many are carried to the very top of
the water, and are so exquisitely diffused and mingled with the liquor, that
each least drop of it contains numbers of Saline Corpuscles? And if motion be
the cause rather of hardness than fluidity, how comes it to pass that in frosty
weather Ice is by heat (which Mr. Hobbs will not deny to be motion, or an
effect of it) turned from a hard to a fluid body? And that Metals, as Gold and
Silver, etc. whilst they are either cold, or exposed but to a moderate heat are
firm and consistent bodies; and by a violent heat, which does manifestly give
their parts a various and vehement agitation, (as appears by their sudden
dissipating of Spittle, Grease, and far more stable bodies, cast upon them,
into smoke) are put into a fluidity, which upon their removal from the fire
they quickly exchange for firmness?

But since the want of more to say would not in haste put a Period to this
Discourse, I am content to let my Haste break it off; especially since after I
have thus examined what Mr. Hobbs teaches concerning Fluidity and Firmness,
either here, or in that Section of his Elements where he pretends to define
them, I think I need not fear that a Doctrine which I have perhaps with some
care endeavored to establish, for the main, upon Experiments, should be
overthrown by Opinions whose grounds are but such as we have already seen; and
in pleading for which the Author is pleased not only to leave almost all my
Arguments untouched, but not so much as to offer at explicating by his
Principles any of those numerous and important Phenomenon of Fluidity and
Firmness delivered in the Treatise he opposes.

And now leaving Mr. Hobbs to apply my self to the Reader, I have to the things
hitherto discourst but this one thing to add concerning them, That as little
cause as Mr. Hobbs has hitherto given me to distrust what I have written of
Fluidity and Firmness; yet I am not now more confident of my Conjectures than I
was, when toward the end of the Preface to the History of these two Qualities I
spoke diffidently enough of the Theorical part of that Treatise. And I freely
confess, that the great difficulty of things, and the little abilities I find
my self furnished with to surmount it, do often in general beget in me a great
distrust even of things whereof my Adversaries Objections give me not any.

FINIS.
The Citations Englished
Page 12. Quanquam vis, etc. Although the force of that motion in the evacuated
Receiver be diminished, being oppressed by the consistence of the Air moved
within, yet it is not extinguished: and therefore that oppression being taken
off will have strength enough to excite an appearance of light, though somewhat
weaker than ordinary.

p. 13, 14. Sine, etc. Without which Hypothesis let never so much labor, art,
cost be bestowed for the finding out of the invisible causes of natural things,
all will be in vain.

p. 15. Cum ejus, etc. Seeing almost all its parts are flexil, like little soft
feathers to fine threads.

Ibid. Sed quisquis, etc. But it matters not who was the Author of that
Supposition. For the very Hypothesis it self, wherein is supposed a motion of
subtle matter, which is swift without any cause assigned, and has moreover
diverse innumerable circulations of Corpuscles generated from the single motion
of that matter, is not the conceit of a man of wit or sense.

p. 16. Nempe hoc, etc. This is the thing that the great Descartes somewhere
admired, that he, whether his Positions are true or false, does never in
argumentation make any right inference from his Suppositions.

p. 17. Quod sane, etc. Which is indeed a most evident argument of the weight
of the Air.

Ibid. Quod quidem lanx, etc. That the Scale in which the Bladder is, is more
deprest than the other, they may be certain, their eyes bearing them witness:
but that this comes from the natural gravity of the Air he cannot be assured;
especially if they are ignorant what is the efficient cause of Gravity.

p. 18. Quod vesica, etc. That the Bladder, whether it be blown up with a pair
of Bellows, or with the breath of ones mouth, is heavier than when it is not
blown up, I will not deny, because of the greater quantity of Atoms from the
Bellows, or of fuliginous Corpuseles that are blown in from the breath. But
notwithstanding they gather nothing of sufficient certainty from this
Experiment of a blown Bladder. They ought to have put into the Scales two
Vessels of equal weight, whereof one should be shut and the other open: For by
this means Air not blown in, but only enclosed, had been weighed. When
therefore you shall see Air so weighed, we will afterward consider what may be
said concerning the Phenomenon you bring.

p. 19. Quod Atmosphaerae, etc. That many Particles both of Earth and Water
mingled with the Ethereal body are in the Atmosphere, I am easily persuaded:
but that in the middle of the Ether they should move upwards, downwards, every
way, and that one leaning on the back of another they should not gravitate, is
a thing utterly unconceivable.

p. 20. Aer quo, etc. The Air, with which in the beginning the Spherical Glass
was full, being moved by those Earthy Corpuscles in a simple circular motion,
and being comprest by the force of the Injection, that of it which is pure
(penetrating the injected Water) gets out into the open Air, and gives place to
the Water. It follows therefore that those earthy Corpuscles have less place
left, in which they can exercise their natural motion: therefore beating one
upon another they force the water to go out; it thus going out, the external
Air (because the Universe is supposed to be full) penetrates it, and
successively takes up the place of the Air that goes out, until the Corpuscles,
the same quantity of Air being restored, regain a liberty natural to their
motion.

p. 21. Quoniam, per, etc. Because by the drawing back of the Sucker the pure
Air was thrust in, but the earthy parts were not thrust in; there was a greater
proportion of earthy Particles, which without the Cylinder were near the
Sucker, unto the pure Air, in which they exercised their motion as well after
this revulsion as before. Wherefore these Particles so moved having less place
to exercise their natural motion in, some of them fell foul and beat upon the
rest. So that of necessity the Particles that were near the surface of the
Sucker must drive it upwards.

Ibid. Vidisti, etc. You see now that the Spring of the Air, which they
fuppose, is either an impossible thing: or they must (for its defense) have
recourse to the Hypothesis of Mr. Hobbs.

p. 23. Quia cuticula omnis, etc. Because every skin is made up of small threads
or filaments, which by reason of their figures cannot accurately touch in all
points. The Bladder therefore, being a skin must be pervious not only to Air
but to Water also, as to sweat: Therefore of the Air beat in by force there is
the same compression within the Bladder that there is without. The endeavor of
which, the way of its motions being every way cross, tends every way to the
concave superficies of the Bladder. Wherefore it is of necessity that it must
swell every way, and the vehemence of the endeavor increasing, be torn at last.

p. 26. Intellexti, etc. Have you understood my Hypotheses? 1. That there are
with the Air intersperst many earthy Particles, endued with a simple circular
motion, congenite to its nature. 2. That there is a greater quantity of these
Particles in the Air that is near the Earth, than in that which is more remote
from it.

p. 27. Neque est, etc. nor is there any one that hitherto has brought any
reason why it may not be so.

p. 29. Nihil, etc. Nothing is moved but by a contiguous Body that is in motion.

Ibid. Dum Suctor, etc. While the Sucker is drawn back, by how much a greater
place is left ( within,) by so much a lesser place is left to the external Air,
which being thrust backwards by the motion of the Sucker toward the outmost
parts, does move in like manner the Air that is next it self, and that Air the
next, and so forwards; so that it is of necessity at last that the Air must be
compelled into the space deserted by the Sucker, and to enter between the
unequal and surface of the Sucker, and the concave of the Cylinder. For it being
supposed that the parts of the Air are infinitely subtle, it is impossible but
they should insinuate themselves that way by which the Sucker is drawn down.
For first, the contact of those surfaces cannot be perfect in all points,
because the surfaces themselves cannot be made infinitely smooth. Then, that
force which is applied to draw back the Sucker, does distend in some measure
the cavity of the Cylinder. Lastly, if in the confines of ( that is, betwixt)
the two surfaces any one single hard Atom should enter, pure Air will enter at
the same way, although with a weak endeavor. I might also have accounted that
Air which for the same cause insinuates it self through the Valve of the
Cylinder. You see therefore the consequence from the retraction of the Sucker,
to the being of an Empty place is taken away. It will follow also that the Air
which is driven up into the place deserted by the Sucker, because it is driven
up thither by a great force, is moved with a very swift and circular motion
betwixt the top and the bottom in the Cylinder, because there is nothing there
that can weaken its motion: and you know that there is nothing that can give
motion to its own self, or diminish it.

p. 39. Haerent hic, etc. Here our men are at a stand: How will you expedite
this difficulty?

A. I have don't already: For the Air being beaten back by the retraction of
the Sucker, and finding no place in the world (which we suppose to be full)
where it might dispose it self, besides that which by driving out other bodies
from their places it may make for it self, is by perpetual pulsion at length
forced in the Cylinder with so great swiftness, between the concave surface of
the Cylinder and the unequal surface of the Sucker, as may answer that store of
power which you found necessary to the drawing back of the Sucker. Now the Air,
with what swiftness it enters, retains the same within, and then distends every
way the sides of the Brass Cylinder, which is ( of it self) Elastical.
Therefore the Air in the Cylinder being vehemently moved, endeavors or thrusts
against all parts of the concave surface of the Cylinder; but in vain, until
the Sucker, is drawn back: But as soon as the Sucker having slipped the hand,
ceases to make its impulse upon the Air, that Air which was before driven in,
by reason of its endeavor against every point of the internal superficies of
the Cylinder and of the Elastical force of the Air, will insinuate it self
between the same surfaces with the same swiftness as that by which it was
impelled, that is, with that velocity which answers the strength of the
impulsion. If therefore so great a power of Weight be hung upon the Sucker as
may answer the power of the hands by which it was impulss'd; the swiftness with
which the same Air goes out of the Cylinder, finding no place in the world
(which is full) where to dispose it self, will again impell the Sucker to the
top of the Cylinder, for the same reason that the Sucker a little before made
an impulse upon the Air.

p. 44. In vas, etc. B. We poured water into an open Vessel, we placed in the
water a long, straight, slender Tube; and we observed that the water did ascend
from the Vessel underneath into the erected Tube.

A. No wonder: For the small Particles that are interspersed in the Air near
the Water, did by their motion beat upon the surface of the Water, so that the
Water must of necessity ascend into the Pipe, and that sensibly into a Pipe
that was so exceeding slender.

p. 45. Siquis, etc. If any one after the frequently-repeated impulse and
retraction of the Sucker, endeavor to draw out the Stopple of the upper
Orifice of the Receiver, he shall find it gravitates very much, as if a weight
of many pounds hung upon it. Whence comes this?

A. From a strong circular endeavor of the Air within the Receiver, made by
the violent ingress of the Air between the unequal surface of the Sucker and the
concave of the Cylinder, procured by the repeated impulse and revulsion of the
Sucker, which you improperly call the Exsuction of the Air. For by reason of
the fullness of Nature the Stopple cannot be drawn out, but the Air that is in
the Receiver (contiguous to the Stopple) must be drawn out too: which Air, if
it were settled and at rest, the Stopple would easily be drawn out; but whiles
that doesmost swiftly circulate, it comes out very hardly, that is, it seems to
be very heavy.

B. Very likely: For as soon as fresh Air is by degrees let into the Receiver,
it likewise by degrees loses this seeming gravity.

p. 47. Vidimus, etc. We saw also water, being let down into the Receiver,
after some returns of the motion of the Sucker, to bubble so as if it had
boiled over a fire.

A. This likewise happens, as we spoke, by reason of the swiftness of the
circulating Air: unless perhaps you find the water hot too whiles it bubbles.
For if we were sure it was hot, we must find out some other cause of the
Phenomenon.

B. We are certain it is not sensibly hot.

A. In what therefore can the greater or lesser motion of the Atmosphere
promote such a motion as this?

B. I suppose they do not attribute this motion to the Atmosphere.

p. 49. A. It is manifest from this Experiment, that the Receiver is not made
empty by this exsuction of Air, as you call it: For the water could not be
moved but by some contiguous mover, that was it self in motion. Therefore this
Phenomenon seems to contain no weak demonstration of my Hypothesis.

p. 50. Besides, tell me, could you see the water bubbling in that manner?

B. What else?

A. Do not your Associates grant that Vision is made by a continued action from
the object unto the eye? Do they not also think action to be motion, and all
motion to be of some body? How therefore could the motion be derived from the
object, the water, unto your eyes through a Vacuum, that is somewhat that is
not a body?

B. Our friends do not affirm the Recipient to be so empty that no Air at all
is left.

A. No matter whether the Receiver be wholly, or for the greater part empty;
for which ever you suppose, the derivation of the motion from the object to the
eye will be intercepted.

B. It may be so; I cannot tell what to answer.

p. 51. Credin' tu, etc. Do you think these Animals were therefore so quickly
killed because they wanted Air? How then do they who make a trade of Diving
live under water, of whom there be some who being accustomed from their
childhood have wanted Air a whole hour? No. Thatmost vehement motion by which
Bladders shut therein are distended and broken, kills these Animals shut up in
the Receiver.

Ibid. Ego contra, etc. I on the contrary think that neither the Air can be
sucked out, nor that the Animal would so soon dye if it were sucked out. The
action indeed to which this death is a consequent may seem either a certain
suction (and so, that the Animal is killed by the exsuction of the included
Air, its Respiration being taken away) or a compulsion of the Air from all
parts toward the Center of the spherical Glass in which the Animal is
enclosed, and so may be seen to dye stifled by the tenacity of the compressed
Air, as it were, with Water; the Air more tenacious than usual, being drawn
into the inwards of the Lungs, and there between the Pulmonary Artery and Vein
stopping the course of the blood.

p. 53. Placet, etc. Your Hypothesis pleases me better than that of the Spring
of the Air: For from its truth depends the truth of a Vacuum or a Plenum; but
from the truth of that nothing follows on either part of the Question. The make
of the Air (says he) is like that of comprest wool. Well; wool is made of
hairs or threads. Right; but of what figure? if of a Parallelopipedon, there can
be no compression of parts: if not of a Parallelopipedon, there will be betwixt
the hairs certain spaces left, which if they be empty they suppose some place
empty, to prove that a Vacuum is possible; if full, they say that is full which
they suppose to be empty.

p. 56. Fuere, etc. There were some of them that said there remained in those
coals (though they seemed extinguished) some fiery Particles, which being
blowed up by the Air upon its admission did re-kindle the rest of the mass.

Ibid. Nae, etc. In good faith they seem not so much as to have considered what
they should speak, as to have taken it up at all adventures. Do you believe
that in a kindled coal, there is any part which is not a coal but fire; or in a
red-hot Iron there is any part that is not Iron but Fire? A great City may be
set on fire by one spark: Now if the body of fire be different from the thing
fired, there can be no more parts of fire in the whole Town on fire than that
one spark. We see bodies of diverse kinds may be set on fire by the light of the
Sun, as well by the Refraction as the Reflection that is made in
Burning-glasses. And yet I do not believe that there is any man thinks that
Particles of fire darted from the Sun can pass through the substance of a
crystal Globe. And in the Air between the Sun and the Globe there is no fire.

p. 58. When is it that we may truly say of a man that he is dead, or (which is
the same) has expired his Soul? For it has been known that some men who have
been taken for dead, being brought out the next day revived.

A. It is hard to determine the point of time in which the soul is separated
from the body. Proceed therefore to other Experiments.

p. 59. Si acus, etc. If a Needle excited by a Loadstone hang freely within the
Receiver, it will nevertheless follow the motion of the Iron which is drawn
about without the Receiver. So objects put within will be seen by those that
are without, and sounds made within will be heard without: all these as well
after as before the exsuction of the Air, except that the sounds are somewhat
more weakly heard after than before.

B. These are most manifest signs that the Receiver is always full, and that
the Air cannot thence be sucked out. That the sounds thence are more weak to
ones hearing is a sign of the consistence of the Air; for the consistence of
the Air is diametrically opposite from its motion.

p. 61. Quia nihil etc. Because there was nothing there that the weight of the
Atmosphere should do; no more strong or evident Argument could be made against
a Vacuum than this Experiment. For if of two coherent Marbles either of them
should be thrust forward that way that their surfaces lie contiguous, they
would easily be severed; the neighboring Air successively flowing into the
deserted place. But so to pull them asunder, that at one time they should lose
their whole contact, is impossible, the world being full. For then either
motion must be made from one term to another in an instant, or two bodies at
the same time must be in the same place: to say either of which is absurd.

p. 62. Confitentur, etc. They themselves and all others confess, that all
Ponderation is an endeavor every way by right lines unto the Center of the
Earth; and so that it is made not by the figure of a Cylinder or Column, but by
a Pyramide, whose top is the Center of the Earth, and whose Basis is part of
the surface of the Atmosphere.

Ibid. Conatus, etc. Therefore the endeavor of all the points that ponderate
will be propagated to the surface of the upper Marble, before it can be
propagated further (suppose) to the Earth.

p. 64. Has, etc. These Scales he puts one upon another and draws out the Air,
and then are they kept so comprest and united by the gravity of the external
Air, that six strong men cannot pull them asunder. But if at length by the use
of utmost endeavor they are plucked in sunder, they make a noise equal to the
report of a Musket; but as soon as ever by the Stop-cock opened there is the
least entrance given to the Air, they are severed of their own accord.

p. 65. Sed vis, etc. But can the Spring, which they say is in the Air, confer
nothing to the holding up the Marble? -- Nothing at all: For there is no
endeavor of the Air to the Center of the Earth, more than to any other point
in the Universe. For seeing that heavy things tend from the circumference of
the Atmosphere unto the Center of the Earth, and thence again to the
circumference of the Atmosphere by the same reflected lines, the endeavor
upwards will be equal to the endeavor downwards, and so destroying one another
they will endeavor neither way.

p. 66. Non potest ergo pars BC, etc. Therefore the part BC (that is a part of
the Atmosphere placed any where within the whole) cannot (by reason of its
greatness) descend, although it be heavy, and therefore it cannot press or
gravitate.

Ibid. Si possibile, etc. If I should deny it possible, that by the art of man
two furfaces of two bodies could be made so accurately fit that they should
touch in all points, so that there could no creable Corpuscle pass between
them; I do not see how they could defend their own Hypothesis, or disprove our
Negative assertion.

Ibid. Vtraque, etc. Both these Fancies, as well that of the Weight as of the
Spring or Antitupy of the Air, are Dreams. But if it be granted that there is a
kind of Recoyling in those small hairs or slender Corpuscles of which the Air
consists; one may enquire whence it is that those crooked bodies, settled and
at quiet in that posture, came to be moved into a streightness. They ought, if
they will be esteemed Natural Philosophers, to assign some possible cause of
this.

p. 67. Cur non, etc. Why cannot the water, which when it was injected did
compress the particles of Air, be again cast out by the same particles
explicating themselves?

A. Because when explicated they require no greater place than when comprest:
As in a vessel full of water, wherein are many Eeles, the same proportion of
place receives them, whether they are folded round or at length. Therefore they
cannot drive up the water by their Spring, which is nothing else but the motion
of bodies explicating themselves.

B. The comparison of Air to Eeles in water I suppose will be well received by
our Academians.

p. 68. Vides, etc. You see how foolish a thing it is to bring for the
explication of such effects Metaphorical words, as the shunning of a Vacuum,
the ahhorrence of Nature, etc. which heretofore the Schools used to defend
their reputation.

Ibid. In the Gardeners Watering-pots therefore is the water suspended, because
that which issues out at so small a hole is so little, that it cannot diffuse
it self to such a length, that by its descent it may give passage to the Air
through the circumferences of the holes. Nor can the Air driven off by the
water going out find any other place besides that which the water leaves.

p. 69. Qui per, etc. He that sucks water into his mouth by a Pipe, first sucks
up the Air between, whereby he removes the distended external Air, which being
removed (the world being full) it can have no place but by removing the next,
and so by continual pulsion the water is at length driven into the Pipe, and
does fucceed the Air which is sucked out.

p. 72. Id vero, etc. But that is impossible: For in a Siphon, unless both legs
are filled with water, the water will not ascend out of the Basin. The cause of
its ascent into that cloth is the motion of the earthy Atoms which are near the
water, I say the simple circular motion communicated to the Air in which they
move, which Atoms striking the water beat it up into the woolly matter, which
beating of them against the cloth makes it more and more moist, till it becomes
all over wet. And when it is so, etc.

p. 73. A. Fateris, etc. You confess then that your Collegiates have as yet in
nothing advanced the knowledge of natural causes, but that one of them has
found out an Engine, in which there may be such a motion of the Air excited,
that the parts of the Sphere may together every way tend unto the Center, and
that the Hypotheses of Mr. Hobbs, before probable enough, may be thence made
more probable.

B. Right; I am not ashamed to confess it; for it is somewhat to arrive so far,
if we can make no further progress.

A. Why so far? To what end such preparation and charge for Engines difficult
to be made, to make no further discovery than Mr. Hobbs had made before you?
Why did you not rather begin where he ended? Why did you not use the Principles
he had laid; and when Aristotle had rightly said, That without the knowledge of
Motion there is no knowledge of Nature, how durst you take such a task upon
your selves?

Ibid. Est, etc. Thus to have made an entrance though we miss
Of further progress, some performance is.


p. 75. But most of us distinguish the nature of fluid from that which is not
fluid, by the greatness of the parts of which any body consists and is made up
with. Wherefore we do not only look upon Air, Water, and all Liquors, but upon
Ashes also and Dust, as fluid bodies. And we deny not that fluid things may be
made of things not fluid; for we do not digest the Notion of infinite
Divisibility.

A. Infinite Division cannot be conceived, but ( infinite) Divisibility may
easily. I on the contrary do not understand the distinction of Fluids and not
Fluids, which you take from the greatness of the parts: could I digest this, I
must say, the ruins of shattered rubbish stones that lie in Paul's were fluid.
But if those ruins cannot be called fluid because the stones are too big,
define me the bigness that the parts of a ruined wall must have that they may
be called fluid. But you that cannot understand infinite Divisibility, tell me
what you think to be the cause why I should think it more hard for Almighty God
to create a fluid body less than any Atom proposed, that its parts might
actually flow, than to create the Ocean. Therefore you make me despair of any
fruit of your meeting, by saying, that they think Air, Water, and other fluids
consist of Non-fluids; as if a wall that began to fall and be ruinous were
called by them a fluid body. If they may speak so, every thing is fluid, for
even Marble it self may be broken into parts less than any Atom imagined by
Epicurus.

p. 79. Ruina, etc. The ruins that lie in Paul's Church might be called fluid.

Ibid. Si sic, etc. If they may so speak, there is nothing but is fluid, for
even Marble may be beaten into parts less than any Epicurean Atom.

p. 80. Divisio, etc. Division that is infinite cannot be conceived,
Divisibility may easily.

p. 81, 82. Quia corpuscula, etc. But the Corpuscles (such as are the Atoms
supposed by Lucretius and also by Mr. Hobbs) being hard before might be easily
compacted by any of the mentioned causes, so that it is not to be doubted but
that the whole to be made of those Corpuscles will be hard.

Ibid. Si dura, etc. If hard bodies are made out of parts originally hard, why
are not fluid bodies made of parts originally fluid? Could great fluids, as the
Ether, be created; and could not small ones? He that first made a body hard or
fluid, could if he would have made it greater or less than any other proposed
body. Now if a fluid body be made of parts not fluid, (as you speak) and hard
bodies only from hard parts; does it not follow that nothing neither fluid nor
hard is made of original fluids?

p. 84. B. Quaenam, etc. What are the principles of Fluidity and Firmness.

A. Of Fluidity nothing but Rest, of Firmness Motion, such as is fit to produce
that effect. By Rest I understand the rest of two parts one with another, when
they each touch, but neither press one another. For entire bodies of fluids may
be in motion their fluidity abiding, and hard bodies be at rest although their
parts be in motion.

p. 85. Atque binc, etc. And hence it is manifest that there is a great
compression in the Air so moved and shut up, namely, so great as that force by
which it was driven in was able to make; and also that from so great
compression some degree of consistence must be made, though less than that of
the consistence of water. Now if in all the same Particles of Air, besides the
motion by which one presses another, there was also the simple circular motion
and that vehement enough, it would be almost impossible any one of them should
be moved from its little circle; but that the other Particles resisting, the
whole would be pressed together, that is, become hard: For that is hard of
which no part gives place but upon the motion of the whole. You see therefore
that hardness may be made in a most fluid body by this simple circular motion
of Particles, which was before imparted to them by two contrary motions.

p. 86. Atque talis, etc. And such indeed may be the cause of the Durum primum,
or first hard body. But of the second, that is, of the cohesion of two of these
first hard bodies, the cause may be the very same simple circular motion,
conjoined with their superficial contact, or perhaps their being one with
another intricated.

Ibid. Si supponamus, etc. If we suppose with them that the cause of hardness
is the greatness or thickness of the parts, what reason can we give why
congealed water should be harder or firmer than the same water is before such
congelation?

p. 87. Ut sit, etc. That it be conceivable, that is, not absurd; and that from
its being granted the necessity of the Phenomenon may be inferred.

p. 88. Qui, etc. They which putting bodies to bodies show the new and
admirable works of Nature do wonderfully inflame the minds of men with the love
of Philosophy, and do not a little instigate them unto the search of Causes,
and on that account are worthy of commendation.

True; for they enrich Natural History, without which Natural Science is in
vain sought for.

A Summary of the Contents of the several Chapters.
CHAP. I.
THe occasion and scope of the present Treatise. Reasons why Mr. Hobbs might
have employed himself otherwise, and have spared this Discourse, p. 2. Why the
Author would have been contented he had done so, ibid. Why he now undertakes
the Reply, p. 3.

CHAP. II.
Of some mistakes of Mr. Hobbs touching matters of Fact and the Authors
Doctrine. That he mistakes in ascribing the Explications and Experiments in the
Physico-Mechanical Treatise of the Society at Gresham College, p. 3. the
Experiments having been seen done long, and the book published, before the
Society began, etc. p. 4. That the Experiments were not devised nor employed to
prove a Vacuum, Ibid. Whether Mr. Hobbs by the Experiment of the Gardeners
Watering-pot demonstrates that there can be no Vacuum, p. 5. That if the
Watering-pot were tall enough, the water would run out with unstopping the
upper Orifice, proved by M. Paschal's Experiment, p. 6. The way of Argument on
both sides compared, p. 7, 8. Why the Author did not assign the cause of
Springs, p. 9. That Mr. Hobbs his account of Springs is imperfect, and that he
has not solved the Phenomenon of them, p. 10, 11, 12, 13. That he mistook the
Authors notion of the Air, p. 14. 15.

CHAP. III.
Wherein the Weight and Spring of the Air are asserted against Mr. Hobbs.
Several Experiments recited that prove the real Weight of the Air, p. 16, 17.
Mr. Hobbs's Objections against the Experiment of the heaviness of a blown
Bladder, p. 17, 18. answered, p. 19. The Spring of the Air asserted from Mr.
Hobbs's concessions, p. 20, 21, The same asserted by particular Experiments, p.
22, 23. Mr. Hobbs his answer to that of the Bladder considered, p. 23, 24.
Experiments of the Spring of the Air not comprest, p. 25.

CHAP. IV.
Wherein Mr. Hobbs his principal Explications of the Authors Phenomenon are
examined. What things Mr. Hobbs takes for granted, p. 26. His Hypothesis
considered of the simple circular motion, whether it be not precariously
ascribed to aqueous and earthy Particles, p. 27, 28. Whether in the exhaustion
of the Cylinder any Vacuum be produced, p. 29, 30, 31. Experiments to prove
that the Glass is in great part devoid of common Air, p. 31, 32. Whether a
purer sort of Air may unperceived dive under Water to pass into the Receiver
betwixt the Cylinder and the Suker, p. 33, 34. That the Cartesian way of
explicating this Phenomenon in favor of the Plenists is more plausible than
Mr. Hobbs's, p. 35. Whether the place deserted by the suspended Mercury in the
Torricellian Experiment be empty or full of Air, p. 37, 38. Mr. Hobbs's
Explication of that Experiment of Mr. Boil, in which the Air impells up the
Sucker together with above 100. pound weight, p. 39, 40. The Examination of
this Explication, p. 41, 42.

CHAP. V.
In which diverse scattered Explications and other passages in Mr. Hobbs's
Dialogue are examined: His Explications why water without visible force ascends
in a slender Pipe considered, p. 44, 45. Why the stopple of the Cover of the
exhausted Receiver so much gravitates, considered, p. 46. His Explication and
the Authors, why in the exhausting of the Receiver water let down into it
boyles as it were or bubbles there, viewed and compared, p. 47, 48 Whether the
Phenomenon of this water bubbling in the Receiver be an evidence that there is
no vacuity in the Receiver, p. 49, 50. Whether Animals in the exhausted
Receiver dye for want of Air, or for the causes assigned by Mr. Hobbs, p. 51,
52. That the Author asserts not the proof of a Vacuum or Plenum to depend on
the Hypothesis of the Spring of the Air, p. 53. That the Air in the exhausted
Receiver is not thicker but thinner, not heavier but lighter, proved by
Experiments, p. 54 55. The Epicurean Hypothesis of fire, and the effects of the
Sunbeams through Burningglasses, p. 57. Whether he deserves a censure that
calls kindled coals fire, p. 58.

CHAP. VI.
Wherein other passages of Mr. Hobbs's Dialogue that concern the Author are
examined. That the Experiments of the Needle's motion in the exhausted
Receiver, and of sounds being audible, and objects visible there, are
reconcilable to the doctrine of the Atomists, p. 59. Whether from the cohesion
of two Marbles the non: existence of a Vacuum follows, p. 60, 61. How the lower
Marble is upheld, p. 62, 63. The power of the oblique pressure of the Air to
these effects illustrated by Experiments, p. 64. Whether the throwing up of
water in the Glass fountains, invented by Vincenzo Vincenti of Urbin, can be
explicated by the Spring of the Air, p. 67, 68. Mr Hobbs's Explication of the
cause of waters being suspended in a Gardeners Wateringpot examined, p. 69. An
Experiment purposely devised to show that both Vacuists and Plenists should
admit an Elastical power in the Air, p. 70, 71. Mr. Hobbs's correction of the
Authors discourse about the ascension of water in Siphons and Filtres
animadverted, p. 72. Some unhandsom passages, and such as show the unequal
estimation Mr. Hobbs has of his own and others preformances in Philosophy, p.
73, 74. What parts of Mr. Hobbs's Treatise, and why, past by without censure by
the Author, p. 75.

CHAP. VII. (Being an Appendix to the past Discourse)
Wherein is examined what Mr. Hobbs teaches concerning Fluidity and Firmness.
Mr. Hobbs mistakes, and so misreports, the Authors Doctrine of the cause of
Fluidity, p. 77. His Animadversions on the Doctrine considered, p. 78, 79.
Whether fluid bodies are made from parts originally fluid, or from small Solids
in motion, etc. p. 79, 80, 81. Mr. Hobbs's Theory of Fluidity and Firmness
examined, p. 81, 82, etc. What influence therein his simple circular motion may
have, considered, p. 82, 83. That there is a third requisite of a good
Hypothesis, viz. That it be not inconsistent with any Truth or Phenomenon of
Nature, p. 84. That Mr Hobbs his Hypothesis wants this requisite, proved by
references, p. 85. By instances out of ordinary, not elaborate, Experiments, p.
86. The Conclusion to the Reader, p. 88.

FINIS.
A CATALOGUE Of all the PHILOSOPHICAL WORKS Published by our AUTHOR.
*NEW Physico-mechanical Experiments concerning the Weight and Spring of the
Air; published in English, Anno Dom. 1660.

* A Continuation of them, Part I. 1669.

* The Defense of the New Experiments, etc. against Franciscus Linus.

The Examen of the Physical Dialogues of Thomas Hobbs, concerning the Air.
These two were published, A. D. 1661.

* The Skeptical Chemist. 1661.

* Physiological Essays, together with the History of Fluidity and Firmness,
and some other Tracts, Printed 1662.

* The Experimental History of Colors begun, A. 1663.

Concerning the usefulness of Experimental Philosophy; the first Tome: A. 1664.

The second Tome was Printed, 1669.

* A Tract concerning the Origin of Forms and Qualities, 1666.

Though this Tract was turned into Latin diverse years before the Genevlan
Collection was published, yet was omitted therein whence it appears, that the
Publisher was not very cautious, who affirms in his Preface, That all Mr.
Boyle's Works are contained in that Volume.

The Experimental History of Cold begun, to which is subjoined a Dissertation
concerning Antiperistasis, together with an Examen of Mr. Hobbs's Doctrine
about Cold; 1665.

* Hydrostatical Paradoxes; 1666.

* The Origin of Forms and Qualities; the second Edition; to which is annexed a
Dissertation concerning Subordinate Forms; 1671.

* Tracts concerning the Cosmical Qualities of things; Cosmical Suspicions; the
Temper of the Marine Regions; the Temper of the Subterranean Regions, and of
the Bottom of the Sea: 1671.

* An Essay concerning the Origin and Virtues of Gems; 1672.

A Tract containing New Experiments between Flame and Air; together with an
Hydrostatical Dissertation; 1672.

* Some Essays concerning the wonderful Subtilty and Efficacy of Effluviums,
and their determinate Nature; 1673.

Some Tracts consisting of Observations concerning the Saltness of the Sea;
with a Skeptical Dialogue concerning the Nature of Cold both positive and
privative; 1674.

Tracts containing some Suspicions concerning some Occult Qualities of the Air;
with an Appendix touching Celestial Magnets, etc. 1674.

An Introduction to the History of particular Qualities in the Phylosophical
Transactions N. 63. p. 2057.

* Of the Excellency of the Mechanical Hypothesis; N. 103. p. 53.

Experiments and Observations concerning the Mechanical Production and Origin
of several particular Qualities; together with some Reflections upon the
Hypothesis of Acid and Alcaly; 1675.

The Skeptical Chemist, or Chymico-physical Doubts and Paradoxes about those
Experiments, whereby vulgar Spagyrists do labor to evince, that Sal; Sulphur
and Mercury are the genuine Principles of things; to which, viz. in this 2d.
Edition, sundry Experiments and Considerations are subjoined concerning the
Producibleness of Chemical Principles; 1680.

* A Continuation of new Physico-mechanical Experiments; the second Part; 1680.

The Aerial Noctiluca, or some New Phenomenon and a Process of a Factitious
self-shining Substance; 1680.

New Experiments and Observations made upon the Icy Noctiluca, to which is
annexed a Chemical Paradox; 168.

These are the Philosophical Works of our Author hitherto published; what he
has wrote in Divinity belongs not properly to this place; not to mention
several Dissertations of his which you may find here and there intersporsed
among the Philosophical Transactions published in Print.


