THE VICTORY OF TRUTH FOR The Peace of the CHURCH, To the King of GREAT
BRITAIN; To invite him to embrace the Roman Catholic Faith.

By Monsieur De la Militiere, Counselor in Ordinary to the King of France.

With an Answer thereunto, Written by the Right Reverend John Bramhall, D. D.
and Lord Bishop of Londonderry.

Printed at the Hague, 1653.

To the King of Great Britain, to invite his Majesty to embrace the Catholic
Faith.
SIR,
THE Wisdom of Gods Counsels is far above the prudence of men, who are
altogether void of the knowledge of his grace. One sort, who know neither God,
nor his providence, look upon all the events of humane life, as if they
happened by chance. They imagine that that which we call good luck, or ill
luck, has no other cause than hazard, and that which every man's prudence or
imprudence brings to the conduct of his life. Others, who acknowledge a Divine
providence, but only after the manner that God has manifested it to the world
by the instructions and judgments of his Law, think that all the goods, which
heap prosperities upon them, are the effects and testimonies of the favor
where with God cherishes those that are his; And that the Ils, that oppress
man's life with miseries, are arguments of the anger and hatred of God upon
those he handles after that manner. But Christians, to whom God has revealed
by the Gospel the counsel of his mercy in Jesus Christ, know, that in his
Cross, on which for satisfying the Justice of of the Law, he has bore the pain
of our sins, he has changed, for those he calls to his Communion, the use of
Afflictions. And that he imployes them first to humble them, and acknowledge
their sin, that they may desire deliverance, to the end they may come by this
way to the Faith of his grace, which does deliver them. And when they are
entered into Communion with him by faith, and that the exercise of the same
afflictions accomplisheth in them the work of his grace, in giving them, by his
consolation, in their patience, the hope of the glorious happiness which he
has promised them, and which carries over all their affections to the loving
of him. Those therefore that have this faith and this hope, are of a judgment
far differing from the opinion of men of the world, upon the event of Goods and
Evils which accompany man's life.

Considering, Sir, the present fortune of your serene Majesty, far removed
from the Majestic condition of your Birth, I humble my self with you in the
sight of the powerful hand of God, who is the only Judge, and only Master of
Monarchs, to ascend by the steps, whereto the Gospel addresses us, even into
the counsel of his infinite mercy. And I find there, that the disaster of this
great calamity, which environs you, is a work of the wisdom of the King of
Kings, who will show in you, whom he has honored with his Unction, and his
Image, an admirable effect of his grace and of his power. I say, Sir, that
under the Cloak of so many sad adventures, which try you by revolutions so
strange, that all the Universe does tremble, the King of Heaven, and of the
Earth, who has humbled himself for you, infinitely more low than you are,
draws himself near unto you. He comes to take you by the hand, not only to
re^stablish you in your Throne, but to make you sit in his, that you may reign
with him eternally, after you have employed the Scepter, which he shall put
again into your hand, to re-establish his Kingdom among your people. It is
very easy for me, Sir, to give you a reason of this judgment I make of tha^ of
God upon your sacred Person, and to explicate unto you, not only the causes
and effects of the ill which is come upon you, but also the way, the use, and
the success of the remedy, which the hand of God will give you, to accomplish
in you this work of his mercy. If we seek the Cause for which we behold that
the hand of God has made it self so grievously heavy upon the sacred head of
the King your Father, and which pursues yet after him your Royal Person with so
many sinister accidents, which has caused this great desolation to come upon
all your Kingdoms, this confusion, and this subversion of their peace and
former prosperity, this change into which they are so blindly precipitated, to
part with the form of Government that God had established amongst them, under
which they had lived so happily for so many Ages past, to become slaves of the
yoke which the armed hand of a Tyrant has put upon their head under the false
name of Liberty, it will be very easy for us to find the Cause, and to
acknowledge it by the Effects.

You are not ignorant, Sir, and all the world knows it with you, that the
subject for which this Paricidal Parliament has so cruelly persecuted the King
your Father, has been the Ecclesiastical Government, of which they desired to
change the form, by abolishing Episcopacy, and suppressing the Liturgy, and
the Ceremonies, by which the Protestants of your Kingdom had yet retained some
image of the Catholic Church. Those, which they call Puritans and
Presbyterians, who would live under the form of the Genevian Discipline, could
not endure the form of that Ancient Order, which the Royal Authority had
retained as instituted by Divine Authority, and for this very thing necessary
for its conformity, to preserve in Christian Estates the form of a Monarchical
Government. From thence it is come, that the Puritan and Presbyterian Faction
has conceived, and always kept in its breast an implacable hatred against
Monarchical Government, by reason of their aversion from the Episcopal. That
which the prudence of King James, your Majesty's Grandfather, Sir, having
judiciously taken notice of, did as wisely inform his posterity, by an express
Book, to take heed of it. And this King knowing Church, as well as State
matters, foreseeing the inconvenience that might arise, expressing from his
mouth that which touched him at the heart, had this familiar speech, No Bishop,
no King; which is become a lamentable Prophecy under his Successor. But, O
good God! what Successor? Such an one certainly, that had neither cause nor
pretext capable to stir up the hatred of Subjects against a King so merciful,
so just, and so loyal, so amiable to his People, so venerable to his
Neighbors, that upon this only prejudication, wherein the Puritan Faction had
instructed them, in making them believe, that under that Form of Government,
and Ancient Service, the King and the Bishops had an intention to re-establish
in the Realm the Catholic Religion. This is the poison, which the Puritan
Faction has blown into the hearts of the People, to fill them with hatred
against a King so love-worthy.

And this Republican Parliament, endeavoring to erect it self in a Sovereign
Authority, by annihilating that of the King, has not thought any occasion more
favorable to their design, than to act the Puritan, that they might come to
the execution of their desires: which they have done at last by the
Sacrilegious Paricide of their Archbishop and of their King. This was, Sir, the
grand work of man's malice, and the Devils stratagem, which caused the ils which
are fallen upon your Crown and Person, by the pitiful fate of that succession
which ought to have befallen you. But the Justice and Wisdom of God in this
conjuncture, has other ends. Every one knows that this Archbishop, ^ourished
in the Schism from the Catholic Church, had no other thought no^ inclination,
than to reunite in one body the People divided into Sects among themselves, as
well as from the Church, and to make himself Chief Head of this Schismatical
Body.

And we see God has permitted, that his own People, divided against it self,
has caused his Head to be cut off.

The King otherwise accomplished in all royal and moral virtues, did use in the
Schism, by the Law of his Predecessors, the Authority which God had given him
in temporal matters, for governing of spiritual, and called himself the Head.
It is for that reason, that God chastizing in his person the fault of his
Predecessors, would let us know by the tragical spectacle of an unheard of
Death, in a King no less innocent than lawful, that so strange an effect of his
anger has had no other cause than to instruct all other Princes that are in
the Schism, with what severity God will revenge his glory, for their injuring
the Unity and Authority of his Church.

But if such is the Effect of Divine Justice and Wisdom in the cause of your
misfortune, Sir, his Mercy goes far before it; and this is the effect that
concerns you. For God makes it here plainly appear unto your Majesty, that the
Reformation, which the Authors of the Schism in this latter age have pretended
to make, has been (under the pretext of so good an outside) no other thing in
effect than the entire ruin as well of the Faith, and form of the Church, as
of the Order it self instituted by God for the governing of men. This is the
Lesson which God sets before your eyes, in the history of this sad Revolution,
which has given you a wound, the feeling whereof is to be your instruction.
You shall see, Sir, through all the circumstances of these tragical effects
which have produced the trouble, and changed the form of your Estates, and
which have ravished from you the Crown: That the new Religion which your
Predecessors embraced after the Schism, is the only efficient cause, by the
very maxims, and foundations of the design, which its Authors have called the
Reformation of the Church.

Their new opinions did very easily sside themselves under this apparent
color, through the clefts of the Schism into the spirit of the Bishops, who
made themselves culpable. But neither they themselves that received this
novelty, nor the Kings that authorized them, did think, they should charge
themselves with Uria's packet, which would abolish both the authority of the
Bis^ops, and the Sovereignty of Kings. For men are always blind in the works
of Darkness, which they do by the instinct of the Devil, who goes disguizing
himself into an Angel of Light, that he may induce them for to commit them. And
their passions which do blind them do insensibly draw them into precipices of
mis-haps, whereof neither the extraordinary steepness nor depth is by them
discerned.

Certainly whosoever should have demanded of Peter Martyr himself, and Martin
Bucer, who carried Calvin's Reformation into England, if they went to bring in
the Brownists opinions, who by maxims received from their hands, did a little
after think upon a more exact purity, by the motions which they suppose the
Holy Ghost suggests unto them, from whence it is that they esteem themselves
more Reformed Puritans? Whosoever likewise should have enquired of them, if
they came to tell them they might be of what Religion they pleased, and for the
extinction of all Ecclesiastical Discipline, of all rule and form of a common
Faith, according to the opinion of the Independents? Whosoever should at last
have asked them, whether the Sword of the Word they carried in their mouths,
was to cut off their King's and Bishop's heads, that they might give: a Form
altogether new, as well to the Kingdom as to the Church, what would they have
answered? They would have sworn without doubt with their hands upon the new
Gospel they carried about them, that their intentions were further distant from
these thoughts, than the Earth is from Hell. And nevertheless this thing is no
ways to be doubted of, and altogether apparent at present, that ^alvin,
Martyr, Bucer, and the Bishops which admitted their Reformation, and the Kings
which authorized it, have brought in by the maxims of their Foundations not
only Protestants, but also Brownists and Independents. The Bishops that
received this Reformation saw not that of it would be bred the Sect of the
Presbyterians, Enemies to the Hierarchy of the Church, and all the Order of its
institutions, as well for the Service as for the Government, and would ruin
their Authority, that they might abolish Royalty it self. But neither did
Calvin, Martyr, nor Bucer, know, that from the maxims of their Reformation
would spring up the Brownists and Indep^ndents, who would ruin their
Reformation by introducing an indifference concerning all opinion in Religion.

This is that, Sir, which the history of things happened in the progress of this
Reformation (the knowledge whereof your Majesty at this present carries
engraven in your heart by too bitter feelings) represents unto your eyes, to
the end all the world may see the nature and Genius by the effects of its
maxims. I will represent them, Sir, to the eyes of your Majesty, and by a
demonstration so lively and evident, that no reason can contradict it, You
shall see that the pain you suffer, and under which your Estate groans, is the
true effect, as the very punishment of the sins your Fathers committed, and
trans^itted unto you, then, when under the pretext of this blind Reformation,
they abandoned the Faith of the Church, and her Communion. For it is after thi^
m^nner the just vengeance of God punishet^ sin by it self, and that its own
proper work becomes the punishment it deserves. This Religion, for which the
Bishops, the Kings, and the People have forsook the Church, has destroyed the
Bishops, and the Kings, and reduced the People to live without Bishops, without
Kings, without a Form of Government, and without Discipline in Religion, under
the Tyranny of a Monster, who, without being either King or Bishop, attributes
to himself all Authority both in State and in Religion. This which I declare
unto your Majesty, Sir, is, to make you understand, that this terrible work of
the hand of God, which afflicts you after this manner, is nevertheless a
judgment of his mercy for you: For you may see he sends you not this trouble,
but that you may perceive the sin, whereof it is the offspring, that you may
draw your self from the one and from the other, by the knowledge which he gives
you of the horror you should have for the Cause, by the grief you resent by
its Effect. You shall see it, Sir, clearly enough by the consequents of the
Maxims upon which the Authors of the Reformation which your Fathers embraced,
have laid their Foundations.

The Foundations of the Reformation of Calvin are laid upon these two Maxims,
which he, and all those which have forsook the Church, as himself, has
delivered as indubitable to the People which have followed him: The first is,
That the Church was fallen into ruin and desolation, by Error in its Faith,
by Idolatry in its Service, and by Tyranny in its Government. The second, That
to reform and re-establish it ^n its Original Purity, the Faith of its
Doctrine, of its Service, and of its Government, was to be reduced to the only
precepts of the Scripture', of the sense whereof every Believer ought to be
Judge, for his own proper salvation, by the light of the Holy Ghost which
conducts him. They saw that if they did not suppose these Maxims for the causes
of their Reformation, they could not pretend any which might oblige them to
forsake the Church, which they had a mind to leave, that they might frame a
Contrary Party, and make war against her. For they could not deny the Church
from which they separated, the Title of the True Church, but in accusing of it,
as they have done, of Error, Idolatry, and of Tyranny. And if we suppose this
accusation for true, they could not bring in the necessity of a Separation, to
make their Reformation, but in excluding the Authority of Tradition, and the
Judgment of the Church, and by reducing the rule of the Reformation to the
Scripture it self, interpreted by every man's Judge^ent.

Your Majesty, Sir, shall now see, that of those Maxims which the Bishops of
your Realm (already become Schismatics) received for the causes of the
Reformation which they admitted, there was first of all Formed the Sect of
Puritan-Presbyterians, against the Protestant-Episcopalians, who could not
subsist against them, upon the Foundation of these Maxims. And that at length
the Brownists, the more Reformed Puritans, did raise themselves upon the same
Foundations, who have since begot the Independents for the ruin of the
Presbyterians, by the same reasons by which the others had ruined the
Protestants and Episcopacy, and with Episcopacy Royalty it self: In such sort,
that all this dreadful disorder, which makes your Kingdoms to be a Chaos of
lamentable disorder, in which your authority finds it self put out, comes from
these Principles of Reformation, which are the natural source thereof.

That this is so, your Majesty, Sir may clearly perceive it. When the Bishops
consented to these Principles of Reformation, they abandoned by them the Faith
of the Catholic Church concerning the Sacrifice of the Mass; concerning
Transubstantiation in the holy Eucharist; concerning the number and virtue of
the seven Sacraments; concerning Justification real and inherent in the
faithful, and of their Merits, and the Invocation of Saints; concerning Prayer
for the Dead, and of Purgatory; concerning the Authority of the Pope, and of
the adhering of all the Faithful to the Sea of St. Peter at Rome. But they
retain, nevertheless, the Episcopal Dignity and Authority, with a part of the
Liturgy, and Ceremonies of the Catholic Church.

But the Puritan-Presbyterians have cast away all Form of Hierarchy, and
community of the Liturgy and Ceremonies with the Church of Rome, as pernicious
remainders of the Papal Tyranny and Idolatry, as they call them. That they
might oppose both Parties, according to the first Maxim of their Reformation,
they brought in a Form of Government altogether novel, and composed a Form of
Service altogether new. Upon which they have had so much advantage against the
Protestants in combating them with the reasons of their common Principles, and
in stirring up the People heated with the zeal of Reformation, that it was
impossible for them to subsist if the Puritans could but once be supported, by
the Authority of Parliament, against the Authority of the King, who only did
support the Protestant Cause, not by arguing, but by command. For Controversy,
by their Principles, was all for the Puritans against the Protestants.

Could they, without Tradition, and by the holy Scripture alone, interpreted by
the judgment of every one, find Episcopal Dignity, and its Authority, with
distinction, and superiority of power above the other Pastors and Ministers?
They could certainly, without doubt, by the Authority of the holy Scripture,
assisted by Tradition, which declares the lawful sense. But in doing this, the
victory which it gives them, obliges them to consent likewise to the
Authority, and Primacy of the Pope, for the Government of the Universal Church,
as founded in the Primacy St. Peter received in the College of the Apostles, as
well for the Form of the Government of the Universal Church, as of every
particular Church, from whence every Bishop derives his Authority. Then thus it
must be, either that the Protestants abandon Episcopacy as a seed of Tyranny,
and become Presbyterians; or, in retaining it, to enter again into the
Communion of the Pope, and Bishops who adhere to him. Though there be no need
to speak here, that their sole Division makes it impossible for them to
subsist, by the reason which the great Bishop and Martyr, St. Cyprian,
represents to all Bishops, in declaring the obligation they have strongly to
retain the Unity of the Church, by the not to be divided Unity of Episcopacy,
whereof every one does solidly possess his share. Upon which he admonishes
them, that if any one goes to separate himself, it shall happen unto him, as to
a Beam drawn from the body of the Sun, which shall have no more part, through
its division, in the unity of the light which continues in the body. As to a
Bough broken from the Tree, which shall spring no more, having no more share in
the sap which remains in the body and in the root of the Tree. Even like a
Rivolet, cut off from the Fountain, which will dry up, having no more to do
with the course of the water which runs from the Spring. This is that also,
Sir, which your Bishops cannot avoid. It must be, that being separated from the
Mother Church, they should be extinguished, and should vanish away, as its come
to pass. It must be, that their very pain ^as the proper work of the cause of
^hier error. That their Reformation made them lose their Form.

But if the Puritans have had this advantage upon the Protestants, by the
Common Principles of their Reformation, that which the same Principles have
given the Brownists, to withdraw themselves from the Puritans of the Genevian
Discipline, in the more exact purity, which their spirit, Interpreter of the
sense of the Scripture, suggests unto them, is yet more great. Behold how they
combat the one party against the other, and the victory of the last. The
Puritans of the Genevian Discipline have determined of Articles of Faith, and
have formed their Confession, to which they oblige all those that receive their
Communion. But this Law, which prescribes by Authority a common belief among
all the Communicants, cannot agree with the judgment ^at every Believer can
and ought to make of the sense of the Scriptures, by the assistance of the Holy
Ghost, according to the second common Maxim of their Reformation. For if one
supposes it true, no other Authority can bear rule over the Conscience, nor
prescribe it any thing beyond the sense that the Spirit suggests to it in the
interpreting of the Scripture. Upon which the Brownists also set upon the
Presbyterians by all the same Authorities, upon which they have founded theirs,
to separate themselves from the Church, and abandon its determinations. They
maintain, That to oblige the Faith of faithful men to a formular confession,
which can have no other than an humane authority, is to bring them forthwith
under the Papal Tyranny, from which the Holy Ghost has freed them. Against
this the Calvinists have no reply, which does not wound themselves with their
own hands, and which is not their condemnation pronounced by themselves. For
they can answer nothing pertinently, if they do not borrow the reasons the
Church has against them. So God, perpetual Protector of his Church, causes her
Enemies to pronounce her Victory with their own mouths: whilst that they issued
from the teeth and the mouth of the Serpent, to make war with her, do wage it
among themselves, and kill one another.

From these Brownists, as your Majesty, Sir, knows much better, are come the
Independents, which are not risen, but since the advantage the
Puritan-Presbyterians had upon the Protestants, by the Authority of the
Parliamentiers. It is those that have produced this falseprophet of blood and
slaughter, to end this last Act of Infernal Reformation, that he himself
preaches to his Musulmans, with his Sword in his hand, after he has broke the
Cross, and changed the Episcopal Crosier into a Murtherer's Axe.

By this same spirit of the Brownists, in which he has been originally
instructed, by using Disputes he deduces Fundamental Maxims of the common
Reformation among them, he wars against the Presbyterians with much more
advantage than he did against the Protestants. From whence he promises himself
to make them all submit to his opinion, which is an indifference of all opinion
of Religion.

Which shall fall out without doubt according to his own mind, if they will
follow the Consequences of their own Maxims: For the reason of which, he gives
liberty to every man to believe and prophecy that which they think the Spirit
suggests to them. But he thinks in making these People, separated from the
Church, taste the Liberty of Conscience, he shall rally all their different
Sects into one Body, to set them against the Body of the Catholic Church, to
the end he may destroy the Pope, and the Bishops that conduct her, and may
exterminate the Kings that defend her. He calls that, the great work of God. He
assures the success to all them that follow him, by the revelations which he
makes them believe he had at his Fasts, his Prayers, and his reading the holy
Scriptures. But it is no marvel he can assemble such a number of Followers by
the arguing of their Maxims: For since they had already produced these
different bodies of reformed Battalions, and reforming, even to infinity,
Protestants, Presbyterians, and Brownists, who in a perpetual war cannot agree
among themselves; He comes further, as more fit to serve himself of their
Maxims, to put them to the Ho there, by the indifference, and by abolishing all
Laws that rule upon the Conscience, and leaving every man's thoughts free, and
the liberty to prophecy and interpret the Scriptures, according to the sense
his spirit dictates to him. For, as to the remainder, he troubles not himself
to see by this spirit, the prodigious number of Sects and Insects to swarm
about, who daily vomit for more monstrous opinions than ca^ come from the
bottomless pit. For l^ there be what difference there will among them, they all
agree in his indifferency.

By this Catastrophe of the Reformation, undertaken by those that have divided
the Church in these latter Ages you see, Sir, what has been both the Design
and Genius. This is not I tha^ represent the truth of it to you, God has set
it before your eyes, or I may rather say, in your heart, written in Characters
which shall never be blotted out. And to write them with his own hand, he
himself is descended from Heaven, environed with the fire and thunder of his
anger, which appears enlightened upon you. But from the middle thereof you hear
the voice of his mercy, recalling you to him, and declaring to you, that all
this he has done, to let you know the sins of your Fathers, by drawing you out
of them, that he may call you back into his Church, where all benediction shall
be given you. For true Piety and Religion, whereof she has been made the
Guardian, finds there (as the Apostle speaks) the promises of present life, and
of that which is to come; And your Faith, which God will work in you by the
virtue of the Cross, in the present affliction wherein you are, submitting all
your desires to the Wisdom of his Counsel, and power of his strength, shall
meet there the comfort of your patience, conformable to the hope you shall put
in him. You will say then, Sir, when you consider your self, and the work that
God shall have wrought in you, That the Wisdom of the Judgments of God is
without bottom! That the Knowledge thereof is very difficult! That it is
impossible to find it out, if he himself does not manifest it! He will manifest
it to you, Sir, and you may see it, if you consider the great abyss that was
between you and God; how far you were drawn from him, before he came to you
after thi^ manner, and drew himself near to you that he might draw you to him.

When the King your Father had the Crown upon his Head, and was sitting upon
his Throne in the middle of his flourishing Kingdoms, in the abundance of all
prosperity and glory; And that you, Heir to this Majesty and Royal Pomp, bred
up your spirit, among these mundane delights, of the desire and hope of adding
to the luster of your Grandfathers, the splendour of your brave Actions,
wherewith your politic and military virtues should adorn your life, and the
History of your Reign: What Is this then, when all the reasons of State, as
well as those wherewith your Conscience had been only instructed, would have
kept you engaged in this new Religion, the error whereof you have sucked in
with the milk of your infancy, your eyes and your ears should have been capable
of seeing and hearing the Truths which now make known to you the fault, and the
condemnation, which God by the wisdom and power of his Judgments has drawn
from it self, and his proper works, that you may feel the effects? How should
you have been able to have discovered, under this fair show of Reformation,
whereof she has taken the Title, under this splendid luster which she has put
upon her face, of Knowledge and Eloquence, the gifts whereof shine in her
Doctors and Ministers; of the reading, and particular regard she commands them
to have toward the holy Scriptures; of the familiar Texts; which adorn their
Pastors Discourses and Preachings; of the popular exercises of her Psalms and
Canticles; of the Prayers and Orisons which are extracted and interwoven with
the Understanding, which gives consolation: Should you have been able to have
discovered, I say, that under this appearance of Piety she had dis-avow'd her
strength, if God had not at present let you see it in the works of horror and
confusion, deadly to Christian piety and charity, destructive to all Form of
Religion, Enemies to all Order of God, which she has produced by the
consequences of her Fundamental Maxims? Sir, Had your Majesty taken notice of
the imposture and deceit which the Father of Lies has hidden under these
Baits, that they themselves, whom he made the first Instruments and Authors of
the division of the Church, did not perceive, for they would have abhorred it
had they known it would have been such? This is then truly the great work of
God, whereof this false prophet understands not the reason, when he speaks
thus: God has certainly done this work: And God has raised him up himself, to
put this confusion among them which have forsaken the Unity of the Church, in
dividing themselves into a thousand Sects, of which they acknowledge at
present, that no one can call himself the Church. For the Sect of the
Protestants cannot pretend to it, since she her self subsists no more: but that
every one sees her justly perished, by the same Maxims that separated her from
the Church; and that the Presbyterians, which seduced them, have now destroyed
them. Nor the Sect of the Presbyterians, which is under the yoke of the
Independents, who cut their throats with the same Swords wherewith they warred
against the Church: For they brought them, by their own Maxims, to renounce all
Discipline, all Government, all Law, and all Rule of Unity, and by consequence
all Form of the Church. This cursed Cham has then discovered his Father's
filthiness, that is to say, of the first Author of this pretended Reformation,
who being drunk with the wine of his error, did not himself know ^t.

But if God pleases, the impudence of his brazen face, who has lost all
shamefacedness, being not afraid to discover, by his Independence, the
Foundations of this preposterous Reformation, shall now touch his brethren with
compunction and shame, that they may return to their common Father.

He will cause the Presbyterians and Protestants to understand, that it was the
spirit of senslesness and error, which made Luther conceive and undertake the
design of dividing the Church, under pretext of a false Reformation. From
whence they will perceive (if they can but come to themselves) that one ought
not to desire, neither that any one can do any thing true or lawful, but in the
union, and by the consent of the Church, and the rule of Tradition, which she
has received from the Apostles, and conserved by a continued succession.

As God, Sir, draws light out of darkness, so your Majesty sees, that he makes
your salvation to come out of your calamity. But this is not for you alone.
That which he will do in your Person, he will bring to pass in all your
Kingdoms, by your Person. And not only in all your Kingdoms, but in all the
places, and in all those which are separated from the Church, as your Kingdoms
are.

That which you have singular in this cause, is, by being the greatest King of
the party divided from the Church, and that your Kingdoms are the greatest and
most flourishing Estate that has received this novelty of Religion, where she
has found the most powerful Sanctuary, and where she has planted her seat the
most eminent, and most assured; This is likewise a reason why God has put her
into this confusion, in destroying her by the different Sects which she her
self has engendered, that all the world may know the spirit of error, from
whence she has taken her Original.

For all the world at present sees what this spirit is, and its nature, if it
is the Spirit of Christ, it is the Spirit of peac^ and truth; if it be the
spirit of Satan it is the spirit of trouble and error which has raised the
trouble and errou^ which rules at present in your Kingdoms.

Since such is the spirit of this new Reformation, and its Maxims, such ar^ its
works, that are at this day discovered, and made evident: who is that man that
can defend it? that can preserve i^ in his conscience? that can have repos^ or
comfort in his soul, by adhering to it? There Is no more need of Disputes, or
Arguments to convince it: She is convinced by her self, according to the
character the Spirit of God has stamped upon the Heretical man, by the Pen of
the Apostle St. Paul, who commands us to depart for these reasons: There is,
says he, a perverted spirit, that is condemned by it self. This is the imag^
that all the world does see at present in this Reformation, and its Genius.

But there rests now one thing to do which is, to apply this remedy of
Salvation to the Conscience of the People seduced by the error. There is no
more to do than to anoint the wound the Scorpion has made with the oil where
it has been bruised. For the way to heal them is now very easy, by reason
their Reformation has received such a miserable success. There is nothing more
easy than to make the People know thereupon by the conviction of their Pastors,
upon the very Foundations and Maxims of their Reformation, that they have
neither Church nor Faith: But then when they supposed (contrary to the promise
of Jesus Christ) the Church was fallen into ruin, for pretext of reforming it,
they have not been able to form an other, which has the conditions of the true
Church, but an infinity of different and contrary Sects among them, none of
which can be the Church; but in rejecting the authority of Tradition for
interpreting the Scripture, and the judgment of the Church for the declaration
of her Faith, They have abandoned the Unity of the Faith, that every one might
abound in his own sense, by the different opinions they have conceived. That
which of necessity must cast them, as it is come to pass, into the Independence
of all rule, and the indifference of all opinion in Religion.

And as modesty to accuse the Church of Error in all the Ages, has been the
beginning to make the Authors of this Reformation agree, that the Church
remained pure in Faith during the time of the four first general Councils; they
have afforded us a way by this to disabuse the People, they do abuse, when they
accuse the Church at this day of Error in the heads of her Faith, which they
have rejected. For they can no longer avoid falling into a manifest
contradiction of the sense which they impute to the ancient Fathers in points
of Faith, which are in controversy between us. They cannot brand the Church at
this day for having a different opinion in Faith from the Ancient Church,
without cutting their throats with their own proper contradictions, upon the
opinion they attribute to the Fa^hers.

So that there is nothing more to do for the informing the People, separated
from the Church, of the truth, and obliging them to enter again into her, than
to make them understand the cheat wherewith they have been surprised under the
name of Reformation, by convincing, in their presence, their Ministers, of an
evident contradiction of themselves, by the consequences of the Fundamental
Maxims of their Reformation. From whence results the indubitable Demonstration,
which proceeds from the spirit of lying and error.

If it please your Majesty, Sir, to employ this way for your instruction, and
the satisfaction of your Conscience, that your Conversion and return to t^
Church may both open the hearts and the way for all the rest to follow your
example, You cannot do it more solemnly, or commodiously, than in the place
wherein you are at the present* We have in this place five Ministers of the
Communion separated from the Catholic Church, who have gotten themselves as
much credit and authority, through the esteem of their sufficiency, and
reputation of their zeal, as any that are in their whole body.

Your Majesty, Sir, may easily obtain of the King your good Brother and
Friend, that they be called, by his Authority, to come (with all those of their
Communion wherewith they would be assisted) and appear in presence of Monsieur
the Archbishop of Paris, and Monsieur his Coadjutor, and the Catholic Doctors,
which he shall please to bring with him. And there, Sir, you Majesty being
present, to speak and answer with all security and liberty, that which their
spirit and conscience does suggest to them upon the evident contradictions of
the principles and consequences of their Reformation, that, in all their
different Sects which have for saken the Church under this pretext, there is
neither Church nor Faith. And that, upon the Points of Faith, where they have
accused the Church of Error, and have taken the opportunity to separate
themselves from her, they are likewise separated from the Communion of the
Church of all Ages. So that they cannot any ways accuse us of diversity of
opinion with the Ancient Church, but that they again fall into an evident
contradiction of themselves, as well as of the Ancient Fathers, and of us.

These Ministers, Sir, will deny neither the desire of your Majesty, nor the
Commandment of the King your good Brother, to render the duty both to their
charge and to their conscience, unless they will wirness, by their denial, the
open forsaking which they make o^ their cause, and the condemnation which they
themselves pronounce in their hearts.

But they will love rather (as I think) ingenuously to present themselves, to
yield to the truth, which they cannot contradict, than to incurr the blame of
being acknowledged formal enemies of the peace and reunion of the Church,
through the perverseness of an obstinate Faith. I know not what to think, that
they should rather love to fling themselves headlong, with their people, into
the confusion and disorder of Independency, and indifference of all opinion in
Religion, than to avouch the error and blindness of those who were the first
Egressors from the Church by these Maxims, which have cast, by their consequenc
s, their Followers into this abyss of irreligion, whereinto we see them at this
present fallen.

And when the Ministers would let themselves be carried away to so unlucky a
thought, I do no ways believe that in France the People would follow them, and
adhere to their opinions.

This is wherefore, Sir, I dare hope that the Ministers which are in Paris,
being obliged by the desire of your Majesty, and the will of their Sovereign,
to submit to this Law, which their own Conscience imposes on them for the
satisfaction of their own People (for the People will have no less affection,
and will be no less desirous to see the success of the appearance of their
Ministers, and the answer they shall make) will yield to it, and will rather
choose to walk in the way of honor, and a good conscience, than basely to
appear desertors, at one and the same time, both of their Cause, and good Faith.

Whatsoever comes to pass, Sir, and whatsoever they do, whether they follow the
motion of the Spirit of Peace and Truth, or whether the Spirit of Pride suggest
unto them to avoid and fly both the one and the other, you^ Majesty shall
always have all full satisfaction for departing from the error, which you
shall see forsaken or condemned by its own Ministers; and entering into the
Church, which is the Pillar of Truth, and Rock of Ages, against which you see
all the sail of different Sects, running at every wind of Doctrine, through the
deceit of them that conduct them, to break and shipwreck themselves. And then
when your Majesty shall be entered into the Church after this manner, and when
all the world shall see, that the desire to glorify God, by the searching for
the Truth, by the repose of your Conscience, and by the love of your Salvation,
shall have been your whole motive, You need not doubt, Sir, but your example
will make the like impression in all the souls that are touched with the fear
of God.

You need not doubt, Sir, for so much as God has elevated your Majesty in
birth and eminent dignity above the rest that are in the Communion wherein ^ou
have lived, They all seeing these ^ircumstances of your change, and en^rance
into the Sanctuary of the Church upon the wings of the victory of Truth, which
carries you thither alone, will ^e stirred up to give glory to God for ^he same
causes for which you shall be ^endred to him.

It concerns you then, Sir, to make ^our entrance by this means, and that ^ou
serve your self of this way to ad^ress your self thither, to the end your
^onversion and return to the Church, ^ring to her, with you, by the solemn
^onviction of the error which has ^ismembred her, not only those which ^he
division of your Fathers has torn from her, but also all the rest which ^he
same cause has separated. For by ^he power which Truth has upon the
Conscience of men, when it is apparent, here is no doubt but it will come to
^ass after this manner.

When the People shall see that the Ministers called in the presence of you^
Majesty, either by their avowing of the truth, or refusal to appear, shall
have been themselves the Ministers of you^ Conversion, every one will ^nter up
on the examination of the causes an^ reasons of the Truth, which shall have
moved you thither, which shall have no^ less virtue to make the like impression
in their souls, by the same means.

For whether the Ministers do sincerely yield to the Truth, which they will not
know how to contradict, or whether they condemn themselves by their refusal of
an ingenuous proceeding, the event of their Convocation shall be alike and
universal in all places, where the same way to call back the People to the
Church shall be practiced.

There are no Ministers in France will know what to answer, when those of Paris
shall be made dumb. No others will by any manner of means dispute them
concerning their sufficiency: But if they are wanting to the duty of a good
Conscience, you may easily meet many more ingenuous, who will no ways refuse
to acknowledge the Truth. By this way the People, who seek nothing but their
salvation, and who have no interest more precious, will be ravished to see
themselves at last, by a plain, solid and sincere instruction, upon the true
understanding of matters of the Catholic Faith, drawn from this Labyrinth of
disputes, which are given them for matter of Reformation, no less Enemies to
Piety than Christian Charity.

For this effect, Sir, desiring to be assisting to the design of making the
People see, by the conviction of their Ministers, that being separated from the
Church under this pretext of Reformation, they are left by that means without
Faith, and without the Church. And then when one persuades them; that in the
Questions controverted i^ Faith, the Church teaches contrary to what the
Ancient Church has believed; those that accuse them cannon do it but by a
formal contradicting bot^ the holy Fathers and themselves, which is a necessary
argument of lying and error: I here put forth into the light a little
Treatise, wherein these two Truth^ are rendered evident.

They have formed no Controversy more important, according to their own
opinion, than that of Transubstantiation in the holy Sacrament of the
Eucharist. They accuse us for having Introduced, by the truth of this change,
the necessity of adoring Jesus Christ in this Sacrament, or the Sacrament it
self, which we maintain to be Jesus Christ himself. They impute unto us, that
in this we have altered the Faith of the Ancient Church, to whom they say, both
this change, and the adoration of the Sacrament, has been unknown. They make
this the principal cause, forsooth, of their sole necessity of separating
themselves from us.

And being not able to deny, that the whole Ancient Church did solemnly offer
the Sacrifice of the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ to God his Father,
according to his institution, in the holy Eucharist, they also cloak their
difference in this subject, from the Ancient Church, and from us, with this,
That the Ancient Church did not believe (as they presume) Transubstantiation
with us, nor by consequence the Sacrifice, as we do, saying, That to this
subject, as they reject in our belief Transubstantiation, so they have for the
same reason likewise abolished the Sacrifice, which the Church celebrates at
this present. I have made it evident, Sir, that the Faith of the Church at this
day is conformable to the Ancient upon this change, in a Book which I have
published against the defenses brought by Minister Aubertin upon the passages
of the holy Fathers, in his Book of the Eucharist.

I have reduced the demonstration of the Truth to this point, viz. That all the
holy Fathers have believed, that by the change, which interposes it self in
this Sacrament, there is rendered, the same Flesh, and the same Blood of Jesus
Christ, received by the mouths of Believers, whereof Jesus Christ speaks in St.
John, where he commands us to eat and drink them, that we may have eternal
life. The Minister has not been able to contradict this truth, but in formally
contradicting the sense which the Authors of his opinion, before him, have
attributed to the Fathers, as conformable to them, and in making the sense of
the Fathers formally contrary to that of Jesus Christ, and that which he
attributes to them formally contrary to the true sense which they have and do
declare in clear and express words. I have convinced him by the proof of an
evident demonstration in this little Treatise. And if he be called to answer
upon this conviction, the Truth will be found to be victorious, either by his
good or his evil Faith. And as their Consciences tell them, and bite them for
having introduced, by their Reformation, all Opinions equally contrary to the
Faith of the Church of all Ages. When they see themselves reduced to this
extremity, they cast themselves into the retrenchment of their Fundamental
Maxims, which is to admit of no rule of Faith, but that of the Scripture,
interpreted by every man's reason. Upon that I have convinced them by a
Demonstration without Reply, that by the design of their Reformation, founded
upon the use of this rule, they have lost both the Church and Faith. Which they
must avouch if they be called to answer there, or that the Truth shall conserve
its advantage by the refusal they shall make.

I most humbly entreat your Majesty, Sir, that you will be pleased to let this
little work have the glory to appear to the World under your Royal Name, for a
prop which will be able to serve your Faith, as an Instrument of the Truth, the
Victory whereof ought happily to gain you to the Church: And by gaining you, to
bring with you her Peace, and reunion of all the Parties that are divided from
her. For assuredly this grace of Heaven is not far from us, if we our selves do
not draw our selves back.

And I am certain, that if it please the prudence of the Bishops, which the
Holy Ghost has established for the conduct of the Church (as I hope they will
be pleased) to serve themselves toward the People that have abandoned their
Crosier, of the way that I propose and present to your Majesty, they shall
see, without much pain, and in a little time, the strayed Sheep returning to
them, by the very hand of those which keep them withdrawn from their
Sheepfolds. For in effect, when the evidence of this demonstrated Truth shall
once have taken its place (by the sweetness of the amiable conferences, where
she ought to be treated with all sincerity and liberty) in the spirit of all
our separated Brethren, as well Ministers as People, they will consent with joy
to re-enter into the Catholic Church. So much the more willingly, that by the
reasons of the truth of her Faith, acknowledged conformable to the Tradition of
all Ages, they shall so acknowledge her in all her parts, to be the True Seed
from which the Holy Spirit has caused Piety and Charity to spring, flourish
and fructify in Believers.

From whence it follows by the same reason, that the true and lawful
Reformation, which all good men of the Church desire in the Church, does depend
no otherwise than upon the understanding and practice of these same Truths, by
the duty to which they address all Believers, in the different vocations
whereto God calls them. In all which, the end which is proposed them, is no
other than to live united among them, and with Jesus Christ, by the grace of
the Holy Ghost, to serve God under the obedience of the Government which he
has put into the hands of the Bishops, which feed the Flock with an unanimous
consent, under the Authority of the espe^ial Chair of St. Peter, established at
Rome by two Principals of the Apostles, St. Peter, and St. Paul, from which
whosoever separates himself, is a Schismatic, and out of the Communion of the
Church.

Upon this, Sir, I am imboldened to speak for this last time to your Majesty,
that as you may if you will, by the way which I propose to you, lay the
Foundation of this work, by your Conversion and entrance into the Catholic
Church: You will find also, that the success shall be, in the hand of God, the
indubitable way of re-establishing you in your Throne. Certainly all will agree
with me, that this work is upon such conditions, that if it had received its
accomplishment in Paris, with the Ministers, and People separated from the
Church, there is no place in all France wherein they would refuse to do the like.

And if once the love of the Peace, and reunion of the Church, had thus gained
the heart of our separated Brethren which are in this Kingdom, acknowledging
in this manner, that the only safe and necessary Reformation ought to be this,
which, by the truth of the definitions of the Faith of the Church, in her
Doctrine, in her Service, and in her Government, shall reestablish a Christian
life among Christians: the other People and Pastors (and the Pastors for the
love, and by the very motion of the People) which are in the same Communion in
other parts of Europe, will without doubt do the same thing.

Think you, Sir, that if your Subjects of Scotland, and those which are in
England and Ireland, faithful and affectionate to your Crown and Person, seeing
the success of this project happened in France, to which your Conversion shall
have given the beginning and motion, they will resist the call of the same
grace, and that they can be able to find in their hearts, in their mouths, and
in their hands, either reason, or means, for to hinder themselves to follow
that, which all those of their Communion shall have done here? And after this
will you doubt, that the blessing of God, who is never wanting to his promises,
will not accomplish in you fully that which he has promised to those that
believe in him, by the mouth of his own Son, when he tells them, Search the
Kingdom of God, and his righteousness, and all things shall be added unto you?
Will you doubt, that in thus searching of his Kingdom, you shall not find also
your own? And that Heaven will not likewise render unto you, upon the Earth,
this temporal recompense, for a token of that you shall have sought, and which
you shall receive in Heaven for eternity?

Yes, Sir, the Word of God deceives no man; it is more firm and immovable than
the Heaven and the Earth; for the one and the other shall vanish away, but one
sole Iota of the Word uttered from the mouth of the Son of God, shall not pass
away. When I tell you these things, founded upon the Truth which he has spoken
unto us, believe that this is he himself that addresses them to you by my
mouth. It is he himself that calls you. It is he himself that stretches forth
his hand toward you. It is he himself, that by his hand has conducted you,
for this end, to the place where you are. Recollect again your self upon all
the thoughts of your heart, since the time your Majesty parted from hence, to
the time your Majesty returned back.

Think upon all that you have been willing to do, and upon all that which it
has pleased God to do with you: For he has done all the things, both what you
see and what you suffer, upon your Person and upon your Estate.

He has put you into the Estate you are, to make you understand his voice, and
for to oblige you to say to him, Lord, what will thou that I do?

You have thought to be able to reascend upon your Throne, by the means of
those of your Subjects, who appeared to retain for you, and for your Crown,
that fidelity to which a more ancient Bond held them obliged more straightly than
all others. God would not have it so. They had a design to bind your Conscience
to the Laws of their Reformation, by an oath to observe the conditions of
their Covenant, and by abjuring your opinions, that drew more near the
Catholic Religion.

They hoped by this means, that in conserving upon your head some Form, at
least apparent, of the Royal Government, under which they had so happily obeyed
your Fathers for so many Ages, they should avoid the falling under the slavage
of the Tyranny which is called Cromwell's Commonwealth.

And that they should defend by this way the factiousness of their Religion
from giving place to his Independency, What is it come to? God has destroyed
all their Counsels. He has routed all their Armies by the Arm of this
False-prophet, by whose mouth he convinces, and confounds in the face of their
Ministers, by mouth and by writing, the rules of their Covenant, by the proper
Maxims of their Reformation. God has delivered them into his hands, and
imposed upon them the yoke of his absolute domination. They must now submit to
the Laws of his Independency, and of his Commonwealth, the name whereof serves
for a Masque to his Tyranny.

But God has delivered you, Sir, and by a conduct of his Providence, full of
trembling and admiration, he has withdrawn your Sacred Person from a thousand
dangers, which threatened it from the fury and cruelty of this Monster, who
spared neither the force of Iron, nor the value of Gold, to find the means of
violently taking away your life. You have seen, Sir, the anger of God to
descend upon your head, who according to the terms of the Scripture, has
loosned the Belts of Kings, and bound their Reins with Cords.

You have seen his Arm armed with his rage, to defeat your Armies. Combating at
their head you have done bravely, with your hand, and with your courage, all
that the generosity of a valiant and magnanimous Prince could do, to associate
Victory to the justice of your Arms. You have there shed your Blood, and seen
that of your faithful Subjects to stream through the fields covered with their
bodies.

Your valor, and their unfearful hearts, had for a time gotten the advantage
of the great number of your Enemies, who saw themselves ready to turn their
backs: But the chance of Arms turning in an instant for them, this ill hap,
fatal to your Crown ravishd from you in this last Conflict, according to humane
appearance, both the way, and hope of recovering it. But God has ways unknown
to men; and his ways are not our ways. It is in our weakness that he
magnifies his strength, and in our lowliness that he makes his height to be
seen.

Then when you were thus deprived of your Forces, and all humane means of
safety taken from you, he came to you under another visage, and armed you with
a sense of hardiness, and resolution, which was above the spirit of a man, for
the Party which you made choice of for your security. You resolved with your
self to seek it, by exposing your sole Person in the solitariness of ways, and
in the desert of Forests, to the hazard of a thousand sad Accidents; after you
had hidden all the Marks of that Majesty which is born with you, under a form
borrowed from the most base condition, that the eyes of the People, which owe
you after God the second homage, might not know what you truly were. You have
passed after this manner, without astonishment, and without fear, across a
thousand objects, which the imagination at every step presented to you. It is
there, where you acknowledged God had encamped his Angels about you, for your
guard, and for your defense. It is there, where he made a simple Peasant, and
an infirm Woman, the very Angels of his assistance, for to be your guide:
giving to the simplicity of the one, and to the frailty of the other, prudence
and resolution necessary to conduct you, with as much judgment as sincere
loyalty, and to bring you, as a stranger and unknown person, both the object of
every man's scorn and disdain, into the Capital City of your Ancestors
Inheritance. It is there, where before fearing (by reason of the Orders set
forth against your life, and for discovering you) the meeting so many faces
that would regard yours, the hand of God has withdrawn the eyes of all those
who had a heart to hurt you. And he has opened them to him alone, for to
acknowledge you, who without being prevented, either by a foresight, or
expectation of you, became the Angel of your conduct, for your crossing the
Seas, descending upon our Banks, and moreover, rendering you to the eyes of the
Queen your dear Mother, to whom your presence has caused a greater cessation
of grief, and rendered a greater joy, than you did at your Birth.

God has then after this manner, Sir, made you to return hither into the
Bosom, wherein your Majesty has begun to live, to the end he may give you a
new one, by your being born again into the spiritual Bosom of your eternal
Mother. You may see the conduct and counsel of God, who calls you to him by a
call so marvelous, having heard the prayers and vows, the sighs and tears of
this Catholic Princess, to give her the joy to see you rendered a partaker of
the greatest graces she has received from God, and which she has implored for
you ever since your Birth, without ceasing.

Since she is the Daughter of Henry the Great, the Glory of most Christian
Kings, she implores of God for you the inheritance of that grace he received
from his hand, which set him at one and the same time time both in the Church,
and upon the Throne. Her faith implores it, her patience hopes it, and her
piety shall obtain it. This is the consolation she sighs after, for restoring
her from so many bitter afflictions, which she has sucked in at leisure, and
that the hand of God has poured upon her, in his Sons Chalice, by which he
proves the constancy of those who love him.

To the tears of this desolate Princess, I add, Sir, the Innocent Blood shed
before God by the King your Father, whom I think I may be able without fear to
style happy. For if we look upon the cause of his death, he has been
persecuted and cruelly ^ain, being able to avoid the one and the other from the
hands of his Enemies, if he would have submitted his Conscience to their
Covenant, and consented to the abolishing of Episcopacy.

But he has loved rather to glorify God by the confession of a good
Conscience, and for supporting a Dignity which he has believed to have been
instituted by God, according to the opinion of the Catholic Faith. Certainly
we ought to believe, that it is to this Faith, which he has preferred before
the greatest things in the world, which we must rehears, and acknowledge for
the fruits, Piety, Humility, Patience, Constancy, Resignation to the will of
God, submission even to that of men, for the love of God, which we have seen in
him, and which his persecution, suffering, prison, unworthy intreatings,
criminal proceeding, degradation, condemnation, the horror and cruelty of his
punishment, like to which the Sun did never yet see an example on the Earth,
have rendered him more illustrious and more bright shining than the light of the
Sun it self. We may say, that that firmness of this faith has been in his
heart a secret work of God, for reuniting him, in this trial of the last
moments of his life, to his Cat^olique Church, in the number of his faithful
Elect, many of which (says St. Austin) invisibly belong to the Church, though
they are not rendered members visibly. And we ought to believe, that this Crown,
which he has gained by the constancy of his faith, has been woven for him by
the hands of Jesus Christ, the King of Kings, hearing the prayer and
intercession of the most happy Queen his Grandmother, who has in the same
manner shed he^ blood, and given up her soul into the hands of God, by one and
the same punishment, with a faith and constancy not to be imitated, for the
Catholic Faith, which was the very cause of the hatred and persecution she
received from her people, and most near Kinswoman, from whom the succession of
the Crown belonged to her. For the prayers of the most happy Martyrs in Heaven,
tends to obtain continually of God, by Jesus Christ, the accomplishment of the
same grace they have received here below, imploring it for those that have
need, to the end that their Faith may be also consummated by a perfect Charity.
This is the grace, Sir, you shall make trial of, when your Majesty shall
attain this Faith, by your reunion with the Church. You shall feel likewise the
effect of the prayers and intercession this glorious Princess makes to God for
you by Jesus Christ; to the end that when you shall be restored to his Church,
the Throne un^ustly taken away both from her, and from you, shall be rendered to
you in the middle of your Subjects, there to establish by the same grace, the
Kingdom of Jesus Christ.

To these prayers, which all the Angels and Saints which are in the Church in
Heaven, and in Earth, make to God for your Majesty, I join, Sir, my vows and
supplications, with this testimony of my devotion to your most humble service,
in a Subject which I have esteemed the most important, and most worthy to gain
me the honor of the good favor of your Majesty, and that to style my self,

SIR, Of your Majesty the most humble, most faithful, and most obedient
Servant, La Militiere.

AN ANSWER TO Monsieur de la Militiere his Impertinent Dedication of his
Imaginary Triumph, To the KING of Great Britain, to invite him to embrace the
Roman Catholic Religion.

By John Bramhall, D. D. and Lord Bishop of Derry.

HAGUE, Printed in the Year, 1653.

An Answer to Monseiur de la Militiere his Fpistle to the King of
Great-Brittain, wherein he inviteth His Majesty to forsake the Church of
England, and to embrace the Roman Chatholick Religion.
SIR,
YOU might long have disputed your Question of Transubstantiation, with your
learned Adversary, and proclaimed your own Triumph on a silver Trumpet to the
World, before any Member of the Church of England had interposed in this
present exigence of our Affairs. I know no necessity that Christians must be
like Cocks, that when one Crows, all the rest must crow for Plut.
company.

Monseiur Aubertine will not want a surviving friend, to teach you what it is
to teach you what it is to sound a Triumph before you have gained the Victory.
He was no fool that desired no other Epitaph on his Tomb than this, Here lies
the Author of this sentence, Prurigo Sir Henry wotton.
disput andi scabies Ecclesiae, the itch of disputing is the scab of the Church.

Having viewed all your strength with a single eye, I find not one of your
Arguments that comes home to Transubstantiation, but only to a true Real
Presence, which no genuine Son of the Church of England did ever deny, no nor
your Adversary himself. Christ said, This is my Body, what he said, we do
steadfastly believe; he said not after this or that manner, neque con, neque
suh, neque trans; And therefore we place it among the Opinions of the Schools,
not among the Articles of our Faith.

The holy Eucharist, which is the Sacrament of Peace and Unity, ought not No
differences in the Church directly about the Sacrament for the first 800 years.
to be made the matter of strife and Contention. There wanted not abuses in the
Administration of this Sacrament, in the most pure and primitive times: as
Profaneness and Uncharitableness among the Corinthians. The Simonians, and
Menandrians, 1 Cor. 11.
and some other such Imps of Satan, unworthy the name of Christians, did
wholly forbear the use of the Eucharist, but it was not for any difference
Theod. ex Ignatio.
about the sacrament it self, but about the Natural Body of Christ; They held,
that his Flesh, and Blood, and Passion, were not true and real, but imaginary
and phant astical things.

The Maniches did forbear the Cup, but it was not for any difference about the
sacrament it self; They made two Gods, a good God, whom they called (...) or
Light, and an evil God, whom they termed (...) or Darkness, which evil God,
they said, did make someCreatures of the Dreg, or more feculent parts of the
Matter, which were evil and impure; and among these Evil Creatu^es they
esteemed Wine, which they called the Gaul of the Dragon: For this cause, not
upon any other scruple, they wholly abstained from the Cup, or used water in
Leo. Ser. 4. de Quad. Epiph. her. 30. and 46. Aug. l. de. H^re. c. 64.
the place of wine, which Epiphanius records among the Errors of the
Ebionites and Tacians; And St Augustine of the Aquarians. Still we do not find
any clashing either in word or writing directly about this sacrament, in the
universal Church of Christ, much less about the presence of Christ in the
sacrament. Neque ullus veterum disputat contra ^el. l. 1. de Sac. Euch. (...).
1.
hunc errorem primis sexcentis Annis.

The first that are supposed by Bellarmine to have broached any Error in the
Church about the Real presence, were the Ichonomachi, after 700 years. Primi
qui veritatem corporis Domini in Eucharistia in quaestionem vocarunt, fuerint
Ichonomachi post Annum Domini 700. only because they called the Bread Bell.
ibid. Syn. Nic. 2 Act 6.
and Wine the Image of Christ's body* This is as great a mistake as the former*
Their difference was merely about Images, not at all about the Eucharist; so
much Vasques confesses, that In his judgment they art not to be numbered Disp.
179. c. 1
with those who deny the presence of Christ in the Eucharist.

We may well find different observations Yet different Observations,
in those days, as one Church consecrating leavened Bread, another unleavened;
One Church making use of pure wine, another of wine mixed with water; One
Church admitting Infants to the Communion, another not admitting them; but
without Controversies or Censures, or Animosity one against the other: we find
no Debates or Disputes concerning the presence of Christ's Body in the
Sacrament, and much less concerning the manner of his presence, for the first
800 years.

Yet all the time we find as different expressions among those Primitive
Fathers, And different expressions.
as among our modern writers at this day, some calling the Sacrament the sign
of Christ's Body, the figure of his Body, the Symbol of his Body, the mystery of
his Body, the exemplar type and representation of his Body, saying that the
Elements do not recede from their first Nature; Others naming it the true Body
and Blood of Christ, changed, not in shape but in nature, yea doubting not to
say, that in this Sacrament we see Christ, we touch Christ, we eat Christ, that
we fasten our teeth in his very Flesh, and make our Tongues red in his Blood:
Yet notwithstanding there were no Questions, no Quarrels, no Contentions
amongst them; there needed no Councils to order them, no Conferences to
reconcile them, because they contented themselves to believe what Christ had
said, this is my Body, without presuming on their own heads, to determine the
manner how it is his Body; neither weighing all their own words so exactly
before any controversy was raised, nor expounding the sayings of other men
contrary to the Analogy of Faith.

The first doubt about the presence of Christ's Body in the Sacrament seems The
first difference about the presence of Christ in the Sacrament.
to have been moved not long before the year 900. in the days of Bertram and
Paschasius, but the Controversy was not well formed, nor this new Article of
Transubstantiation sufficiently concocted in the days of Berengarius, after
the year 1050. as appears by the gross mistaking, and mistating of the
Question on both sides; First Berengarius, if we may trust his Adversaries,
knew no mean between a naked Figure, or empty sign of Christ's presence, and a
Corporeal or Local presence, and afterward fell into another extreme of
impanation; on the other side the Pope and the Council made no differrence
between Consubstantiation and Transubstantiation, they understood nothing of
the spiritual or indivisible being of the Flesh and Blood of Christ in the
Sacrament, as appears by that ignorant and Capernaiticall Retractation and
Abjuration, which they imposed upon Berengarius, Pe^ned by Vmbertus a Cardinal,
approved by Pope Nicholas, and a Council, Ego Exact. Syn. Romans sub Nich. 2.
Berengarius etc.

I Berengarius do consent to the Holy Roman Apostolic See, and profess with
my Mouth and my Heart, to hold the same Faith of the Sacrament of the Lords
supper, with Pope Nicholas and this holy Synod, etc. And what the Faith of Pope
Nicholas and this Synod was, follows in the next words; That the Bread and
Wine, which are set upon the Altar after Consecration, are not only the
Sacrament, but the very Body and Blood of Christ. This seems to favor
Consubstantiation, rather than Transubstantiation; If the Bread and Wine be the
Body and Blood of Christ, then they remain bread and wine sti^l; If the bread
be not only the Sacrament, but also the thing of the Sacrament, if it be both
the sign and the thing signified, how is it now to be made nothing? It follows
in the Retractation; That the body and blood of Christ is sensibly, not only in
the sacrament, but in truth handled and brok^n by the hand of the Priest, and
bruised by the teeth of the Faithful. If it be even so, there needs no more
but feel and be satisfied. To this they made Berengarius swear by the
consubstantiall Trinity, and the holy Gospels, and accurse and anathematize all
those who held the contrary; yet these words did so much scandalize and offend
the Glosser upon Gratian, that he could not forbear to admonish the Reader,
that unless he understood those words in a sound sense, he would fall into a
greater Heresy than that of Berengarius. Not without reason, for the most
favorable of the Schoolmen do confess, D^ Cons. did. 2 cap. Eg^ ^er.
that these words are not properly and literaly true, but figuratively and
metanimically, understanding the thing containing by the thing contained, as to
say the Body of Christ is broken or bruised, because the quantity or Species of
Bread are broken or bruised, they might as well say, that the Body and Blood of
Christ becoms fusty and sour, as often as the Species of Bread and Wine before
their corruption become fusty and sour. But the retractation of Berengarius can
admit no such figurative sense, that the Body and Blood of Christ in the
Sacrament are divided and bruised sensibly, not only in the Sacrament (that is
the Species) but also in truth. A most ignorant Capernaitical assertion; For
the Body of Christ being not in the Sacrament modo quant itativo, according to
their own Tenet, but indivisibly, after a spiritual manner, without
extrinficall extension of Parts, cannot in it self, or in Truth, be either
divided or bruised.

Therefore others of the Schoolmen go more roundly and ingenuously to work, and
confess, that it is an abusive and excessive Alex. Gab. Bon^v. etc.
expression, not to be held or defended, and that it happened to Berengarius
(they should have said to Pope Nicholas, and Cardinal Umbertus) as it does with
those who out of a detestation of one error incline to another.

Neither will it avail them any thing at all, that the Fathers have sometimes
used such expressions of seeing Christ, of touching Christ in the Sacrament, of
fastening our teeth in his Flesh, and making our toungsred in his Blood. There
is a great difference between a Sermon to the people, and a solemn Retractation
before a Judge. The Fathers do not say, that such expressions are true, not
only Sacramentally or figuratively, (as they made Berengarius both say and
accurse all others that held otherwise) but also properly, and in the things
themselves. The Fathers never meant by these forms of speech to determine the
manner of the presence, (which was not dreamt of in their days) but to raise
the Devotion of their Hearers and Readers; to advertise the people of God, that
they should not rest in the external symbols, or signs, but principally be
intent upon the invisible Grace, which was both lawful and commendable for
them to do. Leave us their primitive liberty, and we will not refrain from the
like expressions.

I urge this to show that the new doctrine of Transubstantiation is so far
from being an old Article of Faith, that it was not well digested, nor rightly
understood, in any tolerable measure, by the greatest Clerks, and most
concerned, above a thousand years after Christ.

The first definition or determination of this manner of the presence was yet
later, in the Council of Lateran, in the Scot. in 4. sent. did. 11. q. 3. T.
3. q. 75. d. 81. c. 1. The determination of the manner of the presence opened a
floodgate to a Deluge of Controversies.
days of Innocent the Third, after the year 1200. Ante Lateranense Concilium
Transubstantiatio non fuit dogma fidei, And what the fruit of it was, let
Vasques bear witness, Audito nomine Transubstantiationis, etc. The very name of
Transubstantiation being but heard, so great a Controversy did arise among the
later Schoolmen concerning the Nature thereof, that the more they endeavored
to wind themselves out, the more they wrapped themselves in greater
difficulties, whereby the Mystery of Faith became more difficult, both to be
explaned, and to be understood, and more exposed to the Cavils of its
Adversaries. He adds that the name of Conversion and Transubstantiation gave
occasion to these controversies.

No sooner was this Bell rung out, no sooner was this fatal Sentence given, but
as if Pandora's Box had been newly set wide open, whole Swarms of noysom
Questions and Debates did fill the Schools. Th^n it began to be disputed by
what means this Change comes, whether by the Benediction of the Elements, or by
the repetition of these words of Christ, This is my Body. The common current of
your Schools is for the later: But your judicious Archbishop Lib. de c^r.
Theol. Schol.
of Caesaria, since the Council of Trent, in a book dedicated to Sixtus the
Fifth, produces great reason to the contrary.

Then was the Question started, what the demonstrative Pronoun Hoc signifies in
these words, This is my Body; whether this Thing, or this Substance, or this
Bread, or this Body, or this Meat, or these Accidents, or that which is
contained under these Species, or this individum vagum, or Gloss. de Con. d. 2.
cap. Tim^rem.
lastly (which seems stranger than all the rest) this Nothing.

Then it began to be argued, whether the Elements were annihilated; whether the
matter and form of them being destroyed, their Essence did yet remain, or the
essence being converted, the existence remained; whether the sacramental
existence of the Body and Blood of Christ do depend upon its natural Existence;
whether the whole Host were Transubstantiated, or only some parts of it, that
Guidm^nd. (...). (...). de ver.
is, such parts as should be distributed to worthy Communicants; or whether in
those parts of the Host which were distributed unto unworthy Communicants, the
matter of bread and wine did not return. Whether the Deity did assume the
Bread, or the Species thereof, by a new Hypostaticall Union, called Impanation,
either absolutely, or respectively Mediante Corpore. Whether the Body and Blood
of Christ might be present in the Sacrament without Transubstantiation, with
the Bread or without the Bread; Whether a Body may be Transubstantiated into a
Spirit, and (which is most Vasq. dis^. 184. 6. 8.
strange) whether a Creature might be Transubstantiated into the Deity.

Then the Schoolmen began to wrangle what manner of change this was, whether a
material change, or a formal change, or a change of the whole substance, both
matter and form; and if it were a Conversion of the whole substance, then
whether it was by way of Production, or by Adduction, or by Conservation, each
of which greater Squadrons are subdivided into several lesser Parties, speaking
as different language as the builders of Babel, pestering and perplexing one
another with inextricable difficulties.

It cannot be a new Production (says one) because the Body of Christ, wherinto
the Elements are supposed to be converted, did pre-exist before the change;
neither can that Body which is made of Bread, be the same body with that which
was born of a Virgin.

If it be not by Production (say others) but only by Adduction, then it is not
a Transubstantiation, but a Transubiation, not a change of Natures, but a local
succession. Then the Priest is not the Maker of his Maker, (as they use to
brag) but only puts him into a new positure or presence, under the Species of
Bread and Wine.

Howbeit this way by Adduction be the more common, and the safer way (if we may
trust Be^larmine) yet of all Conversions or Changes, it has least affinity
with Transubstantiation. Suppose the water had not been turned into wine at
Cana of Galile by our Savior, but poured out, or utterly destroyed, and wine
new created, or Adduced by Miracle into the water-Pots, in such a manner, that
the introduction of the wine, should be the expulsion of the water, not only
comitanter but causaliter, in such case it had been no Transubstantiation.
Moses his Rod was truly changed into a Serpent, but it was by Production, if
his Rod had been conveyed away invisibly, by Legerdemain, and a Serpent had
been adduced into the place of it, what Transubstantiation had this been? None
at all; no, though the adduction of the Serpent had been the means of the
expulsion and destruction of the Rod. It is so far from Transubstantiation,
that it is no Conversion at all. The substance of the Elements is not
converted, for that is supposed to be destroyed; The Accidents are not
converted, but remain the same they were. It is no Adduction at all, when the
Body of Christ (which is the thing supposed to be adduced) remains still in
Heaven, where it was before.

It cannot be a Conservative Conversion, say others; for the same individual
thing cannot be Conserved by two total distinct Conservations: but if this were
a Conservative conversion, the Body of Christ should be conserved by two total
distinct Conservations, the one in Heaven, the other in Earth; Yea by ten
thousand distinct total Conservations upon Earth, even as many as there are
consecrated Hosts; Which seems to be ridiculous, and without any necessity
administers Uasq. T. 3. q. 75. d. 181 c. 4.
great occasion to the Adversaries of Christian Religion, of jeasting and
deriding the Mysteries of four Faith.

So here we have a Transubstantiation without Transubstantiation; A production
of a Modus or manner ofbeing, for a production of a Substance; An Annihilation
suppo^ed, yet no Annihilation confessed; An Adduction, without any Adduction; A
terminus ad quem, without a terminus a quo; who shall reconcile us to ou^
selves? But the End is not yet.

Then grew up the Q^tion, what is the proper Adequate Body which is contained
under the species or Accidents; whether a material Body, or a substantial Body,
or a living Body, ora n organical Body, or an Humane Body; whether it have
weight or not, and why it is not perceived; whether it can be seen by the eye
of mortal man; whether it can act or suffer any thing; whether it be movable or
immovable; whether by it self or by Accident, or by both; whether it can move
in one place, and rest in another; or be moved with two contrary motions, as
upwards and downwards, Southwards and Northwards, at the same time?

Add to these, whether the Soul of Christ, and the Deity, and the whole
Trinity, do follow the Body and Blood of Christ under either species, by
Concomitance? whether the Sacramental body must have suffered the same things
with the Natural Body? As supposing that an Host consecrated at Christ's last
supper, had been reserved until after his Passion, whether Christ must have
died, and his Blood have been actually shed in the Sacrament? Yea, whether
those wounds that were imprinted by the Whips in his natural body, might and
should have been found in his sacramental body without flagellation?

Likewise, what Blood of Christ is in the Sacrament? whether that blood only
which was shed, or that blood only which remained in the Body, or both the one
and the other? And whether that blood which was shed was assumed again by the
Humanity in the Resurrection?

Then began those Paradoxical Questions to be first agitated in the Schools,
whether the same inividual body, without division or discontinuation from it
self, can be locally in ten thousand places, yea in Heaven and in Earth at the
same time; or if not locally, yet whether it can be spiritually and
indivisibly? And whether it be not the same as to this purpose, whether a Body
be locally or spiritually present in more places than one? Bellarmine seems to
incline to the affirmative. Though to be any where s^cramentally Bell. l. 3. de
Euc. c. 3. in fine.
does not imply the taking up of a place, yet it implies a true and real
presence, and if it be in more Hosts or Altars than one, it seems no less
opposite unto Indivisibility, than the filling up of many places. Nay, he is
past seeming positive, that without doubt if a Body cannot be in two places
locally, it cannot be sacramentally in two places.

Compare this of Bellarmine with that In 4 d. 44* q. 7. art. (...) q. 3.
of Aquinas, that it is not possible for one body to be in more places than one
locally* no not by Miracle, because it implies (...) Contradiction; And
consider upon what to^ering foundations you build Articles of Faith. It is
impossible, and implies a Contradiction, for the Body of Christ to be locally
in more Hosts than one at the same time (says Aquinas) But it is as
impossible, and implies (...) Contradiction as much, for the Body o^ Christ to
be Sacramentally in more Hosts than one at the same time, as to be locally
(says Bellarmine). The Inference is plain and obvious.

And many such strange questions are moved, as whether it be possible the thing
contained should be a thousand times greater than the thing containing? whether
a definitive being in (...) place, do not imply a not being out o^ that place?
whether more bodies than one can be in one and the same place? whether there
can be a penetration of Dimensions? whether a Body can subsi^ after a
spiritual manner, so as to take up no place at all, but to be whollv in the
whole, and wholly in every part? Moreover whether the whole Body and Blood of
Christ be in every particle of the Bread, and of the Cup, and if it be* then
whether only after the division of the Bread and Wine, or before division also?
And in how many parts, and in which parts, is the whole Body and Blood of
Christ; whether in the least parts, and if in the least parts, then whether in
the least in kind, or the least in quantity, that is, so long as the Species
may retain the name of Bread and Wine, or so long as the matter is divisible,
and whether the Body and Blood of Christ be also in the indivisible parts, as
points, and ^ines and superficies?

Lastly, whether Accidents can subsist without their Subjects, that is, whether
they can be both Accidents, and no Accidents? whether all the Accidents of the
Elements do remain, and partienlarly whether the quantity does remain? whether
the other Accidents ^o in^ere in the quantity as their subject, that is,
whether an Accident can have an A^cident? whether the Quantity of Christ's Body
be there, and whether it be thero after a quantitative manner, with extension
of Parts, either extrinsecal or intrinsecal, and whether the quantity of the
Body of Christ be distinct an^ Figured, or indistinct and Unfigured? whether
the Accidents can nourish or make drunken or corrupt, and a new body be
generated of them; And what supplies the p^ace of the matter in such
generation, whether the quantity, or the Body of Christ, or the old matter of
the bread and wine restored by Miracle, or new matter created by God? And how
long in such corruption does the body of Christ continue?

Whosoever is but moderatly versed in your great Doctors, must needs know that
these questions are not the private doubts or debates of single Schoolmen, but
the common Garboils and general eng^gements of your who^e Schools.

Wherefore it had been a mere vanity to cite every particular Author for each
question, and would have made the margent swell ten times greater than the Text.

From this bold determination of the manner of the presence how, have flowed
two other differences, First the detention of the Cup from the Laity, meer^y
upon presumption of Concomitance, first decreed in the Council of Constance,
after the year 1400. Let what will become of Concomitance, whi^est we keep our
selves to the Institution of Christ and the universal practice of the Primitive
Church. It was not for nothing that our Savior did distinguish his Body from
his blood, not only in the Consecration, but also in the Distribution of the
Sacrament. By the way give me leave to represent a Contradiction in Bellarmine,
which I am not able to reconcile. In one place he says, The Providence of God
is marveilous I. ib. 4. de Euch. c. 25
in holy Scripture, for S^. Luke has put these words [do you this] after the
sacrament given under the form of Bread but he repeated it not after the giving
of the Cup, that we might understand that the Lord commanded that the Sacrament
should be d^stributed unto all under the form of Bread, but not under the form
of Wine. And yet in the next Chapter but one, of the same book, he does
positively determine the contrary, upon the ground of Concomitance, that the
Bread may be taken away if the Cup be given, but both cannot be taken away
together. Can that be taken away Chap. 27.
which Christ ^ath expressly commanded to be given to all?

A second difference flowing from Transubstantiation is about the Adoration of
the Sacrament; One of those impediments which hinder our Communication with you
in the Celebration e^ divine Offices: We deny not a Venerable respect unto the
Consecrate Elements, not only as love tokens sent us by our best friend, but as
the Instruments ordained by our Savior to convey to us the Merits of his
Passion* But for the Person of Christ, God forbid that we should deny him
Divine worship at any time, and especially in the use of this Holy Sacrament;
we belecve with St. Austine, that No man eats of that Flesh, but first he
Adores. But that which offends us is this, That you teach and require all men
to Adore the very S^crament with Divine Honor. To this end you hold it out to
the People. To this end Corpus Christi day Conc. Uien.
was instituted about 300 years since. Yet we know that even upon your own
grounds you cannot without a particular Revelation have any infallible
assurance that any Host is consecrated; And consequently you have no assurance
that you do not commit material Idolatry.

But that which weighs most with us is this. That we dare not give divine
worship unto any Creature, no not to the very Humanity of Christ in the
Abstract (much less to the Host) but to the whole person of Christ God and Man,
by reason of the Hypostaticall Union between the Child of the blessed Virgin
Mary, and the eternal Son, who is God over all blessed for ever. Show us such
an Union betwixt the Deity and the Elements, or Accidents, and you say
something. But you pretend no such things, The highest that you dare go is this.
As they that adored Christ when B^ll. 4. de Euch. c. 29. quodam modo.
he was upon Earth, did[after a certain kind of manner] adore his Garments. Is
this all? This is after a certain kind of manner indeed. We have enough. There
is no more Adoration due to the Sacrament, than to the Garments which Christ
did wear upon Earth. Exact no more.

Thus the seamless Coat of Christ is torn into pi^ces; Thus Faith is minc^d
into shreds, and s^un up into ^icities, more subtle than the Webs of Spiders,

Fidem minutis diss^ant ambagibus
(...) quisque est lingua ^quior.
Because curious wits cannot content themselves to touch hot Coals with Tongs,
but they must take them up with their naked Fingers, nor to u^prehend Mysteries
of Religion by Faith, without descanting upon them, and determining them by
Reason, whilst themselves confess that they are incomprehensible by humane
Reason, and imperceptible by Man's imagination; How ^q. p. 3. 1. 76. A^t. 7.
Christ is present in the sacrament can neither be perceived by sense, nor by
imagination. The more inexcusable is their presumption to Anatomise Mysteries,
and to determine supernatural not reveled Truths upon their own heads, which if
they were revealed were not possible to be comprehended by mortal man; As vain
an attempt as if a Child should think to lade out all the water out of the Sea
with a Cockleshell. Secret things belong to the Lord our God, but Deuteronomy. 29. 29.
things revealed, unto us, and our Children for ever.

This is the reason why we rest in the words of Christ, this is my body,
leaving the manner to him that made the sacrament; we know it is sacramental,
and therefore esficacious, because God was never wanting to his own Ordinances,
where man did not set a Bar against himself. But to determine whether it be
corporeally or spiritually, (I mean not only after the manner of a spirit, but
in a spiritual sense) whether it be in the soul only, or in the Host also; And
if in the Host, whether by Consubstantiation or Transubstantiation, whether by
Production, or Aduction, or Conservation, or Assumption, or by whatsoever other
way bold and blind men dare conjecture, we determine not.

Motum sentimus, modum nescimus, praesentiam credimus. Durand.
This was the belief of the Primitive Church, this was the Faith of the ancient
Fathers, who were never acquainted with these modern questions de modo, which
edify not, but expose Christian Religion to contempt. We know what to think,
and what to say with probability, modesty, and submission in the Schools; But
we dare neither scrue up the Question to such a height, not d^ctate our
Opinions to others so Magisterially as Articles of Faith.

Nescire velle quae Magister maximus Docere non vult, erud^ta est inscitia. O!
how happy had the Christian world been, if Scholars could have sat Against
multiplying of questions, and Controversies.
down contented with a latitude of general, sufficient, saving Truth, (which
when all is done must be the Olive branch of Peace, to show that the deluge of
Ecclesiastical division is abated) without ^ading too far into particular
subtilties, or doting about Questions and Logomachies, whereof comes envy,
strife, raylings, evil surmisings, perverse disputings. Old Con^roverersies
evermore raise up new Controversies, and yet more Controversies, as Circles in
the ^ater do produce other Circles.

Now especially these Sc^olasticall quarrels seem to be unseasonable, when
Zenos School is newly opened in the World, who sometimes wanted Opinions, but
never wanted Arguments; Now when Atheism and Sacrilege are become the Mode of
the Times; Now when all the Fundamentalls of Theology, Morality, and Policy,
are undermined and ready to be blown up; Now when the unhappy contentions of
great Princes, or their Ministers, have hazarded the very being of Monarchy and
Christianity; Now when Bellona shakes her bloody whip over this Kingdom, it
becomes well all good Christians, and Subjects, to leave their litigious
Q^estions, and to bring water to quench the fire of Civil dissension already
kindled, rather than to blow the Coals of discord, and to render themselves
censurable by all discreet persons, like that half-witted fellow personated in
theOrator, Qui cum capitis mederi debuisset reduviem curavit; when his head was
extremely distempered, he busied himself about a small push on his fingers end.

But that which creates this tro^ble to you and me at this time, is your
Preface, The occasion of this Discourse.
and Epistle Dedicatory; wherein to adorn your vainly imagined Victory in an
unseasonable Controversy, you rest not contented that your Adversary grace
your Triumph, unless the King of great Britain, and all his subjects, yea and
all Protestants besides, attend your Chariot. Neither do you only desire this,
but augurate it, or rather you relate it as a thing already as good as done:
for you tell him, that his ^ies and P. 37.
hi^ ears do hear and see those Truths, which make him to know the Faul^s of
that new Religion which he had suck^ with his milk; you set forth the causes of
his Conversion, The tears of his Mother, and the Blood of his Father, whom you
suppose (against evident truth) ^o have died an invisible Member of your Roman
Chatholique Church. And you prescribe the means to perfect his conversion,
which must be a Conference of your Theologians with the Ministers of Charenton.

If your Charity be not to be blamed, The Authors indiscretion,
to wish no worse to another than you do to your self, yet prudent men desire
more Discretion in you, than to have presented such a Treatise to the view of
the World under his Majesty's protection, without his license, and against his
Conscience: Had you not heard that such groundles insinnations as these, and
other private whisperings concerning his Fathers Apostatising to the Roman
Religion, did lose him the hearts of many Subjects? If you did, why would you
insist in the same steps, to deprive the son of all possibility of recovering
them?

If your intention be only to invite his To no pur pose. The King is already a
better Catholic than himself. Discursus modestus Jesuitar^ p. 13. Watsons
quodlib. l. 2. Art. 4.
Majesty to embrace the Chatholick Faith you might have spared both your oil
and labor. The Chatholick Faith flourished 1 200. years in the World before
Transubstantiation was defined among your selves. Persons better accquainted
with the Primitive times than your self (unles you wrong one another) do
acknowledge, that the Fathers did not touch either the Word or the Matter of
Transubstantiation. Mark it well, neither Name nor thing. His Majesty does
^rmly believe all supernatural Truth revealed in sacred Writ. He embra^eth
cheerfully whatsoever the holy A^ostles, or the Nicene Fathers, or blessed
Athanasius in their respective Creeds or Summaries of Chatholick Faith did set
down as necessary to be believed. He is ready to receive whatsoever the
Chatholick Church of this Age does unanimously believe to be a Particle of
saving Truth.

But if you seek to obtrude upon him the Roman Church, with its adherents, for
the Catholic Church, excluding three parts of four of the Christian world from
the Communion of Christ, or the opinions thereof for Articles and Fundamentals
of Catholic Faith, neither his Reason, nor his Religion, nor his Charity, will
suffer him to listen unto you. The Truths received by our Church, are
sufficient in point of ^aith to make him a good Ca^holick. More than this your
Roman Bishops, your Roman Church, your Tridentine Concill, may not, cannot
obtrude upon him. Listen to the third general Council, that of Ephesus, which
de^eed, Par. 2. Act. 6. c. 7.
that it should be lawful for no man to publish or compose another Faith or
Creed than that which was defined by the Nicene Council; And that whos^ever
should dare to eompose or offer any such to any persons willing Not lawful to
add to the old Creed.
to be converted from Paganism, Judaism, or Heresy, if they were Bishops or
Clerks should be deposed, if Laymen ana^ hematised.

Suffer us to enjoy the same Creed the Primitive Fat^ers did, which nons will
say to have been insufficient, except they be mad, as was alleged by the Greeks
in the Council of Florence. Council. Flo. Sess. 10. prof. fill. in bulla pii
quarti.
You have violated this Canon, you have obtruded a New Creed upon Christendom.
New I say, not in words only, but in sense also.

Some things are de Symbolo, some What are additions to the Creed, and what are
only explications.
things are contra Symbolum, and some things are only praeter Symbolum. Some
things are contained in the Creed, either expressly or virtually, either in the
Letter or in the Sense, and may be deduced by evident Consequence from the
Creed, as the Deity of Christ, his two Natures, the Procession of the Holy
Ghost. The Addition of these was properly no no addition, but an explication.
Yet such an explication, no person, no Assembly under an Occumenical Council,
can impose upon the Catholic Church. Aq. 2. 2. q. 1. Art. 10.
And such an one your Tridentine Synod was not.

Secondly, some things are contra symbolum, contrary to the Symbolical Faith,
and either expressly or virtually overthrow some Article of it. These additions
are not only unlawful, but heretical also in themselves, and after conviction
render a man a formal Heretic; whether some of your additions be not of this
nature, I will not now dispute.

Thirdly, some things are neither of the Faith, nor against the Faith, but
only besides the Faith; That is, opinions or truths of an inferior nature*
which are not so necessary to be actually known: for though all revealed truths
be alike necessary to be believed when they are known, yet all revealed truths
are not alike necessary to be known. It is not denied, but that General or
Provincial Councils may make constitutions concerning these for unity and
uniformity, and oblige all such as are subject to their jurisdiction to receive
them, either actively, or passively, without c^ntumacy or opposition. But to
make these, or any of these, a part of the Creed, and to oblige all Christians
under pain of damnation to know and believe them, is really to add to the
Creed, and to change the Symbolical, Apostolical Faith, to which none can add,
from which none can take away, and comes within the compass of St. Paul's
Curse, Gal. 1. (...).
If we, or an Angel from Heaven, shall Preach unto you a^y other Gospel (or
Faith) than that which we have Preached, let him be accursed. Such are your
Universality of the Roman Church, by the institution of Christ, to make her the
Mother of her Grandmother the Church of Jerusalem, and the Mistress of her many
elder Sisters. Your Doctrine of Purgatory and Indulgences, and the Worship of
Images, and all other novelties defined in the Council of Trent, all which are
comprehended in your New Roman Creed, and obtruded by you upon all the world to
be believed under pain of damnation. He that can extract all these out of the
old Apostolic Creed, must needs be an excellent Chemist, and may safely
undertake to draw water out of a Pumice.

That afflictions come not by chance, that prosperity is no evidence of Gods P.
4. Crosses ar^ not alwaie^ punishments, bu^ sometimes corrections, or trials.
favor, or adversity of his hatred; that crosses imposed by God upon his
servants, look more forwards toward their amendment, than backwards to their
demerits, and proceed not from a Judge revenging, but from a Father correcting,
or (which you have omitted) from a Lord Paramount proving and magnifying before
the world his own graces in his Servants for his Glory and their Advantage, are
undeniable Truths which we readily admit. As likewise that the dim eye of man
cannot penetrate into the secret dispensations of Gods temporal judgments and
mercies in this life, so as to say this man is punished, that other chastised,
this third is only proved.

But you forget all this soon after, Which the Author presently forgets. P.
(...).
when you take upon you to search into, yea more, to determine the grounds and
reasons why the hand of God, as well as the Parliament, has been so heavy upon
the Head of his late Majesty, and his Royal Son. Namely on Gods part, P. 14.
because he called himself the Head of the Church. God purposing by his
punishment, to teach all other Princes that are in the Schism, with what
severity he can vindicate his glory in the injury done unto the Unity and
Authority of his Church. And on the Parliaments part, because he would not
consent to the Abolition of Episcopacy, and suppression of the Liturgy, and
Ceremonies established in the Church of England.

First, what warrant have you to enquire into the Actions of that b^essed Saint
and Martyr, which of them should be the causes of his sufferings? Not
remembering that the Disciples received a check from their Master upon the like
presumption; Who sinned? this man, Joh. 9. 2.
or his Parents, that he was born blind? Jesus answered, neither has this man
sinned, nor his Parents, but that the works of God should be made manifest in
him.

The Heroical Virtues, the flaming Better grounds of his Majesty's sufferings,
than those of the Author.
Charity, the admirable Patience, the rare Humility, the exemplary Chastity,
the constant and frequent Devotions, and the invincible Courage of that happy
Prince, not daunted with the ugly face of a most horrid death, have rendered him
the Glory of his Country, the Honor of that Church whereof he was the chiefest
Member, the admiration of Christendom, and a Pattern for all Princes, of what
Communion soever, to imitate unto the end of the world. His Sufferings were
Palms, his Pri^on a Paradise, and his Death-day the Birthday of his happiness;
whom his Enemies advantaged more by their Cruelty, than they could have done by
their Courtesy. They deprived him of a corruptible Crown, and invested him
with a Crown of glory; They snatched him from the sweet society of his dearest
Spouse, and from most hopeful Olive branches, to Ps. 128. 3.
place him in the bosom of the holy Angels. This alone is ground enough for
his sufferings, to manifest unto the world those transcendent and unparalled
graces, where with God had enriched him, to which his sufferings gave the
greatest luster, as the Stars shine brightest in a dark night.

The like liberty you assume toward the other most glorious Martyr, the late
The Authors rash censure upon the Archbishop of Cant.
Archbishop of Canterbury, a man of profound learning, and exemplary life, of
clean hands, of a most sincere heart, a Patron of all good Learning, a
Professor of Ancient Truth, a great friend indeed, and earnest pursuer, of
Order, Unity, and Uniformity in Religion, but most free from all sinister ends,
either avaritious or ambitious, wherewith you do uncharitably charge him, as if
he sought only his own Graudeur, to make himself the head of a Schismatical
body. In brief, you therefore censure him, because you did not know him. I wish
all your great Ecclesiastiques had his Innocence, and fervent zeal for Gods
Church, and the peace thereof, to plead for them at the day of Judgment.

By applying these particular Afflictions according to your own ungrounded
Fancy, what a wide gap have you opened to the liberty and boldness of other
men? who if they should assume to themselves the same freedom that you have
done, might say as much, with as much reason, concerning the pressures of other
great Princes abroad, that God afflicts them, because they will not become
Protestants, as you can say that God afflicted our late King, because he would
not turn Papist.

But if you will not allow his Majesty's sufferings to be merely probatory; And
if (for your satisfaction) there must be a weight of sin found out to mov^ the
wheel of Gods Justice, why do yo^ not rather fix upon the body of hi^ Subjects,
or at least a disloyal part of them? We confess that the best of us Sovereigns
may be taken away for the sin^ of their Subjects.
did not deserve such a Jewel, that God might justly snatch him from us in his
wrath for our ingratitude. Reason, Religion, and Experience do all teach us,
that it is usual with A^mighty God, to look upon a body politic, or
Ecclesiastic, as one man, and to deprive a perverse people of a good and
gracious Governor; as an expert Physician, by opening a vein in one member,
cures the distempers of another. For the transgressions of a Land, many are the
Princes Pro. 28. 2.
^hereof.

It may be that two or three of our Princes at the most (the greater part Not
above two or three of our Princes called Heads of the Church.
whereof were Roman Catho^iques) did (...) themse^ves, or give others leave to
^tile them, the Heads of the Church, within their Dominions. But no man can be
so simple, as to conceive that they ^ntended a spiritual headship to infuse ^he
life and motion of grace into the ^earts of the faithful, such an head is
Christ alone; No nor yet an Ecclesia^ical headship; We did never believe that
our Kings in their own persons ^ould exercise any act pertaining either ^o the
power of Order or Juri^ction: Nothing can give that to another, which it has
not it self. They meant That is only political heads.
one^y a Civil or Political Head, as Saul is called the Head of the Tribes of
Israel, to see that pub^ick peace be pres^rved; 1 Samuel 15. 17.
to see that all Subjects, as well Ecc^esiastiques as others, do their duties,
in their several places; to see that all things be managed for that great and
Architectonical end, that is the weal and benefit of the whole body politic,
both for soul and body. If you will not trust me, Hear our Church it self; When
we attribute the Sovereign Art. 37.
Government of the Church to the King, we do not give him any power ^o
administer the W^rd or Sacraments; but only that Prerogative which God in hol^
Scripture has always allowed to Godly Princes, to see that all States and
Orders of their Sub^ects, Ecclesiastical and Civil, do their duties, and to
punish those who are delinquent, with the civil Sword Here is no power
ascribed, Expos. Paraph^. art. Conf. Ang. A^t. 37.
no punishment inflicted, but merely political, and this is approved and
justisied by S. Clara, both by reason, and by the examples of the Parliament of
Paris. Yet by virtue of this Political power, he is the Keeper of both Tables,
the preserver of true Piety toward God, as we^l as right Justice toward men;
And is obliged to take care of the souls, as well as the skins and carcasses of
his Subjects.

This power, though not this name, The Chr^stian Emperors political heads.
the Christian Emperors of old assumed unto themselves, to Convocate Synods,
to preside in Synods, to confirm Synods, to establish Ecclesiastical Laws, to
receive Appeals, to nominate Bishops, to eject Bishops, to suppress Heresies,
to compose Ecclesiastical differences, in Councils, out of Councils, by
themselves, by their delegates: All which is as clear in the History of the
Church, as if it were written with a beam of the Sun.

This power, though not this name, The old Kings of England political heads.
the Ancient Kings of England ever exercised, not only before the Reformation,
but before the Norman Conquest, as appears by the Acts of their great Councils,
by their Statutes, and Articles of the Clergy, by so many Laws of provision
against the Bishop of Romes conferring Ecclesiastical dignities and benefices
upon Foreiners, by so many sharp oppositions against the exactions and
usurpations of the Court of Rome, by so many Laws concerning the Patronage of
Bishoprics, and Investitures of Bishops, by so many examples of Churchmen
punished by the Civil Magistrate. Of all which Jewels the Roman Court had
undoubted^y robbed the Crown, if the Peers and Prelates of the Kingdom had not
come into ^he rescue.

By the Ancient Laws of England it is death, or at lest a forfeiture of all
his goods, for any man to publish the Popes Bull without the Kings License. The
Popes Legate without the Kings leave could not enter into the Realm. If an
Ordinary did refuse to accept a resignation, See Au^horities for all these in
Cawdries Case, in Judge Cook his Reports.
the King might supply his defect. If any Ecclesiastical Court did exceed the
bounds of its just power, either in the nature of the cause, or manner of
proceeding, the Kings Prohibition had place. So in effect the Kings of England
were always the Political heads of the Church within their own Dominions. So
the Kings of France are at this day.

But who told you that ever King Neither K. Charles, K. James, nor Q. Elizabeth
styled heads of the Church.
Charles did call himself the Head of the Church? thereby to merit such an
heavy Judgment. He did not, nor yet King James his Father, nor Queen Elizabeth
before them both, who took Order in her first Parliament, to have it lest out
^f her Title; They thought that name did sound ill, and that it entrenched too
far upon the right of their Savior. Therefore they declined it, and were
called only Supreme Governors, in all Causes, over all persons Ecclesiastical
and Civil; which is a Title de jure inseparable from the Crown of all Sovereign
Princes; Where it is wanting de facto (if any place be so unhappy to want it)
the King is but half a King, and the Commonwealth a Serpent with two Heads.

Thus you see, you are doubly, and both wa^es miserably mistaken. First, King
Charles did never style himself Head of the Church, nor could with patience
endure to hear that Title. Secondly, a Political Headship is not injurious to
the Unity, or Authority of the Church. The Kings of Is^ael and Judah, the
Christian Emperors, the Eng^ish Kings before the Reformation, yea, even before
the Conquest, and other Sovereign Princes of the Roman Communion have owned it
signa^ly.

But it seems you have been to^d, or have read this, in the virulent writings
of Sand^rs, or Parsons, or have heard of a ludicrous scoffing proposition of a
M^rriage between the two Heads of the two Churches, Six^us Quintus, and Queen
Elizabeth, for the re-uniting forsooth of Christendom. All the satisfaction
The Auth^ (...) the Pope to leave that vain Title.
I should enjoin you, is to persuade the Bishop of R^me (if Gregory the Great
were living, you could not fail of speeding) to imitate the piety and humility
of our Princes; that is, to content himself with his Patriarchical dignity, and
primacy of Order, and Princip^m unit at is, and to quit that much more
presumptuous, and (if a Popes word may pass for current) Antichristian term of
the Head of the Catholic Church. If the Pope be the Head of the Catholic
Church, then the Catholic Church is the Popes Body, which would be but an
harsh expression to Christian ears: then the Catholic Church should have no
Head, when there is no Pope, two or three Heads, when there are two or three
Popes; an unsound Head, when there is an heretical Pope; a broken Head, when
the Pope is censured or deposed; and no Head, when the Sea is vacant. If the
Church must have one Universal, Visible, Ecclesiastical Head, a general Council
may best pretend to that Title.

Neither are you more successful in your other Reason, why the Parliament
Hatred of Episc^pacy not ^he true ^ause ^hy ^he (...) persecu^d the King.
persecuted the King; Because he maintained Episcopacy, both out of Conscience
and Interest, which they sought to abolish. For though it be easily admitted,
that some seditious and heterodox persons had an evil eye, both against
Monarchy, and Episcopacy, from the very beginning of these troubles, either out
of a fiery zeal, or vain affectation of Novelty, (like those, who having the
green sickness, prefer chalk and meal in a corner, before wholesome meat at
their Fathers table,) or out of a greedy and covetous desire of gathering some
sticks for themselves upon the fall of those great Oaks: yet certainly they,
who were the contrivers, and principal actors in this business, did more malign
Episcopacy for Monarchies sake, than Monarchy for Episcopacies. What end had
the Nuncio's Faction in Ireland against Episcopacy? whose mutinous courses
apparently lost that Kingdom. When the Kings consent to the Abolition of
Episcopacy in Scotland was extorted from him by the Presbyterian faction (which
probably the prime Authors do rue sufficiently by this time) were those
Presbyterian Scots any thing more favorable to Monarchy? To come to England,
the chief Scene of this bloody Tragedy: If that party in Parliament had at
first proposed any such thing, as the Ab^ition either of Monarchy, or
Episcopacy, undoubtedly they had ruined their whole design; until daily
tumults, and uncontrollable uproars had chased away the greater, and sounder
part of both Houses: Their first Protestation was solemnly made to God, both
for King and Church, as they were by Law established.

Would you know then what it was that Conjured up the storm among us? The true
causes of the troubles in England.
It was some feigned jealousies and fears, (which the first broachers
themselves knew well enough to be fables) dispersed cunningly among the People,
That the King purposed to subvert the Fundamental Laws of the Kingdom, and to
reduce the free English Subject to a condition of absolute slavery under an
Arbitrary Government. For which massy weight of malicious untruth, they had no
supporters, but a few Bull-rushes. Secondly, that he meant to apostate from the
Protestant Religion to Popery, and to that end had raised the Irish Rebellion
by secret encouragements and Commissions; For which monstrous calumny, they had
no other foundation (except the solemn Religious Order of Divine Service in his
own Chapel, and Cathedral Churches) than some unseasonable disputes about an
Altar, or a Table, and the permission of the Popes Agent to make a short stay
in England, more for reason of State than of Religion. And some senseless
fictions of some Irish Rebels, who having a Patent under the Great Seal of
Ireland for their Lands, to color their barbarous murders, showed it to the
poor simple people as a Commission from the King to leavy Forces. And lastly,
some impious pious frauds of some of your own party, whose private whispers,
and printed insinuations, did give hopes that the Church of England was coming
about to shake hands with the Roman in the points controverted; Which was
merely devised to gull some silly Creatures, whom they found apt to be catched
with chaff; for which they had no more pretext of truth, than you have for your
groundless intimations in this unwelcome dedication.

These suspicions being compounded with Covetousness, Ambition, Envy,
Emulation, desire of Revenge, and discontent, were the sourse of all our
Calamities. Thus much you your self confess in ^ffect; that, this supposition,
that the King and Bishops had an intention to re-establish the Roman Catholic
Religion, was the venom which the Puritan Faction insused into the hearts of
the people, to fill them with hatred against a King worthy of love; And the P.
11.
Parliament judged it a favorable occasion for their design, to advance
themselves to Sovereign Authority. Be Judge your self how much they are
accessory to our sufferings, who either were, or are the Authors, or fomenters
of these damnable slanders.

There was yet one cause more of this cruel persecution, which I cannot conceal
from you, because it concerns some of your old acquaintance. There was a Bishop
in the world (losers must have leave to talk) whose privy Purse, and subtle
Counsels, did help to kindle that unnatural war in his Majesty's three
Kingdoms. Our Cardinal Wolsey complained before his death, That he had served
his King better than his God. But certainly this practice in your friend, was
neither Good service to his God, to be the author of the effusion of so much
innocent blood, nor yet to his King, to let the world see such a dangerous
president. It is high time for a man to look to himself, when his next
neighbors house is all on a flame.

As hitherto I have followed your steps, though not altogether in your own
method, or rather your own confusion; So I shall observe the same course for
the future. Your discourse is so full of Meanders and windings, turnings, and
returnings, you congregate He^erogeneous matter, and segregate that which is
Homogeneous, as if you had made your Dedication by starts, and snatches; and
never digested your who'^ discourse. On the contrary, where I meet with any
thing, it shall be my desire to dispach it out of my hands, with whatsoever
pertains unto it, once for all. I hope you expect not that I should amuse my
self at your Rheto^cal flowers, and elegant expressions* they agree well enough
with the work you were about; The Pipe plays sweetly, whilst the Fowler is
catching his prey. Trappings are not to be condemned, if the things themselves
are good and useful; but I prefer one Pomegranat-Tree laden with good fruit,
before a whole row of Cypresses, that serve only for show. Be sure of this,
that where any thing in your Epistle reflects upon the Church of England, I
shall not miss it first or last, though it be but a loose unjoynted pe^ce, and
so perhaps hitherto untouched.

Amongst other things which you lay We are only accused of Schism.
to our charge, you glance, at the least twelve times, at our supposed Schism:
But from first to last, never attempt to prove it, as if you took it for
granted. I have shaped a Coat for a Schismatic, and had presented it to you in
this Answer; but considering that the matter is of moment, and merits as much
to be seriously and solidly weighed, as your naked Crimination without all
pretext of proof deserves to be slighted, lest it might seem here as an
impertinent digression, to take up too much place in this short Discourse, I
have added it at the Conclusion of this Answer, in a short Tract by it self,
that you may peruse it if you please.

You fall heavily, in this Discourse, Presbyterians and Brownists have been
Romes bst friends.
upon the Presbyterians, Brownists, and Independents; if they intend to return
you any answer, they may send it by a messenger of their own. As for my part, I
am not their Proctor, I have received no Fee from them. And if I should
undertake to plead their Cause upon my own head, by our old English Law, you
might call me to an account for unlawful maintenance. Only give me leave as a
by-stander to wonder why you are so cholerique against them, for certainly they
have done you more service in England, than ever you could have done for your
selves.

And I wonder no less why you call our Reformation, a Calvinistical
Reformation, brought into England by Bucer, and Peter Martyr, a blind
Reformation, yea, the entire ruin of the Faith, of the very form of the Church,
and of the civil Government of the Commonwealth instituted by God. Though you
confess again in our favor, that if our first Reformers had been interrogated,
P. 16.
whether they meant any such thing, P. 19.
they would have purged themselves, and P. 14.
avouched their Innocence with their P. 17.
hands upon the new Gospel. The gifts of Enemies are no gifts. If such as these
are all your courtesies, you may be pleased to take them again; Our first
Reformers might safely swear upon any Gospel, old or new, that they meant no
such thing. And we may as securely swear upon all the books of God, old or new,
that there is no such thing. But why our Gospel should be younger or newer than
Sixtus Quintus his Gospel, or Clemens Octavus his Gospel, passes my
understanding, and yours also.

Comparisons are odious, therefore I will not say, that the true English
Protestant standing to his own grounds, is the best subject in the world: But I
do say, that he is as good a subject as any in the wortd, and our principles as
Innocent, and as auxiliary to civil Government, as the maxims of any Church
under Heaven; And more than yours, where the clashing of two Supreme
Authorities, and the exemption of your numerous Clergy from the Coercive power
of the Prince, and some other novelties, which I forbear to mention, do always
threaten a storm.

Tell me Sir, if you can, what Church in Europe has declared more fully, or
more favorably for Monarchy than the poor Church of England, That the most
high and sacred Order L. Cant. 1643. C. I.
of Kings, is of Divine Right, being the Ordinance of God himself, founded in
the prime Laws of Nature, and clearly established by express Texts, both of the
old, and new Testament. Moreover, that this power is extended over all their
Subjects, Ecclesiastical and Civil; That to s^t up any Independent coactive
power above them, either Papal, or popular, either directly, or indirectly, is
to undermine their great royal Office, and cunningly to overthrow that most
Sacred Ordinance, which god himself has established. That for their subjects
to bear Arms against them, Offensive or defensive, upon any pretense
whatsoever, is to resist the powers which are ordained of God.

And why do you call our Reformation Calvinistical? contrary to your The
English Reformation not Calvinistic^ P. 9.
own Conscience, contrary to your own confession, That in our Reformation we
retained the ancient Order of Episcopacy, as Instituted by divine authority,
and a Liturgy, and Ceremonies, whereby we preserved the face, or Image of the
Catholic Church. And that for this* P. 10.
very caus^ the disciplinarians of Geneva, and the Presbyterians, did conceive
an implacable hatred against the King for the Churches sake, and out of their
aversion to it. Did they hate their own Reformation so implacably? If these
things be to be reconciled, reddat mihi minam Diogenes. He that looks more in
disputation to the Advantage of his party, than to the Truth of his grounds,
had need of a strong memory; We retained not only Episcopacy, Liturgy, and
Ceremonies, but all things else that were conformable to the Discipline, and
public service of the Primitive Church rightly understood.

No, Sir, we cannot pin our faith upon the sleeve of any particular man, as one
used to say, We love no nismes; neither Calvinism, nor Lutheranism, nor M. The.
Sq.
Jonsenianism, but only one, that we derive from Antioch, that is
Christianism. We honor Learning, and Piety in our fellow servants, but we
desire to wear no other badge or Cognizance than that we received from our own
Master at our Baptism. Bucer was as fit to be Calvin's Master, as his Scholar.
So long as Calvin continued with him in Germany, he was for Episcopacy,
Liturgy, and Ceremonies, (and for assurance thereof subscribed the Augustane
Confession) and his late learned Successor, and assertor in Geneva, Monsieur
Deodate, with sundry others of that Communion, were not averse from them. Or
why do you call Reformation blind? It was not blindness, but too much
affectation of knowledge, and too much peeping into controverted and new
fangled Questions that has endamaged our Religion. It is you that teach the
Colliers Creed, not we.

Howsoever you pretend to prove that our Reformation was the ruin of the
Church, and Commonwealth; we expect you should endeavor to prove it. You
cannot so far mistake your self as to conceive your authority to be the same
with us, that Pythagoras had among his Scholars, to have his Dictates received
for Oracles without proof; what did I say, that you pretend to prove it? That Is
too low an expression, you promi^e us a demonstration P. 19.
of it, so lively and evident that no reason shall be able to contradict it.
Are you not afraid that too much expectation should prejudice your discourse by
diminishing our applause?

Quid tanto dignum feret hi^ proneissor hia^u? Do you think of nothing now but
Triumphs? Lively and evident demonstration, not to be contradicted by reason,
is like the Phoenix, much talked of, but seldom seen. Most men, when they see a
man strip up his sleeves, and make too large promises of fair dealing, do
suspect juggling. No man proclameth in the Market that he has rotten wares to
sell; And therefore we must be careful, notwithstanding your great promises, to
keep well Epicharmus his Jewel, Remember to distrust. By your permission, your
glistering demonstration is a very counterfeit, not so valuable as a Bristol
Diamond, when it comes to be examined by the wheel.

Sometimes nothing is more necessary than Reformation. Never was Reforma^n is
some^imes necessary.
house so well builded, that now and then needed not reparation. Never Garden
so well planted, but must sometimes be weeded. Never any order so well
instituted, but in long tract of time there will be a bending and declining
from its Primitive perfection, and a necessity of reducing it to its first
principles. Are your Houses of Religion which are Reformed, therefore the less
Religious? Why then did all the Princes and Commonwealths in Europe, Yea the
Fathers themselves in the Council of Trent, cry out so often, so earnestly, for
a Reformation? yet were forced to content themselves with a vain shadow for the
substance, as Ixion embraced a Cloud for Juno, or Children are often stilled
with an empty bottle.

But Reformation is not agreeable to all persons. Judas loved not an Audit,
Reformation not agreeable to all persons, especially the Court of Rome.
because he kept the Bag. Dull Lethargick people had rather sleep to death than
to be awaked; and mad phrenetick Bigots are apt to beat the Surgeon that
would bind up their wounds; but none are so a verse from Reformation as the
Court of Rome, where the very name is more formidable than Hannibal at the
Gates, yea than all the five terrible things. No mervail they are afraid to
have their Oranges squeesed to their hands; if they were infallible as they
pretend, there was no need of a Reformation; we wish they were, but we see they
are not.

On the other side, it cannot be denied There is danger in Reformation.
that Reformation, when it is unseasonable, or inordinate, or excessive, may do
more hurt than good; when Reformers want just Authority, or due information, or
have sinister ends, or where the remedy may be of worse consequence than the
abuse, or where men run out of one extreme into another; therefore it is a rule
in prudence, Not to remove an ill custom, when it is well settled, unless it
bring great prejudices, and then it is better to give one account why we have
taken it away, than to be always making excuses why we do it not. Needless
alteration does diminish the venerable esteem of Religion, and lessen the
credit of ancient truths. Break Ice in one place, and it will crack in more.
Crooked sticks by bending straight are sometimes broken into two.

There is a right mean between these The right rule of Reformation.
extremes, if men could light on it, that is, neither to destroy the body out
of hatred to the sores and Ulcers, nor yet to cherish the sores and Ulcers, out
of a doting affection to the body; that is, neither to destroy ancient
Institutions, out of a zealous hatred to some new abuses, nor yet to dote so
upon ancient Institutions, as for their sakes to cherish new abuses.

Our Reformation is just as much the Our Reformation not the ruin of Faith
Church or Commonwealth.
cause of the ruin of our Church and Commonwealth, as the building of
Tenderden Steepl was the cause of Goodwins Sands, or ruin of the Country
thereabouts, because they happened both much about the same time.

-- Careat successibus opto,
May he ever want success who judges of Actions by the Event. Our Reformation
has ruined the Faith, just as the plucking up of weeds in a Garden, ruins the
good Herbs. It has ruined the Church, just as a body full of superfluous and
vicious humors is ruined by an healthful purgation. It has ruined the
Commonwealth, just as pruning ^f the Vine ruins the E^m. No, no Sir, Our
s^fferings, for the Faith, for the Church, for the Monarchy, do proclaim us
Innocent to all the world, of the ruin either of Faith, or Church, or Monarchy.
And in this capacity we choose rather to ste^ve as Innocents, (...) to swim in
plenty as Nocents.

But this is but one of your doubles to k^ep us from the right form. It is your
new Roman Creed that has ruined the Faith. It is your Papal Court that has
ruined the Church. It is your new Doctrines of the Popes Omnipotence over
temporal persons in order unto spiritual ends, of absolving subjects from their
Oaths of Allegiance, of exempting the Clergy from secular jurisdiction, of the
lawfulness of murdering Tyrants and excommunicated Princes, of aequivocation
and the like, that first infected the world to the danger of Civil Government.
Yet far be it from me to make these the Universal Tenets of your Church, at any
time, much less at this time, when they are much fallen from their former credit;
neither can I deny that sundry dangerous positions, destructive to all civil
societies, have been transplanted by our Sectaries, and taken too deep root in
our quarters, but never by our fault. If God should grant us the benefit of an
Ecumenical or Occidental Council, it would become both you and us in the first
place to pluck up such seditious opinions root and branch.

You say our Calvinistical Reformation (so you are pleased to call it as would
have it, for the moderate and and orderly Reformation of England, was the
terror, and eyesore of Rome) is founded upon two maxims, The one, that the
Church was fallen to ruin and Our (...) supposed Maxim*
desolation, and become guilty of Idolatry and Tyranny.

This is neither our foundation, nor our superstruction, neither our maxim, The
Catholic Church cannot come to ruin, or b^ guilty o^ Idolatry or Tyranny.
nor our Opinion. It is so far from it, that we hold and teach the direct
contrary. First, that the Gates of Hell shall never prevail against the
Universal Church, that though the rain descend, and the floods come, and the
winds blow and beat upon it, yet it shall never fall to ruin or desolation;
because it is builded upon a Rock. Secondly, we believe that the Catholic
Church is the faithful Spouse of Christ, and cannot be guilty of Idolatry,
which is spiritual Adultery. Thirdly, we never said, we never thought, that the
Occumenical Church of Christ was guilty of Tyranny. It is principled to suffer
wrong, to do none, and by suffering to Conquer, as a flock of unarmed Sheep, in
the midst Chrysostom.
of a company of ravenous Wolves, A new and unheard of kind of warfare as if
one should throw an handful of dry flax into the midst of a flaming fire to
extinguish it.

But I presume this is one of the Idiotisms ^f your language, in which ^holick
and Roman not Convertibles.
by the Church you a^waies understand the Roman Church, making Roman and
Catholic to be Convertibles. As if Christ could not have a Church, nor that
Church any privileges, unless the Court of Rome might have the Monopoly of
them. There is a vast difference between the Catholic Church and a Patriarchal
Church. The Catholic Church can never fail; any Patriarchal Church may
Apostate and fail. We have a promise that the Candle shall not be put out, we
have no promise that the Candlesticks shall not be removed. Rev. 2. 5.


But supposing that (which we can never grant) the Catholic Church The Roman
Church it self not absolutely fallen to ruin.
and Roman Church were Convertibles, yet still you do us wrong. First we do not
maintain, that the Roman Church it self is fallen to ruin and desolation, we
grant to it a true metaphysical being, though not a true moral being; we hope
their errors are rather in superstructures, than in fundamentals; we do not say
that the Plants of saving truth (which are common to you and us) are plucked up
by the roots in the Roman Church, but we say that they are overgrown with
weeds, and in danger to be choked.

Next for Idolatry, whether, and why, and how far, we accuse your Whether the
Roman Church be guilty of Idolatry.
Church of it, deserves further Consideration. First you agree with us. That
God alone is the Object of Religion, and consequently that all Religious
worship is due terminatively only to him; that God alone is to be invocated
absolutely or ultimately, that is, so as to grant our requests and fulfill our
desires by himself, and that the Saints are not the objects of our prayers, but
joint petitioners with us, and intercessors for us to the throne of Grace.

Secondly, we profess as well as you, that there is a proportionab^e degree of
honor, and respect, due to every creature in Heaven and Earth, according to
the dignity of it, and therefore more honor due to a glorified Spirit, than to
a mortal man: But withal we add, that this honor, is not servitutis but
charitatis, not of service as to our Lords and Masters, but of love and charity
as to our friends and fellow servants, of the same kind and nature with that
Honor which we give to holy men on Earth. And herein we are confident that we
shall have your consent.

Thirdly, we agree in this also, that abundant love and duty does extend an
honorable respect from the person of a dear friend, or noble benefactor, to
his posterity, to his memory, to his Monument, to his Image, to his Relics,
to every thing that he loved, or that pertained to him, even to the Earth which
he did tread upon, for his sake. Put a Liefhebber, or Virtuoso, among a company
of rare pictures, and he will pick out the best pieces for their proper value.
But a friend or child will more esteem the Picture of a Benefactor, or
Ancestor, for its relation. The respect of the one is terminated in the
Picture, that of the other is radicated in the exemplar. Yet still an Image is
but an Image, and the kinds of respect must not be confounded. The respect
given to an Image, must be respect proper for an Im^ge, not Courtship, not
Worship, not Adoration. More respect is due to the person of the meanest
beggar, than to all the Images of Christ and his Apostles, and a 1000.
Primitive Saints or Progenitors. Hitherto there is either no difference nor
peril either of Idolatry, or Superstition.

Wherein then did consist this guilt of Idolatry contracted by the Roman
Church? I am willing for the present to pass by the private abuses of
particular persons, which seem to me no otherwise chargeable upon the whole
Church, than for Connivence. As the making Images to counterfeit tears, and
words, and gestures, and complements, for advantage, to induce silly people to
believe that there was something of divinity in them; and the multitude of
fictitious Relics, and supposititious Saints, which credulity first
introduced, and since covetousness has nourished. I take no notice now of
those remote suspicions or suppositions of the possibility of want of
intention, either in the Priest that consecrates the Sacrament, or in him that
Baptized, or in the Bishop that ordained him, or in any one through the whole
line of succession; in all which cases (according to your own principles) you
give divine worship to corporeal Elements, which is at least material Idolatry.

I will not stand now to examine the truth of your distinctions, of (...), and
(...), yet you know well enough, that (...) is no religious worship, and (...)
is coin lately minted, that will not pass for current in the Catholic Church.
Whilst your common people understand not these distinctions of degrees of
honor, what holds them from falling downright into Idolatry?

Neither do I urge how you have distributed the Patronage of particular
Countries, the Cure of several Diseases, the protection of all distinct
professions of men, and all kinds of Creatures, among the Saints, just as the
Heathen did among their Tutelary Gods; nor how little warrant you have for this
practice from experience; nor lastly, how you build more Churches, erect more
Altars, offer more presents, pour out more prayers, make more vows, perform
more offices to the Mother than to the Son. Yet though we should hold our
peace, methinks you should ponder these things seriously, and either for your
own satisfaction, or ours, take away such unnecessary occasions of scandal and
disunion.

But I cannot omit, that the Council of Trent is not contented to enjoin the
Adoration of Christ in the Sacrament, (which we never deny) but of the
Sacrament it self (that is, according to the common current of your Schoolmen,
the A^cidents or Species of Bread and Wine, because it contains Christ.) Why do
they not add upon the same grounds, that the pix is to be adored with divine
worship, because it contains the Sacrament? Divine honor is not due to the
very Humanity of Christ, as it is abstracted from the Deity, but to the whole
person, Deity and Humanity, hypostatically united. Neither the Grace of Union,
nor the Grace of Unction can conferr more upon the Humanity, than the Humanity
is capable of. There is no such Union between the Deity and the Sacrament,
neither immediately, nor yet mediately, mediante corpor.

Neither do you ordinarily ascribe (...) or divine worship to a Crucifix, or to
the Image of Christ, indeed not Terminatively, but trans^untly, so as not to
rest in the Image or Crucifix, but to pass to the exemplar, or person
crucified. But why a piece of Wood should be made partaker of divine honors
even in (...), or in be passage passe^h my unde^nding. The Heathens ^ted not,
the same (...) for all their gross Idolatry. Let them plead for themselves. Non
ego, etc. I do not worship that stone which I see, but I serve him whom I do
not see.

Lastly, whilst you are pleased to use them, I may not forget those strange
insolent forms of prayer, contained in your books, even ultimate prayers, if we
take the words as they sound, directed to the Creatures, that they would
protect you at the hour of death, and deliver you from the Devil, and confer
spiritual graces upon you, and admit you into Heaven, precibus meritisque, by
their prayers and merits. (You know what Merit signifies in your language, a
Condignity, or at least a Congruity of desert.) The exposition of your Doctors
is, that they should do all this for you by their pra^ers; as improper a form
of speech, as if a Suppliant intending only to move an ordinary Courtier to
mediate for him unto the King, should fall down upon his knees before the
Courtier, and beseech him to make him an Earl, or a Knight, or to bestow such
an Office, or such a Pardon upon him, or to do some other Grace for him,
properly belonging to the Prerogative Royal. How agrees this with the words,
Precibus meri^que? A beggar does not deserve an Alms by asking it. This is a
snare to ignorant persons, who take the words to signify as they sound. And
(it is to be feared) do commit downright Idolatry by their Pastors faults, who
prescribe such improper forms unto them.

Concerning Tyranny, which makes up The Roman Court most Tyrannical.
the arrear of the first supposed Maxim: We do not accuse the Roman Church of
Tyranny, but the Roman Court. If either the unjust usurpation o^ Sovereign
power, or the extending thereof to the destruction of the Laws and Canons of
the Church, yea, even to give a Non obstante, either to the Institution of
Christ, or at least to the uniform practice of the Primitive Ages, or to them
both; If the swallowing up of all Ecclesiastical Jurisd^ction, and the
arrogating of a supercivil power paramount; If the causing of poor people to
trot to Rome, from all the Quarters of Europe, to wast their livelyhoods there;
If the trampling upon Emperors, and the disciplining of Monarchs be
Tyrannical, either the Court of Rome has been Tyrannical, or there never was
Tyranny in the world

I doubt not but some great persons when they have had bloody Tragedies to act
for their own particular ends, have sometimes made the Roman Church a stalking
horse, and the pretense of Catholic Religion a blind to keep their Policies
undiscerned: But if we consider seriously, what cruelties have been really
acted throughout Europe, either by the Inquisitors General, or by persons
specially delegated for that purpose, against the Waldenses of old, and against
the Protestants of later days, against poor ignorant persons, against women
and children, against mad men, against dead carcasses, as Bue^r, etc. upon
pretense of Religion, not only by ordinary forms of punishment, and of death,
but by fire and faggots, by strange new-devised tortures, we shall quickly find
that the Court of Rome has died it self red in Christian blood, and equalled
the most Tyrannical persecutions of the Heathen Emperors.

The other Maxim whereupon you say that our Reformation was grounded, was Our
second sup^osed Maxim.
this, That the only way to reform the Faith an^ Liturgy, and Government of
the Church, was to conform them to the dictates of holy Scripture, of the sense
whereof every P. 21.
private Christian ought to be the Judge, by the light of the Spirit, excluding
Tradition, and the publi^k Judgment of the Church. You add, That we cannot
prove Episcopacy P. 26.
by Scripture, without the Help of Tradition; And if we do admit of Tradition,
we must acknowledge the Papacy for the Government of the Catholic Church, as
founded in the Primacy of St. Peter.

Your second supposed ground is no truer than the former, we are as far from
Much mistaken.
Anarchy as from Tyranme; As we would not have humane Authority, like Medusa's
head, to transform reasonable men into senseless stones; So we do not put the
reigns of Government into the hands of each, or any private person, to reform
according to their fantasies. And that we may not deal like blunderers, or
deceitful persons, to wrap up or involve our selves on purpose in confused
Generalities, I will set down our sense distinctly, When you understand it, I
hope you will repent of your rash censuring of us, of whom you had so little
knowledge.

Three things offer themselves to be considered: First, concerning the Rule of
The Scripture (...) rule of supernatural truths.
Scripture; Secondly, the proper Expounders thereof; and Thirdly, the manner of
Exposition.

Concerning Scripture we believe, That it was impossible for humane reason,
without the help of divine Revelation, to find out those supernatural truths
which are necessary to Salvation. 2. That to supply this defect of natural
reason, God out of his abundant goodness has given us the holy Scriptures,
which have not their authority from the writing which is humane, but from the
Revelation which is divine, from the Holy Ghost. Thirdly, that this being the
purpose of the Holy Ghost, it is blasphemy to say he would not, or could not
attain unto it. And that therefore the holy Scriptures do comprehend all
necessary supernatural truths; So much is confessed by Bellarmine, that All
things which L. 4. de verbo Dei, cap. 11.
are necessary to be believed, and to be done by all Christians, were preached
to all by the Apostles, and were all written. Fourthly, that the Scripture is
more properly to be called a Rule of supernatural truths than a Judge, or if it
be sometimes called a Judge, it is no otherwise than the Law is called a Judge
of civil Controversies between man and man, that is, the rule of judging what
is right, and what is wrong. That which shows what is strait, shows
likewise what is crooked.

Secondly, concerning the proper Expounders Who are the proper expounders of
Scripture* and how far.
of Scripture, we do believe that the Gospel does not consist in the words, but
in the sense, non in superficie, sed in medulla; And therefore that though this
infallible Rule be given for the common benefit of all, yet every one is not an
able or fit Artist to make application of this Rule, in all particular cases.
To preserve the common right, and yet prevent particular abuses, we distinguish
Judgment into three kinds.

Judgment of Discretion, Judgment of Direction, and Judgment of Jurisdiction.

As in the former Instance of the Law, (the ignorance whereof exc^seth no man)
every Subject has Judgment of Discretion, to apply it particularly to the
preservation of himself, his estate and interest; The Advocates, and those who
are skilful in the Law, have moreover a Judgment of Direction, to advise
others of less knowledge and experience; But those who are Constituted by the
Sovereign power, to determine emergent difficulties, and differences, and to
distribute and administer Justice to the whole body of a Province or Kingdom,
have moreover a Judgment of Jurisdiction, which is not only discretionary, or
directive, but authoritative, to impose an Obligation of obedience unto those
who are under their charge. If these last shall transgress the rule of the Law,
they are not accountable to their Inferiors, but to him or them that have the
Sovereign power of Legislative Judicature; Ejus est legem interpretari, cujus
est condere.

To apply this to the case in question concerning the exposition of the holy
Scripture. Every Christian keeping himself within the bounds of due obedience,
and submission to his lawful Superiors, has a Judgment of Discretion; Prove
all things, hold fast that which is good. He may apply the 1 These. 5. 21.
Rule of holy Scripture for his own private instruction, comfort, ^dification
and direction, and for the framing of his life and belief aceordingly. The
Pastors of the Church (who are placed over Gods people as watchmen and guides)
have more than this, a judgment of Direction, to expound and interpret the
holy Scriptures to others, and out of them to instruct the ignorant, to reduce
them who wander out of the right way, to confute errors, to foretell dangers,
and to draw sinners to repentance. The chief Pastors, to whose care the
Regiment of the Church is committed in a more special manner, have yet an
higher degree of judgment, a Judgment of Jurisdiction, to prescribe, to
enjoin, to constitute, to reform, to censure, to condemn, to bind, to loose,
judicially, authoritatively, in their respective charges. If their Key shall
err, either their Key of Knowledge, or their Key of Jurisdiction, they are
accountable to their respective Superiors, and in the last place to a general
Council, which under Christ upon Earth, is the highest Judge of Controversies.
Thus we have seen what is the Rule of Faith, and by whom, and how far
respectively this rule is to be applied.

Thirdly, for the manner of expounding The manner of expounding Scripture.
holy Scriptures, (for there may be a privacy in this also, and more dangerous
than the privacy of the person) many things are necessary to the right
interpretation of the Law, to unde^stand the reason of it, the precedents, the
terms, the forms, the reports, and an ability to compare Law with Law. He that
wants all these Qualifications altogether, is no interpreter of Law. He that
wants but some of them, or wants the perfection of them, by how much the
greater is his defect, by so much the less valuable is his exposition; And if
he shall out of private fancy, or blind presumption, arrogate to himself,
without these requisite means, or above his capacity and proportion of
Knowledge, a power of expounding Law, he is a madman.

So many things are required to render a man capable to expound the holy
Scriptures, some more necessarily, some less, some absolutely, some
respectively; As First, to know the right Analogy of Faith, to which all
interpretations of Scripture must be of necessity conformed. Secondly, to know
the practice and tradition of the Church, and the received expositions of
former Interpreters in the successive ages, which gives a great light to the
finding out of the right sense. Thirdly, to be able to compare Texts with
Texts, Antecedents with Consequents, without which one can hardly attain to the
drift and scope of the Holy Ghost in the obscurer passages. And lastly, it is
something to know the Idiotisms of that language wherein the Scriptures were
written. He that wants all these requisites, and yet takes upon him out of a
phanatique presumption of private illumination to interpret Scripture, is a
doting Enthusiast, fitter to be refuted with Scorn than with Arguments. He that
presumes above that degree and proportion which he has in these means, and
above the talent which God has given him, (as he that has a little Language,
yet wants Logic, or having both Language and Logic, knows not, or regards not
either the Judgment of former Expositors, or the practice and tradition of the
purest Primitive Ages, or the Symbolical Faith of the Catholic Church) is not
a likely workman to build a Temple to the Lord, but ruin and destruction to
himself, and his seduced followers. A new Physician (we say) requires a new
Churchyard; But such bold ignorant Empericks in Theology, are ten times more
dangerous to the Soul, than an ungrounded unexperienced Quacksalver to the Body.

This has always been the doctrine, This is conformable to the doctrine and
practice of our Church. Can. 1603. Can. 49.
and the practice of our English Church; First, it is so far from admitting
Laymen to be Directive Interpreters of holy Scripture, that it allows not this
Liberty to Clergymen so much as to gloss upon the Text, until they be
Licenced to become Preachers. Secondly, for Judgment of Discretion only, it
gives it not to private Se^ the P^eface to the Bishops Bible.
persons above their Talents, or beyond their last. It disallows all
fantastical, and Enthusiastical presumption of incompetent and unqualified
Expositors. It admits no man into holy Orders, that is, to be capable of being
made a Directive In^erpreter of Scripture, howsoever otherwise qualified,
unless he be able to give a good account of his Faith in the Latin tongue, so
Can. 34.
as to be able to frame all his Expositions according to the Analogy thereof.
It forbids the Licenced Preachers to teach the Can. 1571. tit. Concionatores.
people any doctrine as necessary to be religiously held and believed, which
the Catholic Fathers, and old Bishops of the Primitive Church, have not
collected out of the Scriptures. It ascribes a Judgment of Jurisdiction over
Preachers to Bishops, in all manner of Ecclesiastical duties, as appears by the
whole body of our Canons. And especially where any difference or public Can.
1631. Can. 53.
Opposition has been between Preachers, about any point or doctrine deduced
out of Scripture. It gives a power of determining all emergent Controversies of
faith above Bishops to the Church, as to the witness and keeper of the Sacred
Oracles. Art. 20. Can. 1603. Can. 139.
And to a lawful Synod, as the representative Church.

Now, Sir, be your own Judge, how infinitely you have wronged us, and your self
more, suggesting that temerariously, and without the Sphere of your knowledge,
to his Majesty, for the principal ground of our Reformation, which our souls
abhor. Is there no mean between stupidity and madness? Must either all things
be lawful for private persons, or nothing? Because we would not have them like
David's Horse and Mule, without understanding, do we therefore put both Swords
in their hands, to reform and cut off, to plant and to pluck up, to alter and
abolish at their pleasure? We allow them Christian liberty, but would not have
them Libertines. Admit some have abused this just liberty, may we therefore
take it away from others? So we shall leave neither a ^un in Heaven, nor any
excellent Crea^ure upon Earth, for all have been abused ^y some persons, in
some kinds, at some ^imes.

We receive not your upstart supposititious traditions, nor unwritten
fundamentals: The English Church an enemy to upstart, not to Apostolical
traditions.
But we admit genuine, Universal, Apostolical traditions; As the Apostles
Creed, the perpetual Virginity of the Mother of God, the Anniversary Festivals
of the Church, the Lenton fast. Yet we know that both the duration of it, and
the manner of observing it, was very different in the Pri^nitive times. We
believe Episcopacy, to an ingenuous person, may be proved out of Scripture
without the help of Tradition, but to such as are froward, the perpetual
practice and tradition of the Church renders the interpretation of the Text
more authentic, and the proof more convincing. What is this to us who admit
the practice and tradition of ^he Church, as an excellent help of Exposition?
Use is the best interpreter of Laws, and we are so far from believing that We
cannot admit tradition without allowing the Papacy, that one of the principal
mo^ives why we rejected the Papacy, as it is now established with Universality
of Jurisdiction, by the Institution of Christ and superiority above Ecumenical
Councils, and Infallibility of Judgment, was the constant tradition of the
Primitive Church.

So Sir, you see your demonstration shaken into ^ces; You who take upon you to
remove whole Churches at our pleasure, have not so much ground left you as to
set your Instrument upon. Your two main ground-works being vanished, all your
Presbyterian and Independent superstructions do remain like so many Bubbles, or
Castles in the Air, It were folly to lay closer siege to them, which the next
puff of wind will disperse, ru^at subductis tecta Columnis.

Howsoever, though you have mistaken the grounds of our Reformation, and of
your discourse, yet you charge us, that we have renounced the Sacrifice of the
Mass, Transubstantiation, the seven Sacraments, Justification by inherent
righteousness, P. 24.
Merits, Invocation of Saints, Prayer for the Dead, with P^rgatory, and the
Authority of the Pope. Are these all the necessary Articles of the new Roman
Creed, that we have renounced? Surely no; you deal too favorably with us. We
have in like manner renounced your Image Worship, your half Communion, your
Prayers in a tongue un known, etc. It seems you were loath to mention these
things.

First, you say we have renounced your Sacrifice of the Mass. If the Sacr^fice
Of the Sacrifice of the Mass.
of the Mass be the same with the Sacrifice of the Cross, we attribute more
unto it than your selves; we place our whole hope of Salvation in it. If you
understand another Propitiatory Sacrifice, distinct from that (as this of the
Mass seems to be, for confessedly the Priest is not the same, the Altar is not
the same, the Temple is not the same) If you think of any new meritorious
satisfaction to God for the sins of the world, or of any new supplement to the
merits of Christ's Passion, you must give us leave to renounce your Sacrifice
indeed, and to adhere to the Apostle; By one offering he has persected for
ever them that are sanctified. Heb. 10. 14


Surely you cannot think that Christ did actually sacrifice himself at his last
Supper (for then he had redeemed the world at his last Supper, then his
subsequent sacrifice upon the Cross had been superfluous) nor that the Priest
now does more than Christ did then. We do readily acknowledge an Eucharistical
sacrifice of prayers and praises; we profess a commemoration of the sacrifice
of the Cross; and in the language of holy Church, things commemorated are
related as if they were then acted; As, Almighty In the Collects for these
Feasts.
God, who have given us thy Son [as this day] to be born of a pure Virgin. And,
whose praise the younger Innocents have [this day] set forth. And between the
Ascension and Pentecost, which have exalted thy Son Jesus Christ with great
Triumph into Heaven, we beseech thee leave us not comfortless, but send un^ thy
holy Spirit. We acknowledge a Representation of that sacrifice to God the
Father, we acknowledge an Impetration of the benefit of it, we maintain an
Application of its virtue: So here is a commemorative, impetrative, applicative
sacrifice. Speak distinctly, and I cannot understand what you can desire more.
To make it a suppletory sacrifice, to supply the defects of the only true
sacrifice of the Cross, I hope both you and I abhor.

The next crime objected by you to us is, that we have renounced
Transubstantiation. Of Transubstantiation.
It is true, we have rejected it deservedly from being an Article of our Creed;
you need not wonder at that. But if we had rejected it 400 years sooner, that
had been a Miracle. It was not so soon hatched. To find but the word
Transubstantiation in any old Author, were sussicient to prove him a
counterfeit.

Your next Article of the septenary number of the Sacraments is not much Of 7.
Sacraments.
older. Never so much as mentioned in any Scripture, or Council, or Creed, or
Father, or ancient Author; first devised by Peter Lombard; first decreed by
Anno 1439 1528 1547.
Eugenius the fourth; first confirmed in the Provincial Council of Sen^s, and
after in the Council of Trent. Either the word Sacrament is taken largely, and
then the washing of the Disciples feet is called a Sacrament, then the only
sprinkling of Ashes on a Christians head is called a Sacrament, then there are
God knows how many Sacraments more than seven; Or else it is taken strictly for
a visible sign, instituted by Christ, ^o convey or confirm invisible Grace to
all such partakers thereof, as do not set a bar against themselves, according
to the Analogy between the Sign and the thing signified. And in this sense the
proper and certain Sacraments of the Christian Church, common ^o all, or (in
the words of our Church) generally necessary to Salvation, are but two, Baptism
and the Supper of our Lord. More than these St. Ambrose wri^es not of in his
Book de Sacrament is, because he did not know them. These we admit for genuine,
and general Sacramen^s. Their S^ cramental virtue we acknowledge.

The rest we retain more purely than your selves, though not under the Notion
of such proper and general Sacraments. As Confirmation, Ordination, Matrimony,
Penitence (though we neither approve of your preposterous manner of Absolution
before satisfaction, nor of your ordinary Penitentiary tax) and lastly, the
Visitation of, and Prayer for the sick, which only is of perpetual necessity.
The Unction prescribed by St. James, being appropriable to the miraculous gift
of healing, or recovering Jam. 5. 14.
men out of sicknesses, then in use; Whereas your custom is clean contrary,
never, or rarely to enoyl any man, until he be past all hope of Recovery. The
Ordinary and most received custom of preparing sick persons for another world
in the Primitive Church, was Prayer and Absolution, or the benefit of the Keys,
and the Viaticum of the Body and Blood of Christ, which we retain.

Concerning Justification, we believe Of Justification.
that all good Christians have true inherent Justice, though not perfect,
according to a perfection of degrees, as Gold is true Gold, though it be mixed
with some dross. We believe that this inherent Justice and Sanctity, does make
them truly just and holy. But if the word Justification be taken in sensu
forensi, for the acquittal of a man from former guilt, to make an offender just
in the eye of the Law, as it is opposed to Condemnation, It is God that
justifies, Romans 8. 33.
who is he that condemns? Then it is not our inherent righteousness that
justifies us in this sense, but the free Grace of God for the merits of Jesus
Christ.

Next for Merits, we never doubted Of Merits.
of the necessity of good Works, without which Faith is but a fiction. We are
not so stupid to imagine that Christ did wash us from our sins, that we might
wallow more securely in sin, but that we might serve him in holiness and
righteousness all the days of our life. We never doubted of the reward of good
Works; Come ye blessed of my Father, etc. for I was hungry, and ye fed me. Nor
whether this reward be due to them in Justice; Henceforth is laid 1 Timothy 4. 8
up for me a Crown of righteousness, which the Lord the just Judge shall give
me in that day. Faithful promise makes due debt. This was all that the Ancient
Church did ever understand by the name of Merits. Let Petavius bear witness;
Antiqui Patres omnes, and prae Disert. Eecles. lib. 2. c. 4.
caeteris Augustinus, cumque i is consentiens Romana and Catholica piet as
ag^oscit merita eo sensu, nimirum ut neque Dei gratiam ulla antecedant merita,
and haec ipsa tum ex gratia, tum ex gratuit a Dei pollicitatione tot a
pendeant. All the Ancient Fathers, especially St. Austin, and the Roman and
Catholic faith consenting with them, do acknowledge Merits in this sense,
that no Merits go before the grace of God, and that these very Merits do depend
wholly on grace, and on the free promise of God. Hold you to this, and we shall
have no more difference about Merits; Do you exact more of us, than all the
Fathers, or the Roman and Catholic piety does acknowledge?

It is an easy thing for a wrangling Sophister to dispute of Merits in the
Schools, or for a vain Orator to declaim of Merits out of the Pulpit: but when
we come to lie upon our deathbeds, and present our selves at the last hour
before the Tribunal of Christ, it is high time both for you and us to renounce
our own merits, and to cast our selves naked into the Arms of our Savior. That
any works of ours, who are the best of us but unprofitable servants, which
properly are not ours, but Gods own gifts; and if they were ours, are a just
debt due unto him, setting aside Gods free promise, and gracious acceptance,
should condignly by their own intrinsecal value deserve the joys of Heaven, to
which they have no more proportion than they have to satisfy for the eternal
torments of Hell, This is that which we have renounced, and which we never
ought to admit.

If your Invocation of Saints were Of Invocation of Saints.
not such as it is, to request of them Patronage and Protection, spiritual
graces, and Celestial joys, by their prayers, and by their merits (alas the
wisest Virgins have oil in their Lamps little enough for themselves.) Yet it is
not necessary for two Reasons; First, no Saint does love us so well as Christ,
No Saint has given us such assurance of his love, or done so much for us as
Christ. No Saint is so willing, or able to help us as Christ. And secondly, we
have no command from God to invocate them.

So much your own Authors do confess, and give this reason for it, Lest S.
Clara ^robl. 37. ^x Horantio.
the Gentiles being converted, should bel^eve that they were drawn back again
to the worship of the Creature. But we have another command, Call upon me in
the day of trouble, and I will hear thee. We have no promise to be heard, when
we do invocate them; But we have another promise, Whatsoever ye shall ask the
Father in my name, ye shall receive it. We have no example in holy Scripture of
any that did invocate them, but rather the contrary; See thou do it not; I am
thy fellowservant, worship God. We have no Rev. 22. 9.
cer^ainty that they do hear our particular prayers, especially mental prayers,
yea a thousand prayers poured out at one Instant in several parts of the world;
We know what your men say of the g^ass of the Trinity, and of extraordinary
Revelations: But these are bold conjectures without any certainty, and
inconsistent the one with the other.

We do sometimes meet in Ancient Authors, with the Intercesfion of Saints in
General, which we also acknowledge; Or an oblique invocation of them (as you
term it) that is a prayer directed to God, that he will hear the intercession
of the Saints for us, which we do not condemn; Or a wish, or a Rhetorical
Apostrophe, or perhaps something more in some single Ancient Author: But for an
Ordinary Invocation in particular necessities, and much more for public
Invocation in the Liturgies of the Church, we meet not with it for the first
six hundred years, or thereabouts; All which time, and afterward also, the
common principles and tradition of the Church were against it. So far were they
from obtruding it as a necessary fundamental Article of Christian Religion.

It is a common fault of your wri^ers, Of Prayer for the Dead, with Purgatory.
always to couple Prayer for the Dead, and Purgatory together, as if the one
did necess^rily suppose, or imply the other; In whose steps you tread. Prayer
for the Dead has often proceeded upon mistaken grounds, often from true
grounds, both inconsistent with your Purgatory. Many have held an Opinion, that
though the souls were not extinguished at the time of their separation from the
body, yet they did lie in secret re^eptacles, in a profound or dead sleep,
until the Resur^ection, doing nothing, suffering nothing in the mean time, but
only the delay of their glory. Others held that all must pass through the fire
of Conflagration at the day of judgment. These opinions were inconsistent with
your Purgatory, yet all these, upon these very grounds used Prayer for the
Dead. Others, called the mer^ifull Doctors, held, that the very pains of Hell
might be lessened by the prayer of the living: Such a prayer is that which we
meet with in your own Missal, O King of Glory, deliver the souls of all the
faithful deceased, from the pains of Hell, from the deep Lake, from the mouth
of the Lion (that is, the Devil) Tar^.
that the bottomless pit of Hell do not swallow them up. A man may lawfully
pray for that which is certain, if it be to come, but one cannot lawfully pray
for that which is past. The souls which are in Purgatory (by your learning) are
past the fear of Hell. Nor can this petition be any wai^s so wrested, as to
become appliable to the hour of death. This prayer is not for the man, but for
the soul separated; nor for the soul of a sick man, or a dying man, but for the
souls of m^n actually deceased. Certainly this prayer must have reference,
either to the sleeping of the souls, or to the pains of Hell; To deliverance
out of Purgatory it can have no relation. Neither are you ab^e to produce any
one prayer public or private, neither any one indulgence to that purpose, for
the delivery of any one soul out of Purgatory, in all the Primitive times, or
out of their own ancient Missals or Records. Such are the Innovations which you
would impose upon us, as Articles of Faith, which the greatest part of the
Catholic Church never received until this day. Moreover, though the sins of
the faithful be privately and particularly remitted at the day of death, yet
the public promulgation of their pardon at the day of judgment is to come.
Though their ^ouls be always in an estate of blessedness, ^yet they want the
consummation of this blessedness, extensively at least, until the body be
reunited unto the soul, (and as it is piously and probably believed)
intensively also, that the soul has not yet so full and clear a vision of God,
as it shall have hereafter. Then what forbids Christians to pray for this
public acquittal, for this Consummation of blessedness? So we do pray, as
often as we say, thy Kingdom come, or, come Lord Jesus, come quickly. Our
Church is yet plainer, That we with this our Brother, and all other departed in
the faith of thy holy name, may have our perfect Consummation of blessedness in
thy everlasting King^me. This is far enough from your more gainful prayers for
the dead, to deliver them out of Purgatory.

Lastly, concerning the Authority of The Authority of the Pope.
the Pope, It is he himself that has renounced his lawful Patriarchal
Authority. And if we should offer it him at this day, he would disdain it. We
have only freed our selves from his tyrannical usurped Authority. But upon
what terms, upon what grounds, how far, and with what intention, we have
separated our selves, or rather have suffered our selves to be separated from
the Church of Rome, you may find if you p^ease in the Treatise of Schism.

I cannot choose but wonder to see P. 27.
you cite St. Cyprian against us in this case, who separated himself from you,
as well as we, in the days of a much better Bishop than we, and upon much
weaker grounds than we, and published his dissent to the world in two African
Councils; He liked not the swelling Title of Bishop of Bishops, nor that one
Bishop should tyrannically terrify another into ^edience; No more do we. He
gave a primacy, or principality of order to the Chair of St. Peter, as
Principium unit at is; so do we: But he believed that every Bishop had an
equal share of Episcopal power; so do we, He provided a part, as he thought
fit in a Provincial Council for his own safety, and the saf^ty of his Flock; so
did we. He writ to your great Bishop as to his Brother and Colleague, and dared
to reprehend him for receiving but a Letter from such as had been ^ensured by
the African Bishops. In Saint Cyprians sense, you are the Beam that have
separated you selves from the body of the Sun; you are the Bough that is lopped
from the Tree; you are the stream which is divided from the Fountain. It is
you, principally you, that have divided the unity of the Church.

You collect as a Corollary from our supposed principal of the right and
sufficiency Whether humane Laws bind the Conscience.
of private judgment, enlightened by the Spirit, that no humane Authority can
bind the Conscience of another, or prescribe any thing unto it. I have formerly
showed you your gross mistake in the premises, Now if you please hear our sense
of the Conclusion. Humane Laws cannot be properly said to bind the Conscience,
by the sole authority of the Lawgiver; But partly by the equity of the Law,
every one being obliged to advance that which conduces to a public good, thou
shall love thy neighbor as thy self; And especially by Divine Authority, which
commands every soul to be subject to the higher powers, for conscience sake;
not prudentially only. The question is soon decided, just Laws of lawfu^l
Superiors, either Civil, or Ecclesiastical, have authority to bind the
Conscience in themselves, but not from themselves.

How shall we believe that it is not you but God that represents these things
P. 34. 69. The Author a little Enthusiastical.
to his Majesty, that addresseth them to him by your mouth, that calls him,
that stretches out his hand to him, that has set these things before his
eyes, in Characters not to be defaced? What? That his Majesty should turn
Roman Catholic? Are they like Belshazars Characters, and are you the only
Daniel that can read them? we do not see a Cloven Tongue upon your head, nor a
Dove seem^ng to whisper in your ear. Be not too consident, lest some take it to
be a little taint of Anabaptism; perhaps you have had as strange fantasies as
this heretofore, whilst you were of a contrary party.

Be it what it will be, you cannot offer it to his ^ajestie with more
confidence, or pre^end more intimacy with God, or to be more familiarly
acquainted with his Cabinet Counsel, than a Scotch Presbyter; And yet your
self would not value all his confidence at a Button. Wise men are not easily
gained by empty shows o^ pretenses, that signify nothing but the pretenders
vanity, nor by Enthusiastical interpretation of occurrences. It is only the
weight of reason that depresseth the scale of their judgment, and makes them
to yield and submit unto it.

Howsoever it be God or you tha^ represent these things to his Majesty, you
tell us, that the end is to reduce him from those errors which he sucked in
with his milk, which in the days of Peace, and abundance, it had been
disficult for him to discover, But now his Eyes and his ears do see and hear
those Truths which mak^ it evident to him, that God has condemned them to
reduce him to the Communion of the Church; wherein you promise him all manner
of blessings. Who told you of his Majesty's new illumination? or what have you
seen to believe any such thing? when you da^e avo^ch such gross untruths of
himself, to himself, how should he credit your private presumptions, which you
tell him as a new Mercury dropped down from Heaven. The Romanists r^quire
submission to their Church as necessary to salvation.


You tell us that it is necessary for every one to adhere to the true Church,
which is the keeper of saving truth. That is true, but nothing to his Majesty
who has more right already in the Catholic Church than your self. You tell us
moreover that this Church is the Roman Church. That is not tr^e; but suppose it
were most true, as it is most false, what should a man be beter or more nearer
to the knowledge of the Yet cannot agree an^ong themselves what this Roman
Church is
Truth, and consequently to his sal^ation, for his submission to the Roman
Church; As long as you cannot agree among your selves either what this Roman
Church is, or wh^t this infallible Judge is? One says it is the Pope alone;
Another says no, but the Pope with his Conclave of Cardinals; A third will go
no less than the Pope and a Provincial Council; A fourth will not be contented
without the Pope and a General Council; A Fifth is for a general Council alone,
^ither with or without the Pope; A Sixth party (and they are of no small
esteem amongst you here at this present) is for the Essential Church, that is,
the Company of all faithful people, Whose reception (say they) makes the true
ratificationof the Acts of its representative Body. It were as good to have no
infallible Judge, as not to know or agree who it is. Be not so censorious in
condemning others, for not submitting to your Roman Church or infallible Judge,
nor so positive to make this submission so absolutely necessary to salvation,
until you agree better what this Judge or Church is. It is five to one against
you, that you your self miss the right Judge. The English Church not perished.


Whatsoever become of your Church, you say Ours is perished by the proper Axioms
of our own Reformation, and has no more any (...) in the world, nor pretense
to the Privilege of a Church. This is hard. He perishes twice that peri sheth
by his own weapons. Even so Joseph's brethren told Joseph himself, with
Consciences gui^ty enough, one is not. This Genesis 42. 13.
is that which the Court of Rome would be content to purchase at any rate. This
has been the end of all their Negotiations and Instructions, by all means to
support the Presbyterian Faction in England against Episcopacy; Not that they
loved them more than us, but that they feared us more than them.

There was an Israelitish Church, when Elias did not see it; but he must be as
blind as Bartimaeus, that cannon see the E^glish Church. Wheresoever there is a
lawful English Pastor, and an English Flock, and a subordination of this ^lock
to that Pastor, there is a Branch of the true English Protestant Church. Do you
make no difference between a Church persecuted, and a Church extinguished? Have
patience and expect the Catastrophe. It may be all this while the Carpenters
Son is making a Coffin for Juli^n. If it please God, we may yet see the Church
o^ England which is now frying in the fire, come out like Gold out of the
Furnace more pure, and more full of l^ster. If not, his Will be done. Just art
thou O Lord, and Righteous are all thy judgments. The Primitive Church was as
glorious in the sight of God when they served him in Holes and Corners, in
Cryptis, Sacellis, Conventiculis, Ecclesiolis, as when his worship was more
splendidly performed in Basilicis and Cyriacis, in goodly Churches and
magnificent Cathedralls.

Your Design stops not at the King of Great Britain, but extends it self to P.
42.
all his subjects, yea to all Protestants whatsoever. I wonder why you stay
there, and would not add all the Eastern The Authors vain Dreams.
Churches, and the great Turk himself, fince you might have done it with
another penfull of Ink? and with as much pretense of Reason, to secure himself
from the joint Forces of Christendom thus united by your means. A strong
Pha^tasie will discover Armies, and Navies in the Clouds, men and Horses, and
Chariots in the fire, and hear Articulate Dictates from the Bells. This is is
not to write wakeing, but dreaming.

Yet you make it an easy work; to effect which, there needs no Disputation,
but only to behold the Heretical Genius of our Reformation, which is
sufficiently condemned by it self, if men P. 43. 44.
will only take the pains to compare the Fundamental Principles thereof with
the Consequences. Great Houses and Forts are builded at an easy charge in
Paper. When you have consulted with your A^chitects, and Enginiers, you will
find it to be a work of more difficu^ty. And your Adversa^ies Resolution may
teach you, to your cost, what it is to promise to your self such an easy
Conquest before the Fight, and let you see that those golden Mountains which
you phantasied have no subsistence but in your Brain, and send you home to seek
that selfConviction there, which you sought to fasten upon others. When you are
able to prove your Universal Monarchy, your new Cannon of Faith, your new
Treasury of the Church, your new Roman Purgatory, whereof the Pope keeps the
Keys, your Image worship, your Common-Praiers in (...) tongue unknown, your
deteining of the Cup from the Laity in the public Administration of the
Sacrament, and the rest os your new C^eed, out of the four first General
Councils, or the Universal Tradition of the Church in those days, either as
principles or Fundamental Truths, (which you affirm) or so much as ordinary
points of Faith, (which we deny) we will yield our selves to be guilty both of
Contradiction and Schism. Until you are able to make these Innovations good,
it were best for you to be silent, and leave your vaporing. Desparate
undertakings do easily forseit a man's Reputation.

Now are we come to the most specious piece of your whole Epistle, P. 47. etc.
His vainer Proposition of a cons^quence.
that is, the Motion or proposition of a Conference, by Authority of the King
of France, at the instance of the King of great Britain, before the Archbishop
of Paris, and his Coadjutor. between some of your Roman Catholic Doctors, and
the Ministers of the Reformed Church at Paris, whom you do deservedly commend
^or their sufficiency and Zeal. You further suppose that the Ministers of the
Reformed Church will accept of such a Disputation, or by their Tergiversation
betray the weakness of their Cause; And you conclude confidently beyond
^upposition, that they will be con^uted and convicted, and that their
conversion or conviction will afford sufficient ground to the King of Great
Britain, to embrace the Communion of the Roman Catholic Church; And that his
conversion will reduce all conscientious Protestants to Unity and due obedience.

I will contract your larger Palm to a Fist. If the King of Great Britain
desire a solemn Conference, the King of France will enjoin it; If he enjoin it,
the Ministers will accept it; It they do accept, they are sure to be convicted;
If they be convicted, the King of Great Britain will change his Religion; If he
(...) his Religion, all conscientious P^nts will be reduced; And all this (...)
be done, not by the old way of D^ting, No, take heed of that, the burnt Child
dreads the fire; But by a proper new way of refuting old Protestant Principles
by new Independent Practices. Why was this Remedy found out no sooner? This
might have eased the Cardinals in their Consultations about propagating the
Faith; This might have saved Cardinal Allen all his Machiavillian Instructions
to his English Emissaries; This may in a short time ^vrne the Inquisitors out
of their employment for want of an Object, and not leave such a thing as
Heretical pravity in the World. How must men praise your Fortune, and applaud
your Invention? But stay, the second thoughts are wiser; what is this Chain
supposed to be of Adamant, should prove a rope of Sand? And so it is; I have
seen a Sorites disgraced, and hissed out of the Schools, for drawing but one
lame leg after it, this is foundred of all four, from the beginning to the end
there is nothing in it but future Contingents, which are known only to God, no^
one Grain of necessary Truth. The King of England desires no such Conference.


First Sir, be not angry if a man take away the subject of your whole
discourse; It is but your officiousness, the King desires no such Con^erence.
Let them desire Conferences who waver in their Faith. All these blustering
Storms have radicated him deeper in his Religion. And chiefly that which you
make the chiefest motive to his Apostating, the Martirdom of his Royal Father,
and an hereditary love to that Church which he has (...) with his Blood.

Secondly, if his Majesty should incline to such a Conference, do you If he
should he had neither Reason nor need to desert his English Clergy.
think he would desert the English Clergy, who have forsaken their Country,
their Friends, their Estates, out of their Conscience, out of their d^ty to God
and their Sovereign; who understand the constitution o^ the English Church much
better than your self, or any Forrainers how susficent soever, and cast himself
wholly upon Strangers, whose Reformation (you say) is different from that of
England, in the points of Episcopacy, Liturgy, and the Ceremonies of the
Church? Say, what was the Reason of this gross Omission? were you afraid of
that Image of the Church (as you call it in a sleighting manner) which they
retained? O^ did you not think any of the English Nation worthy to bear your
Books at a Conference? It has been otherwise heretofore, and you will find it
otherwise now, when you come to prove it. I know not whether England has been
more fortunate or unfortunate since the Reformation, in breeding as many able
P^lemique Writers on both sides, as any Nation in Europe; Stapleton, Harding,
Parsons, Sanders, Reynolds, Bishop etc. for the Roman Church. Jewel, Andrews,
Abbot, Lawd, White, Field, Montague, Reynolds, Whitaker etc. for the English
Church; (I forbear to name those that are living) and many mo e who come not
short of these, if they had pleased to communicate their Talents to the World.
This is such a c^ntumely that (...) upon the Nation, and you must be contented
to be told of it.

Thirdly, how are you sure that the Such a Conference not ^t to be granted by
^he King of France.
King of France and his Counsel would give way to such a public Conference?
Private Insinuations use to prevail much when a man may Lavere and tack to and
again to compass his Ends. Au^hority or the Sword may put an end ^o
Controversies: But public Conferences for the most part do but start new
Q^estions, and revive old forgotten Animosities. What were the Donatists the
better for the Collation at Carthage? The Mind of a man is generous, and where
it looks for Opposition, it fortifies it self against it. Urban the Eighth was
the wisest Pope you have had of late, who by his Moderation and Courtesy cooled
much of that Heat, which the violence of his Predecessors had raised against
the Court of Rome. The mild bea^es of the Sun were more prevalent, than the
blustering Blasts of the North Wind. Multiplying of Words more commonly
engenders strite, than peace.

Fourthly, upon what Grounds are you Nor to be accepted by the Min sters of the
Reformed Church.
so confident, that the Ministers of the Reformed Church would admit of such a
public Disputation upon those terms which you propose? That is, ^o accept of
the Archbishop of Paris and his Coadjutor, two persons interessed, for
competent Judges. I am as confident of the contrary, that they would rather
choose to suffer, than wrong their Cause so much; Frustra fit per plura quod
fieri potest per pauciora. It were a readier way for them, and but the same in
effect to subscribe to a blank paper, and to submit without Disputation.

Fifthly, suppose (all this notwithstanding) such a Conference should Nor could
any such Success be expected from it.
hold, what reason have you to promise to your self such success as to obtain
so easy a Victory? You have had Conferences and Conferences again at Poisye,
and other places, and gained by them just as much as you might put in your eye
and see never the worse. When Conferences are only made use of as Pageants, to
grace the Introduction of some new Proselite, and to preserve his Reputation
from the aspersion of Desultorious Levity, they seem much more efficatious than
they are. As they know well enough who are privy to what is acted in the
withdrawing Room. The time was when you have been as confident in a contrary
Opinion, that such a Free Conference would have sealed the Walls of Rome, and
levelled the Popes Triple Crown.

Sixthly, whether the Ministers The 'Authors importinence and saucinese with
the King.
should accept of such a partial unequal Conference or not, or whatsoever
should be the succes thereof, you trespass too boldly upon his Majesty's
patience, to dictate to him so pragmatically, so Magisterially, what he should
do, or would do, in such a case, which is never like to be. Does his Fathers
constancy en ourage you to believe, that he is a Reed shaken with the Wind; Qui
pauca considerat, sacile pronunciat, He that weighs no more Circumstances or
Occurrances than serve for the advancement of his Design, pronounces sentence
easily, but temerariously, and sor the most part unsoundly. When such a thing
as you dream of should happen, it were good manners in you to leave his Majesty
to his Christian Liberty. But to trouble your self and others about the Moons
shining in the water, so unseas^nably, so impertinently, or with what will come
to p^ss when the sky falls, is unbeseeming the Counselor of a King.

Lastly, consider how your Pen does His Pen over run^ his Wit.
overrun your Reason, and overreach all grounds of probability, to ascribe
unto his Majesty's chang such an infallible I^fluence upon all Protestants, as
to reduce them to the Roman Communion, not only his own subjects, but
Foreiners. His blessed Fathers example had not so much influence upon the Scots
his Native Subjects. He was no Changling indeed, neither to the right hand nor
to the left. Henry the Fourth, his Grandfather, did turn indeed to the Roman
Church. Had his change any such influence upon the Protestant party in France?
I know no followers such a change would gain him, but I foresee clearly how
many Hearts it would lose him. Certainly Sir, if you would do a meritorious
piece of service to his greatest Adversaries, you could not fix upon any thing
that would content them more highly, than to see you successful in this
undertaking. I have done with your Proposi^ion. He that compares it and your
Demonstration together, will easily judge them to be twins, at the first sight.

As a Motive to his Majtsties Conversion, you present him with a Treatise of
Transubstantiation, and desire that it may appear un to the World under his
Royal name,

I meddle not with your Treatise, His improper choice of a Pation for his
Treatise.
some of your learned Adversaries friends will give you your hands full enough.
But how can h s Majesty protect or patronise a Treatise against his judgment
against his Conscience, so contrary to the doctrine of the Church of England,
not only ^nce the Reformation, but before? About the year seven hundred, The
Body of Christ wherein he suffered, Sermon. S^xon in (...) Paschat.
and his Body Conseorated in the Host, differ much. The Body wherein he
suffered was born of the Virgin, consisting of flesh and bones, and humane
members; his Spiritual body, which we call the Host, ^onsists of many Grains,
without blood, bones, or human Members, wherefore nothing is to be under stood
there Corporally, but all Spiritually. Transubstantiation was neither held for
an Article of Falth, nor a point of Faith in those days.

You charge the Protestants in diverse places, That they have neither Church nor
Faith, but have lost both. P. 62.
And at the later end of your Treatise you undertake to demonstrate it: But P.
222.
your Demonstration is a mere Parologism. You multiply your Terms, you His
un^kilfulnes, or his unfortunate^ess in his Demonstrations.
confound your terms, you chang and alter your Terms, contrary to the rules of
right arguing, and vainly beat the air, concluding nothing which you ought to
prove, nothing which your Adversary will deny. You would prove that Protestants
have no Church. That you never attempt; B^t you do attempt to prove (how
pitiful God knows) that they are not the only Church, that is, the one,
Holy Catholic Church. This they did never affirm, they did never think. It
susficeth them to be a part of that Universal Church; more pure, more
Orthodox, more Catholic than the Roman, always professing Christ visibly,
never lurking invisibly in another Communion, which is another of your
mistakes. I should advise you to promise us no more evident Demonstrations;
either your skill, or your luck is so extremly bad.

In the second place you affirm that Faith is founded upon divine Authority,
and Revelation, and deposited with the Church. All that is true; But that which
you add, that it is founded in the Authority of Christ speaking by the mouth of
his Church; By this Church understanding the Church of this Age, and (which is
yet worse) the Church of one place, and (which is worst of all) the Bishop of
that one Church, is most false.

And so is that which you add, that the faith of Protestants is founded upon
The great advantage of the Protestant above the Roman Catholic in the choice
of his foundation.
their own reasonings, which makes so many differences among them. Reason must
be subservient in the application of the Rule of Faith; It cannot be the
foundation of Faith. Bad reasoning may bring forth differences and errors about
Faith, both with you and us, but the abuse of Reason does not take away the use
of Reason. We have this Advantage of you, that if any one of us do build an
erroneous Opinion upon the holy Scripture, yet because our adherence to the
Scripture is firmer and nearer than our adherence to our particular error, that
full, and free, and universal assent which we give to holy Scripture, and to
all things therein contained, is an implicit Condemnation and retractation of
our particular error, which we hold unwittingly, and unwillingly against
Scripture. But your foundation of Faith being composed of uncertainties,
whether this man be Pope or not, whether this Pope be Judge or not, whether
this Judge be infallible or not, and if infallible, wherein, and how far; the
faith which is builded thereupon cannot but be fallible and uncertain. The
stricter the adherence is to a false, uncertain, or fallible rule, the more
dangerous is the error. So our right foundation purges away our error in
superstruction; And your wrong foundation lessens the value of your truths, and
doubles the guilt of your errors.

I will (by your leave) requite your demonstration, and turn the mouths of your
own Canons against your self.

That Church which has changed the Apostolical Creed, the Apostolical
Succession, the Apostolical Regiment, and the Apostolical Communion, is no
Apostolical, Orthodox, or Catholic Church.

But the Church of Rome has changed the Apostolical Creed, the Apostolical
Succession, the Apostolical Regiment, and the Apostolical Communion.

Therefore the Church of Rome is no Apostolical Orthodox, or Catholic Church.

They have changed the Apostolical Creed, by making a new Creed, wherein are
many things inserted, that hold no Analogy with the old Apostles Creed; The
Apostolical Succession, by engrossing the whole succession to Rome, and making
all other Bishops to be but the Popes Vicars, and Substitutes, as to their
Jurisdiction; The Apostolical Regiment by erecting a visible and Universal
Monarchy in the Church; And lastly the Apostolical Communion, by
excommunicating three parts of the holy Catholic Apostolic Church.

Again, That Church which resolves its Faith not into divine Revelation and
Authority, but into Humane infallibility, or the Infallibility of the present
Church, without knowing, or according, what that present Church is, whether the
Virtual, or the representative, or the essential Church, or a body compounded
of some of these, has no true faith.

But the Church of Rome resolves its Faith, not into divine Revelation and
Authority, but into the Infallibility of the present Church, not knowing, or
not according, what that present Church is, whether the Virtual Church (that is
the Pope,) or the Representative Church (that is a general Council) or the
Essential Church, (that is the Church of B^lievers diffused over the world,) or
a body compounded of some of these, (that is the Pope, and a General or
Provincial Council.)

Therefore the Church of Rome has not true faith. The greater number of your
Writers is for the Pope, that this infallibility is fixed to his Chair. But of
all other Judgments, that is most fallible and uncertain; for if Simony make a
Nullity in a Papal Election, we have great reason to doubt, that that Chair
has not been filled by a right Pope these last hundred years. These are no
other but your own Mediums; Such luck you have with your irrefragable
demonstrations.

In case his Majesty will turn Roman Catholic you promise him restitution P.
68. His Majesty's Apostasy is not the way to his restitution.
to his Kingdoms.

Great undertakers are seldom good performers; when you are making your
Proselytes, you promise them golden Mountains, but when the work is done, you
deal with them, as he did with his Saint, who promised a Candle as big as his
Mast, and offered one no bigger than his finger. Do you however think it
reason, that any man should change his Religion for temporal respects, though
it were for a Kingdom? Jeroboam did so, you may remember what was the success
of it.

You propose this as the readiest means to restore him. Others who penetrate
deeper into the true state of his affairs, look upon it as the readiest way to
ruin his hopes, by the alienation of his friends, by the confirmation of his
foes, and in some sort the justification of their former feigned fears. Do you
think all Roman Catholic Princes desire this change as earnestly as your self?
Give them leave first to consult with their particular Interests. A common
Interest prevails more with Confederates than a common faith. The Sword
distingu^sheth not between Protestants and Papists.

But what is the ground of this your great Confidence? no less than Scripture.
Seek ye first the kingdom of God, and the righteousness of it, and all other
things shall be added unto you. You say the word of God deceives no man. True,
but you may deteive your self out of the word of God. The Conclusion always
follows the weaker part, such as this, are commonly your mistaken grounds, when
they come to be examined. The text says, Seek the kingdom of God, You would
have his Majesty dese^t the kingdom of God; The promise is of all things
necessary or convenient, you will be your own Carver, and oblige God Almighty
to Kingdoms and particular conditions. The promise is made (as all tempral
promises are,) with an implicit exception of the Cross, un^ess God see it to
be otherwise more expedient for us; He that denies us gold, and gives us
patience and other graces more precious than Gold, that denies a temporal 1
(...)* 1. 7.
Kingdom to give an eternal, does not wrong us. T^s was out of your head.

That the Scots had an antienter Obligation P. 70. The obligation of the Scots
to his Majesty the greatest of any Subjects in the known world.
to fidelity toward his Majesty, and that Royal Family than the English, is a
truth not to be doubted or disputed of, I think I may safely add, than any
Nation in Europe, or in the known world to their Prince, his Majesty being the
hundred and tenth Monarch of that line, that has swayed the Scepter of that
Kingdom successively. The more the pity that a few treacherous Shebas, and a
pack of bawling seditious Orators, under the vizard and shadow of pure
Religion, to the extreme scandal of all honest professors, should be able to
overturn such an ancient fabric, and radicated succession of Kingly Government.

But take heed Sir, how you believe that any engagement of the Presbyterian
Their Treachery.
faction in Scotland, proceeded either from conscience, or gratitude, or
fidelity, or aimed at the resetling of his Majesty upon his throne. No, no,
their hearts were double, their treaties on their parts were mere treacheries
from the beginning. I mean not any of those many loyal patriots, that never
bowed their knees to Baalberith the God of the Covenant, in that Nation; Nor
yet any of those serious The loyal Scots excepted.
converts, that no sooner discove^ed the legerdemain of a company of canting
impostors, but they sought to stop the stream of Schism and sedition, with the
hazard of their own lives and estates; Nor even those whose eyes were longer
held with the Spirit of slumber, by some stronger spells of disciplinarian
charmers, but did yet later open their eyes, and come in to do their duties, at
the sixth or ninth hour. All these are expunged by me out of this black Roll.
Let their posterities enjoy the fruit of their respective loyalties, And let
their memories be daily more and more blessed. But I mean the obstinate
Ringleaders, and Standard-bearers of the Presbyterian Covenant of both robes,
and the The disloyal Sco^s deciphered.
setters up of that misshapen Idol. It is from these I say, that no help or hope
could in reason be expected. They who sold the Father, and such a Father, were
not likely to prove loyal to the Son; They who hanged up one of the most
ancient Gentlemen in Europe, the gallant Marqu^ss of Montrose, being then their
lawful Viceroy, like a dog in such base and barbarous manner, together with
his Ma^esties Commission, to the public dishonor of their King, in the chief
City of that Kingdom, in a time of Treaty; They who purged the Army, over and
over, as loath on their parts willingly to leave one dram of honesty, or loyalty
in it, who would not admit their fellow subjects of much more merit and courage
than themselves to assist them; They who would not permit his Majesty to
continue among the Soldiery, lest he should grow too popular; They who after
they had proclaimed to the world his Title and right to that Crown, yet sought
to have him excluded from the benefit of it, and from the execution of his
Kingly Office, until he should abjure his Religion, cast dirt upon his Parents,
alienate his loyal subjects, and ratify the usurpations of his Rebels; These,
(these I say,) were most unlikely persons to be his restorers. Was it ever
heard before, that subjects acknowledged a Sovereign, and yet endeavored to
exclude him from his rights, until he had granted whatsoever seemed good in
their eyes? Others may be more severe in their judgments, but I for my part No
hope from that party until they ^epent.
could be well contented, that God would give them the Honor to be the
repayrers of the breach, who have been the makers of the breach; to be the
restorers of Monarchy, who have been the ruiners of Monarchy; to be the
re-establishers of peace, who have been the chiefest Catalines and promoters of
War. But that can never be whilst they justify their former rebellious
practices, and after they have eaten and devoured, wipe their mouths, and say
what have we done? until they acknowledge their former errors; Repentance only
is able to knit the broken bone; why should they be more afraid to confess
their faults, and shame the Devil, than to commit them?

Yet I cannot say with you that P. 73. God must not be limited to time or means
of deliverance.
this has robbed his Majesty of all hopes and means of recovery. We may not
limit God to any time, who commonly withholds his h^lp until the Bricks be
doubled, until the edge of the razor does touch the very throats of his
servant, that the glory of the work may wholly redound to himself. We may not
limit God to those means which seem most probable in our eyes. So long as
Joseph trusted to his friend in Court, God did forget him; when Pharaohs Butler
had quite forgotten Joseph, then God remembered him. God has nobler ways of
restitution than by Battails, and bloodshed, that is, by changing the hearts of
his creatures at his pleasure, and turning Esau's vowed revenge into love and
kindness.

I confess, his Majesty's resolution P. 74. 75. His Majesty's escape ou^ of
England almost miraculous,
was great, so was his prudence; that neither fear (which uses to betray the
succors of the soul,) nor any indiscreet Action, or word, or gesture, in so
long a time should either discover him, or render him suspected. When I
consider that the Heir of a Crown, in the midst of that Kingdom where he had
his breeding, whom all men's eyes had used to Court as the rising Sun, of no
common features or physiognomy, at such time when he was not only believed,
but known to be among them, when every Corner of the Kingdom was full of Spys
to search him, and every Port and Inn full of Officers to apprehend him, I say
that he should travail at such a time, so long, so far, so freely, in the sight
of the Sun, exposed to the view of all petsons, without either discovery, or
suspicion, seems little less than a miracle. That God had smitten the eyes of
those who met him with blindness, as the ^yes of the Sodomites, that they could
not find Lots door, or the Syrian Soldiers, that were sent to apprehend
Elisha. This strange escape, and that former out of Scotland, where his
condition was not much better, nor his person much And seems to presage that
God has something to do with him.
safer, do seem strangely to presage, that God has yet some great work to be
done by him in his own due time.

You attribute this rare deliverance, and the hopes of his conversion, in part
P. 76. Prayers and tears the (...) A^ms of women;
to the prayers and tears of his Mother; prayers and tears were the only
proper Arms of the old Primitive Christians; more particularly they are the
best and most agreeable defense of that sex; but especially the prayers and
tears of a Mother, for the Son of her desires, are most powerful. As it was
said of the prayers and tears of Monica, Especially of Mothers;
for St. Austine her Son; fieri non p^tuit ut filius istarum lacrymarum
periret, It could not be that a Son should perish for whom so many tears were
shed. God sees her tears, and hears her prayers, and will grant her request, if
not according to her will and desire, (we often ask those things which being
granted would prove prejudicial to our selves and our friends) yet ad utilit
atem, to his Majesty's greater advantage, which is much better: She wishes him
a good Catholic, and God will preserve him a good Catholic as he is. We do
not doubt but the prayers Yet not so powerful as his Fathers intercession now
in Heaven. P. 77. The Authors instance of Henry the great not pertinent.
of his Father (who now follows the Lamb in his whi^es) for his perseverance,
will be more effectual with God, than the prayers of his Mother for his change.

Your instance of his Majesty's Grandfather, your grand King Henry the fourth
is not so apposite, or fit for your purpose. He gained his Crown by turning
himself toward his people, you would persuade his Majesty to turn from his
people, and to cast away his possibilities of restitution, that is, to cut off
a natural leg, and take one of wood. Plu^rch.


To the tears of his Mother you add P. 77. 78. The just commendation of K.
Charles.
the blood of his Father, whom you justly style happy, and say most truly of
him, that he preferred the Catholic Faith before his Crown, his liberty, his
life, and whatsoever was most dear unto him. This faith was formerly rooted in
his heart by God, not secretly and invisibly in the last moments of his life to
unite him to the Roman Catholic Church, but openly during his whole Reign, all
which time he lived in the bosom of the true Catholic Church. Yet you are so
extremely It is gross imp^dence to feign that he dyed a Roman Catholic.
partial to your seif that you affirm that he died invisibly a Member of your
Roman Catholic Church, as it is by you contre-distinguished to the rest of the
Christian world. An old pious fraud, or artifice of yours, learned from
Machiavel, to gain credit to your Religion by all means, either true or false;
but contrary to his own profession at his death, contrary to the express
knowledge of all that were present at his murder. Upon a vain presumption,
that, Talem nisi vestra Ecclesia nulla pareret filium. And because you are not
able to produce one living witness, you cite St. Austin to no purpose to prove
that the elect before they are converted, do belong invisibly to the Church;
Yea and before they were born also. But St. Austine neither said nor thought,
that after they are converted they make no visible profession, or profess the
contrary to that which they believe. Seek not thus to adorn your particular
Church, not with borrowed but with stolen Saints, Whom all the world know to
have been none of yours. What Faith he professed living, he confirmed dying;
In the Communion of the Church of England he lived, and in that Communion at
his death he commended his soul into the hands of God his Savior. That which
The Authors confession confutes his demonstration, that Protestants have no
faith.
you have confessed here concerning King Charles, will spoil your former
demonstration, that the Protestants have neither Church nor Faith.

But you confess no more in particular here, than I have heard some of your
famous Roman Doctors in this City acknowledge to be true in general; And no
more than that which the Bishop of Chalcedon (a man that cannot be suspected of
partiality on our side,) has affirmed and published in two of his Books to the
world in Print; That Protestantibus credentibus, etc. persons living in the
Communion of the Protestant Church, if they endeavor to l^arn the truth, and
are not able to attain unto it, but hold it implicitly in the preparation of
their minds, and are ready to receive it when God shall be pleased to reveal it
(which all good Protestants and all good Christians are) they neither want
Church, nor Faith, nor Salvation. Mark these words well. They have neither
Church, nor Faith, say you; If they be thus qualified (as they all are) they
want neither Church, nor Faith, nor Salvation, says he.

Lastly, Sir, to let us see, that your His intelligence as good in Heaven (...)
upon Earth.
intelligence is as good in Heaven as it is upon Earth, and that you know both
who are there, and what they do, you tell us, That the Crown and Conquest,
which his late Majesty gained by his sufferings, was pro^ured by the
intercession of his Grandmother Queen Mary. We should be the apter to believe
this, if you were able to make it appear, that all the Saints in Heaven do know
all the particular necessities of all their posterity upon Earth. St. Austin
makes the matter much more doubtful than you, that is the least of his
Assertion, or rather to be plainly false; fa^endum Aug. de ^ra pro mort^s. c.
15.
est nescire quidem ^ortuos quid hic agatur. But with presumptions you did
begin your Dedication, and with presumptions you end it. In the mean time, till
you can make that appear, we observe, that neither Queen Mary's constancy in
the Roman Catholic No faith sufficient armor against bloody attempts.
Faith, nor Henry the Fourths change to the Roman Catholic Faith, could save
them from a bloody end. Then by what warrant do you impute King Charles his
sufferings to his error in Religion? Be your own Judge.

Heu quanta de spe decidimus! Alas! The Author much fallen from his former
charity in seeking the reunion of Christendom.
from what hopes are we fallen! Pardon our error, that we have mistaken you so
long. You have heretofore pretended your self to be a moderate person, and one
that seriously endeavored the reuniting of Christendom by a fair
Accommodation. The widest wounds are closed up in time, and strange Plants by
Inoculation are incorporated together and made one; And is there no way to
close up the wounds of the Church, and to unite the disagreeing members of the
same mystical body? Why were Caleb and Joshua only admitted into the Land of
promise, whilst the carcasses of the rest perished in the Wilderness, but
only because they had been Peacemakers in a time of Schism? Well fare our
learned and ingenuous Countryman St. Clara, who is altogether as perspicacious
as your self, but much more charitable. You tell us to our grief, that there is
no accommodation to be expected; that Cardinal P. 204.
Richelieu was too good a Christian, and too good a Catholic, to have any
such thought; that the one Religion is true, the other false, and that there is
no society between light and darkness. This is plain dealing, to tell us what
we must trust to. No Peace is to be expected from you, unless we will come unto
you upon our knees, with the words of the Prodigal Child in our mouths, Father
forgive us, we have sinned against Heaven, and against thee. Is not this rare
Courtesy? If we will submit to your will in all things, you will have no
longer difference with us. So we might come to shake a worse Church by the
hand, than that which we were separated from.

If you could be contented to wave your last four hundred years determinations,
The way to a gener^l Accommodation.
or if you liked them for your selves, yet not to obtrude them upon other
Churches; If you could rest satisfied with your old Patriarchal power, and your
Principium unit at is, or Primacy of Order, much good might be expected from
free Councils, and Conferences from moderate persons; And we might yet live in
Hope to see an Union, if not in all Opinions, yet in Charity, and all necessary
points of saving truth, between all Christians; to see the Eastern and Western
Chur^hes join hand in hand, and sing, Ecce quam bonum and quam jucundum est
habitare fratres in unum; Behold how good and pleasant a thing it is for
brethren to dwell together in unity. But whilst you impose upon us daily new
Articles of Faith, and urge rigidly, what you have unadvisedly determined, we
dare not sacrifice Truth to Peace, nor be separated from the Gospel, to be
joined to the Roman Church; Yet in the point of our separation, and in all
things which concern either doctrine or discipline, we profess all due
obedience and submission to the judgment and definitions of the truly
Catholic Church; Lamenting with all our hearts the present condition of
Christendom, which renders an Ecumenical Council, if not impossible (men's
judgments may be had, where their persons cannot) yet very difficult, wishing
one, as general as might be, and (until God send such an Opportunity)
endeavoring to conform our selves in all things, both in Credendis, and
Agendis, to whatsoever is uniform in the belief or practice, in the doctrine or
discipline of the Universal Church; And lastly, holding an Actual Communion
with all the divided parts of the Christian world, in most things, and in voto,
according to our desires, in all things.

FINIS.

