NEW EXPERIMENTS, AND OBSERVATIONS, Made upon the ICY NOCTILUCA.

Imparted in a Letter to a Friend living in the Country.

To which is annexed A Chemical Paradox.

By the Honorable ROBERT BOIL, Fellow of the Royal Society.

LONDON, Printed by R. E. for B. Took, at the Ship in St. Paul's Churchyard.
1681/2.

AN ADVERTISEMENT OF THE PUBLISHER TO THE READER.
THose, who have published some former Tracts of this Honorable Author's, have
made their Complaints, That his Writings have not met with the same Candor and
Ingenuity from all Writers: For though some have very civilly mentioned his
Name in those Experiments, Observations, and Phenomenon, which they have
borrowed from His Writings; yet others have vendicated that to themselves,
which was none of their own; for having lighted their Candle at his Torch, and
raised some Superstructures upon those Foundations he had laid, they have made
no mention of him at all; in which matter the Sincerity of Philosophers is not
a little required.

It Is known, That Mr. Boil was the First Inventer of that Pneumatick Engine,
or Air-Pump, called from Him, Machina Boiliana; the Figure and many of the uses
whereof he has described in his Tract entitled, New Physico-Mechanical
Experiments concerning the Spring and Weight of the Air, (and in the
Continuation of it;) which Book, being Translated into Latin, and dispersed
into Foreign Parts, has given occasion to Transmarine Virtuosi to make Essays
(not altogether unsuccessful) concerning the Fabricating of the like Engines;
though none of their Tracts upon that Subject have equaled the Original. In
like manner it is highly probable that his Dissertations concerning
Phosphorus's, and his free Distribution of several Parcels of that Luminous
Substance, have excited others to descant upon the same Subject.

But that it may justly appear, That the Honorable Author shines only by his
own Light, and has not any thing mutuatitious in the following Treatise, the
Reader is to be advertised, That this Tract had much earlier come abroad, if,
after I had received the Whole, even to the last Sheet in 1681. that so the
English Edition, and my Latin Version thereof (wherewith the Noble Author was
willing to gratify the Curious in Foreign Parts) might be carried on
together, I had not been by long Sickness, and diverse unfavourable and
unexpected ^ircumstances, obliged to retain it some Months in my Hands.

Which I am the more troubl^d at, because I find, that my necessitated Delay
has given Opportunity to the Publication of some Experiments about
Noctiluca's. But the Virtuosi, who have the Honor to be acquainted with the
Noble Author of this Book, and have seen the last Summer and Autumn diverse of
the Chief Experiments made, which are mentioned therein, will easily believe,
that the Author needed not to borrow any thing from those Specimens which have
been lately published by an ingenious Man about Noctiluca's; which, beside that
they contain but very few Phenomenon, or Trials coincident with His, were so
far from affording him any Information, that (to be sure to be no Borrower) he
never would to this day read any one of them, or hear them read. And it
appears, by the Close of the Aerial Noctiluca, presented in Print to the Royal
Society, toward the end of the Year 1680. that he then knew and had practiced
several other Ways of making Noctiluca's, than That, which he Then, and before
any other Man, imparted to the World.

The Usefulness of the ensuing Discoveries and Reflections will be best judged
of by discerning Readers, who therefore need not to be previously informed
thereof by me.

THE PREFACE.
SIR,
THe very kind Reception, you were pleased to give those Papers about the
AERIAL NOCTILUCA, that I addressed to you about the beginning of the last
Winter, does not only invite me, but in a manner oblige me to impart to you
some Trials, that I made, after I had sent you the others, about the same kind
of Phosphorus; to which you may now be pleased to annex them, by way of
Continuation, or Appendix. But that being true, which is noted by Lucretius,
where he prettily says, That -- Res accendunt lumina rebus, you will not think
it strange, that if this Observation holds in other things, it should
particularly take place in Luminous things themselves: and therefore, without
any further Preamble, I shall tell you, That whilst my Occasions permitted me
to stay in London, I was willing to try, whether I could carry on somewhat
further that which had already been not unsuccessfully begun. And accordingly I
caused to be prepared and distilled four or five several Materials, which I
thought the Curious, especially those addicted to Chemistry, would wish to have
had Trials made upon, and would perhaps blame me, if I had omitted to employ.
But those Materials, not answering what was desired, we made choice of another
or two, which I forbear to name, for certain Reasons, and particularly for
this, because they are to be found but in very few Places, and perhaps would
not have served my turn, if I had not luckily procured them in a Season whose
Dryness continued almost to a Wonder.

From these Materials sometimes, and sometimes also from the (...) Residence of
Urine, we ob^ ^ow and then some of the Aerial Noctiluca, such as That you have
hitherto received Accounts of; but more frequently a Nobler sort of Phosphorus,
about which I now proceed to impart to you some Observations, as I did, without
any curious Method or Ornament, set them down from time to time as I happened to
make or remember them. And, to facilitate the Pardon I beg of you, for having
omitted some Experiments that perhaps you will wish I had made, I must acquaint
you, That being by some Necessary Occasions enforced to leave London, for a
much longer time than I have done for several Years last past, I have been
obliged to make most of the following Trials in a small Village, where I yet
am, and where, being unaccommodated with Furnaces, Instruments, and other
Chemical and Mechanical Conveniences, for making and varying Experiments, you
receive an Account not of all the Trials, I would have made, (some of the Chief
of my Catalogue remaining still unattempted) but of all Those I could make in
my present Circumstances. However, such as they are, I think not fit to delay
any longer the acquainting you with them; and therefore have ordered them to be
gathered into one small Collection of Memoirs, to which Paper I have given the
Title of The Glacial or Icy Noctiluca, not only to distinguish it from the
Aerial one, whereof you have already had an Account; but for another Reason,
that you will quickly meet with in the little Tract it self, from whose Perusal
I must not now any longer detain you.

An APPENDIX To the AERIAL NOCTILUCA.
SECT. I.
THE shining Matter, contained in our best Phials, being partly wasted in
Experiments, and partly given away, I thought fit to try, whether by the help
of Heat and other Motion, our want might not be somewhat supplied, till more
Noctilucous Matter could be prepared.

Experiment I.
In pursuit of this Design, I took an old Phial that had been long laid aside
as useless, because the Matter had been poured out of it into a clearer and
smaller Glass, and having held that side of this Phial, to which I perceived
some Feculent Matter stuck, near the Fire, till it had conceived a considerable
degree of warmth, I removed it into a dark place, and as I expected, found it
to shine, and that Vividly enough, whilst it retained a Competent degree of
heat; and when it cooled too much, the Light ceased with the Agitation, that as
a Cause or a Condition accompanied it. But if afterward the Phial were again
held to the Fire as before, the shining Power would be excited, and the
Splendour would continue a pretty while. But after some days or weeks (for I
remember not which,) this Disposition to be made Luminous by external heat, was
utterly lost.

Experiment II.
Having also taken notice of a little Feculent Stuff, that stuck to the inside
of the Glass, that had contained some of our Noctilucal Matter, I imagined,
that though it would not shine in the dark by the contact of the Air, to which
it had been too long accustomed; yet when once that dispirited or disanimated
Superficies, (if I may so call it,) that had lain exposed to the Air, was
removed, the more Internal part of the Matter might not be destitute of a
shining Power. I carefully scraped off, the outermost Surface, and rubbing a
little of the rest with my finger upon my hand, I found it to shine well
enough. And though the Matter, being once more left exposed to the Air, did
lose in its Superficial parts the Virtue of shining in the dark; yet those
parts being taken off, the remaining Matter (being rubbed) did not appear
destitute of a Luminous Quality, so that it seemed, that though the Air did
after a while, mortify as it were and spoil the Superficial parts that were
exposed to its immediate Contact, yet this vitiated Surface served for a kind
of Cover or Fence to the Matter that lay beneath it, and kept it from
Evaporating or Spending those Spirituous or Subtle parts, on whose Account it
was capable of becoming Luminous.

Experiment III.
And as I had observed on other occasions, that Liquors abounding in Tenacious
parts, though the Liquors did not appear opacous or Feculent, would leave
sticking to the insides of the Glasses, that contained them, somewhat, that
though generally not perceived, because not very manifest, was by some other
ways that I had tried discoverable: Having, as I was saying, observed this, in
some other Cases, I suspected, that even in a Phial that had formerly contained
some of our shining Substance, though it seemed to have been well emptied, and
to have no gross Feculency adhering to it, there might stick somewhat, which
though unobserved by the naked Eye, might be made visible to the naked Eye, by
heat or motion. In pursuance of this Conjecture, I took this Glass, and having
cracked it into Fragments, that it might be put into the neck of a Phial of a
convenient shape and size; and having well stopped the Vessel and removed it into
a dark place, we there shook it, and had the pleasure to see, not only that
Light was readily produced by the motion excited in the justling of the parts
one against another, but that by reason of the various position of the
Fragments of Glass, some looking upwards, some downwards, some to the right
hand, and some to the left, the light seemed to be Vibrated every way, with a
very delightful Vividness. This Production of a kind of blazing Light was often
repeated with these broken pieces of Glass, and if the Phial were heated, the
effect seemed more quick and considerable: And (if I misremember not,) by only
warming the Phial, without shaking it, a Light would be produced.

Experiment IV.
Afterward having beaten some of the Glass into such small pieces as were
capable of passing through the neck of a Glass-Egg with a flat bottom, that it
might stand upright of it self, we Hermetically sealed up the neck, to try
whether by this hindering the included Matter from exhaling or transpiring, we
could keep the beaten Glass always fit to exhibit the Phenomenon; but we found
not the event answer our desires, for after no long time, we could no more
produce any Light in our Sealed Vessel, though an unlucky Accident happening in
one of our last Tryal^, keeps me from being fully satisfied of the
unpracticableness of the thing des^gned.

Experiment V.
In the Printed Tract of the Aerial Noctiluca, there is mention made of some
Liquor that was Hermetically Sealed up in a bolt-Glass, that was not great, to
try whether by this way we could for any long time preserve the shining faculty
of that Liquor wherein it was already exceeding faint, and not to be excited
but by a considerable degree of heat, and a vehement agitation of the Vessel it
self. This Sealed Glass having been left in the corner of a Window, for what
was judged a competent time, we yesternight approached the Vessel by degrees to
the Fire, and shaking it from time to time till the included Liquor had
acquired a considerable degree of heat. Then removing it to a dark place, and
shaking the Vessel somewhat strongly, we perceived that the disposition the
Liquor had to shine, was very much impaired, but not quite abolished. For there
would from time to time, upon the rude agitation it was put into, appear little
portions of Matter that looked prettily, and shone very Vividly, like sparks of
Fire; and some of these appeared in the Spherical part of the Glass, and some
in the Neck. Some of them seemed as it were fixed to their first Station, and
others moved upwards and downwards, and most of them continued some time to
shine a pretty while before they disappeared, and when they vanished, few of
them did so by degrees, but each luminous speck, when it had lasted out its
time, lost its whole Light at once.

SECT. II.
THE new Liquid Phosphorus, I lately mentioned to have been made, since the
publishing of the Aeri^l Noctiluca, was poured into a large Phial, that might
contain (by our guess) ten or twelve times as much as was put into it, so that
the shining Matter, having so much Air included with it, might thereby be
assisted to diversifie at least some of the Phenomena afforded by former
Noctilucas.

Observation I.
And accordingly I observed in the first place, that though the shining steams
filled the whole cavity of the large Glass, that was untaken up by the Liquor
and the residence, and this lighter flame continued much longer at once, than
any we have hitherto mentioned, for it continued Vivid several Days and Nights
together, without ever unstopping the Phial to give it fresh Air. And, if I
misremember not, I observed it to do so for about a week, before my occasions
hindered me from observing it any longer.

Observation II.
I sometimes took notice with pleasure, that some Exhalations or Vapors, that
appeared considerably luminous, seemed to roll to and fro, like little Clouds
or Aggregates of Smoke in the Cavity of the Vessel, though it seemed difficult
to determine what should give them, and maintain in them, such a motion.

Observation III.
The bigness of the Glass being considerable, it happened that sometimes when I
went into the darkened place where I kept it, so much luminous Matter would make
a surprising show, but though its extent were far greater, yet its intensity
did not much exceed that of the Light afforded by the Noctilucas of the first
sort, as for distinctions sake, those may be called that are mentioned in the
Printed Account. Only this I often took notice of, that, in case I shook the
Matter gently, the Light would appear much more vivid. and, as it were, would
flash in and about the surface of the Liquor where it was Contiguous to the
Air, than it did elsewhere. And this splendour was such, that if it had been
lasting, I thought it would have made our Phosphorus useful for considerable
purposes.

Observation IV.
When after having so many Days kept this Glass stopped, at last it would not
longer shine of it self, we supposed it to be reduced to the condition of a
Phosphorus of the first sort, and accordingly found, that upon the removal of
the Stoppel, and ingress of fresh Air, the Cavity would in a moment be filled
with fumes that looked white in an enlightened place, but luminous in a dark one,
and (probably by reason of the quantity of the Air contained in so capacious a
Glass) the light usually continued much longer than 'twas wont to do in
Noctilucas of the first sort.

Observation V.
Being desirous to try, whether this more vigorous Matter, if it were kept so
exactly stopped, that none of the Luminous Vapors could exhale, would not last
very long, I put near two spoonfuls of the Liquor with some of the sediment
into a bolt-Glass (with a flat bottom that it might stand without leaning)
capable of containing in all near twice as much, this Glass being Hermetically
Sealed, the included Liquor continued to shine without any external help either
of Air or Heat, for about six Days and Nights, but then it gave over shining,
nor would be made luminous again by moderate shaking.

Observation VI.
After having poured out some more of the Liquor and Sediment that had been
kept in the great Phial, formerly mentioned, into a smaller Phial, to make a
Present of it to a Virtuoso, the remaining Matter, having now a greater
proportion of Air included with it, was very apt to be put into a Luminous
agitation, if I may so call it, and would emit Exhalations, that would not only
fill the Cavity of the Glass, but manifestly move to and fro in it after a
somewhat odd manner. And being one Night willing to give a Lady, and some other
Company, the divertisement of a new Phenomenon, after having opened the Phial,
and then having stopped it again, I shook it, and turned it in such a way, that
much the greatest part of Liquor having been before poured out, the residence
was as it were spread over the inside of the Glass, to which its Particles
stuck, because there wanted Liquor enough to wash them down: By which means,
those little portions of the Sediment being not covered, as they were wont to
be with Water, but exposed to the immediate Contact of the Air, shone much more
vividly than the Luminous Exhalations were wont to do, and the light being
tremulous and twinkling, as well as brisk, they seemed to emulate so many
little Stars in a Cloudless but dark Night, and continued this Scintillation
longer than one would have expected, to the no small delight of the beholders,
for whose sake the Experiment was several times repeated with success.

NEW PHENOMENON Exhibited by an ICY NOCTILUCA, OR, Solid Self-shining Substance.
SECT. III.
IN the Address of the foregoing Appendix to the Aerial Noctiluca, I intimated
the Reason, why I did not think fit to give you a more particular account of
the Materials I employed in prosecuting my design, of making better qualified
Noctilucas. And therefore I shall not for the present trouble you with the
mention of proceedings, that for want of some things seldom procurable, you
would not where you live, be able to imitate: But shall save you and my self
the trouble of a further preamble.

Having then by processes, not unlike that I annexed to the Close of the Aerial
Noctiluca, obtained a Self-shining Substance of a Consistent form; I proceed to
give you some account of what I have observed about it, and tried with it,
which will take up the less time to do, because many things belonging to it in
common with the shining Liquor, with which I have already entertained you,
those will be the fewer that belong peculiarly to the Self-shining Matter,
endowed with a Consistent form.

About which it may be proper to take notice of some affections, that seem more
immediately to belong to the Substance it self, than most of the things do that
are to follow.

Some Qualities of the Noctiluca it self.
1. And first, Though it usually came over in distillation in the form of
diverse little Grains, or Fragments, differing for the most part from one
another, both in bigness (some being of the size of Grains of Corn, and others
of Pease, or large Cherry-Stones) and also as to their shapes, which most
commonly were irregular, as Concretions are wont to be, that are casually
produced, yet when the Distillation was carried on prosperously, we obtained
the desired Matter in greater Lumps, sometimes as large as small Beans, and
sometimes at least three or four times as large, but not proportionably thick.

2. These Lumps whether small or great, were Colorless; and usually when they
were held against the Light, transparent; so that diverse Bodies placed beyond
them at a convenient distance, might be plainly seen through them. And some of
the bigger appeared so like such Fragments of Ice, as being thin, are
oftentimes very clear, and almost quite destitute of manifest Bubbles; that
because of this great resemblance, and for distinction sake, I thought it not
amiss to call our consistent Self-shining Substance, the Icy or Glacial
Noctiluca (and for variety Phosphorus) which name I chose to give it, rather
than that of Crystalline, because this Epithet is not unfrequently given to
every Diaphanous Liquor, as well as to Transparent Solids. But when I said,
that our Noctiluca was Transparent and Colorless, I meant it only in reference
to what usually appeared. For whether it were any real difference in the
Texture or constitution of the Body it self, or the effect of some casual
junctures of Circumstances, I am not sure; but this occurred to us, that
sometime, especially by Candlelight, some lesser Fragments appeared not
Diaphanous, nor always either Colorless, nor of the same Color. For sometimes
the Matter looked Reddish, sometimes of a faint, but pleasing Blew, and
sometimes too, of a Color to which I cannot easily assign a known Name.

3. Our Icy Noctiluca or Phosphorus, is manifestly heavier in Specie than
common Water, in which being put, it readily sinks to the bottom, and quietly
lies there.

4 The Ice like Body, though consistent, is not hard; being far less so, than
common Ice; but yet it is not so soft but that it is brittle, and will more
easily be broken in pieces by the pressure of ones Fingers, than receive shapes
from them; and yet by him that goes somewhat warily to work, it may be spread
upon a solid Body, almost like the unmelted Tallow of a Candle.

5. The Consistent Phosphorus is fusible enough. For though in the Air it will
not be brought to melt, without some difficulty and waste, yet by the help of
hot Liquors, and even of Water it self, it may with a little care and dexterity
be brought to melt, which is an Observation of good use; because by means of
fusion, several Fragments (if the Matter be pure enough) may be brought to run
into one Lump, and in that condition may both be the better preserved, and
become fit to be applied to some considerable uses, which cannot so well, if at
all, be made of lesser, though numerous Fragments.

6. This Glacial Noctiluca is, as to sense, cold, but of a texture that
disposes it to be easily agitated, and by agitation become incalescent, as will
appear hereafter. When this Solid Noctiluca is held in the free Air, though
perhaps its superficies be wet, it affords a very vivid Light, usually
surpassing That of the Aerial Noctiluca, and this Light seems to proceed from,
if not also to reside in the Body it self.

7. When our Icy Phosphorus is taken out of its receptacle, and exposed to the
immediate contact of the free Air, it usually emits a wonderful deal of Smoke,
discernable by the Light of the Body it ascends from; and this plentiful
emission of Effluviums usually lasts as long as the Phosphorus is kept in the
Air.

8. But it is pleasant to observe, and deserves to be considered, That as soon
as it is plunged in Water, so as to be quite covered with that Liquor, it ceases
not only to Smoke as before, but to shine, as if a thoroughly kindled Coal were
suddenly quenched in Water. And if it were not for this, our Noctiluca would
effluviate so fast, that it would be quickly wasted; whereas the Water, fencing
it from the contact of the Air, keeps it from spending it self as formerly, and
yet does really make but a seeming and temporary extinction of this Anomalous
Fire. For as soon as it is again taken out of the Water (though it have lain
there perhaps a great while) it falls to shine again, even whilst it is yet
dropping wet.

9. And I have sometimes had the pleasure to observe, that when I had so large
a Piece of Noctiluca, that I could conveniently hold one half of it under the
Surface of the Water, and the other half above it, whilst the emers'd part
afforded no Light, the extant part shone Vividly.

Having thus mentioned most of the qualities that belong to the Noctiluca it
self, I shall now proceed to the Phenomenon, my Trials on it, or with it
afforded me, without confining my self to any solicitous order, since my
Circumstances permitted me not to keep one in making those trials. But before I
descend to other Particulars, It will not, I think, be amiss to take notice of
a few, that, having more affinity than others with the last mentioned quality
of our Phosphorus, seem proper to be annexed to what has been delivered of it.

OBSERVATIONS About The WATER Wherein the NOCTILUCA Was kept.
SECT. IV.
BEcause I guessed that the Water wherein the Noctiluca had been long kept
covered, to fence it from the Air, though it did not manifestly dissolve the
Mass, yet might be impregnated at least with the more Saline, and on that
account resoluble parts of it, I thought fit to make a few trials upon this
Liquor.

Experiment I.
And First, I found that it had a strong and penetrant taste, that seemed near
of kin to that of Sea Salt, but was more piercing, as if Brine were mingled
with Spirit of Salt, and it relished also somewhat of Vitriol.

Experiment II.
Being put into a small concave Vessel of Refined Silver upon lighted Coals and
Ashes, it evaporated but very slowly, and would not be brought to shoot into
Crystals, nor yet to afford a dry Salt, but coagulated into a Substance
sometimes like a Gelly, and sometimes, as to consistence, like whites of Eggs;
which Substance was easily melted by heat.

Experment III.
When this Substance was kept a while on a hotter Fire, it only boiled at
first, but soon after began, as I guessed it would, to make a crackling noise;
wherein, this was remarkable and pretty, that the Explosions were accompanied
with flashes of Fire and light, which if they were small, were generally very
Blew, like the Flames of Sulphur, but more Vivid, and sometimes also more Blew;
but the greater cracks, whose noise was considerable, were wont to appear of a
Yellow color and very Luminous. And these Phenomenon did not only appear
whilst the Matter was Boiling over the Fire, but a pretty while after the
Vessel was taken off and held in the Air.

Experiment IV.
If before the Coagulated Matter were too far wasted by the heat, it were
suffered to cool a little, it appeared to have acquired a consistence like
melted Rosin, or rather still Bird-Lime, for it would draw out into Threeds of,
perhaps, a Foot or more in length; and having held one of these Threeds to the
Flame of a Candle, it did not take Fire, but melted into little Globul's, as
capillary Threeds of Glass are in like circumstances wont to do. And having
made some of them stick to the wieck of a Candle, toward the bottom of the
Flame, they Colored the lower part of the flame quite round with a very fine
Blew, which lasted much longer than one would have Expected.

Experiment V.
This glutinous Substance had, by the Action of the Fire, acquired an odd kind
of strong smell, almost like That of Garlic, and being left all night in the
Air, attracted to it (to use the Vulgar Phrase) the moisture of it, exceeding
fast, being dissolved in a good part into a Liquor almost as strong as Spirit
of Salt.

Experiment VI.
Putting this Substance again over the Fire, as before, it appeared to be more
fixed than one would have looked for, for though there were not so much as a
Spoonful of it, yet it continued Boiling for a great while, and afforded a
Multitude of shining Explosions, whereof some made a considerable noise, and
gave notable flashes of Light, which seemed to be made by condensed and
agitated Fumes, suppressed by the somewhat hardened Surface of the Matter, and
kindled in their eruption into the Air, into which some parts of these Fumes,
that were not kindled, escaped in the form of a Smoke, whose smell was very
strong and rank, but of a peculiar kind. To which I shall add, what seemed
strange, that though oftentimes two, and sometimes more slashes appeard at
once, yet so small a quantity of Matter continued to afford them for almost an
hour together, and probably would have done it longer, but that the late time
of the Night obliged me to go to Bed, before the Experiment was finished.

What Liquors would, or would not dissolve, the Icy Noctiluca.
SECT. V.
AMong other ways of investigating the Nature of our Icy Phosphorus, I thought
fit to try, whether or no it would be dissolved in some Liquors of differing
kinds, hoping, that if it would be so in any of them, it might somewhat assist
us to guess at its Texture.

Experiment I.
We found then by trial, That common Water would not in the Cold dissolve it,
though the Liquor was thereby Impregnated, as when Crocus Metallorum, or Glass
of Antimony, being infused in Wine or Water, the Menstruum will be Impregnated
by its Emetick Particles, and yet the Bulk, Shape, and Color of the Cro^us, or
the Glass, will not thereby be visibly diminished or altered.

Experiment II.
Afterward we put a Grain or two of our Lucid Matter into a little Urinous
Spirit of Sal Ammoniac, but it seemed not to make any conflict with it, nor
manifestly to work upon it, though, to give the Liquor time to make a Solution,
we left them together for several days. But as soon as we had poured aside the
Spirit, it appeared that it had not by any contrariety destroyed the power of
the Noctiluca, which began readily to shine as formerly, and yet, might be
immediately suppressed again, by suffering the Liquor to cover it as before;
but when we had, by keeping the Phial for some time in a moderate heat,
Impregnated the Liquor with it, this Liquor, being then dropped into Water, had a
like effect with That mentioned in the Experiment of Impregnated Spirit of Wine.

Experiment III.
Seeing a Volatile and Urinous Salt would not work sensibly upon our
Phosphorus, we thought fit to try, what Corrosive Liquors would do, and
accordingly, we put a Grain or two of our Splendent Matter into a very small
Phial, wherein was a little Oil of Vitriol, that Menstruum appearing, in many
cases, more Corrosive, than other vulgar Acids, but neither did this Menstruum
dissolve our Icy Noctiluca in the Cold, and therefore putting it in some heat,
we found, that though it did not manifestly dissolve the shining Matter, yet
the warmed Oil made it melt, and appear at least for the time a fluid Body; in
which this seemed to me remarkable, that this so fugitive a Substance should be
ponderous enough to lie at the bottom of Oil of Vitriol, which is one of the
heaviest Fluids we yet know, except Quicksilver, which many will not allow to
be a Liquor. What we did with this melted Noctiluca was not unpleasant to see,
and will, God permitting, be hereafter mentioned.

Experiment IV.
Afterward we put a small Fragment of our Icy Phosphorus into Aquafortis, and
though we kept it in that Menstruum, two or three Days, and set the Vial that
contained them for many hours in a warm place, (the Chimney Corner) yet we
found the Matter so little altered, as to its visible appearance, that we
doubted whether the Liquor had dissolved any sensible quantity of it.

Having tried Saline Menstruums upon our Icy Phosphorus, I thought fit to try
Oils, and also Spirit of Wine, that is reckoned by Chemists to be of great
affinity with them.

Experiment V.
Whereupon I put a little of our Noctiluca into some Oil of Turpentine, which
not dissolving it in the Cold, the small Vial that contained it, was left all
Night in the Chimny upon warm Ashes. But though the next Day none of the
Phosphorus appeared any longer in the Glass, yet we could not perceive by two
or three differing Trials, that the Oil was much altered by it, and
particularly I observed that though the Glass were unstopt, and kept so for a
while, yet the Ingress of the Air did not produce any sensible light, nor did
we perceive the upper part of the Glass to be full of white Fumes, as is usual
in diverse other Liquors Impregnated with our Noctiluca, when they are unstopt.

SECT. VI.
IT has rendered the Experiments made with the Aerial Noctiluca, much less
acceptable, than otherwise they would have been, to the delicate sort of
Speculators, especially to Ladies, that the Light they produced was accompanied
with a very unpleasant smell, that issued out of the Phial whenever it was
unstopped, to let in the Air. But by the help of our Icy Noctiluca, I found a
way to prevent this ungrateful concomitant of our Artificial Light. But not
being discouraged by the bad success of the forementioned Experiment, I hoped
an Aromatical Oil might do, what Subtle Oils had not done.

Experiment I.
And therefore having in a very small Phial put about a Grain of Noctilucal
Matter, and covered it with as much pure Essential of Cinnamon, as would swim
less than a Fingers breadth above it, we carefully stopped our little Phial, and
having warily held the bottom of it against a Fire, till the Phosphorus began
to melt, I suffered it to Cool; and then unstopping it in a dark place, had the
pleasure to see produced a Vanishing indeed, but a Vivid Light. So that by this
means I could afterward show the production of Light to the nearest Persons of
Quality, not only without offending their Noses, whilst their Eyes were
gratified, but with adding to the pleasure of a delightful Apparition, That of
a Fragrant smell. But because Oil of Cloves is more easy to be had good, than
the Oil of Cinnamon, and is also much cheaper, I tried the Experiment more fully
with That, and therefore shall proceed to give you (for an Example of Aromatic
Oils) the Phenomenon of it.

Experiment II.
We put some of our Luminous Ice into a little pure Oil of Cloves, such as the
Chemists call Essential, but found after a considerable time (no less than some
Days) that at least a good part of the Matter was undissolved, but yet the
Liquor was richly Impregnated by it, as we found by a pretty Phenomenon that
it afforded us. For the little Phial, it was kept in, being opened in a dark
place, there immediately ensued a kind of flash of Light, far more Vivid, its
small Bulk considered, than any Liquor had afforded us before. But the
brightness of this Apparition was it seems too great to be lasting, for this
Flame-like Substance usually expired in less than a Minute of an Hour,
sometimes perhaps in half that time. And there were two other Circumstances
particular enough in this Phenomenon; On^, that sometimes, especially if a
Candle were in the Room, the shining Fluid would appear of a pleasant and
somewhat surprising Bluish Color. And the Other, that the Light would cease
whilst yet there remained in the upper part of the Glass pretty Store of
Whitish Fumes, such as we have formerly often Observed in the Aerial Noctiluca
to be the usual Causes or Concomitants of Light, as if in our present case the
shining Substance preyed on, or resided in only the finer and more delicate
Particles of the Whitish Exhalations.

Experiment III.
Instead of the Oil of Cloves, we substitued some Chemical Oil of Mace, into
which we put a competent quantity of the Glacial Phosphorus; but though we
warmed the bottom of the Phial, at least as much as we judged necessary, yet,
upon the unstopping of it, there appeared no sign of Light, though the trial
was made much more than once or twice, and sometimes with favorable
Circumstances, which event was the less expected, because the Oil, made use of,
was presented me as very pure, by the same Traveller who gave me That of Cloves
newly mentioned. And because also the Warmed Phosphorus was so well
conditioned, that as soon as ever the Oil was removed, it shone with a somewhat
extraordinary Vividness.

Experiment IV.
We made also a Trial or two with Distilled and Fragrant Oil of Anniseeds, to
see, if That being an Essential Oil as Chemists speak, and being looked upon by
many as a kind of Aromatic Oil, it would better dissolve the Noctiluca, or be
Impregnated by its Luciferous parts; but we found that it neither dissolved the
Matter, nor upon the unstopping of the Phial, that contained it, did it afford
any Light, or so much as Whitish Fumes, which seemed somewhat strange, because
the Oil was very subtle, and by its aptness to Coagulate of it self, showed
that it was Genuine, and not as Chemical Oils that are Venal too frequently
(if not most commonly) are, Sophisticated.

If these two last recited Experiments prove constant, they will argue that not
every Fragrant, no, nor every Aromatical Oil, properly so called, has the like
operation upon our Noctilucal Matter, as the Oil of Cloves and Cinnamon have.

If I had had or could have procured other Essential Oils, on whose Genuineness
I could have depended, I had tried their effects upon our Phosphorus.

Experiment V.
But having no more Oils fit for my turn, I next tried whether I could dissolve
our shining Matter in Ardent Spirits, which are thought by Chemists to be of
near Consanguinity with distilled Oils; (not now to enquire, whether they do
not consist of the finer parts of the highly rarefied Oil of Bodies, united
with a great proportion of their Phlegm) and having accordingly put some of our
Icy Phosphorus into the Spirit of wine, though the Menstruum did some hundreds
of times exceed the Body 'twas to work upon, yet after diverse days, wherein it
stood in a Window, exposed to the Sun Beams, in the hottest part of the Summer,
it appeared undissolv'd at the bottom of the Liquor, and scarce sensibly
diminished. But of the separation of Spirit of Wine upon the Noctilucal Matter,
further trials will require, that more be said hereafter.

Of a way of suddenly producing Light in common Water, by the help of another,
not Luminous, Liquor.
SECT. VII.
I Come now to recite to you a Phenomenon which I presume may not displease
you. I had a hint of it from a casual Observation made by my industrious
Laborant. For having, to encourage him, allowed him for his own use some
Fragments of our Icy Noctiluca, he mingled a portion of this shining Substance
with a Spirituous Medicinal Liquor that he had prepared, by extracting several
Drugs with it, and having afterward upon some occasion or other diluted it
with Water, it afforded him a Phaenemenon, at which being surpised, he came to
acquaint me with it, bringing me withal some of the Liquor. But I thinking that
the Phenomenon did not depend upon the Peculiar Nature of the Liquor, whose
being very Compounded and high Colored made me judge it not fit for Luciferous
Experiments, but proceeded from the Vinous Spirits wherein that Liquor
abounded, I thought fit to make the Experiment with a Liquor as Colorless and
Simple as I could. The effects of such Liquors being more easy to be
discerned, and judged of, and reasoned upon. And accordingly we weighed out in
a tender Balance one Grain of our Glacial Phosphorus, wiped dry, and broken in
four or five pieces, for the easier dissolution. And to these in a Crystalline
Phial, we put a convenient quantity of highly Rectified Vinous Spirit, and
stopping the Phial close, we suffered the things contained in it, to remain for
many hours, sometimes (and indeed for the most part) in the Cold, and sometimes
in the Warm Sun, but perceived not that near a total dissolution was made of
the Noctilucal Matter by the Liquor in which it lay, even one of the lesser
Fragments appearing, as well as the others, undissolved in the bottom of it.
However, since a Body consisting of such subtle parts may communicate many of
them to a contiguous Liquor without any diminution of its Bulk, observable by
the Eye, I thought fit to try what Effects this Body had upon the Vinous Spirit.

Observation I.
And First, I Observed, that it did not manifestly discolor the Liquor, but
left it Transparent and Limpid, as before, save that there appeared some very
small Earthy Corpuscles, like Dust at the bottom of the Liquor, when being a
little shaken (to raise them) it was attentively viewed.

Observation II.
We did not Observe that, upon the unstopping of the Phial, and the restored
commerce between the inward and outward Air, there appeared any flame or
Luminous Exhalations, as is usual upon opening Phials that contain the Liquid
Aerial Noctiluca.

Observation III.
But the Phenomenon I chiefly intend to relate was This, That, having in a
dark Night dropped a little of this Impregnated Spirit into a small China Cup,
with common Water in it, though the Spirit neither in the Phial, nor in its
passage through the Air, disclosed any degree of Luminousness, yet as soon as
ever the drops came to touch the Liquor, they would be as it were kindled by
the Cold Water, and afford little flashes of Light, which was more Vivid than
the Noctiluca it self, affording a Splendour that made not only the brims of the
Cup, but diverse of the Neighboring Objects manifestly Visible, not to say
conspicuous. But these Coruscations had the property of other Lightning, to
vanish almost as soon as they appeared, nor would the Water, that produced
them, by being agitated, shine; but others might immediately be produced, by
letting fresh drops fall into the same Water, upon whose Surface they seemed to
diffuse themselves, and would sometimes leave for a little while a faintly
Luminous as it were Film or Membrane.

Observation IV.
And that it might not be thought that this accension (if I may so call it) was
produced or occasioned by any Antiperistasis, which the SchoolMen, and the
generality even of Philosophers, are pleased to fancy (whose Opinion I have in
a particular discourse examined) I thought fit to try, whether our Phenomenon
would not be produced with hot Water as well as with cold, and accordingly I
found that the Impregnated Spirit of Wine produced rather a greater than a
lesser Light in hot Water than it had done in cold.

One of my designs, I had in making this Experiment, being to examine a
conjecture I had made about the great diffusedness of the Noctilucal Matter,
the subtilty of whose Particles made me think they were not to be judged absent
where ever they were not numerous or agitated enough to be of themselves
Visible: this I say being in my thoughts, I judged it not fit to put our
Splendent Icy Matter into the Spirit of Wine at adventures. Wherefore having in
a very good Balance weighed out one Grain of our Noctiluca, (first wiped dry,)
we put to it at several times, that it might the better dissolve, above two
thousand Grains of Spirit of Wine, that would burn all away; and yet, which may
seem strange, this small quantity of Noctilucal Matter did so Impregnate all
the Liquor put upon it, that though nothing of Luminous did appear in the
Menstruum nor in any Exhalations rising from it, though the Phial were
unstopped, or the Liquor poured out of it into the Air, yet as soon as ever
'twas dropped into common Water there would be produced a Vivid Apparition of
Light, such as has been a little above described.

It seemed not very improbable, that these sudden and vanishing flashes might,
at least in great part, proceed from the quick disingagement and extrusion of
the Noctilucal Particles, made by the Water, which, diluting the Vinous Spirit,
disabled them from retaining with them the Luciferous Corpuscles. As if into
one Ounce of high rectified Spirit of Wine, you put half a Dram, or a Dram of
Camphire, the Liquor will dissolve it, without being thereby manifestly altered
as to Color or Transparency; but if you drop this solution into common Water,
the Vinous Spirits will immediately diffuse themselves into the Liquor, and let
go the Corpuscles of the Camphire, which will Float like a White Powder upon
the Surface of the Water. To this Conjecture is agreeable what upon Trial we
Observed with our Impregnated Spirit of Wine namely, that being dropped into
other, well Deflegmed Spirit of Wine, we saw no Light produced; but when it was
dropped into an Urinous Spirit of Sal Ammoniac, which seems to consist of the
Volatile Salt dissolved in the Phlegm or Aqueous Liquor, the Noctilucal
Corpuscles by this Waterish part were freed from the Vinous Spirits, almost as
much as they would have been by common Water, and did accordingly shine with
much briskness.

EXPERIMENTS Discovering a Strange SUBTILTY Of parts in the GLACIAL NOCTILUCA.
SECT. VIII.
BUT what has been above recited, is not all that I thought fit to try with the
shining Matter, that I told you we dissolved in Spirt of Wine, for after
having, as I lately recited, brought one Grain to Impregnate between four and
five Ounces of Alcohol, as the Chemists call the high Rectified Spirit of Wine,
which did at least two thousand times exceed the weight of the Noctilucal
Matter, I presumed that this very parcel of Spirit of Wine, wherein the shining
Matter was already diffused and scattered into so many thousand Corpuscles, as
sufficed to Impregnate all the Liquor, would yet communicate to a good quantity
of Water Particles enough to make it shine, when agitated, wherefore when we
had weighed out in a very trusty Balance one Dram of our Impregnated Spirit of
Wine, we mixed it with, and shook it in as much fair Water as we thought fit,
(but not all at once) that is till we had to our Dram of Spirit of Wine, put
above fifty times its weight of Water, and that Alcohol it self weighing at
least two thousand times as much as the Noctilucal Matter, that Impregnated it,
it follows, (though it may seem strange it should be true,) that the single
Grain of Icy Noctiluca was able to Diffuse it self through, and Impregnate full
a hundred thousand Grains of Liquor, so as (when duly ordered) to make it
Luminous. For having presently after the last Water was put into the Glass,
stopped the Vessel Close with a good Cork, and shaken it a little in a dark
place, the whole Phial appeared to be full of Light, which though it were not
more than ordinary intense, yet by reason of the Bulk of the Liquor made a
glorious show, and discovered diverse of the Neighboring Objects. And after we
had done shaking that Phial, not only the upper part, which was filled with
Exhalations and Vapors, shined like those other Liquid Phosphorusses formerly
mentioned, but what was not observed in Them, the Water it self had a
Luminousness, though of an inferior degree, of its whole Mass, which yet will
not keep me from thinking of some expedient that may satisfy those who may
suspect, as I did, that some of this Light proceeded from the Exhalations that
shined through that Diaphanous Water, though this did not seem the only nor
perhaps the chief cause of its appearing Luminous, since when the Glass was
shaken, the whole Mass of the Liquor appeared to shine, so that we could
plainly see through the sides of the Vessel, the Conical Figure of its bottom.

After this, I prosecuted the Experiment a good way further, increasing the
proportion of the Water to fresh Impregnated Spirit, and I found (what perhaps
you will think strange) that one part of the Noctiluca, being first dissolved
in Alcohol of Wine, and afterward briskly shaken into a convenient quantity of
Water, rendered Luminous as much Liquor, as upon Calculation amounted to four
hundred thousand times its Weight. And this did not seem to proceed from the
Irradiation of the Luminous Corpuscles or Exhalations, shining in the empty
space at the top of the Glass; because the Phial was so near filled with
Liquor, that there was but little room left for Vapors; and because also, the
Vapors, that did play in that space, shined but very faintly, and when the
Glass was at rest much less than a minute of an hour, the Light would reach but
a little way downwards in the Water, and yet was there so dim, as to be scarce
discernable. Whereas in our Experiment, not only the agitated Liquor appeared
Luminous throughout, but the Light was brisk enough, insomuch that the Conical
Figure of the bottom of the Glass was clearly visible by the help of it.

But lest some should think, that if this Experiment had been further and
further prosecuted, the Luminousness would have still extended to greater and
greater quantities of Water, I shall add, that when I increased the proportion
of this Liquor to the Noctilucal Matter, to be dispersed through it, by putting
in near three or four ounces of Water, more than I guessed would be convenient,
the Luminous Matter seemed to be as it were drowned or lost in so much Liquor,
for though we gave it much more agitation, than had in the former Experiments
been needful to produce Light, yet no Luminousness at all appeared in the
mixture. Wherefore, taking some fresh Spirit, and shaking it into such a
quantity of Water, as I thought it might serve to Impregnate, I found by
Supputation, that the Luminous Mass of Liquor, thereby produced, amounted to no
less, but a pretty deal more, than five hundred thousand times the Weight of
the Noctilucal Matter dispersed through it, which is a visible expansion, very
much greater, than, I think, has been hitherto observed in any Corporeal
Substance dissolved in a visible Liquor, since it four times exceeds that
expansion of Cochineal, which I many years since imparted to the ingenious, and
which several of them have in their Writings, been pleased to take notice of,
as a prodigious thing; one part of the Cochineal, ordered as I there mention,
having in that Experiment produced a discernable Color in an hundred twenty
five thousand parts of Water. To what has been said, I shall add these three
Circumstances, which may increase the strangeness of the Experiment.

1. The first is, that I here only delivered the manifest Impregnation of the
Water it self, which is a gross and tangible Liquor, by the dispersed Particles
of the Noctilucal Matter, but have made no estimate of the incomparably greater
expansion of the Light, that from the Matter included in the Phial, illuminated
the Ambient Air, to a considerable distance from it, though by reason the
darkened Room was not great, I was disabled to make an Estimate how far the
Enlightened Sphere of Air might have extended.

2. The Second is, that this Experiment was not favorably made, but rather
invidiously, since we purposely weighed out somewhat less of the lucid Matter,
and now and then more of the Water, than the precise quantities that
calculation supposes, that I might be sure the Experiment was made severely
enough.

3. And lastly, upon search I found that the grain of Icy Phosphorus, that was
first put into the Spirit of Wine, we made use of all this while, was not,
though after so long a time, totally dissolved; a small Fragment, amounting to
about an eighth part, if not more, remaining at the bottom of the Phial; upon
which having poured some fresh Alcohol of Wine, and kept it a while in a little
heat, to further the dissolution, I found That Liquor did, as I thought it
would, grow very Luminous, when dropped into common Water, so that it seemed
probable, that if the whole Grain of Icy Phosphorus had been dissolved at first
in the Spirit of Wine, it would have Impregnated above six hundred thousand
times its weight of Water, sufficient to make it shine.

SECT. IX.
I Come now to another way, by which I thought the great Subtilty of parts in
our Noctilucal Matter might appear with good advantage, and possibly you will
think by the success, that I missed not of what I expected from the intended
Trial.

Experiment I.
We carefully weighed out a small lump of our shining Matter, amounting to
three Grains, and having purposely broken it into diverse lesser Fragments,
perhaps six or seven at least, we laid them upon a flat bottomed Glass, that
was broader at the top than the bottom, and shallow too, (not being near an
Inch deep) that the Matter might be more fully exposed to the free Air. This
Glass we placed in a South Window, laying it very shelving, that the Liquor to
be produced, by its resolution in the moist Air, might presently run down, and
not hinder the free Evaporation of the remaining Matter. In which posture of
the Glass, we had also another aim, to be hereafter mentioned. The Vessel being
thus placed, about ten of the Clock at Night, all the Fragments of the
Noctiluca shined briskly, and so continued to do, till most of them were
resolved into other Substances, and the biggest of them continued to shine till
they were reduced to such a smallness, that they would scarce have been seen,
had not their own Light made them visible. But the main thing that I am to take
notice of in this Experiment, (and which perhaps will somewhat surprise you,)
is, that so little quantity of Noctilucal Matter continued to emit visible
Fumes for a good many more than an hundred and fifty Hours, and this with
Circumstances that made the thing more strange.

1. As First, That this Smoke was not only visible but manifest, and that as
well in the Night (as I often observed from time to time) as in the Day.

2. Secondly, That the several Parcels of Matter did each emit there Fumes all
at once, as if it were from so many little Chimneys.

3. Thirdly, That this Smoke was so Copious, and withal so Tenacious, that it
would easily retain the form of Smoke at a considerable distance from the
Bodies that emitted it, so that as I walked to and fro in the Room, a careless
look toward the Glass would often discover it to me, and sometimes it would
manifestly appear at a distance, that I estimated to be near a Foot from the
Matter that afforded it.

I shall now add, to another purpose, the following Circumstances; namely,

1. First, That the motion of the Smoke was swift enough, considering that it
had no Channel or Chimny to assist it. It was not always, nor for the most
part, directly upwards, but sometimes Horizontal, sometimes downwards,
sometimes toward the right hand, and sometimes toward the left, as if the
motion of the Fumes had been determined by the situation of those parts of the
Noctilucal Fragment, by which they were emitted, and as 'twere discharged; I
use this last expression, because taking pleasure to watch attentively the
Circumstances of our delightful Experiment, I thought, I many times observed a
kind of Palpitation or Aestuation in the little shining Fragments, which I
gathered from the Apparent great inequality I perceived in the plenty of the
Smoke, that was emitted at several times, all of them perhaps within the
compass of a minute or two. But on this I forbear to discourse, till I shall
have made further observations; and therefore I shall proceed to take notice of
one Circumstance more in our Experiment; which is,

2. Secondly, That even in the latter part of it, after the shining Matter had
been so long exposed to the Air, it emitted a smell strong enough; which seemed
to be caused by odorous Exhalations, distinct from the visible Fumes.

SECT. X.
AND now it is time that I give you some account of the reason, (that I but
pointed at before,) why I chose such a Glass, and kept it in a shelving
posture; this I did, that I might not lose, but preserve the Liquor, which I
knew would fall from the Saline part of the shining Matter, which Liquor I
thought fit to Examine in order to discover certain things; particularly,
whether the Limpid Water, as it appeared to be, that was as 'twere the Cadaver,
or, to employ Chemical terms, the deliquated Caput Mortuum, of the shining
substance, did not yet contain something, as well Luminous as Saline.

Experiment I.
To satisfy my self about this, I caused this Liquor to be put into a small
concave Vessel of carefully refined Silver (that other Salts than Nitre and
Alum might not Corrode it) which I had purposely provided for the quick
Evaporation and Crystallization of smaller quantities of Matter. Our Liquor,
being in this Vessel put upon some small Coals and Ashes, did not Evaporate
near so easily, as one would have thought, but turned into an Unctuous
Substance, of a dark Reddish Color; wherefore we placed the Vessel upon quick
Coals, that by their brisk heat they might make the Liquor boil, and free it
from superfluous moisture. By this means after a while it was reduced to a
Substance that afforded us a pretty Phenomenon, not unlike to That elsewhere
mentioned, where we spoke of the Infusion or Solution of the Solid Phosphorus
in common Water. For the boiling Liquor crackled like a handful of Bay Salt
cast into the Fire, and whilst these cracklings continued, (which they did much
longer than one would have expected) they imitated little Volleys of Shot, not
only in the great number of the Noises they made, but in the little slashes
that accompanied them, which flashes, when the Fire was somewhat increased,
were so many, and followed one another so fast, that they appeared to make up a
continued flame, not unpleasant to behold.

Experiment II.
After the foregoing Experiment, I had a mind to be able to make some estimate,
how far the breaking of the shining Matter into Fragments, and the conditions
of the Vessel contributed to the quick consumption of it. To this purpose, we
took a lump of three Grains, carefully weighed out, and put it into a small
Glass Funnel, whose upper end was wide and capacious enough, in reference to
the lower part, which was exceeding slender, that the Noctiluca might have Air
both above and (oftentimes) below, and yet the Matter might not side down, till
it were so wasted, as to be less than a small Pins head; a Vessel of this shape
I chose to make use of, that I might catch the Liquor, that would be afforded
by the deliquation of our Icy Phosphorus; for which purpose the slender pipe of
this Funnel was put into the Orifice of a small Cylindrical Phial, and there
kept in a quiet place, which was a South-Window, from whence every Night, after
I was in Bed, I caused it to be brought into my Chamber, to see if it continued
to shine. By which Trials, I found that it remained Luminous, and was not yet
so wasted, to fall quite through the Funnel into the Phial, at somewhat beyond
the end of the Fifteenth day; so that it continued to shine, three hundred and
sixty Hours.

The very Limpid Liquor, that was brought into the Phial by this Experiment,
was unhappily lost before I could make any Trials with it, but not before I had
done the chief thing I aimed at, in saving of it, which was to know its weight
to be by and by mentioned.

What has been hitherto related, may justly enough make a Man reflect, with
some wonder, upon the strange minuteness and multitude of parts, that are
crowded together in our Noctilucal Matter; if we consider what a multitude of
Luminous Beams of visible Smoke, of Odorable, though unseen, Esfluviums, so
small a quantity of it, as three Grains, which are but the twentieth part of a
Dram, could incessantly afford for two or three hundred hours; leaving after
all this behind it above three times its Weight, (for so we found it to be) of
a Liquor, which it self was not a Cadavorous one, or, what it looked like,
common Water, but (as may be argued from what was lately recited of the same
kind of Liquor) might have been Impregnated with very many Saline parts, and
not a few capable of shining briskly.

OBSERVATIONS About the INFLAMABILITY Of the NOCTILUCA It self.
SECT. XI.
Observation I.
I Took a little of the Consistent Noctiluca, and having broken it, and, as its
brittleness would permit, spread it here and there, upon a piece of folded
Paper, I lighted that Paper at the flame of a Candle, and observed, that when
the flame reached This or That little Fragment of the shining Matter, it would
take Fire, and burn away in a slashing and very sputtering manner, accompanied
with noise, almost as Grains of Salt Petre are wont to do, when they are put
upon a live Coal.

Observation II.
I observed also, that if I put pieces of Paper, on which I had placed some of
these Grains of Noctilucal Matter, upon some Embers covered with Ashes, before
the paper it self took Fire, the shining Matter would communicate its flame to
the Contiguous Paper.

Experiment I.
We took a Fragment of our shining Matter, not amounting to a Grain, This we
put into half a Spoonful or less of high Rectified Spirit of Wine, and kindling
that Liquor with the flame of a Candle, the Spirit burned away, as is usual, in
a-flame partly Yellow, (and especially at the out side) but chiefly Blew: But
though the heat of the Silver Spoon, wherein the Trial was made, did quickly
(as might well be expected) melt the Noctilucal Matter, and gave it a Globular
form, yet it continued at the bottom without manifestly mixing with the Vinous
Spirits, or considerably altering the Color of their flame: But when the
Spirit of Wine was all consumed, without leaving any jot of Phlegm behind it,
the last drops coming, when they were actually kindled, to touch the shining
Matter, presently set it a Fire, but its flame was very differing from that of
the Vinous Spirits. For besides somewhat that was odd in its Figure, its Color
was not at all Blew, or Bluish, but of an intense Yellow, and burned so
fiercely, and with so Vivid a Light, as was somewhat surprising to behold, and
continued to Burn a pretty while, considering the paucity of the combustible
Matter. And whilst it burned, it emitted good store of Smoke, that seemed to be
darted up to a considerable height, the Matter did not burn all away at first,
but left a kind of Caput Mortuum, which lay in the form of a little Cake,
partly of a deep Yellow, and partly of a fine Red. This Matter being more Bulky
in proportion to That, That was consumed, than I thought it likely that so
little of the Phosphorus should contain of incombustible Matter, I proceeded to
burn it, as elsewhere will be related after another manner, till there remained
but some very few light feces, that seemed to be of the same nature, with Those
that are to be mentioned in the next Experiment.

Experiment II.
We took a small Fragment, not amounting to a Grain of the Noctilucal Matter,
and putting it into a Silver Spoon, we cast upon it the Sunbeams concentrated
by our smallest (Dioptrical) burning Glass; by These it was presently set on
Fire, and afforded, together with a great deal of Smoke, a flame exceeding
Yellow, and so very fierce and bright, that it was conspicuous; though the
Window being purposely set open, the Beams of the Sun, then in the Meridian,
were suffered to beat full upon it, and a brisk Wind did also blow upon it
without extinguishing it. At the bottom of the Spoon, the expiring flame left a
round and broad Caput Mortuum, consisting of diverse Circles, like those of a
Sardonix, whereof the largest was White, another Yellow, and the third Red, all
the three Colors being Pleasant and Vivid enough. Some part of this Caput
Mortuum, being again brought to be freely touched by the Air, appeared
Combustible, and the rest being left in the Spoon, that the Air might work upon
it, did for the most part soon resolve it self per Deliquium into a Liquor,
almost as sharp as Spirit of Salt, the rest being a light Black Feculency, of
which, because there was so very little of it, we could make no Examen.

Experiment III.
Being desirous to try, whether the Nectilucal Matter would, by bare pressure
or motion, be brought to Burn, I thought not fit to depend upon such other
Experiments, as are here related, wherein it appears able to set Fire on diverse
Bodies, belonging to the vegetable kingdom, or are otherwise easily inflamable,
wherefore we put two Grains of our dried Nectilucal Matter into a Glass Mortar
(furnished with a Glass Pestle) whose coldness and thickness were able to keep
it from being put into any sensible heat by the operation, that was to be
performed in it, and consequently from communicating any heat of its own to the
Noctilucal Matter. This was pretty briskly rubbed in the Mortar, with the Glass
Pestle, but though it was thereby brought to shine much more Vividly than
before, yet it did not take Fire, which I was apt to impute to the great
coldness of the Glass, which much opposed the Incalescence of the Phosphorus,
but after a while longer it took Fire, and began to burn away in an actual
flame, with much Smoke: But this did not last so long, as might have been
expected, which short duration might proceed from the Vessel, that continued
sensibly cold, and perhaps also from the narrowness, and depth of it, which
somewhat hindered the free access of the Air; for some Matter, that was taken
out on the Pestle, seemed to Burn better, than That which remained in the
Mortar, which being extinguished, was once more kindled by Trituration, but
soon expiring again, could not by the same means be rekindled, but only was
brought to shine briskly.

EXPERIMENTS About BURNING Other BODIES With the NOCTILUCA.
SECT. XII.
I Formerly intimated that our consistent Noctiluca, notwithstanding the
appearance it had of Ice, and its actual Coldness to the touch, was much
disposed to have its parts easily put into motion, and might by that means be
brought to be sensibly hot. And I think it time now to proceed to make this
good by particular Instances.

1. And First, If our Phosphorus be for any time pressed hard between ones
Fingers, or against a Board, or some such hard and not very cold Body, it will
oftentimes be felt actually and very sensibly hot, and sometimes the degree of
heat will be so vehement, as to Scorch the Skin, as my venturous Laborant found
several times to his no small pain, his Fingers being almost covered with
Blisters raised on them, by handling our shining Matter, with too bold a
curiosity: And he complained to me, that, though according to the usual fate of
Chemists, he had been often Burned on other occasions, yet he sound Blisters,
excited by the Phosphorus, more painful than others; and he is not the only
person that has complained to me of their finding the Burning made with this
Matter to be more tedious and difficult to be cured, than ordinary ones. But,
as our Noctiluca was not always made of the same Matter, nor with care equally
successful, so I observed its proneness to incalescence, and the degrees of
heat, to which it would be brought by motion, to be differing enough; upon
which account, I did not find, that some portions of it, would produce those
higher effects of heat, that some others did, besides that these higher effects
did gradually differ among themselves.

2. Agreeably to this, after having in vain tried to Fire Paper by pressing and
rubbing some of our Phosphorus upon it with the blade of a Knife, I took a
piece of fine Paper, and having dried, and warmed it at the Fire, I put a
little of our Noctiluca in a fold of it, and rubbing the Paper between my
hands, though by tha^ attrition there were produced a sensible, and even
considerable heat, yet it did not reach to what I desired, but con^^^uing a
little while to rub the Paper to and fro, it did on a sudden take Fire, and
blazed out, so that it would have Burned my hand, if This had not been kept
from receiving much harm (for all it did not escape) by a thin Glove, that was
thereby scorched, and in part shrivel'd up. After the same manner, to make the
Experiment the more certain, I fired another piece of Paper, but then desisted,
that I might not unnecessarily waste a Substance, wherewith I was but meanly
stored.

3. If the firing of Gunpowder could be performed with our Phosphorus, without
the assistance of Circumstances, whose difficult concourse will keep it from
being more than an instructive Curiosity; the fear that it might be applied to
uses mischievous to Men, would keep me silent of the power our Phosphorus may
be brought to have of kindling Gunpowder, when it is befriended with favorable
Circumstances. To try therefore, whether our Phosphorus, which appeared not
inferior to That of Mr. Craft's, would (as His did sometimes, though not
easily) fire Gunpowder, we took a little of our shining Matter, and having a
little wiped it, to dry it, we put it upon some dry Gunpowder, and with a
Knife pressed it, and in some sort rubbed it upon the Black Grains, but found,
that though a heat were produced, and sometimes such as would make some of the
Corns of Powder have a Bluish flame, yet the mixture would not go off: So that
the Laborant, to whom I left the care of reiterating the Experiment in my
presence, presuming it would not succeed, scrupled not to hold his Head over
it, that he might the better see what change was made in the mixture; but then
upon a sudden the powder took Fire, and the flame shooting up, caught hold of
his Hair, which made a Blaze, that proving innocent enough, became more
diverting, than the smell of the Smoke that succeeded it was delightful.

4. But the same Laborant, who was very helpful to me in varying the
preparation of the Phosphorus, had a worse misadventure not long after, for
bringing me some newly Distilled Grains of our Noctiluca, covered with some of
the shining Water, that came over with it, he unluckily broke the Glass in his
Pocket, whereupon the heat of his Body, increased by the motion his long walk
had put it into, did so excite the Matter, that was fallen out of the broken
Phial, that it Burned two or three great holes in his Breeches, before he could
come to me to relate his misfortune, the recent effects of which I could not
look upon without some wonder as well as smiles.

5. Having already told you the effect of our Noctiluca upon Gunpowder; I
thought fit to try, whether it would not kindle a Body, that is thought
somewhat less prone to take fire. Exper.
And accordingly having put together about half a Grain of our dry Noctilucal
Matter, and six times its weight of common flowers of Sulphur, they were lodged
in the fold of a Piece of White Paper which was laid upon a Board, and when I
had a little bruised and rubbed This with the Haft of a Knife, it shone through
the intercepted Paper very Vividly, but did no more: Wherefore, suspecting that
the want of Air was the cause why it did but shine, not burn too, I opened the
Paper, and found that as soon as the Air had access, it took Fire and furiously
Burned the Paper, and, if I had not been wary, had burned me too. Another time,
the same Experiment being tried, afforded this notable Phenomenon, that the
Ingredients, being well rubbed together in folded Paper, though before the
Paper was displaid and exposed to the Air, they did not kindle, yet upon the
contact of This, the mixture took Fire, and did not burn away with a slow
flame, as Brimstone is wont to do, but slashed away at once with a great blaze,
like Fired Gunpowder, save that the flame appeared more Luminous.

6. The highest effect of the heat of our Icy Noctiluca was casually produced
by the Laborant, who being desirous to try, whether some that was newly
prepared was good and fit to be brought to me, began to Write Letters with it,
upon a piece of Planck, that had been long used in the Laboratory as part of a
Stove, and he, chancing to press the recent Matter hard upon this Board, that
the constant heat of the place had brought to an unusual degree of dryness,
found to his surprise, that he had not only shining but burning Letters: The
Lucid Matter having actually set on Fire those parts of the Wood, against which
he had strongly pressed it.

SECT. XIII.
Experiment I.
TO examine somewhat particularly, to what Family, or Sort of Salts, the Saline
part of our Noctilucal Matter either does belong, or has most cognation with
(for I thought it possible it might not fully agree with any known Species of
Salts, but have somewhat peculiar to it self) I suffered a little of the small
stock, I then had, to resolve it self per Deliquium into a clear Liquor, and
then made with it some of the Trials elsewhere delivered, by which I am wont to
examine what Species a Salt belongs to, guessing this Liquor by the taste, and
the manner how it was made, to be somewhat, though not altogether, of the
nature of Spirit of Sea Salt: I dropped a little o^^^ upon a convenient
proportion o^ ^^rup of Violets, and found that it (...) it not Green, as a
Volatile (...) Salt would have done, but of a fine Carnation Color, such as
that Syrup is wont to acquire, upon the mixture of an Acid Spirit with it. I
found also, that a very little of our Anomalous Liquor presently destroyed the
blew Color, and not the other of a Tincture of Lignum Nephriticum.

Experiment II.
I also put some of this Liquor, that came by Deliquium from the Noctiluca,
upon some silings of Copper, which being thoroughly wetted, and some of them
covered with it, I exposed in a hollow Glass for two or three Days to the Air:
and by this means had, as I expected, without the help of heat, a solution of
some of the Filings of Copper, the Color of which was not a deep Azure, as if
it had been made with a Volatile Urinous Salt; but seemed to partake of Green
and Blew, and to be an intermediate or Compounded Color.

Experiment III.
To make the Saline nature of this Liquor the more manifest, I put some of it
upon powder of Red Coral, which it presently fell upon, and Corroded with noise
and froth; and putting another parcel of the same Liquor, upon some dry Salt of
Tartar, there presently ensued a fierce conflict between them, whereby some
noise and much froth was produced; so that I thought it needless to waste any
more of the Noctilucal Matter, (wherewith I was but slenderly stored) to make
it more apparent, that our Liquor was not, as most Chemists would have
expected, of an Urinous nature, but belonged to the Family of Acid Salts, and
seemed to be near of kin to that branch of them, to which the Spirituous part
of common or Sea Salt belongs.

Experiment IV.
Some Virtuosi may be apt to think, that since our Icy Noctiluca is of a more
Solid Substance than the Aerial, and uses to continue to shine much longer,
since I say this is so, if the consistent Phosphorus were included in a Glass,
whence its expirations could have no vent, the Matter being kept from wasting,
the Luminousness may also be kept from ceasing. This conjecture being
plausible, though the Notion I have of the Nature of our Noctiluca, could not
promise me a confirmation of the conjecture, yet, to prevent the being blamed
for an easily evitable omission, I put some of our dry Phosphorus into a clear
Phial, capable, as was guessed, to hold about an Ounce of Water, and having
very carefully closed this Glass, I laid it aside, and observed it to continue
to shine for some few days, after which the Light manifestly decayed, and soon
after quite disappeared, though I thought it possible, that it did not
altogether so soon expire, as it ceased to be visible to me; because the
Whitish Fumes, emitted by the Matter, whilst it continued to shine, had covered
the inside of the Glass, with a kind of Whitish Soot, that at length opacating
it, might well hinder a faint Light from pervading the Vessel and reaching our
Eyes. But it seems, that the Air included with the Phosphorus, either had some
vital Substance (if I may so call it) preyed upon thereby, or else was by the
Fumes of the Phosphorus, to name no other possible ways, tamed and rendered at
length unfit to continue the slame [sui generis] of our Noctiluca.

Experiment V.
Yet to pursue the design of making a Light more lasting than ordinary, by
keeping the Matter from commerce with the External Air, I took some of our
Noctilucal Matter, that came over with the Aqueous, from which 'twas not so
easily separable, but that I thought it best to leave them together, in regard
that it shone so well, that it might pass for an excellent portion of the
Aerial Noctiluca: This we Sealed up in a Glass-Egg (whose bottom had been made
flat on purpose, that it might stand without leaning) and setting it in a
place, where it would be frequently in my Eyes, I observed it from time to
time, especially at Night, and found it continue to shine (if I much
misremember not) a Week or longer, and that with so little decay of Light, that
I was surpised, when, coming in the Night time to look upon it, I found it to
shine no more at all, especially since I could not restore any manifest light
to it, either by agitation, or by moderately warming the Sealed Glass, that
contained it.

Experiment VI.
After many Observations made of the degrees of Light, that our Icy Noctiluca
afforded, as 'twere of its own accord, without external heat, I thought fit to
try whether by the application of a moderate heat of the Fire, the Light might
not be much invigorated, and perhaps the Phosphorus it self be brought actually
to kindle, even in a Close Vessel. This Design, I was the rather induced to
prosecute, because I had some hopes, that by this way of increasing the Light
of our Phosphorus, though it should not long retain its acquired degree of
Luminousness, yet this increase might continue long enough for some not
inconsiderable uses. And especially (in case much Noctilucal Matter were heated
at once) to give Light enough for taking of Gunpowder out of the Gun-room of a
Ship, or out of a Magazine, without danger of firing the Powder, which would be
a means to prevent those sad accidents, that have but too frequently happened
to Ships, especially of War, of which we had very lately a notable instance in
the River of Thames. In prosecution of this Design, we took some Grains of our
Consistent Phosphorus, and having put them into a round Glass-Egg, somewhat
larger than an ordinary Hen Egg, fitted with a stem of a proportionable
bigness, and about two thirds of a Foot long. This being Hermetically sealed
up, (at least as far as we discerned) the Globulous part of it was warily, and
by Degrees, warmed at the Fire, and then we instantly removed it into a dark
place, were the included Matter, not only shone by great odds more vividly than
before it was heated, but some portions of it were brought to an actual flame,
as appeared both by the radiant Splendour of the Burning Matter, and by the
condition of the Smoke, it emitted: And yet more manifestly, by the intense
heat which the flaming part of the Matter (and not the other parts
(communicated to that part of the Glass, which it adhered to; for there the
Vessel was not to be so much as touched without inconvenience; and when this
flame expired, which it did after no long time, the portion of the lately
kindled Matter did no more shine or burn as before, but was reduced to the
condition of the rest of the Noctilucal Matter, together with which it did for
a good while retain a considerable degree of Light, upon the account of the
heat, it had been exposed to, over and above that Luminousness that ordinarily
belonged to it.

This Experiment appeared so strange, and was so delightful to those that had
never seen it, that partly to gratify the curious, and partly to pursue my own
design, 'twas reiterated within the compass of a Month or two, between (if I
mistake not) twenty and thirty times, the same Matter being still kept in the
same Vessel, though by being melted, and in great part sublimed by its frequent
approaches to the Fire, it was divided into several parcels. But this made the
Experiment so much the more pleasant, in regard that sometimes (for it was not
always) more than one or perhaps than two portions of the Matter would seem to
burn at once. This was looked upon as a very new and scarce credible thing,
that one should be able to bring a Body to Burn with an actual flame, and for
no inconsiderable time, in a Glass Hermetically Sealed, and not large neither.
But to deal with Philosophical sincerity, I must not conceal from you, that
after we had made many Trials, in the above mentioned Glass, there happened a
Phenomenon, which gave me some suspicion, that at that time, it was not
actually Sealed: But it did not appear, but that it had been very well Sealed
at first, and might continue so during several Trials, for after this suspicion
we used this Glass ten or twelve times, or perhaps oftener to make the before
recited Experiment, and after all those we could perceive no crack or flaw at
all in the ball or stem of the Glass, and found it difficult to get in the
point of a small pin into a little hole, which we either found, or, by
endeavoring to find one, made at the Apex. However, by the things formerly
related, it appeared, that our Noctilucal Matter would Burn with less vent by
great odds, than other fewels known to us, and that a small quantity may be
made to burn and shine longer, than one would expect. And we were encouraged by
what we saw, to hope that if a more considerable quantity of Matter, were put
into a conveniently shaped Glass, and assisted with other friendly
Circumstances, especially if the Luminousness could be a little heightened, it
may be rendered fit to be of some use in Ships, and Magazines of Powder.

If I had been furnished with accommodations, when I first made the foregoing
Experiment, I would have pursued the Trial somewhat further, by making a pretty
quantity of our Noctilucal Matter, burn several times, in a thin Glass-Vessel,
exquisitely closed with Hermes his Seal, that, by weighing the Vessel in exact
Scales, both before and after the accension of the included Phosphorus, I might
find whether any ponderable parts were subtle enough to pervade the pores of
the Glass, and in case they were not, I then hoped to discover, what change of
texture might be made in the Matter of a body, reduced to an actual flame, in
a Vessel, wherein it could not receive the free Air, nor emit any Fumes or
exhalations, which would have been to me a very acceptable Experiment: And
perhaps would have proved a very instructive one too. Since, as I have in
another place complained, in the Analyzes, hitherto made by Chemists, either
the body exposed to the Fire, has not been actually inflamed, which is the case
of Those distilled in exactly closed Vessels, or else there has been some
commerce betwixt Them, and the external Air, which may justly render it
doubtful, whether the bodies produced by this Analysis were the same both for
number, nature, etc. that would have been produced in Vessels, exquisitely
closed, since we see that Wood, for Instance, burned in a Chimny, affords store
of Soot and Ashes, which are very differing bodies from those that Chemists
obtain from the same Wood, Distilled in close Vessels.

But to trouble you no further with what I would have done, I shall add one
Circumstance, I observed, in what was done. Namely, That sometimes there
appeared a little Liquor in the Glass (whether it consisted of some Aqueous
Particles, that may be suspected to have lain hid in the Noctilucal Matter, or
were produced by the actual deflagration of a part of the Matter) and the rest
of the Matter by the reiterated operarations of the Fire was turned to a Red
Color, which it yet retains.

SECT. XIV.
Experiment I.
I Have formerly related, that upon the immersion of our Phosphorus into Water,
it would immediately cease shining, and continue without Light, as long as
'twas kept under that Liquor. This gave me a ground to suppose, that, by the
interposition of Water between the Noctilucal Matter and the Air, the
Phosphorus may be kept unactive, till it be fitted, by an extraordinary
agitation of its parts, to act with an unwonted vigor, when the Air shall come
to touch it suddenly; this supposition, I say, induced me to put two Grains of
our Icy Noctiluca into a small Glass Egg, and pour a pretty quantity of Water
on it: In order to the following Experiment, we heated the Liquor well, yet
without making it at all boil, and thereby melted the little Fragments of Solid
Matter, and made them flow into one Liquid Mass, that kept it self at the
bottom, distinct from the Water: This done, we presently removed the Glass into
a dark place, and pouring out the Water, we observed, that as soon as the Air
came to touch the Noctilucal Matter, it seemed to be kindled into an actual
flame, that afforded a very Vivid Light, which success pleased me the better,
because it showed, that a kind of Fire may be kept under Water, as long as one
pleases, without sensibly burning, and yet in a moment, upon the bare removal
of the Water, show it self in the form of actual Fire. That our shining
Substance was of this nature appeared manifestly by this, That the Water, being
poured out somewhat too hastily, carried along with it, which I did not intend
it should do, the whole Mass of the Noctilucal Matter, and This* by its fall
into the Silver Cup, that was employed to receive the Liquor, was divided into
two or three parts, which coming to a more free or full contact of the Air,
blazed out much more than when they were in the Glass, and afforded us a
delightful spectacle, since the flame burned upon the Water with much Light and
fierceness, and a strange deal of Smoke, and it did ever and anon, sputter with
noise, like Salt Petre made to burn upon a live Coal. These flames continued
the pleasure we had to see them burn upon the water a pretty while, and after
their extinction, looking into the Siver Cup, we found diverse flakes of a
Reddish Matter, (which the Chemists would call a Caput Mortuum) that lay at the
bottom of the Water; and the sides of the Silver Cup, that were next to that
Liquor looked almost as if fine Brick-dust had been strewed upon them.

Experiment II.
Being desirous to see whether, our Noctilucal Matter shining through a
Colored Glass, the Beams of Light would be tinged in their passage, we took
two or three Grains of our Matter, and put it into a Phial, of an almost
Spherical Figure, capable of holding, by our estimate, about twelve Ounces of
Water; which Phial was made of fine Glass, of a very pleasant Color,
participating of those that are called Orange and Aurora: But the Lucid Matter,
being shut up in this Phial, and carried into a dark Room, did not appear
through the Glass to be considerably altered in Color; whch because I imputed
partly to the smalness of the Fragment of the Phosphorus, in reference to the
capacity of the Vessel, through which it would give no more than a faint Light,
I caused the Glass to be considerably heated, and then brought it into the dark
Room, I staid for it in, there as soon as 'twas come, the included matter
seemed to be actually flaming, and the trajected Beams of Light appeared of an
unusual and glorious Color, the Light being so considerable, that it made
diverse Bodies distinctly visible, at a pretty distance from the Glass; and we
judged that by the help of it a Book of a good Print might have been easily
read; but this Light, which was the greatest we had, till then, produced with
our Phosphorus, did not last long in its vigor, but in a short time gradually
decayed, till it came to little more than the usual splendour of the Noctilucal
Matter.

Experiment III.
I formerly related, that I could not make such an Experiment, as I succesfully
tried with the Oil of Cinnamon and the Oil of Cloves, to succeed with the Oil of
Mace. But now I must add, that the little Phial, wherein the Noctilucal Matter
and that Oil were included, having been set aside as useless, I afterward
chanced to cast my Eyes on it, and to have the curiosity to try, whether or no
the unsuccessful Experiment I had made before, were not one of that kind, which
in another Paper I have discoursed of, under the name of Contingent ones, and
accordingly there being a somewhat dark corner in the Room, I carried the Phial
thither, and although it were yet broad day, I unstopt it there, and was
somewhat surpised to find the included Matter to afford immediately a vigorus
Light, which put me afterward upon repeating the Experiment at different
times, which I did with the like success, without being able to determine the
cause of this odd Phenomenon.

Experiment IV.
One Experiment I shall now relate, which, though (because it seems, as well as
the last recited, a contingent one, I forbore to set down with the rest) will
perhaps be thought more singular than any of them.

We had in one of our Receivers, that was but small (since it was not judged
capable of containing a Gallon of Water) a parcel of our Consistent Noctiluca,
in which my Laborant told me, that he had met with a Phenomenon, that to him
who knew nothing of what is related Sect. XIV. Exper. 1. was very surprising,
and seemed to appear by chance, since he often tried in vain, to produce it
when he pleased. This Receiver I took into my custody, and pouring out the
common Water, with which the splendid Matter was kept covered to hinder it from
steaming away, we observed no other change, than that, upon the removal of the
Water and the contact of the Air, the Noctiluca would immediately shine, and
continue to do so, till we thought fit to extinguish it pro tempore, by pouring
Water on it again.

This being done in the Morning, I considered the following Night, that this
Receiver having been kept in the Laboratory, which constant and sometimes
vehement Fires made a very warm place, 'twas but fit in order to make the Trial
a fair one, to bring the shining Matter to as great a warmth, as it had in the
Laboratory, where it exhibited the Phenomenon, I was desirous to see. Having
then caused the Receiver, with the Water in it, to be held in a hot place, till
the Liquor had attained, by our guess, a fit degree of Tepidity, we poured out
the Water, and within a minute or two after, by our estimate, we had the
pleasure to see, that the consistent Matter, notwitstanding the wetness that in
probability the Water had lest on it, we observed I say, that This wet Matter,
upon the contact of the Air, took Fire of it self, not without noise, and burnt
with a manifest and actual Flame. But our pleasure was somewhat moderated,
though the Experiment was the more ascertained, by this accident: That, before
we could pour in Water to quench the Fire, the violence of the flame had broken
the Receiver, which was thick enough, and thrown off a piece above half as
broad as the Palm of ones Hand, by which unlucky chance we were hindered from
endeavoring to find, as we intended to do, whether we could by repeated Trials
discover the cause of the appearing contingency of this odd Phenomenon, which
had far oftener in vain, than successfully, been endeavored to be produced.

This Experiment recalls into my memory a notable Phenomenon belonging to that
formerly recited ( Sect. XI. Exper. 2.) about the kindling of our Phosphorus
with the Sunbeams, united by a burning Glass: For whereas, I there mention,
that the Noctilucal Matter did not burn all away at first, but left a kind of
Caput Mortuum, which lay in the form of a Cake variously colored, I shall now
add, that so much Matter could not be left unfired, unless something hindered
its accension; we warily turned over the little Cake, with the point of a sharp
Knife, and then the under part, being I presumed hot, presently took Fire upon
the contact of the Air, and flamed away, till the Matter was almost totally
consumed.

The Conclusion.
AND now I have acquainted you with all the chief things, that I have hitherto
been able to try, or observe about our Icy Noctiluca, or solid Phosphorus: And
though I have been obliged to deliver them without any exact Method, yet
perhaps their novelty will serve to make them acceptable to you. Light is so
noble a thing, that the matter, our Phosphorus affords it to reside in, being
endued with some uncommon qualities, and particularly with a strange and almost
incredible subtilty of parts, I cannot but hope, that, if improvements upon
such a Matter were more industriously attempted, by persons better qualified
for such a Work, than I (especially in my present Circumstances) pretend to be,
something would be produced, tending to the discovery of the nature, not only
of Light, but diverse other Bodies, and perhaps also, of good use to humane
life. If some unwelcome Circumstances did not for the present discourage me, I
would contribute my weak endeavors toward such a design. For sometimes I
think a Naturalists Pen, ought to be like a Merchants Ship, that comes from
time to time into Port to rest, but not always to stay there, but to take in
new Lading, and re-fit it self for a new Voyage to the same or other parts. In
the mean time I recommend this Subject to your self, and those excellent
Virtuosi, you hold Correspondence with, whose ingenious Attempts to advance
true Philosophy, will have, for their good success, the hearty wishes of

Your most Affectionate, and most Humble Servant, R. B.

FINIS.
A CHEMICAL PARADOX, Grounded upon NEW EXPERIMENTS, Making it probable.

That Chemical Principles are Transmutable: So that, out of One of Them, Others
may be Produced.

By the Honorable ROBERT BOIL, Fellow of the Royal Society.

LONDON, Printed by R. E. for B. Took, at the Ship in St. Paul's Churchyard.
1681/2.

AN ADVERTISEMENT OF THE PUBLISHER TO THE READER.
THE Following PARADOX having been written in or before the Year 1680. was kept
in the Author's Hands, that it might come out with the Latin Version of his
Treatise, entitled, The Producibleness of Chemical Principles, which is
annexed to the Second Edition of His Skeptical Chemist, printed 1680. but some
unluckie Accidents having k^pt that Translation from being finished, the Author
thought sit the ensuing Paper should accompany his Icy Noctiluca, both in
English and in Latin: Upon this account, he sent me not only the Discourse,
that now comes forth, but some other Papers, containing the Minutes taken from
time to time, by his Laborant, of what occurred in the long Train of
Distillations, on which the following Reflections are grounded. For, the Reader,
whether Foreign or Domestic, may here be pleased to be advertised, once for
all, That as the Author has been pleased to publish all his Works in the
English Tongue, for Reasons best known to himself; so the Province of the
Translating them into Latin, has been undertaken by others: For, indeed, his
Assiduity and diligent Attendance on his daily and growing Experiments, will
not allow him leisure or opportunity to undertake that Work himself; tho
otherwise if he had a desire to polish any thing in that Tongue, his Pen can
command a sluent style. This by the by. But I having returned to the Author
both his own Papers, and my Version of them, in one Roll, it unfortunately
happened, that before the Icy Noctiluca was printed off, there broke out in the
Night a great Fire not far from the Author's Lodging, which was so threatening,
even after the blowing up of several Houses to stop it, that, as many others
were obli^ed hastily to remove their Gods, our Author thought sit by the same
way to endeavor to se^^^e his own Manuscripts; but did it not so successfully,
but that some a^^ yet missing; and, among others, the English and Latin Papers
lately mentioned. Notwith^^andin^ which, the Importance of the Subje^t, and the
Nov^lty of the Experiments, prevailed with the Author, to prevent the like
mischance from happening to what be could ^^ive concerning them) t^ communicate
them to the Curicus, who will, by what I have here related, be enabled to
understand what he writes at the beginning of that part of the following Paper,
which, because it was written after the Fire abovementioned, and very long
after the rest, he calls his Postscript.

A CHEMICAL PARADOX.
I Adventured many years ago, in the Skeptical Chemist, and long after in other
Papers, to lay down some Reasons of Questioning, whether the Fire be the true
and proper Instrument of Analyzing mixed Bodies, and do but dissociate their
Principles or Ingredients, without altering them or compounding them anew. But
I shall now present you a discovery, that will perhaps make you think the
Vulgar opinion of Chemists to be less fit to be doubted of, than rejected. The
occasion of making the following Experiments, was afforded me by the complaint
of an ingenious Chemist, (and great Distiller) who told me, that endeavoring
to purify an Essential Oil by Rectification, he found to his disappointment,
that he Distilled it four or five times successively, yet it still left some
Faeces, (but much less than at the first) though he concluded, that if he
should undergo the trouble of distilling the Liquor, a few times more, it
would come over perfectly pure, without leaving any faeculency behind it. But
'twas more congruous to my Hypothesis, to conjecture, that the Caput Mortuum he
complained of, was not, (at least after the first or second Distillation,) a
more gross or Faeculent part of the Oil, separated from the more pure; but a
new compound produced, as other concretes also might be, by the operation of
the Fire. This conjecture of mine was favored by some Experiments, I had made
many years before, and imparted to some inquisitive men, whereby two distilled
Liquors were made, barely by their mutual re-actions, to afford great store of
an Earthly and very fixed Substance. And to the same conjecture it was
suitable, that by obstinately reiterating the Experiment, the action o^ the
Fire upon the parts of the Body, exposed to it, and their mutual operations and
combinations among themselves, and not improbably too, the material concurrence
of Igneous particles, might produce, besides Earthly faeces, other Bodies not
unlike those that pass for the Chemists Principles. How far the event proved
agreeable to his Hypothesis, will be best gathered from the Phenomenon
themselves, of the Trials, which I shall proceed to set down a succinct account
of, as soon as I have premised, to make way for it, That by an Essential Oil,
Chemists are wont to mean such a fine Oleagenous Liquor, as to prevent
Empyreume and faeculent parts, has been distilled with store of Water in a (
Vesica or) Limbeck.

We took a pound of Essential Oil of Annifeeds, which Liquor (we therefore made
choice of, because it is more easy to discern it, by its self-coagulating
property, not to be sophisticated; and having put it into a Glass Retort of a
convenient size, we caused it to be Distilled, (in a Sand Furnace, capable of
giving a strong Fire) thirty six times, in which train of Operations, the
ensuing Phenomenon were both congruous to our Hypothesis, and in themselves
observable.

1. As pure as the Essential, or, as some Spagyrists style them, the Aetherial
Oils of Vegetables are presumed to be, and as confidently as Chemists pretend
they are, the pure Sulphurs or Unctuous principles of the Bodies that afford
them; yet, not only the first distillation left a Substance Black, like Pitch,
at the bottom of the Retort, but, at every one of the following Distillations,
such a Substance was either separated or generated.

2. Though after a Distillation or two it seemed likely, that this Pitchy
Substance would be found every time less and less, which made the person,
formerly mentioned, tell me, that he supposed within ten or at most twelve
Distillations, in all, if one should make so many this which he looked upon as
an Earthy recrement would be quite separated, and leave the Oil a most pure and
Homogeneous Liquor; yet I that (as I formerly intimated) looked upon this black
stuff not as a separated Excrement, but generated Substance, caused the
Distillations to be repeated till they had attained thrice that number, and not
only found that at each time, such a black Substance was left; but that now and
then a subsequent Distillation yielded much more of it than the precedent had
done; which change, from less to more, and from more to less, was not observed
only once or twice, but several times. And though this odd Pitchy Substance
were toward the latter end found in less quantity, than at the beginning, yet
the cause of that may well be, that the Oil to be Distilled did sensibly from
time to time decrease in Bulk, partly by reason of the recess of that portion
of the Oil, which could not but be dissipated and lost in so many Cohobations;
and partly, and indeed chiefly, by the loss of so much Oil as was transmuted
into Pitch and other Substances.

3. The Oil appeared in Distillation more fixed or unapt to rise than one would
have expected from so fine and light a Liquor, and especially toward the
latter end of the Distillations, it was often necessary to employ a scarce
credible degree of Fire to elevate all, that was not turned into Pitch.

4. The Liquor did not Distill like a pure Principle or Homogeneous Body, as
Quicksilver is wont to do, but first some fine and light Oil usually came over,
after which followed a less volatile Oil with another Substance or two, and
after that, another ascended in a distinct manner.

5. For it is to be noted that besides the forementioned black Earth, there were
produced by the operation of the Fire diverse other Substances, whereof the
first was a Waterish Liquor or Phlegm; which, after the Oil had been exposed to
some Distillations, began to grow very troublesome. For being rarefied by the
heat of the Fire into large bubbles, the Antipathy, or rather Incongruity,
between them and the Oil, occasioned a kind of conflict, wherein these Bubbles
did often suddenly break, (usually not without much noise) and sometimes with
such violence, as to shake and endanger the Retort; which once, by this
contest, was actually broken; yet not so, but that the Liquors and other
products of the Fire were saved by the watchful Laborant, and seasonably
transferred into a new Retort.

6. Besides this Phlegm, and the Pitch formerly taken notice of, our operation
afforded us from time to time a pretty quantity of a certain Substance, which,
with some not unskilful Persons, passed for a Volatile Salt; because it
ascended to the upper part of the Vessel, and appeared in a dry form, almost
like short Needles; and because also, it seemed to the Laborant, that, like a
Salt, it was (part of it at least) dissoluble in the Spirituous Phlegm,
mentioned in the last Number. But though at first, I inclined to this Opinion,
yet having made some few Trials to examine the truth of it, I was, and still am,
a little doubtful, whether this sublimed Body deserve the name of a true
Volatile Salt, though possibly there may be a pretty deal of that contained in
it. For I found the lumps of it, notwithstanding their seeming Sponginess, to
sink in common Water, and continue at the bottom of it without manifestly being
dissolved by that Liquor, (as mere Volatile Salts are wont easily to be) either
in the Cold, or by being kept a while in a moderate heat. I found this
Substance fusible, like Beeswax, at the flame of a small Taper, and if a lump
of it were kindled thereat, it would burn away, partly with a Yellow flame, and
partly with a flame more intensly Blue, than That of rectified Spirit of Wine,
but it appeared apt enough to go out of it self.

These, and some other things inclined me to look upon our anomalous Sublimate,
as a Substance, sui generis; but yet such a one, as I suspected to be somewhat
of kin to a Sal Volatile Oleosum, such as Camphire seems to be. For our
Sublimate rises without strong Fire, and that in a dry form, and is easily
enough fusible; all which I have observed in Camphire, as well as in Volatile
Salts, and our Sublimate will, like Camphire, dissolve in a high rectified
Vinous Spirit without at all Coloring the Liquor. And having long since found
by trial, that Camphire will, though slowly, dissolve in good Oil of Vitriol,
and make the Menstruum look of a Reddish Brown; I put some of that solvent upon
our Sublimate, and after having left them some hours together, though but in
the Cold, the Liquor seemed to have dissolved part of the dry Body, having, by
its action upon it, acquired a Brown Color somewhat inclining to Red; and part
of this Liquor being put into a pretty deal of common Water, there seemed to
Emerge by degrees a dry Body, or Flores, which brought into my mind, what I
have elsewhere observed, when I employed the same method, to recover Camphire
out of Oil of Vitriol. But, as I was lately intimating, thoug I think it not
improbable, that our Anomalous Sublimate may be nearer of kin to a Sal Volatile
Oleosum, than to any of the Chemical Principles; yet I have not hitherto found
the resemblance betwixt it and such a Salt, to be complete enough to make me
Dogmatical in referring it to any Chemical Product, of a known denomination:
And therefore, till I be further satisfied, I shall only add, that this
Volatile Salt, or Oily Sublimate, or whatever name it may deserve, was very
pretty to look upon, being glittering almost like some fine flowers of Benzoin;
and of this we had, though it were very light, between two or three Drams.

7. Besides all these differing Substances, our Oil of Anniseeds afforded us
from time to time, a little quantity of Spirit, as we concluded from two or
three Signs; One, that it came not over with the Phlegm, and yet would mingle
with that Liquor, but not with the Distilled Oil: And another, that, as it was
more fixed than the Oil and Phlegm, so it rose latter than they; and not only
needed a stronger degree of Fire; but, which is chiefly considerable, it was
usually observed, to come over in white fumes, as many Spirits, that are
somewhat fixed, are wont to do; which was the more easy to be observed,
because, that being willing to make use of the same Retort as long as we could,
for the greater certainty of the Experiment, and the Pitch being not to be
taken out, whilst 'twas any thing soft, because of its close sticking to the
Glass, it was thought, to give at the latter end of the Distillation, so strong
a Fire, as, by making the Sand and Retort red hot (or very little less hot)
would make the Pitch so dry and brittle, that it might afterward be loosened
from the sides of the Glass, and got out in the form of a dry and brittle,
though exceeding Black Substance. And to the two foregoing signs I shall now
add a third, that does more clearly evince, that the Substance we have been
speaking of, was a Spirit: For, though it could not but be very much weakened by
being diffused through so great a quantity of Phlegm, as came over before it,
yet its Corpuscles were so many and vigorous, that when I put them upon the
powder of crude Coral, they presently began to dissolve it, and the Phlegmatic
Spirit did in a trice make a great Ebullition with noise and bubbles, whether I
poured it on the fixed Salt of Tartar, or the Urinous and Volatile Salt of Sal
Armoniack.

The success of this Experiment, being answerable enough to what I desired and
expected from it, allowed me to make diverse reflections on it, and particularly
those that follow.

And, 1. Our Trial argues, that a Substance, that is looked upon by Chemists as
a homogeneous Body, and which passes for one of their Principles, (for that is
the case of our Essential Oil of Anniseeds) may yet be of such a nature, that
barely by the further action of the Fire, it may be made to afford a very
considerable proportion of a Substance exceedingly different from that which
afforded it. For in our Experiment, we obtained a Caput Mortuum, whose
qualities were quite other, than those of Oil of Anniseeds; since it was
opacous, black, dry, very difficultly fusible, and fixed, in so strong a degree
of Fire, as made the Retort that contained it, and the Sand about it red hot.
This Substance would lie undissolved in a highly Rectified Vinous Spirit, into
which Oil of Anniseeds would readily have diffused it self (if they had been a
litte shaken together) without the help of heat. And though we made the Liquor
actually boil a pretty while, yet most of the Caput Mortuum continued a black
Substance, only it discolored the Menstruum, which looked as if it had rather
extracted a Tincture, than made a solution properly so called. And of this
black and Pitch-like Caput Mortuum, we had at the end of our Distillations,
when we weighed the several parcels altogether, not much less (which you may
justly think strange) than half the weight of the whole Oil of Anniseeds; this
black stuff amounting to a pretty deal more than seven Ounces. And from hence
we may collect, that the Analysis, wont to he acquiesced in by vulgar Chemists;
is as yet, but an indetermined thing, since they have not declared (nor perhaps
thought of any such thing) what number of Distillations, (whether one or more,
or if more then one, how many,) shall be made the standard, by which we are to
conclude, that a Substance, obtained by Distillation, is a Chemical Principle.

2. It may be also inferred from some Phenomenon of our Experiment, that the
Fire, as it is wont to be employed, is not, as Chemists pretend it to be, the
true and genuine Instrument of the Analysis of Bodies, since it does not, as
they presume it does, barely extricate and separate the several similar
Substances, that, though concealed and disguised by commixtures with each
other, were pre-existent (in the same forms wherein they afterward appear) in
the Body exposed to its operation. For in our case the Oil of Anniseeds is,
according to the Chemists estimate, the Sulphurous Principle of the Concrete;
and therefore has not any other Principles, especially in any considerable
quantity, contained in it. And yet, by the bare action of the Fire, this Oil,
which they acknowledge to be a similar Body, is brought to afford three or four
other Substances, of differing natures from one another.

3. From the two foregoing Observations we may likewise deduce, That the Fire,
at least in diverse cases, may not only separate, but variously compound and
alter, the parts of a Body exposed to its action; and thereby give considering
men cause to suspect, that diverse Substances, that are presumed to be only
Extricated or Extracted by the operation of the Fire, may be really produced by
it.

4. Agreeably to which suspicion, it happens unluckily enough for the Chemical
Hypothesis; that in our Experiment, the Substances that were obtained, were, a
fixed and Earthy Powder, a not inconsiderable portion of Phlegm, a Spirituous
Liquor, and a dry Sublimate, akin to a Volatile Salt: And these, though they
all proceed from a Body, that, according to the Chemists should not, and
indeed, for ought appears, did not actually contain any of them before, did yet
so resemble in qualities the Earths, Phlegm, and Spirit, that Chemists obtain
by Distillation from those Bodies, they look upon as perfectly mixed and
compounded, that if they are not the same, they have diverse qualities, so like
those, that entitle what is afforded by confessedly mixed Bodies to the name of
Phlegm or Salt, or some other Primordial Ingredient, that the Earth for
instance, or the (acid) Spirit obtained in our Experiment, are far less
differing from the Earth of Blood, or the Spirit of Amber, than these are from
the Earth and Salt of thoroughly Calcined Hartshorn.

5. 'Twill scarce be necessary to draw so obvious a Corollary from what has
been already deliverd, as this; That it is possible, that Chemical Principles
(or at least such Substances, as a Vulgar Chemist, not knowing from what Body
they were obtained, would look upon, as such) may be made of another.

But though I shall not enlarge on this Corollary, it will not be amiss to make
one considerable Observation, that belongs to it. Namely, that Acid and Aqueous
Substances, how differing soever each of them is from a pure Oil, may be
produced from it, by the action of the Fire. For I found by Trial, that in that
Liquor which the Laborant took for the Phlegm of Oil of Anniseeds, there was
such store of Acid parts, that (as was above recited) they would readily
dissolve powdered Coral, though crude, even in the cold; and would make a great
conflict with Salt of Tartar, and with that of Urine, as soon as the Liquor was
put upon it. But yet the greatest part of the Liquor by far, seemed to be of an
Aqueous nature, which a Chemist would call Phlegm; which is a Body that will
not mingle with Oil, and is otherwise exceedingly different from Oil,
especially an Essential one, (such of that of Anniseeds,) whose purity makes it
it totally inflamable. And the quantity of the whole Liquor, consisting of Acid
and Phlegmatic parts, was far from being inconsiderable, amounting to about
two Ounces and three quarters. It may also be worth while to observe, as
another thing belonging to our Corollary, that the Truth, declared in it,
allows us to question, whether it be necessary to suppose with the Chemists,
that Nature has been obliged to make provision of great quantities of
Primordial and Simple Bodies, and that she is solicitous to mix them all
together, for the composing of a Body, capable of affording by the Analysis or
separatory Operation of the Fire, Salt, Spirit, Sulphur, Phlegm and Earth: I
will not hence universally infer, that there are no such Substances, one or
more to be found, in any of those Bodies that are called perfectly mixed,
antecedently to their being exposed to the Fire. But this, I think, will follow
from what has been delivered, that the pre-existence of such Substances must be
made out by some other way, than the bare operation of the Fire; and that the
grand Chemical supposition will not hold in all Bodies, that what similar Body
soever is obtained by the operation of the Fire from a Concrete, committed to
Distillation, was formerly and actually pre-existent in it.

6. And lastly, our Experiment affords us a considerable Argument in favor of
that part of the Corpuscular, or Mechanical Hypothesis, that teaches, inanimate
Bodies to differ from one another, but in the bigness, shape, motion,
contexture, and in a word, the Mechanical affections, of the minute parts they
consist of. For in our Experiment, we see that Oil of Anniseeds, which is not
only an uniform or similar Body, as to sense, but is judged so by Chemists,
upon an Analysis of the concrete that afforded it, is, by having its parts
variously agitated, shak'd, and rubbed against one another, and in differing
manners broken, associated, and ranged, transmuted into four Bodies of such
differing natures and qualities, as the Chemists principles and Elements are
known to be. And this without the help of any true Seed or plastic Principle,
by the bare operation of the Fire, which Helmont calls the Artificial death of
things, and the destroyer of Seminalities. And this is the more considerable,
because, whereas the Ancient Corpuscularian Philosophers assigned three general
ways whereby Bodies may be produced; namely, by the addition of new parts, the
dividing, and sometimes taking away a portion of the former, and the
Transposition of the constituent parts, in our Experiment, the whole work seems
to be performed only by what they would have called Transposition, and that
guided but by so simple, impetuous, and unruly an Agent, as the Fire. Unless it
be said, that diverse igneous particles, that penetrated the Glass Retort, did
substantially associate themselves with some parts of the Oil of Anniseeds, and
concur with them to compose the Pitch-like Caput Mortuum; which they will
perhaps say, that (whatever others may do) I ought to allow as a possible
thing; after what I have elsewhere written, purposely to show, that such a
penetration of the Pores of Glass, by the Atoms of Fire is not impossible. But
the Experiment, I have delivered, of the Ponderability of Flame, prove only
that some of its Particles may combine with heavy Bodies, and fixed in the
degree of Fire I exposed them to; my Trials having been made upon Tin and Lead.
And it will not perhaps be thought likely, that Igneous Atoms should, by their
combination with the Particles of an inflamable Oil, produce an Aqueous Liquor,
and that in great quantity; as we lately noted of the Acid Phlegm of Anniseeds,
amounting to two ounces and almost six Drams.

Upon the whole Matter, the Phenomenon, observable in our Experiment upon Oil
of Anniseeds, seem very congruous to the Mechanical Hypothesis, and very
unfavourable to That of the Chemists. For, whether the Fire be supposed to have
Acted merely as an Agent, or Efficient Cause, or to have also concurred as a
Material one; it appears, that by changes of Texture, without the Addition of
any visible Parts, or of any Seed, Bodies very differing in Color,
Consistence, Fixity, and diverse other Qualities, may be produced from a Body,
not only homogeneous, as to sense, but pure enough to pass for a Chemical
Principle. And, though the suspicion lately proposed, should be allowed to be
Probable, as to the other Products, as well as to the black Substance; yet
still our Process upon the Oil of Anniseeds would afford considerable
Corollaries against the Chemical Doctrine, I call in question. For, 1. The
Objection we are considering, will give wary men just ground to suspect, that
in ordinary Chemical Distillations the Fire is not always to be looked upon as
a mere Instrument of Analysis; but may in many, if not in most cases, be also a
material Cause of the supposed Principles, produced by its means; which is
quite contrary to the Received Doctrine of the Vulgar Spagyrists, (who are
those, I now dispute with.) But, not to insist on this Remark, I think our
process upon Oil of Anniseeds, will not serve to prove the Paradox proposed at
the beginning of this Paper; since, treating of Ingredients Chymically
obtainable, I may be allowed to speak of them in the usual sense of Chemists,
who suppose the different Substances, obtained from a Body committed to
Distillation, to be the Hypostatical Principles, and other Ingredients of it,
without supposing the Fire to do any more than extricate or disentangle them
from one another. So that, Secondly, (to conclude at last this long Paragraph)
our Experiment seems to prove the Production of other Chemical Principles out
of one, as validly as their Experiments prove, that such Principles are
obtained from the Bodies, they call Mixed. For, whereas the force of the lately
proposed surmise or objection, lies in this, that the Association of Igneous
Particles hinders the different Substances, that our Oil of Anniseeds afforded
us, from being uncompounded Bodies, and therefore from being true Principles,
they may for all this have as good right to the Title of Principles, as most of
these they will have us take for such: Since the Atoms of the Fire, may every
whit as reasonably be supposed, to Associate themselves variously with the
Corpuscles of a Mixed Body, committed to Distillation, as with those of Oil of
Anniseeds, and so their supposed Principles will, no more than ours, be free
from Composition. Nay the advantage in the Comparison, lies on our side, since
the different Substances, that Chemists are wont to obtain from a mixed Body,
may be Compounded, not only with Igneous Particles, but with the differing
Ingredients of the same Body; since this in their Hypothesis is a mixed Body;
whereas Essential Oil of Anniseeds is by them granted to be a Simple one: And
therefore each of its Productions, is compounded with no Extraneous Substance,
save the Corpuscles of the Fire.

When I had framed the Conjecture, That from a Chemical Principle, several
differing Bodies might be obtained by the mere operation of the Fire; I thought
fit to endeavor the Confirmation of it, by making Experiments upon other
Distilled Oils, (for those made by expression, are by Chemists themselves,
owned to be Compounded Bodies,) of Natures different, both from the Oil of
Anniseeds, and from one another. And accordingly, whilst our Process with this
Oil, which the Chemists call Essential, and which was drawn from a Vegetable
Seed, was carrying on, I took care to have Distilled in the same Furnace, Oil
of Turpentine; which, though drawn from a Vegetable Substance differs very much
from Oil of Anniseeds, as also Oil of Amber; which, according to Chemists,
belongs to the Mineral Kingdom: And lastly, Oil of Hartshorn, afforded by a
Subject, which (to speak in their Phrase) belongs to the Animal Kingdom.

POSTSCRIPT.
THese Oils were committed to the same Laborant, that managed the lately
mentioned Oil of Anniseeds; and he accordingly kept a kind of Journal of the
number of Rectifications, the Quantities of Pitchy Matter from time to time
afforded by them, and diverse other Phenomenon, or Circumstances, that occurred
in so tedious a Prosecution, as I thought Experiments of such moment deserved.
But, the Papers, containing the Minutes of these things, having been unhappily
lost, with diverse others, by occasion of a great Fire, that obliged me after
midnight to make a hasty and very disorderly remove of my Writings, I could
never since retrieve the Particulars. And therefore I must content my self, to
set down as much of the Trials (which I hope will comprize the most substantial
part of them) as by examining my own Memory and the Laborants, and by some few
other helps, I am able to collect: As soon as I have given here one
Advertisement, because I think it was omitted, in the Papers, whence the
foregoing part of this writing, was Transcribed. The Advertisement is this;
that as well in the precedent, as in the subsequent part of this Discourse, I
do not take Chemical Principles in the strictest sense of that Term, wherein it
is confined to Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury; but in the larger acception, wherein
the Learned Doctor Willis, and diverse other Chemists (that are not all his
Juniors) employ it, when they comprize under it, two Elementary Bodies; as they
do when they constitute five Principles, (which perhaps might be more clearly
called Similar Ingredients;) in which number they comprize Phlegm and Earth,
which other Chemists, as well as the Aristotelians would call Elements, (of the
Body that affords them.) Taking then in this whole Writing, the word Principles
in the larger sense above declared (congruously whereunto I usually call them
the Chemical Principles indefinitely, not the Hypostatical Principles, which
are accounted but three;) I proceed to the particular Observations and
Reflections I was going to begin.

First, Then it plainly appears, that two of the three lately mentioned Oils,
namely, the Oil of Turpentine, and the Oil of Amber, and therefore very
probably the third also, (my design being the same in all three) were Distilled
at least fifty times; for I intended not to stop short of that number. And by
an Inscription upon one of the Phials, I found that the Oil, which the
contained Liquor was drawn from, had been Distilled one and fifty times: which
number exceeds by fifteen, that of the Distillations formerly mentioned to have
been made of the Oil of Annniseeds.

2. Each of the three other Oils, ( viz. that of Hearts horn, that of
Turpentine, and that of Amber,) did leave from time to time, in the bottom of
the Retorts, whence they were drawn off, a not inconsiderable quantity of Black
Faeces, much like those, that were left by the Oil of Anniseeds, and which I
have formerly called a Pitchy Substance: I found in a Superscrib'd Paper, some
quantity of this stuff left by the Oil of Turpentine, and, though I am not
certain, whether it were all the stuff of this kind that was afforded by the
pound of Oil we employed, yet it amounted to above two Ounces and five Drams:
And if I much mistake not, the other two Oils did each of them afford a
considerable quantity of Black Terrestrial Matter, though the hee^^ul Laborant
observed, that the Oil of Hartshorn did sooner leave often yielding copious
Faeces (as I often in this ^eper call them, to comply with the Chemists Terms,
though I assent not to their Notion) than the Oil of Turpentine, or that of
Amber. But if neither of the two afforded any more, than did the Oil of
Turpentine, I look upon it as a remarkable thing, that the Oil of Anniseeds,
which is a fine Essential Oil, Distilled in a Vesica or Limbeck, should yield
above twice more of Earthy Matter, than either of the three other Oils, that
were Distilled but in Retorts.

3. Of the Color of the Rectified Oil of Hartshorn I can say little, having
unluckily lost the Liquor it self; but the Oil of Amber, after the one and
fiftieth Distillation, was indeed very clear, but yet of an Amber Color, that
was far from pale: And the Oil of Turpentine, that is usually after one
Rectification a clear and Colorless Liquor, after fifty Distillations,
appeared almost Red.

4. But that is much more considerable, which I observed in the quantities of
the different Liquors, afforded by the long series of our Distillations, for at
the end of the process, the remaining Oil of Turpentine, for instance, did not
appear to my Eyes to be considerably, if at all, Superior in bulk to another
Liquor, that came over with it in Distillation, and was not true Oil, for it
would readily enough mix with Water, but keep it self in a Mass distinct from
the Oil, and weighed above three Ounces and three quarters.

5. This oddly produced Liquor, I looked upon as compounded of Spirit and of
Phlegm: For though the latter did so much exceed the other in quantity, that in
an expert Chemists Opinion, the whole Liquor passed for Phlegm; yet, I not only
judged some parts of it to be Spirits, but found them to be of an Acid nature
too; since, besides what the taste made me suspect, I found that the Compounded
Liquor would readily enough begin to Corrode beaten Coral, even in the cold,
and some of it being poured upon good Salt of Tartar, presently made with it a
Conflict and Ebullition, not without a hissing noise and a multitude of
Bubbles. So likewise the Spirituous Phlegm of Amber made a conflict with Salt
of Tartar, and dissolved crude Coral, as other weak. Acid Spirits are also wont
to do. This Liquor of Amber was not pale, as the Phlegmatic Spirit of Oil of
Anniseeds, was; and that lately mentioned to have been obtained from Oil of
Turpentine was high Colored, being of a brownish Red.

6. I forgot to take notice in due place (and therefore do it in this) that,
among other Trials made to discover, that the Spirits afforded by our Oils were
really Acid, we put two ounces of the Spirituous Phlegm of Oil of Anniseeds
(that being the mildest Oil) upon some Minium; and, having digested them a
while together, found the Liquor turned sweet, and fit (as we judged) to make
Saccharum Saturni: And this Liquor (after Filtration through Cap paper) being
gently abstracted, left in the bottom of the Retort, a thick Honey like
Substance, from which (the Distillation being continued in the same Retort, but
with a much stronger or heat) there came over some Liquor, which being in too
little quantity to be Rectified, we could not free it from its Phlegm, and
therefore did not find it Inflammable; as I guessed the Spirituous part would
have been after Rectification, in regard the Liquor was exceeding like the
Spiritus Ardens Saturni, I have elsewhere described in its peculiar, and very
penetrating taste and sm^ll.

7. It may not he unfit to be taken notice of in this place, that, having
lighted on two Phials, that I long knew not what was become of, one of which
contained some of the Oil of Turpentine, and the other some of the Oil of
Amber, that I formerly mentioned to have been each of them Distilled at least
50 times; I thought fit to try, whether after these Liquors had been laid by
about a year and half, or longer, they, would after having had so long a time
to defecate themselves in, yield still such a black Substance, as has been
oftentimes mentioned; and having, to satisfy my self, caused each of these
Liquors to be again Distilled in a Retort, it left behind it a greater quantity
of a black and shining Substance, than could well have been expected.

8. It may seem very odd in it self, and may much serve to confirm, what I have
elsewhere delivered about the Mechanical Origin of Fixity, as also of the
Qualities opposite to Fusibleness and to Fluidity; that, so Volatile and thin a
Liquor, as a Chemical and Rectified Oil, should by the bare operation of the
Fire, be brought to yield a great quantity of what looks so like Terrestrial
faeces, as our Pitchy Capita Mortua did. But this reflection will, I presume,
appear the better grounded, if I add the success of one Trial (among others)
that I made, to examine the Terrestrial Nature of the black Bodies, I am
speaking of: For, although many Bodies that will not ascend, or be dissipated
in close Vessels, will easily be driven away in open ones; yet having put one
ounce of the Caput Mortuum of the Oil of Anniseeds, and as much of that
afforded by Oil of Turpentine, each of them into a distinct Crucible, and kept
them three hours and a half, or near four hours, in such a heat, as made the
Vessels all the while red hot; though we kept not the Crucibles closely
covered, but only loosly to keep out the Ashes, yet we found, when the Vessels
were removed from the Fire, that the contained Bodies had not at all been
brought to fusion, only that from the Oil of Anniseeds was in part somewhat
caked together: And notwithstanding, all the heat, they had been exposed to,
the Pitchy Substance of the Oil of Turpentine, retained not far from three
quarters of its first weight; and the Caput Mortuum of Oil of Anniseeds lost
about eighteen grains less than that.

9. After this we also endeavored to discover, whether our Pitchy Substances
would afford any Fixed or Alcalisate Salt, as the Capita Mortua of most Bodies
belonging to the Vegetable Kingdom, are wont to do. But though we kept an Ounce
a-piece of the black Substances, left by the Oil of Anniseeds and that of
Turpentine, for nine or ten hours, red hot in the Crucibles; yet we found
indeed the Bodies very much diminished in quantity, but they did not appear at
all Calcined.

10. Into a couple of Ounces of this last named Liquor, we put by little and
little, of much of dry Salt of Tartar as it would work upon, as an Acid, or (if
you please) till there would no longer be any visible conflict excited by
adding more Salt. The Acid being thus mortified or satiated, I intended to draw
off all the rest of the Liquor, and to try with the Phlegm drawn off, whether
by cohobating it very slowly in a new Glass-head and Body, I could not make a
farther transmutation of the Terebinthinate Oil, and change, at least, part of
this Aqueous Phlegmatic Liquor into a whitish Earth. About the possibility of
which Transmutation, and of some others also, I might here subjoyn an account,
if, since the lately mentioned Fire, I could have found a short discourse, I
wrote, to propose and examine this grand Physicochymical Problem, Whether we
ought to admit any other Elements or Hypostatical Principles at all, even so
much as one of the Bodies that are commonly called, mixed:

FINIS.
ERRATA.
THE first Advertisement, page 5. line 18. delevery. p. 22. l. 5. read
Immersed. p. 34. l. 5. r. Spe-ctators. p. 40. l. 16. 1. Operation. p. 125. l.
22. r. Little.


