A CONFUTATION of the DUTCH-ARMINIAN TENENT, of Universal Redemption.

With Relation in special, unto certain Sectaries, in ENGLAND.

By name, the Morians, or Revelators, with others tracing them; who hold, That
Christ died for all men, good and bad.

By THEOPH. BRABOURN.

Matthew. 7.6. Give ye not that which is holy, to dogs; neither cast ye your
pearls, before swine. LONDON, Printed by WILL. BENTLEY, Anno Domini 1651.

To the READER.
THis ensuing Discource (Christian Reader) lying by me, and fitted for the
Press; but with thoughts, never to have it Printed so long as I live: my mind
is now altered, very lately, upon this occation: Finding by sad experience,
that this Dutch-ARMINIAN Tenent, of Universal Redemption, has of late invaded
our English Nation, and infected the minds, and perverted the judgment of
many, who pretend highest for God and godliness; I could not but alter my
thoughts, and resolve to publish this Discource, if it may be, to prevent the
further growth and spreading of it. There is a Sect of Revelators, or
Manifestators, called Morians; of one MORE dwelling near Wisbech, who with his
Disciples, about eight or nine years since, were orthodox in this point with
us; but since, finding this new light, of Universal Redemption, to be a notable
means to further an other and more ancient new light, which formerly he had
received and taught; namely, his doctrine of Free Grace, as he calls it,
presently he set abroach this Universal Redemption among his Disciples: of and
from whom (as I suppose) our Independents of later time, have borrowed this
light: for of late, some of them are not ashamed to teach and preach it
publicly, offering Christ and the benefits of his death, to dogs and swine, to
the worst of men, saying, Come Whoremaster, come Drunkard, the work is wrought
for you, believe it, etc. and they may as well say, Come Rascal, come Rogue,
come Tag and Rag, believe it, Christ died for you all. Thus they fear not, to
give Christ that Pearl and Holy thing, unto dogs and swine. Their new Arminian
light has taught them, to give the Childrens bread to dogs. Not long since,
some of the Bishops were tainted with this Error, and how odious were they for
it in the eyes of these very men? but now themselves are infected with the same
Error, and it is become a lovely Truth: and what have these men to say for this
Error more than the Bishops had? surely, if so much, yet nothing more, unless
it be this, that it is a bright beam of new light arisen to them of late; and
notably tending to their new doctrine of Free grace, as they call it; and that
the spirit has taught it them: but remember, that there is a Spirit of Truth,
and a spirit of Error, 1. John 4.6. and so I end.

THEO. BRABOURN.

A CONFUTATION of the ARMINIAN Tenent, of Universal Redemption.
IN handling this Controversy, I shall first propound sundry Arguments
against it. Secondly, I shall make answer unto the Texts alleged by
Arminians, for proof of their Tenent. Thirdly, I shall confute a common Answer
of theirs, given to a notable Objection of ours. And Fourthly, I shall confute
their distinction of Impetration and Application. I begin with the first of
these: and these are my Arguments against it.

ARGUM. I.
If Christ forbade his ministers, to give, or deliver his Word and Sacrament
concerning his death, unto all men, as unto unbelieving, impenitent,
scandalous, and wicked men; Then Christ did not give or deliver himself to
death for all men: or, then Christ died not for all men. The reason hereof is
this; If Christ had given himself to death for all men, good and bad, then
would he have his ministers to do so too, in delivering the Word and Sacrament;
and it is against reason to think, that Christ should give himself for all men,
and forbid his ministers to give him to all men, or to some men: so there is
the same reason of both: Now if he forbade his ministers, to deliver his Word
and Sacrament unto all men, unto wicked and impenitent men, then surely, he did
not deliver himself to death for all men.

For 1. It is absurd to think, that a ministers Commission, in delivering the
Word and Sacrament concerning Christ's death, should be of less extent than
Christ his death is of; as, that his Commission should extend but to some men
only, when Christ his death extends to all men: wherefore if his Commission be
but unto some men only, then Christ his death is not to, or for all men, but
to and for some men only. 2. The Word and Sacrament concerning Christ his
death, are signs representing Christ's death unto us; now the sign and the thing
signified by it, must be of equal extent; as, if the sign belong but unto some
men only, then Christ his death, the thing signified by it, belongs not unto
all men, but unto some men only. 3. If Christ would not permit his ministers,
to give the bread and wine in the Sacrament (which is the lesser) unto all men,
then much less would he give himself which is the greater) unto all men: If he
forbade his ministers, to give his bread and wine unto all men, muchless would
he give his life, his own body and blood for all men: if he denied the Sign
unto wicked and impenitent persons, then much more would he deny there the
thing signified, which is, his precious body and blood: so much for my
proposition.

But Christ forbade his ministers, to give, or deliver his Word and Sacrament
concerning his death unto all men, as unto unbelieving, impenitent, scandalous
and wicked men. This my assumption I thus prove, first concerning the Sacrament.

1. It is the doctrine, both of our own and other reformed Churches, that
Christ would not have the Sacrament of the Lords supper, given by the minister
unto unbelievers, impenitent, scandalous, and wicked men. 2. Philip would not
give the Sacrament of Baptism unto the Eunuch, but upon the condition of his
faith first, Acts 8.37. S. Paul would not have the Lords supper given unto the
incestuous person, 1. Corinthians. 5.1, 5, 13. nor unto impenitent wicked men, as
not unto fornicatours, idolaters, drunkards, railers, nor extortioners, 1. Cor.
5.11. and see Matthew. 18.17. So much for the Sacrament, next for the Word.

2. Concerning the Word: Christ would not have the word concerning his death,
given or delivered by his ministers unto unbelievers, impenitent, scandalous,
and wicked men; which I thus prove:

In the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, the Minister delivers the bread, with
these words of Christ, This is my body, which is broken for thee: the which
words, are according to Christ's institution, 1. Cor. 11.24. Luke 22.19. now
forasmuch as Christ would not have impenitent wicked persons admitted to the
Lords Supper, he would not have his ministers deliver unto them, this his word
concerning his death, This is my body: which is broken for thee: so Christ's
minister may not say to a wicked man, Christ died for thee. Yet if Arminians
doctrine be true, that Christ died for all men, then a minister may say to the
vilest impenitent person, were he a Judas or worse, Christ died for thee. And
by the way, I wonder that Independents can hold forth Christ to all men in a
Sermon, saying, Come whore-master, drunkard, etc. Christ died for thee; and yet
refuse to give the Lords supper to scandalous persons, saying to them; Christ
died for thee. 2. Our Savior would not have holy things given to dogs, nor
pearls to swine, Matthew. 7.6. now wicked and impenitent persons, appearing
incorrigible, are dogs and swine; and Christ, whether given in the word or in
the sacrament, is an holy thing, and a pearl: wherefore a minister may not give
Christ to an incorrigible wicked man, saying, Christ died for thee. 3. S. Paul
preached the word concerning Christ's death at Antioch, Acts 13.14, 16, 27, 38.
where being a mixed multitude, of sheep and goats, of wheat and tares, he
directs his speech unto the sheep and wheat, not unto the goats and tares; for
he spoke as he said, To those that fear God, Acts 13.16, 26. and so soon as
some of his Auditors appeared to be goats and tares, and such as feared not
God, he turned away from them, and carried away the Gospel unto the Gentiles,
refusing to preach the word of Christ unto them, Acts 13.45, 46. and see Acts
19.9. whereby you see, S. Paul a minister of Christ, would not deliver the word
concerning Christ's death, unto wicked men, and such as feared not God.

It may be objected, that S. Paul says, It was necessary, that this word
should first be preached unto them, that is, unto those goats and tares, the
obstinate Jews Acts 13.46. and so Paul preached of Christ's death, as well to
wicked men as to the godly. Hereunto I answer, 1. As the Husbandman bestows
the same pains, upon the tares as upon the wheat, before the tares appear to
him to be tares; so the Apostle might preach Christ to the wicked, as well as
to the godly, they being together in a mixed assembly, before the wicked
appeared to him to be wicked: but yet as the husbandman takes pains for the
wheats sake, and not for the tares sake; so Paul might preach Christ, for the
godly's sake, and not for the wicked's sake: and it is evident in the Text to
be so: for Paul directs his speech unto the godly in the Assembly, to those
that feared God, Acts 13.16.26. excluding the wicked: for when in an Assembly,
there are both godly and wicked, if the minister directs his speech to the
godly, he excludes the wicked; or if he directs an use to the wicked, he
excludes the godly. 2. So soon as these tares, the obstinate Jews, appeared to
Paul to be tares, as you see, he refused to preach Christ unto them, Acts
13.45, 46. and for the same cause, had he known them at the first to be tares,
and if he could have separated them from the assembly of the godly, he would
not have preached Christ unto them at the first. True it is, Paul says, It was
necessary that the Word should be preached unto them: for it could not be
avoided, being they were mixed with the godly, and did not at first appear to
be tares: it was therefore necessary for Paul to preach unto them, with the
godly at the first, though he intended not his doctrine to be for them. Thus I
have proved my Assumption: and so the conclusion follows thus,

Therefore Christ did not give or deliver himself to death for all men: or,
Christ died not for all men. So much for my first Argument.

ARGUM. II.
If Christ would not pray for all men, then Christ would not die for all men.
The reason thereof is this; If Christ would not do the lesser for all men, then
he would not do the greater for all men: If Christ would not offer to God, the
calves of his lips for all men, then he would not offer to God the sacrifice of
his precious body and blood for all men: If Christ would not bestow so much
love upon all men as to pray for them, then would he not bestow so much love
upon all men as to die, and to shed his heart blood for them: In a word, If
Christ would exclude some men from his prayers, surely he meant to exclude them
from his bitter death and passion. So much for my proposition.

But Christ would not pray for all men. For proof hereof see John 17.8, 9.
where believers are distinguished from the world, that is, from the world of
unbelievers; and for these men who then did believe, Christ prayed, saying, I
pray for them, verse. 9. and Christ prayed also for those men, who should
afterward to the worlds end believe in him verse. 20. but for the world, that
is, for the world of unbelievers, Christ would not vouchsafe so much as to pray
to God for them, saying, I pray not for the world, verse. 9. So much for proof
of my Assumption, and so my Conclusion follows.

Therefore Christ would not die for all men. And by consequence, Christ did not
die for all men: for look what Christ would not do, that he did not do: unless
we should imagine, that Christ his will, and his actions, were contrary one to
the other: or, that he did do that, which he did not first will to do.

Arminians in their Acta Synodalia, de Morte Christi, page 319. do answer to my
Assumption, and to my Text brought to prove it, thus; Christ says not, that he
would not pray for the world, that is, that he would never afterward pray for
them; but thus he says, that he does not pray for the world, that is, that he
does not for that present time pray for them; or that he does not in this
particular prayer, John 17.9. pray for them. Hereunto I thus reply.

1. Though I shall prove by and by, that there is more in Christ's words, than
Arminians do grant, yet this which they do grant, is sufficient to make good my
argument: for this is in the Text, and they grant it, that Christ said, He did
not pray for the world, that is, at that time and in that particular prayer, he
did not pray for them: from which it does undeniably follow, that as he did not
then pray for them, so he would not then pray for them; or it was his will, at
that time and in that prayer, not to pray for them, but to exclude them from
his prayer, and from the benefit thereof. This I thus make good.

A wise man's actions and words, do flow from his understanding and his will;
and his words and deeds, are regulated and governed by his will; so as what he
does or speaks, the same he first willed; and what he refuses to do or to
speak, the same he wills, or wills not to do or speak, I say, being a man's
actions and words are regulated by his will, both in his speech, and in his
silence refusing to speak, whenever, he is so silent, as that he refuses to
speak, it is manifest that it is his will to be silent, and to refuse to speak:
wherefore when Christ said, I pray not, or I do not now in this prayer pray for
the world; hereby it is evident, that at that time his will, was not to pray
for them; but that his will was against it, or his will was against praying for
them at that time: because he willed silence at this time, and refused to pray
for them in this prayer.

When a father having ten sons, says, I give unto my nine elder sons, an
hundred pounds apeece, but is silent saying nothing of his tenth or youngest
son; suppose it will not hence follow, that the fathers mind and will was to
deny him, and to refuse to give him an hundred pounds; yet it is otherwise in
this case: for when the father says, I give an hundred pounds apeece to my
nine elder sons, but as for my tenth and youngest son, who is a wicked man, a
riotous and prodigal son, I give him nothing; here it is manifest, that the
fathers will was, to exclude the youngest son, and to be unwilling at that time
that he should have an hundred pounds: so our Savior, having many good and
godly followers of him, who were believers, says, I pray for them John 17.9.
and for all them, John 17.20. but as for the world, that is, for impenitent and
unbelieving men, I pray not for them, John 17.9. here it is clear, that as he
did not then pray for them, so he would not at that time pray for them: for he
voluntarily excluded them from his prayer, when he prayed for others.

Such negative speeches as this in John 17.9. are voluntary denials, refusals,
or exclusions; not only signifying a thing not done, but also a will not to do
it, as you may see John 8.11, 50. and 13.18. Gal. 2.2.

Thus it is proved, that as Christ did not in that prayer pray for the world,
so it was not his will but against his will, then to pray for them: now hence
it follows, That if at any time Christ did voluntarily refuse to pray for any
men, then he would not die for them, or then he would refuse to die for them:
and so you see, that from what Arminians do grant, my argument is made good:
but I shall further prove, more to be in Christ's words, than what they grant,
and thus I prove it.

2. As Christ did not pray for the world, and also as is proved, Christ would
not at that time and in that prayer pray for them; so it is gatherable from the
Text and context, that Christ would never afterward pray for them; the which
Arminians deny, and this I here prove: Christ his prayer, though uttered and
made then, yet the virtue and extent of it lasted after, or unto the death of
that present world of impenitent wicked men: for as Christ's prayer, once made
for the godly, extends it self for their good, unto their death, John 17.9, 11,
15, 21, 24. so Christ's exclusion of that wicked world, from the benefit of his
prayer once, must be an exclusion of them for ever after: unless it could be
shown, that after Christ's prayer, that wicked world converted and believed,
which cannot be shown. Now if this wicked world were ever after the same, why
should Christ alter his mind toward them? why should he pray for them
afterward, more than he did before? and I can but marvel, that Arminians
should grant, that once Christ did not pray for that world, and yet suppose
that afterward he did pray for them; and yet have no ground for this supposed
thing.

2 The ground and reason of Christ his prayer, will clear it up, that as he did
not for the present pray for the world, so he would not for the future pray for
them; or so he would never after pray for them. The reason why Christ prayed
for believers, was because they believed in him, John 17.8, 9, 20. and because
they were Gods people, for they are thine, John 17.9. and because God the
Father had given them to Christ, John 17.9. On the contrary, the reason why
Christ prayed not for the world, must needs be, because they were worldlings,
wicked and impenitent persons, unbelievers, and were none of Gods people, nor
given to Christ: now this being the cause, why Christ refused to pray for them
at that present time, John 17.9. for the same cause, Christ could never pray
for them afterward: for many of that wicked world, lived and died
impenitently, and in unbelief, Luke 7.30. John 3.19. Acts 13.45, 46, 50. Luke
19.41, 42. Romans 9.27, 31, 32. 2. Cor. 3.14, 15. Mark 4.11, 12. If their
unbelief hindered Christ's prayer at that time, John 17.9. it must for ever
after hinder his prayer: because many of them were ever after unbelievers, and
the very same men as before, when Christ refused to pray for them. So much for
my second Argument.

ARGUM. III.
If Christ so loved all men, as to give himself and die for all men; then would
he have caused the Gospel to be preached to all men; by means whereof, they
should have knowledge of his death, and might believe in him, so as to be the
better for his death. This I thus prove.

1 He that wills the End, he wills the means tending unto it, and whereby
it must be obtained: the end and the proper or necessary means cannot be
separated: Christ's death for men, is the End, the preaching of Christ's death in
the Gospel, is the means for men to know it, and to believe in him, so as to be
the better for it: wherefore, if Christ so loved all men, as to die and give
himself for them, he could not but out of the same his love, have given them
knowledge of it by preaching, which is the means of faith, that so they might
partake of the benefit of his death.

2 If Christ out of his love John 3.16. and 15.13. died for all men, then if he
would not give all men knowledge of it, whereby they might apply it to
themselves, or believe in him, that so they might be the better for his death;
then he is like a Physician, pretending the greatest love possible to cure his
friend, by preparing and making a most sovereign potion for him; but sets it
behind or under the bed, or in some secret corner of the chamber, where it is
impossible for the sick man to find it: all this is but a pretense of love: for
if it were true love, he would have set it where the sick man should have had
knowledge of it, or he would have given him knowledge of it, that so he might
make use of it for his health: so if Christ had died for all men, all men
should have known it, and must have had it preached unto them, that so they
might make use of it for salvation.

3 They may as well say, God intends by ordinary means, to save a man's
natural life, and yet deny him food, as to say, Christ intended to die for the
salvation of all men, and yet deny them the knowledge of it by the Gospel
preached. So much for my Major.

But Christ neither would nor has caused the Gospel to be preached to all men;
whereby they should be brought to faith, and be the better for his death. This
I thus prove, 1. The Gospel is not in these days preached to many Indians, and
barbarous nations. 2. In old time before us, the Gospel, or any thing of
Christ, was not preached to millions of Gentiles, Psalm. 147.19, 20. Acts 10.12,
28. and 16.6, 7. Ephesians 2.11, 12, 13, 14. 3. Christ preached to some men in
parables, and darkly, to this end, that they should not obtain remission of
sins, and be the better for his death, Mark 4.11, 12. So much for my Minor; and
the conclusion follows.

Therefore Christ did not so love all men, as to give himself, and to die for
all men.

Before I have done with this Argument, I must answer an Objection, which my
Reader may make; and confute an Answer, which the Arminians do make: the
Objection is this you said in your first Argument, that Christ would not have
the word concerning his death (which is Gospel) to be preached to wicked,
impenitent, and unbelieving men: and here in this third Argument, you say, that
the Gospel ought to be preached to all men; and among all men, are many wicked
men, etc. Hereunto I answer, that this is no contradiction: for in my first
Argument, I spoke absolutely and as the truth is; but here in my third
Argument, I speak not absolutely, but conditionally, with an if: as, If Christ
died for all men, then the Gospel must be preached to all men, be they godly or
wicked: so this I speak but upon a supposition of the truth of the Arminian
tenent, which if it be true, then this follows, that Gospel must be preached to
all men, good and bad. So much of this Objection: and now I come to the answer
of Arminians, which is this.

The Arminians in their Acta Synodalia, de Morte Christi, page 327, 328. do
answer this my third Argument thus: that a limitation is to be added to my
Major, and then my Minor will be false: thus therefore they frame it a new, and
limit it: If Christ so loved all men, as to die for all men; then would he have
caused the Gospel to be actually preached to all men; or else be prepared and
in a readiness to have it preached, so soon as men be fitted to receive it.

The better to color this limitation, they make a twofold calling, a common or
general calling, and a special calling: by the general calling, they understand
the law and light of nature, as the natural knowledge that there is a God, and
of the law of God, to which men ow obedience: now to him that uses this
aright, God is prepared to communicate unto him his special calling, which is,
the preaching of the Gospel: so the well using of that, is a fitting and
preparing of men for this: and the reason why many men are denied the Gospel,
is their own fault, because they do abuse the light of nature, or the general
calling: so then Gods will is, to have the Gospel preached actually to all men
that are fitted for it; and is prepared to have it preached to others, so soon
as they be fitted for it, and so be they do not put a bar in the way to hinder
God, by their evil deserts, and unfitedness.

Hereunto I thus reply, I will not contend about this order and method of God,
that first he wills all men, to make good use of the law and light of nature;
and then and not before to vouchsafe the Gospel to them; be this true or false,
I will not question it, but rather grant it for argument sake: but yet this I
deny, (though it be never so true in it self) that this limitation shall be
added to my Major, That God is prepared to have the Gospel preached to men, so
soon as men be fitted for it and not before; for this is an absurd limitation:
and it is to maintain one Error by another, the which I make thus appear,

1 They say, as it is, implied in the antecedent part of my Major, That Christ
died for all men: and then they would add to it this, That some of those men
are not fit to know it, or not fitted to hear of it and receive it (for this is
implied in their limitation:) now is not this an absurd thing to be added? as
first to hold, that Christ died for all men, and then to add to this, that some
of those men are not fit to hear of it, or to know it? This were ^^^erable, if
it were held, that though men be unfit to know it at some one time of their
lives, yet they should be fit at some other time before death; but forasmuch as
men abuse the light of nature all their lives long, and so die impenitently,
therefore they must hold, that many men are never fit, to hear of or know, what
Christ has done for them: and is it not absurd to say, Christ died for many
men, who nor are, nor ever shall be fit to know it? or Christ died for many,
who shall never be fit to know what he has done for them? are they fitted for
Christ to die for them, and not fitted to know he died for them?

This conceit is like unto this; A man pays a ransom, to redeem one from
captivity or prison, but the prisoner or captive is not fit to hear or know of
it, so long as he lives: or like unto this, A Physician, makes an excellent
and healthful potion or cordial for his sick patient, but adds this, saying,
He shall know of it so soon as he is fit to know of it and to receive it, when
as he knows the patient shall never be fit so long as he lives; is not this
absurd: ^^^refore, if they will hold, that Christ died for all men, they must
hold also, that they are fit to know and hear of it: which being so, this is a
frivolous and absurd limitation, to add saying, or else God and Christ be
prepared, to cause the Gospel to be preached to men, so soon as they be fitted
for it, or be fit to receive it.

2 Christ foresaw, that many men in the world, would never make a good use of
the law and light of nature, whereby to be fitted to know of his death. If
therefore this was no hinderance for Christ to die for them, then this is no
hinderance for the Gospel to be preached to them: for there is as good reason
for the one as the other: yea the reason is stronger, to think men's unfitness
should rather hinder Christ to die for them, than to hinder a sermon of Christ's
death to be preached to them: for Christ his blood is of more value, than a
ministers words and breath: wherefore, if Christ died for all men, then are all
men fit to hear of it: and so this limitation of fitness is frivolous.

Furthermore, those whom Christ died for, those he loved infinitely, and
unspeakably, John 3.16. and 15.13. now if it be true, as Arminians say, that
Christ died for all men, then he infinitely and unspeakably loved all men, even
those who abused the general call, the light of nature, albeit he foresaw they
would live and die in in the abuse of it: and was his love so hot and strong to
those men, as to pass by this abuse, when he shed his hearts blood for them;
and was it become so cold and weak to them afterward, as to stick at it and not
pass it by, when he thought of causing a sermon of his death to be preached to
them, whereby they might be the better for his death? was Christ's love so hot,
as to require no fitness in them, when he died for them, and was it become so
cold afterward, as to stick at these men's unfitness to hear a sermon of his
death? surely, if nothing in these men, could hinder Christ to die for them;
then nothing in them, can hinder a sermon of Christ to be preached to them: if
there needed no qualification in them, to render them fit for Christ to die for
them; then there needs no qualification in them, to fit them to hear a sermon
of Christ: unless you suppose more virtue or dignity to be in a sermon of
Christ, than is in the blood of Christ: so you see, this limitation of fitness
is vain.

3 To say, Christ died for all men; and then to add this unto it, That they
shall not have the Gospel (which is a necessary means of obtaining the end of
Christ's death) preached unto them, unless they be fit for it, or until they be
fitted to receive it, is a very absurd addition and limitation as you have
seen: so it is also as absurd, to say, God or Christ is prepared and in a
readiness, to have the Gospel preached so soon as men be fitted for it: for
there be thousands of Indians and others, who live and die in the abuse of the
law and light of nature, and so are never fit for the Gospel, and who never
heard the Gospel: now can it be truly said, that God or Christ has prepared
himself, to use and apply means unto such, as never will be capable of the
means? and unto such, as he well knows and fore-sees will never be capable of
it? did ever any wise man prepare himself, to do any thing, the which he
fore-sees shall never be done? and yet such a preparation Arminians do ascribe
unto the wise God. Will a Physician prepare himself, to give physic to a dead
man, or to one whom he knows will never be fit to take it?

Moreover, If this fitness be pre-required, then thus I reason: God not only
fore-sees that many will never be fit for the Gospel, but also is resolved in
himself, that the Gospel shall never be preached to them; because he fore-sees,
they shall and will live and die unfitted; now can it be said, that God is
prepared to do that thing, which he is resolved in himself shall never be done?
you may as well say, God is prepared to save the reprobate angels and devils.
Thus you see, there is cause enough for me to reject this limitation and
addition to my Major: wherefore my Argument must stand as I framed it; without
this their addition: and then it is strong and good to prove, that Christ died
not for all men: and it is unanswerable, their answer being confuted. So far of
my third Argument.

ARGUM. IV.
If God the Son, died for the sins of all men; then God the Father, will
justify the persons, and pardon the sins of all men.

But God the Father, will not justify the persons, and pardon the sins of all
men: for if he should, then all men should be saved, Mark 16.16. Luke 13.3.
Revel. 21.8.

Therefore God the Son, did not die for the sins of all men.

As for my Major, thus I prove it. 1 Arminians say, that by the word world,
John 3.16. we are to understand, all men in the world: now if God the Father so
exceedingly loved all men, as to give his only begotten Son to die for them,
John 3.16. then he can do no less than justify the persons, and pardon the
sins of all men: because, 1. He loved all men: and he gave his Son for none
other end, but for all men to obtain justification, and pardon of sin: now
surely, God will not loose his love, nor fail of his end, nor waste and spill
in vain, the blood of his only Son: all which he should do, if he should not
justify all men, after he had given his Son for them, and to justify them. If
it be in his power, will any wise man loose his love, be frustrated of his end,
and spend all his labor and cost in vain?

2 Christ is the Lamb of God, that takes away the sins of the world, John
1.29. now if Christ has taken away by his death, the sins of the world, that
is, (as Arminians say) of all men; then God the Father, cannot retain their
sins: those men's sins, which are removed or taken away, cannot be unpardoned or
remain upon them: wherefore if Christ died for all men, and has taken away the
sins of all men, then surely God the Father, has or will justify and pardon
the sins of all men, or else, Christ that Lamb has not taken away their sins.

3 If God the Father, gave Christ his Son, to die and pacify his wrath for the
sins of all men, John 3.16. then God the Father, cannot but accept of his sons
death; it being according to his own will, and being his own gift: and if he
accepts of it, then his wrath must needs be pacified for the sins of all men,
and so he cannot deny to justify all men, and pardon their sins.

4 God the Father, in giving his Son; and God the Son, in giving himself, both
aimed at one and the same end, namely justification and pardon of sin; and both
aimed at the same persons for obtaining this end: or else, God the Father, and
God the Son, were not both of one mind, but of diverse or contrary minds:
wherefore, if God the Son died to obtain pardon of sins for all men, then God
the Father, will vouchsafe pardon of sins to all men.

5 If God should not justify all those men, for whom Christ died, he should be
unjust: for Christ gave himself to death, as (...) a ransom for all men, as
Arminians say, 1. Tim. 2.6. a ransom, is the full price for the redemption of a
prisoner or captive: now when a king takes a ransom for a thousand captives, if
he deliver not them all and every one, he is unjust: so God the Father, having
taken and received at the hands of Christ, a full price and ransom, for the
sins of all men, as Arminians say, he should be unjust, if he should not set
free from sin, all and every man in the world. Furthermore, if God shall not
justify and set free all men, there will be fraud and folly imputed to God and
Christ: for where there is fair and honest dealing, the buyer and the seller
are agreed upon the same terms, as if the buyer intends to have so many in
number, be it ten, twenty, an hundred, or a thousand, the seller intends the
same number also, and the same persons: or else there is fraud in the one, and
folly in the other: now Christ is the purchaser, and if he intended by his
death to ransom all men, then God the Father, must intend the same, and must
justify and deliver from wrath even all men: He must in justice deliver as
many as Christ bought, and the same persons, that is, all men in the world: or
else, you impute fraud and folly to God and to Christ.

I shall enlarge my self upon this last Argument, by descending to some
particulars, as thus; If God shall not justify and save eternally Judas,
Pharaoh, Cain, Corah and his wicked company, for whom Christ died, as say
Arminians; then he shall be very unjust: this I thus prove: If Christ died for
Judas, Pharaoh, and other abominable wicked men; then have they suffered in
this life, the full wrath of God for all their sins, and have made a sufficient
and perfect satisfaction to Gods justice already here: for though they suffered
not in this life in their own persons; yet if it be true, that Christ died for
them, then they suffered in the person of Christ, when in this life he died on
the Cross for them, which is to be reckoned as their own death and suffering.
This I thus prove; Look what a man's surety performs for him, that is reckoned
as done by himself: as, in case my surety pays my debt, it is reckoned as my
payment: for thereby I am discharged. So if Christ paid the debt of Judas,
Pharaoh and the rest, it is as if they had paid it in their own persons: and so
they must be discharged. Hence it follows,

That since Judas and others, have suffered in the person of Christ, which is
to be reckoned as their own suffering, 1. That Judas and Pharaoh, have made a
full and perfect satisfaction to Gods justice for all their sins, having
suffered in this life the second death, and hell with the pains thereof, or
what is equivalent thereunto. 2. That God must in justice, justify and save
this wicked crew eternally: or else he will be an unjust Judge: for he shall
punish one sin twice, once in Christ the surety, and once again in Judas the
principal. So much for proof of my Major: as for my Minor, it needs no proof,
it being so clear.

Answer.
Arminians do answer thus to my Major: That it follows not, that if Christ
died for all men, then God must justify and save all men: for God may
interpose the condition of faith, to go between Christ's death for Judas and
others, and the act of Gods justification: and so as though Christ died for all
men, yet God will not justify any of them, unless they first believe.

Reply.
1 It is absurd to suppose, that God would put in a condition, after he has
taken a ransom and payment of a full price. Conditions are always made before
the price is paid; but never after the price is paid and received: what man
that sells house or land does put in a condition, after he has received his
money? Wherefore, since Arminians will not have the condition of Faith, to go
before Christ's death, it is too late to put in this condition after Christ's
death: for by his death, the ransom and price is fully paid and received; paid
by Christ, and received by God the Father.

2 If Christ died for Judas and all men, considered absolutely as sinners and
without faith, as Arminians hold; then God the Father, must justify Judas and
all men, considered absolutely as sinners and without Faith, and so the
condition of Faith cannot be interposed: for the Buyer and Seller (if there be
fair dealings between them, so as one does not overreach the other,) are both
agreed upon the same terms; so as if the Buyer purchases and pays the price
without any condition, then the Seller that takes the price, must give up the
thing bought and paid for, without any condition: and so God cannot be said, to
put in the condition of Faith, between Christ's death and the act of
justification.

3 Since Arminians hold, that Christ died for all men as sinners, and without
the condition of Faith; God cannot in justice require the condition of Faith,
before he will justify them: for if he shall require it, then many thousands
for whom Christ died, dying without Faith, must be damned, and suffer for their
sins eternally in the next life: now if Christ died for them in this life, and
suffered for them, and in their room, stead and place, then God shall be unjust
to punish these men for their sins in the next life, though they die without
faith: for so he shall punish one sin twice, once in Christ their surety, and
once in themselves the principal. Since Judas has suffered for his sins, in
the person of Christ in this life, God shall be an unjust Judge, to punish
Judas for his sins in the next life, though he has no faith: for God has (as
they say) punished Judas his sins in the person of Christ, and therefore he
shall be unjust to punish him also in his own person. It is extreme injustice,
to require a debt both of the surety, and also of the principal: wherefore
Judas his debt, being paid to God by Christ, God cannot in justice require the
condition of Faith of him, so as for want of it to damn him, and to cause him
to suffer for his sins in the next life, and so to pay his own debt in his own
person: for so God should require one debt to be twice paid: and so you see,
that the condition of faith, cannot be interposed betwixt Christ's death, and
justification; being that God in justice must justify and set free from the
debt of punishment, all those men whose debt Christ has paid, whether they
believe or not believe: when God looks upon Judas, as having suffered in the
person of Christ, he cannot but see his justice fully satisfied, and therefore
cannot but justify and free him, believing or not believing: wherefore, to
interpose the condition of Faith, is to make God an unjust Judge.

4 I shall here add one thing, which will both strengthen my Major, and also
confute their answer. They say, Christ died for all men; and therefore they
must so generally understand the Text, 2. Cor. 5.15. which says, He died for
all, etc. now all those who Christ died for, those he reconciled to God his
father. He is the reconciliation not for our sins only, but also for the sins
if the whole world. 1. John. 2.2. And all those who Christ died for, 2. Cor.
5.15. God the Father reconciled unto himself. 2. Cor. 5.19. God was in Christ,
and reconciled the world to himself; that is, God was in Christ, when he died
on the Cross for the sins of all men, and reconciled them unto himself: now as
God reconciled all men or the world, so he justified them all: for the Text
says, He did not impute their sins unto them; 2. Cor. 5.19. Furthermore,
reconciliation, does presuppose justification to go before: for the party
offended, is not said to be reconciled, until he has first forgiven the
offense and the offender. So then the world which Christ died for, the same
world God justified: thus you see my Major confirmed.

Next to confute their answer: Faith cannot be interposed betwixt Christ's
death, and Gods justification, so as to hinder any man for whom Christ died
from justification: because those whom Christ died for, 1. John 2.2. 2. Cor.
5.15. those God justified, not imputing their sins unto them, 2. Cor. 5.19. and
those God reconciled unto himself, 2. Cor. 5.19. so Faith cannot be any
condition, so as to hinder any man by want of it, for whom Christ died, from
justification: because all those Christ died for, all those God reconciled and
justified: if Christ died for Judas, then God justified Judas; yet Judas had no
faith interposed betwixt Impetration and Application, for he was no believer.
If Arminians say, Christ died for all men; then Paul says, God justified all
men; and I may say, God justifies them whether they believe or not believe:
for faith cannot be interposed. So much for my fourth Argument.

ARGUM. V.
If Christ died for all men, then God the Father loved all men, and that with a
special and incomparable love. My reason here is; Because God the Father gave
his Son, yea his only Son to death for them: now for a Father to deliver up to
death his Son, yea his only Son, for a man; this bewrays love to that man, yea
matches love. See a text for it, John 3.16. God so loved the world, that he
gave his only begotten Son, etc. What greater love than this did ever God show
to the world, than when he gave his only begotten Son to die for them?

But God the Father did not love all men, with a special and incomparable love.
This I thus prove: Because there are, and ever were many unbelieving wicked and
impenitent men in the world, who lived and died in Gods hatred: I have loved
Jacob, and have hated Esau, Romans 9.13. and see Romans 9.22. The wicked, and him
that loves iniquity, does his soul hate, Psalm. 11.5. Thou hate them that
work iniquity, Psalm. 5.5, 6.

Therefore Christ did not die for all men.

To avoid the strength of this Argument, Arminians, perhaps, will answer thus,
That God loved all men as sinners, but hates them as impenitent sinners, etc.
Hereunto I reply, That this is a distinction unheard of, and no where grounded
in the Scriptures that I know of, and therefore it is to be rejected. That God
loves all men, as his creatures, may pass as a sound position; but that God
loves all men, as sinners, and that with an incomparable and matchles love, is
to me most unsound: for a thing considered as evil, is no object of love, but
of hatred: and so much for my fifth Argument.

Thus I have by five Arguments proved, That Christ died not for all men: and so
I have finished the first thing propounded at the beginning: and now I come to
the second, which is to make answer unto the Texts of Scripture, brought by
Arminians to prove, That Christ died for all men.

An Answer unto the Texts alleged by Arminians, to prove an Universal
Redemption.
JOHN 3.16. God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, etc.
BY this Text Arminians would prove, that Christ died for all men: and for this
end, they urge the word world in the Text; which they will needs have generally
and universally taken, so as to signify all men in the world, whether good or
bad, believers or unbelievers: and so as Christ should die for all men in the
largest sense.

Answer.
1 I take it for a great weakness in Arminians, to build so confidently upon
the word world, urging, that it must be generally taken here, for all men in
the world: who knows not, that knows any thing in Scripture, that general
words are very often used by holy penmen particularly? The general word all,
is often used particularly for some, or for many, as in Matthew. 3.5. 1. Cor.
1.5. and 13.2, 7. and 9.25. and 6.12. and 10.23, 33. many examples may be given
for other words also; but passing by them, I shall instance in the word in
question.

The word world, is sometime taken for all men in the world, as in Romans 5.12.
and sometime it is taken for all men in the world, excepting eight persons, as
in 2. Pet. 3.6. 1. Pet. 3.20. The world that then was perished, over-flowed
with water: and sometime it is taken for the most men in the world, as in 2.
Cor. 4.4. John 15.18, 19. and 17.9. The God of this world has blinded the
minds, etc. and sometime it is taken for the lesser number of men in the world,
as in Acts 17.6. John 12.19. These are they which have subverted the state of
the world. And, Behold the world goes after him. Now since this word is so
variously used, how can they be so confident as to averr, that it must be taken
in the largest sense?

My answer therefore is, that as the word world, is sometime taken for the
lesser number of men in the world, which are Disciples and followers of Christ,
as in John 12.19. so it may be taken also in their Text alleged, John 3.16.
for believers, who are the lesser number of this world: and this is my first
Answer.

2 I shall prove, that the word world, is used for believers only: and then it
will follow, that as there is a world of the wicked, so there is a world of
believers also: for this end,

See John 1.29. Behold the Lamb of God, which takes away the sins of the
world. Though Arminians say, that Christ, this Lamb of God, died for the sins
of the world, and for all men, by way of Impetration; yet they hold, that
Christ has not justified, or procured justification for all men in the world,
by way of Application; nor for any men but for believers only: now this Text
speaks of Taking away the sins of the world, which is no less, than to procure
Justification, and to make Application of Christ's death, by freeing men from
their sins: and therefore this text is not to be understood, of the world of
all men, but of believers only, and of the world of believers: for no men's
sins are Taken away, but believers only, see 2. Cor. 5.19. God was in Christ,
and reconciled the world unto himself, not imputing their sins unto them. Here
the world that were reconciled, and justified, their sins being not imputed,
was not the world of all men, but of believers only; it was the world of
believers only, unles you will say, all men in the world are justified.

See Romans 11.12, 15. If the fall of them, be the riches of the world, etc.
Again, If the casting away of them, be the reconciling of the world, etc. Here
by the world, is not meant all men in the world, but the Gentiles only: for
the Jews are not comprised in the word: nor are all the Gentiles comprised
therein, but only the believing Gentiles: for the fall of the Jews, was no
riches to unbelieving Gentiles; nor was the casting away of the Jews, the
reconciling of unbelieving Gentiles: and that it is spoken of believing
Gentiles, may further appear by these words in the Chapter Romans 11.11. Through
their fall, salvation unto the Gentiles, Romans 11, 17. Some of the branches be
broken off, and thou a wild olive tree, was grafted in, and partaker of the
root and fatness of the olive tree, Romans 11.20. Through unbelief they are
broken off, and thou stand by faith.

See John 6.33. The bread of God is he which comes down from heaven, and
gives life unto the world. Here by the word world, we must understand,
believers, and the world of believers: for Christ gives not life to
unbelievers.

Thus by four Texts I have proved, that the word world, is often used for
believers, and for the world of believers: now from hence my answer is this,
that since the word world is often used for believers, and for the world of
believers; therefore this their alleged text Jo. 3.16. may be understood of
believers only, and of the world of believers: and this is my 2d Answer.

3 I shall here prove, not only (as before) that by the word world, believers,
and the believing world may be meant; but that they are and must of necessity
be meant, and this is evident by the Text and context.

For this is a Rule, that general words are to be restrained according to the
matter in hand: now the matter in hand, or the persons handled and spoken of,
are believers; this you may see clearly expressed, in John 3.15, 16. That
whosoever believes in him, etc. verse. 15. God so loved the world, etc. that
whosoever believes in him, etc. verse. 16. wherefore believers, being the
persons spoken of, the general word world, is to be restrained to believers.

The question or main thing labored to be proved and cleared, is, That
believers shall not perish, but have life eternal, as you may see John 3.15. to
prove and amplify this, S. John brings a reason in the next verse, John 3.16.
as you may see by the particle (for, or because.) For, God so loved the world,
that he has given his only Son, that whosoever believes in him, should not
perish, but have life eternal; which is as if he had said, Believers shall not
perish, as the question is in verse 15. For, God so loved believers, or the
world of believers, as to give his only son for them, that whosoever does,
will, or shall hereafter believe in him, shall not perish, as it is in the
reason alleged in verse 16. I confess, the word believes, or according to
the Original believing, is in the present tense or time, but it must be
understood of all tenses and times, past, present, and to come: so as Gods love
in Christ, was to them that did believe before Christ's time, to them that do
believe in Christ's time, and to them that shall or will believe after Christ's
time: this is added, to prevent an Arminian objection, saying, if by world,
believers be meant, then the word whosoever, implies a distinction, as if there
were two sorts of believers, one believing, the other not believing at one and
the same time: but the word whosoever, may be understood distributively or
distinctively, of believers before Christ's time, of believers in Christ's time,
and of believers after Christ's time, to the worlds end. But to return, for as
much as the question and thing to be amplified, was the salvation of believers
verse 15. it is not reasonable, to understand the reason and amplification
brought to confirm it in verse 16. of any other persons than believers. It were
impertinent to argue thus, Believers shall not perish; for, or because God
loved the world of all men, and gave Christ his Son for all men: this is to
prove a special and peculiar mercy belonging unto some men only, by an
argument which is general, and belongs to all men. Now by the same Argument, it
may as soundly be proved, that not only Believers shall not perish, but also
that no man in the world shall perish; for, or because God loved the world of
all men, and gave Christ his Son for all men: and so you see, that by the word
world, believers and the world of believers only, must of necessity be meant.

The Text says, God so loved the world: now it is clear, that God does not
love all men in the world, with such a peculiar, matchless, and incomparable
kind of love, as the Text speaks of: for there are many thousands of men in
the world, which God is so far off from loving, as that the Scripture says
expressly, God hates them: Esau have I hated Romans 9.13, 22. Prove. 16.5. and
6.16, 17, 18, 19. Psalm. 5.5, 6. and 11.5. wherefore, since God loves not all
men in the world with an incomparable love, therefore by the word world in John
3.16. cannot be meant, all men in the world: nor any besides believers: for God
so loved them only.

4 Arminians may as well say and hold, that all men in the world shall be
justified and saved eternally; as to say and hold, that Christ died for all men
in the world: for it is said, 2. Cor. 5.19. God was in Christ, and reconciled
the world to himself, not imputing their sins. If here the word world be
largely taken, after the fashion of Arminians, then all the men in the world,
are reconciled to God, and their sins forgiven, or not imputed unto them; and
then they must be eternally saved. And see Romans 11.15. The casting away of the
Jews, was the reconciling of the world. And see 1. John 2.2. He is the
reconciliation for our sins; and not for ours only, but also for the sins of
the whole world. And see John 1.29. Behold the Lamb of God, which takes away
the sins of the world: so if by the word world, they will understand all men,
then they must hold also, that all men in the world are reconciled to God,
justified, and their sins taken away: and this is my last Answer to their Text
John 3.16. and so I come to answer another of their Texts.

1. John 2.2.
And he is the reconciliation for our sins: and not for ours only, but also
for the sins of the whole world. Here again they urge the word world: and say
it must be taken in the largest sense, for all men in the world: for the Text
says, not only the world, as in John 3.16. but the whole world, to note the
universalitie.

2 The Text says, not for our sins only, that is, not for our sins only who
are believers; but also for the sins of the whole world, that is, for the sins
of unbelievers as well as believers: and so all men in the world, both
believers and unbelievers, even the whole world are here meant.

Answer.
Enough has been said in my former answer, touching the word World; showing
that it is often taken, not for all men, but for some, and for many men in the
world, and for the world of believers; and so in this last sense it may be
taken in this Text, 1. John 2.2.

But whereas they urge us in this Text, with the word whole, in that S. John
says the whole World, this will nothing mend their cause: for as the word
World, is often used for some, or for many men in the world, so are these
words, the whole World: for this end note. 1. That other expressions,
equivalent to this, and of as large extent as this, yet are not to be taken in
the largest sense, but are used for many in the world, as in Isa. 23.17. and
34.1. Lament. 4.12. Col. 1.6. Mark. 16.15. Secondly, these very words in
question, namely the whole World, are used for many in the world: as in Romans
1.8. your faith is published throughout the whole World: it is not credible,
that every particular man and woman, in the whole World, had heard of the faith
of these R^mans. And see 1. Ioh. 5.19. we know that we are of God, and this
whole World lies in wickedness. If the whole World here mentioned, so taken
in the Arminian sense, for all and every man in the world, how could S. John
exempt himself and other godly persons living then with him, from lying in
wickedness? so you see, that by these words the whole World, is not always
meant, all and every particular man and woman in the world. Arminians may as
well say, that S. John says, Ioh. 5.19. that all men then living were wicked
men, and none godly; as to say, that the same Apostle in 1. Ioh. 2.2. says,
that Christ died for all men in the whole World, none excepted: for S. John
mentions the whole World, in both Texts. So much for answer to their first
inference from the Text.

As for their second inference from this Text, it is built upon a needless and
groundless exposition of the Text: for thus they expound it. He is the
reconciliation for our sins; that is, for the sins of us believers now living
in the world: and not for ours only, but also for the sins of the whole World;
that is, not for our sins only who are believers now living in the world, but
also for the sins of unbelievers now living in the world: and so he is a
reconciliation for the sins of the whole World now living, both believers and
unbelievers. To this I thus answer.

1 For them to expound the Text, as belonging to wicked ungodly men and
unbelievers, must needs be a false exposition: for it makes God and Christ, to
express their singular, matchless, and incomparable love, unto such men, as
they foresaw would live and die in their wickedness, hatred of God,
impenitency, and unbelief: now the Scriptures inform us, that God is so far off
from loving such men, as that he hates and abhors them, Psalm. 5.5*6. Psalm.
11.5. wherefore the Text must not be enlarged unto unbelievers.

2 The enlargement of Christ's death and reconciliation, at the end of the
verse, may very well and safely be understood of believers only, after this
manner: He is the reconciliation not only for our sins, who are believing
Jews; but also for the sins of the whole world of believers, both Jews and
Gentiles: or thus, He is the reconciliation not only for our sins, who are
believers now living; but also for the sins of the whole World of believers,
living before our time, in our time, or that shall believe hereafter. The death
and reconciliation of Christ, is to be extended unto all times, past, present,
and to come: Jesus Christ, is yesterday, and to day, and the same for ever,
Heb. 13.8. Thus you see, how this Text may well be understood, not of all men,
but of believers only: and this sense suiteth well with the context, and
matter in hand, or with the persons spoken of, who are believers only, as you
may see 1. Ioh. 2.1, 3. So much for answer to their second Text, 1. Ioh. 2.2.
and so I come to their third Text.

1. TIM. 2.6.
Who gave himself a ransom for all men, etc. Lo, here say they, it is clearly
expressed, that Christ died, and gave himself to death, not for some men only,
but for all men: and it is evident also by the context, that this word all,
must be universally taken and in the largest sense: for so it is taken verse. 1.
I exhort that prayers be made for all men, verse. 2. and for all that are in
authority, verse. 4. who will that all men shall be saved, and come unto the
acknowledging of the truth.

Answer.
Here again, you see the weakness of Arminians, in that they build so
confidently upon the word all; as if they had never read or heard, that this
word all is very often used in Scripture particularly, for some, or for many:
as in Matt. 3.5. Then went out to him Jerusalem, and all Judea, and all the
region about Jordan, and were baptized, etc. Matt. 4.23. Jesus, etc. healed all
or every sickness, all or every disease, etc. Romans 15.13. The God of hope fill
you with all joy, etc. but carnal joy is not prayed for here, and see 1. Cor.
1.5. and 13.7. and 9.25. and 10.33, 23. and 6.12. Phil. 2.21. 3. John 12. Thus
you see, how the word all, in 1. Tim. 2.6. may be understood of all that are
believers; who are not all men in the world, but some only, or many.

Whereas they endeavor to prove by the context, that the word all must be
taken in the largest sense; because it is so taken in the former verses: my
answer is, that the matter in the first six verses is not one and the same, but
diverse. In verse. 1, 2. the matter is about good government, but in verse. 4, 5,
6. the matter is about man's salvation: now being the matter is diverse,
therefore the word all may be diversely understood, as universally in verse. 1,
2. and particularly for some, in verse. 4, 5, 6. and this is usual in expounding
of Scripture, to take the word all generally in some matter treated of, and
particularly in some other matter treated of.

Whereas they urge the fourth verse. who will that all men shall be saved; my
answer is, that here the word all must not be taken in the largest sense: for
God will not have all and every man to be saved: for he wills not the
salvation of reprobates, impenitent, and unbelieving persons, as you may see in
Romans 9.11, 13, 18, 21, 22, 27. Romans 11.8, 9, 10. 1. Pet. 2.8. 2. These. 2.10,
11, 12. Ioh. 3.18. Mark. 16.16. Revel. 21.8. Mark. 4.11, 12.

To conclude, as the Text says, He will that all men shall be saved: so it
says, that they shall all come to the knowledge of the truth, verse. 4. now
this cannot be understood of all men in the largest sense: for God does not
vouchsafe the Gospel and knowledge of the truth in our time unto many Indians
and wild savages: and before our time, the Apostle Paul was forbidden of the
holy Ghost, to preach the word in Asia and Bythinia, Act. 16.6, 7. and further
see these Texts Mark 4.11, 12. Mat. 11.25. Ioh. 12.39, 40. Psalm. 79.6. so you
see, the word all is not universally to be taken: and so much for answer to
their third Text.

ROMANS 14.15. and 1. COR. 8.11.
Destroy not him with thy meat, for whom Christ died. Romans 14.15. Through thy
knowledge shall the weak brother perish, for whom Christ died. 1. Cor. 8.11.
From both these Texts they gather, that Christ died for those that perish, as
well as for those that perish not, but are saved: and if he died for those that
perish, and for those that perish not; then he died for all men.

Answer.
1 That Christ died for those that perish not, but are saved: this they say, we
grant: and that Christ died also for those that perish, and are not saved: this
they prove by these two Texts, Romans 14.15. 1. Cor. 8.11. To this their proof I
thus answer, To destroy is one thing, and to occation or hazard destruction is
another. To perish is one thing, and to occation or hazard perdition is
another. Now these two Texts may be understood of the latter only, namely of
the occation and hazard of perdition and destruction: for those strong
Christians, did by their unseasonable use of meats offend the weak, and did
thereby give them an occation of falling, of perdition and destruction: this
sense the contexts give light unto, both in Romans 14.13. and in 1. Cor. 8.9. and
me think, Arminians cannot think, that the strong Christians, did by their
unseasonable use of meats, really and actually destroy all those weak
Christians, who saw them eat these meats, or who by their example, were
emboldened to eat them: now if they did not perish and were indeed destroyed,
how can Arminians say, Christ died for those that perish?

2 I answer, Whereas they undertake to prove, that some perished for whom
Christ died: this is false, and cannot be proved by these two Texts: for admit,
that by example of the strong, the weak Christians did eat meats against their
conscience, and so sinned; yet it will not follow, that they were therefore
destroyed, and perished eternally: unless Arminians will say, that by
repentance of that sin, they could not be saved; or will be so uncharitable, as
without a ground for it, to say, they lived and died in this sin without
repentance. Sure I am, repentance is a salve for greater sins than this, Acts
11.18. So it cannot be proved, that those weak Christians perished; and
therefore it cannot be proved, that Christ died for those that perished. So
much for answer to these two Texts, Romans 14.15. and 1. Cor. 8.11.

HEBR. 10.29.
Of how much soever punishment suppose ye shall he be worthy, which treads
under foot the Son of God, and counts the blood of the Testament as an unholy
thing, wherewith he was sanctified. Here say they, are some men for whom Christ
died, being that they were sanctified by Christ's blood; and yet became
apostates, and shall be sorely punished: so then Christ died for those that
perish, as well as for those that perish not: and if he died for both, then he
died for all men.

Answer.
Whereas they collect from this Text, that some believers and sanctified by the
blood of Christ, did indeed make apostasy, and so as they perished; this
collection is groundless: for the Text may be understood conditionally, or as a
supposition; as if the Apostle had said, If a believer, and one sanctified by
the blood of Christ, shall make apostasy and tread under foot the blood of
Christ, he shall perish, or be surely punished. Or thus, Of how much sorer
punishment shall a man be worthy, if he treads under foot the Son of God, etc.
Now a conditional speech, or a supposition, does not affirm and assert the
thing to be done indeed, but only it supposes a thing, or puts a case, as in
Hebr. 10.26, 38. so this Text does not assert and affirm, that some believers
either did or should make apostasy, and so perish: that the Text may be
understood conditionally, as a supposition, and as a case put, I make it thus
appear.

1 These are equivalent propositions; He that does such a thing, and, If one
does such a thing: for example, He that sheds man's blood, by man shall his
blood be shed, Genesis 9.6. the which is equivalent to this, If one sheds man's
blood, by man shall his blood be shed. So in like manner, He that apostatizeth
and treads under foot the blood of Christ, shall perish or be sorely punished,
Heb. 10.29. the which is equivalent to this, If one apostatizeth and treads
under foot the blood of Christ, he shall perish or be sorely punished, so it is
indifferent to take either of the two expressions: and further note, that
neither of the two do assert and affirm the thing to be indeed done; as it is
not affirmed, that any have shed man's blood, so it is not affirmed, that any
believer has apostatized, and trodden under foot the blood of Christ: it is
only said, He that does it, etc. or, If one does it, etc.

2 In Heb. 10.26. our translators render it thus, If we sin willingly, etc. the
which in the Original is in the participle thus, We sinning willingly, etc. now
since this latter, may be rendered conditionally, (so it must be rendered,
unless we make believers guilty of wilful sinning,) why may it not be so too,
three verses after? for in Heb. 10.29. in the Original it is in the participle
thus, Treading under foot, etc. which may be rendered thus, If he tread under
foot, etc. and so the Apostle does not assert or affirm, that any man does or
has indeed, trodden under foot the blood of Christ, or made apostasy. Note
further, that in verse. 26.27. you have the question: in verse. 28. you have the
argument: and in verse. 29. is the application of it to the question. Now where
the question is conditional, the application must not be absolute: and
therefore the 29. verse. must be conditionally understood.

3 The Apostle says in the last verse. save one, Heb. 10.38. If any withdraw
himself, etc. In which words, he speaks of apostasy and withdrawing
conditionally: wherefore the apostasy and treading under foot Christ's blood,
mentioned before in Heb. 10.29. man be understood conditionally also: and so
nothing is asserted as done.

4 In the last verse. Heb. 10.39. the Apostle speaking of believers, as he does
also in Heb. 10.26, 29. says, we are not they which withdraw our selves.
Whereby he plainly signifies, that the believers of whom he wrote in Heb.
10.29. had not, or did not withdraw themselves, or make apostasy: wherefore
the apostasy, in treading Christ's blood under foot, mentioned Heb. 10.29. is
not asserted or affirmed, as a thing indeed done by believers; but as a
supposition, as if in case a believer should do such a thing, then he should
perish or be sorely punished. So much for answer to this Text, Heb. 10.29.

2. PET. 2.1.
There shall be false teachers among you, etc. denying the Lord that bought
them, and bring on themselves swift damnation. Here say they, S. Peter affirms,
that some men bought by the blood of Christ, shall be false teachers, bring in
damnable Heresies, deny the Lord Christ, and shall bring on themselves
damnation: whence they argue as before, that Christ bought or died for those
that perish and are damned; and consequently for all men: for we say, Christ
died for those that perish not, but are saved: and they prove by this Text,
that Christ died for those that do perish, and are damned: so if Christ died
for those that perish, and for those that perish not, then he died for all men:
of this see their Acta Synodalia de morte Christi, page 346.

Answer.
1 It cannot be proved by this Text, that Christ bought those that did perish
and are damned: for the Text does not expressly say or intimate, that these
false teachers, did ever after live and die in impenitency: for be it so, that
they taught false Doctrine, brought in damnable Heresies, and denied the Lord
Christ Jesus; yet they might repent of all these sins before they died, and so
be eternally saved: Paul when he was a Saul, was a blasphemer, a persecutor,
and an oppressor; and yet he was upon his rePentance received to mercy, 1. Tim.
1.13, 16. and he thought he was bound to do, many contrary things against the
name of Jesus Christ, Act. 26.9, 10, 11. whereby he denied the Lord that bought
him, and yet he was not damned.

But perhaps they will urge the last words of the Text, that they shall bring
on themselves swift damnation. To which I answer, that from these words it
cannot be proved, that they were damned: for these words must be understood
with an exception, unless they repent: as Mat. 3.10. every tree that brings
not forth good fruit, is hewn down, and cast into the fire, that is, unless
they repent. Revel. 21.8. But the fearful, and the unbelieving, etc. shall
have their part in the lake, which burns with fire and brimstone, that is, if
they repent not, but go on still in their sins till death: so, they shall bring
on themselves swift damnation, unless they repent, and this is my first answer.

2 Whereas Arminians understand by the word [Lord] in the Text, the Lord Christ
Jesus: and by the word [bought] in the Text, the redemption from sin and
eternal wrath by the blood of Christ: I deny both these senses of the words;
and shall show, that they may be well and safely taken in other senses, which
will nothing further their cause.

First, for the word Lord: it may be understood of God the Father, or of God in
general: for the clearing up of this, note, that in the new Testament, the word
whereby Christ is noted usually is (...) translated Lord; but in this Text of
Peter, we have an other word, which is (...), and translated Lord: and being an
other word, and not usual to note Christ, it is likely enough to be of an other
sense: we find this word (...) translated Lord, and usually applied to God the
Father, or to God in general, or to earthly and fleshly Lords and Masters, not
unto Christ as Mediator, as in these Texts, Luke 2.29. Act. 4.24. 2. Tim. 2.21.
Jude 4. 1. Tim. 6.1, 2. Tit. 2.9. 1. Pet. 2.18. wherefore since this word is
usually, speaking of God, understood of God the Father, why may it not be so
understood also in this their Text, 2. Pet. 2.1. and since it is seldom, or
rather never understood of Christ as Redeemer, why should it be so understood
in this Text, 2. Pet. 2.1.

Secondly, for the word bought: this may be understood of Gods buying and
redeeming his people, from their bondage in Egypt, or from some other slavery,
servitude, and bondage to their enemies; of which you may read in Deuteronomy. 9.26.
2. Sam. 7.23. Psalm. 10.7.2, 3. Jer. 15.21. Mich. 4.10. Jer. 31.10, 11. And then
the words of S. Peter, may be understood as an agravation of the sin of those
false teachers, for that they should bring into the Church, such damnable
Heresies, as whereby they should deny even the Lord their God, who bought and
redeemed them from servitude and slavery, unto their oppressing enemies in the
flesh. And the rather this sense may stand, because it so well suites with the
other word (...) Lord, the which is taken for God the Father, but seldom or
rather never for Christ the Redeemer, and this is my second answer.

3 As touching the word (...), translated bought them: it may be rendered
taught them: it may be translated taught: see Crispine and Scapula, who say,
that the Noun (...), has (besides an other signification) this for one, it
signifies an oration or sermon: and the Verbs (...), and (...), signify to
preach or teach: yea the word (...), signifies not only to buy, but also to
consult, and to give counsel: wherefore the Text may be thus translated:
Denying the Lord that taught them, or gave them counsel. Now this makes nothing
for proof that the Lord bought them, or redeemed them: and this is my third
Answer.

4 If for all this, they will press the Text, and understand it of the Lord
Christ, and that he has bought and redeemed wicked persons and unbelievers, 2.
Pet. 2.1. they may as well say also, that God justified the world of wicked men
and unbelievers, 2. Cor. 5.19. and that God justifies the ungodly, as ungodly,
Romans 4.5. which is contrary to Prove. 17.15. and so much for answer to this
their Text, 2. Pet. 2.1.

ROMANS 5.6.
For when we were yet without strength, in due time Christ died for the
ungodly. Lo here say they, is it not said expressly, that Christ died for the
ungodly? If therefore Christ died as well for the ungodly, as for the godly,
then Christ died for all men, for good and bad.

Answer.
There is another Text of like kind, 1. Pet. 3.18. Christ has once suffered,
the Just for the unjust, etc. Wherefore one Answer shall serve to both.

True it is, that Christ died for the ungodly, and for the unjust: and had he
not died for such, it had been woe to all godly persons: for as Paul says of
the godly and believing Corinthians, that there was a time, when they were
ungodly and unjust, as idolaters, adulterers, drunkards, and extortioners, etc.
1. Cor. 6.9, 10, 11. so may I say, there was a time before our conversion, when
we were ungodly and unjust: if therefore Christ had not died for ungodly and
unjust persons, no godly man now living could possibly be saved.

Wherefore we must distinguish of ungodly persons thus: There are some ungodly
persons, who are become believing and penitent godly persons: and for these
ungodly persons Christ died, as the Text says: and of such the Text speaks,
as is plain Romans 5.6, 8, 10. but there are other ungodly persons, who persist
still even unto death in their ungodliness, refusing to repent and believe: now
I deny that Christ died for these; or that the Text is to be understood of
these. These are dogs and swine, wherefore Christ the pearl is not to be given
to these, Matthew. 7.6. Christ would not vouchsafe to pray for these, John 17.9.
and therefore he would not die for them: and this is my Answer to this Text.

Thus I have made answer, to all the Texts of Scripture, which seem to have any
weight in them, for the Arminian cause: they have also some arguments, as two
or three, but the one of them only deserves an answer, so passing by the
other, I shall here propound it, and make answer to it: you shall find it in
their Acta Synodalia page 337. de Morte Christi

ARGUMENT.
Whosoever are bound to believe in Christ Jesus, for them Christ died.

But all men are bound to believe in Christ Jesus.

Therefore for all men Christ died.

As for the Major they prove it by this reason: because if it be not true, some
men, as those for whom Christ died not, are bound to believe a lie or a
falsehood: which is very absurd. The Minor they prove by this Text, John 3.19,
36.

Answer.
I deny their Major: for it is not true, that Christ died for all those men
who are bound to believe in him: that is, to believe in him, that he is the Son
of God, and Savior of the world, which is the right object of faith. And as
for the reason, whereby they labor to prove their Major, it is unsound: for it
leans upon an unsound (though common) description of justifying faith: for they
describe it thus: Faith in Christ, is a certain and full or plerophorie
perswation of the mind, whereby we embrace Christ, with this confidence, that
he died not only for others, but also for us, or for me and my sins in
particular. This description however common, yet is it unsound: for it cannot
be proved in Scripture: for I no where find in the Scripture, that the object
of faith, is to believe that Christ died for us, or for thee and me in
particular, as they suppose in their Argument: this I deny, and they must prove
it if they can, and when they can. The object of justifying and saving faith
is, to believe that Christ is the Son of God, the Messiah, the Savior of the
world, and the like: and this is the current of the Scriptures every where: in
particular see John 20.31. These things are written, that ye might believe,
that Jesus is that Christ the Son of God: and that in or so believing, ye might
have life, etc. All men may be bound to believe this, and yet not bound to
believe a lie: or those for whom Christ died not, may be bound to believe all
this, and yet not be bound to believe a lie or a falsehood.

Now that the Scriptures do every where make this the object of faith, that
Christ is the Son of God, the Messiah, the Savior of the world, and the like;
beside the Text alleged John 20.31. See also these Texts, Matthew. 16.16. the
object of S. Peter's faith, whereof he made confession unto, and before Christ,
was this, Thou art Christ, the Son of the living God. Acts 8.37. The object of
the Eunuch's faith was the same, I believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God.
Acts 9.20. the sum of Paul's preaching, to beget saving faith in men, was this,
That Christ was that Son of God. Acts 2.36. the sum of Peter's sermon, as
touching Faith, whereby he converted three thousand souls unto the faith, was
this, That he whom they had crucified, God had made him both Lord and Christ.
1. John 5.5. who is he that overcomes the world, but he who believes, that
Jesus is that Son of God? So you see, the victorious faith is, to believe, that
Christ is the Son of God. Acts 17.3, 4. Paul preached, that Christ died and
rose again; and that this is Jesus Christ. And by this sermon of Christ, he won
many to the faith, as you may see in the fourth verse. Acts 18.5. here you have
another sermon of Paul's, that Jesus was the Christ; and this is the object of
faith. John 1.29, 34. S. John's sermon was this, Behold the Lamb of God, which
takes away the sins of the world, etc. and This is that Son of God. John 1.49,
50. Nathanaels confession of faith, was this, Thou art that Son of God. John
4.7, 25, 29, 39, 42. The faith of the woman of Samaria, and of other the
Samaritanes, was this, that Jesus was the Messiah, and the Christ: and that
Jesus was that Christ, the Savior of the world. John 11.27. the faith of
Martha was, that Christ was the Son of God. Thus you see, that according to the
current of the Scriptures, the object of faith is, To believe that Christ is
the Son of God, the Savior, with the like: now all men may be bound to believe
these things of Christ, and yet not be bound to believe a lie, or those for
whom Christ died not, may be bound to believe these things of Christ, and yet
are not bound to believe a falsehood: nor hence will it follow, that Christ died
for them that are bound to believe this. But I no where read, that Christ
required, or that the Apostles preached for such a particular applicatorie
faith as this, That Christ is mine, or that Christ died for our sins, or that
Christ died for thee, or for me in particular.

I confess I read of Thomas his faith, John 20.28. saying, Thou art my Lord and
my God. And of Paul's faith, Gal. 2.20. saying, Who has loved me, and given
himself for me. These indeed were acts of the two Apostles faith; but I no
where read, that Christ required of every man this faith, as necessary to
salvation; nor do I read, that the Apostles or any one of them, did preach this
faith to the people, when in their sermons they preached to beget men unto the
faith: wherefore I judge, 1. That this kind of faith is proper unto Apostles,
and unto Christians of the highest form in the school of Christ; and not common
to every weak Christian: for how then should they be saved? since many hundreds
of weak Christians, neither can nor dare say, Christ is mine: or Christ died
for me in particular. 2. I judge, that this act or kind of faith, is a
consequent of justifying faith, and may safely and comfortably be concluded and
collected, by strong Christians from it, thus; He that has justifying faith,
Christ is his, and Christ died for him. But I in particular have justifying
faith: for I believe, that Christ is the Son of God, and the Savior of the
world; and my faith is accompanied with good works, as Sanctification and
Mortification, etc. Therefore Christ is mine, and Christ died for me in
particular. So much for clearing of my Answer: and so much also for answer to
their argument.

By this time we have finished these things propounded to be handled; First we
have by sundry Arguments proved, That Christ died not for all men. Secondly,
we have answered all their Texts of Scripture, and their Argument, whereby they
would prove the contrary. Now in the third place, we confute a common answer of
Arminians, which they give to a notable objection of ours.

The Confutation of a common Answer of Arminians, which they give to a notable
Objection of ours.
FIrst I shall propound our Objection. Secondly I shall give you the Arminian
answer. And Thirdly I shall confute it in my Reply.

Objection.
If Christ died for Judas, and all other wicked and ungodly men, why are they
not all saved? how can any be damned, for whom Christ died? for if Christ died
for them, then have they suffered in this life in the person of Christ their
surety, the torments of the next life, which Christ upon the Cross bore for
them, and in their room and place: now God having punished Judas and the rest,
in the person of Christ on the Cross in this life, with the punishment due to
the next life; he cannot punish them again in the next life, unless he be an
unjust Judge, punishing the same men for the same sins twice: once in this
life, and once more in the next life: and therefore Judas and all other men,
must be saved, if Christ died for all men.

Answer.
Hereunto Dutch and English Arminians both, make this answer, Judas and the
rest will not believe: they refuse to believe in Christ, and so to apply him:
and therefore God may justly damn them, Joh. 3.18. Mark. 16.16. see their Acta
Synodalia, de Morte Christi, page 320. and this they endeavor to clear by some
similitudes: If a Physician tenders a potion to a patient, he is not to be
blamed, if the patient will not receive it and apply it; but the fault and
blame is only in the patient. So if God offers Christ, to Judas and all other
wicked men; but they will not believe in him and apply him, then the blame is
theirs, and so God is free of injustice, though he damn them. An other simily
is this; A King having many subjects in captivity under a foreign King, pays
a full and sufficient ransom for every one of them; now many of those captives
despise their liberty, and choose to live in captivity and bondage; In this case
there is no blame in the King, but in the captives only: So God and Christ
have ransomed all men, but many men despise this ransom, by refusing to
believe, and so choose to live in captivity and thraldom still; wherefore if
God keep them under everlasting thraldom, he is not unjust or blameable, but
these despisers only are blameable.

Reply.
I shall first deal with their answer, and then with their similitudes: I begin
with their answer.

1 Be it so, that Judas does not and will not believe, but obstinately refuses
to believe; yet this freeth not God of injustice if he damn Judas; supposing
that Christ died for Judas: for clearing of this, I ask Arminians, whether
Christ died for men, considered as believers, or as sinners and unbelievers?
Hereunto they will not say, as believers: for so they should justify our
Doctrine, which is, that Christ died for believers, and for them only:
wherefore they must answer, that Christ died for men considered as sinners and
without belief; and so faith is no condition of impetration, or of Christ's
death and ransom paid for men: now if Christ impetrating, and paying a ransom
for men, did it absolutely and without any condition or consideration of faith
in them; then for application, God the Father cannot require faith in men
before application, or before he will apply Christ his death unto them in
justification: unless they will absurdly think, that Christ and God were not of
one and the same mind, but were at odds and difference in the work of
Redemption: as if Christ should buy and purchase us absolutely without a
condition, but God should sell us upon a condition; so absurdly they should
think, the buyer and seller should be at odds, and not agreed both upon the
same terms: now since it must follow, that if Christ died for Judas without
respect to faith in him, then God cannot but justify and save Judas without
regard to faith in him; then though Judas does not believe, and wilfully
refuses to believe, yet God cannot in justice damn him for his not believing:
because when Christ bought Judas of God the Father, and God the Father sold
Judas to Christ, there was no condition of faith intended betwixt them: and
therefore Judas must be saved. If you say, that Christ died for Judas, then God
cannot require faith of him, so as he should for his infidelity, in justice
damn and punish him in the next life; God cannot be so unjust, as to punish one
man twice for his sins, as once in Christ his surety, and once again in himself
the principal; one debt must not be twice paid: wherefore to allege a reason
from Judas his unbelief, why God may damn him in the next life, is to allege
a reason, why God may deal unjustly in the next life.

Now what they should say to this I cannot devise, unless they will distinguish
of Judas his sins, and so make an hotchpotch of the work of Redemption, saying,
that Christ died for some of Judas his sins, but not for all, as not for his
unbelief: and then it will follow, that Christ is made an half Savior, or a
partial Savior: and Christ died for some of Judas his sins, and Judas dies
for other some of his sins: and, Christ died for all Judas his sins save that
one of unbelief, and Judas is now in Hell for no sins committed, but suffers
only for one sin, namely his unbelief: these are absurd and groundless
fantasies, never broched by any Christian man, unless Arminians will be the
first. 2. So saying, they contradict themselves: For if Christ died not for
unbelief, then he died not for all men: for many men are unbelievers, 2. These.
3.2. Christ's death was for believers, or for unbelievers: we say, it was for
believers, ergo they must hold, that it was for unbelievers. So much touching
their answer; and now I come to their similitudes, and first to that of a
Physician.

1 This simily of a Physician, is altogether impertinent to their purpose; for
by this simily it is cleared, that God in justice may damn Judas once, because
he refuses to believe; but it does not clear that which is in question, which
is, that God in justice may damn Judas twice for his sin of unbelief; that is,
once in his surety Christ, and once more in his own person: this is high
injustice: no similitudes may or can make God to be unjust.

If the patient refuses to receive and apply the potion, he is to bear the
blame; but it is not so in Judas, if he refuses to believe and apply Christ:
because if Christ died for Judas absolutely, and without respect to his belief
or unbelief, as Arminians say, then he is not bound to believe in Christ, as a
means to free him from damnation; for Christ has already suffered his
damnation for him, before God the Father required any faith in him, when he
died for him, considered as a sinner or unbeliever: so Judas is not to be
blamed for not believing; since Christ in dying for him and in his room,
required or respected no faith in him; and it is too late for God the Father,
to require the condition of faith in him, after he has punished him and his
sin in Christ.

Further, though in Physic, the patient is to apply the potion to avoid death,
yet it is not so in the potion of Christ's death, to free us from death: for
here man is to do nothing, but to be passive, if Christ died for all
unbelievers; but it is God who is to make application, and to apply Christ's
death to men, whether they believe or believe not: because he received and
accepted Christ's death for all men, believers or not believers: in what
condition Christ gave himself for men, in such condition God received Christ
for men.

1 Though a Physician tenders a potion to his patient, so as he refuses to
apply it he must die; yet it is not so to be applied, as if God tendered Christ
upon the condition of faith, so as if they refuse to believe they must be
damned: for it is absurd to think or say, that after God had received and
accepted of Christ and his death for men, without any condition at all, be it
faith or any other; he should afterward require a condition, or tender Christ
upon a condition of faith. God having received Christ's death for men without
condition, he has no tender to make unto men now, but to tender them
justification, glorification, and freedom from condemnation; this or nothing is
to be tendered: for after God has punished and damned a man in Christ, it is
most absurd to think, he should then require of him, faith as a condition and
means to free him from damnation. Thus much for the simile of a Physicia^.

2 As for the other simile of a King and the Captives, this is also
impertinent: for 1. Be it so, that Judas and other captives do despise Christ's
ransom, and faith the means of it, yet this will not clear God of injustice, if
he punish Judas twice; once in Christ his surety, and once again in his own
person: no simile can make God unjust, or to punish one man or one sin twice:
God in justice may punish Judas his dispising once, as in Christ, or in Judas;
but not twice, as in Christ and in Judas both. 2. This simile is unfit for the
purpose, and therefore to be rejected: if it were fitted to our question, it
should be thus framed: A King having many subjects in captivity to a foreign
King, pays their ransom by his son, who is put into captivity for them, and
lies there in their room; but they despise their liberty, choose to live in
captivity still; wherefore the foreign King, may keep both the Kings son, and
the captives also in prison and captivity: can the foreign King do this
injustice? So much for their second similitude.

I cannot imagine what Arminians should say to evade these things, unless they
will coin a new distinction, and strange to Christian ears, and so make a
hotchpotch of the work of Redemption, saying, that Christ died for some of a
man's sins, but not for all his sins, as not for his final unbelief, or new
infidelity, or infidelity unrepented of, as they express it: and then they
think to evade all by this answer, that God punished Christ for all Judas his
sins, excepting his infidelity, and punished Judas for his infidelity; and so
God punishes no sin twice, nor is he unjust. But to this new distinction I
thus reply.

1 It makes Christ to be but a partial Savior, or an half Savior: for by
this distinction they say, Christ died for some, or many of a man's sins, but
not for all; for not for unbelief. 2. It makes Christ to die for some of Judas
his sins, and Judas himself to die for other some of his sins. 3. It makes
Judas and other wicked men and unbelievers, to suffer hell torments, for none
of all their horrible and abominable sins committed in their life time; but
only for their final unbelief: for they say, Christ died and suffered for all
their other sins. Now to say that wicked men do not suffer in hell, for their
other horrible sins besides infidelity, is not only absurd, but manifestly
false: as is to be seen Matthew. 25.41, 42, 43. John 5.29. Romans 2.6, 8, 9. Jude
7. Revel. 21.8. where we see, that wicked men suffer in hell, for their
unmercifulness, contention, unrighteousness, fornication, murder, sorcerie,
idolatry, and lies: so you see, they can make no evasion, but by coining of a
new distinction, which makes an hotchpotch of the work of Redemption, and is
not only absurd, but also manifestly false, as is proved. 2. If Christ died
not for new infidelity, then he died not for all men: for many believe not
after invitation by the Gospel preached, which they call, new infidelity, John
12.37. So much for confutation of the Arminian answer, saying to us, that
therefore God may justly damn Judas, because he will not believe. Now their
answer being confuted, our objection remains good, namely, that if Christ died
for all men, then it follows, that no man shall be damned, but that Judas and
all men shall be saved. And so I come to the fourth and last thing propounded
to be handled, which is, A Confutation of their distinction of Impetration and
Application.

The distinction of Impetration and Application confuted.
FIrst we must know what Arminians understand by these terms. By impetration,
they understand the death and passion of Christ, whereby he merited remission
of sins and justification for all men. By application, they understand the
fruit and benefit of Christ's death and passion; which is (as I conceive it must
be) the real and actual remission of sins and justification, applied unto the
faithful. The former, namely Impetration, is proper to God the Son: the
latter, namely Application, is proper unto God the Father. Furthermore, they
place Faith, between Impetration and Application; so as though Christ died and
impetrated for all men, yet God justifies, and makes application of Christ's
death unto believers only: now the better to help on the matter, they say,
that these being acts of grace and favor, God may according to his infinite
wisdom, order them according to his most free will: the which words, as I take
it, are spoken in relation to Faith, that God may place it before or after
impetration, as it pleases his wisdom. Having thus opened their meaning, I
thus proceed.

As for this distinction of Impetration and Application, I acknowledge it: for
as it is Christ that died or impetrated for us, so it is God that justifies
us, and makes application of Christ's death unto us, Romans 8.33. And I am
content, that they call what Christ did for us on the Cross, Impetration; and
what God does for us in relation to it, and by virtue of it, Application: but I
mislike of their division, that they should divide the works of Christ and God;
so as if Christ should impetrate and die for many men, to whom God makes no
application of Christ's death: for they say, Christ impetrated for all men,
believers and unbelievers, but God applies Christ's death for justification to
believers only: now thus the Works of Christ and God, do not concur in the
same persons, but are divided: for God makes no application unto many men, for
whom Christ made impetration. On the contrary we hold, that the works of God
the Father, and God the Son, are undivided: distinguished they may be, but
divided they may not be: they always concur as touching the same persons; to
whomsoever God makes application, to and for those and none other Christ made
impetrations; and for whomsoever Christ impetrated, to those and to all those
God makes application. And as touching faith, we hold, that as God respects
faith in application, so Christ respects faith in impetration, so as faith is
precedent in both: and so God and Christ, had respect unto the same persons,
and unto the same qualification of the persons: but that faith is to come
between impetration and application, is but an Arminian devise; dividing the
consideration and respects of God and Christ, of the Father and the Son, about
one and the same work of Redemption: and so I come to the Confutation.

1 For the absurdnes of this distinction of impetration and application; and
the Arminian devise, of faith coming between them, as a condition of the latter
only: put case, that a King, having subjects in thraldom and captivity under a
foreign King, and to ransom and redeem them, he sends his only Son, to lay in
bondage and captivity for them and in their stead and place; and this the King
does without any condition at all, to be performed by his subjects: If now the
foreign King, refuses to deliver and set free the subjects, unless they will
perform some condition first, which he imposes upon them, and which their own
King never required of them in sending his Son, nor did his Son go into
captivity for them upon any such condition: is it not absurd to imagine, that
the foreign King should require a condition to be performed by the subjects,
before he will apply the ransom to them, and set them free? it must needs be
absurd, for you must imagine, folly and ignorance in the one King, or fraud and
deceit in the other King, in that they were not first agreed both on the same
terms, before the son was put into captivity. So is the case, if Faith goes
between impetration and application; and if Christ died for men absolutely
without the condition of Faith, and yet God will require the condition of
Faith, before he will make application and set men free from their sins and
condemnation.

I know nothing they have to say, to free themselves of this absurdity but
this, that both the Kings, Christ and God, were at the first agreed on the same
terms, as thus: they both agreed, that Christ should impetrate and die for all
men absolutely, without consideration of any faith in them; but that God should
apply Christ's death to none but believers, or to such as did first believe: To
this I reply, that this occasion is guilty of these absurdities.

1 That the King should put his only son, to live in thraldom and bondage; and
his son should willingly endure all this misery, for millions, even the greater
number of his subjects in captivity, whom he foresaw and knew well, should not
be a rush the better for it, because they would not keep the condition agreed
on. Will any wise man, give and pay a certain price certainly, for an uncertain
possession, be it of house or land? much less will any pay aforehand, for that
land or house, which he foresees he shall never enjoy? yet such a purchaser
they make Christ to be by this agreement.

The absurdness also of this may appear by this simile: Abraham bought of the
Hittites, for 400 shekels of silver, a field to bury his wife in; and upon the
payment of the money, the field was delivered to him for a possession, Genesis
23.16, etc. now is it not absurd to imagine, that Abraham and the Hittites,
should both be agreed, that Abraham should buy and pay for the field absolutely
without any condition, but yet the Hittites should require a condition to go
between paying and possession, and before Abraham should have possession? and
without it, no possession? where a condition is required, it always goes before
payment; never after, or between payment and possession: so though they in
words ascribe wisdom to God, saying, that God may according to his infinite
wisdom, order Faith to go before or after impetration, yet in this case indeed,
they impute absurdness and folly to God, in putting the condition of Faith after
the price of Christ's death. (The case is the same, in buying a thing, as
Abraham did for himself, or for a man's friend or friends, as Christ did.)

1 They say, Christ's intention was by his death to save all men, even
unbelievers in Acta Synodalia, page 344. now for Christ to agree with God, to
put in a condition of Faith after impetration, is a contradiction and crossing
of his intension: for by his death, he intended to save unbelievers, but by
agreeing to require Faith of unbelievers, or they to be denied salvation, he
(foreseing they would not and should not believe) intended not to have them
saved: for he agreed to a condition which barred them from salvation: so much
for the absurdity of this agreement.

2 An other absurdity in the distinction is this: It makes God to be an unjust
Judge: for Christ by his impetration and dying for the sins of unbelievers,
has born the punishment of their sins for them in this life; now for God to
punish unbelievers for their sins in the next life (as he will Mark 16.16.) is
to punish twice over for the same sins, which is an act of injustice in God:
now this must be so, if you distinguish of impetration and application in such
sort, as they concur not in the same persons, but are divided, so as
impetration belongs unto unbelievers, but application belongs not to them: for
if application and justification belongs not to them, then they must suffer
punishment for their sins in the next life, and so God shall be unjust: for
after he has punished unbelievers in Christ their surety, he shall punish
them again, in their own persons: so you see, impetration and application are
not to be distinguished in respect of persons, as if the one belonged to some
persons, but not the other, unless you will make God to be an unjust Judge.

3 I shall confute this distinction by a Text of Scripture, understanding it in
the Arminian sense: see 2. Cor. 5.15, 19. In verse 15. speaking of Christ and
his death, it says, one died for all, etc. Here I understand the word all, in
the Arminian sense: and then in verse 19. it speaks again of Christ and his
death, saying, God was in Christ, (that is, in Christ upon the Cross, when he
died for all) and reconciled the world unto himself, not imputing their sins
unto them. So here you have the impetration of Christ's death; and the
application of it, in reconciliation and not imputation of sins: now here
application, is made as large as impetration, and to belong unto the same
persons, without distinction or division: for those [all] which Christ died
for, were all of them reconciled to God, and justified, their sins not being
imputed unto them: the same world which Christ died for, John 3.16. the same
was reconciled and had no sins imputed to them. So S. Paul did not allow of
this Arminian distinction and division, of impetration and application, in the
Arminian sense, so as impetration should be understood more largely for persons
than application; or as if impetration had been for all men, and application
but for some men.

4 This distinction is guilty yet of another absurdity, for it makes the
means of faith, to be used altogether too late, and so to become an
unprofitable and frivolous means: for Arminians make faith to be a means to
avoid an evil, after the evil is past. They say, Christ by his impetration,
suffered the evil of death for unbelievers: now in as much as Christ suffered
death, and bore the evil of punishment of unbelievers, for them and in their
stead and room, they themselves have suffered death, and bore the evil of
punishment in the person of Christ: now after unbelievers have born the evil of
punishment, it is too late to use faith as a means to obtain application, and
justification, and a freedom from the evil of punishment: for thus they should
use a means to avoid an evil, after the evil is past, and so the means of faith
is made unprofitable and frivolous: wherefore should I use any means to avoid
imprisonment, when my Surety has suffered imprisonment for me? were not means
in this case frivolous? If Christ did impetrate and die for Judas and in his
stead, then Judas has suffered death by his Surety Christ; what need then is
there of faith in Judas, as a means to obtain application and freedom from
death, after he has suffered death, as by his Surety? This is as if a Judge
should hang a man for his offense, and then require him to use means to free
himself from death. And so much for confutation of this distinction, of
Impetration and Application.

FINIS.

