THE SKEPTICAL CHEMIST: OR CHYMICO-PHYSICAL Doubts and Paradoxes, Touching the
SPAGYRIST'S PRINCIPLES Commonly called HYPOSTATICAL, As they are wont to be
Proposed and Defended by the Generality of ALCHYMISTS. Whereunto is praemis'd
Part of another Discourse relating to the same Subject. BY The Honorable
ROBERT BOIL, Esquire;

LONDON, Printed by J. Cadwell for J. Crook, and are to be Sold at the Ship in
St. Paul's Churchyard. MDCLXI.

A PRAEFACE INTRODUCTORY To the following Treatise.
TO give the Reader an account, Why the following Treatise is suffered to pass
abroad so maimed, and imperfect, I must inform him that it is now long since,
that to gratify an ingenious Gentleman, I set down some of the Reasons that
kept me from fully acquiescing either in the Peripatetical, or in the Chemical
Doctrine, of the Material Principles of mixed Bodies. This Discourse some years
after falling into the hands of some Learned men, had the good luck to be so
favorably received, and advantageously spoken of by them, that having had more
then ordinary Invitations given me to make it public, I thought fit to review
it, that I might retrench some things that seemed not so fit to be shown to
every Reader, And substitute some of those other things that occurred to me of
the trials and observations I had since made. What became of my papers, I
elsewhere mention in a Preface where I complain of it: But since I writ That, I
found many sheets that belonged to the subjects I am now about to discourse of.
Wherefore seeing that I had then in my hands as much of the first Dialogue as
was requisite to state the Case, and serve for an Introduction as well to the
conference betwixt Carneades and Eleutherius, as to some other Dialogues, which
for certain reasons are not now herewith published, I resolved to supply, as
well as I could, the Contents of a Paper belonging to the second of the
following Discourses, which I could not possibly retrive, though it were the
chief of them all. And having once more tried the Opinion of Friends, but not
of the same, about this imperfect work, I found it such, that I was content in
compliance with their Desires, that not only it should be published, but that
it should be published as soon as conveniently might be. I had indeed all along
the Dialogues spoken of my self, as of a third Person; For, they containing
Discourses which were among the first Treatises that I ventured long ago to
write of matters Philosophical, I had reason to desire, with the Painter, to
latere pone tabulam, and hear what men would say of them, before I owned my
self to be their Author. But besides that now I find, it is not unknown to many
who it is that writ them, I am made to believe that it is not inexpedient, they
should be known to come from a Person not altogether a stranger to Chemical
Affairs. And I made the less scruple to let them come abroad uncompleated,
partly, because my affairs and Prae-ingagements to publish diverse other
Treatises allowed me small hopes of being able in a great while to complete
these Dialogues. And partly, because I am not unapt to think, that they may
come abroad seasonably enough, though not for the Authors reputation, yet for
other purposes. For I observe, that of late Chemistry begins, as indeed it
deserves, to be cultivated by Learned Men who before despised it; and to be
pretended to by many who never cultivated it, that they may be thought not to
ignore it: Whence it is come to pass, that diverse Chemical Notions about
Matters Philosophical are taken for granted and employed, and so adopted by
very eminent Writers both Naturalists and Physicians. Now this I fear may prove
somewhat prejudicial to the Advancement of solid Philosophy: For though I am a
great Lover of Chemical Experiments, and though I have no mean esteem of diverse
Chemical Remedies, yet I distinguish these from their Notions about the causes
of things, and their manner of Generation. And for ought I can hitherto
discern, there are a thousand Phenomenon in Nature, besides a Multitude of
Accidents relating to the humane Body, which will scarcely be clearly and
satisfactorily made out by them that confine themselves to deduce things from
Salt, Sulphur and Mercury, and the other Notions peculiar to the Chemists,
without taking much more Notice than they are wont to do, of the Motions and
Figures, of the small Parts of Matter, and the other more Catholic and
Fruitful affections of Bodies. Wherefore it will not perhaps be now
unseasonable to let our Carneades warn Men, not to subscribe to the grand
Doctrine of the Chemists touching their three Hypostatical Principles, till
they have a little examined it, and considered, how they can clear it from his
Objections, diverse of which it is like they may never have thought on; since a
Chemist scarce would, and none but a Chemist could propose them. I hope also it
will not be unacceptable to several Ingenious Persons, who are unwilling to
determine of any important Controversy, without a previous consideration of
what may be said on both sides, and yet have greater desires to understand
Chemical Matters, than Opportunities of learning them, to find here together,
besides several Experiments of my own purposely made to Illustrate the Doctrine
of the Elements, diverse others scarce to be met with, otherwise then Scattered
among many Chemical Books. And to Find these Associated Experiments so
Delivered as that an Ordinary Reader, if he be but Acquainted with the usual
Chemical Terms, may easily enough Understand Them; and even a wary One may
safely rely on Them. These Things I add, because a Person any Thing versed in
the Writings of Chemists cannot but Discern by their obscure, ambiguous, and
almost Aenigmatical Way of expressing what they pretend to Teach, that they
have no Mind to be understood at all, but by the Sons of Art (as they call
them) nor to be Understood even by these without Difficulty and Hazardous
Trials. Insomuch that some of Them Scarce ever speak so heartily, as when they
make use of that known Chemical Sentence; Ubi palam locuti sumus, ibi nihil
diximus. And as the obscurity of what some Writers deliver makes it very
difficult to be understood; so the Unfaithfulness of too many others makes it
unfit to be reli'd on. For though unwillingly, Yet I must for the truths sake,
and the Readers, warn him not to be forward to believe Chemical Experiments
when they are set down only by way of Prescriptions, and not of Relations; that
is, unless he that delivers them mentions his doing it upon his own particular
knowledge, or upon the Relation of some credible person, avowing it upon his
own experience. For I am troubled, I must complain, that even Eminent Writers,
both Physicians and Philosophers, whom I can easily name, if it be required,
have of late suffered themselves to be so far imposed upon, as to Publish and
Build upon Chemical Experiments, which questionless they never tried; for if
they had, they would, as well as I, have found them not to be true. And indeed
it were to be wished, that now that those begin to quote Chemical Experiments
that are not themselves Acquainted with Chemical Operations, men would Leave
off that Indefinite Way of Vouching the Chemists say this, or the Chemists
affirm that, and would rather for each Experiment they allege name the Author
or Authors, upon whose credit they relate it; For, by this means they would
secure themselves from the suspicion of falsehood (to which the other Practice
Exposes them) and they would Leave the Reader to Judge of what is fit for him
to Believe of what is Delivered, whilst they employ not their own great names
to Countenance doubtful Relations; and they will also do Justice to the
Inventors or Publishers of true Experiments, as well as upon the Obtruders of
false ones. Whereas by that general Way of quoting the Chemists, the candid
Writer is Defrauded of the particular Praise, and the Impostor escapes the
Personal Disgrace that is due to him.

The remaining Part of this Praeface must be employed in saying something for
Carneades, and something for my Self.

And first, Carneades hopes that he will be thought to have disputed civilly
and Modestly enough for one that was to play the Antagonist and the Sceptick.
And if he any where seem to slight his Adversaries Tenants and Arguments, he
is willing to have it looked upon as what he was induced to, not so much by his
Opinion of them, as the Examples of Themistius and Philoponus, and the custom
of such kind of Disputes.

Next, In case that some of his Arguments shall not be thought of the most
Cogent sort that may be, he hopes it will be considered that it ought not to be
Expected, that they should be So. For, his Part being chiefly but to propose
Doubts and Scruples, he does enough, if he shows that his Adversaries Arguments
are not strongly Concluding, though his own be not so neither. And if there
should appear any disagreement betwixt the things he delivers in diverse
passages, he hopes it will be considered, that it is not necessary that all the
things a Sceptick Proposes, should be consonant; since it being his work to
Suggest doubts against the Opinion he questions, it is allowable for him to
propose two or more several Hypotheses about the same thing: And to say that
it may be accounted for this way, or that way, or the other Way, though these
ways be perhaps inconsistent among Themselves. Because it is enough for him,
if either of the proposed Hypotheses be but as probable as that he calls a
question. And if he proposes many that are Each of them probable, he does the
more satisfy his doubts, by making it appear the more difficult to be sure,
that that which they always differ from is the true. And our Garneades by
holding the Negative, he has this Advantage, that if among all the Instances he
brings to invalidate all the Vulgar Doctrine of those he Disputes with, any one
be Irrefragable, that alone is sufficient to overthrow a Doctrine which
Universally asserts what he opposes. For, it cannot be true, that all Bodies
whatsoever that are reckoned among the Perfectly mixed Ones, are Compounded of
such a Determinate Number of such or such Ingredients, in case any one such
Body can be produced, that is not so compounded; and he hopes too, that
Accurateness will be the less expected from him, because his undertaking
obliges him to maintain such Opinions in Chemistry, and that chiefly by
Chemical Arguments, as are Contrary to the very Principles of the Chemists;
From whose writings it is not Therefore like he should receive any intentionall
Assistance, except from some Passages of the Bold and Ingenious Helmont, with
whom he yet disagrees in many things (which reduce him to explicate Diverse
Chemical Phenomenon, according to other Notions;) And of whose Ratiocinations,
not only some seem very Extravagant, but even the Rest are not wont to be as
considerable as his Experiments. And though it be True indeed, that some
Aristotelians have occasionally written against the Chemical Doctrine he
Oppugnes, yet since they have done it according to their Principles, And since
our Carneades must as well oppose their Hypothesis as that of the Spagyrist, he
was fain to fight his Adversaries with their own Weapons, Those of the
Peripatetick being Improper, if not hurtful for a Person of his Tenants;
besides that those Aristotelians, (at Least, those he met with,) that have
written against the Chemists, seem to have had so little Experimental Knowledge
in Chemical Matters, that by their frequent Mistakes and unskilful Way of
Oppugning, they have too often exposed Themselves to the Derision of their
Adversaries, for writing so Confidently against what they appear so little to
understand.

And Lastly, Carneades hopes, he shall do the Ingenious this Piece of service,
that by having Thus drawn the Chemists Doctrine out of their Dark and Smoakie
Laboratories, and both brought it into the open light, and shown the weakness
of their Proofs, that have hitherto been wont to be brought for it, either
Judicious Men shall henceforth be allowed calmly and after due information to
disbelieve it, or those abler Chemists, that are zealous for the reputation of
it, will be obliged to speak plainer then hitherto has been done, and maintain
it by better Experiments and Arguments then Those Carneades has examined: so
That he hopes, the Curious will one Way or other Derive either satisfaction or
instruction from his endeavors. And as he is ready to make good the profession
he makes in the close of his Discourse, he being ready to be better informed,
so he expects either to be indeed informed, or to be let alone. For Though if
any Truly knowing Chemists shall Think fit in a civil and rational way to show
him any truth touching the matter in Dispute That he yet discernes not,
Carneades will not refuse either to admit, or to own a Conviction: yet if any
impertinent Person shall, either to get Himself a Name, or for what other end
soever, wilfully or carelessly mistake the State of the Controversy, G. and F.
and H. and others, in their books against one another.
or the sense of his Arguments, or shall rail instead of arguing, as has been
done of Late in Print by diverse Chemists; or lastly, shall write against them
in a canting way; I mean, shall express himself in ambiguous or obscure terms,
or argue from experiments not intelligibly enough Delivered, Carneades
professes, That he values his time so much, as not to think the answering such
Trifles worth the loss of it.

And now having said thus much for Carneades, I hope the Reader will give me
leave to say something too for my self.

And first, if some morose Readers shall find fault with my having made the
Interlocutors upon occasion complement with one another, and that I have almost
all along written these Dialogues in a style more Fashionable then That of mere
scholars is wont to be, I hope I shall be excused by them that shall consider,
that to keep a due decorum in the Discourses, it was fit that in a book written
by a Gentleman, and wherein only Gentlemen are introduced as speakers, the
Language should be more smooth, and the Expressions more civil than is usual in
the more Scholastic way of writing. And indeed, I am not sorry to have this
Opportunity of giving an example how to manage even Disputes with Civility;
whence perhaps some Readers will be assisted to discern a Difference betwixt
Bluntness of speech and Strength of reason, and find that a man may be a
Champion for Truth, without being an Enemy to Civility; and may confute an
Opinion without railing at Them that hold it; To whom he that desires to
convince and not to provoke them, must make some amends by his Civility to
their Persons, for his severity to their mistakes; and must say as little else
as he can, to displease them, when he says that they are in an error.

But perhaps other Readers will be less apt to find fault with the Civility of
my Disputants, than the Chemists will be, upon the reading of some Passages of
the following Dialogue, to accuse Carneades of Asperity. But if I have made my
Sceptick sometimes speak sleightingly of the Opinions he opposes, I hope it
will not be found that I have done any more, than became the Part he was to act
of an Opponent: Especially, if what I have made him say be compared with what
the Prince of the Roman Orators himself makes both great Persons and Friends
say of one another Opinions, in his excellent Dialogues, De Natura Deorum: And
I shall scarce be suspected of Partiality, in the case, by them that take
Notice that there is full as much (if not far more) liberty of sleighting their
Adversaries Tenants to be met with in the Discourses of those with whom
Carneades disputes. Nor needed I make the Interlocutors speak otherwise then
freely in a Dialogue, wherein it was sufficiently intimated, that I meant not
to declare my own Opinion of the Arguments proposed, much less of the whole
Controversy it self otherwise than as it may by an attentive Reader be guessed
at by some Passages of Carneades: (I say, some Passages, because I make not all
that he says, especially in the heat of Disputation, mine,) partly in this
Discourse, and partly in some other Dialogues betwixt the same speakers (though
they treat not immediately of the Elements) which have long layn by me, and
expect the Entertainment that these present Discourses will meet with. And
indeed they will much mistake me, that shall conclude from what I now publish,
that I am at Defyance with Chemistry, or would make my Readers so. I hope the
Specimina I have lately published of an attempt to show the usefulness of
Chemical Experiments to Contemplative Philosophers, will give those that shall
read them other thoughts of me; and I had a design (but wanted opportunity) to
publish with these Papers an Essay I have lying by me, the greater part of
which is Apologetical for one sort of Chemists. And at least, as for those that
know me, I hope the pain I have taken in the fire will both convince them, that
I am far from being an Enemy to the Chemists Art, (though I am no friend to
many that disgrace it by professing it,) and persuade them to believe me when I
declare that I distinguish betwixt those Chemists that are either Cheats, or
but Laborants, and the true Adepti; By whom, could I enjoy their Conversation,
I would both willingly and thankfully be instructed; especially concerning the
Nature and Generation of Metals: And possibly, those that know how little I
have remitted of my former addictedness to make Chemical Experiments, will
easily believe, that one of the chief Designs of this Skeptical Discourse was,
not so much to discredit Chemistry, as to give an occasion and a kind of
necessity to the more knowing Artists to lay aside a little of their overgreat
Reservedness, and either explicate or prove the Chemical Theory better than
ordinary Chemists have done, or by enriching us with some of their nobler
secrets to evince that Their art is able to make amends even for the
deficiencies of their Theory: And thus much I shall here make bold to add, that
we shall much undervalue Chemistry, if we imagine, that it cannot teach us
things far more useful, not only to Physic but to Philosophy, than those that
are hitherto known to vulgar Chemists. And yet as for inferior Spagyrists
themselves, they have by their labors deserved so well of the Commonwealth of
Learning, that methinks it is Pity they should ever miss the Truth which they
have so industriously sought. And though I be no Admirer of the Theorical Part
of their Art, yet my conjectures will much deceive me, if the Practical Part be
not much more cultivated than hitherto it has been, and do not both employ
Philosophy and Philosophers, and help to make men such. Nor would I that have
been diverted by other Studies as well as affairs, be thought to pretend being
a profound Spagyrist, by finding so many faults in the Doctrine wherein the
Generality of Chemists scruples not to Acquiesce: For besides that it is most
commonly far easier to frame Objections against any proposed Hypothesis, than
to propose an Hypothesis not liable to Objections (besides this I say) it is no
such great matter, if whereas Beginners in Chemistry are commonly at once
imbued with the Theory and Operations of their profession, I who had the good
Fortune to Learn the Operations from illiterate Persons, upon whose credit I
was not Tempted to take up any opinion about them, should consider things with
less prejudice, and consequently with other Eyes than the Generality of
Learners; And should be more disposed to accommodate the Phenomenon that
occurred to me to other Notions than to those of the Spagyrists. And having at
first entertained a suspicion That the Vulgar Principles were less General and
comprehensive, or less considerately Deduced from Chemical Operations, than
was believed; it was not uneasy for me both to Take notice of diverse
Phenomenon, overlooked by prepossest Persons, that seemed not to suite so well
with the Hermetical Doctrine; and to devise some Experiments likely to furnish
me with Objections against it, not known to many, that having practiced
Chemistry longer perchance then I have yet lived, may have far more Experience,
Than I, of particular processes.

To conclude, whether the Notions I have proposed, and the Experiments I have
communicated, be considerable, or not, I willingly leave others to Judge; and
This only I shall say for my Self, That I have endeavored to deliver matters
of Fact, so faithfully, that I may as well assist the less skilful Readers to
examine the Chemical Hypothesis, as provoke the Spagyrical Philosophers to
illustrate it: which if they do, and that either the Chemical opinion, or the
Peripatetick, or any other Theory of the Elements differing from that I am most
inclined to, shall be intelligibly explicated, and duly proved to me; what I
have hitherto discoursed will not hinder it from making a Proselyte of a Person
that Loves Fluctuation of Judgment little enough to be willing to be eased of
it by any thing but Error.

PHYSIOLOGICAL CONSIDERATIONS Touching The experiments wont to be employed to
evince either the IV Peripatetick Elements, or the III Chemical Principles of
Mixed Bodies.
Part of the First Dialogue.
I Perceive that diverse of my Friends have thought it very strange to hear me
speak so irresolvedly, as I have been wont to do, concerning those things which
some take to be the Elements, and others to be the Principles of all mixed
Bodies. But I blush not to acknowledge that I much less scruple to confess
that I Doubt, when I do so, then to profess that I Know what I do not: And I
should have much stronger Expectations then I dare yet entertain, to see
Philosophy solidly established, if men would more carefully distinguish those
things that they know, from those that they ignore or do but think, and then
explicate clearly the things they conceive they understand, acknowledge
ingenuously what it is they ignore, and profess so heartily their Doubts, that
the industry of intelligent persons might be set on work to make further
enquiries, and the easiness of less discerning Men might not be imposed on. But
because a more particular account will probably be expected of my
unsatisfyedness not only with the Peripatetick, but with the Chemical Doctrine
of the Primitive Ingredients of Bodies: It may possibly serve to satisfy others
of the excusableness of my disatisfaction to peruse the ensuing Relation of
what passed a while since at a meeting of persons of several opinions, in a
place that need not here be named; where the subject whereof we have been
speaking, was amply and variously discoursed of.

It was on one of the fairest days of this Summer that the inquisitive
Eleutherius came to invite me to make a visit with him to his friend Carneades.
I readily consented to this motion, telling him that if he would but permit me
to go first and make an excuse at a place not far off, where I had at that hour
appointed to meet, but not about a business either of moment, or that could not
well admit of a delay, I would presently wait on him, because of my knowing
Carneades to be so conversant with nature and with Furnaces, and so unconfined
to vulgar Opinions, that he would probably by some ingenious Paradox or other,
give our minds at least a pleasing Exercise, and perhaps enrich them with some
solid instruction. Eleutherius then first going with me to the place where my
Apology was to be made, I accompanied him to the lodging of Carneades, where
when we were come, we were told by the Servants, that he was retired with a
couple of Friends (whose names they also told us) to one of the Arbours in his
Garden, to enjoy under its cool shades a delightful protection from the yet
troublesome heat of the Sun.

Eleutherius being perfectly acquainted with that Garden immediately led me to
the Arbor, and relying on the intimate familiarity that had been long
cherished betwixt him and Carneades; in spite of my Reluctance to what might
look like an intrusion upon his privacy, drawing me by the hand, he abruptly
entered the Arbor, where we found Carneades, Philoponus, and Themistius,
sitting close about a little round Table, on which besides paper, pen, and
ink, there lay two or three open Books; Carneades appeared not at all troubled
at this surprise, but rising from the Table, received his Friend with open
looks and arms, and welcoming me also with his wonted freedom and civility,
invited us to rest our selves by him, which, as soon as we had exchanged with
his two Friends (who were ours also) the civilities accustomed on such
occasions, we did. And he presently after we had seated our selves, shutting
the Books that lay open, and turning to us with a smiling countenance seemed
ready to begin some such unconcerning discourse as is wont to pass or rather
waste the time in promiscuous companies.

But Eleutherius guessing at what he meant to do, prevented him by telling him,
I perceive Carneades by the books that you have been now shutting, and much
more by the posture wherein I found Persons qualified to discourse of serious
matters, and so accustomed to do it, that you three were before our coming,
engaged in some Philosophical conference, which I hope you will either
prosecute, and allow us to be partakers of, in recompense of the freedom we
have used in presuming to surprise you, or else give us leave to repair the
injury we should otherwise do you, by leaving you to the freedom we have
interrupted, and punishing our selves for our boldness by depriving our selves
of the happiness of your company. With these last words he and I rose up, as if
we meant to be gone, But Carneades suddenly laying hold on his arm, and
stopping him by it, smileingly told him, We are not so forward to lose good
company as you seem to imagine; especially since you are pleased to desire to
be present at what we shall say, about such a Subject as that You found us
considering. For that, being the number of the Elements, Principles, or
Material Ingredients of Bodies, is an enquiry whose truth is of that
Importance, and of that Difficulty, that it may as well deserve as require to
be searched into by such skillful Indagators of Nature as your selves. And
therefore we sent to invite the bold and acute Leucippus to lend us some light
by his Atomical Paradox, upon which we expected such pregnant hints, that 'twas
not without a great deal of trouble that we had lately word brought us that he
was not to be found; and we had likewise begged the Assistance of your presence
and thoughts, had not the messenger we employed to Leucippus informed us, that
as he was going, he saw you both pass by toward another part of the Town; And
this frustrated expectation of Leucippus his company, who told me but last
night that he would be ready to give me a meeting where I pleased to day,
having very long suspended our conference about the freshly mentioned Subject,
it was so newly begun when you came in, that we shall scarce need to repeat any
thing to acquaint you with what has passed betwixt us before your arrival, so
that I cannot but look upon it as a fortunate Accident that you should come so
seasonably, to be not hearers alone, but we hope Interlocutors at our
conference. For we shall not only allow of your presence at it, but desire your
Assistance in it; which I add both for other reasons, and because though these
learned Gentlemen (says he, turning to his two friends) need not fear to
discourse before any Auditory, provided it be intelligent enough to understand
them, yet for my part (continues he with a new smile,) I shall not dare to vent
my unpremeditated thoughts before two such Critics, unless by promising to
take your turns of speaking, You will allow me mine of quarrelling, with what
has been said. He and his friends added diverse things to convince us that they
were both desirous that we should hear them, and resolved against our doing so,
unless we allowed them sometimes to hear us. Elutherius after having a while
fruitlesly endeavored to obtain leave to be silent promised he would not be so
always, provided that he were permitted according to the freedom of his
Genious and Principles to side with one of them in the managing of one
Argument, and, if he saw cause, with his Antagonist, in the Prosecution of
another, without being confined to stick to any one party or Opinion, which was
after some debate accorded him. But I conscious to my own Disability's told
them resolutely that I was as much more willing as more fit to be a hearer then
a speaker, among such knowing Persons, and on so abstruse a Subject. And that
therefore I beseeched them without necessitating me to proclaim my weaknesses,
to allow me to lessen them by being a silent Auditor of their Discourses: to
suffer me to be at which I could present them no motive, save that their
instructions would make them in me a more intelligent Admirer. I added, that I
desired not to be idle whilst they were employed, but would if they pleased, by
writing down in short hand what should be delivered, preserve Discourses that I
knew would merit to be lasting. At first Carneades and his two friends utterly
rejected this motion; and all that my Resoluteness to make use of my ears, not
tongue, at their debates, could do, was to make them acquiesce in the
Proposition of Eleutherius, who thinking himself concerned, because he brought
me thither, to afford me some faint assistance, was content that I should
register their Arguments, that I might be the better able after the conclusion
of their conference to give them my sense upon the Subject of it, (The number
of Elements or Principles:) which he promised I should do at the end of the
present Debates, if time would permit, or else at our next meeting. And this
being by him undertaken in my name, though without my consent, the company
would by no means receive my Protestation against it, but casting, all at once,
their eyes on Carneades, they did by that and their unanimous silence, invite
him to begin; which (after a short pause, during which he turned himself to
Eleutherius and me) he did in this manner.

Notwithstanding the subtle reasonings I have met with in the books of the
Peripateticks, and the pretty experiments that have been showed me in the
Laboratories of Chemists, I am of so diffident, or dull a Nature, as to think
that if neither of them can bring more cogent arguments to evince the truth of
their assertion then are wont to be brought; a Man may rationally enough retain
some doubts concerning the very number of those material Ingredients of mixed
bodies, which some would have us call Elements, and others principles. Indeed
when I considered that the Tenants concerning the Elements are as considerable
amongst the Doctrines of natural Philosophy as the Elements themselves are
among the bodies of the Universe, I expected to find those Opinions solidly
established, upon which so many others are superstructed. But when I took the
pains impartially to examine the bodies themselves that are said to result from
the blended Elements, and to torture them into a confession of their
constituent Principles, I was quickly induced to think that the number of the
Elements has been contended about by Philosophers with more earnestness then
success. This unsatisfiedness of mine has been much wondered at, by these two
Gentlemen (at which words he pointed at Themistius and Philoponus) who though
they differ almost as much betwixt themselves about the question we are to
consider, as I do from either of them, yet they both agree very well in this,
that there is a determinate number of such ingredients as I was just now
speaking of, and that what that number is, I say not, may be (for what may not
such as they persuade?) but is wont to be clearly enough demonstrated both by
Reason and Experience. This has occasioned our present Conference. For our
Discourse this afternoon, having fallen from one subject to another, and at
length settled on this, they proffered to demonstrate to me, each of them the
truth of his opinion, out of both the Topics that I have freshly named. But on
the former (that of Reason strictly so taken) we declined insisting at the
present, lest we should not have time enough before supper to go thorough the
Reasons and Experiments too. The latter of which we unanimously thought the
most requisite to be seriously examined. I must desire you then to take notice
Gentlemen (continued Carneades) that my present business does not oblige me so
to declare my own opinion on the Subject in question, as to assert or deny the
truth either of the Peripatetick, or the Chemical Doctrine concerning the
number of the Elements, but only to show you that neither of these Doctrines
has been satisfactorily proved by the arguments commonly alleged on its
behalf. So that if I really discern (as perhaps I think I do) that there may
be a more rational account then ordinary, given of one of these opinions, I am
left free to declare my self of it, notwithstanding my present engagement, it
being obvious to all your observation, that a solid truth may be generally
maintained by no other, then incompetent Arguments. And to this Declaration I
hope it will be needless to add, that my task obliges me not to answer the
Arguments that may be drawn either for Themistius or Philoponus's Opinion from
the Topic of reason, as opposed to experiments; since it is these only that I
am to examine and not all these neither, but such of them alone as either of
them shall think fit to insist on, and as have hitherto been wont to be brought
either to prove that it is the four Peripatetick Elements, or that it is the
three Chemical Principles that all compounded bodies consist of. These things
(adds Carneades) I thought my self obliged to premise, partly lest you should
do these Gentlemen (pointing at Themistius and Philoponus, and smiling on them)
the injury of measuring their parts by the arguments they are ready to propose,
the laws of our Conference confining them to make use of those that the vulgar
of Philosophers (for even of them there is a vulgar) has drawn up to their
hands; and partly, that you should not condemn me of presumption for disputing
against persons over whom I can hope for no advantage, that I must not derive
from the nature, or rules of our controversy, wherein I have but a negative to
defend, and wherein too I am like on several occasions to have the Assistance
of one of my disagreeing adversaries against the other.

Philoponus and Themistius soon returned this complement with civilities of the
like nature, in which Eleutherius perceiving them engaged, to prevent the
further loss of that time of which they were not like to have very much to
spare, he minded them that their present business was not to exchange
complements, but Arguments: and then addressing his speech to Carneades, I
esteem it no small happiness (says he) that I am come here so luckily this
Evening. For I have been long disquieted with Doubts concerning this very
subject which you are now ready to debate. And since a Question of this
importance is to be now discussed by persons that maintain such variety of
opinions concerning it, and are both so able to enquire after truth, and so
ready to embrace it by whomsoever and on what occasion soever it is presented
them; I cannot but promise my self that I shall before we part either lose my
Doubts or the hopes of ever finding them resolved: Eleutherius paused not here;
but to prevent their answer, added almost in the same breath; and I am not a
little pleased to find that you are resolved on this occasion to insist rather
on Experiments then Syllogismes. For I, and no doubt You, have long observed,
that those Dialectical subtleties, that the Schoolmen too often employ about
Physiological Mysteries, are wont much more to declare the wit of him that uses
them, then increase the knowledge or remove the doubts of sober lovers of
truth. And such captious subtleties do indeed often puzzle and sometimes
silence men, but rarely satisfy them. Being like the tricks of Jugglers,
whereby men doubt not but they are cheated, though oftentimes they cannot
declare by what slights they are imposed on. And therefore I think you have
done very wisely to make it your business to consider the Phenomenon relating
to the present Question, which have been afforded by experiments, especially
since it might seem injurious to our senses, by whose mediation we acquire so
much of the knowledge we have of things corporal, to have recourse to
far-fetched and abstracted Ratiocination, to know what are the sensible
ingredients of those sensible things that we daily see and handle, and are
supposed to have the liberty to untwist (if I may so speak) into the primitive
bodies they consist of. He annexed that he wished therefore they would no
longer delay his expected satisfaction, if they had not, as he feared they had,
forgotten something preparatory to their debate; and that was to lay down what
should be all along understood by the word Principle or Element. Carneades
thanked him for his admonition, but told him that they had not been unmindful
of so requisite a thing. But that being Gentlemen and very far from the
litigious humor of loving to wrangle about words or terms or notions as empty;
they had before his coming in, readily agreed promiscuously to use when they
pleased, Elements and Principles as terms equivalent: and to understand both by
the one and the other, those primitive and simple Bodies of which the mixed ones
are said to be composed, and into which they are ultimately resolved. And upon
the same account (he added) we agreed to discourse of the opinions to be
debated, as we have found them maintained by the Generality of the assertors of
the four Elements of the one party, and of those that receive the three
Principles on the other, without tying our selves to enquire scrupulously what
notion either Aristotle or Paracelsus, or this or that Interpreter, or follower
of either of those great persons, framed of Elements or Principles; our design
being to examine, not what these or those writers thought or taught, but what
we find to be the obvious and most general opinion of those, who are willing to
be accounted Favorers of the Peripatetick or Chemical Doctrine, concerning
this subject.

I see not (says Eleutherius) why you might not immediately begin to argue, if
you were but agreed which of your two friendly Adversaries shall be first
heard. And it being quickly resolved on that Themistius should first propose
the Proofs for his Opinion, because it was the antienter, and the more general,
he made not the company expect long before he thus addressed himself to
Eleutherius, as to the Person least interessed in the dispute.

If you have taken sufficient notice of the late Confession which was made by
Carneades, and which (though his Civility dressed it up in complementall
Expressions) was exacted of him by his Justice, I suppose You will be easily
made sensible, that I engage in this Controversy with great and peculiar
Disadvantages, besides those which his Parts and my Personal Disabilities would
bring to any other cause to be maintained by me against him. For he justly
apprehending the force of truth, though speaking by no better a tongue then
mine, has made it the chief condition of our Duel, that I should lay aside the
best Weapons I have, and those I can best handle; Whereas if I were allowed the
freedom, in pleading for the four Elements, to employ the Arguments suggested
to me by Reason to demonstrare them, I should almost as little doubt of making
You a Proselyte to those unsever'd Teachers, Truth and Aristotle, as I do of
your Candor and your Judgment. And I hope you will however consider, that that
great Favorite and Interpreter of Nature, Aristotle, who was (as his Organum
witnesses) the greatest Master of Logic that ever lived, disclaimed the course
taken by other petty Philosophers (Ancient and Modern) who not attending the
Coherence and Consequences of their Opinions, are more sollicitous to make each
particular Opinion plausible independently upon the the rest, then to frame
them all so, as not only to be consistent together, but to support each other.
For that great Man in his vast and comprehensive Intellect, so framed each of
his Notions, that being curiously adapted into one Systeme, they need not each
of them any other defense then that which their mutual Coherence gives them:
As it is in an Arch, where each single stone, which if severed from the rest
would be perhaps defenseless, is sufficiently secured by the solidity and
entireness of the whole Fabric of which it is a part. How justly this may be
applied to the present case, I could easily show You, if I were permitted to
declare to You, how harmonious Aristotle's Doctrine of the Elements is with his
other Principles of Philosophy; and how rationally he has deduced their number
from that of the combinations of the four first Qualities from the kinds of
simple Motion belonging to simple bodies, and from I know not how many other
Principles and Phenomenon of Nature, which so conspire with his Doctrine of the
Elements, that they mutually strengthen and support each other. But since it is
forbidden me to insist on Reflections of this kind, I must proceed to tell You,
that though the Assertors of the four Elements value Reason so highly, and are
furnished with Arguments enough drawn from thence, to be satisfied that there
must be four Elements, though no Man had ever yet made any sensible trial to
discover their Number, yet they are not destitute of Experience to satisfy
others that are wont to be more swayed by their senses then their Reason. And I
shall proceed to consider the testimony of Experience, when I shall have first
advertised You, that if Men were as perfectly rational as it is to be wished
they were, this sensible way of Probation would be as needless as it is wont to
be imperfect. For it is much more high and Philosophical to discover things a
priore, then a posteriore. And therefore the Peripateticks have not been very
sollicitous to gather Experiments to prove their Doctrines, contenting
themselves with a few only, to satisfy those that are not capable of a Nobler
Conviction. And indeed they employ Experiments rather to illustrate then to
demonstrate their Doctrines, as Astronomers use Sphaeres of pastboard, to
descend to the capacities of such as must be taught by their senses, for want
of being arrived to a clear apprehension of purely Mathematical Notions and
Truths. I speak thus Eleutherius (adds Themistius) only to do right to Reason,
and not out of Diffidence of the Experimental proof I am to allege. For though
I shall name but one, yet it is such a one as will make all other appear as
needless as it self will be found Satisfactory. For if You but consider a piece
of green-Wood burning in a Chimney, You will readily discern in the disbanded
parts of it the four Elements, of which we teach It and other mixed bodies to be
composed. The fire discovers it self in the flame by its own light; the smoke
by ascending to the top of the chimney, and there readily vanishing into air,
like a River losing it self in the Sea, sufficiently manifests to what Element
it belongs and gladly returns. The water in its own form boiling and hissing
at the ends of the burning Wood betrays it self to more then one of our
senses; and the ashes by their weight, their firiness, and their dryness, put
it past doubt that they belong to the Element of Earth. If I spoke (continues
Themistius) to less knowing Persons, I would perhaps make some Excuse for
building upon such an obvious and easy Analysis, but 'twould be, I fear,
injurious, not to think such an Apology needless to You, who are too judicious
either to think it necessary that Experiments to prove obvious truths should be
far fetched, or to wonder that among so many mixed Bodies that are compounded
of the four Elements, some of them should upon a slight Analysis manifestly
exhibit the Ingredients they consist of. Especially since it is very agreeable
to the Goodness of Nature, to disclose, even in some of the most obvious
Experiments that Men make, a Truth so important, and so requisite to be taken
notice of by them. Besides that our Analysis by how much the more obvious we
make it, by so much the more suittable it will be to the Nature of that
Doctrine which it is alleged to prove, which being as clear and intelligible to
the Understanding as obvious to the sense, it is no marvail the learned part of
Mankind should so long and so generally embrace it. For this Doctrine is very
different from the whimseys of Chemists and other Modern Innovators, of whose
Hypotheses we may observe, as Naturalists do of less perfect Animals, that as
they are hastily formed, so they are commonly short lived. For so these, as
they are often framed in one week, are perhaps thought fit to be laughed at the
next; and being built perchance but upon two or three Experiments are destroyed
by a third or fourth, whereas the doctrine of the four Elements was framed by
Aristotle after he had leasurely considered those Theories of former
Philosophers, which are now with great applause revived, as discovered by these
latter ages; And had so judiciously detected and supplied the Errors and
defects of former Hypotheses concerning the Elements, that his Doctrine of them
has been ever since deservedly embraced by the lettered part of Mankind: All
the Philosophers that preceded him having in their several ages contributed to
the compleatness of this Doctrine, as those of succeeding times have acquiesc'd
in it. Nor has an Hypothesis so deliberately and maturely established been
called in Question till in the last Century Paracelfus and some few other sooty
Empiricks, rather then (as they are fain to call themselves) Philosophers,
having their eyes darkened, and their Brains troubled with the smoke of their
own Furnaces, began to rail at the Peripatetick Doctrine, which they were too
illiterate to understand, and to tell the credulous World, that they could see
but three Ingredients in mixed Bodies; which to gain themselves the repute of
Inventors, they endeavored to disguise by calling them, instead of Earth, and
Fire, and Vapor, Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury; to which they gave the canting
title of Hypostatical Principles: but when they came to describe them, they
showed how little they understood what they meant by them, by disagreeing as
much from one another, as from the truth they agreed in opposing: For they
deliver their Hypotheses as darkly as their Processes; and it is almost as
impossible for any sober Man to find their meaning, as it is for them to find
their Elixir. And indeed nothing has spread their Philosophy, but their great
Brags and undertakings; notwithstanding all which, (says Themistius smiling) I
scarce know any thing they have performed worth wondering at, save that they
have been able to draw Philoponus to their Party, and to engage him to the
Defense of an unintelligible Hypothesis, who knows so well as he does, that
Principles ought to be like Diamonds, as well very clear, as perfectly solid.

Themistius having after these last words declared by his silence, that he had
finished his Discourse, Carneades addressing himself, as his Adversary had
done, to Eleutherius, returned this Answer to it. I hoped for Demonstration,
but I perceive Themistius hopes to put me off with a Harangue, wherein he
cannot have given me a greater Opinion of his Parts, then he has given me
Distrust for his Hypothesis, since for it even a Man of such Learning can bring
no better Arguments. The Rhetorical part of his Discourse, though it make not
the least part of it, I shall say nothing to, designing to examine only the
Argumentative part, and leaving it to Philoponus to answer those passages
wherein either Paracelsus or Chemists are concerned: I shall observe to You,
that in what he has said besides, he makes it his Business to do these two
things. The one to propose and make out an Experiment to demonstrate the common
Opinion about the four Elements; And the other, to insinuate diverse things
which he thinks may repair the weakness of his Argument, from Experience, and
upon other Accounts bring some credit to the otherwise defenseless Doctrine he
maintains.

To begin then with his Experiment of the burning Wood, it seems to me to be
obnoxious to not a few considerable Exceptions.

And first, if I would now deal rigidly with my Adversary, I might here make a
great Question of the very way of Probation which he and others employ, without
the least scruple, to evince, that the Bodies commonly called mixed, are made up
of Earth, Air, Water, and Fire, which they are pleased also to call Elements;
namely that upon the supposed Analysis made by the fire, of the former sort of
Concretes, there are wont to emerge Bodies resembling those which they take for
the Elements. For not to Anticipate here what I foresee I shall have occasion
to insist on, when I come to discourse with Philoponus concerning the right
that fire has to pass for the proper and Universal Instrument of Analyzing mixed
Bodies, not to Anticipate that, I say, if I were disposed to wrangle, I might
allege, that by Themistius his Experiment it would appear rather that those he
calls Elements, are made of those he calls mixed Bodies, then mixed Bodies of
the Elements. For in Themistius's Analyz'd Wood, and in other Bodies dissipated
and altered by the fire, it appears, and he confesses, that which he takes for
Elementary Fire and Water, are made out of the Concrete; but it appears not
that the Concrete was made up of Fire and Water. Nor has either He, or any Man,
for ought I know, of his persuasion, yet proved that nothing can be obtained
from a Body by the fire that was not Pre-existent in it.

At this unexpected objection, not only Themistius, but the rest of the company
appeared not a little surpised; but after a while Philoponus conceiving his
opinion, as well as that of Aristotle, concerned in that Objection, You cannot
sure (says he to Carneades) propose this Difficulty, not to call it Cavil,
otherwise then as an Exercise of wit, and not as laying any weight upon it. For
how can that be separated from a thing that was not existent in it. When, for
instance, a Refiner mingles Gold and Lead, and exposing this Mixture upon a
Cuppell to the violence of the fire, thereby separates it into pure and
resulgent Gold and Lead (which driven off together with the Dross of the Gold
is thence called Lithargyrium Auri) can any man doubt that sees these two so
differing substances separated from the Mass, that they were existent in it
before it was committed to the fire.

I should (replies Carneades) allow your Argument to prove something, if, as
Men see the Refiners commonly take before hand both Lead and Gold to make the
Mass you speak of, so we did see Nature pull down a parcel of the Element of
Fire, that is fancied to be placed I know not how many thousand Leagues off,
contiguous to the Orb of the Moon, and to blend it with a quantity of each of
the three other Elements, to compose every mixed Body, upon whose Resolution the
Fire presents us with Fire, and Earth, and the rest. And let me add,
Philoponus, that to make your Reasoning cogent, it must be first proved, that
the fire does only take the Elementary Ingredients asunder, without otherwise
altering them. For else it is obvious, that Bodies may afford substances which
were not pre-existent in them; as Flesh too long kept produces Magots, and old
Cheese Mites, which I suppose you will not affirm to be Ingredients of those
Bodies. Now that fire does not always barely separate the Elementary parts,
but sometimes at least alter also the Ingredients of Bodies, if I did not
expect ere long a better occasion to prove it, I might make probable out of
your very Instance, wherein there is nothing Elementary separated by the great
violence of the Refiners fire: the Gold and Lead which are the two Ingredients
separated upon the Analysis being confessedly yet perfectly mixed Bodies, and
the Litharge being Lead indeed; but such Lead as is differing in consistence
and other Qualities from what it was before. To which I must add that I have
sometimes seen, and so questionless have you much oftener, some parcells of
Glass adhering to the Test or Cuppel, and this Glass though Emergent as well
as the Gold or Litharge upon your Analysis, you will not I hope allow to have
been a third Ingredient of the Mass out of which the fire produced it.

Both Philoponus and Themistius were about to reply, when Eleutherius
apprehending that the Prosecution of this Dispute would take up time, which
might be better employ d, thought fit to prevent them by saying to Carneades:
You made at least half a Promise, when you first proposed this Objection, that
you would not (now at least) insist on it, nor indeed does it seem to be of
absolute necessity to your cause, that you should. For though you should grant
that there are Elements, it would not follow that there must be precisely four.
And therefore I hope you will proceed to acquaint us with your other and more
considerable Objections against Themistius's Opinion, especially since there is
so great a Disproportion in Bulk betwixt the Earth, Water and Air, on the one
part, and those little parcells of resembling substances, that the fire
separates from Concretes on the other part, that I can scarce think that you
are serious, when to lose no advantage against your Adversary, you seem to deny
it to be rational, to conclude these great simple Bodies to be the Elements,
and not the Products of compounded ones.

What you allege (replies Carneades) of the Vastness of the Earth and Water,
has long since made me willing to allow them to be the greatest and chief
Masses of Matter to be met with here below: But I think I could show You, if
You would give me leave, that this will prove only that the Elements, as You
call them, are the chief Bodies that make up the neighboring part of the
World, but not that they are such Ingredients as every mixed Body must consist
of. But since You challenge me of something of a Promise, though it be not an
entire one, Yet I shall willingly perform it. And indeed I intended not when I
first mentioned this Objection, to insist on it at present against Themistius,
(as I plainly intimated in my way of proposing it:) being only desirous to let
you see, that though I discerned my Advantages, yet I was willing to forego
some of them; rather then appear a rigid Adversary of a Cause so weak, that it
may with safety be favorably dealt with. But I must here profess, and desire
You to take Notice of it, that though I pass on to another Argument, it is not
because I think this first invalid. For You will find in the Progress of our
Dispute, that I had some reason to question the very way of Probation employed
both by Peripateticks and Chemists, to evince the being and number of the
Elements. For that there are such, and that they are wont to be separated by
the Analysis made by Fire, is indeed taken for granted by both Parties, but has
not (for ought I know) been so much as plausibly attempted to be proved by
either. Hoping then that when we come to that part of our Debate, wherein
Considerations relating to this Matter are to be treated of, you will remember
what I have now said, and that I do rather for a while suppose, then absolutely
grant the truth of what I have questioned, I will proceed to another Objection.

And hereupon Eleutherius having mis'd him not to be unmindfull, when time
should serve, of what he had declared.

I consider then (says Carneades) in the next place, that there are diverse
Bodies out of which Themistius will not prove in haste, that there can be so
many Elements as four extracted by the Fire. And I should perchance trouble him
if I should ask him what Peripatetick can show us, (I say not, all the four
Elements, for that would be too rigid a Question, but) any one of them
extracted out of Gold by any degree of Fire whatsoever. Nor is Gold the only
Body in Nature that would puzzle an Aristotelian, that is no more to analyze
by the Fire into Elementary Bodies, since, for ought I have yet observed, both
Silver and calcined Venetian Talck, and some other Concretes, not necessary
here to be named, are so fixed, that to reduce any of them into four
Heterogeneous Substances has hitherto proved a Task much too hard, not only for
the Disciples of Aristotle, but those of Vulcan, at least, whilst the latter
have employed only Fire to make the Analysis.

The next Argument (continues Carneades) that I shall urge against Themistius's
Opinion shall be this, That as there are diverse Bodies whose Analysts by Fire
cannot reduce them into so many Heterogeneous Substances or Ingregredients as
four, so there are others which may be reduced into more, as the Blood (and
diverse other parts) of Men and other Animals, which yield when analyz'd five
distinct Substances, Phlegm, Spirit, Oil, Salt and Earth, as Experience has
shown us in distilling Man's Blood, Harts-Horns, and diverse other Bodies that
belonging to the Animal-Kingdom abound with not uneasily sequestrable Salt.

THE SKEPTICAL CHEMIST: OR CHYMICO-PHYSICAL Doubts and Paradoxes, Touching the
EXPERIMENTS WHEREBY VULGAR SPAGYRISTS Are wont to Endeavor to Evince their
SALT, SULPHUR AND MERCURY, TO BE The True Principles of Things.

Utinam jam tenerentur omnia, and inoperta ac confessa Veritas esset! Nihil ex
Decretis mutaremus. Nunc Veritatem cum eis qui docent, quaerimus. Sen.

LONDON, Printed for J. Crook, and are to be sold at the Ship in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1661.

THE SKEPTICAL CHEMIST. The First Part.
I Am (says Carneades) so unwilling to deny Eleutherius any thing, that
though, before the rest of the Company I am resolved to make good the part I
have undertaken of a Sceptick; yet I shall readily, since you will have it so,
lay aside for a while the Person of an Adversary to the Peripateticks and
Chemists; and before I acquaint you with my Objections against their Opinions,
acknowledge to you what may be (whether truly or not) tollerably enough added,
in favor of a certain number of Principles of mixed Bodies, to that grand and
known Argument from the Analysis of compound Bodies, which I may possibly
hereafter be able to confute.

And that you may the more easily Examine, and the better Judge of what I have
to say, I shall cast it into a pretty number of distinct Propositions, to which
I shall not premise any thing; because I take it for granted, that you need not
be advertised, that much of what I am to deliver, whether for or against a
determinate number of Ingredients of mixed Bodies, may be indifferently applied
to the four Peripatetick Elements, and the three Chemical Principles, though
diverse of my Objections will more peculiarly belong to these last named,
because the Chemical Hypothesis seeming to be much more countenanced by
Experience then the other, it will be expedient to insist chiefly upon the
disproving of that; especially since most of the Arguments that are employed
against it, may, by a little variation, be made to conclude, at least as
strongly against the less plausible, Aristotelian Doctrine.

To proceed then to my Propositions, I shall begin with this, That

This (says Carneades) I suppose you will easily enough allow. For besides
that which happens in the Generation, Corruption, Nutrition, and wasting of
Bodies, that which we discover partly by our Microscopes of the extreme
littleness of even the scarce sensible parts of Concretes; and partly by the
Chemical Resolutions of mixed Bodies, and by diverse other Operations of
Spagyrical Fires upon them, seems sufficiently to manifest their consisting of
parts very minute and of differing Figures. And that there does also intervene
a various local Motion of such small Bodies, will scarce be denied; whether we
choose to grant the Origin of Concretions assigned by Epicurus, or that related
by Moses. For the first, as you well know, supposes not only all mixed Bodies,
but all others to be produced by the various and casual occursions of Atoms,
moving themselves to and fro by an internal Principle in the Immense or rather
Infinite Vacuum. And as for the inspired Historian, He, informing us that the
great and Wise Author of Things did not immediately create Plants, Beasts,
Birds, etc. but produced them out of those portions of the pre-existent, though
created, Matter, that he calls Water and Earth, allows us to conceive, that the
constituent Particles whereof these new Concretes were to consist, were
variously moved in order to their being connected into the Bodies they were, by
their various Coalitions and Textures, to compose.

But (continues Carneades) presuming that the first Proposition needs not be
longer insisted on, I will pass on to the second, and tell you that

or Masses as were not easily dissipable into such Particles as composed them.
To what may be deduced, in favor of this Assertion, from the Nature of the
Thing it self, I will add something out of Experience, which though I have not
known it used to such a purpose, seems to me more fairly to make out that there
May be Elementary Bodies, then the more questionable Experiments of
Peripateticks and Chemists prove that there Are such. I consider then that Gold
will mix and be colliquated not only with Silver, Copper, Tin and Lead, but
with Antimony, Regulus Martis and many other Minerals, with which it will
compose Bodies very differing both from Gold, and the other Ingredients of the
resulting Concretes. And the same Gold will also by common Aqua Regis, and (I
speak it knowingly) by diverse other Menstruums be reduced into a seeming
Liquor, in so much that the Corpuscles of Gold will, with those of the
Menstruum, pass through Cap-Paper, and with them also coagulate into a
Crystalline Salt. And I have further tried, that with a small quantity of a
certain Saline Substance I prepared, I can easily enough sublime Gold into the
form of red Crystalls of a considerable length; and many other ways may Gold
be disguised, and help to constitute Bodies of very differing Natures both from
It and from one another, and nevertheless be afterward reduced to the
self-same Numerical, Yellow, Fixed, Ponderous and Malleable Gold it was before
its commixture. Nor is it only the fixedst of Metals, but the most fugitive,
that I may employ in favor of our Proposition: for Quicksilver will with
diverse Metals compose an Amalgam, with diverse Menstruums it seems to be turned
into a Liquor, with Aqua fortis it will be brought into either a red or white
Powder or precipitate, with Oil of Vitriol into a pale Yellow one, with Sulphur
it will compose a bloodred and volatile Cinaber, with some Saline Bodies it
will ascend in form of a Salt which will be dissoluble in water; with Regulus
of Antimony and Silver I have seen it sublimed into a kind of Crystals, with
another Mixture I reduced it into a malleable Body, into a hard and brittle
Substance by another: And some there are who affirm, that by proper Additaments
they can reduce Quicksilver into Oil, nay into Glass, to mention no more. And
yet out of all these exotic Compounds, we may recover the very same running
Mercury that was the main Ingredient of them, and was so disguised in them. Now
the Reason (proceeds Carneades) that I have represented these things concerning
Gold and Quicksilver, is, That it may not appear absurd to conceive, that such
little primary Masses or Clusters, as our Proposition mentions, may remain
undissipated, notwithstanding their entering into the composition of various
Concretions, since the Corpuscle of Gold and Mercury, though they be not
primary Concretions of the most minute Particles of matter, but confessedly
mixed Bodies, are able to concur plentifully to the composition of several
very differing Bodies, without losing their own Nature or Texture, or having
their cohaesion violated by the divorce of their associated parts or
Ingredients.

Give me leave to add (says Eleutherius) on this occasion, to what you now
observed, that as confidently as some Chemists, and other modern Innovators in
Philosophy are wont to object against the Peripateticks, That from the mixture
of their four Elements there could arise but an inconsiderable variety of
compound Bodies; yet if the Aristotelians were but half as well versed in the
works of Nature as they are in the Writings of their Master, the proposed
Objection would not so calmly triumph, as for want of Experiments they are fain
to suffer it to do. For if we assign to the Corpuscles, whereof each Element
consists, a peculiar size and shape, it may easily enough be manifested, That
such differingly figured Corpuscles may be mingled in such various Proportions,
and may be connected so many several ways, that an almost incredible number of
variously qualified Concretes may be composed of them. Especially since the
Corpuscles of one Element may barely, by being associated among themselves,
make up little Masses of differing size and figure from their constituent
parts: and since also to the strict union of such minute Bodies there seems
oftentimes nothing requisite, besides the bare Contact of a great part of their
Surfaces. And how great a variety of Phenomenon the same matter, without the
addition of any other, and only several ways disposed or contexed, is able to
exhibit, may partly appear by the multitude of differing Engines which by the
contrivances of skilful Mechanilians, and the dexterity of expert Workmen, may
be made of Iron alone. But in our present case being allowed to deduce compound
Bodies from four very differently qualified sorts of matter, he who shall but
consider what you freshly took notice of concerning the new Concretes resulting
from the mixture of incorporated Minerals, will scarce doubt but that the four
Elements managed by Natures Skill may afford a multitude of differing
Compounds.

I am thus far of your mind (says Carneades) that the Aristotelians might
with probability deduce a much greater number of compound Bodies from the
mixture of their four Elements, than according to their present Hypothesis they
can, if instead of vainly attempting to deduce the variety and properties of
all mixed Bodies from the Combinations and Temperaments of the four Elements, as
they are (among them) endowd with the four first Qualities, they had
endeavored to do it by the Bulk and Figure of the smallest parts of those
supposed Elements. For from these more Catholic and Fruitful Accidents of the
Elementary matter may spring a great variety of Textures, upon whose Account a
multitude of compound Bodies may very much differ from one another. And what I
now observe touching the four Peripatetick Elements, may be also applied,
mutatis mutandis, (as they speak) to the Chemical Principles. But (to take
notice of that by the by) both the one and the other, must, I fear, call in to
their assistance something that is not Elementary, to excite or regulate the
motion of the parts of the matter, and dispose them after the manner requisite
to the Constitution of particular Concretes. For that otherwise they are like
to give us but a very imperfect account of the Origin of very many mixed
Bodies, It would, I think, be no hard matter to persuade you, if it would not
spend time, and were no Digression, to examine, what they are wont to allege
of the Origin of the Textures and Qualities of mixed Bodies, from a certain
substantial Form, whose Origination they leave more obscure than what it is
assumed to explicate.

But to proceed to a new Proposition.

Of the Experiments that induce me to make this Concession, I am like to have
occasion enough to mention several in the prosecution of my Discourse. And
therefore, that I may not hereafter be obliged to trouble You and my self with
needless Repetitions, I shall now only desire you to take notice of such
Experiments, when they shall be mentioned, and in your thoughts refer them
hither.

To these three Concessions I have but this Fourth to add, That

When I said, without very much Inconvenience, I had in my Thoughts that sober
Admonition of Galen, Cum de re constat, de verbis non est Litigandum. And
therefore also I scruple not to say Elements or Principles, partly because the
Chemists are wont to call the Ingredients of mixed Bodies, Principles, as the
Aristotelians name them Elements; I would here exclude neither. And, partly,
because it seems doubtful whether the same Ingredients may not be called
Principles? as not being compounded of any more primary Bodies: and Elements,
in regard that all mixed Bodies are compounded of them. But I thought it
requisite to limit my Concession by premising the words, very much, to the word
Inconvenience, because that though the Inconvenience of calling the distinct
Substances, mentioned in the Proposition Elements or Principles, be not very
great, yet that it is an Impropriety of Speech, and consequently in a matter of
this moment not to be altogether overlooked, You will perhaps think, as well as
I, by that time you shall have heard the following part of my Discourse, by
which you will best discern what Construction to put upon the former
Propositions, and how far they may be looked upon, as things that I concede as
true, and how far as things I only represent as specious enough to be fit to be
considered.

And now Eleutherius (continues Carneades) I must resume the person of a
Sceptick, and as such, propose some part of what may be either dislik't, or at
least doubted of in the common Hypothesis of the Chemists: which if I examine
with a little the more freedom, I hope I need not desire you (a Person to whom
I have the Happiness of being so well known) to look upon it as something more
suitable to the Employment whereto the Company has, for this Meeting, doomed
me; then either to my Humor or my Custom.

Now though I might present you many things against the Vulgar Chemical Opinion
of the three Principles, and the Experiments wont to be alleged as
Demonstrations of it, yet those I shall at present offer you may be
conveniently enough comprehended in four Capital Considerations; touching all
which I shall only premise this in general, That since it is not my present
Task so much to assert an Hypothesis of my own, as to give an Account wherefore
I suspect the Truth of that of the Chemists, it ought not to be expected that
all my Objections should be of the most cogent sort, since it is reason enough
to Doubt of a proposed Opinion, that there appears no cogent Reason for it.

To come then to the Objections themselves; I consider in the first place, That
notwithstanding what common Chemists have proved or taught, it may reasonably
enough be Doubted, how far, and in what sense, Fire ought to be esteemed the
genuine and universal Instrument of analyzing mixed Bodies.

This Doubt, you may remember, was formerly mentioned, but so transiently
discoursed of, that it will now be fit to insist upon it; And manifest that it
was not so inconsiderately proposed as our Adversaries then imagined.

But, before I enter any farther into this Disquisition, I cannot but here take
notice, that it were to be wished, our Chemists had clearly informed us what
kind of Division of Bodies by Fire must determine the number of the Elements:
For it is nothing near so easy as many seem to think, to determine distinctly
the Effects of Heat, as I could easily manifest, if I had leisure to show you
how much the Operations of Fire may be diversified by Circumstances. But not
wholly to pass by a matter of this Importance, I will first take notice to you,
that Guajacum (for Instance) burnt with an open Fire in a Chimney, is
sequestered into Ashes and Soot, whereas the same Wood distilled in a Retort
does yield far other Heterogeneities, (to use the Helmontian expression) and is
resoly'd into Oil, Spirit, Vinager, Water and Charcoal; the last of which to be
reduced into Ashes, requires the being farther calcined then it can be in a
close Vessel: Besides having kindled Amber, and held a clean Silver Spoon, or
some other Concave and smooth Vessel over the Smoke of its Flame, I observed
the Soot into which that Fume condensed, to be very differing from any thing
that I had observed to proceed from the steam of Amber purposely (for that is
not usual) distilled per se in close Vessels. Thus having, for Trials sake,
kindled Camphire, and caught the Smoke that copiously ascended out of the
Flame, it condensed into a Black and unctuous Soot, which would not have been
guess d by the Smell or other Properties to have proceeded from Camphire:
whereas having (as I shall otherwhere more fully declare) exposed a quantity of
that Fugitive Concrete to a gentle heat in a close Glass-Vessel, it sublimed up
without seeming to have lost any thing of its whiteness, or its Nature, both
which it retained, though afterward I so increased the Fire as to bring it to
Fusion. And, besides Camphire, there are diverse other Bodies (that I elsewhere
name) in which the heat in close Vessels is not wont to make any separation of
Heterogeneities, but only a comminution of Parts, those that rise first being
Homogeneal with the others, though subdivided into smaller Particles: whence
Sublimations have been styled, The Pestles of the Chemists. But not here to
mention what I elsewhere take notice of, concerning common Brimstone once or
twice sublimed, that exposed to a moderate Fire in Subliming-Pots, it rises all
into dry, and almost tastless, Flowers; Whereas being exposed to a naked Fire
it affords store of a Saline and Fretting Liquor: Not to mention this, I say, I
will further observe to you, that as it is considerable in the Analysis of mixed
Bodies, whether the Fire act on them when they are exposed to the open Air, or
shut up in close Vessels, so is the degree of Fire by which the Analysis is
attempted of no small moment. For a mild Balneum will sever unfermented Blood
(for Instance) but into Phlegm and Caput mortuum, the later whereof (which I
have sometimes had) hard, brittle, and of diverse Colors, (transparent almost
like Tortoise-shell) pressed by a good Fire in a Retort yields a Spirit, an Oil
or two, and a volatile Salt, besides a Caput mortuum. It may be also pertinent
to our present Design, to take notice of what happens in the making and
distilling of Soap; for by one degree of Fire the Salt, the Water and the Oil
or Grease, whereof that factitious Concrete is made up, being boiled up
together are easily brought to mingle and incorporate into one Mass; but by
another and further degree of Heat the same Mass may be again divided into an
oleagenous, an aqueous, a Saline, and an Earthy part. And so we may observe
that impure Silver and Lead being exposed together to a moderate Fire, will
thereby be colliquated into one Mass, and mingle per minima, as they speak,
whereas a much vehementer Fire will drive or carry off the baser Metals (I mean
the Lead, and the Copper or other Alloy) from the Silver, though not, for ought
appears, separate them from one another. Besides, when a Vegetable abounding in
fixed Salt is analyz'd by a naked Fire, as one degree of Heat will reduce it
into Ashes, (as the Chemists themselves teach us) so, by only a further degree
of Fire, those Ashes may be vitrified and turned into Glass. I will not stay to
examine how far a mere Chemist might on this occasion demand, If it be lawful
for an Aristotelian to make Ashes, (which he mistakes for mere Earth) pass for
an Element, because by one degree of Fire it may be produced, why a Chemist may
not upon the like Principle argue, that Glass is one of the Elements of many
Bodies, because that also may be obtained from them, barely by the Fire? I will
not, I say, lose time to examine this, but observe, that by a Method of
applying the Fire, such similar Bodies may be obtained from a Concrete, as
Chemists have not been able to separate; either by barely burning it in an open
Fire, or by barely distilling it in close Vessels. For to me it seems very
considerable, and I wonder that men have taken so little notice of it, that I
have not by any of the common ways of Distillation in close Vessels, seen any
separation made of such a volatile Salt as is afforded us by Wood, when that is
first by an open Fire divided into Ashes and Soot, and that Soot is afterward
placed in a strong Retort, and compelled by an urgent Fire to part with its
Spirit, Oil and Salt; for though I dare not peremptorily deny, that in the
Liquors of Guajacum and other Woods distilled in Retorts after the common
manner, there may be Saline parts, which by reason of the Analogy may pretend
to the name of some kind of volatile Salts; yet questionless there is a great
disparity betwixt such Salts and that which we have sometimes obtained upon the
first Distillation of Soot (though for the most part it has not been separated
from the first or second Rectification, and sometimes not till the third) For
we could never yet see separated from Woods analyz'd only the vusgar way in
close vessels any volatile Salt in a dry and Saline form, as that of Soot,
which we have often had very Crystalline and Geometrically figured. And then,
whereas the Saline parts of the Spirits of Guajacum, etc. appear upon
distillation sluggish enough, the Salt of Soot seems to be one of the most
volatile Bodies in all Nature; and if it be well made will readily ascend with
the mild heat of a Furnace, warm 'd only by the single Wieck of a Lamp, to the
top of the highest Glass Vessels that are commonly made use of for
Distillation: and besides all this, the taste and smell of the Salt of Soot are
exceeding differing from those of the Spirits of Guajacum, etc. and the former
not only smells and tastes much less like a vegetable Salt, than like that of
Hartshorn, and other Animal Concretes; but in diverse other Properties seems
more of Kin to the Family of Animals, than to that of vegetable Salts, as I
may elsewhere (God permitting) have an occasion more particularly to declare. I
might likewise by some other Examples manifest, That the Chemists, to have
dealt clearly, ought to have more explicitly and particularly declared by what
Degree of Fire, and in what manner of Application of it, they would have us
Judge a Division made by the Fire to be a true Analysis into their Principles,
and the Productions of it to deserve the name of Elementary Bodies. But it is
time that I proceed to mention the particular Reasons that incline me to Doubt,
whether the Fire be the true and universal Analyzer of mixed Bodies; of which
Reasons what has been already objected may pass for one.

In the next place I observe, That there are some mixed Bodies from which it has
not been yet made appear, that any degree of Fire can separate either Salt or
Sulphur or Mercury, much less all the Three. The most obvious Instance of this
Truth is Gold, which is a Body so fixed, and wherein the Elementary Ingredients
(if it have any) are so firmly united to each other, that we find not in the
operations wherein Gold is exposed to the Fire, how violent soever, that it
does discernably so much as lose of its fixednesse or weight, so far is it from
being dissipated into those Principles, whereof one at least is acknowledged to
be Fugitive enough; and so justly did the Spagyricall Poet somewhere exclaim,

Cuncta adeo miris illic compagibus haerent. And I must not omit on this
occasion to mention to you, Eleutherius, the memorable Experiment that I
remember I met with in Gasto Claveus Apolog. Argur. and Chrysopera.
Gasto Claveus, who, though a Lawyer by Profession, seems to have had no small
Curiosity and Experience in Chemical affairs: He relates then, that having put
into one small Earthen Vessel an Ounce of the most pure Gold, and into another
the like weight of pure Silver, he placed them both in that part of a
Glass-house Furnace wherein the Workmen keep their Metal, (as our English
Artificers call their Liquid Glass) continually melted, and that having there
kept both the Gold and the Silver in constant Fusion for two Months together,
he afterward took them out of the Furnace and the Vessels, and weighing both
of them again, found that the Silver had not lost above a 12th part of its
weight, but the Gold had not of his lost any thing at all. And though our
Author endeavors to give us of this a Scholastic Reason, which I suppose you
would be as little satisfied with, as I was when I read it; yet for the matter
of Fact, which will serve our present turn, he assures us, that though it be
strange, yet Experience it self taught it him to be most true.

And though there be not perhaps any other Body to be found so perfectly fixed
as Gold, yet there are diverse others so fixed or composed, at least of so
strictly united parts, that I have not yet observed the Fire to separate from
them any one of the Chemists Principles. I need not tell you what Complaints
the more Candid and Judicious of the Chemists themselves are wont to make of
those Boasters that confidently pretend, that they have extracted the Salt or
Sulphur of Quicksilver, when they have disguised it by Additaments, wherewith
it resembles the Concretes whose Names are given it; whereas by a skillful and
rigid Examen, it may be easily enough stripped of its Disguises, and made to
appear again in the pristine form of running Mercury. The pretended Salts and
Sulphurs being so far from being Elementary parts extracted out of the Body of
Mercury, that they are rather (to borrow a term of the Grammarians)
De-compound Bodies, made up of the whole Metal and the Menstruum, or other
Additaments employed to disguise it. And as for Silver, I never could see any
degree of Fire make it part with any of its three Principles. And though the
Experiment lately mentioned from Claveus may beget a Suspicion that Silver may
be dissipated by Fire, provided it be extremely violent and very lasting: yet
it will not necessarily follow, that because the Fire was able at length to
make the Silver lose a little of its weight, it was therefore able to dissipate
it into its Principles. For first I might allege that I have observed little
Grains of Silver to lie hid in the small Cavities (perhaps glas'd over by a
vitrifying heat) in Crucibles, wherein Silver has been long kept in Fusion,
whence some Goldsmiths of my Acquaintance make a Benefit by grinding such
Crucibles to powder, to recover out of them the latent particles of Silver. And
hence I might argue, that perhaps Claveus was mistaken, and imagined that
Silver to have been driven away by the Fire, that indeed lay in minute parts
hid in his Crucible, in whose pores so small a quantity as he mist of so
ponderous a Body might very well lie concealed.

But Secondly, admitting that some parts of the Silver were driven away by the
violence of the Fire, what proof is there that it was either the Salt, the
Sulphur, or the Mercury of the Metal, and not rather a part of it homogeneous
to what remained? For besides, that the Silver that was left see m'd not
sensibly altered, which probably would have appeared, had so much of any one of
its Principles been separated from it: We find in other Mineral Bodies of a
less permanent nature than Silver, that the Fire may divide them into such
minute parts, as to be able to carry them away with its self, without at all
destroying their Nature. Thus we see that in the refining of Silver, the Lead
that is mixed with it (to carry away the Copper or other ignoble Mineral that
embases the Silver) will, if it be let alone, in time evaporate away upon the
Test; but if (as is most usual amongst those that refine great quantities of
Metals together) the Lead be blown off from the Silver by Bellows, that which
would else have gone away in the Form of unheeded steams, will in great part be
collected not far from the Silver, in the Form of a darkish Powder or Calx,
which, because it is blown off from Silver, they call Litharge of Silver.
Agricola de Natura Fossil. Lib. 9. Cap. 11. and 12.
And thus Agricola in diverse places informs us, when Copper, or the Oar of it
is colliquated by the violence of the Fire with Cadmia, the Sparks that in
great multitudes do fly upwards do, some of them, stick to the vaulted Roofs of
the Furnaces, in the form of little and (for the most part) White Bubbles,
which therefore the Greeks, and, in Imitation of them, our Drugsters call
Pompholix: and others more heavy partly adhere to the sides of the Furnace, and
partly (especially if the Covers be not kept upon the Pots) fall to the Ground,
and by reason of their Ashy Color as well as Weight were called by the same
Greeks (...), which, I need not tell you, in their Language signifies Ashes. I
might add, that I have not found that from Venetian Talck (I say Venetian,
because I have found other kinds of that Mineral more open) from the Lapis
Ossifragus, (which the Shops call Ostiocolla) from Muscovia Glass, from pure
and Fusible Sand, to mention now no other Concretes; those of my Acquaintance
that have tried have been able by the Fire to separate any one of the
Hypostatical Principles, which you will the less scruple to believe, if you
consider that Glass may be made by the bare Colliquation of the Salt and Earth
remaining in the Ashes of a burnt Plant, and that yet common Glass, once made,
does so far resist the violence of the Fire, that most Chemists think it a Body
more undestroyable then Gold it self. For if the Artificer can so firmly unite
such comparative gross Particles as those of Earth and Salt that make up common
Ashes, into a Body indissoluble by Fire; why may not Nature associate in diverse
Bodies the more minute Elementary Corpuscles she has at hand too firmly to let
them be separable by the Fire? And on this Occasion, Eleutherius, give me leave
to mention to you two or three slight Experiments, which will, I hope, be
found more pertinent to our present Discourse, than at first perhaps they will
appear. The first is, that, having (for Trials sake) put a quantity of that
Fugitive Concrete, Camphire, into a Glass Vessel, and placed it in a gentle
Heat, I found it (not leaving behind, according to my Estimate, not so much as
one Grain) to sublime to the Top of the Vessel into Flowers: which in
Whiteness, Smell, etc. seemed not to differ from the Camphire it self. Another
Experiment is that of Helmont, who in several places affirms, That a Coal kept
in a Glass exactly closed will never be calcined to Ashes, though kept never so
long in a strong Fire. To countenance which I shall tell you this Trial of my
own, That having sometimes distilled some Woods, as particularly Box, whilst
our Caput mortuum remained in the Retort, it continued black like Charcoal,
though the Retort were Earthen, and kept redhot in a vehement Fire; but as soon
as ever it was brought out of the candent Vessel into the open Air, the burning
Coals did hastily degenerate or fall asunder, without the Assistance of any new
Calcination, into pure white Ashes. And to these two I shall add but this
obvious and known Observation, that common Sulphur (if it be pure and freed
from its Vinager) being leasurely sublimed in close Vessels, rises into dry
Flowers, which may be presently melted into a Body of the same Nature with
that which afforded them. Though if Brimstone be burnt in the open Air it
gives, you know, a penetrating Fume, which being caught in a Glass-Bell
condenses into that acid Liquor called Oil of Sulphur per Campanam. The use I
would make of these Experiments collated with what I lately told you out of
Agricola is this, That even among the Bodies that are not fixed, there are
diverse of such a Texture, that it will be hard to make it appear, how the Fire,
as Chemists are wont to employ it, can resolve them into Elementary Substances.
For some Bodies being of such a Texture that the Fire can drive them into the
cooler and less hot part of the Vessels wherein they are included, and if need
be, remove them from place to place to fly the greatest heat, more easily than
it can divorce their Elements (especially without the Assistance of the Air) we
see that our Chemists cannot Analyze them in close Vessels, and of other
compound Bodies the open Fire can as little separate the Elements. For what can
a naked Fire do to Analyze a mixed Body, if its component Principles be so
minute, and so strictly united, that the Corpuscles of it need less heat to
carry them up, than is requisite to divide them into their Principles. So that
of some Bodies the Fire cannot in close Vessels make any Analysis at all, and
others will in the open Air fly away in the Forms of Flowers or Liquors, before
the Heat can prove able to divide them into their Principles. And this may
hold, whether the various similar parts of a Concrete be combined by Nature or
by Art; For in factitious Sal Armoniack we find the common and the Urinous
Salts so well mingled, that both in the open Fire, and in subliming Vessels
they rise together as one Salt, which seems in such Vessels irresoluble by Fire
alone. For I can show you Sal Armoniack which after the ninth Sublimation does
still retain its compounded Nature. And indeed I scarce know any one Mineral,
from which by Fire alone Chemists are wont to sever any Substance simple enough
to deserve the name of an Element or Principle. For though out of native
Cinnaber they distill Quicksilver, and though from many of those Stones that
the Ancients called Pyrites they sublime Brimstone, yet both that Quicksilver
and this Sulphur being very often the same with the common Minerals that are
sold in the Shops under those names, are themselves too much compounded Bodies
to pass for the Elements of such. And thus much, Eleutherius, for the Second
Argument that belongs to my First Consideration; the others I shall the less
insist on, because I have dwelt so long upon this.

Proceed we then in the next place to consider, That there are diverse
Separations to be made by other means, which either cannot at all, or else
cannot so well be made by the Fire alone. When Gold and Silver are melted into
one Mass, it would lay a great Obligation upon Refiners and Goldsmiths to teach
them the Art of separating them by the Fire, without the trouble and charge
they are fain to be at to sever them. Whereas they may be very easily parted by
the Affusion of Spirit of Nitte or Aqua fortis (which the French therefore call
Eau de Depart:) so likewise the Metalline part of Vitriol will not be so easily
and conveniently separated from the Saline part even by a violent Fire, as by
the Affusion of certain Alkalizate Salts in a liquid Form upon the Solution of
Vitriol made in common water. For thereby the acid Salt of the Vitriol, leaving
the Copper it had corroded to join with the added Salts, the Metalline part
will be precipitated to the bottom almost like Mud. And that I may not give
Instances only in De-compound Bodies, I will add a not useless one of another
kind. Not only Chemists have not been able (for ought is vulgarly known) by
Fire alone to separate true Sulphur from Antimony; but though you may find in
their Books many plausible Processes of Extracting it, yet he that shall make
as many fruitless Trials as I have done to obtain it by, most of them will, I
suppose, be easily persuaded, that the Productions of such Processes are
Antimonial Sulphurs rather in Name than Nature. But though Antimony sublimed by
its self is reduced but to a volatile Powder, or Antimonial Flowers, of a
compounded Nature like the Mineral that affords them: yet I remember that some
years ago I sublimed out of Antimony a Sulphur, and that in greater plenty then
ever I saw obtained from that Mineral, by a Method which I shall therefore
acquaint you with, because Chemists seem not to have taken notice of what
Importance such Experiments may be in the Indagation of the Nature, and
especially of the Number of the Elements. Having then purposely for Trials sake
digested eight Ounces of good and well powdered Antimony with twelve Ounces of
Oil of Vitriol in a well stopped Glas-Vessel for about six or seven Weeks; and
having caused the Mass (grown hard and brittle) to be distilled in a Retort
placed in Sand, with a strong Fire; we found the Antimony to be so opened, or
altered by the Menstruum wherewith it had been digested, That whereas crude
Antimony, forced up by the Fire, arises only in Flowers, our Antimony thus
handled afforded us partly in the Receiver, and partly in the Neck and at the
Top of the Retort, about an Ounce of Sulphur, yellow and brittle like common
Brimstone, and of so Sulphurous a smell, that upon the unluting the Vessels it
infected the Room with a scarce supportable stink. And this Sulphur, besides
the Color and Smell, had the perfect Inflamability of common Brimstone, and
would immediately kindle (at the Flame of a Candle) and burn blew like it. And
though it seemed that the long digestion wherein our Antimony and Menstruum
were detained, did conduce to the better unlocking of the Mineral, yet if you
have not the leisure to make so long a Digestion, you may by incorporating with
powdered Antimony a convenient Quantity of Oil of Vitriol, and committing them
immediately to Distillation, obtain a little Sulphur like unto the common one,
and more combustible than perhaps you will at first take notice of. For I have
observed, that though (after its being first kindled) the Flame would sometimes
go out too soon of its self, if the same Lump of Sulphur were held again to the
Flame of a Candle, it would be rekindled and burn a pretty while, not only
after the second, but after the third or fourth accension. You, to whom I think
I showed my way of discovering something of Sulphurous in Oil of Vitriol, may
perchance suspect, Eleutherius, either that this Substance was some Venereal
Sulphur that lay hid in that Liquor, and was by this operation only reduced
into a manifest Body; or else that it was a compound of the unctuous parts of
the Antimony, Lib. 1. Observat. Cap. 6.
and the Saline ones of the Vitriol, in regard that (as Gunther informs us)
diverse learned men would have Sulphur to be nothing but a mixture made in the
Bowels of the Earth of Vitriolate Spirits and a certain combustible Substance.
But the Quantity of Sulphur we obtained by Digestion was much too great to have
been latent in the Oil of Vitriol. And that Vitriolate Spirits are not
necessary to the Constitution of such a Sulphur as ours, I could easily
manifest, if I would acquaint you with the several ways by which I have
obtained, though not in such plenty, a Sulphur of Antimony, colored and
combustible like common Brimstone. And though I am not now minded to discover
them, yet I shall tell you, that to satisfy some Ingenious Men, that distilled
Vitriolate Spirits are not necessary to the obtaining of such a Sulphur as we
have been considering, I did by the bare distillation of only Spirit of Nitre,
from its weight of crude Antimony separate, in a short time, a yellow and very
inflamable Sulphur, which, for ought I know, deserves as much the name of an
Element, as any thing that Chemists are wont to separate from any Mineral by
the Fire. I could perhaps tell you of other Operations upon Antimony, whereby
That may be extracted from it, which cannot be forced out of it by the Fire;
but I shall reserve them for a fitter Opportunity, and only annex at present
this slight, but not impertinent Experiment. That whereas I lately observed to
you, that the Urinous and common Salts whereof Sal Armoniack consists, remained
unsever'd by the Fire in many successive Sublimations, they may be easily
separated, and partly without any Fire at all, by pouring upon the Concrete
finely powdered, a Solution of Salt of Tartar, or of the Salt of Wood-Ashes;
for upon your diligently mixing of these you will find your Nose invaded with
a very strong smell of Urine, and perhaps too your Eyes forced to water, by the
same subtle and piercing Body that produces the stink; both these effects
proceeding from hence, that by the Alcalizate Salt, the Sea Salt that entered
the composition of the Sal Armoniack is mortified and made more fixed, and
thereby a divorce is made between it and the volatile Urinous Salt, which being
at once set at liberty, and put into motion, begins presently to fly away, and
to offend the Nostrils and Eyes it meets with by the way. And if the operation
of these Salts be in convenient Glasses promoted by warmth, though but by that
of a Bath, the ascending Steams may easily be caught and reduced into a
penetrant Spirit, abounding with a Salt, which I have sometimes found to be
separable in a Crystalline Form. I might add to these Instances, that whereas
Sublimate, consisting, as you know, of Salts and Quicksilver combined and
carried up together by Heat, may be Sublimed, I know not how often, by a like
degree of Fire, without suffering any divorce of the component Bodies, the
Mercury may be easily severed from the adhering Salts, if the Sublimate be
distilled from Salt of Tartar, Quick Lime, or such Alcalizate Bodies. But I
will rather observe to you, Eleutherius, what diverse ingenious men have thought
somewhat strange; that by such an Additament that seems but only to promote the
Separation, there may be easily obtained from a Concrete (that by the Fire
alone is easily divisible into all the Elements that Vegetables are supposed to
consist of) such a similar Substance as differs in many respects from them all,
and consequently has by many of the most Intelligent Chemists been denied to be
contained in the mixed Body. For I know a way, and have practiced it, whereby
common Tartat, without the addition of any thing that is not perfectly a
Mineral except Saltpetre, may by one Distillation in an Earthen Retort be made
to afford good store of real Salt, readily dissoluble in water, which I found
to be neither acid, nor of the smell of Tartar, and to be almost as volatile as
Spirit of Wine it self, and to be indeed of so differing a Nature from all that
is wont to be separated by Fire from Tartar, that diverse Learned Men, with whom
I discoursed of it, could hardly be brought to believe, that so fugitive a Salt
could be afforded by Tartar, till I assured it them upon my own Knowledge. And
if I did not think you apt to suspect me to be rather too backward than too
forward to credit or affirm unlikely things, I could convince you by what I
have yet lying by me of that anomalous Salt.

The Fourth thing that I shall allege to countenance my first Consideration
is, That the Fire even when it divides a Body into Substances of diverse
Consistences, does not most commonly analyze it into Hypostatical Principles,
but only disposes its parts into new Textures, and thereby produces Concretes
of a new indeed, but yet of a compound Nature. This Argument it will be
requisite for me to prosecute so fully hereafter, that I hope you will then
confess that it is not for want of good Proofs that I desire leave to suspend my
Proofs till the Series of my Discourse shall make it more proper and seasonable
to propose them.

It may be further alleged on the behalf of my First Consideration, That some
such distinct Substances may be obtained from some Concretes without Fire, as
deserve no less the name of Elementary, than many that Chemists extort by the
Violence of the Fire.

We see that the Inflamable Spirit, or as the Chemists esteem it, the Sulphur
of Wine, may not only be separated from it by the gentle heat of a Bath, but
may be distilled either by the help of the Sunbeams, or even of a Dunghill,
being indeed of so Fugitive a Nature, that it is not easy to keep it from
flying away, even without the Application of external heat. I have likewise
observed that a Vessel full of Urine being placed in a Dunghill, the
Putrefaction is wont after some weeks so to open the Body, that the parts
disbanding the Saline Spirit, will within no very long time, if the Vessel be
not stopped, fly away of it self; Insomuch that from such Urine I have been able
to distill little or nothing else than a nauseous Phlegm, instead of the
active and piercing Salt and Spirit that it would have afforded, when first
exposed to the Fire, if the Vessel had been carefully stopped.

And this leads me to consider in the Fifth place, That it will be very hard to
prove, that there can no other Body or way be given which will as well as the
Fire divide Concretes into several homogeneous Substances, which may
consequently be called their Elements or Principles, as well as those separated
or produced by the Fire. For since we have lately seen, that Nature can
successefully employ other Instruments than the Fire to separate distinct
Substances from mixed Bodies, how know we, but that Nature has made, or Art may
make, some such Substance as may be a fit Instrument to Analyze mixed Bodies, or
that some such Method may be found by Humane Industry or Luck, by whose means
compound Bodies may be resolved into other Substances, than such as they are
wont to be divided into by the Fire. And why the Products of such an Analysis
may not as justly be called the component Principles of the Bodies that afford
them, it will not be easy to show, especially since I shall hereafter make it
evident, that the Substances which Chemists are wont to call the Salts, and
Sulphurs, and Mercuries of Bodies, are not so pure and Elementary as they
presume, and as their Hypothesis requires. And this may therefore be the more
freely pressed upon the Chemists, because neither the Paracelsians, nor the
Helmontians can reject it without apparent Injury to their respective Masters.
For Helmont does more than once Inform his Readers, that both Paracelsus and
Himself were Possessors of the famous Liquor, Alkahest, which for its great
power in resolving Bodies irresoluble by Vulgar Fires, he somewhere seems to
call Ignis Gehennae. To this Liquor he ascribes, (and that in great part upon
his own Experience) such wonders, that if we suppose them all true, I am so
much the more a Friend to Knowledge than to Wealth, that I should think the
Alkahest a nobler and more desirable Secret than the Philosophers Stone it
self. Of this Universal Dissolvent he relates, That having digested with it for
a competent time a piece of Oaken Charcoal, it was thereby reduced into a
couple of new and distinct Liquors, discriminated from each other by their
Color and Situation, and that the whole body of the Coal was reduced into
those Liquors, both of them separable from his Immortal Menstruum, which
remained as fit for such Operations as before. And he moreover tells us in
diverse places of his Writings, that by this powerful, and unwearied Agent, he
could dissolve Metals, Marchasites, Stones, Vegetable and Animal Bodies of what
kind soever, and even Glass it self (first reduced to powder,) and in a word,
all kinds of mixed Bodies in the World into their several similar Substances,
without any Residence or Caput mortuum. And lastly, we may gather this further
from his Informations, That the homogeneous Substances obtainable from compound
Bodies by his piercing Liquor, were oftentimes different enough both as to
Number and as to Nature, from those into which the same Bodies are wont to be
divided by common Fire. Of which I shall need in this place to mention no other
proof, then that whereas we know that in our common Analysis of a mixed Body,
there remains a terrestrial and very fixed Substance, oftentimes associated with
a Salt as fixed; Our Author tells us, that by his way he could Distill over all
Concretes without any Caput mortuum, and consequently could make those parts of
the Concrete volatile, which in the Vulgar Analysis would have been fixed. So
that if our Chemists will not reject the solemn and repeated. Testimony of a
Person, who cannot but be acknowledged for one of the greatest Spagyrists that
they can boast of, they must not deny that there is to be found in Nature
another Agent able to Analyze compound Bodies less violently, and both more
genuinely and more universally than the Fire. And for my own part, though I
cannot but say on this Occasion what (you know) our Friend Mr. Boil is wont to
say, when he is asked his Opinion of any strange Experiment; That He that has
seen it has more Reason to believe it, than He that has not; yet I have found
Helmont so faithful a Writer, even in diverse of his improbable Experiments (I
always except that Extravagant Treatise De Magnetica Vulnerum Curatione, which
some of his Friends affirm to have been first published by his Enemies) that I
think it somewhat harsh to give him the Lie, especially to what he delivers
upon his own proper Trial. And I have heard from very credible Eyewitnesses
some things, and seen some others my self, which argue so strongly, that a
circulated Salt, or a Menstruum (such as it may be) may by being abstracted
from compound Bodies, whether Mineral, Animal, or Vegetable, leave them more
unlockt than a wary Naturalist would easily believe, that I dare not
confidently measure the Power of Nature and Art by that of the Menstruums, and
other Instruments that eminent Chemists themselves are as yet wont to Empoly
about the Analyzing of Bodies; nor Deny that a Menstruum may at least from this
or that particular Concrete obtain some apparently similar Substance, differing
from any obtainable from the same Body by any degree or manner of Application
of the Fire. And I am the more backward to deny peremptorily, that there may be
such Openers of compound Bodies, because among the Experiments that make me
speak thus warily, there wanted not some in which it appeared not, that one of
the Substances not separable by common Fires and Menstruums could retain any
thing of the Salt by which the separation was made.

And here, Eleutherius, (says Carneades) I should conclude as much of my
Discourse as belongs to the first Consideration I proposed, but that I foresee,
that what I have delivered will appear liable to two such specious Objections,
that I cannot safely proceed any further till I have examined them.

And first, one sort of Opposers will be forward to tell me, That they do not
pretend by Fire alone to separate out of all compound Bodies their Hypostatical
Principles; it being sufficient that the Fire divides them into such, though
afterward they employ other Bodies to collect the similar parts of the
Compound; as it is known, that though they make use of water to collect the
Saline parts of Ashes from the Terrestrial wherewith they are blended, yet it
is the Fire only that Incinerates Bodies, and reduces the fixed part of them
into the Salt and Earth, where of Ashes are made up. This Objection is not, I
confess, inconsiderable, and I might in great part allow of it, without
granting it to make against me, if I would content my self to answer, that it
is not against those that make it that I have been disputing, but against those
Vulgar Chemists, who themselves believe, and would fain make others do so, That
the Fire is not only an universal, but an adaequate and sufficient Instrument
to analyze mixed Bodies with. For as to their Practice of Extracting the fixed
Salt out of Ashes by the Affusion of Water, it is obvious to allege, that the
Water does only assemble together the Salt the Fire had before divided from the
Earth: as a Sieve does not further break the Corn, but only bring together into
two distinct heaps the Flour and the Bran, whose Corpuscles before lay
promiscuously blended together in the Meal. This I say I might allege, and
thereby exempt my self from the need of taking any farther notice of the
proposed Objection. But not to lose the Rise it may afford me of Illustrating
the matter under Consideration, I am content briefly to consider it, as far
forth as my present Disquisition may be concerned in it.

Not to repeat then what has been already answered, I say farther, that though
I am so civil an Adversary, that I will allow the Chemists, after the Fire has
done all its work, the use of fair Water to make their Extractions with, in
such cases wherein the Water does not cooperate with the Fire to make the
Analysis; yet since I Grant this but upon Supposition that the Water does only
wash off the Saline Particles, which the Fire Alone has Before Extricated in
the Analyz'd Body, it will not be Reasonable, that this Concession should
Extend to other Liquors that may Add to what they Dissolve, nor so much as to
other Cases than those Newly Mentioned: Which Limitation I Desire You would be
Pleased to Bear in Mind till I shall Anon have Occasion to make Use of it. And
This being thus Premised, I shall Proceed to Observe,

First, That Many of the Instances I Proposed in the Preceding Discourse are
Such, that the Objection we are Considering will not at all Reach Them. For
Fire can no more with the Assistance of Water than without it Separate any of
the Three Principles, either from Gold, Silver, Mercury, or some Others of the
Concretes named Above.

Hence We may Infer, That Fire is not an Universal Analyzer of all Mixed
Bodies, since of Metals and Minerals, wherein Chemists have most Exercised
Themselves, there Appear scarce Any which they are able to Aanlyze by Fire,
Nay, from which they can Unquestionably Separate so much as any One of their
Hypostatical Principles; Which may well Appear no small Disparagement as well
to their Hypothesis as to their Pretensions.

It will also remain True, notwithstanding the Objection, That there may be
Other Ways than the wonted Analysis by Fire, to Separate from a Compound Body
Substances as Homogeneneous as those that Chemists Scruple not to Reckon among
their Tria Prima (as some of them, for Brevity Sake, call their Three
Principles.)

And it Appears, That by Convenient Additaments such Substances may be
Separated by the Help of the Fire, as could not be so by the Fire alone:
Witness the Sulphur of Antimony.

And Lastly, I must Represent, That since it appears too that the Fire is but
One of the Instruments that must be Employed in the Resolution of Bodies, We
may Reasonably Challenge the Liberty of doing Two Things. For when ever any
Menstruum or other Additament is Employed, together with the Fire to Obtain a
Sulphur or a Salt from a Body, We may well take the Freedom to Examine, whether
or no That Menstruum do barely Help to Separate the Principle Obtained by It,
or whether there Intervene not a Coalition of the Parts of the Body Wrought
upon with Those of the Menstruum, whereby the Produced Concrete may be Judged
to Result from the Union of Both. And it will be farther Allowable for Us to
Consider, how far any Substance, Separated by the Help of such Additaments,
Ought to pass for one of the Tria Prima; since by One Way of Handling the same
Mixed Body it may according to the Nature of the Additaments, and the Method of
Working upon it, be made to Afford differing Substances from those Obtainable
from it by other Additaments, and another Method, nay and (as may appear by
what I Formerly told You about Tartar) Differing from any of the Substances
into which a Concrete is Divisible by the Fire without Additaments, though
perhaps those Additaments do not, as Ingredients, enter the Composition of the
Obtained Body, but only Diversify the Operation of the Fire upon the Concrete;
and though that Concrete by the Fire alone may be Divided into a Number of
Differing Substances, as Great as any of the Chemists that I have met with
teach us that of the Elements to be. And having said thus much (says
Carneades) to the Objection likely to be Proposed by some Chemists, I am now to
Examine that which I Foresee will be Confidently pressed by Diverse
Peripateticks, who, to Prove Fire to be the true Analyzer of Bodies, will
Plead, That it is the very Definition of Heat given by Aristotle, and Generally
Received, Congregare Homogenea, and Heterogenea Segregare, to Assemble Things
of a Resembling, and Disjoyn those of a Differing Nature. To this I answer,
That this Effect is far from being so Essential to Heat, as it is Generally
Imagined; for it rather Seems, that the True and Genuine Property of Heat is,
to set a Moving, and thereby to Dissociate the parts of Bodies, and Subdivide
them into Minute Particles, without regard to their being Homogeneous or
Heterogeneous, as is apparent in the Boiling of Water, the Distillation of
Quicksilver, or the Exposing of Bodies to the action of the Fire, whose Parts
either Are not (at least in that Degree of Heat Appear not) Dissmilar, where
all that the Fire can do, is to Divide the Body into very Minute Parts which
are of the same Nature with one another, and with their Totum, as their
Reduction by Condensation Evinces. And even when the Fire seems most so
Congregare Homogenea, and Segregare Heterogenea, it Produces that Effect but by
Accident; For the Fire does but Dissolve the Cement, or rather Shatter the
Frame, or [tructure that kept the Heterogeneous Parts of Bodies together, under
one Common Form; upon which Dissolution the Component Particles of the Mixed,
being Freed and set at Liberty, do Naturally, and oftentimes without any
Operation of the Fire, Associate themselves each with its Like, or rather do
take those places which their Several Degrees of Gravity and Levity, Fixedness
or Volatility (either Natural, or Adventitious from the Impression of the Fire)
Assign them. Thus in the Distillation (for Instance) of Man's Blood, the Fire
does First begin to Dissolve the Nexus or Cement of the Body; and then the
Water, being the most Volatile, and Easy to be Extracted, is either by the
Igneous Atoms, or the Agitation they are put into by the Fire, first carried
up, till Forsaken by what carried it up, its Weight sinks it down into the
Receiver: but all this while the other Principles of the Concrete Remain
Unsever'd, and Require a stronger Degree of Heat to make a Separation of its
more Fixed Elements; and therefore the Fire must be Increased which Carries over
the Volatile Salt and the Spirit, they being, though Believed to be Differing
Principles, and though Really of Different Consistency, yet of an almost Equal
Volatility. After them, as less Fugitive, comes over the Oil, and leaves
behind the Earth and the Alcali, which being of an Equal Fixednesse, the Fire
Severs them not, for all the Definition of the Schools. And if into a Red-hot
Earthen or Iron Retort you cast the Matter to be Distilled, You may Observe, as
I have often done, that the Predominant Fire will Carry up all the Volatile
Elements Confusedly in one Fume, which will afterward take their Places in the
Receiver, either according to the Degree of their Gravity, or according to the
Exigency of their respective Textures; the Salt Adhering, for the most part, to
the Sides and Top, and the Phlegm Fastening it self there too in great Drops,
the Oil and Spirit placing themselves Under, or Above one another, according
as their Ponderousness makes them Swim or Sink. For it is Observable, that
though Oil or Liquid Sulphur be one of the Elements Separated by this Fiery
Analysis, yet the Heat which Accidentally Unites the Particles of the other
Volatile Principles, has not always the same Operation on this, there being
diverse Bodies which Yield Two Oils, whereof the One sinks to the Bottom of that
Spirit on which the other Swims; as I can show You in some Oils of the same
Deers Blood, which are yet by Me: Nay I can show you Two Oils carefully made of
the same Parcel of Humane Blood, which not only Differ extremely in Color, but
Swim upon one another without Mixture, and if by Agitation Confounded will of
themselves Divorce again.

And that the Fire does oftentimes divide Bodies, upon the account that some of
their Parts are more Fixed, and some more Volatile, how far soever either of
these Two may be from a pure Elementary Nature, is Obvious enough, if Men would
but heed it in the Burning of Wood, which the Fire Dissipates into Smoke and
Ashes: For not only the latter of these is Confessedly made up of two such
Differing Bodies as Earth and Salt; but the Former being condensed into that
Soot which adheres to our Chimneys, Discovers it self to Contain both Salt and
Oil, and Spirit and Earth, (and some Portion of Phlegm too) which being, all
almost, Equally Volatile to that Degree of Fire which Forces them up, (the more
Volatile Parts Helping perhaps, as well as the Urgency of the Fire, to carry up
the more Fixed ones, as I have often Tried in Dulcified Colcothar, Sublimed by
Sal Armoniack Blended with it) are carried Up together, but may afterward be
Separated by other Degrees of Fire, whose orderly Gradation allows the
Disparity of their Volatileness to Discover it self. Besides, if Differing
Bodies United into one Mass be both sufficiently Fixed, the Fire finding no
Parts Volatile enough to be Expelled or carried up, makes no Separation at all;
as may appear by a Mixture of Colliquated Silver and Gold, whose Component
Metals may be easily Severed by Aqua Fortis, or Aqua Regis (according to the
Predominancy of the Silver or the Gold) but in the Fire alone, though vehement,
the Metals remain unsever'd, the Fire only dividing the Body into smaller
Particles (whose Littleness may be argued from their Fluidity) in which either
the little nimble Atoms of Fire, or its brisk and numberless strokes upon the
Vessels, hinder Rest and Continuity, without any Sequestration of Elementary
Principles. Moreover, the Fire sometimes does not Separate, so much as Unite,
Bodies of a differing Nature; provided they be of an almost resembling
Fixedness, and have in the Figure of their Parts an Aptness to Coalition, as we
see in the making of many Plasters, Ointments, etc. And in such Metalline
Mixtures as that made by Melting together two parts of clean Brass with one of
pure Copper, of which some Ingenious Tradesmen cast such curious Patterns (for
Gold and Silver Works) as I have sometimes taken great Pleasure to Look upon.
Sometimes the Bodies mingled by the Fire are Differing enough as to Fixidity
and Volatility, and yet are so combined by the first Operation of the Fire,
that it self does scarce afterward Separate them, but only Pulverize them;
whereof an Instance is afforded us by the Common Preparation of Mercurius
Dulcis, where the Saline Particles of the Vitriol, Sea Salt, and sometimes
Nitre, Employed to make the Sublimate, do so unite themselves with the
Mercurial Particles made use of, first to Make Sublimate, and then to Dulcifie
it, that the Saline and Metalline Parts arise together in many successive
Sublimations, as if they all made but one Body. And sometimes too the Fire does
not only not Sever the Differing Elements of a Body, but Combine them so
firmly, that Nature her self does very seldom, if ever, make Unions less
Dissoluble. For the Fire meeting with some Bodies exceedingly and almost
equally Fixed, instead of making a Separation, makes an Union so strict, that it
self, alone, is unable to Dissolve it; As we see, when an Alcalizate Salt and
the Terrestrial Residue of the Ashes are Incorporated with pure Sand, and by
Vitrification made one permanent Body, (I mean the course or greenish sort of
Glass) that mocks the greatest Violence of the Fire, which though able to Marry
the Ingredients of it, yet is not able to Divorce them. I can show you some
pieces of Glass which I saw flow down from an Earthen Crucible purposely
Exposed for a good while, with Silver in it, to a very vehement Fire. And some
that deal much in the Fusion of Metals Inform me, that the melting of a great
part of a Crucible into Glass is no great Wonder in their Furnaces. I remember,
I have Observed too in the Melting of great Quantities of Iron out of the Oar,
by the Help of store of Charcoal (for they Affirm that Sea-Coal will not yield
a Flame strong enough) that by the prodigious Vehemence of the Fire, Excited by
vast Bellows (made to play by great Wheels turned about by Water) part of the
Materials Exposed to it was, instead of being Analyz'd, Colliquated, and turned
into a Dark, Solid and very Ponderous Glass, and that in such Quantity, that in
some places I have seen the very Highways, near such Iron-works, mended with
Heaps of such Lumps of Glass, instead of Stones and Gravel. And I have also
Observed, that some kind of Fire-stone it self, having been employed in
Furnaces wherein it was exposed to very strong and lasting Fires, has had all
its Fixed Parts so Wrought on by the Fire, as to be Perfectly Vitrifi'd, which I
have tried by Forcing from it Pretty large Pieces of Perfect and Transparent
Glass. And lest You might think, Eleutherius, that the Questioned Definition of
Heat may be Demonstrated, by the Definition which is wont to be given and
Acquiesc'd in, of its contrary Quality, Cold, whose property is taught to be
tam Homogenea, quam Heterogenea congregare; Give me leave to represent to You,
that neither is this Definition unquestionable; for not to Mention the
Exceptions, which a Logician, as such, may Take at it, I Consider that the
Union of Heterogeneous Bodies which is Supposed to be the Genuine Production of
Cold, is not Performed by every Degree of Cold. For we see for Instance that in
the Urine of Healthy Men, when the Liquor has been Suffered a while to stand,
the Cold makes a Separation of the Thinner Part from the Grosser, which
Subsides to the Bottom, and Grows Opacous there; whereas if the Urinal be
Warm, these Parts readily Mingle again, and the whole Liquor becomes
Transparent as before. And when, by Glaciation, Wood, Straw, Dust, Water, etc.
are Supposed to be United into one Lump of Ice, the Cold does not Cause any
Real Union or Adunation, (if I may so Speak) of these Bodies, but only
Hardening the Aqueous Parts of the Liquor into Ice, the other Bodies being
Accidentally Present in that Liquor are frozen up in it, but not Really United.
And accordingly if we Expose a Heap of Money Consisting of Gold, Silver and
Copper Coins, or any other Bodies of Differing Natures, which are Destitute of
Aqueous Moisture, Capable of Congelation, to never so intense a Cold, we find
not that these Differing Bodies are at all thereby so much as Compacted, much
less United together; and even in Liquors Themselves we find Phaenoment which
Induce us to Question the Definition which we are examining. If Paracelsus his
Authority were to be looked upon as a Sufficient Proof in matters of this
Nature, I might here insist on that Process of his, whereby he Teaches that the
Essence of Wine may be Severed from the Phlegm and Ignoble Part by the
Assistance of Congelation: and because much Weight has been laid upon this
Process, not only by Paracelsians, but other Writers, some of whom seem not to
have perused it themselves, I shall give You the entire Passage in the Authors
own Words, as I lately found them in the sixth Book of his Archidoxis, an
Extract whereof I have yet about me; and it sounds thus. De Vino sciendum est,
faecem phlegmaque ejus esse Mineram, and Vini substantiam esse corpus in quo
conservatur Essentia, prout auri in auro latet Essentia. Juxta quod Practicam
nobis ad Memoriam ponimus, ut non obliviscamur, ad hunc modum: Recipe Vinum
vetustissimum and optimum quod habere poteris, calore saporeque ad placitum,
hoc in vas vitreum infundas ut tertiam ejus partem impleat, and sigillo
Hermetis occlusum in equino ventre mensibus quatuor, and in continuato calore
teneatur qui non deficiat. Quo peracto, Hyeme cum frigus and gelu maxim
saeviunt, his per mensem exponatur ut congeletur. Ad hunc modum frigus vini
spiritum una cum ejus substantia protrudit in vini centrum, ac separat a
phlegmate: Congelatum abjice, quod vero congelatum non est, id Spiritum cum
substantia esse judicato. Hunc in Pelicanum positum in arenae digestione non
adeo calida per aliquod tempus manner sinito; Postmodum eximito vini
Magisterium, de quo locuti sumus.

But I dare not Eleu. lay much Weight upon this Process, because I have found
that if it were True, it would be but seldom Practicable in this Country upon
the best Wine: for Though this present Winter has been Extraordinary Cold, yet
in very Keen Frosts accompanied with lasting Snowes, I have not been able in
any Measure to Freeze a thin Vial full of Sack; and even with Snow and Salt I
could Freeze little more then the Surface of it; and I suppose Eleu. that it is
not every Degree of Cold that is Capable of Congealing Liquors, which is able
to make such an Analysis (if I may so call it) of them by Separating their
Aqueous and Spirituous Parts; for I have sometimes, though not often, frozen
severally, Red-wine, Urine and Milk, but could not Observe the expected
Separation. And the Dutchmen that were forced to Winter in that Icie Region
near the Artick Circle, called Nova Zembla, although they relate, as we shall
see below, that there was a Separation of Parts made in their frozen Beer about
the middle of November, yet of the Freezing of their Back in December following
they give but this Account: Yea and our Sack, which is so hot, was Frozen very
hard, so that when we were every Man to have his part, we were forced to melt
it in the Fire; which we shared every second Day, about half a Pint for a Man,
wherewith we were forced to sustain our selves. In which words they imply not,
that their Back was divided by the Frost into differing Substances, after such
manner as their Beer had been. All which notwithstanding, Eleu. suppose that it
may be made to appear, that even Cold sometimes may Congregare Homogenea, and
Heterogenea Segregare: and to Manifest this I may tell you, that I did once,
purposely, cause to be Decocted in fair Water a Plant abounding with
Sulphurous and Spirituous Parts, and having exposed the Decoction to a keen
North Wind in a very Frosty Night, I observed, that the more Aqueous Parts of
it were turned by the next Morning into Ice, toward the innermost part of
which, the more Agile and Spirituous parts, as I then conjectured, having
Retreated, to shun as much as might be their Environing Enemy, they had there
preserved themselves unfrozen in the Form of a high colored Liquor, the
Aqueous and Spirituous parts having been so slightly (Blended rather than)
United in the Decoction, that they were easily Separable by such a Degree of
Cold as would not have been able to have Divorced the Parts of Urine or Wine,
which by Fermentation or Digestion are wont, as Trial has informed me, to be
more intimately associated each with other. But I have already intimated,
Eleutherius, that I shall not Insist on this Experiment, not only because,
having made it but once I may possibly have been mistaken in it; but also (and
that principally) because of that much more full and eminent Experiment of the
Separative Virtue of extreme Cold, that was made, against their Wills, by the
forementioned Dutch men that Wintered in Nova Zembla; the Relation of whose
Voyage being a very scarce Book, it will not be amiss to give you that
Memorable part of it which concerns our present Theme, as I caused the Passage
to be extracted out of the Englished Voyage it self.

Gerard de Veer, John Cornelyson and Others, sent out of Amsterdam, Anno Dom.
1596. being forced by unseasonable Weather to Winter in Nova Zembla, near
Ice-Haven; on the thirteenth of October, Three of us (says the Relation) went
aboard the Ship, and laded a Sled with Beer; but when we had laden it, thinking
to go to our House with it, suddenly there arose such a Wind, and so great a
Storm and Cold, that we were forced to go into the Ship again, because we were
not able to stay without; and we could not get the Beer into the Ship again,
but were forced to let it stand without upon the Sled: the Fourteenth, as we
came out of the Ship, we found the Barrel of Beer standing upon the Sled, but
it was fast frozen at the Heads; yet by reason of the great Cold, the Beer that
purged out froze as hard upon the Side of the Barrel, as if it had been glu'd
thereon: and in that sort we drew it to our House, and set the Barrel an end,
and drank it up; but first we were forced to melt the Beer, for there was
scarce any unfrozen Beer in the barrel; but in that thick Yiest that was
unfrozen day the Strength of the Beer, so that it was too strong to drink
alone, and that which was frozen tasted like Water; and being melted we Mixed
one with the other, and so drank it; but it had neither Strength nor Taste. And
on this Occasion I remember, that having the last very Sharp Winter purposely
tried to Freeze, among other Liquors, some Beer moderately strong, in Glass
Vessels, with Snow and Salt, I observed, that there came out of the Neck a
certain thick Substance, which, it seems, was much better able then the rest of
the Liquor (that I found turned into Ice) to resist a Frost, and which, by its
Color and consistence seemed mafestly enough to be Yiest, whereat, I confess,
I somewhat marvail'd, because I did not either discern by the Taste, or find
by Enquiry, that the Beer was at all too New to be very fit to be Drank. I
might confirm the Dutchmens Relation, by what happened a while since to a near
Friend of mine, who complained to me, that having Brewed some Beer or Ale for
his own drinking in Holland (where he then dwelt) the Keenness of the late
bitter Winter froze the Drink so as to reduce it into Ice, and a small
Proportion of a very Strong and Spirituous Liquor. But I must not entertain you
any longer concerning Cold, not only because you may think I have but lost my
way into a Theme which does not directly belong to my present Undertaking; but
because I have already enlarged my self too much upon the first Consideration I
proposed, though it appears so much a Paradox, that it seemed to Require that I
should say much to keep it from being thought a mere Extravagance; yet since I
Undertook but to make the common Assumption of our Chemists and Aristotelians
appear Questionable, I hope I have so Performed that Task, that I may now
Proceed to my Following Considerations, and Insist less on them than I have
done on the First.

THE SKEPTICAL CHEMIST. The Second Part.
THe Second Consideration I Desire to have Notice Taken of, is This, That it is
not so Sure, as Both Chemists and Aristotelians are wont to Think it, that
every Seemingly Similar or Distinct Substance that is Separated from a Body by
the Help of the Fire, was Pre-existent in it as a Principle or Element of it.

That I may not make this Paradox a Greater then I needs must, I will First
Briefly Explain what the Proposition means, before I proceed to Argue for it.

And I suppose You will easily Believe That I do not mean that any thing is
separable from a Body by Fire, that was not Materially pre-existent in it; for
it Far Exceeds the power of Merely Natural Agents, and Consequently of the
Fire, to produce anew, so Much as one Atome of Matter, which they can but
Modifie and Alter, not Create; which is so Obvious a Truth, that almost all
Sects of Philosophers have Denied the Power of producing Matter to Second
Causes; and the Epicureans and some Others have Done the Like, in Reference to
their Gods themselves.

Nor does the Proposition peremptorily Deny but that some Things Obtained by
the Fire from a Mixed Body, may have been more then barely Materially
pre-existent in it, since there are Concretes, which before they be Exposed to
the Fire afford us several Documents of their abounding, some with Salt, and
Others with Sulphur. For it will serve the present Turn, if it appear that
diverse things Obtained from a Mixed Body exposed to the Fire, were not its
Ingredients Before: for if this be made to appear it, will be Rational enough
to suspect that Chemists may Decieve themselves, and Others, in concluding
Resolutely and Universally, those Substances to be the Elementary Ingredients
of Bodies barely separated by the Fire, of which it yet may be Doubted Whether
there be such or No; at least till some other Argument then that drawn from the
Analysis be Brought to resolve the Doubt.

That then which I Mean by the Proposition I am Explaining, is, That it may
without Absurdity be Doubted whether or no the Differing Substances Obtainable
from a Concrete Dissipated by the Fire were so Exsistent in it in that Form
(at least as to their minute Parts) wherein we find them when the Analysis is
over, that the Fire did only Dis join and Extricate the Corpuscles of one
Principle from those of the other wherewith before they were Blended.

Having thus Explained my Proposition, I shall endeavor to do two things, to
prove it; The first of which is to show that such Substances as Chemists call
Principles May be produced De novo (as they speak.) And the other is to make it
probable that by the Fire we may Actually obtain from some Mixed Bodies such
Substances as were not in the Newly Expounded sense, pre-existent in them.

To begin then with the First of these, I Consider that if it be as true as
it is probable, that Compounded Bodies Differ from One Another but in the
Various Textures Resulting from the Bigness, Shape, Motion, and contrivance of
their small parts. It will not be Irrational to conceive that one and the same
parcel of the Universal Matter may by Various Alterations and Contextures be
brought to Deserve the Name, sometimes of a Sulphurous, and sometimes of a
Terrene, or Aqueous Body. And this I could more largely Explicate, but that our
Friend Mr. Boil has promised us something about Qualities, wherein the Theme I
now willingly Resign him, Will I Question not be Studiously Enquired into.
Wherefore what I shall now advance in favor of what I have lately Delivered
shall be Deduced from Experiments made Diverse Years since. The first of which
would have been much more considerable, but that by some intervening Accidents
I was Necessitated to lose the best time of the year, for a trial of the Nature
of that I designed; it being about he middle of May before I was able to begin
an Experiment which should have then been two months old; but such as it was,
it will not perhaps be impertinent to Give You this Narrative of it. At the
time newly Mentioned, I caused My Gardener (being by Urgent Occasions Hindered
from being present myself) to dig out a convenient quantity of good Earth, and
dry it well in an Oven, to weigh it, to put it in an Earthen pot almost level
with the Surface of the ground, and to set in it a selected seed he had before
received from me, for that purpose, of Squash, which is an Indian kind of
Pompion, that Grows apace; this seed I Ordered Him to Water only with Rain or
Spring Water. I did not (when my Occasions permitted me to visit it) without
delight behold how fast it Grew, though unseasonably sown; but the Hastening
Winter Hindered it from attaining any thing near its due and Wonted magnitude;
(for I found the same Autumn, in my Garden, some of those plants, by Measure,
as big about as my Middle) and made me order the having it taken Up; Which
about the Middle of October was carefully Done by the same Gardener, who a
while after sent me this account of it; I have Weighed the Pompion with the
Stalk and Leaves, all which Weighed three pound wanting a quarter; Then I took
the Earth, baked it as formerly, and found it just as much as I did at First,
which made me think I had not dried it Sufficiently: then I put it into the
Oven twice More, after the Bread was Drawn, and Weighed it the Second time, but
found it Shrink little or nothing.

But to deal Heartily with You, Eleutherius, I must not conceal from You the
Event of another Experiment of this Kind made this present Summer, wherein the
Earth seems to have been much more Wasted; as may appear by the following
account, Lately sent me by the same Gardener, in these Words. To give You an
Account of your Cucumbers, I have Gained two Indifferent Fair Ones, the Weight
of them is ten Pound and a Half, the Branches with the Roots Weighed four
Pounds wanting two Ounces; and when I had weighed them I took the Earth, and
baked it in several small Earthen Dishes in an Oven; and when I had so done, I
found the Earth wanted a Pound and a half of what it was formerly; yet I was
not satisfied, doubting the Earth was not dry: I put it into an Oven the Second
Time, (after the Bread was drawn) and after I had taken it out and weighed it,
I found it to be the Same Weight: So I Suppose there was no Moisture left in
the Earth. Neither do I think that the Pound and Half that was wanting was
Drawn away by the Cucumber but a great Part of it in the Ordering was in Dust
(and the like) wasted: (the Cucumbers are kept by themselves, lest You should
send for them.) But yet in this Trial, Eleutherius, it appears that though some
of the Earth, or rather the dissoluble Salt harbored in it, were wasted, the
main Body of the Plant consisted of Transmuted Water. And I might add, that a
year after I caused the formerly mentioned Experiment, touching large Pompions,
to be reiterated, with so good success, that if my memory does not much
mis-inform me, it did not only much surpass any that I made before, but seemed
strangely to conclude what I am pleading for; though (by reason I have
unhappily lost the particular Account my Gardener writ me up of the
Circumstances) I dare not insist upon them. The like Experiment may be as
conveniently tried with the seeds of any Plant, whose growth is hasty, and its
size Bulky. If Tobacco will in These Cold Climates Grow well in Earth undung'd,
it would not be amiss to make a Trial with it; for it is an annual Plant, that
arises where it prospers, sometimes as high as a Tall Man; and I have had
leaves of it in my Garden near a Foot and a Half broad. But the next time I
Try this Experiment, it shall be with several seeds of the same sort, in the
same pot of Earth, that so the event may be the more Conspicuous. But because
every Body has not Convenience of time and place for this Experiment neither, I
made in my Chamber, some shorter and more Expeditions Trials. I took a Top of
Spearmint, about an Inch Long, and put it into a good Vial full of Spring
water, so as the upper part of the Mint was above the neck of the Glass, and
the lower part Immersed in the Water; within a few Days this Mint began to
shoot forth Roots into the Water, and to display its Leaves, and aspire
upwards; and in a short time it had numerous Roots and Leaves, and these very
strong and fragrant of the Odor of the Mint: but the Heat of my Chamber, as I
suppose, killed the Plant when it was grown to have a pretty thick Stalk, which
with the various and ramified Roots, which it shot into the Water as if it had
been Earth, presented in its Transparent Flower-pot a Spectacle not unpleasant
to behold. The like I tried with sweet Marjoram, and I found the Experiment
succeed also, though somewhat more slowly, with Balm and Peniroyal, to name
now no other Plants. And one of these Vegetables, cherished only by Water,
having obtained a competent Growth, I did, for Trials sake, cause to be
Distilled in a small Retort, and thereby obtained some Phlegm, a little
Empyrcumaticall Spirit, a small Quantity of adust Oil, and a Caput mortuum;
which appearing to be a Coal concluded it to consist of Salt and Earth: but the
Quantity of it was so small that I forbore to Calcine it. The Water I used to
nourish this Plant was not shifted nor renewed; and I chose Springwater rather
than Rainwater, because the latter is more discernably a kind of (...),
which, though it be granted to be freed from grosser Mixtures, seems yet to
Contain in it, besides the Steams of several Bodies wandering in the Air, which
may be supposed to impregnate it, a certain Spirituous Substance, which may be
Extracted out of it, and is by some mistaken for the Spirit of the World
Corporify'd, upon what Grounds, and with what Probability, I may elsewhere
perchance, but must not now, Discourse to you.

But perhaps I might have saved a great part of my Labor. For I find that
Helmont (an Author more considerable for his Experiments than many Learned men
are pleased to think him) having had an Opportunity to prosecute an Experiment
much of the same nature with those I have been now speaking of, for five Years
together, obtained at the end of that time so notable a Quantity of Transmuted
Water, that I should scarce Think it fit to have his Experiment, and Mine
Mentioned together, were it not that the Length of Time Requisite to this may
deterr the Curiosity of some, and exceed the leisure of Others; and partly,
that so Paradoxical a Truth as that which these Experiments seem to hold forth,
needs to be Confirmed by more Witnesses then one, especially since the
Extravagancies and Untruths to be met with in Helmonts Treatise of the
Magnetic Cure of Wounds, have made his Testimonies suspected in his other
Writings, though as to some of the Unlikely matters of Fact he delivers in
them, I might safely undertake to be his Compurgator. But that Experiment of
his which I was mentioning to You, he says, was this. He took 200 pound of
Earth dried in an Oven, and having put it into an Earthen Vessel and moistened
it with Rain water he planted in it the Trunk of a Willow tree of five pound
Weight; this he VVater'd, as need required, with Rain or with Distilled
Water; and to keep the Neighboring Earth from getting into the Vessel, he
employed a plate of Iron tinned over and perforated with many holes. Five years
being efflux'd, he took out the Tree and weighed' it, and (with computing the
leaves that fell during four Autumnes) he found it to weigh 169 pound, and
about three Ounces. And Having again Dried the Earth it grew in, he found it
want of its Former Weight of 200 Pound, about a couple only of Ounces; so that
164 pound of the Roots, VVood, and Bark, which Constituted the Tree, seem to
have Sprung from the Water. And though it appears not that Helmont had the
Curiosity to make any Analysis of this Plant, yet what I lately told You I did
to One of the Vegetables I nourished with Water only, will I suppose keep You
from Doubting that if he had Distilled this Tree, it would have afforded him
the like Distinct Substances as another Vegetable of the same kind. I need not
Subjoyne that I had it also in my thoughts to try how Experiments to the same
purpose with those I related to You would succeed in other Bodies then
Vegetables, because importunate Avocations having hitherto hindered me from
putting my Design in Practice, I can yet speak but Confecturally of the
Success: but the best is, that the Experiments already made and mentioned to
you need not the Assistance of new Ones, to Verify as much as my present task
makes it concern me to prove by Experiments of this Nature.

One would suspect (says Eleutherius after his long silence) by what You have
been discoursing, that You are not far from Helmonts Opinion about the
Origination of Compound Bodies, and perhaps too dislike not the Arguments which
he imployes to prove it.

What Helmontian Opinion, and what Arguments do you mean (asks Carneades.)

What You have been Newly Discoursing (replies Eleutherius) tells us, that You
cannot but know that this bold and Acute Spagyrist scruples not to Assert that
all mixed Bodies spring from one Element; and that Vegetables, Animals,
Marchasites, Stones, Metalls, etc. are Materially but simple Water disguised
into these Various Forms, by the plastic or Formative Virtue of their seeds.
And as for his Reasons you may find diverse of them scattered up and down his
writings; the considerabl'st of which seem to be these three; The Ultimate
Reduction of mixed Bodies into Insipid Water, the Vicissitude of the supposed
Elements, and the production of perfectly mixed Bodies out of simple Water. And
first he affirms that the Sal circulatus Paracelsi, or his Liquor Alkahest,
does adaequately resolve Plants, Animals, and Mineralls into one Liquor or
more, according to their several internal Disparities of Parts (without Caput
Mortuum, or the Destruction of their seminal Virtues;) and that the Alkahest
being abstracted from these Liquors in the same weight and Virtue wherewith it
Dissolved them, the Liquors may by frequent Cohobations from chalk or some
other idoneous matter, be Totally deprived of their feminal Endowments, and
return at last to their first matter, Insipid Water; some other ways he
proposes here and there, to divest some particular Bodies of their borrowed
shapes, and make them remigrate to their first Simplicity. The second Topic
whence Helmont draws his Arguments, to prove Water to be the Material cause
of Mixed Bodies, I told You was this, that the other supposed Elements may be
transmuted into one another. But the Experiments by him here and there produced
on this Occasion, are so uneasy to be made and to be judged of, that I shall
not insist on them; not to mention, that if they were granted to be true, his
Inference from them is somewhat disputable; and therefore I shall pass on to
tell You, That as, in his First Argument, our Paradoxical Author endeavors to
prove Water the Sole Element of Mixed Bodies, by their Ultimate Resolution, when
by his Alkahest, or some other conquering Agent, the Seeds have been Destroyed,
which Disguised them, or when by time those seeds are Weari'd or Exantlated or
unable to Act their Parts upon the Stage of the Universe any Longer: So in his
Third Argument he Endeavors to evince the same Conclusion, by the constitution
of Bodies which he asserts to be nothing but Water Subdued by Seminal Virtues.
Of this he gives here and there in his Writings several Instances, as to Plants
and Animals; but diverse of them being Difficult either to be tried or to be
Understood, and others of them being not altogether Unobnoxious to Exceptions,
I think you have singl'd out the Principal and less Questionable Experiment
when you lately mentioned that of the Willow Tree. And having thus, Continues
Eleutherius, to Answer your Question, given you a Summary Account of what I am
Confident You know better then I do, I shall be very glad to receive Your Sense
of it, if the giving it me will not too much Divert You from the Prosecution of
your Discourse.

That If (replies Carneades) was not needlessly annexed: for thoroughly to examine
such an Hypothesis and such Arguments would require so many Considerations, and
Consequently so much time, that I should not now have the Liesure to perfect
such a Digression, and much less to finish my Principle Discourse. Yet thus
much I shall tell You at present, that you need not fear my rejecting this
Opinion for its Novelty; since, however the Helmontians may in complement to
their Master pretend it to be a new Discovery, Yet though the Arguments be for
the most part his, the Opinion it self is very Ancient: For Diogenes Laertius
and diverse other Authors speak of Thales, as the first among the Graecians that
made disquisitions upon nature. And of this Thales, I Remember, De Natura
Deorum.
Tully informs us, that he taught all things were at first made of Water. And
it seems by Plutarch and Justin Martyr, that the Opinion was Ancienter then he:
For they tell us that he used to defend his Tene tby the Testimony of Homer.
And a Greek Author, (the Scholiast of Apollonius) upon these Words (...)
Argonaut. 4.
The Earth of Slime was made,
Affirms (out of Zeno) that the Chaos, whereof all things were made, was,
according to Hesiod, Water; which, settling first, became Slime, and then
condensed into solid Earth. And the same Opinion about the Generation of Slime
seems to have been entertained by Orpheus, Athenagoras.
out of whom one of the Ancients cites this Testimony, (...)
Of Water Slime was made.
It seems also by what is delivered in Strabo out of another Author,
Universarumrerum primordia diversa esse, faciendi autem mundi initium aquam.
Strabo. Geograp lib. 15. circa medium.
concerning the Indians, That they likewise held that all things had differing
Beginnings, but that of which the World was made, was Water. And the like
Opinion has been by some of the Ancients ascribed to the Phoenicians, from whom
Thales himself is conceived to have borrowed it; as probably he Greeks did much
of their Thelogie, and, as I am apt to think, of their Philosophy too; since
the Devising of the Atomical Hypothesis commonly ascribed to Lucippus and his
Disciple Democritus, is by Learned Men attributed to one Moschus a Phoenician.
And possibly the Opinion is yet antienter than so; For it is known that the
Phoenicians borrowed most of their Learning from the Hebrews. And among those
that acknowledge the Books of Moses, many have been inclined to think Water to
have been the Primitive and Universal Matter, by perusing the Beginning of
Genesis, where the Waters seem to be mentioned as the Material Cause, not only
of Sublunary Compounded Bodies, but of all those that make up the Universe;
whose Component Parts did orderly, as it were, emerge out of that vast Abyss,
by the Operation of the Spirit of God, who is said to have been moving Himself
as hatching Females do (as the Original (...), Deuter. 32.11.
Meracephet is said to Import, and as it seems to signify in one of the two
other places, Jerem. 23.9.
wherein alone I have met with it in the Hebrew Bible) upon the Face of the
Waters; which being, as may be supposed, Divinely Impregnated with the seeds of
all things, were by that productive Incubation qualified to produce them. But
you, I presume, Expect that I should Discourse of this Matter like a
Naturalist, not a Philologer. Wherefore I shall add, to Countenance Helmont's
Opinion, That whereas he gives not, that I remember, any Instance of any
Mineral Body, nor scarce of any Animal, generated of Water, a French Chemist,
Monsieur de Rochas, has presented his Readers an Experiment, which if it were
punctually such as he has delivered it, is very Notable. He then, Discoursing
of the Generation of things according to certain Chemical and Metaphorical
Notions (which I confess are not to me Intelligible) sets down, among diverse
Speculations not pertinent to our Subject, the following Narrative, which I
shall repeat to you the sense of in English, with as little variation from the
Literal sense of the French words, as my memory will enable me. Having (says
he) discerned such great Wonders by the Natural Operation of Water, I would
know what may be done with it by Art Imitating Nature. Wherefore I took Water
which I well knew not to be compounded, nor to be mixed with any other thing
than that Spirit of Life (whereof he had spoken before;) and with a Heat
Artificial, Continual and Proportionate, I prepared and disposed it by the
above mentioned Graduations of Coagulation, Congelation, and Fixation, until
it was turned into Earth, which Earth produced Animals, Vegetables and
Minerals. I tell not what Animals, Vegetables and Minerals, for that is
reserved for another Occasion: but the Animals did Move of themselves, Eat,
etc. -- and by the true Anatomy I made of them, I found that they were
composed of much Sulphur, little Mercury, and less Salt. -- The Minerals began
to grow and increase by converting into their own Nature one part of the Earth
thereunto disposed; they were solid and heavy. And by this truly Demonstrative
Science, namely Chemistry, I found that they were composed of much Salt, little
Sulphur, and less Mercury.

But (says Carneades) I have some Suspicions concerning this strange Relation,
which make me unwilling to Declare an Opinion of it, unless I were satisfied
concerning diverse Material Circumstances that our Author has left unmentioned;
though as for the Generation of Living Creatures, both Vegetable and Sensitive,
it needs not seem Incredible, since we find that our common water (which
indeed is often Impregnated with Variety of Seminal Principles and Rudiments)
being long kept in a quiet place will putrify and stink, and then perhaps too
produce Moss and little Worms, or other Insects, according to the nature of the
Seeds that were lurking in it. I must likewise desire you to take Notice, that
as Helmont gives us no Instance of the Production of Minerals out of Water, so
the main Argument that he employ's to prove that they and other Bodies may be
resolved into water, is drawn from the Operations of his Alkahest, and
consequently cannot be satisfactorily Examined by You and Me.

Yet certainly (says Eleutherius) You cannot but have somewhat wondered as
well as I, to observe how great a share of Water goes to the making up of
Diverse Bodies, whose Disguises promise nothing near so much. The Distillation
of Eeles, though it yielded me some Oil, and Spirit, and Volatile Salt,
besides the Caput mortuum, yet were all these so disproportionate to the Phlegm
that came from them (and in which at first they boiled as in a Pot of Water)
that they seemed to have bin nothing but coagulated Phlegm, which does likewise
strangely abound in Vipers, though they are esteemed very hot in Operation, and
will in a Convenient Air survive some days the loss of their Heads and
Hearts, so vigorous is their Vivacity. Man's Blood it self as Spirituous, and as
Elaborate a Liquor as it is reputed, does so abound in Phlegm, that, the other
Day, Distilling some of it on purpose to try the Experiment (as I had formerly
done in Deers Blood) out of about seven Ounces and a half of pure Blood we drew
near six Ounces of Phlegm, before any of the more operative Principles began
to arise, and Invite us to change the Receiver. And to satisfy my self that
some of these Animal Phlegms were void enough of Spirit to deserve that Name,
I would not content my self to taste them only, but fruitlesly poured on them
acid Liquors, to try if they contained any Volatile Salt or Spirit, which (had
there been any there) would probably have discovered it self by making an
Ebullition with the affused Liquor. And now I mention Corrosive Spirits, I am
minded to Inform you, That though they seem to be nothing else but Fluid
Salts, yet they abound in Water, as you may Observe, if either you Entangle,
and so Fix their Saline Part, by making them Corrode some idoneous Body, or
else if you mortify it with a contrary Salt; as I have very manifestly
Observed in the making a Medecin somewhat like Helmont's Balsamus Samech, with
Distilled Vinager instead of Spirit of Wine, wherewith he prepares it: For you
would scarce Believe (what I have lately Observed) that of that acid Spirit,
the Salt of Tartar, from which it is Distilled, will by mortifying and
retaining the acid Salt turn into worthless Phlegm near twenty times its
weight, before it be so fully Impregnated as to rob no more Distilled Vinager
of its Salt. And though Spirit of Wine Exquisitely rectified seem of all
Liquors to be the most free from Water, it being so Igneous that it will Flame
all away without leaving the least Drop behind it, yet even this Fiery Liquor
is by Helmont not improbably affirmed, in case what he relates be True, to be
Materially Water, under a Sulphurous Disguise: For, according to him, in the
making that excellent Medecin, Paracelsus his Balsamus Samech, (which is
nothing but Sal Tartari dulcified by Distilling from it Spirit of Wine till the
Salt be sufficiently glutted with its Sulphur, and suffer the Liquor to be
drawn off, as strong as it was poured on) when the Salt of Tartar from which it
is Distilled has retained, or deprived it of the Sulphurous parts of the
Spirit of Wine, the rest, which is incomparably the greater part of the Liquor,
will remigrate into Phlegm. I added that Clause [In case what he Relates be
True] because I have not as yet sufficiently tried it my self. But not only
something of Experiment keeps me from thinking it, as many Chemists do, absurd,
(though I have, as well as they, in vain tried it with ordinary Salt of
Tartar:) but besides that Helmont often Relates it, and draws Consequences from
it; A Person noted for his Soberness and Skill in Spagyrical Preparations,
having been asked by me, Whether the Experiment might not be made to succeed, if
the Salt and Spirit were prepared according to a way suitable to my Principles,
he affirmed to me, that he had that way I proposed made Helmont's Experiment
succeed very well, without adding any thing to the Salt and Spirit. But our way
is neither short nor Easy.

I have indeed (says Carneades) sometimes wondered to see how much Phlegm may
be obtained from Bodies by the Fire. But concerning that Phlegm I may anon
have Occasion to note something, which I therefore shall not now anticipate.
But to return to the Opinion of Thales, and of Helmont, I consider, that
supposing the Alkahest could reduce all Bodies into water, yet whether that
water, because insipid, must be Elementary, may not groundlesly be doubted; For
I remember the Candid and Eloquent Petrus Laurembergius in his Notes upon
Sala's Aphorisms affirms, that he saw an insipid Menstruum that was a
powerful Dissolvent, and (if my Memory do not much mis-informe me) could
dissolve Gold. And the water which may be Drawn from Quicksilver without
Addition, though it be almost Tastless, You will I believe think of a differing
Nature from simple Water, especially if you Digest in it Appropriated
Mineralls. To which I shall add but this, that this Consideration may be
further extended. For I see no Necessity to conceive that the Water mentioned
in the Beginning of Genesis, as the Universal Matter, was simple and Elementary
Water; since though we should Suppose it to have been an Agitated Congeries or
Heap consisting of a great Variety of Seminal Principles and Rudiments, and of
other Corpuscles fit to be subdued and Fashioned by them, it might yet be a
Body Fluid like Water, in case the Corpuscles it was made up of, were by their
Creator made small enough, and put into such an actual Motion as might make
them Glide along one another. And as we now say, the Sea consists of Water,
notwithstanding the Saline, Terrestrial, and other Bodies mingled with it,)
such a Liquor may well enough be called Water, because that was the greatest
of the known Bodies whereunto it was like; Though, that a Body may be Fluid
enough to appear a Liquor, and yet contain Corpuscles of a very differing
Nature, You will easily believe, if You but expose a good Quantity of Vitriol
in a strong Vessel to a Competent Fire. For although it contains both Aqueous,
Earthy, Saline, Sulphurous, and Metalline Corpuscles, yet the whole Mass will
at first be Fluid like water, and boil like a seething pot.

I might easily (Continues Carneades) enlarge my self on such Considerations,
if I were Now Obliged to give You my Judgment of the Thalesian, and Helmontian,
Hypothesis. But Whether or no we conclude that all things were at first
Generated of Water, I may Deduce from what I have tried Concerning the Growth
of Vegetables, nourished with water, all that I now proposed to my Self or need
at present to prove, namely that Salt, Spirit, Earth, and even Oil (though that
be thought of all Bodies the most opposite to Water) may be produced out of
Water; and consequently that a Chemical Principle as well as a Peripatetick
Element, may (in some cases) be Generated anew, or obtained from such a parcel
of Matter as was not endowed with the form of such aprinciple or Element before.

And having thus, Eleutherius, Evinced that it is possible that such Substances
as those that Chemists are wont to call their Tria Prima, may be Generated,
anew: I must next Endeavor to make it Probable, that the Operation of the Fire
does Actually (sometimes) not only divide Compounded Bodies into small Parts,
but Compound those Parts after a new Manner; whence Consequently, for ought we
Know, there may Emerge as well Saline and Sulphurous Substances, as Bodies of
other Textures. And perhaps it will assist us in our Enquiry after the Effects
of the Operations of the Fire upon other Bodies, to Consider a little, what it
does to those Mixtures which being Productions of the Art of Man, We best know
the Composition of. You may then be pleased to take Notice that though Soap is
made up by the Sope-Boylers of Oil or Grease, and Salt, and Water Diligently
Incorporated together, yet if You expose the Mass they Constitute to a Graduall
Fire in a Retort, You shall then indeed make a Separation, but not of the same
Substances that were United into Soap, but of others of a Distant and yet not
an Elementary Nature, and especially of an Oil very sharp and Faetid, and of a
very Differing Quality from that which was Employed to make the Soap: so if you
Mingle in a due Proportion, Sal Armoniack with Quicklime, and Distill them by
Degrees of Fire, You shall not Divide the Sal Armoniack from the Quicklime,
though the one be a Volatile, and the other a Fixed Substance, but that which
will ascend will be a Spirit much more Fugitive, Penetrant, and stinking, then
Sal Armoniack; and there will remain with the Quicklime all or very near all
the Sea Salt that concurred to make up the Sal Armoniack; concerning which Sea
Salt I shall, to satisfy You how well it was United to the Lime, inform You,
that I have by making the Fire at length very Vehement, caused both the
Ingredients to melt in the Retort it self into one Mass and such Masses are apt
to Relent in the Moist Air. If it be here Objected, that these Instances are
taken from factitious Concretes which are more Compounded then those which
Nature produces; I shall reply, that besides that I have Mentioned them as much
to Illustrate what I proposed, as to prove it, it will be Difficult to Evince
that Nature her self does not make Decompound Bodies, I mean mingle together
such mixed Bodies as are already Compounded of Elementary, or rather of more
simple ones. For Vitriol (for Instance) though I have sometimes taken it out of
Mineral Earths, where Nature had without any assistance of Art prepared it to
my Hand, is really, though Chemists are pleased to reckon it among Salts, a
De-compounded Body Consisting (as I shall have occasion to declare anon) of a
Terrestrial Substance, of a Metal, and also of at least one Saline Body, of a
peculiar and not Elementary Nature. And we see also in Animals, that their
blood may be composed of Diverse very Differing Mixed Bodies, since we find it
observed that diverse Sea-Fowle taste rank of the Fish on which they ordinarily
feed; and Hipocrates himself Observes, that a Child may be purged by the Milk
of the Nurse, if she have taken Elaterium; which argues that the purging
Corpuscles of the Medicament Concur to make up the Milk of the Nurse; and
that white Liquor is generally by Physicians supposed to be but blanched and
altered Blood. And I remember I have observed, not far from the Alps, that at
a certain time of the Year the Butter of that Country was very Offensive to
strangers, by reason of the rank taste of a certain Herb, whereon the Cows were
then wont plentifully to feed. But (proceeds Carneades) to give you Instances
of another kind, to show that things may be obtained by the Fire from a Mixed
Body that were not Pre-existent in it, let Me Remind You, that from many
Vegetables there may without any Addition be Obtained Glass, a Body, which I
presume You will not say was Pre-existent in it, but produced by the Fire. To
which I shall add but this one Example more, namely that by a certain
Artificial way of handling Quicksilver, You may without Addition separate from
it at least a 5th. or 4th. part of a clear Liquor, which with an Ordinary
Peripatetick would pass for Water, and which a Vulgar Chemist would not
scruple to call Phlegm, and which, for ought I have yet seen or heard, is not
reducible into Mercury again, and Consequently is more then a Disguise of it.
Now besides that diverse Chemists will not allow Mercury to have any or at least
any Considerable Quantity of either of the Ignoble Ingredients, Earth and
Water; Besides this, I say, the great Ponderousness of Quicksilver makes it
very unlikely that it can have so much Water in it as may be thus obtained from
it, since Mercury weighs 12 or 14 times as much as water of the same Bulk. Nay
for a further Confirmation of this Argument, I will add this Strange Relation,
that two Friends of mine, the one a Physician, and the other a Mathematician,
and both of them Persons of unsuspected Credit, have Solemnly assured me, that
after many Trials they made, to reduce Mercury into Water, in Order to a
Philosophical Work, upon Gold (which yet, by the way, I know proved
Unsuccesfull) they did once by diverse Cohobations reduce a pound of Quicksilver
into almost a pound of Water, and this without the Addition of any other
Substance, but only by pressing the Mercury by a Skillfully Managed Fire in
purposely contrived Vessels. But of these Experiments our Friend (says
Carneades, pointing at the Register of this Dialogue) will perhaps give You a
more Particular Account then it is necessary for me to do: Since what I have
now said may sufficiently evince, that the Fire may sometimes as well alter
Bodies as divide them, and by it we may obtain from a Mixed Body what was not
Pre-existent in it. And how are we sure that in no other Body what we call
Phlegm is barely separated, not Produced by the Action of the Fire: Since so
many other Mixed Bodies are of a much less Constant, and more alterable Nature,
then Mercury, by many Tricks it is wont to put upon Chemists, and by the
Experiments I told You of, about an hour since, Appears to be. But because I
shall ere long have Occasion to resume into Consideration the Power of the Fire
to produce new Concretes, I shall no longer insist on this Argument at present;
only I must mind You, that if You will not dis-believe Helmonts Relations, You
must confess that the Tria Prima are neither ingenerable nor incorruptible
Substances; since by his Alkabest some of them may be produced of Bodies that
were before of another Denomination; and by the same powerful Menstruum all of
them may be reduced into insipid Water.

Here Carneades was about to pass on to his Third Consideration, when
Eleutherius being desirous to hear what he could say to clear his second
General Consideration from being repugnant to what he seemed to think the true
Theory of Mistion, prevented him by telling him, I somewhat wonder, Carneades,
that You, who are in so many Points unsatisfied with the Peripatetick Opinion
touching the Elements and Mixed Bodies, should also seem averse to that Notion
touching the manner of Mistion, wherein the Chemists (though perhaps without
knowing that they do so) agree with most of the Ancient Philosophers that
preceded Aristotle, and that for Reasons so considerable, that diverse Modern
Naturalists and Physicians, in other things unfavourable enough to the
Spagyrists, do in this case side with them against the common Opinion of the
Schools. If you should ask me (continues Eleutherius) what Reasons I mean? I
should partly by the Writings of Sennertus and other learned Men, and partly by
my own Thoughts, be supplied with more, then 'twere at present proper for me to
Insist largely on. And therefore I shall mention only, and that briefly, three
or four. Of these, I shall take the First from the state of the Controversy it
self, and the genuine Notion of Mistion, which though much intricated by the
Schoolmen, I take in short to be this. Aristotle, at least as many of his
Interpreters expound him, and as indeed he Teaches in some places, where he
professedly Dissents from the Ancients, declares Mistion to be such a mutual
Penetration, and perfect Union of the mingled Elements, that there is no
Portion of the mixed Body, how Minute soever, which does not contain All, and
Every of the Four Elements, or in which, if you please, all the Elements are
not. And I remember, that he reprehends the Mistion taught by the Ancients, as
too slight or gross, for this Reason, that Bodies mixed according to their
Hypothesis, though they appear so to humane Eyes, would not appear such to the
acute Eyes of a Lynx, whose perfecter Sight would discern the Elements, if
they were no otherwise mingled, than as his Predecessors would have it, to be
but Blended, not United; whereas the Ancients, though they did not all Agree
about what kind of Bodies were Mixed, yet they did almost unanimously hold, that
in a compounded Body, though the Miscibilia, whether Elements, Principles, or
whatever they pleased to call them, were associated in such small Parts, and
with so much Exactness, that there was no sensible Part of the Mass but seemed
to be of the same Nature with the rest, and with the whole; Yet as to the
Atoms, or other Insensible Parcels of Matter, whereof each of the Miscibilia
consisted, they retained each of them its own Nature, being but by Apposition
or Juxta-Position united with the rest into one Body. So that although by
virtue of this composition the mixed Body did perhaps obtain Diverse new
Qualities, yet still the Ingredients that Compounded it, retaining their own
Nature, were by the Destruction of the Compositum separable from each other,
the minute Parts disengaged from those of a differing Nature, and associated
with those of their own sort returning to be again, Fire, Earth, or Water, as
they were before they chanced to be Ingredients of that Compositum. This may be
explained (Continues Eleutherius,) by a piece of Cloth made of white and black
threads interwoven, wherein though the whole piece appear neither white nor
black, but of a resulting Color, that is gray, yet each of the white and black
threads that compose it, remains what it was before, as would appear if the
threads were pulled asunder, and sorted each Color by it self. This (pursues
Eleutherius) being, as I understand it, the State of the Controversy, and the
Aristotelians after their Master Commonly Defining, that Mistion is Miscibilium
alteratorum Unio, that seems to comport much better with the Opinion of the
Chemists, then with that of their Adversaries, since according to that as the
newly mentioned Example declares, there is but a Juxta-position of separable
Corpuscles, retaining each its own Nature, whereas according to the
Aristotelians, when what they are pleased to call a mixed Body results from the
Concourse of the Elements, the Miscibilia cannot so properly be said to be
Altered, as Destroyed, since there is no Part in the mixed Body, how small
soever, that can be called either Fir, or Air, or Water, or Earth.

Nor indeed can I well understand, how Bodies can be mingled other ways then
as I have declared, or at least how they can be mingled, as our Peripateticks
would have it. For whereas Aristotle tells us, that if a Drop of Wine be put
into ten thousand Measures of Water, the Wine being Overpowered by so Vast a
Quantity of Water will be turned into it, he speaks to my Apprehension, very
improbably; For though One should add to that Quantity of Water as many Drops
of Wine as would a Thousand times exceed it all, yet by his Rule the whole
Liquor should not be a Crama, a Mixture of Wine and Water, wherein the Wine
would be Predominant, but Water only; Since the Wine being added but by a Drop
at a time would still Fall into nothing but Water, and Consequently would be
turned into it. And if this would hold in Metals too, 'twere a rare secret for
Goldsmiths, and Refiners; For by melting a Mass of Gold, or Silver, and by but
casting into it Lead or Antimony, Grain after Grain, they might at pleasure,
within a reasonable Compass of time, turn what Quantity they desire, of the
Ignoble into the Noble Metalls. And indeed since a Pint of wine, and a pint of
water, amount to about a Quart of Liquor, it seems manifest to sense, that
these Bodies do not Totally Penetrate one another, as one would have it; but
that each retains its own Dimensions; and Consequently, that they are by being
Mingled only divided into minute Bodies, that do but touch one another with
their Surfaces, as do the Grains, of Wheat, Rye, Barley, etc. in a heap of
several sorts of Corn: And unless we say, that as when one measure of wheat,
for Instance, is Blended with a hundred measures of Barley, there happens only
a Juxta-position and Superficial Contact betwixt the Grains of wheat, and as
many or thereabouts of the Grains of Barley. So when a Drop of wine is mingled
with a great deal of water, there is but an Apposition of so many Vinous
Corpuscles to a Correspondent Number of Aqueous ones; Unless I say this be
said, I see not how that Absurdity will be avoided, whereunto the Stoical
Notion of mistion (namely by (...), or Confusion) was Liable, according to
which the least Body may be co-extended with the greatest: Since in a mixed Body
wherein before the Elements were Mingled there was, for Instance, but one pound
of water to ten thousand of Earth, yet according to them there must not be the
least part of that Compound, that Consisted not as well of Earth, as water. But
I insist, Perhaps, too long (says Eleutherius) upon the proofs afforded me by
the Nature of Mistion: Wherefore I will but name Two or Three other Arguments;
whereof the first shall be, that according to Aristotle himself, the motion of
a mixed Body follows the Nature of the Predominant Element, as those wherein
the Earth prevails, tend toward the Center of heavy Bodies. And since many
things make it Evident, that in diverse Mixed Bodies the Elementary Qualities are
as well Active, though not altogether so much so as in the Elements themselves,
it seems not reasonable to deny the actual Existence of the Elements in those
Bodies wherein they Operate.

To which I shall add this Convincing Argument, that Experience manifests, and
Aristotle Confesses it, that the Miscibilia may be again separated from a mixed
Body, as is Obvious in the Chemical Resolutions of Plants and Animalls, which
could not be unless they did actually retain their forms in it: For since,
according to Aristotle, and I think according to truth, there is but one common
Mass of all things, which he has been pleased to call Materia Prima; And since
it is not therefore the Matter but the Form that Constitutes and Discriminates
Things, to say that the Elements remain not in a Mixed Body, according to their
Forms, but according to their Matter, is not to say that they remain there at
all; Since although those Portions of Matter were Earth and water, etc. before
they concurred, yet the resulting Body being once Constituted, may as well be
said to be simple as any of the Elements, the Matter being confessedly of the
same Nature in all Bodies, and the Elementary Forms being according to this
Hypothesis perished and abolished.

And lastly, and if we will Consult Chemical Experiments, we shall find the
Advantages of the Chemical Doctrine above the Peripatetick Title little less
then Palpable. For in that Operation that Refiners call Quartation, which they
employ to purify Gold, although three parts of Silver be so exquisitely
mingled by Fusion with a fourth Part of Gold (whence the Operation is
Denominated) that the resulting Mass acquires several new Qualities, by virtue
of the Composition, and that there is scarce any sensible part of it that is
not Composed of both the metalls; Yet if You cast this mixture into Aqua
Fortis, the Silver will be dissolved in the Menstruum, and the Gold like a dark
or black Powder will fall to the Bottom of it, and either Body may be again
reduced into such a Metal as it was before, which shows: that it retained its
Nature, notwithstanding its being mixed per Minima with the other: We likewise
see, that though one part of pure Silver be mingled with eight or ten Parts, or
more, of Lead, yet the Fire will upon the Cuppel easily and perfectly separate
them again. And that which I would have you peculiarly Consider on this
Occasion is, that not only in Chymicall Anatomies there is a Separation made of
the Elementary Ingredients, but that some Mixed Bodies afford a very much
greater Quantity of this or that Element or Principle than of another; as we
see, that Turpentine and Amber yield much more Oil and Sulphur than they do
Water, whereas Wine, which is confessed to be a perfectly mixed Body, yields
but a little Inflamable Spirit, or Sulphur, and not much more Earth; but
affords a vast proportion of Phlegm or water: which could not be, if as the
Peripateticks suppose, every, even of the minutest Particles, were of the same
nature with the whole, and consequently did contain both Earth and Water, and
Air, and Fire; Wherefore as to what Aristotle principally, and almost only
Objects, that unless his Opinion be admitted, there would be no true and
perfect Mistion, but only Aggregates or Heaps of contiguous Corpuscles, which,
though the Eye of Man cannot discern, yet the Eye of a Lynx might perceive not
to be of the same Nature with one another and with their Totum, as the Nature
of Mistion requires, if he do not beg the Question, and make Mistion to consist
in what other Naturalists deny to be requisite to it, yet He at least objects
That as a great Inconvenience which I cannot take for such, till he have
brought as Considerable Arguments as I have proposed to prove the contrary, to
evince that Nature makes other Mistions than such as I have allowed, wherein
the Miscibilia are reduced into minute Parts, and United as far as sense can
discern: which if You will not grant to be sufficient for a true Mistion, he
must have the same Quarrel with Nature her self, as with his Adversaties.

Wherefore (Continues Eleutherius) I cannot but somewhat marvail that Carneades
should oppose the Doctrine of the Chemist in a Particular, wherein they do as
well agree with his old Mistress, Nature, as dissent from his old Adversary,
Aristotle.

I must not (replies Carneades) engage my self at present to examine thoroughly
the Controversies concerning Mistion: And if there were no third thing, but
that I were reduced to embrace absolutely and unreservedly either the Opinion
of Aristotle, or that of the Philosophers that went before him, I should look
upon the latter, which the Chemists have adopted, as the more defensible
Opinion: But because differing in the Opinions about the Elements from both
Parties, I think I can take a middle Course, and Discourse to you of Mistion
after a way that does neither perfectly agree, nor perfectly disagree with
either, as I will not peremptorily define, whether there be not Cases wherein
some Phenomenon of Mistion seem to favor the Opinion that the Chemists Patrons
borrowed of the Ancients, I shall only endeavor to show You that there are
some cases which may keep the Doubt, which makes up my second General
Consideration from being unreasonable.

I shall then freely acknowledge to You (says Carneades) that I am not
over-well satisfied with the Doctrine that is ascribed to Aristotle, concerning
Mistion, especially fince it teaches that the four Elements may again be
separated from the mixed Body; whereas if they continued not in it, it would not
be so much a Separation as a Production. And I think the Ancient Philosophers
that Preceded Aristotle, and Chemists who have since received the same Opinion,
do speak of this matter more intelligibly, if not more probably, then the
Peripateticks: but though they speak Congruously enough, to their believing,
that there are a certain Number of Primogeneal Bodies, by whose Concourse all
those we call Mixts are Generated, and which in the Destruction of mixed Bodies
do barely part company, and recede from one another, just such as they were
when they came together; yet I, who meet with very few Opinions that I can
entirely Acquiesce in, must confess to You that I am inclined to differ not
only from the Aristotelians, but from the old Philosophers and the Chemists,
about the Nature of Mistion: And if You will give me leave, I shall Briefly
propose to you my present Notion of it, provided you will look upon it, not so
much as an Assertion as an Hypothesis; in talking of which I do not now pretend
to propose and debate the whole Doctrine of Mistion, but to show that it is not
Improbable, that sometimes mingled substances may be so strictly united, that
it does not by the usual Operations of the Fire, by which Chemists are wont to
suppose themselves to have made the Analyzes of mixed Bodies, sufficiently
appear, that in such Bodies the Miscibilia that concurred to make them up do
each of them retain its own peculiar Nature: and by the Spagyrists Fires may be
more easily extricated and Recovered, than Altered, either by a Change of
Texture in the Parts of the same Ingredient, or by an Association with some
parts of another Ingredient more strict than was that of the parts of this or
that Miscibile among themselves. At these words Eleu. having pressed him to do
what he proposed, and promised to do what he desired;

I consider then (resumes Carneades) that, not to mention those improper Kinds
of mistion, wherein Homogeneous Bodies are Joined, as when Water is mingled
with water, or two Vessels full of the same kind of Wine with one another, the
mistion I am now to Discourse of seems, Generally speaking, to be but an Union
per Minima of any two or more Bodies of differing Denominations; as when Ashes
and Sand are Colliquated into Glass or Antimony, and Iron into Regulus Martis,
or Wine and Water are mingled, and Sugar is dissolved in the Mixture. Now in
this general notion of Mistion it does not appear clearly comprehended, that
the Miscibilia or Ingredients do in their small Parts so retain their Nature
and remain distinct in the Compound, that they may thence by the Fire be again
taken asunder: For though I deny not that in some Mistions of certain permanent
Bodies this Recovery of the same Ingredients may be made, yet I am not
convinced that it will hold in all or even in most, or that it is necessarily
deducible from Chymicall Experiments, and the true Notion of Mistion. To
explain this a little, I assume, that Bodies may be mingled, and that very
durably, that are not Elementary or resolved into Elements or Principles that
they may be mingled; as is evident in the Regulus of Colliquated Antimony, and
Iron newly mentioned; and in Gold Coin, which lasts so many ages; wherein
generally the Gold is alloy'd by the mixture of a quantity, greater or lesser,
(in our Mints they use about a 12th. part) of either silver, or Copper, or
both. Next, I consider, that there being but one Universal matter of things, as
it is known that the Aristotelians themselves acknowledge, who call it Materia
Prima (about which nevertheless I like not all their Opinions,) the Portions of
this matter seem to differ from One Another, but in certain Qualities or
Accidents, fewer or more; upon whose Account the Corporeal Substance they
belong to receives its Denomination, and is referred to this or that particular
sort of Bodies; so that if it come to lose, or be deprived of those Qualities,
though it ceases not to be a Body, yet it ceases from being that kind of Body
as a Plant, or Animal, or Red, Green, Sweet, Sour, or the like. I consider
that it very often happens that the small parts of Bodies cohere together but
by immediate Contact and Rest; and that however, there are few Bodies whose
minute Parts stick so close together, to what cause soever their Combination be
ascribed, but that it is possible to meet with some other Body, whose small
Parts may get between them, and so dis-joyn them; or may be fitted to cohere
more strongly with some of them, then those some do with the rest; or at least
may be combined so closely with them, as that neither the Fire, nor the other
usual Instruments of Chemical Anatomies will separate them. These things being
premised, I will not peremptorily deny, but that there may be some Clusters of
Particules, wherein the Particles are so minute, and the Coherence so strict,
or both, that when Bodies of Differing Denominations, and consisting of such
durable Clusters, happen to be mingled, though the Compound Body made up of
them may be very Differing from either of the Ingredients, yet each of the
little Masses or Clusters may so retain its own Nature, as to be again
separable, such as it was before. As when Gold and Silver being melted together
in a Due Proportion (for in every Proportion, the Refiners will tell You that
the Experiment will not succeed) Aqua Fortis will dissolve the Silver, and
leave the Gold untoucht; by which means, as you lately noted, both the Metalls
may be recovered from the mixed Mass. But (Continues Carneades) there are other
Clusters wherein the Particles stick not so close together, but that they may
meet with Corpuscles of another Denomination, which are disposed to be more
closely United with some of them, then they were among themselves. And in such
case, two thus combining Corpuscles losing that Shape, or Size, or Motion, or
other Accident, upon whose Account they were endowed with such a Determinate
Quality or Nature, each of them really ceases to be a Corpuscle of the same
Denomination it was before; and from the Coalition of these there may emerge a
new Body, as really one, as either of the Corpuscles was before they were
mingled, or, if you please, Confounded: Since this Concretion is really endowed
with its own Distinct qualities, and can no more by the Fire, or any other
known way of Analysis, be divided again into the Corpuscles that at first
concurred to make it, than either of them could by the same means be subdivided
into other Particles. But (says Eleutherius) to make this more intelligible by
particular examples; If you dissolve Copper in Aqua Fortis, or Spirit of Nitre,
(for I remember not which I used, nor do I think it much Material) You may by
Crystalizing the Solution Obtain a goodly Vitriol; which though by Virtue of
the Composition it have manifestly diverse Qualities, not to be met with in
either of the Ingredients, yet it seems that the Nitrous Spirits, or at least
many of them, may in this Compounded Mass retain their former Nature; for
having for trial sake Distilled this Vitrioll Spirit, there came over store of
Red Fumes, which by that Color, by their peculiar stink, and by their
Sourness, manifested themselves to be, Nitrous Spirits; and that the remaining
Calx continued Copper, I suppose you will easily believe. But if you dissolve
Minium, which is but Lead Powdered by the Fire, in good Spirit of Vinager, and
Crystalize the Solution, you shall not only have a Saccharine Salt exceedingly
differing from both its Ingredients; but the Union of some Parts of the
Menstruum with some of those of the Metal is so strict, that the Spirit of
Vinager seems to be, as such, destroyed, since the Saline Corpuscles have quite
lost that acidity, upon whose Account the Liquor was called Spirit of Vinager;
nor can any such Acid Parts as were put to the Minium be Separated by any known
way from the Saccharum Saturni resulting from them both; for not only there is
no Sowrness at all, but an admirable Sweetness to be tasted in the Concretion;
and not only I found not that Spirit of Wine, which otherwise will immediately
hiss when mingled with strong Spirit of Vinager, would hiss being poured upon
Saccharum Saturni, wherein yet the Acid Salt of Vinager, did it Survive, may
seem to be concentrated; but upon the Distillation of Saccharum Saturni by its
Self I found indeed a Liquor very Penetrant, but not at all Acid, and differing
as well in smell and other Qualities, as in taste, from the Spirit of Vinager;
which likewise seemed to have left some of its Parts very firmly united to the
Caput Mortuum, which though of a Leaden Nature was in smell, Color, etc.
differing from Minium; which brings into my mind, that though two Powders, the
one Blew, and the other Yellow, may appear a Green mixture, without either of
them losing its own Color, as a good Microscope has sometimes informed me; yet
having mingled Minium and Sal Armoniack in a requisite Proportion, and exposed
them in a Glass Vessel to the Fire, the whole Mass became White, and the Red
Corpuscles were destroyed; for though the Calcined Lead was separable from the
Salt, yet you will easily believe it did not part from it in the Form of a Red
Powder, such as was the Minium, when it was put to the Sal Armoniack, I leave
it also to be considered, whether in Blood, and diverse other Bodies, it be
probable, that each of the Corpuscles that concur to make a Compound Body
does, though some of them in some Cases may, retain its own Nature in it, so
that Chymsts may Extricate each sort of them from all the others, wherewith it
concurred to make a Body of one Denomination.

I know there may be a Distinction betwixt Matter Immanent, when the material
Parts remain and retain their own Nature in the things materiated, as some of
the Schoolmen speak, (in which sense Wood, Stones and Lime are the matter of a
House,) and Transient, which in the materiated thing is so altered, as to
receive a new Form, without being capable of re-admitting again the Old. In
which sense the Friends of this Distinction say, that Chyle is the matter of
Blood, and Blood that of a Humane Body, of all whose Parts it is presumed to be
the Aliment. I know also that it may be said, that of material Principles, some
are common to all mixed Bodies, as Aristotle's four Elements, or the Chemists
Tria Prima; others Peculiar, which belong to this or that sort of Bodies; as
Butter and a kind of whey may be said to be the Proper Principles of Cream: and
I deny not, but that these Dissinctions may in some Cases be of Use; but partly
by what I have said already, and partly by what I am to say, You may easily
enough guess in what sense I admit them, and discern that in such a sense they
will either illustrate some of my Opinions, or at least will not overthrow any
of them.

To prosecute then what I was saying before, I will add to this purpose, That
since the Major part of Chemists Credit, what those they call Philosophers
affirm of their Stone, I may represent to them, that though when Common Gold
and Lead are mingled Together, the Lead may be severed almost un-alter'd from
the Gold; yet if instead of Gold a Tantillum of the Red Elixir be mingled with
the Saturn, their Union will be so indissoluble in the perfect Gold that will
be produced by it, that there is no known, nor perhaps no possible way of
separating the diffused Elixir from the fixed Lead, but they both Constitute a
most permanent Body, wherein the Saturn seems to have quite lost its
Properties that made it be called Lead, and to have been rather transmuted by
the Elixir, then barely associated to it. So that it seems not always
necessary, that the Bodies that are put together per minima, should each retain
its own Nature; So as when the Mass it Self is dissipated by the Fire, to be
more disposed to re-appear in its Pristine Form, then in any new one, which by
a stricter association of its Parts with those of some of the other Ingredients
of the Compositum, then with one another, it may have acquired.

And if it be objected, that unless the Hypothesis I oppose be admitted, in
such Cases as I have proposed there would not be an Union but a Destruction of
mingled Bodies, which seems all one as to say, that of such Bodies there is no
mistion at all; I answer, that though the Substances that are mingled remain,
only their Accidents are Destroyed, and though we may with tolerable Congruity
call them Miscibilia, because they are Distinct Bodies before they are put
together, however afterward they are so Confounded that I should rather call
them Concretions, or Resulting Bodies, than mixed ones; and though, perhaps,
some other and better Account may be proposed, upon which the name of mistion
may remain; yet if what I have said be thought Reason, I shall nor wrangle
about Words, though I think it fitter to alter a Term of Art, then reject a
new Truth, because it suits not with it. If it be also Objected that this
Notion of mine, concerning mixtion, though it may be allowed, when Bodies
already Compounded are put to be mingled, yet it is not applicable to those
mixtions that are immediately made of the Elements, or Principles themselves; I
Answer in the first place, that I here Consider the Nature of mixtion somewhat
more Generally, then the Chemists, who yet cannot deny that there are
oftentimes Mixtures, and those very durable ones, made of Bodies that are not
Elementary. And in the next place, that though it may be probably pretended
that in those Mixtures that are made immediately of the Bodies that are called
Principles or Elements, the mingled Ingredients may better retain their own
Nature in the Compounded Mass, and be more easily separated from thence; yet,
besides that it may be doubted, whether there be any such Primary Bodies, I see
not why the reason I alleged, of the destructibility of the Ingredients of
Bodies in General, may not sometimes be Applicable to Salt Sulphur or Mercury;
'till it be shown upon what account we are to believe them Privileged. And
however, (if you please but to recall to mind, to what purpose I told you at
First, I meant to speak of Mistion at this Time) you will perhaps allow that
what I have hither to Discoursed about it may not only give some Light to the
Nature of it in general (especially when I shall have an Opportunity to Declare
to you my thoughts on that subject more fully) but may on some Occasions also
be Serviceable to me in the Ensuing Part of this Discourse.

But, to look back Now to that part of our Discourse, whence this Excursion
concerning Mistion has so long diverted us, though we there Deduced, from the
differing Substances obtained from a Plant nourished only with Water, and from
some other things, that it was not necessary that nature should always
compound a Body at first of all such differing bodies as the fire could
afterward make it afford; yet this is not all that may be collected from those
Experiments. For from them there seems also Deducible something that Subverts
an other Foundation of the Chemical Doctrine. For since that (as we have seen)
out of fair Water alone, not only Spirit, but Oil, and Salt, and Earth may be
Produced; It will follow that Salt and Sulphur are not Primogeneal Bodies, and
principles, since they are every Day made out of plain Water by the Texture
which the Seed or Seminal principle of plants puts it into. And this would not
perhaps seem so strange, if through pride, or negligence, We were not Wont to
Overlook the Obvious and Familiar Workings of Nature; For if We consider what
slight Qualities they are that serve to denominate one of the Tria Prima, We
shall find that Nature does frequently enough work as great Alterations in
diverse parcells of matter: For to be readily dissoluble in water, is enough to
make the body that is so, pass for a Salt. And yet I see not why from a new
shufling and Disposition of the Component Particles of a body, it should be
much harder for Nature to compose a body dissoluble in Water, of a portion of
Water that was not so before, then of the Liquid substance of an Egg, which
will easily mix with Water, to produce by the bare warmth of a hatching Hen,
Membrans, Feathrs, Tendons, and other parts, that are not dissoluble in Water
as that Liquid Substance was: Nor is the Hardness and Brittleness of Salt more
difficult for Nature to introduce into such a yielding body as Water, then it
is for her to make the Bones of a Chick out of the tender Substance of the
Liquors of an Egg. But instead of prosecuting this consideration, as I easily
might, I will proceed, as soon as I have taken notice of an objection that lies
in my Way. For I easily foresee it will be alleged, that the above mentioned
Examples are all taken from Plants, and Animals, in whom the Matter is
Fashioned by the Plastic power of the seed, or something analogous thereunto.
Whereas the Fire does not act like any of the Seminal Principles, but destroys
them all, when they come within its Reach. But to this I shall need at present
to make but this easy Answer, That whether it be a Seminal Principle, or any
other which fashions that Matter after those various manners I have mentioned
to You, yet it is Evident, that either by the Plastic principle Alone, or that
and Heat Together, or by some Other cause capable to context the matter, it is
yet possible that the matter may be Anew contrived into such Bodies. And it is
only for the Possibility of this that I am now contending.

THE SKEPTICAL CHEMIST. The Third Part.
WHat I have hitherto Discoursed, Eleutherius, (says his Friend to Him) has, I
presume, shown You, that a Considering Man may very well question the Truth of
those very Suppositions which Chemists as well as Peripatericks, without
proving, take for granted; and upon which Depends the Validity of the
Inferences they draw from their Experiments. Wherefore having dispach't that,
which though a Chemist Perhaps will not, yet I do, look upon as the most
Important, as well as Difficult, part of my Task, it will now be Seasonable for
me to proceed to the Consideration of the Experiments themselves, wherein they
are wont so much to Triumph and Glory. And these will the rather deserve a
serious Examination, because those that Allege them are wont to do it with so
much Confidence and Ostentation, that they have hitherto imposed upon almost
all Persons, without excepting Philosophers and Physicians themselves; who have
read their Books, or heard them talk. For some learned Men have been content
rather to believe what they so boldly Affirm, then be at the trouble and
charge, to try whether or no it be True. Others again, who have Curiosity
enough to Examine the Truth of what is Averred, want Skill and Opportunity to
do what they Desire. And the Generality even of Learned Men, seeing the
Chemists (not contenting themselves with the Schools to amuse the World with
empty words) Actually Performed diverse strange things, and, among those Resolve
Compound Bodies into several Substances not known by former Philosophers to be
contained in them: Men I say, seeing these Things, and Hearing with what
Confidence Chemists Averr the Substances Obtained from Compound Bodies by the
Fire to be the True Elements, or, (as they speak) Hypostaticall Principles of
them, are forward to think it but Just as well as Modest, that according to the
Logicians Rule, the Skillful Artists should be Credited in their own Art;
Especially when those things whose Nature they so Confidently take upon them to
teach others are not only Productions of their own Skill, but such as others
Know not else what to make of.

But though (Continues Carneades) the Chemists have been able upon some or
other of the mentioned Acounts, not only to Delight but Amaze, and almost to
bewitch even Learned Men; yet such as You and I, who are not unpracticed in the
Trade, must not suffer our Selves to be imposed upon by hard Names, or bold
Assertions; nor to be dazzled by that Light which should but assist us to
discern things the more clearly. It is one thing to be able to help Nature to
produce things, and another thing to Understand well the Nature of the things
produced. As we see, that many Persons that can beget Children, are for all
that as Ignorant of the Number and Nature of the parts, especially the internal
ones, that Constitute a Child's? Body, as they that never were Parents. Nor do I
Doubt, but you will excuse me, if as I thank the Chemists for the things their
Analysis shows me, so I take the Liberty to consider how many, and what they
are, without being astonished at them; as if, whosoever has Skill enough to
show men some new thing of his own making, had the Right to make them believe
whatsoever he pleases to tell them concerning it.

Wherefore I will now proceed to my Third General Consideration, which is, That
it does not appear, that Three is precisely and Universally the Number of the
Distinct Substances or Elements, whereinto mixed Bodies are resoluble by the
Fire; I mean that it is not proved by Chemists, that all the Compound Bodies,
which are granted to be perfectly mixed, are upon their Chemical Analysis
divisible each of them into just Three Distinct Substances, neither more nor
less, which are wont to be looked upon as Elementary, or may as well be reputed
so as those that are so reputed. Which last Clause I subjoyne, to prevent your
Objecting, that some of the Substances I may have occasion to mention by and
by, are not perfectly Homogeneous, nor Consequently worthy of the name of
Principles. For that which I am now to consider, is, into how many Differing
Substances, that may plausibly pass for the Elementary Ingredients of a mixed
Body, it may be Analyz'd by the Fire; but whether each of these be
un-compounded, I reserve to examine, when I shall come to the next General
Consideration; where I hope to evince, that the Substances which the Chemists
not only allow, but assert to be the Component Principles of the Body resolved
into them, are not wont to be uncompounded.

Now there are two Kind of Arguments (pursues Carneades) which may be brought
to make my Third Proposition seem probable; one sort of them being of a more
Speculative Nature, and the other drawn from Experience. To begin then with the
first of these.

But as Carneades was going to do as he had said, Eleutherius interrupted him,
by saying with a somewhat smiling countenance;

If you have no mind I should think, that the Proverb, That Good Wits have bad
Memories, is Rational and Applicable to You, You must not Forget now you are
upon the Speculative Considerations, that may relate to the Number of the
Elements; that your Self did not long since Deliver and Concede some
Propositions in Favor of the Chemical Doctrine, which I may without
disparagement to you think it uneasy, even for Carneades to answer.

I have not, replies he, Forgot the Concessions you mean; but I hope too, that
you have not forgot neither with what Cautions they were made, when I had not
yet assumed the Person I am now sustaining. But however, I shall to content
You, so discourse of my Third general consideration, as to let You see, That I
am not Unmindful of the things you would have me remember.

To talk then again according to such principles as I then made use of, I shall
represent, that if it be granted rational to suppose, as I then did, that the
Elements consisted at first of certain small and primary Coalitions of the
minute Particles of matter into Corpuscles very numerous, and very like each
other, It will not be absurd to conceive, that such primary Clusters may be of
far more sorts then three or five; and consequently, that we need not suppose,
that in each of the compound Bodies we are treating of there should be found
just three sorts of such primitive Coalitions, as we are speaking of.

And if according to this Notion we allow a considerable number of differing
Elements, I may add, that it seems very possible, that to the constitution of
one sort of mixed Bodies two kinds of Elementary ones may suffice (as I lately
Exemplified to you, in that most durable Concrete, Glass,) another sort of
Mixts may be composed of three Elements, another of four, another of five, and
another perhaps of many more. So that according to this Notion, there can be no
determinate number assigned, as that of the Elements, of all sorts of compound
Bodies whatsoever, it being very probable that some Concretes consist of fewer,
some of more Elements. Nay, it does not seem Impossible, according to these
Principles, but that there may be two sorts of Mixts, whereof the one may not
have any of all the same Elements as the other consists of; as we oftentimes
see two words, whereof the one has not any one of the Letters to be met with in
the other; or as we often meet with diverse Electuaries, in which no Ingredient
(except Sugar) is common to any two of them. I will not here debate whether
there may not be a multitude of these Corpuscles, which by reason of their
being primary and simple, might be called Elementary, if several sorts of them
should convene to compose any Body, which are as yet free, and neither as yet
contex'd and entangl'd with primary Corpuscles of other kinds, but remains
liable to be subdued and fashioned by Seminal Principles, or the like powerful
and Transmuting Agent, by whom they may be so connected among themselves, or
with the parts of one of the bodies, as to make the compound Bodies, whose
Ingredients they are, resoluble into more, or other Elements then those that
Chemists have hitherto taken notice of.

To all which I may add, that since it appears, by what I observed to you of
the permanency of Gold and Silver, that even Corpuscles that are not of an
Elementary but compounded Nature, may be of so durable a Texture, as to remain
indissoluble in the ordinary Analysis that Chemists make of Bodies by the Fire;
It Is not impossible but that, though there were but three Elements, yet there
may be a greater number of Bodies, which the wonted ways of Anatomy will not
discover to be no Elementary Bodies.

But, says Carneades, having thus far, in compliance to you, talked
conjecturally of the number of the Elements, it is now time to consider, not of
how many Elements it is possible that Nature may compound mixed Bodies, but (at
least as far as the ordinary Experiments of Chemists will inform us) of how
many she does make them up.

I say then, that it does not by these sufficiently appear to me, that there is
any one determinate number of Elements to be uniformly met with in all the
several sorts of Bodies allowed to be perfectly mixed.

And for the more distinct proof of this Proposition, I shall in the first
place Reprelent, That there are diverse Bodies, which I could never see by fire
divided into so many as three Elementary substances. I would fain (as I said
lately to Philoponus) see that fixed and noble Metal we call Gold separated into
Sait, Sulphur and Mercury: and if any man will submit to a comperent forfeiture
in case of sailing, I shall willingly in case of prosperous success pay both
for the Materials and the charges of such an Experiment. It Is not, that after
what I have tried my self I dare peremptorily deny, that there may out of Gold
be extracted a certain substance, which I cannot hinder Chemists from calling
its Tincture or Sulphur; and which leaves the remaining Body deprived of its
wonted color. Nor an I sure, that there cannot be drawn out of the same Metal
a real quick and running Mercury. But for the Salt of Gold, I never could
either see it, or be satisfied that there was ever such a thing separated, in
rerum natura, by the relation of any credible eye witness. And for the several
Processes that Promise that effect, the materials that must be wrought upon are
somewhat too precious and costly to be wasted upon so groundless adventures,
of which not only the success is doubtful, but the very possibility is not yet
demonstrated. Yet that which most deterres me from such trials, is not their
chargeablenesse, but their unsatisfactorinesse, though they should succeed. For
the Extraction of this golden Salt being in Chemists Processes prescribed to be
effected by corrosive Menstruums, or the Intervention of other Saline Bodies,
it will remain doubtful to a wary person, whether the Emergent Salt be that of
the Gold it self; or of the Saline Bodies or Spirits employed to prepare it;
For that such disguises of Metals do often impose upon Artists, I am sure
Eleutherius is not so much a stranger to Chemistry as to ignore. I would
likewise willingly see the three principles separated from the pure sort of
Virgin-Sand, from Qsteocolla, from refined Silver, from Quicksilver, freed from
its adventitious Sulphur, from Venetian Talk, which by long detention in an
extreme Reverberium, I could but divide into smaller Particles, (not the
constituent principles,) Nay, which, when I caused it to be kept, I know not
how long, in a Glasse-house fire, came out in the Figure it is Lumps had when
put in, though altered to an almost Amethystine color; and from diverse other
Bodies, which it were now unnecessary to enumerate. For though I dare not
absolutely affirm it to be impossible to Analyze these Bodies into their Tria
Prima; yet because, neither my own Experiments, nor any competent Testimony
has hitherto either taught me how such an Analysis may be made, or satisfied
me, that it has been so, I must take the Liberty to refrain from believing it,
till the Chemists prove it, or give us intelligible and practicable Processes
to perform what they pretend. For whilst they affect that Aenigmatical
obscurity with which they are wont to puzzle the Readers of their divulged
Processes concerning the Analyticall Preparation of Gold or Mercury, they leave
wary persons much unsatisfyed whether or no the differing Substances, they
promise to produce, be truly the Hypostatical Principles, or only some
intermixtures of the divided Bodies with those employed to work upon them, as
is Evident in the seeming Crystalls of Silver, and those of Mercury; which
though by some inconsiderately supposed to be the Salts of those Metalls, are
plainly but mixtures of the Metalline Bodies, with the Saline parts of Aqua
fortis or other corrosive Liquors; as is evident by their being reducible into
Silver or Quicksilver, as they were before.

I cannot but Confess (says Eleutherius) that though Chemists may upon
probable grounds affirm themselves Able to obtain their Tria Prima, from
Animals and Vegetables, yet I have often wondered that they should so
confidently pretend also to resolve all Metalline and other Mineral bodies into
Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury. For it is a saying almost Proverbial, among those
Chemists themselves that are accounted Philosophers; and our famous Countryman
Roger Bacon has particularly adopted it; that Facilius est aurum facere quam
destruere. And I fear, with You, that Gold is not the only Mineral from which
Chemists are wont fruitlessly to attempt the separating of their three
Principles. I know indeed (continues Eleutherius) that the Learned Sennertus,
even in that book where he takes not upon him to play the Advocate for the
Chemists, but the Umpier betwixt them and the Peripateticks, expresses himself
roundly, thus; Salem omnibus inesse (mixtis scilicet) and ex iis fieri posse
omnibus in resolutionibus Chymicis versatis notissimum est. Sennert. lib. de
cons. and dissens. page 147.
And in the next Page, Quod de sale dixi, says he, Idem de Sulphur dici
potest: but by his favor I must see very good proofs, before I believe such
general Assertions, how boldly soever made; and he that would convince me of
their truth, must first teach me some true and practicable way of separating
Salt and Sulphur from Gold, Silver, and those many different sort of Stones,
that a violent Fire does not bring to Lime, but to Fusion; and not only I, for
my own part, never saw any of those newly named Bodies so resolved; but
Helmont, who was much better versed in the Chemical Anatomizing of Bodies then
either Sennertus or I, has somewhere this resolute passage; Scio (says he) ex
arena, Helmon. page 409.
silicibus and saxis, non Calcariis, nunquam Sulphur aut Mercurium trahi posse;
Nay Quercetanus himself, though the grand stickler for the Tria Prima, has this
Confession of the Irresolubleness of Diamonds; Quercet. apud Billich in
Thessalo redivivo. page 99.
Adamas (says he) omnium factus Lapidum solidissimus ac durissimus ex
arctissima videlicet triunt principiorum unione ac Cohaerentia, quae nulla art
separationis in solutionem principiorum suorum spiritualium disjungi potest.
And indeed, pursues Eleutherius, I was not only glad, but somewhat surprised to
find you inclined to Admit that there may be a Sulphur and a running Mercury
drawn from Gold; for unless you do (as your expression seemed to intimate)
take the word Sulphur in a very loose sense, I must doubt whether our Chemists
can separate a Sulphur from Gold: For when I saw you make the experiment that I
suppose invited you to speak as you did, I did not judge the golden Tincture to
be the true principle of Sulphur extracted from the body, but an aggregate of
some such highly colored parts of the Gold, as a Chemist would have called a
Sulphur incombustible, which in plain English seems to be little better man to
call it a Sulphur and no Sulphur. And as for Metalline Mercuries, I had not
wondered at it, though you had expressed much more severity in speaking of them:
For I remember that having once met an old and famous Artist, who had long been
(and still is) Chemist to a great Monarch, the repute he had of a very honest
man invited me to desire him to tell me ingenuously whether or no, among his
many labors, he had ever really extracted a true and running Mercury out of
Metalls; to which question he freely replied, that he had never separated a
true Mercury from any Metal; nor had ever seen it really done by any man else.
And though Gold is, of all Metalls, That, whose Mercury Chemists have most
endeavored to extract, and which they do the most brag they have extracted;
yet the Experienced Angelus Sala, in his Spagyrical account of the seven
Terrestrial Planets (that is the seven metalls) affords us this memorable
Testimony, to our present purpose; Quanquam (faies he) etc. experientia tamen
(quam stultorum Magistrum vocamus) certe Comprobavit, Mercurium auri adeo
fixum, maturum, and arcte cum reliquis ejusdem corporis substantiis conjungi,
ut nullo modo retrogredi possit. To which he sub-joynes, that he himself had
seen much Labor spent upon that Design, but could never see any such Mercury
produced thereby. And I easily believe what he annexes; that he had often seen
Detected many tricks and Impostures of Cheating Alchymists. For, the most part
of those that are fond of such Charlatans, being unskilful or Credulous, or
both, it is very easy for such as have some Skill, much craft, more boldness,
and no Conscience, to impose upon them; and therefore, though many professed
Alchymists, and diverse Persons of Quality have told me that they have made or
seen the Mercury of Gold, or of this or that other Metal; yet I have been still
apt to fear that either these persons have had a Design to deceive others; or
have not had Skill and circumspection enough to keep themselves from being
deceived.

You recall to my mind (says Carneades) a certain Experiment I once devised,
innocently to deceive some persons, and let them and others see how little is
to be built upon the affirmation of those that are either unskillfull or
unwary, when they tell us they have seen Alchymists make the Mercury of this or
that Metal; and to make this the more evident, I made my Experiment much more
Slight, Short and Simple, than the Chemists usual processes to Extract
Metalline Mercuries; which Operations being commonly more Elaborate and
Intricate, and requiring a much more longer time, give the Alchymists a greater
opportunity to Cozen, and Consequently are more Obnoxious to the Spectators
suspicion. And that wherein I endeavored to make my Experiment look the more
like a True Analysis, was, that I not only pretended as well as others to
extract a Mercury from the Metal I wrought upon, but likewise to separate a
large proportion of manifest and inflamable Sulphur. I take then, of the
filings of Copper, about a Drachme or two, of common sublimate, powdered, the
like Weight, and Sal Armoniack near about as much as of Sublimate; these three
being well mingled together I put into a small Vial with a long neck, or, which
I find better, into a Glass Urinall, which (having first stopped it with
Cotton) to avoid the Noxious Fumes, I approach by degrees to a competent Fire
of well kindled coals, or (which looks better, but more endangers the Glass) to
the Flame of a candle; and after a while the bottom of the Glass being held
Just upon the Kindled Coals, or in the flame, You may in about a quarter of an
Hour, or perchance in half that time, perceive in the Bottom of the Glass some
running Mercury; and if then You take away the Glass and break it, You shall
find a Parcel of Quicksilver, Perhaps altogether, and perhaps part of it in the
pores of the Solid Mass; You shall find too, that the remaining Lump being held
to the Flame of the Candle will readily burn with a greenish Flame, and after a
little while (perchance presently) will in the Air Acquire a Greenish Blew,
which being the Color that is ascribed to Copper, when its Body is unlocked,
It Is easy to persuade Men that this is the True Sulphur of Venus, especially
since not only the Salts may be Supposed partly to be Flown away, and partly to
be Sublimed to the upper part of the Glass, whose inside (will Commonly appear
Whitened by them) but the Metal seems to be quite Destroyed, the Copper no
longer appearing in a Metalline Form, but almost in that of a Resinous Lump;
whereas indeed the Case is only this, That the Saline parts of the Sublimate,
together with the Sal Armoniack, being excited and actuated by the Vehement
heat, fall upon the Copper, (which is a Metal they can more easily corrode,
than silver) whereby the small parts of the Mercury being freed from the Salts
that kept them asunder, and being by the heat tumbled up and down after many
Occursions, they Convene into a Conspicuous Mass of Liquor; and as for the
Salts, some of the more Volatile of them Subliming to the upper part of the
Glass, the others Corrode the Copper, and uniting themselves with it do
strangely alter and Disguise its Metallic Form, and compose with it a new kind
of Concrete inflamable like Sulphur; concerning which I shall not now say any
thing, since I can Referr You to the Diligent Observations which I remember Mr.
Boil has made concerning this Odd kind of Verdigrease. But Continues
Carneades smiling, you know I was not cut out for a Mountebank, and therefore I
will hasten to resume the person of a Sceptick, and take up my discourse where
You diverted me from prosecuting it.

In the next place, then, I consider, that, as there are some Bodies which
yield not so many as the three Principles; so there are many others, that in
their Resolution Exhibit more principles than three; and that therefore the
Ternary Number is not that of the Universal and Adequate Principles of Bodies.
If you allow of the Discourse I ately made You, touching the primary
Associations of the small Particles of matter, You will scarce think it
improbable, that of such Elementary Corpuscles there may be more sorts then
either three, or four, or five. And if you will grant, what will scarce be
denied, that Corpuscles of a compounded Nature may in all the wonted Examples
of Chemists pass for Elementary, I see not, why you should think it impossible,
that as Aqua Fortis, or Aqua Regis will make a Separation of colliquated Silver
and Gold, though the Fire cannot; so there may be some Agent found out so
subtle and so powerful, at least in respect of those particular compounded
Corpuscles, as to be able to resolve them into those more simple ones, whereof
they consist, and consequently increase the number of the Distinct Substances,
whereinto the mixed Body has been hitherto thought resoluble. And if that be
true, which I recited to you a while ago out of Helmont concerning the
Operations of the Alkahest, which divides Bodies into other Distinct
Substances, both as to number and Nature, then the Fire does; it will not a
little countenance my Conjecture. But confining our selves to such ways of
Analyzing mixed Bodies, as are already not unknown to Chemists, it may without
Absurdity be Questioned, whether besides those grosser Elements of Bodies,
which they call Salt Sulphur and Mercury, there may not be Ingredients of a
more Subtle Nature, which being extremely little, and not being in themselves
Visible, may escape unheeded at the Junctures of the Destillatory Vessels,
though never so carefully Luted. For let me observe to you one thing, which
though not taken notice of by Chemists, may be a notion of good Use in diverse
Cases to a Naturalist, that we may well suspect, that there may be several
Sorts of Bodies, which are not Immediate Objects of any one of our senses;
since we See, that not only those little Corpuscles that issue out of the
Loadstone, and perform the Wonders for which it is justly admired; But the
Effluviums of Amber, Jet, and other Electricall Concretes, though by their
effects upon the particular Bodies disposed to receive their Action, they seem
to fall under the Cognizance of our Sight, yet do they not as Electrical
immediately Affect any of our senses, as do the bodies, whether minute or
greater, that we See, Feel, Taste, etc. But, continues Carneades, because you
may expect I should, as the Chemists do, consider only the sensible Ingredients
of Mixed Bodies, let us now fee, what Experience will, even as to these, suggest
to us.

It seems then questionable enough, whether from Grapes variously ordered there
may not be drawn more distinct Substances by the help of the Fire, then from
most other mixed Bodies. For the Grapes themselves being dried into Raysins and
distilled, will (besides Alcali, Phlegm, and Earth) yield a considerable
quantity of an Empyreumatical Oil, and a Spirit of a very different nature
from that of Wine. Also the unfermented Juice of Grapes affords other distilled
Liquors then Wine does. The Juice of Grapes after fermentation will yield a
Spiritus Ardens; which if competently rectifyed will all burn away without
leaving any thing remaining. The same fermented Juice degenerating into
Vinager, yields an acid and corroding Spirit. The same Juice turned up, arms
it self with Tartar; out of which may be separated, as out of other Bodies,
Phlegm, Spirit, Oil, Salt and Earth: not to mention what Substances may be
drawn from the Vine it self, probably differing from those which are separated
from Tartar, which is a body by it self, that has few resemblers in the World.
And I will further consider that what force soever you will allow this
instance, to evince that there are some Bodies that yield more Elements then
others, it can scarce be denied but that the Major part of bodies that are
divisible into Elements, yield more then three. For, besides those which the
Chemists are pleased to name Hypostatical, most bodies contain two others,
Phlegm and Earth, which concurring as well as the rest to the constitution of
Mixts, and being as generally, if not more, found in their Analysis, I see no
sufficient cause why they should be excluded from the number of Elements. Nor
will it suffice to object, as the Paracelsians are wont to do, that the Tria
prima are the most useful Elements, and the Earth and Water but worthless and
unactive; for Elements being called so in relation to the constituting of mixed
Bodies, it should be upon the account of its Ingrediency, not of its use, that
any thing should be affirmed or denied to be an Element: and as for the
pretended uselessness of Earth and Water, it would be considered that
usefulness, or the want of it, denotes only a Respect or Relation to us; and
therefore the presence, or absence of it, alters not the Intrinsic nature of
the thing. The hurtful Teeth of Vipers are for ought I know useless to us, and
yet are not to be denied to be parts of their Bodies; and it were hard to show
of what greater Use to Us, then Phlegm and Earth, are those Undiscerned Stars,
which our New Telescopes discover to Us, in many Blanched places of the Sky;
and yet we cannot but acknowledge them Constituent and Considerably great parts
of the Universe. Besides that whether or no the Phlegm and Earth be
immediately Useful, but necessary to constitute the Body whence they are
separated; and consequently, if the mixed Body be not Useless to us, those
constituent parts, without which it could not have been That mixed Body, may be
said not to be Unuseful to Us: and though the Earth and Water be not so
conspicuously Operative (after separation) as the other three more active
Principles, yet in this case it will not be amiss to remember the lucky Fable
of Menemius Aggrippa, of the dangerous Sedition of the Hands and Legs, and
other more busy parts of the Body, against the seemingly unactive Stomach. And
to this case also we may not unfitly apply that Reasoning of an Apostle, to
another purpose; If the Ear shall say, because I am not the Eye, I am not of
the Body; Is it therefore not of the Body? If the whole Body were Eye, where
were the Hearing? If the whole were for hearing, where the smelling? In a word,
since Earth and water appear, as clearly and as generally as the other
Principles upon the resolution of Bodies, to be the Ingredients whereof they
are made up; and fince they are useful, if not immediately to us, or rather to
Physicians, to the Bodies they constitute, and so though in somewhat a remoter
way, are serviceable to us; to exclude them out of the number of Elements, is
not to imitate Nature.

But, pursues Carneades, though I think it Evident, that Earth and Phlegm are
to be reckoned among the Elements of most Animal and Vegetable Bodies, yet it is
not upon that Account alone, that I think diverse Bodies resoluble into more
Substances then three. For there are two Experiments, that I have sometimes
made to show, that at least some Mixts are divisible into more Distinct
Substances then five. The one of these Experiments, though 'twill be more
seasonable for me to mention it fully anon, yet in the mean time, I shall tell
you thus much of it, That out of two Distilled Liquors, which pass for Elements
of the Bodies whence they are drawn, I can without Addition make a true Yellow
and Inflamable Sulphur, notwithstanding that the two Liquors remain afterward
Distinct. Of the other Experiment, which perhaps will not be altogether
unworthy your Notice, I must now give you this particular Account. I had long
observed, that by the Destillation of diverse Woods, both in Ordinary, and some
unusual sorts of Vessels, the Copious Spirit that came over, had besides a
strong taste, to be mot with in the Empyreumaticall Spirits of many other
Bodies, an Acidity almost like that of Vinager: Wherefore I suspected, that
though the sowrish Liquor Distilled, for Instance, from Box-Wood, be looked upon
by Chemists as barely the Spirit of it, and therefore as one single Element or
Principle; yet it does really consist of two Differing Substances, and may be
divisible into them; and consequently, that such Woods and other Mixts as
abound with such a Vinager, may be said to consist of one Element or Principle,
more then the Chemists as yet are Aware of; Wherefore bethinking my self, how
the separation of these two Spirits might be made, I Quickly found, that there
were several ways of Compassing it. But that of them which I shall at present
mention, was this, Having Destill'd a Quantity of Box-Wood per se, and slowly
rectified the sowrish Spirit, the better to free it both from Oil and Phlegm,
I cast into this Rectified Liquor a convenient Quantity of Powdered Coral,
expecting that the Acid part of the Liquor would Corrode the Coral, and being
associated with it would be so retained by it, that the other part of the
Liquor, which was not of an acid Nature, nor fit to fasten upon the Corals,
would be permitted to ascend alone. Nor was I deceived in my Expectation; For
having gently abstracted the Liquor from the Coralls; there came over a Spirit
of a Strong smell, and of a taste very piercing, but without any sourness; and
which was in diverse qualities manifestly different, not only from a Spirit of
Vinager, but from some Spirit of the same Wood, that I purposely kept by me
without depriving it of its acid Ingredient. And to satisfy you, that these two
Substances were of a very differing Nature, I might inform you of several
Trials that I made, but must not name some of them, because I cannot do so
without making some unseasonable discoveries. Yet this I shall tell you at
present, that the sour Spirit of Box, not only would, as I just now related,
dissolve Corals, which the other would not fasten on, but being poured upon
Salt of Tartar would immediately boil and hiss, whereas the other would lie
quietly upon it. The acid Spirit poured upon Minium made a Sugar of Lead, which
I did not find the other to do; some drops of this penetrant spirit being
mingled with some drops of the blew Syrup of Violets seemed rather to dilute
then otherwise alter the color; whereas the Acid Spirit turned the surup of a
reddish color, and would probably have made it of as pure a red as Acid Salts
are wont to do, had not its operation been hindered by the mixture of the other
Spirit. A few drops of the compound Spirit being Shaken into a pretty quantity
of the infusion of Lignum Nephriticum, presently destroyed all the bluish
color, whereas the other Spirit would not take it away. To all which it might
be added, that having for trials sake poured fair water upon the Corals that
remained in the bottom of the glass wherein I had rectifyed the double spirit
(if I may so call it) that was first drawn from the Box, I found according to
my expectation that the Acid Spirit had really dissolved the Corals, and had
coagulated with them. For by the affusion of fair Water, I Obtained a Solution,
which (to note that singularity upon the bye) was red, whence the Water being
evaporated, there remained a soluble Substance much like the Ordinary Salt of
Coral, as Chemists are pleased to call that Magistery of Corals, which they
make by dissolving them in common spirit of Vinager, and abstracting the
Menstruum ad Siccitatem. I know not whether I should subjoine, on this
occasion, that the simple spirit of Box, if Chemists will have it therefore
Saline because it has a strong taste, will furnish us with a new kind of Saline
Bodies, differing from those hitherto taken notice of. For whereas of the three
chief sorts of Salts, the Acid, the Alcalizate, and the Sulphurous, there is
none that seems to be friends with both the other two, as I may, e're it be
long, have occasion to show; I did not find but that the simple spirit of Box
did agree very well (at least as far as I had occasion to try it) both with
the Acid and the other Salts. For though it would lie very quiet with salt of
Tartar, Spirit of Urine, or other bodies, whose Salts were either of an
Alcalizate or fugitive Nature; yet did not the mingling of Oil of Vitriol it
self produce any hissing or Effervescence, which you know is wont to ensue upon
the Affusion of that highly Acid Liquor upon eit her of the Bodies newly
mentioned.

I think my self, says Eleutherius, beholden to you, for this Experiment; not
only because I forsee you will make it helpful to you in the Enquiry you are
now upon, but because it teaches us a Method, whereby we may prepare a numerous
sort of new spirits, which though more simple then any that are thought
Elementary, are manifestly endowed with peculiar and powerful qualities, some
of which may probably be of considerable use in Physic, as well alone, as
associated with other things; as one may hopefully guess by the redness of that
Solution your sour Spirit made of Corals, and by some other circumstances of
your Narrative. And suppose (pursues Eleutherius) that you are not so confined,
for the separation of the Acid parts of these compound Spirits from the other,
to employ Corals; but that you may as well make use of any Alcalizate Salt, or
of Pearls, or Crabs eyes, or any other Body, upon which common Spirit of
Vinager will easily work, and, to speak in an Helmontian Phrase, Exantlate it
self.

I have not yet tried, says Carneades, of what use the mentioned liquors may
be in Physic, either as Medicines or as Menstruums: But I could mention now
(and may another time) diverse of the trials that I made to satisfy my self of
the difserence of these two Liquors. But that, as I allow you thinking what you
newly told me about Corals, I presume you will allow me, from what I have said
already, to deduce this Corollary; That there are diverse compound bodies, which
may be resolved into four such differing Substances, as may as well merit the
name of Principles, as those to which the Chemists freely give it. For since
they scruple not to reckon that which I call the compound Spirit of Box, for
the spirit, or as others would have it, the Mercury of that Wood, I see not,
why the Acid liquor, and the other, should not each of them, especially that
last named, be looked upon as more worthy to be called an Elementary Principle;
since it must needs be of a more simple nature then the Liquor, which was found
to be divisible into that, and the Acid Spirit. And this further use (continues
Carneades) may be made of our experiment to my present purpose, that it may
give us a rise to suspect, that since a Liquor reputed by the Chemists to be,
without dispute, Homogeneous, is by so slight a way divisible into two distinct
and more simple Ingredients, some more skilful or happier Experimenter then I
may find a way either further to divide one of these Spirits, or to resolve
some or other, if not all, of those other Ingredients of mixed Bodies, that have
hitherto passed among Chemists for their Elements or Principles.

THE SKEPTICAL CHEMIST. The Fourth Part.
ANd thus much (says Carneades) may suffice to be said of the Number of the
Distinct substances separable from mixed Bodies by the Fire: Wherefore I now
proceed to consider the nature of them, and show you, That though they seem
Homogeneous Bodies, yet have they not the purity and simplicity that is
requisite to Elements. And I should immediately proceed to the proof of my
Assertion, but that the Confidence wherewith Chemists are wont to call each of
the Substances we speak of by the name of Sulphur or Mercury, or the other of
the Hypostaticall Principles, and the intolerable Ambiguity they allow
themselves ie their Writings and Expressions, makes it necessary for me in
Order to the Keeping you either from mistaking me, or thinking I mistake the
Controversy, to take Notice to you and complain of the unreasonable Liberty
they give themselves of playing with Names at pleasure. And indeed if I were
obliged in this Dispute, to have such regard to the Phraseology of each
particular Chemist, as not to Write any thing which this or that Author may not
pretend, not to contradict this or that sense, which he may give as Occasion
serves to his Ambiguous Expressions, I should scarce know how to dispute, nor
which way to turn my self. For I find that even Eminent Writers, (such as
Raymund Lully, Paracelsus and others) do so abuse the terms they employ, that
as they will now and then give diverse things, one name; so they will oftentimes
give one thing, many Names; and some of them (perhaps) such, as do much more
properly signify some Distinct Body of another kind; nay even in Technical
Words or Terms of Art, they refrain not from this Confounding Liberty; but
will, as I have Observed, call the same Substance, sometimes the Sulphur, and
Sometimes the Mercury of a Body. And now I speak of Mercury, I cannot but take
Notice, that the Descriptions they give us of that Principle or Ingredient of.
mixed Bodies, are so intricate, that even those that have Endeavored to Pollish
and Illustrate the Notions of the Chemists, are fain to confess that they know
not what to make of it, either by Ingenuous Acknowledgments, or Descriptions
that are not Intelligible.

I must confess (says Eleutherius) I have, in the reading of Paracelsus and
other Chemical Authors, been troubled to find, that such hard Words and
Equivocal Expressions, as You justly complain of, do even when they treat of
Principles, seem to be studiously affected by those Writers; whether to make
themselves to be admired by their Readers, and their Art appear more Venerable
and Mysterious, or, (as they would have us think) to conceal from them a
Knowledge themselves judge inestimable.

But whatever (says Carneades) these Men may promise themselves from a Canting
way of delivering the Principles of Nature, they will find the Major part of
Knowing Men so vain, as when they understand not what they read, to conclude,
that it is rather the Writers fault then their own. And those that are so
ambitious to be admired by the Vulgar, that rather then go without the
Admiration of the Ignorant they will expose themselves to the contempt of the
Learned, those shall, by my consent, freely enjoy their Option. As for the
Mystical Writers scrupling to Communicate their Knowledge, they might less to
their own Disparagement, and to the trouble of their Readers, have concealed it
by writing no Books, then by Writing bad ones. If Themistius were here, he
would not stick to say, that Chemists write thus darkly, not because they think
their Notions too precious to be explained, but because they fear that if they
were explained, men would discern, that they are far from being precious. And
indeed, I fear that the chief Reason why Chemists have written so obscurely of
their three Principles, may be, That not having Clear and Distinct Notions of
them themselves, they cannot write otherwise then Confusedly of what they but
Confusedly Apprehend: Not to say that diverse of them, being Conscious to the
Invalidity of their Doctrine, might well enough discern that they could scarce
keep themselves from being confuted, but by keeping themselves from being
clearly understood. But though much may be said to Excuse the Chemists when
they write Darkly, and Aenigmatically, about the Preparation of their Elixir,
and Some few other grand Arcana, the divulging of which they may upon Grounds
Plausible enough esteem unfit; yet when they pretend to teach the General
Principles of Natural Philosophers, this Equivocall Way of Writing is not to be
endured. For in such Speculative Enquities, where the naked Knowledge of the
Truth is the thing Principally aimed at, what does he teach me worth thanks
that does not, if he can, make his Notion intelligible to me, but by Mystical
Terms, and Ambiguous Phrases darkens what he should clear up; and makes me add
the Trouble of guessing at the sense of what he Equivocally expresses, to that
of examining the Truth of what he seems to deliver. And if the matter of the
Philosophers Stone, and the manner of preparing it, be such Mysteries as they
would have the World believe them, they may Write Intelligibly and Clearly of
the Principles of mixed Bodies in General, without Discovering what they call
the Great Work. But for my part (Continues Carneades) what my Indignation at
this Un-philosophical way of teaching Principles has now extorted from me, is
meant chiefly to excuse my self, if I shall hereafter oppose any Particular
Opinion or assertion, that some Follower of Paracelsus or any Eminent Artist
may pretend not to be his Masters. For, as I told you long since, I am not
Obliged to examine private men's writings, (which were a Labor as endless as
unprofitable) being only engaged to examine those Opinions about the Tria
Prima, which I find those Chemists I have met with to agree in most: And I
Doubt not but my Arguments against their Doctrine will be in great part easily
enough applicable even to those private Opinions, which they do not so directly
and expressly oppose. And indeed, that which I am now entering upon being the
Consideration of the things themselves whereinto Spagyrists resolve mixed Bodies
by the Fire, If I can show that these are not of an Elementary Nature, it will
be no great matter what names these or those Chemists have been pleased to give
them. And I question not that to a Wise man, and consequently to Eleutherius,
it will be less considerable to know, what Men Have thought of Things, then
what they Should have thought.

In the fourth and last place, then, I consider, that as generally as Chemists
are wont to appeal to Experience, and as confidently as they use to instance
the several substances separated by the Fire from a Mixed Body, as a sufficient
proof of their being its component Elements: Yet those differing Substances are
many of them far enough from Elementary simplicity, and may be yet looked upon
as mixed Bodies, most of them also retaining, somewhat at least, if not very
much, of the Nature of those Concretes whence they were forced.

I am glad (says Eleutherius) to see the Vanity or Envy of the canting
Chemists thus discovered and chastis'd; and I could wish, that Learned Men
would conspire together to make these deluding Writers sensible, that they must
no long hope with Impunity to abuse the World. For whilst such Men are quietly
permitted to publish Books with promising Titles, and therein to Assert what
they please, and contradict others, and even themselves as they please, with as
little danger of being confuted as of being understood, they are encouraged to
get themselves a name, at the cost of the Readers, by finding that intelligent
Men are wont for the reason newly mentioned, to let their Books and Them alone:
And the ignorant and credulous (of which the number is still much greater then
that of the other) are forward to admire most what they least understand. But
if Judicious men skilled in Chemical affairs shall once agree to write clearly
and plainly of them, and thereby keep men from being stunned, as it were, or
imposd upon by dark or empty Words; it is to be hoped that these men finding
that they can no longer write impertinently and absurdly, without being laughed
at for doing so, will be reduced either to write nothing, or Books that may
teach us something, and not rob men, as formerly, of invaluable Time; and so
ceasing to trouble the World with Riddles or Impertinencies, we shall either by
their Books receive an Advantage, or by their silence escape an Inconvenience.

But after all this is said (continues Eleutherius) it may be represented in
favor of the Chemists, that, in one regard the Liberty they take in using
names, if it be excusable at any time, may be more so when they speak of the
substances whereinto their Analysis resolves mixed Bodies: Since as Parents have
the Right to name their own Children, it has ever been allowed to the Authors
of new Inventions, to Impose Names upon them. And therefore the subjects we
speak of being so the Productions of the Chymist's Art, as not to be otherwise,
but by it, obtainable; it seems but equitable to give the Artists leave to name
them as they please: considering also that none are so fit and likely to teach
us what those Bodies are, as they to whom we owed them.

I told You already (says Carneades) that there is great Difference betwixt
the being able to make Experiments, and the being able to give a Philosophical
Account of them. And I will not now add, that many a Mine-digger may meet,
whilst he follows his work, with a Gemm or a Mineral which he knows not what
to make of, till he shows it a Jeweller or a Mineralist to be informed what it
is. But that which I would rather have here observed, is, That the Chemists I
am now in debate with have given up the Liberty You challenged for them, of
using Names at Pleasure, and confined Themselves by their Descriptions, though
but such as they are, of their Principles; so that although they might freely
have called any thing their Analysis presents them with, either Sulphur, or
Mercury, or Gas, or Blas, or what they pleased; yet when they have told me that
Sulphur (for instance) is a Primogeneal and simple Body, Inflamable, Odorous,
etc. they must give me leave to dis-believe them, if they tell me that a Body
that is either compounded or uninflamable is such a Sulphur; and to think they
play with words, when they teach that Gold and some other Minerals abound with
an Incombustible Sulphur, which is as proper an Expression, as a Sunshine
Night, or Fluid Ice.

But before I descend to the Mention of Particulars belonging to my Fourth
Consideration, I think it convenient to premise a few Generals; some of which I
shall the less need to insist on at present, because I have Touched on them
already.

And first I must invite you to take notice of a certain passage in Helmont;
Illud notabile, in vino esse Spiritum quendam mitiorem ulterioris and
nobilioris qualitatis participem qua qui immediateper distillationem elicitur
diciturque aqua vitae dephlegmata, quod facilius in simplici Olivarum oleo ad
oculum spectatur. Quippe distillatum oleum absque laterum aut tigularum
additamento, quodque oleum Philosophorum dicitur, multum differt ab ejus
oleitate, quae elicitur prius reducto oleo simplici in parts dissimilares sola
digestione and Salis circulati Paracelsici appositione; siquidem sal circulatum
idem in pondere and quantitatibus pristinis ab oleo segregatur postquam oleum
olivarum in sui beterogeneitates est dispositum. Dulce enim tunc Oleum Olivarum
exoleo, prout and suavissimus vini spiritus a vino hoc pacto separantur,
longeque ab aquae vitae acrimonia distinctus. -- Helmont. Aura vitalis, page
725.
which though I have not Found much heeded by his Readers, He Himself mentions
as a notable thing, and I take to be a very considerable one; for whereas the
Distilled oil of oyle-olive, though drawn per se is (as I have tried) of a
very sharp and fretting Quality, and of an odious taste, He tells us that Simple
oil being only digested with Paracelsus's sal circulatum, is reduced into
dissimilar parts, and yields a sweet Oil, very differing from the
oyledistill'd, from sallet oil; as also that by the same way there may be
separated from Wine a very sweet and gentle Spirit, partaking of a far other
and nobler quality then that which is immediately drawn by distillation and
called Dephlegm'd Aqua vitae, from whose Acrimony this other spirit is
exceedingly remote, although the sal circulatum that makes these Anatomies be
separated from the Analyz'd Bodies, in the same weight and with the same
qualities it had before; which Affirmation of Helmont if we admit to be true,
we must acknowledge that there may be a very great disparity betwixt bodies of
the same denomination (as several oils, or several spirits) separable from
compound Bodies: For, besides the differences I shall anon take notice of,
betwixt those distilled Oils that are commonly known to Chemists, it appears
by this, that by means of the Sal Circulatum, There may be quite another sort
of Oils obtained from the same Body; and who knows but that there may be yet
other Agents found in Nature, by whose help there may, whether by Transmutation
or otherwise, be obtained from the Bodies Vulgarly called Mixed, Oils or other
substances, Differing from those of the same Denomination, known either to
Vulgar Chemists, or even to Helmont Himself: but for fear You should tell me,
that this is but a conjecture grounded upon another Man's Relation, whose Truth
we have not the means to Experiment, I will not Insist upon it; but leaving You
to Consider of it at leisure, I shall proceed to what is next.

Secondly, Then if that be True which was the Opinion of Lucippus, Democritus,
and other prime Anatomists of old, and is in our days revived by no mean
Philosophers; namely, That our Culinary Fire, such as Chemists use, consists of
swarms of little Bodies swiftly moving, which by their smallness and motion
are able to permeate the sollidest and Compactest Bodies, and even Glass it
Self; If this (I say) be True, since we see that In flints and other Concretes,
the Fiery part is Incorporated with the Grosser, it will not be Irrational to
conjecture, that multitudes of these Fiery Corpuscles, getting in at the Pores
of the Glass, may associate themselves with the parts of the mixed Body whereon
they work, and with them Constitute new Kinds of Compound Bodies, according as
the Shape, Size, and other Affections of the Parts of the Dissipated Body
happen to dispose them, in Reference to such Combinations; of which also there
may be the greater Number; if it be likewise granted that the Corpuscles of the
Fire, though all exceeding minute, and very swiftly moved, are not all of the
same bigness, nor Figure. And if I had not Weightier Considerations to
Discourse to you of, I could name to you, to Countenance what I have newly
said, some particular Experiments by which I have been Deduced to think, that
the Particles of an open Fire working upon some Bodies may really Associate
themselves therewith, and add to the Quantity. But because I am not so sure,
that when the Fire works upon Bodies included in Glasses, it does it by a real
Trajection of the Fiery Corpuscles themselves, through the Substance of the
Glass, I will proceed to what is next to be mentioned.

I could (says Eleutherius) help you to some Proofs, whereby I think it may
be made very probable, that when the Fire acts immediately upon a Body, some of
its Corpuscles may stick to those of the burnt Body, as they seem to do in
Quicklime, but in greater numbers, and more permanently. But for fear of
retarding Your Progress, I shall desire you to deferr this Enquiry till another
time, and proceed as you intended.

You may then in the next place (says Carneades) observe with me, that not
only there are some Bodies, as Gold, and Silver, which do not by the usual
Examens, made by Fire, Discover themselves to be mixed; but if (as You may
Remember I formerly told You) it be a De-compound Body that is Dissipable into
several Substances, by being exposed to the Fire it may be resolved into such
a; are neither Elementary, nor such as it was upon its last mixture Compounded
of; but into new Kinds of mixts. Of this I have already given You some Examples
in Soap, Sugar of Lead, and Vitrioll. Now if we shall Consider that there are
some Bodies, as well Natural, (as that I last named) as Factitious, manifestly
Decompounded; That in the Bowels of the Earth Nature may, as we see she
sometimes does, make strange Mixtures; That Animals are nourished with other
Animals and Plants; And, that these themselves have almost all of them their
Nutriment and Growth, either from a certain Nitrous Juice Harbored in the
Pores of the Earth, or from the Excrements of Animalls, or from the putrified
Bodies, either of living Creatures or Vegetables, or from other Substances of a
Compounded Nature; If, I say, we consider this, it may seem probable, that
there may be among the Works of Nature (not to mention those of Art) a greater
Number of De-compound Bodies, then men take Notice of; And indeed, as I have
formerly also observed, it does not at all appear, that all Mixtures must be of
Elementary Bodies; but it seems far more probable, that there are diverse sorts
of compound Bodies, even in regard of all or some of their Ingredients,
considered Antecedently to their Mixture. For though some seem to be made up by
the immediate Coalitions of the Elements, or Principles themselves, and
therefore may be called Prima Mista, or Mista Primaria; yet it seems that many
other Bodies are mingled (if I may so speak) at the second hand, their
immediate Ingredients being not Elementary, but these primary Mixts newly
spoken of; And from diverse of these Secondary sort of Mixts may result, by a
further Composition, a Third sort, and so onwards. Nor is it improbable, that
some Bodies are made up of Mixed Bodies, not all of the same Order, but of
several; as (for Instance) a Concrete may consist of Ingredients, whereof the
one may have been a primary, the other a Secondary Mixed Body; (as I have in
Native Cinnaber, by my way of Resolving it, found both that Courser the part
that seems more properly to be Oar, and a Combustible Sulphur, and a Running
Mercury:) or perhaps without any Ingredient of this latter sort, it may be
composed of Mixed Bodies, some of them of the first, and some of the third Kind;
And this may perhaps be somewhat Illustrated by reflecting upon what happens in
some Chemical Preparations of those Medicines which they call their
Bezoardicum's. For first, they take Antimony and Iron, which may be looked upon
as Prima Mista; of these they compound a Starry Regulus, and to this they add
according to their Intention, either Gold, or Silver, which makes with it a new
and further Composition. To this they add Sublimate, which is it self a
De-compound body, (consisting of common Quicksilver, and diverse Salts United by
Sublimation into a Crystalline Substance) and from this Sublimate, and the
other Metalline Mixtures, they draw a Liquor, which may be allowed to be of a
yet more Compounded Nature. If it be true, as Chemists affirm it, that by this
Art some of the Gold or Silver mingled with the Regulus may be carried over the
Helm with it by the Sublimate; as indeed a Skillful and Candid person
complained to me a while since, That an experienced Friend of His and mine,
having by such a way brought over a great Deal of Gold, in hope to do something
further with it, which might be gainful to him, has not only missed of his
Aim, but is unable to recover his Volatiliz'd Gold out of the Antimonial
butter, wherewith it is strictly united.

Now (Continues Carneades) if a Compound body consist of Ingredients that are
not merely Elementary; it is not hard to conceive, that the Substances into
which the Fire Dissolves it, though seemingly Homogeneous enough, may be of a
Compounded Nature, those parts of each body that are most of Kin associating
themselves into a Compound of a new Kind. As when (for example sake) I have
caused Vitrioll and Sal Armoniack, and Salt Petre to be mingled and Destill'd
together, the Liquor that came over manifested it self not to be either Spirit
of Nitre, or of Sal Armoniack, or of Vitrioll. For none of these would dissolve
crude gold, which yet my Liquor was able readily to do; and thereby manifested
it self to be a new Compound, consisting at least of Spirit of Nitre, and Sal
Armoniack, (for the latter dissolved in the former, will Work on Gold) which
nevertheless are not by any known way separable, and consequently would not
pass for a Mixed Body, if we our selves did not, to obtain it, put and Distill
together diverse Concretes, whose Distinct Operations were known before hand.
And, to add on this Occasion the Experiment I lately promised You, because it
is Applicable to our present purpose, I shall Acquaint You, that suspecting the
Common Oil of Vitrioll not to be altogether such a simple Liquor as Chemists
presume it, I mingled it with an equal or a Double Quantity (for I tried the
Experiment more then once) of common Oil of Turpentine, such as together with
the other Liquor I bought at the Drugsters. And having carefully (for the
Experiment is Nice, and somewhat dangerous) Distilled the Mixture in a small
Glass Retort, I obtained according to my Desire, (besides the two Liquors I had
put in) a pretty Quantity of a certain substance, which sticking all about the
Neck of the Retort Discovered it self to be Sulphur, not only by a very strong
Sulphurous smell, and by the color of Brimstone; but also by this, That being
put upon a coal, it was immediately kindled, and burned like common Sulphur.
And of this Substance I have yet by me some little Parcells, which You may
command and examine when you please. So that from this Experiment I may deduce
either one, or both of these Propositions, That a real Sulphur may be made by
the Conjunction of two such Substances as Chemists take for Elementary, And
which did not either of them apart appear to have any such body in it; or that
Oil of Vitrioll though a Distilled Liquor, and taken for part of the Saline
Principle of the Concrete that yields it, may yet be so Compounded a body as to
contain, besides its Saline part, a Sulphur like common brimstone, which would
hardly be it self a simple or un-compounded body.

I might (pursues Carneades) remind You, that I formerly represented it, as
possible, That as there may be more Elements then five, or six; so the Elements
of one body may be Different from those of another; whence it would follow,
that from the Resolution of Decompound compound body, there may result Mixts of
an altogether new kind, by the Coalition of Elements that never perhaps
convened before. I might, I say, mind You of this, and add diverse things to
this second Consideration; but for fear of wanting time I willingly pretermit
them, to pass on to the third, which is this, That the Fire does not always
barely resolve or take asunder, but may also after a new manner mingle and
compound together the parts (whether Elementary or not) of the Body Dissipated
by it.

This is so evident, says Carneades, in some obvious Examples, that I cannot
but wonder at their Supiness that have not taken notice of it. For when Wood
being burnt in a Chimney is dissipated by the Fire into Smoke and Ashes, that
smoke composes soot, which is so far from being any one of the principles of
the Wood, that (as I noted above) you may by a further Anlysis separate five or
six distinct substances from it. And as for the remaining Ashes, the Chemists
themselves teach us, that by a further degree of fire they may be indissolubly
united into glass. It Is true, that the Analysis which the Chemists principally
build upon is made, not in the open air, but in close Vessels; but however, the
Examples lately produced may invite you shrewdly to suspect, That heat may as
well compound as dissipate the Parts of mixed Bodies: and not to tell you, that
I have known a Vitrification made even in close vessels, I must remind you that
the Flowers of Antimony, and those of Sulphur, are very mixed Bodies, though
they ascend in close vessels: And that 'twas in stopped glasses that I brought
up the whole Body of Camphire. And whereas it may be objected, that all these
Examples are of Bodies forced up in a dry, not a Fluid form, as are the
Liquors wont to be obtained by distillation; I answer, That besides that it is
possible, that a Body may be changed from Consistent to Fluid, or from Fluid to
Consistent, without being otherwise much altered, as may appear by the Easiness
wherewith in Winter, without any Addition or Separation of Visible Ingredients,
the same substance may be quickly hardened into brittle Ice, and thawed again
into Fluid Water; Besides this, I say it would be considered, that common
Quicksilver it self, which the Eminentest Chemists confess to be a mixed Body,
may he Driven over the Helm in its Pristine form of Quicksilver, and
consequently, in that of a Liquor. And certainly it is possible that very
compounded Bodies may concur to Constitute Liquors; Since, not to mention that
I have found it possible, by the help of a certain Menstruum, to distill Gold
it self through a Retort, even with a Moderate Fire: Let us but consider what
happens in Butter of Antimony. For if that be carefully rectified, it may be
reduced into a very clear Liquor; and yet if You cast a quantity of fair water
upon it, there will quickly precipitate a Ponderous and Vomitive Calx, which
made before a considerable part of the Liquor, and yet is indeed (though some
eminent Chemists would have it Mercurial) an Antimonial Body carried over and
kept dissolved by the Salts of the Sublimate, and consequently a compounded
one; as You may find if You will have the Curiosity to Examine this White
powder by a skilful Reduction. And that You may not think that Bodies as
compounded as flowers of Brimstone cannot be brought to Concur to Constitute
Distilled Liquors; And also That You may not imagine with Diverse Learned Men
that pretend no small skill in Chemistry, that at least no mixed Body can be
brought over the Helm, but by corrosive Salts, I am ready to show You, when
You please, among other ways of bringing over Flowers of Brimstone (perhaps I
might add even Mineral Sulphurs) some, wherein I employ none but Oleaginous
bodies to make Volatile Liquors, in which not only the color, but (which is a
much surer mark) the smell and some Operations manifest that there is brought
over a Sulphur that makes part of the Liquor.

One thing more there is, Eleutherius, says Carneades, which is so pertinent
to my present purpose, that though I have touched upon it before, I cannot but
on this occasion take notice of it. And it is this, That the Qualities or
Accidents, upon whose account Chemists are wont to call a portion of Matter by
the name of Mercury or some other of their Principles, are not such but that
it is possible as Great (and therefore why not the like?) may be produced by
such changes of Texture, and other Alterations, as the Fire may make in the
small Parts of a Body. I have already proved, when I discoursed of the second
General Consideration, by what happens to plants nourished only with fair
water, and Eggs hatched into Chickens, that by changing the disposition of the
component parts of a Body, Nature is able to effect as great Changes in a
parcel of Matter reputed similar, as those requisite to Denominate one of the
Tria Prima. And though Helmont do somewhere wittily call the Fire the
Destructor and the Artificial Death of Things; And although another Eminent
Chemist and Physician be pleased to build upon this, That Fire can never
generate any thing but Fire; Yet You will, I doubt not, be of another mind, If
You consider how many new sorts of mixed Bodies Chemists themselves have
produced by means of the Fire: And particularly, if You consider how that Noble
and Permanent Body, Glass, is not only manifestly produced by the violent
action of the Fire, but has never, for ought we know, been produced any other
way. And indeed it seems but an inconsiderate Assertion of some Helmontians,
that every sort of Body of a Peculiar Denomination must be produced by some
Seminal power; as I think I could evince, if I thought it so necessary, as it
is for me to hasten to what I have further to discourse. Nor need it much move
us, that there are some who look upon whatsoever the Fire is employed to
produce, not as upon Natural but Artificial Bodies. For there is not always
such a difference as many imagine betwixt the one and the other: Nor is it so
easy as they think, clearly to assign that which Properly, Constantly, and
Sufficiently, Discriminates them. But not to engage my self in so nice a
Disquisition, it may now suffice to observe, that a thing is commonly termed
Artificial, when a parcel of matter is by the Artificers hand, or Tools, or
both, brought to such a shape or Form, as he Designed beforehand in his Mind:
Whereas in many of the Chemical Productions the effect would be produced
whether the Artificer intended it or no; and is oftentimes very much other then
he Intended or Looked for; and the Instruments employed, are not Tools
Artificially fashioned and shaped, like those of Tradesmen, for this or that
particular Work; but, for the most part, Agents of Nature's own providing, and
whose chief Powers of Operation they receive from their own Nature or Texture,
not the Artificer. And indeed, the Fire is as well a Natural Agent as Seed: And
the Chemist that imployes it, does but apply Natural Agents and Patients, who
being thus brought together, and acting according to their respective Natures,
perform the work themselves; as Apples, Plums, or other fruit, are natural
Productions, though the Gardener bring and fasten together the Sciens of the
Stock, and both Water, and do perhaps diverse other ways Contribute to its
bearing fruit. But, to proceed to what I was going to say, You may observe with
me, Eleutherius, that, as I told You once before, Qualities slight enough may
serve to Denominate a Chemical Principle. For, when they anatomize a compound
Body by the Fire, if they get a Substance inflamable, and that will not mingle
with Water, that they presently call Sulphur; what is sapid and Dissoluble in
Water, that must pass for Salt; Whatsoever is fixed and indissoluble in Water,
that they name Earth. And I was going to add, that, whatsoever Volatile
substance they know not what to make of, not to say, whatsoever they please,
that they call Mercury. But that these Qualities may either be produced,
otherwise then by such as they call Seminal Agents, or may belong to bodies of
a compounded Nature, may be shown, among other Instances, in Glass made of
ashes, where the exceeding strongly-tasted Alcalizate Salt joining with the
Earth becomes insipid, and with it constitutes a Body, which though also dry,
fixed, and indissoluble in Water, is yet manifestly a mixed Body; and made so by
the Fire it self.

And I remmember to our present purpose, that Helmont, amongst other Medicines
that he commends, has a short process, wherein, though the Directions for
Practice are but obscurely intimated; yet I have some reason not to Dis-believe
the Process, without affirming or denying any thing about the virtues of the
remedy to be made by it. Helment page 412.
Quando (says he) oleum cinnamomi etc. suo sali alkali miscetur absque omni
aqua, trium mensium artificiosa occultaque circulatione, totum in salem
volatilem commutatum est, vere essentiam sui simplicis in nobis exprimit, and
usque in prima nostri constitutivasese ingerit. A not unlike Process he
delivers in another place; from whence, if we suppose him to say true, I may
argue, that since by the Fire there may be produced a substance that is as well
Saline and volatile as the Salt of Hartshorn, blood, etc. which pass for
Elementary; and since that this Volatile Salt is really compounded of a
Chemical Oil and a fixed Salt, the one made Volatile by the Other, and both
associated by the fire, it may well be suspected that other Substances,
emerging upon the Dissipation of Bodies by the Fire, may be new sorts of Mixts,
and consist of Substances of differing natures; and particularly, I have
sometimes suspected, that since the Volatile Salts of Blood, Hartshorn, etc.
are figitive and endowed with an exceeding strong smell, either that Chemists
do Erroneously ascribe all odours to sulphurs, or that such Salts consist of
some oily parts well incorporated with the Saline ones. And the like conjecture
I have also made concerning Spirit of Vinager, which, though the Chemists think
one of the Principles of that Body, and though being an Acid Spirit it seems to
be much less of kin then Volatile Salts to sulphurs; yet, not to mention its
piercing smell; which I know not with what congruity the Chemist will deduce
from Salt, I wonder they have not taken notice of what their own Tyrocinium
Chymicum teach us concerning the Destillation of Saccharum Saturni; out of
which Beguinus assures Us, Tyroc. Chym. L. 1. C. 4.
that he distilled, besides a very fine spirit, no less then two Oils, the
one bloodred and ponderous, but the other swimming upon the top of the Spirit,
and of a yellow color; of which he says that he kept then some by him, to
verify what he delivers. And though I remember not that I have had two distinct
Oils from Sugar of Lead, yet that it will though distilled without addition
yield some Oil, disagrees not with my Experience. I know the Chemists will be
apt to pretend, that these Oils are but the volatiliz'd sulphur of the lead;
and will perhaps argue it from what Beguinus relates, that when the
Distillation is ended, you will find a Caput Mortuum extremely black, and (as he
speaks) nullius momenti, as if the Body, or at least the chief part of the
Metal it self were by the distillation carried over the Helm. But since you
know as well as I that Saccharum Saturni is a kind of Magistery, made only by
calcining of Lead per se, dissolving it in distilled Vinager, and crystalizing
the solution; if I had leisure to tell You how Differing a thing I did upon
examination find the Caput Mortuum, so slighted by Beguinus, to be from what
he represents it, I believe you would think the conjecture proposed less
probable then one or other of these three; either that this Oil did formerly
concur to constitute the Spirit of Vinager, and so that what passes for a
Chemical Principle may yet be further resoluble into distinct substances; or
that some parts of the Spirit together with some parts of the Lead may
constitute a Chemical Oil, which therefore though it pass for Homogeneous, may
be a very compounded Body: or at least that by the action of the Distilled
Vinager and the Saturnine Calx one upon another, part of the Liquor may be so
altered as to be transmuted from an Acid Spirit into an Oil. And though the
truth of either of the two former conjectures would make the example I have
reflected on more pertinent to my present argument; yet you will easily discern,
the Third and last Conjecture cannot be unserviceable to confirm some other
passages of my discourse.

To return then to what I was saying just before I mentioned Helmont's
Experiment, I shall subjoyne, That Chemists must confess also that in the
perfectly Dephlegm'd spirit of Wine, or other Fermented Liquors, that which
they call the Sulphur of the Concrete loses, by the Fermentation, the Property
of Oil, (which the Chemists likewise take to be the true Sulphur of the Mixed)
of being unminglable with the Water. Ostendi alias, quomodo lib. una aquae
vitae combibita in sale Tartari siccato, vix fiat semuncia salis, caeterum
totum corpus fiat aqua Elementalis. Helmont. in Aura vitali.
And if You will credit Helmont, all of the purest Spirit of Wine may barely by
the help of pure Salt of Tartar (which is but the fixed Salt of Wine) be
resolved or Transmuted into scarce half an ounce of Salt, and as much
Elementary Water as amounts to the remaining part of the mentioned weight. And
it may (as I think I formerly also noted) be doubted, whether that Fixed and
Alcalizate Salt, which is so unanimously agreed on to be the Saline Principle
of incinerated Bodies, be not, as it is Alcalizate, a Production of the Fire?
For though the taste of Tartar, for Example, seem to argue that it contains a
Salt before it be burned, yet that Salt being very Acid is of a quite Differing
Taste from the Lixiviate Salt of Calcined Tartar. And though it be not truly
Objected against the Chemists, that they obtain all Salts they make, by
reducing the Body they work on into Ashes with Violent Fires, (since Hartshorn,
Amber, Blood, and diverse other Mixts yield a copious Salt before they be burned
to Ashes) yet this Volatile Salt Differs much, as we shall see anon, from the
Fixed Alcalizate Salt I speak of; which for ought I remember is not producible
by any known Way, without Incineration. It Is not unknown to Chemists, that
Quicksilver may be Precipitated, without Addition, into a dry Powder, that
remains so in Water. And some eminent Spagyrists, and even Raimund Lully
himself, teach, that merely by the Fire Quicksilver may in convenient Vessels
be reduced (at least in great part) into a thin Liquor like Water, and
minglable with it. So that by the bare Action of the Fire, it is possible, that
the parts of a mixed Body should be so disposed after new and differing manners,
that it may be sometimes of one consistence, sometimes of another; And may in
one State be disposed to be mingled with Water, and in another not. I could
also show you, that Bodies from which apart Chemists cannot obtain any thing
that is Combustible, may by being associated together, and by the help of the
Fire, afford an inflamable Substance. And that on the other side, it is possible
for a Body to be inflamable, from which it would very much puzzle any ordinary
Chemist, and perhaps any other, to separate an inflamable Principle or
Ingredient. Wherefore, since the Principles of Chemists may receive their
Denominations from Qualities, which it often exceeds not the power of Art, nor
always that of the Fire to produce; And since such Qualities may be found in
Bodies that differ so much in other Qualities from one another, that they need
not be allowed to agree in that pure and simple Nature, which Principles, to be
so indeed, must have; it may justly be suspected, that many Productions of the
Fire that are showed us by Chemists, as the Principles of the Concrete that
afforded them, may be but a new kind of Mixts. And to annex, on this Occasion,
to these arguments taken from the Nature of the thing, one of those which
Logicians call ad Hominem, I shall desire You to take Notice, that though
Paracelsus Himself, and some that are so mistaken as to think he could not be
so, have ventured to teach, that not only the bodies here below, but the
Elements themselves, and all the other Parts of the Universe, are composed of
Salt, Sulphur and Mercury; yet the learned Sennertus, and all the more wary
Chemists, have rejected that conceit, and do many of them confess, that the
Tria Prima are each of them made up of the four Elements; and others of them
make Earth and Water concur with Salt, Sulphur and Mercury, to the Constitution
of Mixed bodies. So that one sort of these Spagyrists, notwithstanding the
specious Titles they give to the productions of the Fire, do in effect grant
what I contend for. And, of the other sort I may well demand, to what Kind of
Bodies the Phlegm and dead Earth, to be met with in Chemical Resolutions, are
to be referred? For either they must say, with Paracelsus, but against their
own Concessions as well as against Experience, that these are also composed of
the Tria Prima, whereof they cannot separate any one from either of them; or
else they must confess that two of the vastest Bodies here below, Earth, and
Water, are neither of them composed of the Tria Prima; and that consequently
those three are not the Universal, and Adequate Ingredients, neither of all
Sublunary Bodies, nor even of all mixed Bodies.

I know that the chief of these Chemists represent, that though the Distinct
Substances into which they divide mixed bodies by the Fire, are not pure and
Homogeneous; yet since the four Elements into which the Aristotelians pretend
to resolve the like bodies by the same Agent, are not simple neither, as
themselves acknowledge, it is as allowable for the Chemists to call the one
Principles, as for the Peripateticks to call the other Elements; since in both
cases the Imposition of the name is grounded only upon the Predominancy of that
Element whose name is ascribed to it. Nor shall I deny, that this Argument of
the Chemists is no ill one against the Aristotelians. But what Answer can it
prove to me, who you know am disputing against the Aristotelian Elements, as
the Chymicall Principles, and must not look upon any body as a true Principle
or Element, but as yet compounded, which is not perfectly Homogeneous, but is
further Resoluble into any number of Distinct Substances how small soever. And
as for the Chemists calling a body Salt, or Sulphur, or Mercury, upon pretense
that the Principle of the same name is predominant in it, That it self is an
Acknowledgment of what I contend for; namely that these productions of the
Fire, are yet compounded bodies. And yet whilst this is granted, it is
affirmed, but not proved, that the reputed Salt, or Sulphur, or Mercury,
consists mainly of one body that deserves the name of a principle of the same
Denomination. For how do Chemists make it appear that there are any such
primitive and simple bodies in those we are speaking of; since it is upon the
matter confessed by the answer lately made, that these are not such? And if
they pretend by Reason to evince what they affirm, what becomes of their
confident boasts, that the Chemists (whom they therefore, after Beguinus, call
a Philosophus or Opifex Sensatus) can convince our Eyes, by manifestly showing
in any mixed body those simple substances he teaches them to be composed of? And
indeed, for the Chemists to have recourse in this case to other proofs then
Experiments, as it is to wave the grand Argument that has all this while been
given out for a Demonstrative One; so it releases me from the obligation to
prosecute a Dispute wherein I am not engaged to Examine any but Experimental
proofs. I know it may plausibly Enough be Represented, in favor of the
Chemists, that it being evident that much the greater part of any thing they
call Salt, or Sulphur, or Mercury, is really such; it would be very rigid to
deny those Substances the names ascribed them, only because of some slight
mixture of another Body; since not only the Peripateticks call particular
parcels of matter Elementary, though they acknowledge that Elements are not to
be anywhere found pure, at least here below; And since especially there is a
manifest Analogy and Resemblance betwixt the bodies obtainable by Chemical
Anatomies and the principles whose names are given them; I have, I say,
considered that these things may be represented: But as for what is drawn from
the Custom of the Peripateticks, I have already told You, that though it may
be employed against Them, Yet it is not available against me who allow nothing
to be an Element that is not perfectly Homogeneous. And whereas it is alleged,
that the Predominant Principle ought to give a name to the substance wherein it
abounds; I answer, that that might much more reasonably be said, if either we
or the Chemists had seen Nature take pure Salt, pure Sulphur, and pure Mercury,
and compound of them every sort of Mixed Bodies. But, since it is to experience
that they appeal, we must not take it for granted, that the Distilled Oil (for
instance) of a plant is mainly composed of the pure principle called Sulphur,
till they have given us an ocular proof, that there is in that sort of Plants
such an Homogeneous Sulphur. For as for the specious argument, which is drawn
from the Resemblance betwixt the Productions of the Fire, and the Respective,
either Aristotelian Elements, or Chemical Principles, by whose names they are
called; it will appear more plausible then cogent, if You will but recall to
mind the state of the controversy; which is not, whether or no there be
obtained from mixed Bodies certain substances that agree in outward appearance,
or in some Qualities with Quicksilver or Brimstone, or some such obvious or
copious Body; But whether or no all Bodies confessed to be perfectly mixed were
composed of, and are resoluble into a determinate number of primary unmixt
Bodies. For, if you keep the state of the question in your Eye, you will easily
discern that there is much of what should be Demonstrated, left unprov'd by
those Chemical Experiments we are Examining. But (not to repeat what I have
already discovered more at large) I shall now take notice, that it will not
presently follow, that because a Production of the Fire has some affinity with
some of the greater Masses of matter here below, that therefore they are both
of the same Nature, and deserve the same Name; for the Chemists are not
content, that flame should be looked upon as a parcel of the Element of Fire,
though it be hot, dry, and active, because it wants some other Qualities
belonging to the nature of Elementary fire. Nor will they let the Peripateticks
call Ashes, or Quicklime, Earth, notwithstanding the many likenesses between
them; because they are not tastlesse, as Elementary Earth ought to be: But if
you should ask me, what then it is, that all the Chemical Anatomies of Bodies
do prove, if they prove not that they consist of the three Principles into
which the fire resolves them? I answer, that their Dissections may be granted
to prove, that some mixed bodies (for in many it will not hold) are by the fire,
when they are included in close Vessels, (for that Condition also is often
requisite) dissolube into several Substances differing in some Qualities, but
principally in Consistence. So that out of most of them may be obtained a fixed
substance partly saline, and partly insipid, an unctuous Liquor, and another
Liquor or more that without being unctuous have a manifest taste. Now if
Chemists will agree to call the dry and sapid substance salt, the Unctuous
liquor Sulphur, and the other Mercury, I shall not much quarrel with them for
so doing: But if they will tell me that Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury, are simple
and primary bodies whereof each mixed body was actually compounded, and which
was really in it antecedently to the operation of the fire, they must give me
leave to doubt whether (whatever their other arguments may do) their
Experiments prove all this. And if they will also tell me that the Substances
their Anatomies are wont to afford them, are pure and similar, as Principles
ought to be, they must give me leave to believe my own senses; and their own
confessions, before their bare Assertions. And that you may not (Eleutherius)
think I deal so rigidly with them, because I scruple to Take these Productions
of the Fire for such as the Chemists would have them pass for, upon the account
of their having some affinity with them; consider a little with me, that in
regard an Element or Principle ought to be perfectly Similar and Homogeneous,
there is no just cause why I should rather give the body proposed the Name of
this or that Element or Principle, because it has a resemblance to it in some
obvious Quality, rather then deny it that name upon the account of diverse other
Qualities, wherein the proposed Bodies are unlike; and if you do but consider
what slight and easily producible qualities they are that suffice, as I have
already more then once observed, to Denominate a Chemical Principle or an
Element, you will not, I hope, think my wariness to be destitute either of
Example, or else of Reason. For we see that the Chemists will not allow the
Aristotelians that the Salt in Ashes ought to be called Earth, though the
Saline and Terrestrial part symbolize in weight, in dryness, in fixness and
fusibility, only because the one is sapid and dissoluble in Water, and the
other not: Besides, we see that sapidness and volatility are wont to denominate
the Chemists Mercury or Spirit; and yet how many Bodies, think you, may agree
in those Qualities which may yet be of very differing natures, and disagree in
qualities either more numerous, or more considerable, or both. For not only
Spirit of Nitre, Aqua Fortis, Spirit of Salt, Spirit of Oil of Vitriol, Spirit
of Allome, Spirit of Vinager, and all Saline Liquors Distilled from Animal
Bodies, but all the Acetous Spirits of Woods freed from their Vinager; All
these, I say, and many others must belong to the Chemists Mercury, though it
appear not why some of them should more be comprehended under one denomination
then the Chemists Sulphur, or Oil should likewise be; for their Distilled
Oils are also Fluid, Volatile, and Tastable, as well as their Mercury; Nor is
it Necessary, that their Sulphur should be Unctuous or Dissoluble in Water,
since they generally referr Spirit of Wine to Sulphurs, although that Spirit be
not Unctuous, and will freely mingle with Water. So that bare Inflamability
must constitute the Essence of the Chemists Sulphur; as uninflamablenesse
joined with any taste is enough to entitle a Distilled Liquor to be their
Mercury. Now since I can further observe to You, that Spirit of Nitre and
Spirit of Hartshorne being poured together will boil and hiss and toss up
one another into the air, which the Chemists make signs of great Antipathy in
the Natures of Bodies (as indeed these Spirits differ much both in Taste,
Smell, and Operations;) Since I elsewhere tell you of my having made two sorts
of Oil out of the same man's blood, that would not mingle with one another; And
since I might tell You Diverse Examples I have met with, of the Contrariety of
Bodies which according to the Chemists must be huddl'd up together under one
Denomination; I leave you to Judge whether such a multitude of Substances as
may agree in these slight Qualities, and yet Disagree in Others more
Considerable, are more worthy to be called by the Name of a Principle (which
ought to be pure and homogeneous,) than to have appellations given them that
may make them differ, in name too, from the bodies from which they so wildly
differ in Nature. And hence also, by the bye, you may perceive that it is not
unreasonable to distrust the Chemists way of Argumentation, when being unable
to show us that such a Liquor is (for Example) purely saline, they prove, that
at least salt is much the predominant principle, because that the proposed
substance is strongly tasted, and all Taste proceeds from salt; whereas those
Spirits, such as spirit of Tartar, spirit of Hartshorn, and the like, which
are reckoned to be the Mercuries of the Bodies that afford them, have
manifestly a strong and piercing taste, and so has (according to what I formerly
noted) the spirit of Box etc. even after the acid Liquor that concurred to
compose it has been separated from it. And indeed, if sapidness belong not to
the spirit or Mercurial Principle of Vegitables and Animals: I scarce know how
it will be discriminated from their phlegm, since by the absence of
Inflamability it must be distinguished from their sulphur, which affords me
another Example, to prove how unacurate the Chemical Doctrine is in our present
Case; since not only the spirits of Vegitables and Animals, but their Oils are
very strongly tasted, as he that shall but wet his tongue with Chemical Oil of
Cinnamon, or of Cloves, or even of Turpentine, may quickly find, to his smart.
And not only I never tried any Chemical Oils whose taste was not very manifest
and strong; but a skilful and inquisitive person who made it his business by
elaborate operations to depurate Chemical Oils, and reduce them to an
Elementary simplicity, Informs us, that he never was able to make them at all
Tastless; whence I might infer, that the proof Chemists confidently give us of
a bodies being saline, is so far from demonstrating the Predominancy, that it
does not clearly Evince so much as the presence of the saline Principle in it.
But I will not (pursues Carneades) remind you, that the Volatile salt of
Hartshorn, Amber, Blood, etc. are exceeding strongly scented, notwithstanding
that most Chemists deduce Odours from Sulphur, and from them argue the
Predominancy of that Principle in the Odorous body, because I must not so much
as add any new Examples of the incompetency of this sort of Chemical arguments;
since having already detained You but too long in those generals that appertain
to my fourth consideration, it is time that I proceed to the particulars
themselves, to which I thought fit they should be previous:

These Generals (continues Carneades) being thus premised, we might the better
survey the Unlikeness that an attentive and unprepossess'd observer may take
notice of in each sort of Bodies which the Chemists are wont to call the salts
or sulphurs or Mercuries of the Concretes that yield Them, as if they had all a
simplicity, and Identity of Nature: whereas salts if they were all Elementary
would as little differ as do the Drops of pure and simple Water. It Is known
that both Chemists and Physicians ascribe to the fixed salts of calcined Bodies
the virtues of their concretes; and consequently very differing Operations. So
we find the Alkali of Wormwood much commended in distempers of the stomach;
that of Eyebright for those that have a weak sight; and that of Guaiacum (of
which a great Quantity yields but a very little salt) is not only much
commended in Venereal Diseases, but is believed to have a peculiar purgative
virtue, which yet I have not had occasion to try. And though, I confess, I have
long thought, that these Alkalizate salts are, for the most part, very near of
kin, and retain very little of the properties of the Concretes whence they were
separated; Yet being minded to Observe watchfully whether I could meet with any
Exceptions to this General Observation, I observed at the Glasse-house, that
sometimes the Metal (as the Workmen call it) or Mass of colliquated
Ingredients, which by Blowing they fashion into Vessels of diverse shapes, did
sometimes prove of a very differing color, and a somewhat differing Texture,
from what was usual. And having enquired whether the cause of such Accidents
might not be derived from the peculiar Nature of the fixed salt employed to
bring the sand to fusion, I found that the knowingst Workmen imputed these
Mis-adventures to the Ashes, of some certain kind of Wood, as having observed
the ignobler kind of Glass I lately mentioned to be frequently produced when
they had employed such sorts of Ashes which therefore they scruple to make use
of, if they took notice of them beforehand. I remember also, that an
Industrious Man of my acquaintance having bought a vast quantity of Tobacco
stalks to make a fixed Salt with, I had the Curiosity to go see whether that
Exotic Plant, which so much abounds in volatile salt, would afford a peculiar
kind of Alcali; and I was pleased to find that in the Lixivium of it, it was
not necessary, as is usual, to evaporate all the Liquor, that there might be
obtained a Saline Calx, consisting like lime quenched in the Air of a heap of
little Corpuscles of unregarded shapes: but the fixed salt shot into figured
Crystal, almost as Nitre or Sal-armoniack and other uncalcin'd salts are wont
to do; And I further remember that I have observed in the fixed Salt of Urine,
brought by depuration to be very white, a taste not so unlike to that of common
salt, and very differing from the wonted caustic Lixiviate taste of other salts
made by Incineration. But because the Instances I have alleged of the
Difference of Alcalizate salt are but few, and therefore I am still inclined to
think, that most Chemists and many Physicians do, inconsideratly enough and
without Warrant from Experience, ascribe the Virtues of the Concretes exposed
to Calcination, to the salts obtained by it; I shall rather, to show the
Disparity of salts, mention in the first Place the apparent Difference betwixt
the Vegetable fixed salts and the Animal Volatile ones: As (for Example) betwixt
salt of Tartar, and salt of Hartshorn; whereof the former is so fixed that
'twill endure the brunt of a violent Fire, and stand in fusion like a Metal;
whereas the other (besides that it has a differing taste and a very differing
smell) is so far from being fixed, that it will fly away in a gentle heat as
easily as spirit of Wine it self. And to this I shall add, in the next place,
That even among the Volatile salts themselves, there is a considerable
Difference, as appears by the distinct Properties of (for Instance) salt of
Amber, salt of Urine, salt of Man's Skull, (so much extolled against the falling
Sickness) and diverse others which cannot escape an ordinary Observer. And this
Diversity of Volatile salts I have observed to be sometimes Discernable even to
the Eye, in their Figures. For the salt of Hartshorn I have observed to adhere
to the Receiver in the form almost of a Parallelipipedon; and of the Volatile
salt of humane blood (long digested before distillation, with spirit of Wine) I
can show you store of grains of that Figure which Geometricians call a
Rhombus; though I dare not undertake that the Figures of these or other Saline
Crystals (if I may so call Them) will be always the same, whatever degree of
Fire have been employed to force them up, or how hastily soever they have been
made to convene in the spirits or liquors, in the lower part of which I have
usually observed them after a while to shoot. And although, as I lately told
You, I seldom found any Difference, as to Medical Virtues, in the fixed Salts of
Diverse Vegetables; and accordingly I have suspected that most of these volatile
Salts, having so great a Resemblance in smell, in taste, and fugitiveness,
differ but little, if at all, in their Medicinal properties: As indeed I have
found them generally to agree in diverse of them (as in their being somewhat
Diaphoretick and very Deopilative; Error vero per distillationem nobis monstrat
etiam Spiritum salinum plane volatilem odore nequicquam ut nec gustu
distinguibilem a spiritu Vrinae; In eo tamen essentialiter diversum, quod
spiritus talis cruoris curat Epilepsiam, non autem spiritus salis lotii.

Helmont. Aura Vitalis.


Yet I remember Helmont somewhere informs us, that there is this Difference
betwixt the saline spirit of Urine and that of Man's blood, that the former will
not cure the Epilepsy, but the Latter will. Of the Efficacy also of the Salt of
Common Amber against the same Disease in Children, (for in Grown Persons it is
not a specific) I may elsewhere have an Occasion to Entertain You. And when I
consider that to the obtaining of these Volatile Salts (especially that of
Urine) there is not requisite such a Destructive Violence of the Fire, as there
is to get those Salts that must be made by Incineration, I am the more invited
to conclude, that they may differ from one another, and consequently recede
from an Elementary Simplicity. And, if I could here show You what Mr. Boil has
Observed, touching the Various Chymicall Distinctions of Salts; You would
quickly discern, not only that Chemists do give themselves a strange Liberty to
call Concretes Salts, that are according to their own Rules to be looked upon
as very Compounded Bodies; but that among those very Salts that seem
Elementary, because produced upon the Anatomy of the Bodies that yield them,
there is not only a visible Disparity, but, to speak in the common Language, a
manifest Antipathy or Contrariety: As is evident in the Ebullition and hissing
that is wont to ensue, when the Acid Spirit of Vitrioll, for Instance, is
poured upon pot ashes, or Salt of Tartar. And I shall beg leave of this
Gentleman, says Carneades, casting his Eyes on me, to let me observe to You
out of some of his papers, particularly those wherein he treats of some
Preparations of Urine, that not only one and the same body may have two Salts
of a contrary Nature, as he exemplifies in the Spirit and Alkali of Nitre; but
that from the same body there may without addition be obtained three differing
and Visible Salts. For He Relates, that he observed in Urine, not only a
Volatile and Crystalline Salt, and a fixed Salt, but likewise a kind of Sal
Armoniack, or such a Salt as would sublime in the form of a salt, and therefore
was not fixed, and yet was far from being so fugitive as the Volatile salt; from
which it seemed also otherwise to differ. I have indeed suspected that this may
be a Sal Armoniack properly enough so called, as Compounded of the Volatile
salt of Urine, and the fixed of the same Liquor, which, as I noted, is not
unlike sea salt; but that it self argues a manifest Difference betwixt the
salts, since such a Volatile salt is not wont to Unite thus with an ordinary
Alcali, but to fly away from it in the Heat. And on this occasion I remember
that, to give some of my Friends an Ocular proof of the difference betwixt the
fixed and Volatile salt (of the same Concrete) Wood, I devised the following
Experiment. I took common Venetian sublimate, and dissolved as much of it as I
well could in fair Water: then I took Wood Ashes, and pouring on them Warm
Water, Dissolved their salt; and filtrating the Water, as soon as I found the
Lixivium sufficiently sharp upon the tongue, I reserved it for use: Then on
part of the former solution of sublimate dropping a little of this Dissolved
Fixed salt of Wood, the Liquors presently turned of an Orange Color; but upon
the other part of the clear solution of sublimate putting some of the Volatile
salt of Wood (which abounds in the spirit of soot) the Liquor immediately
turned white, almost like Milk, and after a while let fall a white sediment,
as the other Liquor did a Yellow one. To all this that I have said concerning
the Difference of salts, Aliquando oleum Cinnamomi, etc. suo sali Alcali
miscetur absque omni aqua, trium mensium Artificiosa occultaque circulatione,
totum in salem volatilem commutatum est. Helmont. Tria Prima Chymicorum, etc.
page 412.
I might add what I Formerly told you, concerning the simple spirit of Box, and
such like Woods, which differ much from the other salts hitherto mentioned, and
yet would belong to the saline Principle, if Chemists did truly teach that all
Tastes proceed from it. And I might also annex, what I noted to you out of
Helmont concerning Bodies, which, though they consist in great part of Chemical
Oils, do yet appear but Volatile salts; But to insist on these things, were to
repeat; and therefore I shall proceed.

This Disparity is also highly eminent in the separated sulphurs or Chemical
Oils of things. For they contain so much of the scent, and taste, and virtues,
of the Bodies whence they were drawn, that they seem to be but the Material
Crasis (if I may so speak) of their Concretes. Thus the Oils of Cinnamon,
Cloves, Nutmegs and other spices, seem to be but the United Aromatic parts
that did ennoble those Bodies. And it is a known thing, that Oil of Cinnamon,
and oil of Cloves, (which I have likewise observed in the Oils of several
Woods) will sink to the Bottom of Water: whereas those of Nutmegs and diverse
other Vegetables will swim upon it. The Oil (abusively called spirit) of Roses
swims at the Top of the Water in the form of a white butter, which I remember
not to have observed in any other Oil drawn in any Limbeck; yet there is a way
(not here to be declared) by which I have seen it come over in the form of
other Aromatic Oils, to the Delight and Wonder of those that beheld it. In
Oil of Anniseeds, which I drew both with, and without Fermentation, I observed
the whole Body of the Oil in a cool place to thicken into the Consistence and
Appearance of white Butter, which with the least heat resumed its Former
Liquidness. In the Oil of Olive drawn over in a Retort, I have likewise more
then once seen a spontaneous Coagulation in the Receiver: And I have of it by
me thus Congealed; which is of such a strangely Penetrating scent, as if
'twould Perforate the Noses that approach it. The like pungent Odor I also
observed in the Distilled Liquor of common soap, which forced over from Minium,
lately afforded an oil of a most admirable Penetrancy; And he must be a great
stranger, both to the Writings and preparations of Chemists, that sees not in
the Oils they distill from Vegetables and Animals, a considerable and obvious
Difference. Nay I shall venture to add, Eleutherius, (what perhaps you will
think of kin to a Paradox) that diverse times out of the same Animal or
Vegetable, there may be extracted Oils of Natures obviously differing. To
which purpose I shall not insist on the swimming and sinking Oils, which I
have sometimes observed to float on, and subside under the spirit of Guajacum,
and that of diverse other Vegetables Distilled with a strong and lasting Fire;
Nor shall I insist on the observation elsewhere mentioned, of the diverse and
unminglable oils afforded us by Humane Blood long fermented and Digested with
spirit of Wine, because these kind of oils may seem chiefly to differ in
Consistence and Weight, being all of them high colored and adust. But the
Experiment which I devised to make out this Difference of the oils of the same
Vegetable, ad Oculum, (as they speak) was this that follows. I took a pound of
Annisseeds, and having grossly beaten them, caused them to be put into a very
large glass Retort almost filled with fair Water; and placing this Retort in a
sand Furnace, I caused a very Gentle heat to be administered during the first
day, and a great part of the second, till the Water was for the most part
drawn off, and had brought over with it at least most of the Volatile and
Aromatic Oil of the seeds. And then increasing the Fire, and changing the
Receiver, I obtained besides an Empyreumatical Spirit, a quantity of adust
oil; whereof a little floated upon the Spirit, and the rest was more heavy,
and not easily separable from it. And whereas these oils were very dark, and
smelled (as Chemists speak) so strongly of the Fire, that their Odor did not
betray from what Vegetables they had been forced; the other Aromatic Oil was
enriched with the genuine smell and taste of the Concrete; and spontaneously
coagulating it self into white butter did manifest self to be the true Oil of
Annisseeds; which Concrete I therefore chose to employ about this Experiment,
that the Difference of these Oils might be more conspicuous then it would have
been, had I instead of it destill'd another Vegetable.

I had almost forgot to take notice, that there is another sort of Bodies,
which though not obtained from Concretes by Distillation, many Chemists are
wont to call their Sulphur; not only because such substances are, for the most
part, high colored (whence they are also, and that more properly, called
Tinctures) as dissolved Sulphurs are wont to be; but especially because they
are, for the most part, abstracted and separated from the rest of the Mass by
Spirit of Wine: which Liquor those men supposing to be Sulphurous, they
conclude, that what it works upon, and abstracts, must be a Sulphur also. And
upon this account they presume, that they can sequester the sulphur even of
Minerals and Metalls; from which it is known that they cannot by Fire alone
separate it. To all This I shall answer; That if these sequestered substances
where indeed the sulphurs of the Bodies whence they are drawn, there would as
well be a great Disparity betwixt Chemical Sulphurs obtained by Spirit of Wine,
as I have already shown there is betwixt those obtained by Distillation in the
form of Oils: which will be evident from hence, that not to urge that
themselves ascribe distinct virtues to Mineral Tinctures, extolling the
Tincture of Gold against such and such Diseases; the Tincture of Antimony, or
of its Glass, against others; and the Tincture of Emerauld against others; it is
plain, that in Tinctures drawn from Vegetables, if the superfluous spirit of
Wine be distilled off, it leaves at the bottom that thicker substance which
Chemists use to call the Extract of the Vegetable. And that these Extracts are
endowed with very differing Qualities according to the Nature of the Particular
Bodies that afforded them (though I fear seldom with so much of the specific
virtues as is wont to be imagined) is freely confessed both by Physicians and
Chemists. But, Eleutherius, (says Carneades) we may here take Notice that the
Chemists do as well in this case, as in many others, allow themselves a License
to abuse Words: For not again to argue from the differing properties of
Tinctures, that they are not exactly pure and Elementary Sulphurs; they would
easily appear not to be so much as Sulphur's, although we should allow Chemical
Oils to deserve that Name. For however in some Mineral Tinctures the Natural
fixtness of the extracted Body does not always suffer it to be easily further
resoluble into differing substances; Yet in very many extracts drawn from
Vegetables, it may very easily be manifested that the spirit of Wine has not
sequestered the sulphurous Ingredient from the saline and Mercurial ones; but
has dissolved (for I take it to be a Solution) the finer Parts of the Concrete
(without making any nice distinction of their being perfectly Sulphurous or
not) and united it self with them into a kind of Magistery; which consequently
must contain Ingredients or Parts of several sorts. For we see that the stones
that are rich in vitriol, being often drenched with Rainwater, the Liquor will
then extract a sine and transparent substance coagulable into Vitriol; and yet
though this Vitriol be readily dissoluble in Water, it is not a true Elementary
Salt, but, as You know, a body resoluble into very differing Parts, whereof one
(as I shall have occasion to tell You anon) is yet of a Metalline, and
consequently not of an Elementary Nature. You may consider also, that common
Sulphur is readily dissoluble in Oil of Turpentine, though notwithstanding its
Name it abounds as well, if not as much, in Salt as in true Sulphur; witness
the great quantity of saline Liquor it affords being set to flame away under a
glass Bell. Nay I have, which perhaps You will think strange, with the same
Oil of Turpentine alone easily enough dissolved crude Antimony finely powdered
into a Blood-red Balsam, wherewith perhaps considerable things may be performed
in Surgery. And if it were now Requisite, I could tell You of some other Bodies
(such as Perhaps You would not suspect) that I have been able to work upon with
certain Chemical Oils. But instead of digressing further I shall make this use
of the Example I have named. That it is not unlikely, but that Spirit of Wine
which by its pungent taste, and by some other Qualities that argue it better
(especially its Reduciblenesse, according to Helmont, into Alcali, and Water,)
seems to be as well of a Saline as of a Sulphurous Nature, may well be
supposed Capable of Dissolving Substances That are not merely Elementary
sulphurs, though perhaps they may abound with Parts that are of kin thereunto.
For I find that Spirit of Wine will dissolve Gumm Lacca, Benzoine, and the
Resinous Parts of Jallap, and even of Guaiacum; whence we may well suspect that
it may from Spices, Herbs, and other less compacted Vegetables, extract
substances that are not perfect Sulphurs but mixed Bodies. And to put it past
Dispute, there is many a Vulgar Extract drawn with Spirit of Wine, which
committed to Distillation will afford such differing substances as will Loudly
proclaim it to have been a very compounded Body. So that we may justly suspect,
that even in Mineral Tinctures it will not always follow, that because a red
substance is drawn from the Concrete by spirit of Wine, that Substance is its
true and Elementary Sulphur. And though some of these Extracts may perhaps be
inflamable; Yet besides that others are not, and besides that their being
reduced to such Minuteness of Parts may much facilitate their taking Fire;
besides this, I say, We see that common Sulphur, common Oil, Gumm Lac, and
many Unctuous and Resinous Bodies, will flame well enough, though they be of
very compounded natures: Nay Travelers of Unsuspected Credit assure Us, as a
known thing, that in some Northern Countries where Firr trees and Pines abound,
the poorer sort of Inhabitants use Long splinters of those Resinous Woods to
burn instead of Candles. And as for the redness wont to be met with in such
solutions, I could easily show, that it is not necessary it should proceed from
the Sulphur of the Concrete, Dissolved by the Spirit of Wine; if I had leisure
to manifest how much Chemists are wont to delude themselves and others by the
Ignorance of those other causes upon whose account spirit of Wine and other
Menstruums may acquire a red or some other high color. But to return to our
Chemical Oils, supposing that they were exactly pure; Yet I hope they would
be, as the best spirit of Wine is, but the more inflamable and deflagrable. And
therefore since an Oil can be by the Fire alone immediately turned into flame,
which is something of a very differing Nature from it: I shall Demand how this
Oil can be a Primogeneal and Incorruptible Body, as most Chemists would have
their Principles; Since it is further resoluble into flame, which whether or no
it be a portion of the Element of Fire, as an Aristotelian would conclude, is
certainly something of a very differing Nature from a Chemical Oil, since it
burns, and shines, and mounts swiftly upwards; none of which a Chemical Oil
does, whilst it continues such. And if it should be Objected, that the
Dissipated Parts of this flaming Oil may be caught and collected again into
Oil or Sulphur; I shall demand, what Chemist appears to have ever done it; and
without Examining whether it may not hence be as well said that sulphur is but
compacted Fire, as that Fire is but diffused Sulphur, I shall leave you to
consider whether it may not hence be argued, that neither Fire nor Sulphur are
primitive and indestructible Bodies; and I shall further observe that, at least
it will hence appear that a portion of matter may without being Compounded with
new Ingredients, by having the Texture and Motion of its small parts changed,
be easily, by the means of the Fire, endowed with new Qualities, more differing
from them it had before, then are those which suffice to discriminate the
Chemists Principles from one another.

We are next to Consider, whether in the Anatomy of mixed Bodies, that which
Chemists call the Mercurial part of them be un-compounded, or no. But to tell
You True, though Chemists do Unanimously affirm that their Resolutions discover
a Principle, which they call Mercury, yet I find them to give of it
Descriptions so Differing, and so Aenigmaticall, that I, who am not ashamed to
confess that I cannot understand what is not sense, must acknowledge to you
that I know not what to make of them. Paracelsus himself, and therefore, as you
will easily believe, many of his Followers, does somewhere call that Mercury
which ascends upon the burning of Wood, as the Peripateticks are wont to take
the same smoke for Air; and so seems to define Mercury by Volatility, or (if I
may coin such a Word) Effumability. But since, in this Example, both Volatile
Salt and Sulphur make part of the smoke, which does indeed consist also both of
Phlegmatic and Terrene Corpuscles, this Notion is not to be admitted; And I
find that the more sober Chemists themselves disavow it. Yet to show you how
little of clearness we are to expect in the accounts even of latter Spagyrists,
be pleased to take notice, that Beguinus, even in his Tyrocinium Chymicum,
written for the Instruction of Novices, when he comes to tell us what are meant
by the Tria Prima, which for their being Principles ought to be defined the
more accurately and plainly, gives us this Description of Mercury; Mercurius
(says he) est liquor ille acidus, permeabilis, Chm. Tyrocin. lib. 1. Cap. 2.
penetrabilis, aethereus, ac purissimus, a quo omnis Nutricatio, Sensus, Motus,
Vires, Colores, Senectutisque Praeproperae retardatio. Which words are not so
much a Definition of it, as an Encomium: and yet Quercetanus in his Description
of the same Principle adds to these, diverse other Epithets. But both of them,
to skip very many other faults that may be found with their Metaphorical
Descriptions, speak incongruously to the Chemists own Principles. For if
Mercury be an Acid Liquor, either Hermetical Philosophy must err in ascribing
all Tastes to Salt, or else Mercury must not be a Principle, but Compounded of a
Saline Ingredient and somewhat else. Libavius, though he find great fault with
the obscurity of what the Chemists write concerning their Mercurial Principle,
does yet but give us such a Negative Description of it, as Sennertus, how
favorable soever to the Tria Prima, is not satisfied with. And this Sennertus
Himself, though the Learned Champion for the Hypostatical Principles, does
almost as frequently as justly complain of the unsatisfactoriness of what the
Chemists teach concerning their Mercury; and yet he himself (but with his
wonted modesty) Substitutes instead of the Description of Libavius, another,
which many Readers, especially if they be not Peripateticks, will not know what
to make of. For scarce telling us any more, then that in all bodies that which
is found besides Salt and Sulphur, and the Elements, or, as they call them,
Phlegm and Dead Earth, is that Spirit which in Aristotle's Language may be
called (...). He says that which I confess is not at all satisfactory to me,
who do not love to seem to acquiesce in any man's Mystical Doctrines, that I may
be thought to understand them.

If (says Eleutherius) I durst presume that the same thing would be thought
clear by me, and those that are fond of such cloudy Expressions as You justly
Tax the Chemists for, I should venture to offer to Consideration, whether or
no, since the Mercurial Principle that arises from Distillation is unanimously
asserted to be distinct from the salt and Sulphur of the same Concrete, that
may not be called the Mercury of a Body, which though it ascend in
Distillation, as do the Phlegm and Sulphur, is neither insipid like the
former, nor inflamable like the latter. And therefore I would substitute to the
too much abused Name of Mercury, the more clear and Familiar Appellation of
Spirit, which is also now very much made use of even by the Chemists
themselves, of our times, though they have not given us so Distinct an
Explication, as were fit, of what may be called the Spirit of a mixed Body.

I should not perhaps (says Carneades) much quarrel with your Notion of
Mercury. But as for the Chemists, what they can mean, with congruity to their
own Principles, by the Mercury of Animals and Vegetables, 'twill not be so
easy to find out; for they ascribe Tastes only to the Saline Principle, and
consequently would be much put to it to show what Liquor it is, in the
Resolution of Bodies, that not being insipid, for that they call Phlegm,
neither is inflamable as Oil or Sulphur, nor has any Taste; which according to
them must proceed from a Mixture, at least, of Salt. And if we should take
Spirit in the sense of the Word received among Modern Chemists and Physicians,
for any Distilled Liquor that is neither Phlegm nor oil, the Appellation
would yet appear Ambiguous enough. For, plainly, that which first ascends in
the Distillation of Wine and Fermented Liquors, is generally as well by
Chemists as others reputed a Spirit. And yet pure Spirit of Wine being wholly
inflamable ought according to them to be reckoned to the Sulphurous, not the
Mercurial Principle. And among the other Liquors that go under the name of
Spirits, there are diverse which seem to belong to the family of Salts, such as
are the Spirits of Nitre, Vitriol, Sea Salt and others, and even the Spirit of
Hartshorn, being, as I have tried, in great part, if not totally reducible
into Salt and Phlegm, may be suspected to be but a Volatile Salt disguised by
the Phlegm mingled with it into the form of a Liquor. However if this be a
Spirit, it manifestly differs very much from that of Vinager, the Taste of the
one being Acid, and the other Salt, and their Mixture in case they be very
pure, sometimes occasioning an Effervescence like that of those Liquors the
Chemists count most contrary to one another. And even among those Liquors that
seem to have a better title then those hitherto mentioned, to the name of
Spirits, there appears a sensible Diversity; For spirit of Oak, for instance,
differs from that of Tartar, and this from that of Box, or of Guaiacum. And in
short, even these spirits as well as other Distilled Liquors manifest a great
Disparity betwixt themselves, either in their Actions on our senses, or in
their other operations.

And (continues Carneades) besides this Disparity that is to be met with among
those Liquors that the Modernes call spirits, and take for similar bodies, what
I have formerly told you concerning the Spirit of Box-wood may let you see that
some of those Liquors not only have qualities very differing from others, but
may be further resolved into substances differing from one another.

And since many modern Chemists and other Naturalists are pleased to take the
Mercurial spirit of Bodies for the same Principle, under differing names, I
must invite you to observe, with me, the great difference that is conspicuous
betwixt all the Vegetable and Animal spirits I have mentioned and running
Mercury. I speak not of that which is commonly sold in shops that many of
themselves will confess to be a mixed Body; but of that which is separated from
Metals, which by some Chemists that seem more Philosophers then the rest, and
especially by the above mentioned Claveus, is (for distinction sake) called
Mercurius Corporum. Now this Metalline Liquor being one of those three
Principles of which Mineral Bodies are by Spagyrists affirmed to be composed
and to be resoluble into them, the many notorious Differences betwixt them and
the Mercuries, as They call Them, of Vegetables and Animals will allow me to
infer, either that Minerals and the other two sorts of Mixed Bodies consist not
of the same Elements, or that those Principles whereinto Minerals are
immediately resolved, which Chemists with great ostentation show us as the true
principles, of them, are but Secundary Principles, or Mixts of a peculiar sort,
which must be themselves reduced to a very differing form, to be of the same
kind with Vegetable and Animal Liquors.

But this is not all; for although I formerly told You how Little Credit there
is to be given to the Chemical Processes commonly to be met with, of Extracting
the Mercuries of Metals, Yet I will now add, that supposing that the more
Judicious of Them do not untruly affirm that they have really drawn true and
running Mercury from several Metals (which I wish they had clearly taught Us
how to do also,) yet it may be still doubted whether such extracted Mercuries
do not as well differ from common Quicksilver, and from one another, as from
the Mercuries of Vegetables and Animalls. Claveus, in his Apology, speaking of
some experiments whereby Metalline Mercuries may be fixed into the nobler
metals, Dixi autem de argento vivo a metallis prolicito, quod vulgar ob nimiam
frigiditatem and humiditatem nimium concoctioni est contumax, nec ab auro solum
alterato coerceri potest. Gast. Clave. in Apoll.
adds, that he spoke of the Mercuries drawn from metals; because common
Quicksilver by reason of its excessive coldness and moisture is unfit for that
particular kind of operation; for which though a few lines before he prescribes
in general the Mercuries of Metalline Bodies, yet he chiefly commends that
drawn by art from silver. And elsewhere, in the same Book, he tells us, that he
himself tried, that by bare coction the quicksilver of Tin or Pewter (argen um
vivum ex stanno prolicitum) may by an efficient cause, as he speaks, be turned
into pure Gold. And the Experienced Alexander van Suchten, somewhere tells us,
that by a way he intimates may be made a Mercury of Copper, not of the Silver
color of other Mercuries, but green; to which I shall add, that an eminent
person, whose name his travells and learned writings have made famous, lately
assured me that he had more then once seen the Mercury of Lead (which what ever
Authors promise, you will find it very difficult to make, at least in any
considerable quantity) fixed into perfect Gold. And being by me demanded whether
or no any other Mercury would not as well have been changed by the same
Operations, he assured me of the Negative.

And since I am fallen upon the mention of the Mercuries of metals, you will
perhaps expect (Eleutherius!) that I should say something of their two other
principles; but I must freely confess to you, that what Disparity there may be
between the salts and sulphurs of Metals and other Menerals, I am not my self
experienced enough in the separations and examens of them, to venture to
determine: (for as for the salts of Metals, I formerly represented it as a
thing much to be questioned, whether they have any at all:) And for the
processes of separation I find in Authors, if they were (what many of them are
not) successfully practicable, as I noted above, yet they are to be performed
by the assistance of other bodies, so hardly, if upon any terms at all,
separable from them, that it is very difficult to give the separated principles
all their due, and no more. But the Sulphur of Antimony which is vehemently
vomitive, and the strongly scented Anodyne Sulphur of Vitriol inclines me to
think that not only Mineral Sulphurs differ from Vegetable ones, but also from
one another, retaining much of the nature of their Concretes. The salts of
metals, and of some sort of minerals, You will easily guess by the Doubts I
formerly expressed, whether metals have any salt at all, that I have not been
so happy as yet to see, perhaps not for want of curiosity. But if Paracelsus
did always write so consentaneously to himself that his opinion were
confidently to be collected from every place of his writings where he seems to
express it, I might safely take upon me to tell you, that he both countenances
in general what I have delivered in my Fourth main consideration, and in
particular warrants me to suspect that there may be a difference in metalline
and mineral Salts, as well as we find it in those of other bodies. For, Sulphur
(says he) aliud in auro, aliud in argento, Paracel. de Mineral. Troct 1. page
141.
aliud in ferro, aliud in plumbo, stanno, etc. sic aliud in Saphiro, aliud in
Smaragdo, aliud in rubino, chrysolito, amethisto, magnete, etc. Item aliud in
lapidibus, silice, salibus, fontibus, etc. nec vero tot sulphura tantum, sed
and tot idem salia; sal aliud in metallis, aliud in gemmis, aliud in lapidibus,
aliud in salibus, aliud in vitriolo, aliud in alumine: similis etiam Mercurii
est ratio. Alius in Metallis, alius in Gemmis, etc. Ita ut unicuique speciei
suus peculiaris Mercurius sit. Et tamen res saltem tres sunt; una essentia est
sulphur; una est sal; una est Mercurius. Addo quod and specialius adhuc singula
dividantur; aurum enim non unum, sed multiplex, ut et non unum pyrum, pomum,
sed idem multiplex; totidem etiam sulphura auri, salia auri, mercurii auri;
idem competit etiam metallis and gemmis; ut quot saphyri praestantiores,
laeviores, etc. tot etiam saphyrica sulphura, saphyrica salia, suphyrici
Mercurii, etc. Idem verum etiam est de turconibus and gemmis aliis universis.
From which passage (Eleutherius) I suppose you will think I might without
rashness conclude, either that my opinion is favored by that of Paracelsus, or
that Paracelsus his opinion was not always the same. But because in diverse
other places of his writings he seems to talk at a differing rate of the three
Principles and the four Elements, I shall content my self to infer from the
alleged passage, that if his doctrine be not consistent with that Part of mine
which it is brought to countenance, it is very difficult to know what his
opinion concerning salt, sulphur and mercury, was; and that consequently we had
reason about the beginning of our conferences, to decline taking upon us,
either to examine or oppose it.

I know not whether I should on this occasion add, that those very bodies the
Chemists call Phlegm and Earth do yet recede from an Elementary simplicity.
That common Earth and Water frequently do so, notwithstanding the received
contrary opinion, is not denied by the more wary of the modern Peripateticks
themselves: and certainly, most Earths are much less simple bodies then is
commonly imagined even by Chemists, who do not so consideratly to prescribe and
employ Earths Promiscuously in those distillations that require the mixture of
some caput mortuum, to hinder the flowing together of the matter, and to retain
its grosser parts. For I have found some Earths to yield by distillation a
Liquor very far from being inodorous or insipid; and it is a known observation,
that most kinds of fat Earth kept covered from the rain, and hindered from
spending themselves in the production of vegetables, will in time become
impregnated with Saltpeter.

But I must remember that the Water and Earths I ought here to speak of, are
such as are separated from mixed Bodies by the fire; and therefore to restrain
my Discourse to such, I shall tell you, That we see the Phlegm of Vitriol (for
instance) is a very effectual remedy against burns; and I know a very Famous
and experienced Physician, whose unsuspected secret (himself confessed to me)
it is, for the discussing of hard and Obstinate Tumors. The Phlegm of
Vinager, though drawn exceeding leasurly in a digesting Furnace, I have
purposely made trial of; and sometimes found it able to draw, though slowly, a
saccharine sweetness out of Lead; and as I remember by long Digestion, I
dissolved Corpals in it. The Phlegm of the sugar of Saturn is said to have
very peculiar properties. Diverse Eminent Chemists teach, that it will dissolve
Pearls, which being precipitated by the spirit of the same concrete are thereby
(as they say) rendered volatile; which has been confirmed to me, upon his own
observation, by a person of great veracity. The Phlegm of Wine, and indeed
diverse other Liquors that are indiscriminately condemnd to be cast away as
phlegm, are endowed with qualities that make them differ both from mere water,
and from each other; and whereas the Chemists are pleased to call the caput
mortuum of what they have distilled (after they have by affusion of water drawn
away its salt) terra damnata, or Earth, it may be doubted whether or no those
earths are all of them perfectly alike: and it is scarce to be doubted, but
that there are some of them which remain yet unreduc'd to an Elementary nature.
The ashes of wood deprived of all the salt, and bone-Ashes, or calcined
Hartshorn, which Refiners choose to make Tests of, as freest from Salt, seem
unlike: and he that shall compare either of these insipid ashes to Lime, and
much more to the calx of Talk (though by the affusion of water they be
exquisitely dulcified) will perhaps see cause to think them things of a
somewhat differing nature. And it is evident in Colcothar that the exactest
calcination, followed by an exquisite dulcification, does not always reduce
the remaining body into elementary earth; for after the salt or Vitriol (if the
Calcination have been too faint) is drawn out of the Colcothar, the residue is
not earth, but a mixed body, rich in Medical virtues (as experience has informed
me) and which Angelus Sala affirms to be partly reducible into malleable
Copper; which I judge very probable: for though when I was making Experiments
upon Colcothar, I was destitute of a Furnace capable of giving a heat intense
Enough to bring such a Calx to Fusion; yet having conjectured that if Colcothar
abounded with that Metal, Aqua Fortis would find it out there, I put some
dulcifi'd Colcothar into that Menstruum, and found the Liquor, according to my
Expectation, presently Colored as Highly as if it had been an Ordinary
Solution of Copper.

THE SKEPTICAL CHEMIST. The Fifth Part.
HEre Carneades making a pause, I must not deny (says his Friend to him) that
I think You have sufficiently proved that these distinct Substances which
Chemists are wont to obtain from Mixed Bodies, by their Vulgar Destillation, are
not pure and simple enough to deserve, in Rigor of speaking, the Name of
Elements, or Principles. But I suppose You have heard, that there are some
Modern Spagyrists, who give out that they can by further and more Skillful
Purifications, so reduce the separated Ingredients of Mixed Bodies to an
Elementary simplicity, That the Oils (for Instance) extracted from all Mixts
shall as perfectly resemble one another, as the Drops of Water do.

If you remember (replies Carneades) that at the Beginning of our Conference
with Philoponus, I declared to him before the rest of the Company, that I would
not engage my self at present to do any more then examine the usual proofs
alleged by Chemists, for the Vulgar doctrine of their three Hypostatical
Principles; You will easily perceive that I am not obliged to make answer to
what you newly proposed; and that it rather grants, then disproves what I have
been contending for: Since by pretending to make so great a change in the
reputed Principles that Destillation affords the common Spagyrists, it is
plainly enough presupposed, that before such Artificial Depurations be made,
the Substances to be made more simple were not yet simple enough to be looked
upon as Elementary; Wherefore in case the Artists you speak of could perform
what they give out they can, yet I should not need to be ashamed of having
questioned the Vulgar Opinion touching the tria Prima. And as to the thing it
self, I shall freely acknowledge to you, that I love not to be forward in
determining things to be impossible, till I know and have considered the means
by which they are proposed to be effected. And therefore I shall not
peremptorily deny either the possibility of what these Artists promise, or my
Assent to any just Inference; however destructive to my Conjectures, that may
be drawn from their performances. But give me leave to tell you withal, that
because such promises are wont (as Experience has more then once informed me)
to be much more easily made, then made good by Chemists, I must withhold my
Belief from their assertions, till their Experiments exact it; and must not be
so easy as to expect before hand, an unlikely thing upon no stronger
Inducements then are yet given me: Besides that I have not yet found by what I
have heard of these Artists, that though they pretend to bring the several
Substances into which the Fire has divided the Concrete, to an exquisite
simplicity, They pretend also to be able by the Fire to divide all Concretes,
Minerals, and others, into the same number of Distinct Substances. And in the
mean time I must think it improbable, that they can either truly separate as
many differing Bodies from Gold (for Instance) or Osteocolla, as we can do from
Wine, or Vitriol; or that the Mercury (for Example) of Gold or Saturn would be
perfectly of the same Nature with that of Hartshorn; and that the sulphur of
Antimony would be but Numerically different from the Distilled butter or oil
of Roses.

But suppose (says Eleutherius) that you should meet with Chemists, who would
allow you to take in Earth and Water into the number of the principles of Mixed
Bodies; and being also content to change the Ambiguous Name of Mercury for that
more intelligible one of spirit, should consequently make the principles of
Compound Bodies to be Five; would you not think it something hard to reject so
plausible an Opinion, only because the Five substances into which the Fire
divides mixed Bodies are not exactly pure, and Homogeneous? For my part
(Continues Carneades) I cannot but think it somewhat strange, in case this
Opinion be not true, that it should fall out so luckily, that so great a
Variety of Bodies should be Analyz'd by the Fire into just five Distinct
substances; which so little differing from the Bodies that bear those names,
may so Plausibly be called Oil, Spirit, Salt, Water, and Earth.

The Opinion You now propose (answers Carneades) being another then that I was
engaged to examine, it is not requisite for me to Debate it at present; nor
should I have leisure to do it thoroughly. Wherefore I shall only tell you in
General, that though I think this Opinion in some respects more defensible then
that of the Vulgar Chemists; yet you may easily enough learn from the past
Discourse what may be thought of it: Since many of the Objections made against
the Vulgar Doctrine of the Chemists seem, without much alteration, employable
against this Hypothesis also. For, besides that this Doctrine does as well as
the other take it for granted, (what is not easy to be proved) that the Fire
is the true and Adequate Analyzer of Bodies, and that all the Distinct
substances obtainable from a mixed Body by the Fire, were so pre-existent in it,
that they were but extricated from each other by the Analysis; Besides that
this Opinion, too, ascribe to the Productions of the Fire an Elementary
simplicity, which I have shown not to belong to them; and besides that this
Doctrine is liable to some of the other Difficulties, wherewith That of the
Tria Prima is encumbered; Besides all this, I say, this quinary number of
Elements, (if you pardon the Expression) ought at least to have been restrained
to the Generality of Animal and Vegetable Bodies, since not only among these
there are some Bodies (as I formerly argued) which, for ought has yet been made
to appear, do consist, either of fewer or more similar substances then
precisely Five. But in the Mineral Kingdom, there is scarce one Concrete that
has been evinced to be adequatly divisible into such five Principles or
Elements, and neither more nor less, as this Opinion would have every mixed Body
to consist of.

And this very thing (continues Carneades) may serve to take away or lessen
your Wonder, that just so many Bodies as five should be found upon the
Resolution of Concretes. For since we find not that the fire can make any such
Analysis (into five Elements) of Metals and other Mineral Bodies, whose Texture
is more strong and permanent, it remains that the Five Substances under
consideration be Obtained from Vegetable and Animal Bodies, which (probably by
reason of their looser Contexture) are capable of being Distilled. And as to
such Bodies, it is natural enough, that, whether we suppose that there are, or
are not, precisely five Elements, there should ordinarily occurr in the
Dissipated parts a five Fold Diversity of Scheme (if I may so speak.) For if
the Parts do not remain all fixed, as in Gold, Calcined Talck, etc. nor all
ascend, as in the Sublimation of Brimstone, Camphire, etc. but after their
Dissipation do associate themselves into new Schemes of Matter; it is very
likely, that they will by the Fire be divided into fixed and Volatile (I mean,
in Reference to that degree of heat by which they are destill'd) and those
Volatile parts will, for the most part, ascend either in a dry form, which
Chemists are pleased to call, if they be Tastless, Flowers; if Sapid, Volatile
Salt; or in a Liquid Form. And this Liquor must be either inflamable, and so
pass for oil, or not inflamable, and yet subtle and pungent, which may be
called Spirit; or else strengthless or insipid, which may be named Phlegm, or
Water. And as for the fixed part, or Caput Mortuum, it will most commonly
consist of Corpuscles, partly Soluble in Water, or Sapid, (especially if the
Saline parts were not so Volatile, as to fly away before) which make up its
fixed salt; and partly insoluble and insipid, which therefore seems to challenge
the name of Earth. But although upon this ground one might easily enough have
foretold, that the differing substances obtained from a perfectly mixed Body by
the Fire would for the most part be reducible to the five newly mentioned
States of Matter; yet it will not presently follow, that these five Distinct
substances were simple and primogeneal bodies, so preexistent in the Concrete
that the fire does but take them asunder. Besides that it does not appear, that
all Mixed Bodies, (witness, Gold, Silver, Mercury, etc.) Nay nor perhaps all
Vegetables, which may appear by what we said above of Camphire, Benzoin, etc.
are resoluble by Fire into just such differing Schemes of Matter. Nor will the
Experiments formerly alleged permit us to look upon these separated Substances
as Elementary, or uncompounded. Neither will it be a sufficient Argument of
their being Bodies that deserve the Names which Chemists are pleased to give
them, that they have an Analogy in point of Consistence, or either Volatility
or Fixtness, or else some other obvious Quality, with the supposed Principles,
whose names are ascribed to them. For, as I told you above, notwithstanding
this Resemblance in some one Quality, there may be such a Disparity in others,
as may be more fit to give them Differing Appellations, then the Resemblance is
to give them one and the same. And indeed it seems but somewhat a gross Way of
judging of the Nature of Bodies, to conclude without Scruple, that those must
be of the same Nature that agree in some such General Quality, as Fluidity,
Dryness, Volatility, and the like: since each of those Qualities, or States of
Matter, may Comprehend a great Variety of Bodies, otherwise of a very differing
Nature; as we may see in the Calxes of Gold, of Vitriol, and of Venetian Talck,
compared with common Ashes, which yet are very dry, and fixed by the vehemence
of the Fire, as well as they. And as we may likewise gather from what I have
formerly Observed, touching the Spirit of Box-Wood, which though a Volatile,
Sapid, and not inflamable Liquor, as well as the Spirits of Hartshorn, of
Blood and others, (and therefore has been hitherto called, the Spirit, and
esteemed for one of the Principles of the Wood that affords it;) may yet, as I
told You, be subdivided into two Liquors, differing from one another, and one
of them at least, from the Generality of other Chemical Spirits.

But you may your self, if you please, (pursues Carneades) accommodate to the
Hypothesis you proposed what other particulars you shall think applicable to
it, in the foregoing Discourse. For I think it unseasonable for me to meddle
now any further with a Controversy, which since it does not now belong to me,
Leaves me at Liberty to Take my Own time to Declare my Self about it.

Eleutherius perceiving that Carneades was somewhat unwilling to spend any more
time upon the debate of this Opinion, and having perhaps some thoughts of
taking hence a Rise to make him Discourse it more fully another time, thought
not fit as then to make any further mention to him of the proposed opinion, but
told him;

I presume I need not mind you, Carneades, That both the Patrons of the ternary
number of Principles, and those that would have five Elements, endeavor to
back their experiments with a specious Reason or two; and especially some of
those Embracers of the Opinion last named (whom I have conversed with, and
found them Learned men) assign this Reason of the necessity of five distinct
Elements; that otherwise mixed Bodies could not be so compounded and tempered as
to obtain a due consistence and competent Duration. For Salt (say they) is the
Basis of Solidity; and Permanency in Compound Bodies, without which the other
four Elements might indeed be variously and loosly blended together, but would
remain incompacted; but that Salt might be dissolved into minute Parts, and
conveyed to the other Substances to be compacted by it, and with it, there is a
Necessity of Water. And that the mixture may not be too hard and brittle, a
Sulphurous or Oily Principle must intervene to make the mass more tenacious;
to this a Mercurial spirit must be superadded; which by its activity may for a
while premeate, and as it were leaven the whole Mass, and thereby promote the
more exquisite mixture and incorporation of the Ingredients. To all which
(lastly) a portion of Earth must be added, which by its dryness and poracity
may soak up part of that water wherein the Salt was dissolved, and eminently
concur with the other ingredients to give the whole body the requisite
consistence.

I perceive (says Carneades smiling) that if it be true, as 'twas lately
rooted from the Proverb, That good Wits have bad Memories, You have that Title,
as well as a better, to a place among the good Wits. For you have already more
then once forgot, that I declared to you that I would at this Conference
Examine only the Experiments of my Adversaries, not their Speculative Reasons.
Yet it is not (Subjoynes Carneades) for fear of meddling with the Argument you
have proposed, that I decline the examining it at present. For if when we are
more at leisure, you shall have a mind that we may Solemnly consider of it
together; I am confident we shall scarce find it insoluble. And in the mean
time we may observe, that such a way of Arguing may, it seems, be speciously
accommodated to differing Hypotheses. For I find that Beguinus, and other
Assertors of the Tria Prima, pretend to make out by such a way, the
requisiteness of their Salt, Sulphur and Mercury, to constitute mixed Bodies,
without taking notice of any necessity of an Addition of Water and Earth.

And indeed neither sort of Chemists seem to have duly considered how great
Variety there is in the Textures and Consistences of Compound Body; sand how
little the consistence and Duration of many of them seem to accommodate and be
explicable by the proposed Notion. And not to mention those almost
incorruptible Substances obtainable by the Fire, which I have proved to be
somewhat compounded, and which the Chemists will readily grant not to be
perfectly mixed Bodies: (Not to mention these, I say) If you will but recall to
mind some of those Experiments, whereby I showed You that out of common Water
only mixed Bodies (and even living ones) of very differing consistences, and
resoluble by Fire into as many Principles as other bodies acknowledged to be
perfectly mixed; if you do this, I say, you will not, I suppose, be averse from
believing, that Nature by a convenient disposition of the minute parts of a
portion of matter may contrive bodies durable enough, and of this, or that, or
the other Consistence, without being obliged to make use of all, much less of
any Determinate quantity of each of the five Elements, or of the three
Principles to compound such bodies of. And I have (pursues Carneades) something
wondered, Chemists should not consider, that there is scarce any body in Nature
so permanent and indissoluble as Glass; which yet themselves teach us may be
made of bare Ashes, brought to fusion by the mere Violence of the Fire; so
that, since Ashes are granted to consist but of pure Salt and simple Earth,
sequestered from all the other Principles or Elements, they must acknowledge,
That even Art it self can of two Elements only, or, if you please, one
Principle and one Element, compound a Body more durable then almost any in the
World. Which being undeniable, how will they prove that Nature cannot compound
Mixed Bodies, and even durable Ones, under all the five Elements or material
Principles.

But to insist any longer on this Occasional Disquisition, Touching their
Opinion that would Establish five Elements, were to remember as little as You
did before, that the Debate of this matter is no part of my first undertaking;
and consequently, that I have already spent time enough in what I look back
upon but as a digression, or at best an Excursion.

And thus, Eleutherius, (says Carneades) having at length gone through the
four Considerations I proposed to Discourse unto you, I hold it not unfit, for
fear my having insisted so long on each of them may have made you forget their
Series, briefly to repeat them by telling you, that

Since, in the first place, it may justly be doubted whether or no the Fire be,
as Chemists suppose it, the genuine and Universal Resolver of mixed Bodies;

Since we may doubt, in the next place, whether or no all the Distinct
Substances that may be obtained from a mixed body by the Fire were pre-existent
there in the forms in which they were separated from it;

Since also, though we should grant the Substances separable from mixed Bodies
by the fire to have been their component Ingredients, yet the Number of such
substances does not appear the same in all mixed Bodies; some of them being
Resoluble into more differing substances than three, and Others not being
Resoluble into so many as three.

And Since, Lastly, those very substances that are thus separated are not for
the most part pure and Elementary bodies, but new kinds of mixts;

Since, I say, these things are so, I hope you will allow me to infer, that
the Vulgar Experiments (I might perchance have Added, the Arguments too) wont
to be Alleged by Chemists to prove, that their three Hypostatical Principles
do adequately compose all mixed Bodies, are not so demonstrative as to reduce a
wary Person to acquiesce in their Doctrine, which, till they Explain and prove
it better, will by its perplexing darkness be more apt to puzzle then satisfy
considering men, and will to them appear encumbered with no small Difficulties.

And from what has been hitherto deduced (continues Carneades) we may Learn,
what to Judge of the common Practice of those Chemists, who because they have
found that Diverse compound Bodies (for it will not hold in All) can be
resolved into, or rather can be brought to afford two or three differing
Substances more then the Soot and Ashes, whereinto the naked fire commonly
divides them in our Chymnies, cry up their own Sect for the Invention of a New
Philosophy, some of them, as Helmont, etc. styling themselves Philosophers by
the Fire; and the most part not only ascribing, but as far as in them lies,
engrossing to those of their Sect the Title of PHILOSOPHERS.

But alas, how narrow is this Philosophy, that reaches but to some of those
compound Bodies, which we find but upon, or in the crust or outside of our
terrestrial Globe, which is it self but a point in comparison of the vast
extended Universe, of whose other and greater parts the Doctrine of the Tria
Prima does not give us an Account! For what does it teach us, either of the
Nature of the Sun, which Astronomers affirm to be eightscore and odd times
bigger then the whole Earth? or of that of those numerous sixth Stars, which,
for ought we know, would very few, if any of them, appear inferior in bulk
and brightness to the Sun, if they were as near us as He? What does the knowing
that Salt, sulphur and Mercury, are the Principles of Mixed Bodies, inform us
of the Nature of that vast, fluid, and Aetherial Substance, that seems to make
up the interstellar, and consequently much the greatest part of the World? for
as for the opinion commonly ascribed to Paracelsus, as if he would have not
only the four Peripatetick Elements, but even the Celestial parts of the
Universe to consist of his three Principles, since the modern Chemists
themselves have not thought so groundless a conceit worth their owning, I shall
not think it Worth my confuting.

But I should perchance forgive the Hypothesis I have been all this while
examining, if, though it reaches but to a very little part of the World, it did
at least give us a satisfactory account of those things to which it is said to
reach. But I find not, that it gives us any other then a very imperfect
information even about mixed Bodies themselves: For how will the knowledge of
the Tria Prima discover to us the Reason, why the Loadstone draws a Needle and
disposes it to respect the Poles, and yet seldom precisely points at them? how
will this Hypothesis teach Us how a Chick is formed in the Egg, or how the
Seminal Principles of Mint, Pompions, and other Vegitables, that I mentioned to
You above, can fashion Water into Various Plants, each of them endowed with its
peculiar and determinate shape, and with diverse specific and discriminating
Qualities? How does this Hypothesis show us, how much Salt, how much Sulphur,
and how much Mereury must be taken to make a Chick or a Pompion? and if We know
that, what Principle is it, that manages these Ingredients, and contrives (for
instance) such Liquors as the White and Yelk of an Egg into such a variety of
Textures as is requisite to fashion the Bones, Veins, Arteries, Nerves,
Tendons, Feathers, Blood, and other parts of a Chick; and not only to fashion
each Limb, but to connect them altogether, after that manner that is most
congruous to the perfection of the Animal which is to Consist of Them? For to
say, that some more fine and subtle part of either or all the Hypostatical
Principles is the Director in all this business, and the Architect of all this
Elaborate structure, is to give one occasion to demand again, what proportion
and way of mixture of the Tria Prima afforded this Architectonick Spirit, and
what Agent made so skilful and happy a mixture? And the Answer to this
Question, if the Chemists will keep themselves within their three Principles,
will be liable to the same Inconvenience, that the Answer to the former was.
And if it were not to entrench upon the Theme of a Friend of ours here
present, I could easily prosecute the Imperfections of the Vulgar Chemists
Philosophy, and show you, that by going about to explicate by their three
Principles, I say not, all the abstruse Properties of mixed Bodies, but even
such Obvious and more familiar Phenomenon as Fluidity and Firmness, The Colors
and Figures of Stones, Minerals, and other compound Bodies, The Nutrition of
either Plants or Animals, the Gravity of Gold or Quicksilver compared with Wine
or Spirit of Wine; By attempting, I say, to render a reason of these (to omit a
thousand others as difficult to account for) from any proportion of the three
simple Ingredients, Chemists will be much more likely to discredit themselves
and their Hypothesis, then satisfy an intelligent Inquirer after Truth.

But (interposes Eleutherus) This Objection seems no more then may be made
against the four Peripatetick Elements. And indeed almost against any other
Hypothesis, that pretends by any Determinate Number of Material Ingredients to
render a reason of the Phenomenon of Nature. And as for the use of the Chemical
Doctrine of the three Principles, I suppose you need not be told by me, Senn.
de Cons. and Dissen. p. 165,
that The great Champion of it, The Learned Sennertus, assigns this noble use
of the Tria Prima, That from Them, as the nearest and most Proper Principles,
may be Deduced and Demonstrated the Properties which are in Mixed Bodies, and
which cannot be Proximately (as They speak) deduced from the Elements. And
This, says he, is chiefly Apparent, when we Inquire into the Properties and
Faculties of Medecines. And I know (continues Eleutherius) That the Person You
have assumed, of an Opponent of the Hermetick Doctrine, will not so far
prevail against your Native and wonted Equity, as To keep You from
acknowledging that Philosophy is much beholden to the Notions and Discoveries
of Chemists.

If the Chemists You speak of (Replies Carneades) had been so modest, or so
Discreet, as to propose their Opinion of the Tria Prima, but as a Notion useful
among Others, to increase Humane knowledge, they had deserved more of our
thanks; and less of our Opposition; but since the Thing that they pretend is
not so much to contribute a Notion toward the Improvement of Philosophy, as to
make this Notion attended by a few less considerable ones) pass for a New
Philosophy it self. Nay, since they boast so much of this phancie of theirs,
that the famous Quercetanus scruples not to write, that if his most certain
Doctrine of the three Principles were sufficiently Learned, Examined, and
Cultivated, it would easily Dispel all the Darkness that benights our minds,
and bring in a Clear Light, that would remove all Difficulties. This School
affording Theorems and Axioms irrefragable, and to be admitted without Dispute
by impartial Judges; and so useful withal, as to exempt us from the necessity
of having recourse, for want of the knowledge of causes, to that Sanctuary of
the igorant, Occult Qualities; since, I say, this Domestic Notion of the
Chemists is so much overvalued by them, I cannot think it unfit, they should be
made sensible of their mistake; and be admonished to take in more fruitful and
comprehensive Principles, if they mean to give us an account of the Phenomenon
of Nature; and not confine themselves and (as far as they can) others to such
narrow Principles, as I fear will scarce enable them to give an account (I mean
an intelligible one) of the tenth part (I say not) of all the Phenomenon of
Nature; but even of all such as by the Leucippian or some of the other sorts of
Principles may be plausibly enough explicated. And though I be not unwilling to
grant, that the incompetency I impute to the Chemical Hypothesis is but the
same which may be Objected against that of the four Elements, and diverse other
Doctrines that have been maintained by Learnedmen; yet since it is the Chemical
Hypothesis only which I am now examining, I see not why, if what I impute to it
be a real inconvenience, either it should cease to be so, or I should scruple
to object it, because other Theories are liable thereunto, as well as the
Hermetical. For I know not why a Truth should be thought less a Truth for the
being fit to overthrow variety of Errors.

I am obliged to You (continues Carneades, a little smiling) for the favorable
Opinion You are pleased to express of my Equity, if there be no design in it.
But I need not be tempted by an Artifice, or invited by a Complement, to
acknowledge the great service that the Labors of Chemists have done the Lovers
of useful Learning; nor even on this occasion shall their Arrogance hinder my
Gratitude. But since we are as well examining to the truth of their Doctrine as
the merit of their industry, I must in order to the investigation of the first,
continue a reply, to talk at the rate of the part I have assumed; And tell you,
that when I acknowledge the usefulness of the Labors of Spagyrists to Natural
Philosophy, I do it upon the score of their experiments, not upon that of Their
Speculations; for it seems to me, that their Writings, as their Furnaces,
afford as well smoke as light; and do little less obscure some subjects, then
they illustrate others. And though I am unwilling to deny, that it is difficult
for a man to be an Accomplished Naturalist, that is a stranger to Chemistry, yet
I look upon the common Operations and practices of Chemists, almost as I do on
the Letters of the Alphabet, without whose knowledge it is very hard for a man
to become a Philosopher; and yet that knowledge is very far from being
sufficient to make him One.

But (says Carneades, resuming a more serious Look) to consider a little more
particularly what you alledg in favor of the Chemical Doctrine of the Tria
Prima, though I shall readily acknowledge it not to be unuseful, and that the
Divisers and Embracers of it have done the Commonwealth of Learning some
service, by helping to destroy that excessive esteem, or rather veneration,
wherewith the Doctrine of the four Elements was almost as generally as
undeservedly entertained; yet what has been alleged concerning the usefulness
of the Tria Prima, seems to me liable to no contemptible Difficulties.

And first, as for the very way of Probation, which the more Learned and more
Sober Champions of the Chemical cause employ to evince the Chemical Principles
in Mixed Bodies, it seems to me to be far enough from being convincing. This
grand and leading Argument, your Sennertus Himself, who lays Great weight upon
it, and tells us, that the most Learned Philosophers employ this way of
Reasoning to prove the most important things, proposes thus: Ubicunque (says
he) pluribus eaedem affectiones and qualitates insunt, per commune quoddam
Principium insint necesse est, sicut omnia sunt Gravia propter terram, calida
propter Ignem. At Colores, Odores, Sapores, esse (...), and similia alia,
mineralibus, Metallis, Gemmis, Lapidibus, Plantis, Animalibus insunt. Ergo per
commune aliquod principium, and subiectum, insunt. At tale principium non sunt
Elementa. Nullam enim habent ad tales qualitates producendas potentiam. Ergo
alia principia, unde fluant, inquirenda sunt.

In the Recital of this Argument, (says Carneades) I therefore thought fit to
retain the Language wherein the Author proposes it, that I might also retain
the propriety of some Latin Terms, to which I do not readily remember any
that fully answer in English. But as for the Argumentation it self, it is built
upon a precarious supposition, that seems to me neither Demonstrable nor true;
for, how does it appear, that where the same Quality is to be met with in many
Bodies, it must belong to them upon the Account of some one Body whereof they
all partake? (For that the Major of our Authors Argument is to be Understood of
the Material Ingredients of bodies, appears by the Instances of Earth and Fire
he annexes to explain it.) For to begin with that very Example which he is
pleased to allege for himself; how can he prove, that the Gravity of all
Bodies proceeds from what they participate of the Element of Earth? Since we
see, that not only common Water, but the more pure Distilled Rain Water is
heavy; and Quicksilver is much heavier than Earth it self; though none of my
Adversaries has yet proved, that it contains any of that Element. And I the
Rather make use of this Example of Quicksilver, because I see not how the
Assertors of the Elements will give any better Account of it then the Chemists.
For if it be demanded how it comes to be Fluid, they will answer, that it
participates much of the Nature of Water. And indeed, according to them, Water
may be the Predominant Element in it, since we see, that several Bodies which
by Distillation afford Liquors that weigh more then their Caput Mortuum do not
yet consist of Liquor enough to be Fluid. Yet if it be demanded how Quicksilver
comes to be so heavy, then it is replied, that it is by reason of the Earth that
abounds in it; but since, according to them, it must consist also of air, and
partly of Fire, which they affirm to be light Elements, how comes it that it
should be so much heavier then Earth of the same bulk, though to fill up the
porosities and other Cavities it be made up into a mass or paste with Water,
which it self they allow to be a heavy Element. But to return to our
Spagyrists, we see that Chemical Oils and fixed Salts, though never so
exquisitely purified and freed from terrestrial parts, do yet remain ponderous
enough. And Experience has informed me, that a pound, for instance, of some of
the heaviest Woods, as Guajacum that will sink in Water, being burnt to Ashes
will yield a much less weight of them (whereof I found but a small part to be
Alcalyzate) then much lighter Vegetables: As also that the black Charcoal of it
will not sink as did the wood, but swim; which argues that the Differing
Gravity of Bodies proceeds chiefly from their particular Texture, as is
manifest in Gold, the closest and Compactest of Bodies, which is many times
heavier then we can possibly make any parcel of Earth of the same Bulk. I will
not examine, what may be argued touching the Gravity or Quality Analagous
thereunto, of even Celestial bodies, from the motion of the spots about the
Sun, d from the appearing equality of the supposed Seas in the Moon; nor
consider how little those Phaemonea would agree with what Sennertus presumes
concerning Gravity. But further to invalidate his supposition, I shall demand,
upon what Chemical Principle Fluidity depends? And yet Fluidity is, two or
three perhaps excepted, the most diffused quality of the universe, and far more
General then almost any other of those that are to be met with in any of the
Chymicall Principles, or Aristotelian Elements; since not only the Air, but
that vast expansion we call Heaven, in comparison of which our Terrestrial
Globe (supposing it were all Solid) is but a point; and perhaps to the Sun and
the fixed Stars are fluid bodies. I demand also, from which of the Chemical
Principles Motion flows; which yet is an affection of matter much more General
then any that can be deduced from any of the three Chemical Principles. I might
ask the like Question concerning Light, which is not only to be found in the
Kindled Sulphur of mixed Bodis, but (not to mention those sorts of rotten Woods,
and rotten Fish that shine in the Dark) in the tails of living Glow-wormes, and
in the Vast bodies of the Sun and Stars. I would gladly also know, in which of
the three Principles the Quality, we call Sound, resides as in its proper
Subject; since either Oil falling upon Oil, or Spirit upon Spirit, or Salt
upon Salt, in a great quantity, and from a considerable height, will make a
noise, or if you please, create a sound, and (that the objection may reach the
Aristotelians) so will also water upon water, and Earth upon Earth. And I could
name other qualities to be met within diverse bodies, of which I suppose my
Adversaries will not in haste assign any Subject, upon whose Account it must
needs be, that the quality belongs to all the other several bodies.

And, before I proceed any further, I must here invite you to compare the
supposition we are examining, with some other of the Chemical Tenants. For,
first they do in effect teach that more then one quality may belong to, and be
deduced from, one Principle. For, they ascribe to Salt Tastes, and the power of
Coagulation; to sulphur, as well Odours as inflamableness; And some of them
ascribe to Mercury, Colors; as all of them do effumability, as they speak. And
on the other side, it is evident that Volatility belongs in common to all the
three Principles, and to Water too. For it is manifest, that Chemical Oils are
Volatile; That also diverse Salts Emerging, upon the Analysis of many Concretes,
are very Volatile, is plain from the figitiveness of Salt, of Harts-horne,
flesh, etc. ascending in the Distillation of those bodies. How easily water may
be made to ascend in Vapors, there is scarce any body that has not observed.
And as for what they call the Mercuriall Principle of bodies, that is so apt to
be raised in the form of Steam, that Paracelsus and others define it by that
aptness to fly up; so that (to draw that inference by the way) it seems not
that Chemists have been accurate in their Doctrine of qualities, and their
respective Principles, since they both derive several qualities from the same
Principle, and must ascribe the same quality to almost all their Principles and
other bodies besides. And thus much for the first thing taken for granted,
without sufficient proof, by your Sennertus: And to add that upon the Bye
(continues Carneades) we may hence learn what to judge of the way of
Argumentation, which that fierce Champion of the Aristotelians against the
Chemists, In Thessalo redivivo. Cap. 10. page 73. and 74.
Anthonius Guntherus Billichius employes, where he pretends to prove against
Beguinus, that not only the four Elements do immediately concur to Constitute
every mixed body, and are both present in it, and obtainable from it upon its
Dissolution; but that in the Tria Prima themselves, whereinto Chemists are wont
to resolve mixed Bodies, each of them clearly discovers it self to consist of
four Elements. The Ratiocination it self (pursues Carneades) being somewhat
unusual, I did the other Day Transcribe it, and (says He, pulling a Paper out
of his Pocket) it is this. Ordiamur, cum Beguino, a ligno viridi, quod si
concremetur, videbis in sudore Aquam, in fumo Aerem, in flamma and Prunis
Ignem, Terram in cineribus: Quod si Beguino placuerit ex eo colligere humidum
aquosum, cohibere humidum oleaginosum, extrahere ex cineribus salem; Ego ipsi
in unoquoque horum seorsim quatuor Elementa ad oculum demonstrabo, eodem
artificio quo in ligno viridi ea demonstravi. Humorem aquosum admovebo Igni.
Ipse Aquam Ebullire videbit, in Vapore Aerem conspiciet, Ignem sentiet in
aestu, plus minus Terrae in sedimento apparebit. Humor porro Oleaginosus aquam
humiditate and fluiditate per se, accensus vero Ignem flamma prodit, fumo
Aerem, fuligine, nidore and amurca terram. Salem denique ipse Beguinus siccum
vocat and Terrestrem, qui tamen nec fusus Aquam, nec caustica vi ignem celare
potest; ignis vero Violentia in halitus versus nec ab Aere se alienum esse
demonstrat; Idem de Lacte, de Ovis, desemine Lini, de Garyophyllis, de Nitro,
de sale Marino, denique de Antimonio, quod fuit de Ligno viridi Judicium; eadem
de illorum partibus, quas Beguinus adducit, sententia, quae de viridis ligni
humore aquoso, quae de liquore ejusdem oleoso, quae de sale fuit.

This bold Discourse (resumes Carneades, putting up again his Paper,) I think
it were not very difficult to confure, if his Arguments were as considerable as
our time will probably prove short for the remaining and more necessary Part of
my Discourse; wherefore referring You for an Answer to what was said concerning
the Dissipated Parts of a burnt piece of green Wood, to what I told Themistius
on the like occasion, I might easily show You, how slightly and superficially
our Guntherus talks of the dividing the flame of Green Wood into his four
Elements; When he makes that vapor to be air, which being caught in Glasses
and condensed, presently discovers it self to have been but an Aggregate of
innumerable very minute drops of Liquor; and When he would prove the Phlegmes
being composed of Fire by that Heat which is adventitious to the Liquor, and
ceases upon the absence of what produced it (whether that be an Agitation
proceeding from the motion of the External Fire, or the presence of a Multitude
of igneous Atoms pervading the pores of the Vessel, and nimbly permeating the
whole Body of the Water) I might, I say, urge these and diverse other Weaknesses
of His Discourse. But I will rather take Notice of what is more pertinent to
the Occasion of this Digression, namely, that Taking it for Granted, that
Fluidity (with which he unwarily seems to confound Humidity) must proceed from
the Element of Water, he makes a Chemical Oil to Consist of that Elementary
Liquor; and yet in the very next Words proves, that it consists also of Fire,
by its Inflamability; not remembering that exquisitely pure Spirit of Wine is
both more Fluid then Water it self, and yet will Flame all away without leaving
the Least Aqueous Moisture behind it; and without such an Amurca and Soot as he
would Deduce the presence of Earth from. So that the same Liquor may according
to his Doctrine be concluded by its great Fluidity to be almost all Water; and
by its burning all away to be all disguised Fire. And by the like way of
Probation our Author would show that the fixed salt of Wood is compounded of the
four Elements. For (says he) being turned by the violence of the Fire into
steames, it shows it self to be of kin to Air; whereas I doubt whether he ever
saw a true fixed Salt (which to become so, must have already endured the
violence of an Incinerating Fire) brought by the Fire alone to ascend in the
Form of Exhalations; but I do not doubt that if he did, and had caught those
Exhalations in convenient Vessels, he would have found them as well as the
Steames of common Salt, etc. of a Saline and not an Aereal Nature. And whereas
our Author takes it also for Granted, that the Fusibility of Salt must be
Deduced from Water, it is indeed so much the Effect of heat variously agitating
the Minute Parts of a Body, without regard to Water, that Gold (which by its
being the heavyest and fixtest of Bodies, should be the most Earthy) will be
brought to Fusion by a strong Fire; which sure is more likely to drive away
then increase its Aqueous Ingredient, if it have any; and on the other side,
for want of a sufficient agitation of its minute parts, Ice is not Fluid, but
Solid; though he presumes also that the Mordicant Quality of Bodies must
proceed from a fiery ingredient; whereas, not to urge that the Light and
inflamable parts, which are the most likely to belong to the Element of Fire,
must probably be driven away by that time the violence of the Fire has reduced
the Body to ashes; Not to urge this, I I say, nor that Oil of Vitriol which
quenches Fire, burns the Tongue and flesh of those that Unwarily taste or apply
it, as a caustic does, it is precarious to prove the Presence of Fire in fixed
salts from their Caustic power, unless it were first shown, that all the
Qualities ascribed to salts must be deduced from those of the Elements; which,
had I Time, I could easily manifest to be no easy talk. And not to mention that
our Author makes a Body as Homogeneous as any he can produce for Elementary,
belong both to Water and Fire, Though it be neither Fluid nor Insipid, like
Water; nor light and Volatile, like Fire; he seems to omit in this Anatomy the
Element of Earth, save That he intimates, That the salt may pass for that; But
since a few lines before, he takes Ashes for Earth, I see not how he will avoid
an Inconsistency either betwixt the Parts of his Discourse or betwixt some of
them and his Doctrine. For since There is a manifest Difference betwixt the
Saline and the insipid Parts of Ashes, I see not how substances That Disagree
in such Notable Qualities can be both said to be Portions of an Element, whose
Nature requires that it be Homogeneous, especially in this case where an
Analysis by the Fire is supposed to have separated it from the admixture of
other Elements, which are confessed by most Aristotelians to be Generally found
in common Earth, and to render it impure. And sure if when we have considered
for how little a Disparities sake the Peripateticks make these Symbolizing
Bodies Air and Fire to be two Distinct Elements, we shall also consider that
the Saline part of Ashes is very strongly Tasted, and easily soluble in Water;
whereas the other part of the same Ashes is insipid and indissoluble in the
same Liquor: Not to add, that the one substance is Opacous, and the other
somewhat Diaphanous, nor that they differ in Diverse other Particulars; If we
consider those things, I say, we shall hardly think that both these Substances
are Elementary Earth; And as to what is sometimes objected, that their Saline
Taste is only an Effect of Incineration and Adustion, it has been elsewhere
fully replied to, when proposed by Themistius, and where it has been proved
against him, that however insipid Earth may perhaps by Additaments be turned
into Salt, yet it is not like it should be so by the Fire alone: For we see that
when we refine Gold and Silver, the violentest Fires We can Employ on them give
them not the least Relish of Saltness. And I think Philoponus has rightly
observed, that the Ashes of some Concretes contain very little salt if any at
all; For Refiners suppose that boneashes are free from it, and therefore make
use of them for Tests and Cuppels, which ought to be Destitute of Salt, lest
the Violence of the Fire should bring them to Vitrification; And having
purposely and heedfully tasted a Cuppel made of only bone-ashes and fair water,
which I had caused to be exposed to a Very Violent Fire, acuated by the Blast
of a large pair of Double Bellows, I could not perceive that the force of the
Fire bad imparted to it the least Saltness, or so much as made it less Insipid.

But (says Carneades) since neither You nor I love Repetitions, I shall not
now make any of what else was urged against Themistius but rather invite You to
take notice with me that when our Author, though a Learned Man, and one that
pretends skill enough in Chemistry to reform the whole Art, comes to make good
his confident Undertaking, to give us an occular Demonstration of the immediate
Presence of the four Elements in the resolution of Green Wood, He is fain to
say things that agree very little with one another. For about the beginning of
that passage of His lately recited to you, he makes the sweat as he calls it of
the green Wood to be Water, the smoke Air, the shining Matter Fire, and the
Ashes Earth; whereas a few lines after, he will in each of these, nay (as I
just now noted) in one Distinct Part of the Ashes, show the four Elements. So
that either the former Analysis must be incompetent to prove that Number of
Elements, since by it the burnt Concrete is not reduced into Elementary Bodies,
but into such as are yet each of them compounded of the four Elements; or else
these Qualities from which he endeavors to deduce the presence of all the
Elements, in the fixed salt, and each of the other separated substances, will be
but a precarious way of probation: especially if you consider, that the
extracted Alcali of Wood, being for ought appears at least as similar a Body as
any that the Peripateticks can show us, if its differing Qualities must argue
the presence of Distinct Elements, it will scarce be possible for them by any
way they know of employing the fire upon a Body, to show that any Body is a
Portion of a true Element: And this recals to my mind, that I am now but in an
occasional Excussion, which aiming only to show that the Peripateticks as well
as the Chemists take in our present Controversy something for granted which
they ought to prove, I shall return to my exceptions, where I ended the first
of them, and further tell you, that neither is that the only precarious thing
that I take notice of in Sennertus his Argumentation; for when he inferrs, that
because the Qualities he Mentions as Colors, Smells, and the like, belong not
to the Elements; they therefore must to the Chemical Principles, he takes that
for granted, which will not in haste be proved; as I might here manifest, but
that I may be and by have a fitter opportunity to take notice of it. And thus
much at present may suffice to have Discoursed against the Supposition, that
almost every Quality must have some (...), as they speak, some Native
receptacle, wherein as in its proper Subject of in hesion it peculiarly
resides, and on whose account that quality belongs to the other Bodies, Wherein
it is to be met with. Now this Fundamental supposition being once Destroyed,
whatsoever is built upon it, must fall to ruin of it self.

But I consider further, that Chemists are (for ought I have found) far from
being able to explicate by any of the Tria Prima, those qualities which they
pretend to belong primarily unto it, and in mixed Bodies to Deduce from it. It Is
true indeed, that such qualities are not explicable by the four Elements; but
it will not therefore follow, that they are so by the three hermetical
Principles; and this is it that seems to have deceived the Chemists, and is
indeed a very common mistake amongst most Disputants, who argue as if there
could be but two Opinions concerning the Difficulty about which they contend;
and consequently they infer, that if their Adversaries Opinion be Erroneous,
Their's must needs be the Truth; whereas many questions, and especially in
matters Physiological, may admit of so many Differing Hypotheses, that 'twill
be very inconsiderate and fallacious to conclude (except where the Opinions are
precisely Contradictory) the Truth of one from the falsity of another. And in
our particular case it is no way necessary, that the Properties of mixed Bodies
must be explicable either by the Hermetical, or the Aristotelian Hypothesis,
there being diverse other and more plausible ways of explaining them, and
especially that, which deduces qualities from the motion, figure, and
contrivance of the small parts of Bodies; as I think might be shown, if the
attempt were as seasonable, as I fear it would be Tedious.

I will allow then, that the Chemists do not causelessly accuse the Doctrine of
the four elements of incompetency to explain the Properties of Compound bodies.
And for this Rejection of a Vulgar Error, they ought not to be denied what
praise men may deserve for exploding a Doctrine whose Imperfections are so
conspicuous, that men needed but not to shut their Eyes, to discover them. But
I am mistaken, if our Hermetical Philosophers Themselves need not, as well as
the Peripateticks, have Recourse to more Fruitful and Comprehensive Principles
then the trial Prima, to make out the Properties of the Bodies they converse
with. Not to accumulate Examples to this purpose, (because I hope for a fitter
opportunity to prosecute this Subject) let us at present only point at Color,
that you may guess by what they say of so obvious and familiar a Quality, how
little Instruction we are to expect from the Tria Prima in those more abstruse
ones, which they with the Aristotelians style Occult. For about Colors,
neither do they at all agree among themselves, nor have I met with any one, of
which of the three Persuasions soever, that does intelligibly explicate Them.
The Vulgar Chemists are wont to ascribe Colors to Mercury; De Cons. and
dissen. cap. 11. page 186.
Paracelsus in diverse places attributes them to Salt; and Sennertus, having
recited their differing Opinions, Dissents from both, and referrs Colors
rather unto Sulphur. But how Colors do, nay, how they may, arise from either
of these Principles, I think you will scarce say that any has yet intelligibly
explicated. And if Mr. Boil will allow me to show you the Experiments which he
has collected about Colors, you will, I doubt not, confess that bodies
exhibit colors, not upon the Account of the Predominancy of this or that
Principle in them, but upon that of their Texture, and especially the
Disposition of their superficial parts, whereby the Light rebounding thence to
the Eye is so modifi'd, as by differing Impressions variously to affect the
Organs of Sight. I might here take notice of the pleasing variety of Colors
exhibited by the Triangular glass, (as it is wont to be called) and demand, what
addition or decrement of either Salt, Sulphur, or Mercury, befalls the Body of
the Glass by being Prismatically figured; and yet it is known, that without that
shape it would not affor'd those colors as it does. But because it may be
objected, that these are not real, but apparent Colors; that I may not lose
time in examing the Distinction, I will allege against the Chemists, a couple
of examples of Real and Permanent Colors Drawn from Metalline Bodies, and
represent, that without the addition of any extraneous body, Quicksilver may by
the Fire alone, and that in glass Vessels, be deprived of its silver-like
Color, and be turned into a Red Body; and from this Red Body without Addition
likewise may be obtained a Mercury Bright and Specular as it was before; So
that I have here a lasting Color Generated and Destroyed (as I have seen) at
pleasure, without adding or taking away either Mercury, Salt, or Sulphur; and
if you take a clean and slender piece of hardened steel, and apply to it the
flame of a candle at some little distance short of the point, You shall not
have held the Steel long in the flame, but You shall perceive diverse Colors,
as Yellow, Red and Blew, to appear upon the Surface of the metal, and as it
were run along in chase of one another toward the point; So that the same
body, and that in one and the same part, may not only have a new color
produced in it, but exhibit successively diverse Colors within a minute of an
hour, or thereabouts; and any of these Colors may by Removing the Steel from
the Fire, become Permanent, and last many years. And this Production and
Variety of Colors cannot reasonably be supposed to proceed from the Accession
of any of the three Principles, to which of them soever Chemists will be
pleased to ascribe Colors; especially considering, that if you but suddenly
Refrigerate that Iron, First made Red hot, it will be hardened and Colorless
again; and not only by the Flame of a Candle, but by any other equivalent heat
Conveniently applied, the like Colors will again be made to appear and succeed
one another, as at the First. But I must not any further prosecute an
Occasional Discourse, though that were not so Difficult for me to do, as I fear
it would be for the Chemists to give a better Account of the other Qualities,
by their Principles, then they have done of Colors. And your Sennertus Himself
(though an Author I much value) would I fear have been exceedingly puzl'd to
resolve, by the Tria Prima, half that Catalogue of Problems, Senuert. de Con.
seus. and Dissens. page 165.166.
which he challenges the Vulgar Peripateticks to explicate by their four
Elements. And supposing it were true, that Salt or Sulphur were the Principle
to which this or that Quality may be peculiarly referred, yet though he that
teaches us this teaches us something concerning That quality, yet he Teaches us
but something. For indeed he does not Teach us That which can in any Tolerable
measure satisfy an inquisitive Searcher after Truth. For what is it to me to
know, that such a quality resides in such a Principle or Element, whilst I
remain altogether ignorant of the Cause of that quality, and the manner of its
production and Operation? How little do I know more then any Ordinary Man of
Gravity, if I know but that the Heaviness of mixed bodies proceeds from that of
the Earth they are composed of, if I know not the reason why the Earth is
Heavy? And how little does the Chemist teach the Philosopher of the Nature of
Purgatition, if he only tells him that the Purgative Virtue of Medicines
resides in their Salt? For, besides that this must not be conceded without
Limitation, since the purging parts of many Vegetables Extracted by the Water
wherein they are infused, are at most but such compounded Salts, (I mean
mingled with Oil, and Spirit, and Earth, as Tartar and diverse other Subjects
of the Vegetable Kingdom afford;) And since too that Quicksilver precipitated
either with Gold, or without Addition, into a powder, is wont to be strongly
enough Cathartical, though the Chemists have not yet proved, that either Gold
or Mercury have any Salt at all, much less any that is Purgative; Besides this,
I say, how little is it to me, to know That it is the Salt of the Rhubarb (for
Instance) that purges, if I find That it does not purge as Salt; since scarce
any Elementary Salt is in small quantity cathartical. And if I know not how
Purgation in general is effected in a Humane Body? In a word, as it is one thing
to know a man's Lodging, and another, to be acquainted with him; so it may be
one thing to know the subject wherein a Quality principally resides, and
another thing to have a right notion and knowledge of the quality its self. Now
that which I take to be the reason of this Chemical Deficiency, is the same
upon whose account I think the Aristotelian and diverse other Theories
incompetent to explicate the Origin of Qualities. For I am apt to think, that
men will never be able to explain the Phenomenon of Nature, while they
endeavor to deduce them only from the Presence and Proportion of such or such
material Ingredients, and consider such ingredients or Elements as Bodies in a
state of rest; whereas indeed the greatest part of the affections of matter,
and consequently of the Phenomenon of nature, seems to depend upon the motion
and the continuance of the small parts of Bodies. For it is by motion that one
part of matter acts upon another; and it is, for the most part, the texture of
the Body upon which the moving parts strike, that modifies to motion or
Impression, and concurrs with it to the production of those Effects which make
up the chief part of the Naturalists Theme.

But (says Eleutherius) me thinks for all this, you have left some part of
what I alleged in behalf of the three principles, unanswered. For all that you
have said will not keep this from being a useful Discovery, that since in the
Salt of one Concrete, in the Sulphur of another and the Mercury of a third, the
Medicinal virtue of it resides, that Principle ought to be separated from the
rest, and there the desired faculty must be sought for.

I never denied (Replies Carneades) that the Notion of the Tria Prima may be of
some use, but (continues he laughing) by what you now alledg for it, it will
but appear That it is useful to Apothecaries, rather than to Philosophers, The
being able to make things Operative being sufficient to those, whereas the
Knowledge of Causes is the Thing looked after by These. And let me Tell You,
Eleutherius, even this it self will need to be entertained with some caution.

For first, it will not presently follow, That if the Purgative or other virtue
of a simple may be easily extracted by Water or Spirit of Wine, it Resides in
the Salt or Sulphur of the Concrete; Since unless the Body have before been
resolved by the Fire, or some Other Powerful Agent, it will, for the most part,
afford in the Liquors I have named, rather the finer compounded parts of it
self, Than the Elementary ones. As I noted before, That Water will dissolve not
only pure Salts, but Crystals of Tartar, Gum Arabic, Myrr'h, and Other
Compound Bodies. As also Spirit of Wine will Dissolve not only the pure Sulphur
of Concretes, but likewise the whole Substance of diverse Resinous Bodies, as
Benzoin, the Gummous parts of Jallap, Gum Lacca, and Other bodies that are
counted perfectly Mixed. And we see that the Extracts made either with Water or
Spirit of Wine are not of a simple and Elementary Nature, but Masses consisting
of the looser Corpuseles, and finer parts of the Concretes whence they are
Drawn; since by Distillation they may be Divided into more Elementary
substances.

Next, we may consider That even when there intervenes a Chemical resolution by
he Fire, it is seldom in the Saline or Sulphurous principle, as such, that the
desired Faculty of the Concrete Resides; But, as that Titular Salt or Sulphur
is yet a mixed body, though the Saline or Sulphurous Nature be predominant in
it. For, if in Chemical Resolutions the separated Substances were pure and
simple Bodies, and of a perfect Elementary Nature; no one would be endued with
more Specific Virtues, than another; and their qualities would Differ as
Little as do those of Water. And let me add this upon the bye, That even
Eminent Chemists have suffered themselves to be reprehended by me for their
over great Diligence in purifying some of the things they obtain by Fire from
mixed Bodies. For though such completely purifyed Ingredients of Bodies might
perhaps be more satisfactory to our Understanding; yet others are often more
useful to our Lives, the efficacy of such Chemical Productions depending most
upon what they retain of the Bodies whence they are separated, or gain by the
new associations of the Dissipated among themselves; whereas if they were
merely Elementary, their uses would be comparatively very small; and the
virtues of Sulphurs, Salts, or Other such Substances of one denomination, would
be the very same.

And by the Way (Eleutherius) I am inclined upon this ground to Think, That the
artificial resolution of compound bodies by Fire does not so much enrich
mankind, as it divides them into their supposed Principles; as upon the score
of its making new compounds by new combinations of the dissipated parts of the
resolved Body. For by this means the Number of mixed Bodies is considerably
increased. And many of those new productions are endowed with useful qualities,
diverse of which they owe not to the body from which they were obtein'd, but to
Their newly Acquired Texture.

But thirdly, that which is principally to be Noted is this, that as there are
diverse Concretes whose Faculties reside in some one or other of those differing
Substances that Chemists call their Sulphurs, Salts, and Mercuries, and
consequently may be best obtained, by analyzing the Concrete whereby the
desired Principles may be had severed or freed from the rest; So there are
other wherein the noblest properties lodge not in the Salt, or Sulphur, or
Mercury, but depend immediately upon the form (or if you will) result from the
determinate structure of the Whole Concrete; and consequently they that go
about to extract the Virtues of such bodies, by exposing them to the Violence
of the Fire, do exceedingly mistake, and take the way to Destroy what they
would obtain.

I remmember that Helmont himself somewhere confesses, That as the Fire betters
some things and improves their Virtues, so it spoils others and makes them
degenerate. And elsewhere he judiciously affirms, that there may be sometimes
greater virtue in a simple, such as Nature has made it, than in any thing that
can by the fire be separated from it. Helm out Pharm. and Dispens. Nov. p. 438.
And lest you should doubt whether he means by the virtues of things those that
are Medical; he has in one place this ingenuous confession; Credo (says he)
simplicia in sua simplicitate esse sufficientia pro sanatione omnium morborum.
Nag. Barthias, even in a Comment upon Beguinus, Vide Jer. ad Begu. Lib. 1. Cap.
17.
scruples not to make this acknowledgment; Valde absurdum est (says he) ex
omnibus rebus extracta facere, salia, quintas essentias; praesertim ex
substantiis per se plane vel subtilibus vel homogeneis, quales sunt uniones,
Corallia, Moscus, Ambra, etc. Consonantly whereunto he also tells Us (and
Vouches the famous Platerus, for having heartily given the same Advertisement
to his Auditors,) that some things have greater virtues, and better suited to
our humane nature, when unprepared, than when they have past the Chemists Fire;
as we see, says my Author, in Pepper; of which some grains swallowed perform
more toward the relief of a Distempered stomach, than a great quantity of the
Oil of the same spice.

It has been (pursues Carneades) by our Friend here present observed concerning
Saltpeter, that none of the substances into which the Fire is wont to divide
it, retains either the Taste, the cooling virtue, or some other of the
properties of the Concrete; and that each of those Substances acquires new
qualities, not to be found in the Saltpeter it self. The shining property of
the tayls of gloworms does survive but so short a time the little animal made
conspicuous by it, that inquisitive men have not scrupled publicly to deride
Baptista Porta and others; who deluded perhaps with some Chemical surmises have
ventured to prescribe the distillation of a Water from the tails of Glowormes,
as a sure way to obtain a liquor shining in the Dark. To which I shall now add
no other example than that afforded us by Amber; which, whilst it remains an
entire body, is endowed with an Electrical faculty of drawing to it self
feathers, strawes, and such like Bodies; which I never could observe either in
its Salt, its Spirit, its Oil, or in the Body I remember I once made by the
reunion of its divided Elements; none of these having such a Texture as the
entire Goncrete. And however Chemists boldly deduce such and such properties
from this or that proportion of their component Principles; yet in Concretes
that abound with this or that Ingredient, it is not always so much by virtue of
its presence, nor its plenty, that the Concrete is qualified to perform such
and such Effects; as upon the account of the particular texture of that and the
other Ingredients, associated after a determinate Manner into one Concrete
(though possibly such a proportion of that ingredient may be more convenient
than an other for the constituting of such a body.) Thus in a clock the hand is
moved upon the dyal, the bell is struck, and the other actions belonging to the
engine are performed, not because the Wheels are of brass or iron, or part of
one metal and part of another, or because the weights are of Lead, but by
Virtue of the size, shape, bigness, and co-aptation of the several parts; which
would perform the same things though the wheels were of Silver, or Lead, or
Wood, and the Weights of Stone or Clay; provided the Fabric or Contrivance of
the engine were the same: though it be not to be denied, that Brass and Steel
are more convenient materials to make clock-wheels of than Lead, or Wood. And
to let you see, Eleutherius, that it is sometimes at least, upon the Texture of
the small parts of a body, and not always upon the presence, or recesse, or
increase, or Decrement of any one of its Principle, that it may lose some such
Qualities, and acquire some such others as are thought very strongly inherent
to the bodies they Reside in. I will add to what may from my past discourse be
referred to this purpose, this Notable Example, from my Own experience; That
Lead may without any additament, and only by various applications of the Fire,
lose its color, and acquire sometimes a gray, sometimes a yellowish, sometimes
a red, sometimes an amethihstine color; and after having past through these,
and perhaps diverse others, again recover its leaden color, and be made a
bright body. That also this Lead, which is so flexible a metal, may be made as
brittle as Glass, and presently be brought to be again flexible and Malleable
as before. And besides, that the same lead, which I find by Microscopes to be
one of the most opacous bodies in the World, may be reduced to a fine
transparent glass; whence yet it may return to an opacous Nature again; and
all this, as I said, without the addition of any extraneous body, and merely by
the manner and Method of exposing it to the Fire.

But (says Carneades) after having already put you to so prolix a trouble, it
is time for me to relieve you with a promise of putting speedily a period to
it; And to make good that promise, I shall from all that I have hitherto
discoursed with you, deduce but this one proposition by way of Corollary. [That
it may as yet be doubted, whether or no there be any determinate Number of
Elements; Or, if you please, whether or no all compound bodies, do consist of
the same number of Elementary ingredients or material Principles.]

This being but an inference from the foregoing Discourse, it will not be
requisite to insist at large on the proofs of it; But only to point at the
chief of Them, and Referr You for Particulars to what has been already
Delivered.

In the First place then, from what has been so largely discoursed, it may
appear, that the Experiments wont to be brought, whether by the common
Peripateticks, or by the vulgar Chemists, to demonstrate that all mixed bodies
are made up precisely either of the four Elements, or the three Hypostatical
Principles, do not evince what they are alleged to prove. And as for the other
common arguments, pretended to be drawn from Reason in favor of the
Aristotelian Hypothesis (for the Chemists are wont to rely almost altogether
upon Experiments) they are Commonly grounded upon such unreasonable or
precarious Suppositions, that it is altogether as easy and as just for any man
to reject them, as for those that take them for granted to assert them, being
indeed all of them as indemonstrable as the conclusion to be inferred from
them; and some of them so manifestly weak and prooflesse; that he must be a
very courteous adversary, that can be willing togrant them; and as unskilful a
one, that can be compelled to do so.

In the next place, it may be considered, if what those Patriarchs of the
Spagyrists, Paracelsus and Helmont, do on diverse occasions positively deliver,
be true; namely that the Alkahest does Resolve all mixed Bodies into other
Principles than the fire, it must be decided which of the two resolutions (that
made by the Alkahest, or that made by the fire) shall determine the number of
the Elements, before we can be certain how many there are.

And in the mean time, we may take notice in the last place, that as the
distinct substances whereinto the Alkahest divides bodies, are affirmed to be
differing in nature from those whereunto they are wont to be reduced by fire,
Novi saxum and lapides omnes in merum salem suo saxo aut lapidi and
aequiponderantem reducere absque omni prorsus sulphurc aut Mercurio.

Helmont. page 409.


and to be obtained from some bodies more in Number than from some others;
since he tells us, he could totally reduce all sorts of Stones into Salt only,
whereas of a coal he had two distinct Liquors. So, although we should acquiesce
in that resolution which is made by fire, we find not that all mixed bodies are
thereby divided into the same number of Elements and Principles; some Concretes
affordding more of them than others do; Nay and sometimes this or that Body
affording a greater number of Differing substances by one way of management,
than the same yields by another. And they that out of Gold, or Mercury, or
Muscovy-glasse, will draw me as many distinct substances as I can separate from
Vitriol, or from the juice of Grapes variously orderd, may teach me that which
I shall very Thankfully learn. Nor does it appear more congruous to that
variety that so much conduces to the perfection of the Universe, that all
elemented bodies be compounded of the same numberof Elements, then it would be
for a language, that all its words should consist of the same number of Letters.

THE SKEPTICAL CHEMIST OR, A Paradoxical Appendix to the Foregoing Treatise.
The Sixth Part.
HEre Carneades Having Dispach't what he Thought Requisite to oppose against
what the Chemists are wont to allege for Proof of their three Principles,
Paused awhile, and looked about him, to discover whether it were Time for him
and his Friend to Rejoyne the Rest of the Company. But Eleutherius perceiving
nothing yet to forbid Them to Prosecute their Discourse a little further, said
to his Friend, (who had likewise taken Notice of the same thing) I half
expected, Carneades, that after you had so freely declared Your doubting,
whether there be any Determinate Number of Elements, You would have proceeded
to question whether there be any Elements at all. And I confess it will be a
Trouble to me if You defeat me of my Expectation; especially since you see the
leisure we have allowed us may probably suffice to examine that Paradox;
because you have so largly Deduced already many Things pertinent to it, that
you need but intimate how you would have them Applied, and what you would
infer from them.

Carneades having in Vain represented that their leisure could be but very
short, that he had already prated very long, that he was unprepared to maintain
so great and so invidious a Paradox, was at length prevailed with to tell his
Friend; Since, Eleutherius, you will have me Discourse Ex Tempore of the
Paradox you mention, I am content, (though more perhaps to express my
Obedience, then my Opinion) to tell you that (supposing the Truth of Helmonts
and Paracelsus's Alkahestical Experiments, if I may so call them) though it may
seem extravagant, yet it is not absurd to doubt, whether, for ought has been
proved, there be a necessity to admit any Elements, or Hypostatical Principles,
at all.

And, as formerly, so now, to avoid the needless trouble of Disputing severally
with the Aristotelians and the Chemists, I will address my self to oppose them
I have last named, Because their Doctrine about the Elements is more applauded
by the Moderns, as pretending highly to be grounded upon Experience. And, to
deal not only fairly but favorably with them, I will allow them to take in
Earth and Water to their other Principles. Which I consent to, the rather that
my Discourse may the better reach the Tenants of the Peripateticks; who cannot
plead for any so probably as for those two Elements; that of fire above the Air
being Generally by Judicious Men exploded as an Imaginary thing; And the Air
not concurring to compose Mixed Bodies as one of their Elements, but only
lodging in their pores, or Rather replenishing, by reason of its Weight and
Fluidity, all those Cavities of bodies here below, whether compounded or not,
that are big enough to admit it, and are not filled up with any grosser
substance.

And, to prevent mistakes, I must advertize You, that I now mean by Elements,
as those Chemists that speak plainest do by their Principles, certain Primitive
and Simple, or perfectly unmingled bodies; which not being made of any other
bodies, or of one another, are the Ingredients of which all those called
perfectly mixed Bodies are immediately compounded, and into which they are
ultimately resolved: now whether there be any one such body to be constantly
met with in all, and each, of those that are said to be Elemented bodies, is
the thing I now question.

By this State of the controversy you will, I suppose, Guess, that I need not
be so absurd as to deny that there are such bodies as Earth, and Water, and
Quicksilver, and Sulphur: But I look upon Earth and Water, as component parts
of the Universe, or rather of the Terrestrial Globe, not of all mixed bodies.
And though I will not peremptorily deny that there may sometimes either a
running Mercury, or a Combustible Substance be obtained from a Mineral, or even
a Metal; yet I need not Concede either of them to be an Element in the sense
above declared; as I shall have occasion to show you by and by.

To give you then a brief account of the grounds I intend to proceed upon, I
must tell you, that in matters of Philosophy, this seems to me a sufficient
reason to doubt of a known and important proposition, that the Truth of it is
not yet by any competent proof made to appear. And congruously herunto, if I
show that the grounds upon which men are persuaded that there are Elements are
unable to satisfy a considering man, I suppose my doubts will appear rational.

Now the Considerations that induce men to think that there are Elements, may
be conveniently enough referred to two heads. Namely, the one, that it is
necessary that Nature make use of Elements to constitute the bodies that are
reputed Mixed. And the other, That the Resolution of such bodies manifests that
nature had compounded them of Elementary ones.

In reference to the former of these Considerations, there are two or three
things that I have to Represent.

And I will begin with reminding you of the Experiments I not long since
related to you concerning the growth of pompions, mint, and other vegetables,
out of fair water. For by those experiments its seems evident, that Water may
be Transmuted into all the other Elements; from whence it may be inferred,
both, That it is not every Thing Chemists will call Salt, Sulphur, or Spirit,
that needs always be a Primordiate and Ingenerable body. And that Nature may
contex a Plant (though that be a perfectly mixed Concrete) without having all
the Elements previously presented to her to compound it of. And, if you will
allow the relation I mentioned out of Mounsieur De Rochas to be True; then may
not only plants, but Animals and Minerals too, be produced out of Water, And
however there is little doubt to be made, but that the plants my trials
afforded me as they were like in so many other respects to the rest of the
plants of the same Denomination; so they would, in case I had reduced them to
putrefaction, have likewise produced Worms or other infects, as well as the
resembling Vegetables are wont to do; so that Water may, by Various Seminal
Principles, be successively Transmuted into both plants and Animals. And if we
consider that not only Men, but even sucking Children are, but too often,
Tormented with Solid Stones, but that diverse sorts of Beasts themselves,
(whatever Helmont against Experience think to the contrary) may be Troubled
with great and Heavy stones in their Kidneys and Bladders, though they Feed but
upon Grass and other Vegetables, that are perhaps but Disguised Water, it will
not seem improbable that even some Concretes of a mineral Nature, may Likewise
be formed of Water.

We may further Take notice, that as a Plant may be nourisht, and consequently
may Consist of Common water; so may both plants and Animals, (perhaps even from
their Seminal Rudiments) consist of compound Bodies, without having any thing
merely Elementary brought them by nature to be compounded by them: This is
evident in diverse men, who whilst they were Infants were fed only with Milk,
afterward Live altogether upon Flesh, Fish, wine, and other perfectly mixed
Bodies. It may be seen also in sheep, who on some of our English Downs or
Plains, grow very fat by feeding upon the grass, without scarce drinking at
all. And yet more manifestly in the magots that breed and grow up to their full
bigness within the pulps of Apples, Pears, or the like Fruit. We see also,
that Dungs that abound with a mixed Salt give a much more speedy increment to
corn and other Vegetables than Water alone would do: And it has been assured
me, by a man experienced in such matters, that sometimes when to bring up roots
very early, the Mould they were planted in was made over-rich, the very
substance of the Plant has rasted of the Dung. And let us also consider a Graft
of one kind of Fruit upon the upper bough of a Tree of another kind. As for
instance, the Ciens of a Pear upon a White-thorne; for there the ascending
Liquor is already altered, either by the root, or in its ascent by the bark, or
both ways, and becomes a new mixed body: as may appear by the differing
qualities to be met with in the saps of several trees; as particularly, the
medicinal virtue of the Birch-Water (which I have sometimes drunk upon Helmonts
great and not undeserved commendation) Now the graft, being fastened to the
stock must necessarily nourish its self, and produce its Fruit, only out of
this compound Juice prepared for it by the Stock, being unable to come at any
other aliment. And if we consider, how much of the Vegetable he feeds upon may
(as we noted above) remain in an Animal; we may easily suppose, That the blood
of that Animal who Feeds upon this, though it be a Well constituted Liquor, and
have all the differing Corpuscles that make it up kept in order by one
praesiding form, may be a strangely Decompounded Body, many of its parts being
themselves decompounded. So little is it Necessary that even in the mixtures
which nature her self makes in Animal and Vegetable Bodies, she should have
pure Elements at hand to make her compositions of.

Having said thus much touching the constitution of Plants and Animals, I might
perhaps be able to say as much touching that of Minerals, and even Metalls, if
it were as easy for us to make experiment in Order to the production of these,
as of those. But the growth or increment of Minerals being usually a work of
excessively long time, and for the most part performed in the bowels of the
Earth, where we cannot see it, I must instead of Experiments make use, on this
occasion, of Observations.

That stones were not all made at once, but that are some of them now adays
generated, may (though it be denied by some) be fully proved by several
examples, of which I shall now scarce alledg any other, then that famous place
in France known by the name of Les Caves Gentieres, where the Water falling
from the upper Parts of the cave to the ground does presently there condense
into little stones, of such figures as the drops, falling either severally or
upon one another, and coagulating presently into stone, chance to exhibit. Of
these stones some Ingenuous Friends of ours, that went a while since to visit
that place, did me the favor to present me with some that they brought thence.
And I remember that both that sober Relator of his Voyages, Van Linschoten, and
another good Author, inform us that in the Diamond Mines (as they call them) in
the East Indies, when having dig'd the Earth, though to no great depth, they
find Diamonds and take them quite away; Yet in a very few years they find in
the same place new Diamonds produced there since. From both which Relations,
especially the first, it seems probable that Nature does not always stay for
diverse Elementary Bodies, when she is to produce stones. And as for Metals
themselves, Authors of good note assure us, that even they were not in the
beginning produced at once altogether, but have been observed to grow; so that
what was not a Mineral or Metal before became one afterward. Of this it were
easy to alledg many testimonies of professed Chemists. But that they may have
the greater authority, I shall rather present you with a few borrowed from more
unsuspected writers. Sulphuris Mineram (as the inquisitive P. Fallopius notes)
quae nutrix est caloris subterranei fabri seu Archaei fontium and mineralium,
Infra terram citissime renasci testantur Historiae Metallicae. Sunt enim loca e
quibus si hoc anno sulphur effossum fuerit; intermissa fossione per
quadriennium redeunt fossores and omnia sulphur, ut autea, rursus inveniunt
plena. Pliny Relates, In Italiae Insula Ilva, gigni ferri metallum. Strabo
multo expressius; effossum ibi metallum semper regenerari. Nam si effossio
spatio centum annorum intermittebatur, and iterum illue revertebantur, fossores
reperisse maximam copiam ferri regeneratam. Which history not only is
countenanced by Fallopius, from the Incom which the Iron of that Island yielded
the Duke of Florence in his time; but is mentioned more epressely to our
porpose, by the Learned Cesalpinus. Vena (says he) ferri copiofissima est in
Italia; ob eam nobilitata Ilva Tirrheni maris Insula incredibili copia, etiam
nostris temporibus eam gignens: Nam terra quae eruitur dum vena effoditur tota,
procedente tempore in venam convertitur. Which last clause is therefore very
notable, because from thence we may deduce, that earth, by a Metalline plastic
principle latent in it, may be in process of time changed into a metal. And
even Agricola himself, though the Chemists complain of him as their adversary,
acknowledges thus much and more; by telling us that at a Town called Saga in
Germany, In Lygiis, ad Sagam opidum; in pratis eruitur ferrum, fossis ad
altitudinem bipedaneam actis. Id decennio renatum denuo fo ditur non aliter ac
Ilvae ferrum.
they dig up Iron in the Fields, by sinking ditches two foot deep; And adding, *
that within the space of ten years the Ditches are dug again for Iron since
produced, As the same Metal is wont to be obtained in Elva. Also concerning
Lead, not to mention what even Galen notes, that it will increase both in bulk
and Weight if it be long kept in Vaults or Sellars, where the Air is gross and
thick, as he collects from the smelling of those pieces of Lead that were
employed to fasten together the parts of old Statues. Not to mention this, I
say, Boccacius Certaldus, as I find him Quoted by a Diligent Writer, has this
Passage touching the Growth of Lead. Fessularum mons (says he) in Hetruria,
Florentiae civitati imminens, lapides plumbarios babet; qui si excidantur,
brevi temporis spatio, novis incrementis instaurantur; ut (annexes my Author)
tradit Boccacius Cortaldus, qui id compotissimum esse scribit. Nihil hoc novi
est; sed de eadem Plinius, lib. 34. Hist. Nature. cap. 17. dudum prodidit,
Inquiens, mirum in his solis plumbi metallis, quod derelicta fertilius
reviviscunt. In plumbariis secundo Lapide ab Amberga dictis ad Asylum
recrementa congesta in cumulos,
exposita solibus pluviisque paucis annis, reddunt suum metallum cum fenore. I
might Add to these, continues Carneades, many things that I have met with
concerning the Generation of Gold and Silver. But, for fear of wanting time, I
shall mention but two or three Narratives. The First you may find Recorded by
Gerhardus the Physic Professor, in these Words. In valle (says he) Joachimaca
argentum gramini modo and more e Lapidibus minerae velut e radice excrevisse
digiti Longitudine, testis est Dr. Schreterus, qui ejusmodi venas aspectu
jucundas and admirabiles Domi sua aliis saepe monstravit and Donavit. Item Aqua
caerulea Inventa est Annebergae, ubi argentum erat adhuc in primo ente, quae
coagulata redacta est in calcem fixi and boni argenti.

The other two Relations I have not met with in Latin Authors, and yet they
are both very memorable in themselves, and as pertinent to our present purpose.

The first I meet with in the Commentary of Johannes Valehius upon the Kleine
Baur, In which that Industrious Chemist Relates, with many circumstances, that
at a Mine-Town (If I may so English the German Bergstat) eight miles or Leagues
distant from Strasburg called Mariakirch, a Workman came to the Overseer, and
desired employment; but he telling him that there was not any of the best sort
at present for him, added that till he could be preferred to some such, he
might in the mean time, to avoid idleness, work in a Grove or Mine-pit
thereabouts, which at that time was little esteemed. This Workman after some
weeks Labor, had by a Crack appearing in the Stone upon a Stroke given near
the wall, an Invitation Given him to Work his Way through, which as soon as he
had done, his Eyes were saluted by a mighty stone or Lump which stood in the
middle of the Cleft (that had a hollow place behind it) upright, and in show
like an armed-man; but consisted of pure fine Silver having no Vein or Ore by
it, or any other Additament, but stood there free, having only underfoot
something like a burnt matter; and yet this one Lump held in Weight above a
1000 marks, which, according to the Dutch, Account makes 500 pound weight of
fine silver. From which and other Circumstances my Author gathers; That by the
warmth of the place, the Noble Metalline Spirits, (Sulphurous and Mercurial)
were carried from the neighboring Galleries or Vaults, through other smaller
Cracks and Clefts, into that Cavity, and there collected as in a close Chamber
or Cellar; whereinto when they were gotten, they did in process of time settle
into the forementioned precious mass of Metal.

The other Germane Relation is of That great Traveller and Laborious Chemist
Johannes (not Georgus) Agricola; who in his notes upon what Poppius has written
of Antimony, Relates, that when he was among the Hungarian Mines in the deep
Groves, he observed that there would often arise in them a warm Steam (not of
that malignant sort which the Germains call Shwadt, which (says he) is a mere
poison, and often suffocates the Diggers, which fastened it self to the Walls;
and that coming again to review it after a couple of days, he discerned that
it was all very fast, and glistering; whereupon having collected it and
Distilled it per Retortam, he obtained from it a fine Spirit, adding, that the
Mine-Men informed him, that this Steam or Damp of the English Mine (retaining
the dutch Term) would at last have become a Metal, as Gold or Silver.

I referr (says Carneades) to another Occasion, the Use that may be made of
these Narratives toward the explicating the Nature of Metalls; and that of
Fixtness, Malleableness, and some other Qualities conspicuous in them. And in
the mean time, this I may at present deduce from these Observations, That it is
not very probable, that, whenever a Mineral, or even a Metal, is to be
Generated in the Bowels of the Earth, Nature needs to have at hand both Salt,
and Sulphur, and Mercury to Compound it of; for, not to urge that the two last
Relations seem less to favor the Chemists than Aristotle, who would have
Metals Generated of certain Halitus or steams, the forementioned Observations
together, make it seem more Likely that the mineral Earths or those Metalline
steams (wherewith probably such Earths are plentifully imbued) do contain in
them some seminal Rudiment, or some thing Equivalent thereunto; by whose
plastic power the rest of the matter, though perhaps Terrestrial and heavy, is
in Tract of time fashioned into this or That metalline Ore; almost as I
formerly noted, that fair water was by the seminal Principle of Mint, Pompions,
and other Vegetables, contrived into Bodies answerable to such Seeds. And that
such Alterations of Terrestrial matter are not impossible, seems evident from
that notable Practice of the Boylers of Saltpeter, who unanimously observe, as
well here in England as in other Countries; That if an Earth pregnant with
Nitre be deprived, by the affusion of water, of all its true and dissoluble
Salt, yet the Earth will after some years yield them Saltpeter again; For
which reason some of the eminent and skillfullest of them keep it in heaps as a
perpetual Mine of Salt Petre; whence it may appear, that the Seminal Principle
of Nitre latent in the Earth does by degrees Transform the neighboring matter
into a Nitrous Body; for though I deny that some Volatile Nitre may by such
Earths be attracted (as they speak) out of the Air, yet that the innermost
parts of such great heaps that lie so remote from the Air should borrow from it
all the Nitre they abound with, is not probable, for other reasons besides the
remoteness of the Air, though I have not the Leisure to mention them.

And I remember, that a personof Great Credit, and well acquainted with the
ways of making Vitriol, affirmed to me, that he had observed, that a kind of
mineral which abounds in that Salt, being kept within Doors and not exposed (as
is usual) to the free Air and Rains, did of it self in no very long time turn
into Vitriol, not only in the outward or superficial, but even in the internal
and most Central parts.

And I also remember, that I met with a certain kind of Merkasite that lay
together in great Quantities under ground, which did, even in my chamber, in so
few hours begin of it self to turn into Vitriol, that we need not distrust the
newly recited narrative. But to return to what I was saying of Nitre; as Nature
made this Saltpeter out of the once almost and inodorous Earth it was bred in,
and did not find a very stinking and corrosive Acid Liquor, and a sharp
Alcalyzate Salt to compound it of, though these be the Bodies into which the
Fire dissolves it; so it were not necessary that Nature should make up all
Metals and other Minerals of Pre-existent Salt, and Sulphur, and Mereury,
though such Bodies might by Fire be obtained from it. Which one consideration
duly weighed is very considerable in the present controversy: And to this agree
well the Relations of our two German Chemists; for besides that it cannot be
convincingly proved, it is not so much as likely that so languid and moderate a
heat as that within the Mines, should carry up to so great a heat, though in
the form of fumes, Salt, Sulphur and Mercury; since we find in our
Distillations, that it requires a considerable Degree of Fire to raise so much
as to the height of one foot not only Salt, but even Mercury it self, in close
Vessels. And if it be objected, that it seems by the stink that is sometimes
observed when Lightening falls down here below, that sulphurous steams may
ascend very high without any extraordinary Degree of heat; It may be answered,
among other things, that the Sulphur of Silver is by Chemists said to be a fixed
Sulphur, though not altogether so well Digested as that of Gold.

But, proceeds Carneades, If it had not been to afford You some hints
concerning the Origin of Metals, I need not have deduced any thing from these
Observations; It not being necessary to the Validity of my Argument that my
Deductions from them should be irrefragable, because my Adversaries the
Aristotelians and Vulgar Chemists do not, I presume, know any better then I, a
priori, of what ingredients Nature compounds Metals and Minerals. For their
Argument to prove that those Bodies are made up of such Principles, is drawn a
posteriori; I mean from this, that upon the Analysis of Mineral bodies they are
resolved into those differing substances. That we may therefore examine this
Argument, Let us proceed to consider what can be alleged in behalf of the E.
lements from the Resolutions of Bodies by the fire; which you remember was the
second Tophick whence I told you the Arguments of my Adversaries were desum'd.

And that I may first dispatch what I have to say concerning Minerals, I will
begin the remaining part of my discourse with considering how the fire divides
them.

And first, I have partly noted above, that though Chemists pretend from some
to draw salt, from others running Mercury, and from others a Sulphur; Yet they
have not hitherto taught us by any way in us among them to separate any one
principle, whether Salt, Sulphur, or Mercury, from all sorts of Minerals
without exception. And thence I may be allowed to conclude that there is not
any of the Elements that is an Ingredient of all Bodies, since there are some
of which it is not so.

In the next place, supposing that either Sulphur or Mercury were obtainable
from all sorts of Minerals. Yet still this Sulphur or Mercury would be but a
compounded, not an Elementary body, as I told you already on another occasion.
And certainly he that takes notice of the wonderful Operations of Quicksilver,
whether it be common, or drawn from Mineral Bodies, can scarce be so
inconsiderate as to think it of the very same nature with that immature and
fugitive substance which in Vegetables and Animals Chemists have been pleased
to call their Mercury. So that when Mercury is got by the help of the fire out
of a metal or other Mineral Body, if we will not suppose that it was not
pre-existent in it, but produced by the action of the fire upon the Concrete,
we may at least suppose this Quicksilver to have been a perfect Body of its own
kind (though perhaps less heterogeneous then more secundary mixts) which
happened to be mingled per minima, and coagulated with the other substances,
whereof the Metal or Mineral consisted. As may be exemplyfied partly by Native
Vermillion wherein the Quicksilver and Sulphur being exquisitely blended both
with one another, and that other course Mineral stuff (what ever it be) that
harbors them, make up a red body differing enough from both; and yet from
which part of the Quicksilver, and of the Sulphur, may be easily enough
obtained; Partly by those Mines wherein nature has so curiously incorporated
Silver with Lead, that it is extremely difficult, and yet possible, to separate
the former out of the Latter. And partly too by native Vitriol, wherein the
Metalline Corpuscles are by skill and industry separable from the saline ones,
though they be so con-coagulated with them, that the whole Concrete is reckoned
among Salts.

And here I further observe, that I never could see any Earth or Water,
properly so called, separated from either Gold or Silver (to name now no other
Metalline Bodies) and therefore to retort the argument upon my Adversaries, I
may conclude, that since there are some bodies in which, for ought appears,
there is neither Earth nor Water. I may be allowed to conclude that neither of
those two is an Universal Ingredient of all those Bodies that are counted
perfectly mixed, which I desire you would remember against Anon.

It may indeed be objected, that the reason why from Gold or Silver we cannot
separate any moisture, is, because that when it is melted out of the Oar, the
vehement Fire requisite to its Fusion forced away all the aqueous and fugitive
moisture; and the like fire may do from the materials of Glass. To which I
shall Answer, that I Remember I read not long since in the Learned Josephus
Acosta, who relates it upon his own observation; that in America, Acesta
Natural. and Moral history of the Indies, L. 3. c. 5, P. 212.
(where he long lived) there is a kind of Silver which the Indians call Papas,
and sometimes (says he) they find pieces very fine and pure like to small
round roots, the which is rare in that metal, but usual in Gold; Concerning
which metal he tells us, that besides this they find some which they call Gold
in grains, which he tells us are small morsels of Gold that they find whole
without mixture of any other metal, which has no need of melting or Refining
in the fire.

I remember that a very skilful and credible person affirmed to me, that being
in the Hungarian mines he had the good fortune to see a mineral that was there
dug up, wherein pieces of Gold of the length, and also almost of the bigness
of a humane Finger, grew in the Oar, as if they had been parts and Branches of
Trees.

And I have my self seen a Lump of whitish Mineral, that was brought as a
Rarity to a Great and knowing Prince, wherein there grew here and there in the
Stone, which looked like a kind of sparr, diverse little Lumps of fine Gold,
(for such I was assured that Trial had manifested it to be) some of them
Seeming to be about the Bigness of pease.

But that is nothing to what our Acosta subjoynes, which is indeed very
memorable, namely, that of the morsels of Native and pure Gold, which we lately
heard him mentioning he had now and then seen some that weighed many pounds; to
which I shall add, that I my self have seen a Lump of Oar not long since dug
up, See Acosla in the forecited Place, and the passage of Pliny quoted by him.
in whose stony part there grew, almost like Trees, diverse parcels though not
of Gold, yet of (what perhaps Mineralists will more wonder at) another Metal
which seemed to be very pure or unmixt with any Heterogeneous Substances, and
were some of them as big as my Finger, if not bigger. But upon Observations of
this kind, though perhaps I could, yet I must not at present dwell any longer.

To proceed Therefore now (says Carneades) to the Consideration of the
Analysis of Vegetables, although my Trials give me no cause to doubt but that
out of most of them five differing Substances may be obtained by the fire, yet
I think it will not be so easily Demonstrated that these deserve to be called
Elements in the Notion above explained.

And before I descend to particulars, I shall repeat and premise this General
Consideration, that these differing substances that are called Elements or
Principles, differ not from each other as Metals, Plants and Animals, or as
such Creatures as are immediately produced each by its peculiar Seed, and
Constitutes a distinct propagable sort of Creatures in the Universe; but these
are only Various Schemes of matter or Substances that differ from each other,
but in consistence (as Running Mercury and the same Metal congealed by the
Vapor of Lead) and some very few other accidents, as Taste, or Smell, or
Inflamability, or the want of them. So that by a change of Texture not
impossible to be wrought by the Fire and other Agents that have the Faculty not
only to dissociate the small parts of Bodies, but afterward to connect them
after a new manner, the same parcel of matter may acquire or lose such
accidents as may suffice to Denominate it Salt, or Sulphur, or Earth. If I were
fully to clear to you my apprehensions concerning this matter, I should perhaps
be obliged to acquaint you with diverse of the Conjectures (for I must yet call
them no more) I have had Concerning the Principles of things purely Corporeal:
For though because I seem not satisfied with the Vulgar Doctrines, either of
the Peripatetick or Paracelsian Schools, many of those that know me, (and
perhaps, among Them, Eleutherius himself) have thought me wedded to the
Epicurean Hypotheses, (as others have mistaken me for an Helmontian;) yet if
you knew how little Conversant I have been with Epicurean Authors, and how
great a part of Lucretius himself I never yet had the Culiosity to read, you
would perchance be of another mind; especially if I were to entertain you at
large, I say not, of my present Notions; but of my former thoughts concerning
the Principles of things. But, as I said above, fully to clear my Apprehensions
would require a Longer Discourse than we can now have.

For, I should tell you that I have sometimes thought it not unfit, that to the
Principles which may be assigned to things, as the World is now Constituted, we
should, if we consider the Great Mass of matter as it was whilst the Universe
was in making, add another, which may Conveniently enough be called an
Architectonick Principle or power; by which I mean those Various
Determinations, and that Skillful Guidance of the motions of the small parts of
the Universal matter by the most wise Author of things, which were necessary at
the beginning to turn that confused Chaos into this Orderly and beautiful
World; and Especially, to contrive the Bodies of Animals and Plants, and the
Seeds of those things whose kinds were to be propagated. For I confess I cannot
well Conceive, how from matter, Barely put into Motion, and then left to it
self, there could Emerge such Curious Fabrics as the Bodies of men and perfect
Animals, and such yet more admirably Contrived parcels of matter, as the seeds
of living Creatures.

I should likewise tell you upon what grounds, and in what sense, I suspected
the Principles of the World, as it now is, to be Three, Matter, Motion and
Rest. I say, as the World now is, because the present Fabric of the Universe,
and especially the seeds of things, together with the established Course of
Nature, is a Requisite or Condition, upon whose account diverse things may be
made out by our three Principles, which otherwise would be very hard, if
possible, to explicate.

I should moreover declare in general (for I pretend not to be able to do it
otherwise) not only why I Conceive that Colors, Odors, Tastes, Fluidness and
Solidity, and those other qualities that Diversifie and Denominate Bodies may
Intelligibly be Deduced from these three; but how two of the Three Epicurean
Principles (which, I need not tell, you are Magnitude, Figure and Weight) are
Themselves Deducible from Matter and Motion; since the Latter of these
Variously Agitating, and, as it were, Distracting the Former, must needs
disjoyne its parts; which being Actually separated must Each of them
necessarily both be of some Size, and obtain some shape or other. Nor did I add
to our Principles the Aristotelean Privation, partly for other Reasons, which I
must not now stay to insist on; and partly because it seems to be rather an
Antecedent, or a Terminus a quo, then a True Principle, as the starting-Post is
none of the Horses Legs or Limbs.

I should also explain why and how I made rest to be, though not so
considerable a Principle of things, as Motion, yet a Principle of them; partly
because it is (for ought we know as Ancient at least as it, and depends not
upon Motion, nor any other quality of matter; and partly, because it may enable
the Body in which it happens to be, both to continue in a State of Rest till
some external force put it out of that state, and to concur to the production
of diverse Changes in the bodies that hit against it, by either quite stopping
or lessning their Motion (whilst the body formerly at Rest Receives all or part
of it into it self) or else by giving a new Bias, or some other Modification,
to Motion, that is, To the Grand and Primary instrument whereby Nature produces
all the Changes and other Qualities that are to be met with in the World.

I should likewise, after all this, explain to you how, although Matter, Motion
and Rest, seemed to me to be the Catholic Principles of the Universe, I
thought the Principles of Particular bodies might be Commodiously enough
reduced to two, namely Matter, and (what Comprehends the two other, and their
effects) the result or Aggregate of those Accidents, which are the Motion or
Rest, (for in some Bodies both are not to be found) the Bigness, Figure,
Texture) and the thence resulting Qualities of the small parts) which are
necessary to entitle the Body whereto they belong to this or that Peculiar
Denomination; and discriminating it from others to appropriate it to a
Determinate Kind of Things, as Yellowness, Fixtness, such a Degree of Weight,
and of Ductility, do make the Portion of matter wherein they Concur, to be
reckoned among perfect metals, and obtain the name of Gold.) Which Aggregate or
result of Accidents you may, if You please, call either Structure or Texture.

Though indeed, that do not so properly Comprehend the motion of the
constituent parts especially in case some of them be Fluid, or what other
appellation shall appear most Expressive. Or if, retaining the Vulgar Term,
You will call it the Form of the thing it denominates, I shall not much oppose
it; Provided the word be interpreted to mean but what I have expressed, and not
a Scholastic Substantial Form, which so many intelligent men profess to be to
them altogether Un-intelligible.

But, says Carneades, if you remember that it is a Sceptick speaks to you, and
that it is not so much my present Talk to make assertions as to suggest doubts,
I hope you will look upon what I have proposed, rather as a Narrative of my
former conjectures touching the principles of things, then as a Resolute
Declaration of my present opinions of them; especially since although they
cannot but appear Very much to their Disadvantage, If you Consider Them as they
are proposed without those Reasons and Explanations by which I could perhaps
make them appear much less extravagant; yet I want time to offer you what may
be alleged to clear and countenance these notions; my design in mentioning
them unto you at present being, partly, to bring some Light and Confirmation to
diverse passages of my discourse to you; partly to show you, that I do not (as
you seem to have suspected) embrace all Epicurus his principles; but Dissent
from him in some main things, as well as from Aristotle and the Chemists, in
others; and partly also, or rather chiefly, to intimate to you the grounds upon
which I likewise differ from Helmont in this, that whereas he ascribes almost
all things, and even diseases themselves, to their determinate Seeds; I am of
opinion, that besides the peculiar Fabrics of the Bodies of Plants and Animals
(and perhaps also of some Metals and Minerals) which I take to be the Effects
of seminal principles, there are many other bodies in nature which have and
deserve distinct and Proper names, but yet do but result from such contextures
of the matter they are made of, as may without determinate seeds be effected by
heat, cold, artificial mixtures and compositions, and diverse other causes which
sometimes nature imployes of her own accord; and oftentimes man by his power
and skill makes use of to fashion the matter according to his Intentions. This
may be exemplified both in the productions of Nature, and in those of Art; of
the first sort I might name multitudes; but to show how slight a variation of
Textures without addition of new ingredients may procure a parcel of matter
diverse names, and make it be Looked upon as Different Things;

I shall invite you to observe with me, That Clouds, Rain, Hail, Snow, Froth,
and Ice, may be but water, having its parts varyed as to their size and
distance in respect of each other, and as to motion and rest. And among
Artificial Productions we may take notice (to skip the Crystals of Tartar) of
Glass, Regulus, Martis-Stellatus, and particularly of the Sugar of Lead, which
though made of that insipid Metal and sour salt of Vinager, has in it a
sweetness surpassing that of common Sugar, and diverse other qualities, which
being not to be found in either of its two ingredients, must be confessed to
belong to the Concrete it self, upon the account of its Texture.

This Consideration premised, it will be, I hope, the more easy to persuade
you that the Fire may as well produce some new textures in a parcel of matter,
as destroy the old.

Wherefore hoping that you have not forgot the Arguments formerly employed
against the Doctrine of the Tria prima; namely that the Salt, Sulphur and
Mercury, into which the Fire seems to resolve Vegetable and Animal Bodies, are
yet compounded, not simple and Elementary Substances; And that (as appeared by
the Experiment of Pompions) the Tria prima may be made out of Water; hoping I
say, that you remember These and the other Things that I formerly represented
to the same purpose, I shall now add only, that if we doubt not the Truth of
some of Helmonts Relation, We may well doubt whether any of these
Heterogeneities be (I say not pre-existent, so as to convene together, when a
plant or Animal is to be constituted but) so much as in-existent in the
Concrete whence they are obtained, when the Chemists first goes about to
resolve it; For, not to insist upon the un-inflamable Spirit of such Concretes,
because that may be pretended to be but a mixture of Phlegm and Salt; the Oil
or Sulphur of Vegetables or Animals is, according to him, reducible by the help
of Lixiviate Salts into Soap; as that Soap is by the help of repeated
Distillations from a Caput Mortuum of Chalk into insipid Water. And as for the
saline substance that seems separable from mixed bodies; Omne autem Alcali
additae pinguedine in aqueum liquorem, qui tandem mera and simplex aqua fit,
reducitur, (ut videre est in Sapone, Lazurio lapide, etc.) quoties per adjuncta
fixa semen Pinguedinis deponit. Helmont.
the same Helmonts trials give us cause to think, That it may be a production
of the Fire, which by transporting and otherwise altering the particles of the
matter, does bring it to a Saline nature.

For I know (says he, in the place formerly alleged to another purpose) a way
to reduce all stones into a mere Salt of equal weight with the stone whence it
was produced, and that without any of the least either Sulphur or Mercury;
which asseveration of my Author would perhaps seem less incredible to You, if I
durst acquaint You with all I could say upon that subject. And hence by the way
you may also conclude that the Sulphur and Mercury, as they call them, that
Chemists are wont to obtain from compound Bodies by the Fire, may possibly in
many Cases be the productions of it; since if the same bodies had been wrought
upon by the Agents employed by Helmont, they would have yielded neither Sulphur
nor Mercury; and those portions of them which the Fire would have presented Us
in the form of Sulphurous and Mercurial Bodies would have, by Helmonts
method, been exhibited to us in the form of Salt.

But though (says Eleutherius) You have alleged very plausible Arguments
against the tria Prima, yet I see not how it will be possible for you to avoid
acknowledging that Earth and Water are Elementary Ingredients, though not of
Mineral Concretes, yet of all Animal and Vegetable Bodies; Since if any of
these of what sort soever be committed to Distillation, there is regularly and
constantly separated from it a phlegm or aqueous part and a Caput Mortuum or
Earth.

I readily acknowledged (answers Carneades) it is not so easy to reject Water
and Earth (and especially the former) as it is to reject the Tria Prima, from
being the Elements of mixed Bodies; but it is not every difficult thing that is
impossible.

I consider then, as to Water, that the chief Qualities which make men give
that name to any visible Substance, are, that it is Fluid or Liquid, and that
it is insipid and inodorous. Now as for the taste of these qualities, I think
you have never seen any of those separated substances that the Chemists call
Phlegm which was perfectly devoyd both of Taste and Smell: and if you object,
that yet it may be reasonably supposed, that since the whole Body is Liquid,
the mass is nothing but Elementary Water faintly imbued with some of the Saline
or Sulphurous parts of the same Concrete, which it retained with it upon its
Separation from the Other Ingredients. To this I answer, That this Objection
would not appear so stong as it is plausible, if Chemists understood the Nature
of Fluidity and Compactnesse; and that, as I formerly observed, to a Bodies
being Fluid there is nothing necessary, but that it be divided into parts small
enough; and that these parts be put into such a motion among themselves as to
glide some this way and some that way, along each others Surfaces. So that,
although a Concrete were never so dry, and had not any Water or other Liquor
inexistent in it, yet such a Comminution of its parts may be made, by the fire
or other Agents, as to turn a great portion of them into Liquor. Of this Truth
I will give an instance, employed by our friend here present as one of the most
conducive of his experiments to Illustrate the nature of Salts. If you Take,
then, sea salt and melt it in the Fire to free it from the aqueous parts, and
afterward distill it with a vehement Fire from burnt Clay, or any other, as dry
a Caput mortuum as you please, you will, as Chemists confess, by teaching it
drive over a good part of the Salt in the form of a Liquor. And to satisfy some
ingenious men, That a great part of this Liquor was still true sea salt brought
by the Operation of the Fire into Corpuscles so small, and perhaps so
advantageously shaped, as to be capable of the form of a Fluid Body, He did in
my presence pour to such spititual salts a due proportion of the spirit (or
salt and Phlegm) of Urine, whereby having evaporated the superfluous moisture,
he soon obtained such another Concrete, both as to taste and smell, and easy
sublimableness as common Salt Armoniack, which you know is made up of gross
and undistill'd sea salt united with the salts of Urine and of Soot, which two
are very near of kin to each other. And further, to manifest that the
Corpuscles of sea salt and the Saline ones of Urine retain their several
Natures in this Concrete, He mixed it with a convenient quantity of Salt of
Tartar, and committing it to Distillation soon regained his spirit of Urine in
a liquid form by its self, the Sea salt staying behind with the Salt of Tartar.
Wherefore it is very possible that dry Bodies may by the Fire be reduced to
Liquors without any separation of Elements, but barely by a certain kind of
Dissipation and Comminution of the matter, whereby its parts are brought into a
new state. And if it be still objected, that the Phlegm of mixed Bodies must be
reputed water, because so weak a taste needs but a very small proportion of Salt
to impart it; It may be replied, that for ought appears, common Salt and diverse
other bodies, though they be distilled never so dry, and in never so close
Vessels, will yield each of them pretty store of a Liquor, wherein though (as I
lately noted) Saline Corpuscles abound, Yet there is besides a large proportion
of Phlegm, as may easily be discovered by coagulating the Saline Corpuseles
with any convenient Body; as I lately told you, our Friend coagulated part of
the Spirit of Salt with Spirit of Urine: and as I have diverse times separated a
salt from Oil of Vitriol it self (though a very ponderous Liquor and drawn
from a saline body) by boiling it with a just quantity of Mercury, and then
washing the newly coagulated salt from the Precipitate with fair Water. Now to
what can we more probably ascribe this plenty of aqueous Substance afforded us
by the Distillation of such bodies, than unto this, That among the various
operations of the Fire upon the matter of a Concrete, diverse particles of that
matter are reduced to such a shape and bigness as is requisite to compose such
a Liquor as Chemists are wont to call Phlegm or Water. How I conjecture this
change may be effected, it is neither necessary for me to tell you, nor possible
to do so without a much longer discourse then were now seasonable. But I desire
you would with me reflect upon what I formerly told you conterning the change
of Quicksilver into Water; For that Water having but a very faint taste, if any
whit more than diverse of those liquors that Chemists referr to Phlegm; By that
experiment it seems evident, that even a metalline body, and therefore much
more such as are but Vegetable or Animal, may by a simple operation of the Fire
be turned in great part into Water. And since those I dispute with are not yet
able out of Gold, or Silver, or diverse other Concretes to separate any thing
like Water; I hope I may be allowed to conclude against Them, that water it
self is not an Universal and pre-existent Ingredient of Mixed Bodies.

But as for those Chemists that, Supposing with me the Truth of what Helmont
relates of the Alkahest's wonderful Effects, have a right to press me with his
Authority concerning them, and to allege that he could Transmute all reputedly
mixed Bodies into insipid and mere Water; To those I shall represent, That
though his Affirmations conclude strongly against the Vulgar Chemists (against
whom I have not therefore scrupled to Employ Them) since they Evince that the
Commonly reputed Principles or Ingredients of Things are not Permanent and
indestructible, since they may be further reduced into Insipid Phlegm
differing from them all; Yet till we can be allowed to examine this Liquor, I
think it not unreasonable to doubt whether it be not something else then mere
Water. For I find not any other reason given by Helmont of his Pronouncing it
so, then that it is insipid. Now Sapour being an Accident or an Affection of
matter that relates to our Tongue, Palate, and other Organs of Taste, it may
very possibly be, that the small Parts of a Body may be of such a Size and
Shape, as either by their extreme Littleness, or by their slenderness, or by
their Figure, to be unable to pierce into and make a perceptible Impression
upon the Nerves or Membranous parts of the Organs of Taste, and what may be fit
to work otherwise upon diverse other Bodies than mere Water can, and
consequently to Disclose it self to be of a Nature far enough from Elementary.
In Silk dyed Red or of any other Color, whilst many Contiguous Threads makes
up a skein, the Color of the Silk is conspicuous; but if only a very few of
them be looked upon, the Color will appear much fainter then before. But if You
take out one simple Thread, you shall not easily be able to discern any Color
at all; So subtle an Object having not the Force to make upon the Optic Nerve
an Impression great enough to be taken Notice of. It is also observed, that the
best sort of Oyl-Olive is almost tastless, and yet I need not tell you how
exceedingly distant in Nature Oil is from Water. The Liquor into which I told
you, upon the Relation of Lully, and Eyewitness that Mercury might be
Transmuted, has sometimes but a very Languid, if any Taste, and yet its
Operations even upon some Mineral Bodies are very peculiar. Quicksilver it self
also, though the Corpuscles it consists of be so very small as to get into the
Pores of that Closest and compactest of Bodies, Gold, is yet (you know)
altogether Tastless. And our Helmont several times tells us, that fair Water
wherein a little Quantity f Quicksilver has lain for some time, though it
acquire no certain Taste or other sensible Quality from the Quicksilver; Yet it
has a power to destroy worms in humane Bodies; which he does much, but not
causelessly extol. And I remember, a great Lady, that had been Eminent for her
Beauty in Diverse Courts, confessed to me, that this insipid Liquor was of all
innocent washes for the Face the best that she ever met with.

And here let me conclude my Discourse, concerning such waters or Liquors as I
have hitherto been examining, with these two Considerations. Whereof the first
is, That by reason of our being wont to drink nothing but Wine, Bear, Cider,
or other strongly tasted Liquors, there may be in several of these Liquors,
that are wont to pass for insipid Phlegm, very peculiar and Distinct, Tastes
though unheeded (and perhaps not to be perceived) by Us. For to omit what
Naturalists affirm of Apes, (and which probably may be true of diverse other
Animals) that they have a more exquisite palate than Men: among Men themselves,
those that are wont to drink nothing but water may (as I have tried in my self)
Discern very sensibly a great Difference of Tastes in several waters, which one
un-accustomed to drink water would take to be all alike insipid. And this is
the first of my two Considerations; the Other is, That it is not impossible
that the Corpuscles into which a body is dissipated by the Fire may by the
Operation of the same fire have their figures so altered, or may be by
associations with one another brought into little Masses of such a Size and
Shape, as not to be fit to make sensible Impressions on the Tongue. And that
you may not think such alterations impossible, be pleased to consider with me;
that not only the sharpest Spirit of Vinager having dissolved as much Coral as
it can, will Coagulate with it into a Substance, which though soluble in water,
like salt, is incomparably less strongly Tasted then the Vinager was before;
but (what is more considerable) though the Acid salts that are carried up with
Quicksilver in the preparation of common sublimate are so sharp, that being
moistened with water it will Corrode some of the Metals themselves; yet this
Corrosive Sublimate being twice or thrice re-sublim'd with a full proportion of
insipid Quicksilver, Constitutes (as you know) that Factitious Concrete, which
the Chemists call Mercurius dulcis; not because it is sweet, but because the
sharpness of the Corrosive Salts is so taken away by their Combination with the
Mercurial Corpuscles, that the whole mixture when it is prepared is judged to
be insipid.

And thus (continues Carneades) having given you some Reasons why I refuse to
admit Elementary water for a constant Ingredient of Mixed Bodies, It will be
easy for me to give you an Account why I also reject Earth.

For first, it may well be suspected that many Substances pass among Chemists
under the name of Earth, because, like it, they are Dry, and Heavy, and Fixed,
which yet are very far from an Elementary Nature. This you will not think
improbable, If you recall to mind what I formerly told you concerning what
Chemists call the Dead Earth of things, and especially touching the copper to
be drawn from the Caput Mortuum of Vitriol; And if also you allow me to subjoyn
a casual but memorable Experiment made by Johannes Agricola upon the Terra
Damnata of Brimstone. Our Author then tells us (in his notes upon Popius,) that
in the year 1621 he made an Oil of Sulphur; the remaining Faeces he
reverberated in a moderate Fire fourteen days; afterward he put them well
luted up in a VVind Oven, and gave them a strong Fire for six hours, purposing
to calcine the Faeces to a perfect Whiteness, that he might make someting else
out of them. But coming to break the pot, he found above but very little
Faeces, and those Gray and not White; but beneath there lay a fine Red Regulus
which he first marvell'd at and knew not what to make of, being well assured
that not the least thing, besides the Faeces of the Sulphur, came into the pot;
and that the Sulphur it self had only been dissolved in Linseed Oil; this
Regulus he found heavy and malleable almost as Lead; having caused a Goldsmith
to draw him a Wire of it, he found it to be of the Fairest copper, and so
rightly colored, that a Jew of Prague Offered him a great price for it. And of
this Metal he says he had 12 loath (or six ounces) out of one pound of Ashes or
Faeces. And this Story may well incline us to suspect that since the Caput
Mortuum of the Sulphur was kept so long in the fire before it was found to be
any thing else then a Terra damnata, there may be diverse other Residences of
Bodies which are wont to pass only for the Terrestrial Faeces of things, and
therefore to be thrown away as soon as the Distillation or Calcination of the
Body that yielded them is ended; which yet if they were long and Skilfully
examined by the fire would appear to be differing from Elementary Earth. And I
have taken notice of the unwarrantable forwardness of common Chemists to
pronounce things useless Faeces, by observing how often they reject the Caput
Mortuum of Verdegrease; which is yet so far from deserving that Name, that not
only by strong fires and convenient Additaments it may in some hours be reduced
into copper, but with a certain Flux Powder I sometimes make for Recreation, I
have in two or three minutes obtained that Metal from it. To which I may add,
that having for trial sake kept Venetian Taclk in no less a heat than that of
a glass Furnace, I found after all the Brunt of the fire it had endured, the
remaining Body though brittle and discolored, had not lost very much of its
former Bulk, and seemed still to be nearer of kin to Talck than to mere Earth.
And I remember too, that a candid Mineralist, famous for his Skill in trying of
Oars, requesting me one day to procure him a certain American Mineral Earth of
a Virtuoso, who he thought would not refuse me; I inquired of him why he seemed
so greedy of it: he confessed to me that this Gentleman having brought that
Earth to the public Say-Masters; and they upon their being unable by any means
to bring it to fusion or make it fly away, he (the Relator) had procured a
little of it; and having tried it with a peculiar Flux separated from it near a
third part of pure Gold; so great mistakes may be committed in hastily
concluding things to be Useless Earth.

Next, it may be supposed, That as in the Resolution of Bodies by the Fire some
of the dissipated Parts may, by their various occursion occasioned by the heat,
be brought to stick together so closely as to constitute Corpuscles too heavy
for the Fire to carry away; the aggregate of which Corpuscles is wont to be
called Ashes or Earth; So other Agents may resolve the Concrete into Minute
Parts, after so differing a manner as not to produce any Caput mortuum, or dry
and heavy Body. As you may remember Helmont above informed us, that with his
great Dissolvent he divided a Coal into two liquid and volatile Bodies,
aequiponderant to the Coal, without any dry or fixed Residence at all.

And indeed, I see not why it should be necessary that all Agents that resolve
Bodies into portions of differingly qualified matter must work on them the same
way, and divide them into just such parts, both for nature and Number, as the
Fire dissipates them into. For since, as I noted before, the Bulk and shape of
the small Parts of bodies, together with their Fitness and Unfitness to be
easily put into Motion, may make the liquors or other substances such
Corpuscles compose, as much to differ from each other as do some of the
Chemical principles: Why may not something happen in this case, not unlike what
is usual in the grosser divisions of bodies by Mechanical Instruments? Where
we see that some Tools reduce Wood, for Instance, into darts of several shapes,
bigness, and other qualities, as Hatchets and Wedges divide it into grosser
parts; some more long and slender, as splinters; and some more thick and
irregular, as chips; but all of considerable bulk; but Files and Saws makes a
Comminution of it into Dust; which, as all the others, is of the more solid
sort of parts; whereas others divide it into long and broad, but thin and
flexible parts, as do Planes: And of this kind of parts it self there is also a
variety according to the Difference of the Tools employed to work on the Wood;
the shavings made by the plane being in some things differing from those shives
or thin and flexible pieces of wood that are obtained by Borers, and these from
some others obtainable by other Tools. Some Chemical Examples applicable to
this purpose I have elsewhere given you. To which I may add, that whereas in a
mixture of Sulphur and Salt of Tartar well melted and incorporated together,
the action of pure spirit of wine digested on it is to separate the sulphurous
from the Alcalizate Parts, by dissolving the former and leaving the latter, the
action of Wine (probably upon the score of its copious Phlegm) upon the same
mixture is to divide it into Corpuscles consisting of both Alcalizate and
Sulphurous Parts united. And if it be objected, that this is but a Factitious
Concrete; I answer, that however the instance may serve to illustrate what I
proposed, if not to prove it; and that Nature her self does in the bowels of
the Earth make Decompounded Bodies, as we see in Vitriol, Cinnaber, and even in
Sulphur it self; I will not urge that the Fire divides new Milk into five
differing Substances; but Runnet and Acid Liquors divide it into a Coagulated
matter and a thin Whey: And on the other side churning divides it into Butter
and Butter-milk, which may either of them be yet reduced to other substances
differing from the former. I will not press this, I say, nor other instances
of this Nature, because I cannot in few words answer what may be objected, that
these Concretes sequestered without the help of the Fire may by it be further
divided into Hypostatical Principles. But I will rather represent, That whereas
the same spirit of Wine will dissociare the Parts of Camphire, and make them
one Liquor with it self; Aqua Fortis will also disjoyn them, and put them into
motion; but so as to keep them together, and yet alter their Texture into the
form of an Oil. I know also an uncompounded Liquor, that an extraordinary
Chemist would not allow to be so much as Saline, which does (as I have tried)
from Coral it self (as fixed as diverse judicious writers assert that Concrete to
be) not only obtain a noble Tincture, without the Intervention of Nitre or
other Salts; but will carry over the Tincture in Distillation. And if some
reasons did not forbid me, I could now tell you of a Menstruum I make my self,
that does more odly dissociate the parts of Minerals very fixed in the fire. So
that it seems not incredible, that there may be some Agent or way of Operation
found, whereby this or that Concrete, if not all Firm Bodies, may be resolved
into parts so very minute and so unapt to stick close to one another, that none
of them may be fixed enough to stay behind in a strong Fire, and to be incapable
of Distillation; nor consequently to be looked upon as Earth. But to return to
Helmont, the same Author somewhere supply's me with another Argument against
the Earth's being such an Element as my Adversaries would have it. For he
somewhere affirms, that he can reduce all the Terrestrial parts of mixed bodies
into infipid water; whence we may argue against the Earths being one of their
Elements, even from that Notion of Elements which you may remember Philoponus
recited out of Aristotle himself, when he lately disputed for his Chemists
against Themistius. And here we may on this occasion consider, that since a
Body from which the Fire has driven away its looser parts is wont to be looked
upon as Earth, upon the Account of its being endowed with both these qualities,
Tastlessenesse and Fixtnesse, (for Salt of Tartar though Fixed passes not among
the Chemists for Earth, because it is strongly Tasted) if it be in the power of
Natural Agents to deprive the Caput Mortuum of a body of either of those two
Qualities, or to give them both to a portion of matter that had them not both
before, the Chemists will not easily define what part of a resolved Concrete is
earth, and make out, that that Earth is a primary, simple, and indestructible
Body. Now there are some cases wherein the more skilful of the Vulgar Chemists
themselves pretend to be able, by repeated Cohobations and other fit
Operations, to make the Distilled parts of a Concrete bring its own Caput
Mortuum over the Helm, in the form of a Liquor; in which state being both
Fluid and Volatile, you will easily believe it would not be taken for Earth.
And indeed by a skilful, but not Vulgar, way of managing some Concretes, there
may be more effected in this kind, then you perhaps would easily think. And on
the other side, that either Earth may be Generated, or at least Bodies that did
not before appear to be near Totally Earth, may be so altered as to pass for
it, seems very possible, if Helmont have done that by Art which he mentions in
several places; Novi item modos quibus totum Salpetiae in terram convertitur,
totumque Sulphur semel dissolutum fixetur in Pulvecrem terreum. Helmont in
Compl. atque Mist. Elementor, Sect. 24.
especially where He says that he knows ways whereby Sulphur once dissolved
is all of it fixed into a Terrestrial Powder, and the whole Body of Saltpeter
may be turned into Earth: Which last he elsewhere says is Done by the Odor
only of a certain Sulphurous Fire. And in another place He mentions one way of
doing this, which I cannot give you an Account of; because the Materials I had
prepared for Trying it, were by a Servants mistake unhappily thrown away.

And these Last Arguments may be confirmed by the Experiment I have often had
occasion to mention concerning the Mint I produced out of Water. And partly by
an Observation of Rondeletius concerning the Growth of Animals also, Nourished
but by Water, which I remembered not to mention, when I discoursed to you about
the Production of things out of Water. Lib 1. cap. 2.
This Diligent Writer then in his instructive book of fishes, affirms That
his Wife kept a fish in a Glass of water without any other Food for three
years; in which space it was constantly augmented, till at last it could not
come out of the Place at which it was put in, and at length was too big for the
glass it self though that were of a large capacity. And because there is no
just reason to doubt, that this Fish, if Distilled, would have yielded the like
differing substances with other Animals: And However, because the Mint which I
had out of water afforded me upon Distillation a good quantity of Charcoal, I
think I may from thence infer, that Earth it self may be produced out of
Water; or if you please, that water may be transmuted into Earth; and
consequently, that though it could be proved that Earth is an Ingredient
actually in-existent in the Vegetable and Animal Bodies whence it may be
obtained by Fire: yet it would not necessarily follow, that Earth as a
pre-existent Element Does with other Principles convene to make up those Bodies
whence it seems to have been separated.

After all is said (says Eleutherius) I have yet something to Object, that I
cannot but think considerable, since Carneades Himself alleged it as such;
for, (continues Eleutherius smiling) I must make bold to try whether you can as
luckily answer your own Arguments, as those of your Antagonists, I mean
(pursues he) that part of your Concessions, wherein you cannot but remember
that you supplied your Adversaries with an Example to prove that there may be
Elementary Bodies, by taking Notice that Gold may be an Ingredient in a
multitude of differing Mixtures, and yet retain its Nature, notwithstanding all
that the Chemists by their Fires and Corrosive Waters are able to do to Destroy
it.

I sufficiently intimated to you at that time (replies Carneades) that I
proposed this Example, chiefly to show you how Nature may be Conceived to have
made Elements, not to prove that she actually has made any; And you know, that
a posse ad esse the Inference will not hold. But (continues Carneades) to
answer more directly to the Objection drawn from Gold, I must tell You, that
though I know very well that diverse of the more sober Chemists have complained
of the Vulgar Chemists, as of Mountebanks or Cheats, for pretending so vainly,
as hitherto they have done, to Destroy Gold; Yet I know a certain Menstruum
(which our Friend has made, and intends shortly to communicate to the
Ingenious) of so piercing and powerful a Quality, That if notwithstanding much
care, and some skill, I did not much deceive my self, I have with it really
destroyed even refined Gold, and brought it into a Metalline Body of another
color and Nature, as I found by Trials purposely made. And if some just
Considerations did not for the present Forbid it, I could Perchance here show
you by another Experiment or Two of my own Trying, that such Menstruums may be
made as to entice away and retain diverse parts, from Bodies, which even the
more Judicious and Experienced Spagyrists have pronounced irresoluble by the
Fire. Though (which I Desire you would mark) in neither of these Instances, the
Gold or Precious Stones be Analys'd into any of the Tria Prima, but only
Reduced to new Concretes. And indeed there is a great Disparity betwixt the
Operations of the several Agents whereby the Parts of a Body come to be
Dissipated. As if (for Instance) you dissolve the purer sort of Vitriol in
common Water, the Liquor will swallow up the Mineral, and so Dissociate its
Corpuscles, that they will seem to make up but one Liquor with those of the
water; and yet each of these Corpuscles retains its Nature and Texture, and
remains a Vitriolate and Compounded Body. But if the same Vitriol be exposed to
a strong Fire, it will then be divided not only, as before, into smaller parts,
but into Heterogeneous Substances, each of the Vitriolate Corpuscles that
remained entire in the water, being it self upon the Destruction of its former
Texture dissipated or divided into new Particles of differing Qualities. But
Instances more fitly applicable to this purpose, I have already given you.
Wherefore to return to what I told you about the Destruction of Gold, that
Experiment Invites me to Represent to you, that Though there were either
Saline, or Sulphurous, or Terrestrial Portions of Matter, whose parts were so
small, so firmly united together, or of a figure so fit to make them cohere to
one another, (as we see that in quicksilver broken into little Globes, the
Parts brought to touch one another do immediately re-imbody) that neither the
Fire, nor the usual Agents employed by Chemists, are pierceing enough to divide
their Parts, so as to destroy the Texture of the single Corpuscles; yet it
would not necessarily follow, That such Permanent Bodies were Elementary, since
it is possible there may be Agents found in Nature, some of whose parts may be of
such a Size and Figure as to take better Hold of some parts of these seemingly
Elementary Corpuscles than these parts do of the rest, and Consequently may
carry away such parts with them, and so dissolve the Texture of the Corpuscle
by pulling its parts asunder. And if it be said, that at least we may this way
discover the Elementary Ingredients of Things, by observing into what
Substances these Corpuscles that were reputed pure are divided; I answer, that
it is not necessary that such a Discovery should be practicable. For if the
Particles of the Dissolvent do take such firm hold of those of the Dissolved
Body, they must constitute together new Bodies, as well as Destroy the Old; and
the strickt Union, which according to this Hypothesis may well be supposed
betwixt the Parts of the Emergent Body, will make it as Little to be Expected
that they should be pulled asunder, but by little Parts of matter, that to
Divide them Associate Themselves and stick extremely close to those of them
which they sever from their Former Adherents. Besides that it is not
impossible, that a Corpuscle supposed to be Elementary may have its Nature
changed, without suffering a Divorce of its parts, barely by a new Texture
Effected by some powerful Agent; as I formerly told you, the same portion of
matter may easily by the Operation of the Fire be turned at pleasure into the
form of a Brittle and Transparent, or an Opacous and Malleable Body.

And indeed, if you consider how far the bare Change of Texture, whether made
by Art or Nature (or rather by Nature with or without the assistance of man)
can go in producing such New Qualities in the same parcel of matter, and how
many inanimate Bodies (such as are all the Chemical productions of the Fire) we
know are Denominated and Distinguished not so much by any Imaginary Substantial
Form, as by the aggregate of these Qualities. If you consider these Things, I
say, and that the varying of either the figure, or the Size, or the Motion, or
the Situation, or Connection of the Corpuscles whereof any of these Bodies is
composed, may alter the Fabric of it, you will possibly be invited to suspect,
with me, that there is no great need that Nature should always have Elements
before hand, whereof to make such Bodies as we call mixts. And that it is not
so easy as Chemists and others have hitherto Imagined, to discern, among the
many differing Substances that may without any extraordinary skill be obtained
from the same portion of matter, Which ought to be esteemed exclusively to all
the rest, its in-existent Elementary Ingredients; much less to determine what
Primogeneal and Simple Bodies convened together to compose it. To exemplify
this, I shall add to what I have already on several occasions Represented, but
this single instance.

You may remember (Eleutherius) that I formerly intimated to you, that besides
Mint and Pompions, I produced diverse other Vegetables of very differing Natures
out of Water. Wherefore you will not, I presume, think it incongruous to
suppose, that when a slender Vineslip is set into the ground, and takes root,
there it may likewise receive its Nutriment from the water attracted out of the
earth by his roots, or impelled by the warm'th of the sun, or pressure of the
ambient air into the pores of them. And this you will the more easily believe,
if you ever observed what a strange quantity of Water will Drop out of a wound
given to the Vine, in a convenient place, at a seasonable time in the Spring;
and how little of Taste or Smell this Aqua Vitis, as Physicians call it, is
endowed with, notwithstanding what concoction or alteration it may receive in
its passage through the Vine, to discriminate it from common Water. Supposing
then this Liquor, at its first entrance into the roots of the Vine, to be
common Water; Let Us a little consider how many various Substances may be
obtained from it; though to do so, I must repeat somewhat that I had a former
occasion to touch upon. And first, this Liquor being Digested in the plant, and
assimilated by the several parts of it, is turned into the Wood, Bark, Pith,
Leaves, etc. of the Vine; The same Liquor may be further dried, and fashon'd
into Vine-buds, and these a while after are advanced unto sour Grapes, which
expressed yield Verjuice, a Liquor very differing in several qualities both
from Wine and other Liquors obtainable from the Vine: These sour Grapes being
by the heat of the Sun concocted and ripened, turn to well tasted Grapes;
Those if dried in the Sun and Distilled, afford a faetid Oil and a piercing
Empyreumatical Spirit, but not a Vinous Spirit; These dried Grapes or Raisins
boiled in a convenient proportion of Water make a sweet Liquor, which being
betimes distilled afford an Oil and Spirit much like those of the Raisins
themselves; If the juice of the Grapes be squeezed out and put to Ferment, it
first becomes a sweet and turbid Liquor, then grows less sweet and more clear,
and then affords in common Distillations not an Oil but a Spirit, which,
though inflamable like Oil, differs much from it, in that it is not fat, and
that it will readily mingle with Water. I have likewise without Addition
obtained in process of time (and by an easy way which I am ready to teach
you) from one of the noblest sorts of Wine, pretty store of pure and curiously
figured Crystals of Salt, together with a great proportion of a Liquor as sweet
almost as Honey; and these I obtained not from Must, but True and sprightly
Wine; besides the Vinous Liquor, the fermented Juice of Grapes is partly turned
into liquid Dregs or Leeze, and partly into that crust or dry feculancy that is
commonly called Tartar; and this Tartar may by the Fire be easily divided into
five differing substances; four of which are not Acid, and the other not so
manifestly Acid as the Tartar it self; The same Vinous Juice after some time,
especially if it be not carefully kept, Degenerates into that very sour Liquor
called Vinegar; from which you may obtain by the Fire a Spirit and a
Crystalline Salt differing enough from the Spirit and Lixiviate Salt of Tartar.
And if you pour the Dephlegm'd Spirit of the Vinegar upon the Salt of Tartar,
there will be produced such a Conflict or Ebullition as if there were scarce
two more contrary Bodies in Nature; and oftentimes in this Vinager you may
observe part of the matter to be turned into an innumerable company of swimming
Animals, which our Friend having diverse years ago observed, has in one of his
Papers taught us how to discover clearly without the help of a Microscope.

Into all these various Schemes of matter, or differingly Qualifyed Bodies,
besides diverse others that I purposely forbear to mention, may the Water that
is imbibed by the roots of the Vine be brought, partly by the formative power
of the plant, and partly by supervenient Agents or Causes, without the visible
concurrence of any extraneous Ingredient; but if we be allowed to add to the
Productions of this transmuted Water a sew other substances, we may much
increase the Variety of such Bodies; although in this second sort of
Productions, the Vinous parts seem scarce to retain any thing of the much more
fixed Bodies wherewith they were mingled, but only to have by their Mixture
with them acquired such a Disposition, that in their recess occasioned by the
Fire they came to be altered as to shape, or Bigness, or both, and associated
after a New manner. Thus, as I formerly told you, I did by the Addition of a
Caput Mortuum of Antimony, and some other Bodies unfit for Distillation, obtain
from crude Tartar, store of a very Volatile and Crystalline Salt, differing
very much in smell and other Qualities from the usual salts of Tartar.

But (says Eleutherius, interrupting him at these Words) if you have no
restraint upon you, I would very gladly before you go any further, be more
particularly informed, how you make this Volatile Salt, because (you know) that
such Multitudes of Chemists have by a scarce imaginable Variety of ways,
attempted in Vain the Volatilization of the Salt of Tartar, that diverse learned
Spagyrists speak as if it were impossible, to make any thing out of Tartar,
that shall be Volatile in a Saline Form, or as some of them express it, in
forma sicca. I am very far from thinking (answers Carneades) that the Salt I
have mentioned is that which Paracelsus and Helmont mean when they speak of Sal
Tartari Volatile, and ascribe such great things to it. For the Salt I speak of
falls extremely short of those Virtues, not seeming in its Taste, Smell, and
other Obvious Qualities, to differ very much (though something it do differ)
from Salt of Hartshorn, and other Volatile Salts drawn from the Distilled
Parts of Animals. Nor have I yet made Trials enough to be sure, that it is a
pure Salt of Tartar without participating any thing at all of the Nitre, or
Antimony. But because it seems more likely to proceed from the Tartar, than
from any of the other Ingredients, and because the Experiment is in it self not
Ignoble, and Luciferous enough (as showing a new way to produce a Volatile Salt
contrary to Acid Salts from Bodies that otherwise are Observed to yield no such
Liquor, but either only, or chiefly, Acid ones,) I shall, to satisfy you,
acquaint you before any of my other Friends with the way I now use (for I have
formerly used some others) to make it.

Take then of good Antimony, Saltpeter and Tartar, of each an equal weight,
and of Quicklime Half the Weight of any one of them; let these be powdered and
well mingled; this done, you must have in readiness a long neck or Retort of
Earth, which must be placed in a Furnace for a naked Fire, and have at the top
of it a hole of a convenient Bigness, at which you may cast in the Mixture, and
presently stop it up again; this Vessel being fitted with a large Receiver must
have Fire made under it, till the bottom of the sides be red hot, and then you
must cast in the above prepared Mixture, by about half a spoonful (more or
less) at a time, at the hole made for that purpose; which being nimbly stopped,
the Fumes will pass into the Receiver and condense there into a Liquor, that
being rectified will be of a pure golden Color, and carry up that color to a
great height; this Spirit abounds in the Salt I told you of, part of which may
easily enough be separated by the way I use in such cases, which is, to put the
Liquor into a glass Egg, or bolthead with a long and narrow Neck. For if this
be placed a little inclining in hot sand, there will sublime up a fine Salt,
which, as I told you, I find to be much of kin to the Volatile Salts of
Animals: For like them it has a Saltish, not an Acid Salt; it hisses upon the
Affusion of Spirit of Nitre, or Oil of Vitriol; it precipitates Corals
Dissolved in Spirit of Vinager; it turns the blew Syrup of Violets immediately
green; it presently turns the Solution of Sublimate into a Milkie whiteness;
and in sum, has diverse Operations like those that I have observed in that sort
of Salts to which I have resembled it: and is so Volatile, that for Distinction
sake, I call it Tartari Fugitivus. What virtues it may have in Physic I have
not yet had the opportunity to Try; but I am apt to think they will not be
despicable. And besides that a very Ingenious Friend of mine tells me he has
done great matters against the stone, with a Preparation not very much
Differing from ours, a very Experienced Germane Chemist finding that I was
unacquainted with the ways of making this salt, told me that in a great City
in his Country, a noted Chemist prizes it so highly, that he had a while since
procured a Privilege from the Magistrates, that none but He, or by his
License, should vent a Spirit made almost after the same Way with mine, save
that he leaves out one of the Ingredients, namely the Quicklime. But,
continues Carneades, to resume my Former Discourse where your Curiosity
interrupted it;

It Is also a common practice in France to bury thin Plates of Copper in the Marc
(as the French call it) or Husks of Grapes, whence the Juice has been squeezed
out in the Wine Press, and by this means the more saline parts of those Husks
working by little and little upon the Copper, Coagulate Themselves with it into
that Bluish Green Substance we in English call Verdigrease. Of which I
therefore take Notice, because having Distilled it in a Naked Fire, I found as
I expected, that by the Association of the Saline with the Metalline parts, the
former were so altered, that the Distilled Liquor, even without Rectification,
seemed by smell and Taste, strong almost like Aqua Fortis, and very much
surpassed the purest and most Rectified Spirit of Vinager that ever I made. And
this Spirit I therefore ascribe to the salt of the Husks altered by their
Co-Mixture with the copper (though the Fire afterward Divorce and Transmute
them) because I found this later in the bottom of the Retort in the Form of a
Crocus or redish powder: And because Copper is of too sluggish a Nature to be
forced over in close Vessels by no stronger a heat. And that which is also
somewhat Remarkable in the Destillation of good Verdigrease, (or at least of
that sort that I used) is this, that I Never could observe that it yielded me
any oil, (unless a little black slime which was separated in Rectification may
pass for Oil) though both Tartar and Vinager, (especially the former) will by
Destillation yield a Moderate proportion of it. If likewise you pour Spirit of
Vinager upon Calcined Lead, the Acid Salt of the Liquor will by its Commixture
with the Metalline parts, though Insipid, acquire in a few hours a more than
Saccharine sweetness; and these Saline parts being by a strong Fire Destill'd
from the Lead wherewith they were imbody'd, will, as I formerly also noted to a
Different purpose, leave the Metal behind them altered in some qualities from
what it was, and will themselves ascend, partly in the Form of an unctuous
Body or Oil, partly in that of Phlegm; but for the greatest part in the Form
of a subtle Spirit, endowed, besides diverse new Qualities which I am not now
willing to take notice of, with a strong smell very much other than that of
Vinager, and a piercing taste quite differing both from the Sowerness of the
Spirit of Vinager, and the Sweetness of the Sugar of Lead.

To be short, As the difference of Bodies may depend merely upon that of the
schemes whereinto their Common matter is put; So the seeds of Things, the Fire
and the other Agents are able to alter the minute parts of a Body (either by
breaking them into smaller ones of differing shapes, or by Uniting together
these Fragments with the unbroken Corpuscles, or such Corpuscles among
Themselves) and the same Agents partly by Altering the shape or bigness of the
Constituent Corpuscles of a Body, partly by driving away some of them, partly
by blending others with them, and partly by some new manner of connecting them,
may give the whole portion of matter a new Texture of its minute parts; and
thereby make it deserve a new and Distinct name. So that according as the small
parts of matter recede from each other, or work upon each other, or are
connected together after this or that determinate manner, a Body of this or
that denomination is produced, as some other Body happens thereby to be altered
or destroyed.

Since then those things which Chemists produce by the help of the Fire are but
inanimate Bodies; since such fruits of the Chemists skill differ from one
another but in so few qualities that we see plainly that by fire and other
Agents we can employ, we can easily enough work as great alterations upon
matter, as those that are requisite to change one of these Chemical Productions
into another; Since the same portion of matter may without being Compounded
with any extraneous Body, or at least Element, be made to put on such a variety
of forms, and consequently to be (successively) turned into so many differing
Bodies. And since the matter clothed with so many differing forms was
originally but water, and that in its passage through so many transformations,
it was never reduced into any of those substances which are reputed to be the
Principles or Elements of mixed Bodies, except by the violence of the fire,
which it self divides not Bodies into perfectly simple or Elementary
substances, but into new Compounds; Since, I say, these things are so, I see
not why we must needs believe that there are any Primogeneal and simple Bodies,
of which as of Pre-exsistent Elements Nature is obliged to compound all others.
Nor do I see why we may not conceive that she may produce the Bodies accounted
mixed out of one another by Variously altering and contriving their minute
parts, without resolving the matter into any such simple or Homogeneous
substances as are pretended. Neither, to dispatch, do I see why it should be
counted absurd to think, that when a Body is resolved by the Fire into its
supposed simple Ingredients, those substances are not true and proper Elements,
but rather were, as it were, Accidentally produced by the fire, which by
Dissipating a Body into minute Parts does, if those parts be shut up in Close
Vessels, for the most part necessarily bring them to Associate Themselves after
another manner than before, and so bring Them into Bodies of such Different
Consistences as the Former Texture of the Body, and Concurrent Circumstances
make such disbanded particles apt to Constitute; as experience shows us (and I
have both noted it, and proved it already) that as there are some Concretes
whose parts when dissipated by fire are fitted to be put into such Schemes of
matter as we call Oil, and Salt, and Spirit; So there are others, such as are
especially the greatest part of Minerals, whose Corpuscles being of another
Size or figure, or perhaps contrived another Way, will not in the Fire yield
Bodies of the like Consistences, but rather others of differing Textures; Not
to mention, that from Gold and some other Bodies, we see not that the Fire
separates any Distinct Substances at all; nor That even those Similar Parts of
Bodies which the Chemists Obtain by the Fire, are the Elements whose names they
bear, but Compound Bodies, upon which, for their resemblance to them in
consistence, or some other obvious Quality, Chemists have been pleased to
bestow such Appellations.

THE CONCLUSION.
THese last Words of Carneades being soon after followed by a noise which
seemed to come from the place where the rest of the Company was, he took it for
a warning, that it was time for him to conclude or break off his Discourse; and
told his Friend; By this time I hope you see, Eleutherius, that if Helmonts
Experiments be true, it is no absurdity to question whether that Doctrine be
one, that does not assert Any Elements in the sense before explained. But
because that, as diverse of my Arguments suppose the mavelous power of the
Alkahest in the Analyzing of Bodies, so the Effects ascribed to that power are
so unparalleled and stupendous, that though I am not sure but that there may
be such an Agent, yet little less than (...) seems requisite to make a man sure
there is. And consequently I leave it to you to judge, how far those of my
Arguments that are built upon Alkahestical Operations are weakened by that
Liquors being Matchless; and shall therefore desire you not to think that I
propose this Paradox that rejects all Elements, as an Opinion equally probable
with the former part of my discourse. For by that, I hope, you are satisfied,
that the Arguments wont to be brought by Chemists, to prove That all Bodies
consist of either Three Principles, or Five, are far from being so strong as
those that I have employed to prove, that there is not any certain and
Determinate number of such Principles or Elements to be met with Universally in
all mixed Bodies. And I suppose I need not tell you, that these Anti-Chymical
Paradoxes might have been managed more to their Advantage; but that having not
confined my Curiosity to Chemical Experiments, I who am but a young Man, and
younger Chemist, can yet be but slenderly furnished with them, in reference to
so great and difficult a Task as you imposed upon me; Besides that, to tell you
the Truth, I durst not employ some even of the best Experiments I am acquainted
with, because I must not yet disclose them; but however, I think I may presume
that what I have hitherto Discoursed will induce you to think, that Chemists
have been much more happy in finding Experiments than the Causes of them; or in
assigning the Principles by which they may best be explained. And indeed, when
in the writings of Paracelsus I meet with such Fantastic and Un-intelligible
Discourses as that Writer often puzzels and tyres his Reader with, fathered
upon such excellent Experiments, as though he seldom clearly teaches, I often
find he knew; me thinks the Chemists, in their searches after truth, are not
unlike the Navigators of Solomon's Tarshish Fleet, who brought home from their
long and tedious Voyages, not only Gold, and Silver, and Ivory, but Apes and
Peacocks too; For so the Writings of several (for I say not, all) of your
Hermetick Philosophers present us, together with diverse Substantial and noble
Experiments, Theories, which either like Peacocks feathers make a great show,
but are neither solid nor useful; or else like Apes, if they have some
appearance of being rational, are blemished with some absurdity or other, that
when they are Attentively considered, makes them appear Ridiculous.

Carneades having thus finished his Discourse against the received Doctrines of
the Elements; Eleutherius judging he should not have time to say much to him
before their separation, made some haste to tell him; I confess, Carneades,
that you have said more in favor of your Paradoxes then I expected. For though
diverse of the Experiments you have mentioned are no secrets, and were not
unknown to me, yet besides that you have added many of your own unto them, you
have laid them together in such a way, and applied them to such purposes, and
made such Deductions From them, as I have not Hitherto met with.

But though I be therefore inclined to think, that Philoponus, had he heard
you, would scarce have been able in all points to defend the Chemical
Hypothesis against the arguments wherewith you have opposed it; yet me thinks
that however your Objections seem to evince a great part of what they pretend
to, yet they evince it not all; and the numerous trials of those you call the
vulgar Chemists, may be allowed to prove something too.

Wherefore, if it be granted you that you have made it probable,

First, that the differing substances into which mixed Bodies are wont to be
resolved by the Fire are not of a pure and an Elementary nature, especially for
this Reason, that they yet retain so much of the nature of the Concrete that
afforded them, as to appear to be yet somewhat compounded, and oftentimes to
differ in one Concrete from Principles of the same denomination in another:

Next, that as to the number of these differing substances, neither is it
precisely three, because in most Vegetable and Animal bodies Earth and Phlegm
are also to be found among their Ingredients; nor is there any one determinate
number into which the Fire (as it is wont to be employed) does precisely and
universally resolve all compound Bodies whatsoever, as well Minerals as others
that are reputed perfectly mixed.

Lastly, that there are diverse Qualities which cannot well be referred to any of
these Substances, as if they primarily resided in it and belonged to it; and
some other qualities, which though they seem to have their chief and most
ordinary residence in some one of these Principles or Elements of mixed Bodies,
are not yet so deducible from it, but that also some more general Principles
must be taken in to explicate them.

If, I say, the Chemists (continues Eleutherius) be so Liberal as to make you
these three Concessions, I hope you will, on your part, be so civil and
Equitable as to grant them these three other propositions, namely;

First, that diverse Mineral Bodies, and therefore probably all the rest, may be
resolved into a Saline, a Sulphurous, and a Mercurial part; And that almost
all Vegetable and Animal Concretes may, if not by the Fire alone, yet, by a
skillful Artist Employing the Fire as his chief Instrument, be divided into
five differing Substances, Salt, Spirit, Oil, Phlegm and Earth; of which the
three former by reason of their being so much more Operative than the Two
Later, deserve to be Looked upon as the Three active Principles, and by way of
Eminence to be called the three principles of mixed bodies.

Next, that these Principles, Though they be not perfectly Devoid of all
Mixture, yet may without inconvenience be styled the Elements of Compounded
bodies, and bear the Names of those Substances which they most Resemble, and
which are manifestly predominant in them; and that especially for this reason,
that none of these Elements is Divisible by the Fire into Four or Five
differing substances, like the Concrete whence it was separated.

Lastly, That Diverse of the Qualities of a mixed Body, and especially the
Medical Virtues, do for the most part lodge in some One or Other of its
principles, and may Therefore usefully be sought for in That Principle severed
from the others.

And in this also (pursues Eleutherius) methinks both you and the Chemists may
easily agree, that the surest way is to Learn by particular Experiments, what
differing parts particular Bodies do consist of, and by what ways (either
Actual or potential fire) they may best and most Conveniently be Separated, as
without relying too much upon the Fire alone, for the resolving of Bodies, so
without fruitlessly contending to force them into more Elements than Nature
made Them up of, or strip the severed Principles so naked, as by making Them
Exquisitely Elementary to make them almost useless,

These things (subjoynes Eleu.) I propose, without despairing to see them
granted by you; not only because I know that you so much prefer the Reputation
of Candor before that of subtility, that your having once supposed a truth
would not hinder you from embracing it when clearly made out to you; but
because, upon the present occasion, it will be no disparagement to you to
recede from some of your Paradoxes, since the nature and occasion of your past
Discourse did not oblige you to declare your own opinions, but only to
personate an Antagonist of the Chemists. So that (concludes he, with a smile)
you may now by granting what I propose, add the Reputation of Loving the truth
sincerely to that of having been able to oppose it subtly.

Carneades's haste forbidding him to answer this crafty piece of flattery; Till
I shall (says he) have an opportunity to acquaint you with my own Opinions
about the controversies I have been discoursing of, you will not, I hope,
expect I should declare my own sense of the Arguments I have employed.
Wherefore I shall only tell you thus much at present; that though not only an
acute Naturalist, but even I my self could take plausible Exceptions at some of
them; yet diverse of them too are such as will not perhaps be readily answered,
and will Reduce my Adversaries, at least, to alter and Reform their Hypothesis.
I perceive I need not mind you that the Objections I made against the
Quaternary of Elements and Ternary of Principles needed not to be opposed so
much against the Doctrines Themselves (either of which, especially the latter,
may be much more probably maintained than hitherto it seems to have been, by
those Writers for it I have met with) as against the unaccurateness and the
unconcludingness of the Analytical Experiments vulgarly Relied On to
Demonstrate them.

And therefore, if either of the two examined Opinions, or any other Theory of
Elements, shall upon rational and Experimental grounds be clearly made out to
me; It Is Obliging, but not irrational, in you to Expect, that I shall not be so
far in Love with my Disquieting Doubts, as not to be content to change them
for undoubted truths. And (concludes Carneades smiling) it were no great
disparagement for a Sceptick to confess to you, that as unsatisfied as the
past discourse may have made you think me with the Doctrines of the
Peripateticks, and the Chemists, about the Elements and Principles, I can yet
so little discover what to acquiesce in, that perchance the Enquiries of others
have scarce been more unsatisfactory to me, than my own have been to my self.

FINIS.
THe Authors constant Absence from the Press, whilst the former Treatise was
Printing, and the Nature of the Subject it self, wherewith ordinary Composers
are not wont to be at all acquainted, will, it is hoped, procure the Readers
Excuse, till the next Edition, if the Errata be somewhat numerous, and if among
them there want not some grosser mistakes, which yet are not the only Blemishes
these lines must take notice of and acknowledge; For the Author now perceives
that through the fault of those to whom he had committed the former Treatise in
loose Sheets, some Papers that belonged to it, have altogether miscarryed. And
though it have luckily enough happened, for the most part, that the Omission of
them does not mar the Cohaerence of the rest; yet till the next designed
Edition afford an opportunity of inserting them, it is thought fit that the
Printer give notice of one Omission at the End of the first Dialogue; and that
to these Errata there be annexed the ensuing sheet of Paper, that was casually
lost, or forgotten by him that should have put it into the Press; where it
ought to have been inserted, in the 187. printed Page, at the break, betwixt
the words, [Nature] in the 13th. line, and [But] in the next line after. Though
it is to be noted here, that by the mistake of the Printer, in some Books, the
number of 187 is placed at the top of two somewhat distant pages; and in such
copies the following addition ought to be inserted in the latter of the two, as
follows.

And on this occasion I cannot but take notice, that whereas the great Argument
which the Chemists are wont to employ to vilify Earth and Water, and make them
be looked upon as useless and unworthy to be reckoned among the Principles of
Mixed Bodies, is, that they are not endowed with Specific Properties, but only
with Elementary qualities; of which they use to speak very sleightingly, as of
qualities contemptible and unactive: I see no sufficient Reason for this
Practice of the Chemists: For it is confessed that Heat is an Elementary
Quality, and yet that an almost innumerable company of confiderable Things are
performed by Heat, is manifest to them that duly consider the various
Phenomenon wherein it intervenes as a principal Actor; and none ought less to
ignore or distrust this Truth then a Chemist. Since almost all the operations
and Productions of his Art are performed chiefly by the means of Heat. And as
for Cold it self, upon whose account they so despise the Earth and Water, if
they please to read in the Voyages of our English and Dutch Navigators in Nova
Zembla and other Northern Regions what stupendous Things may be effected by
Cold, they would not perhaps think it so despicable. And not to repeat what I
lately recited to You out of Paracelsus himself, who by the help of an intense
Cold teaches to separate the Quintessence of Wine; I will only now observe to
You, that the Conservation of the Texture of many Bodies both animate and
inanimate does so much depend upon the convenient motion both of their own
Fluid and Looser Parts, and of the ambient Bodies, whether Air, Water, etc.
that not only in humane Bodies we see that the immoderate or unseasonable
coldness of the Air (especially when it finds such Bodies everheated) does very
frequently discompose the Oeconomie of them, and occasion variety of Diseases;
but in the solid and durable Body of Iron it self, in which one would not
expect that sudden Cold should produce any notable change, it may have so
great an operation, that if you take a Wire, or other slender piece of steel,
and having brought it in the fire to a white heat, You suffer it afterward to
cool leasurely in the Air, it will when it is cold be much of the same
hardness it was of before: Whereas if as soon as You remove it from the fire,
you plunge it into cold water, it will upon the sudden Refrigeration acquire a
very much greater hardness then it had before; Nay, and will become manifestly
brittle. And that you may not impute this to any peculiar Quality in the Water,
or other Liquor, or Unctuous matter, wherein such heated steel is wont to be
quenched that it may be tempered; I know a very skillful Tradesman, that diverse
times hardens steel by suddenly cooling it in a Body that is neither a liquor,
nor so much as moist. A trial of that Nature I remember I have seen made. And
however by the operation that Water has upon steel quenched in it, whether upon
the Account of its coldness and moisture, or upon that of any other of its
qualities, it appears, that water is not always so inefficacious and
contemptible a Body, as our Chemists would have it pass for. And what I have
said of the Efficacy of Cold and Heat, might perhaps be easily enough carried
further by other considerations and experiments; were it not that having been
mentioned only upon the Bye, I must not insist on it, but proceed to another
Subject.

ERRATA.
Page 5. line. 6. read so qualified, 15.19. Ratiocinations, 25.15. for a,
33.17. in a parenth. (that is no more) 51.24. besides another Caput, 79.10.
employ, 86.13. structure, 97.13. Sack, ibid. 22. Sack, 104.29. instead of
appear it, will, leg. appear, it will, 118.20. leisure, ibid. principal,
126.20. and till it suffer, 129. 3 leg. in parenth (notwithstanding, etc.
131.15. so, 144.15. (...), 151.5. nor have been resolved, 180.25. Magistram,
185.15. lately, 188.15. tunned, 200.1. intolerable, ibid. 2. in, 209 21.
tegularum, 210.7. distilled from, 215.25. dele the, 220.1. bodies, 228.11.
fugitive, 231.17. instead of all lege a pound, 237.6. Chemist, 248.18. Ashes
off, 251. 23 Deopilative) 259.6. it self, 269.10 (...), ibid. (...), 276.25.
make a parenth at the words, by the, and shut it after the words in the 27.
line at all, 280.11. Corals, 288.6. ascribes, 294 22. poresity, ibid 28. noted,
296.1. Bodies. 305.8. ( attended, 307.12. dele to, 308.12. devisers. 312 14.
and, 313.3. too, 314.24. fugitivenesse, 333.13. origin, ibid. 24. contrivance
of, 339.1. Nay, Barthias, 142.3. in; I will, 350.26. absurd, 356.11. Goutieres.
358.6. antea. 360.1. compertissimum, ibid 18. Joachimica, ibid. 19. graminis,
ibid. 23. sua, 362 6. Dutch account, 363.2. diggers) ibid 11. and 12. lin. read
damp as the Englishmen also call it, 366.25 a height, 368.19. in use. 370.9.
latter; And, ibid. 24. Water; J, 377.22. Rest, ibid. 25. know) 378.23. after
Aggregate insert or complex, ibid 27. dele) ibid 28. dele), 379.4. before as
begin a parenth. which ends lin. 9. at Gold. ibid. instead of Which, put This,
ibid. 12. with the word Texture should be connected the next line, Though, and
this word Though is to have put before it a parenthesis, which is to end at the
word Fluid in the 16th line, 383 3. Regulus Martis Stellatus, 382.3. Relations,
ibid 9. Chemist, 386.29. confess by teaching it, 391.8. and yet may, 392.1.
an, ibid. 12. of, 393. distinct Tastes; 397.13. Talck, 398.18. Earth, 399.18.
parts, 404.8. sal-petrae, 419.20. after it put in Sal.

The Publisher does advertise the Reader, that seeing there are diverse
Experiments related in this Treatise, which the Author is not unwilling to
submit to the consideration also of Foreign Philosophers, he believes this
piece will be very soon translated into Latin.

END.

