NEW EXPERIMENTS Physico-Mechanicall Touching the Air.

NEW EXPERIMENTS Physico-Mechanicall, Touching The SPRING of the AIR, and its
EFFECTS, (Made, for the most part, in a New PNEUMATICAL ENGINE) Written by way
of LETTER To the Right Honorable Charles Lord Vicount of Dungarvan, Eldest Son
to the EARL of CORK.

By the Honorable Robert Boil Esquire

OXFORD: Printed by H: Hall, Printer to the University, for Tho: Robinson. 1660.

To the Reader.
ALthough the following Treatise being far more prolix then becomes a Letter,
and then I at first intended it; I am very unwilling to increase the already
excessive bulk of the Book by a Preface, yet there are some particulars that I
think my self obliged to take notice of to the Reader, as things, that will
either concern him to know, or me to have known.

In the first place then: If it be demanded why I publish to the World a
Letter, which by its Style and diverse Passages, appears to have been written
as well For, as To a particular Person; I have chiefly these two things to
answer: The one, That the Experiments therein related, having been many of them
tried in the presence of Ingenious Men; and by that means having made some
noise among the Virtuosi (insomuch that some of them have been sent into
Foreign Countries, where they have had the luck not to be despised) I could not
without quite tyring more then one Amanuensis, give out half as many Copies of
them as were so earnestly desired, that I could not civilly refuse them. The
other, That intelligent Persons in matters of this kind persuaded me, that the
publication of what I had observed touching the Nature of the Air, would not be
useless to the World; and that in an Age so taken with Novelties as is ours,
these new Experiments would be grateful to the Lovers of free and real
Learning: So that I might at once comply with my grand Design of promoting
Experimental and Useful Philosophy, and obtain the great satisfaction of giving
some to ingenious Men; the hope of which, is, I confess, a temptation that I
cannot easily resist.

Of my being somewhat prolix in many of my Experiments, I have these Reasons to
render, That some of them being altogether new, seemed to need the being
circumstantially related, to keep the Reader from distrusting them: That diverse
Circumstances I did here and there set down for fear of forgetting them, when I
may hereafter have occasion to make use of them in my other Writings: That in
diverse cases I thought it necessary to deliver things circumstantially, that
the Person I addressed them to, might without mistake, and with as little
trouble as is possible, be able to repeat such unusual Experiments: and that
after I consented to let my Observations be made public, the most ordinary
Reason of my prolixity was, That foreseeing that such a trouble as I met with
in making those trials carefully, and the great expense of time that they
necessarily require, (not to mention the charges of making the Engine, and
employing a man to manage it) will probably keep most men from trying again
those Experiments; I thought I might do the generality of my Readers no
unacceptable piece of service, by so punctually relating what I carefully
observed, that they may look upon these Narratives as standing Records in our
new Pneumaticks, and need not reiterate themselves an Experiment to have as
distinct an Idea of it, as may suffice them to ground their Reflections and
Speculations upon.

And because sometimes it is the Discourse made upon the Experiment that makes
it appear prolix, I have commonly left a conspicuous interval betwixt such
Discourses, and the Experiments whereunto they belong, or are annexed; that
they who desire only the Historical part of the account we give of our Engine,
may read the Narratives, without being put to the trouble of reading the
Reflections too: Which I here take notice of, for the sake of those that are
well versed in the New Philosophy, and in the Mathematics; that such may skip
what was designed, but for such Persons as may be less acquainted even then I,
with matters of this nature (scarce so much as mentioned by any Writer in our
Language) and not for them from whom I shall be much more forward to learn,
then to pretend to teach them. Of my being wont to speak rather doubtfully, or
hesitantly, then resolvedly, concerning matters wherein I apprehend some
difficulty, I have in another Treatise (which may, through Gods Assistance,
come abroad ere long) given a particular, and I hope a satisfactory account:
Wherefore I shall now d^fend my Practice but by the Observation of Aristotle,
who somewhere notes, That to seem to know all things certainly, and to speak
positively of them, is a trick of bold and young Fellows: Whereas those that are
indeed intelligent and considerate, are wont to employ more wary and diffident
Expressions, or (as he speaks) (...).

There are diverse Reflections, and other Passages in the following Epistle, and
even some Experiments (occasionally mentioned) which may seem either
impertinent or superfluous, but are not so: Being purposely written, either to
evince some truth opposed, or disprove some erroneous conceit maintained, by
some eminent New Philosopher, or by some other Ingenious Men, who, I presumed,
would easily forgive me the having on such occasions purposely omitted their
Names; though an inquisitive Person will probably discover diverse of them, by
the mention of the Opinions disproved in the Experiments I am excusing.

Ever since I discerned the usefulness of speculative Geometry to Natural
Philosophy, the unhappy Distempers of my Eyes, have so far kept me from being
much conversant in it, that I fear I shall need the pardon of my Mathematical
Readers, for some Passages, which if I had been deeply skilled in Geometry, I
should have treated more accurately.

And indeed, having, for Reasons elsewhere deduced, purposely kept my self a
stranger to most of the new Hypotheses in Philosophy, I am sensible enough that
the Engine I treat of has prevailed with me to write of some subjects which are
sufficiently remote from those I have been most conversant in. And having been
reduced to write the greatest part of the ensuing Letter at a distance, not
only from my Library, but from my own Manuscripts, I cannot but fear that my
Discourses do not only want many choice things wherewith the Learned Writings
of others might have enriched or imbellished them: But that partly for this
Reason, and partly for that touched upon a little before, It is possible I may
have mentioned some Notions already published by others, without taking notice
of the Authors, not out of any design to defraud deserving Men, but for want of
knowing such particulars to have been already published by them: Especially the
Experiments of our Engine being themselves sufficient to hint such Notions as
we build upon them.

The order of the Experiments every Reader may alter, as suits best with his
own Design in perusing them: For not only all those betwixt whom there is an
Affinity in Nature (by belonging to one subject) are not always placed one by
another, but they are not still set down so much as in the order wherein they
were made; but most commonly in that casual one wherein my occasions induced me
to dispatch them to the Press. And, which is worse, I did usually send quite
away the former Experiments, before the later were written, or perhaps so much
as made: Whereby I lost the advantage of correcting and supplying the
Imperfections of what I had formerly written, by the light of my subsequent
Trials and Discoveries.

Besides all this, the distemper in my eyes forbidding me not only to write my
self so much as one Experiment, but even to read over my self what I dictated
to others. I cannot but fear, that besides the Authors mistakes, this Edition
may be blemished by many, that may be properly imputed to a very unskilful
Writer (whom I was often times by haste reduced against my custom to employ)
and may have escaped the Diligence of that Learned Friend, that does me the
favor to over-see the Press; especially there being the distance of two days
Journey betwixt it and me.

I need not perhaps represent to the equitable Reader, how much the strange
Confusions of this unhappy Nation, in the midst of which I have made and
written these Experiments, are apt to disturb that calmness of Mind, and
^ndistractedness of Thoughts, that are wont to be requisite to Happy
Speculations. But I presume, that by all these things put together, he will
readily perceive, That I have been so far from following the Poets prudent
Counsel touching the slow Publication of Books designed to purchase credit by,
-- Nonumque prematur in Annum
that I suffer this Treatise to come abroad into the World with a multitude of
Disadvantages.

But if it be demanded, why then I did not make it fitter for the Press before
I sent it thither? my Answer must be, That not at first imagining that this
sort of Experiments would prove any thing near so troublesome, either to make,
or to Record, as I afterward found them, I did, to engage the Printer to
dispatch, promise him to send him the whole Epistle in a very short time: So
that although now and then the occasional vacations of the Press, by reason of
Festivals, or the absence of the Corrector, gave me the leisure to exspaciate
upon some subject; yet being oftentimes called upon to dispatch the Papers to
the Press, my promise, and many unexpected Avocations, obliged me to a haste,
which, though it have detracted nothing from the Faithfulness of the Historical
part of our Book, has (I fear) been disadvantageous enough to all the rest. And
I made the less scruple to let the following Papers pass out of my hands, with
all their Imperfections; because, as the public Affairs, and my own, were then
circumstanc'd, I knew not when (if at all) I should be again in a condition to
prosecute Experiments of this kind; especially, since (to omit my being almost
weary of being, as it were, confined to one sort of Experiments) I am
pre-ingag'd (if it please God to vouchsafe me Life and Health) to employ my
first leisure in the publication of some other Physiological Papers, which I
thought 'twould make me much the fitter to take in hand, if I first dispatched
all that I had at this time to write touching our Engine.

I have this further to add, by way of Excuse, That as it has been my design
in publishing these Experiments to gratify Ingenious men; so, if I have not
been much flattered, I may hope that the various hints to be met with in the
following Letter, will (at least) somewhat awaken men's thoughts, and excite
them to new speculations (such as perhaps even inquisitive men would scarce
else light upon) and I need not despair, that even the examination of such new
Suspicions and Enquiries will hence also, at least Occasionally, be
facilitated: I said Occasionally, because it being, as it is proverbially said,
Facile Inventis addere. It seems not irrational to expect, that our Engine it
self, and diverse of our Experiments, will be much promoted by the Industry of
Inventive and Mathematical Wits, whose contrivances may easily either correct
or supply, and consequently surpass many of those we have made use of. And,
particularly, if Men by skill and patience can arrive both to evacuate such
Receivers as ours, till there be no more Air left in them, then there seems to
have remained in the Glasses made use of about the Magdeburgick Experiment
(hereafter to be mentioned) and to keep out the Air for a competent while, the
Usefulness and Discoveries of our Engine, will not be a little advanced. And
perhaps that may belong to it, which I remember Seneca speaks of Nature,
Initiatos (says he) nos credimus, in Vestibulo ejus haeremus: For being now in
a place where we are not quite destitute of moderately skilful Artificers, we
have, since the Conclusion of the following Letter, made some Additions to our
Engine, by whose help we find (upon some new trials) that we may be able,
without much of new trouble, to keep the ambient Air out of the exhausted
Receiver for a whole day; and perhaps we should be able to keep it out much
longer, if before we shall have dispatched some urgent Affairs, and published
some Papers for which a kind of Promise is thought to make us Debtors to the
Press, we could be at leisure to prosecute such Experiments, as may possibly
afford a Supplement to the following Treatise, from which I shall now no longer
detain the Reader.

Friendly Reader,
I Know all Persons that have a public Spirit for the Advancement of Learning,
will think much that this piece came not out in a Language of more general Use,
then this you see it now attired in; especially since the Excellent Noble
Person, who is the Author, is known to be well able himself (being almost
universally a Linguist) to have given it either the Old Latin, or the newer
French Dress.

But if it be an Honor to a Language to be preferred, and this Honor breeds
sometimes an Emulation, as anciently it did between the Greeks and Romans, it
cannot be thought unhandsome for an English Nobleman to have preferred his own:
And it may be a sufficient Reason for the Gentry of Foreign Parts to learn our
Speech, or keep Interpreters, that they are sure to have for their requital,
from many of our English Writers (as here from this piece) much curiously
ingenious, and profitable Learning.

But as to this particular (give me leave to use Words from a Story) Since the
Mountain cannot come to Mahomet, Mahomet will go to the Mountain: I mean thus;
Because many witty Men, Persons of Honor and Estate especially, may be supposed
to be able to make a better account, by employing their Studies and Time on
Matter then Words, and so are justly impeded from learning Languages; And
because (as I may judge) the noble Author is willing to oblige all Men, He has
already provided, that this piece shall shortly be done into Latin, that so it
may come home to diverse worthy Persons in its Stream, who cannot travel to
find it out in its first Origin.

Having therefore leave so to do, I cannot forbear to give the World the
Advertisement of this Latin Edition, lest some skilful Artist should take
needless pains about a Work, which will, ere long (by Gods furtherance) be done
to his Hands; For such unprofitable expenses of Study have too frequently
happened, and too much to the disadvantage of Learning, for want of a
sufficient Correspondence and Intercourse between such as are exercised in the
Mines of Wisdom.

This is all the trouble I shall at present give you: Nor shall I need mind
thee, if you have a true gust for the Book you read, to have an honor and
thankful regard to the Person that has favored us with the Communication of
these his Trials, and is manifestly so great a Patron and Friend to
Experimental Learning, and all true Wisdom; for should you fail in this, you
might deservedly be deprived of some other Observations on the same subject,
which the Author, I hear, has made since the finishing of this Treatise.

I desire to be excused that I do not make Excuses for the slowness of the
Publication, hoping that the long expectation you have had of it, will enhance,
and not diminish your delight in the enjoyment of a piece like to be, amongst
the students in accurate Philosophy, of so general acceptance. Farewell.

R: Sh.

A Summary of the chief Matters treated of in this Epistolical Discourse.
THe Proaemium, wherein is set down the oc^asion of this Discourse, 1. The
motives that induced the Author thereunto, 2 etc. The hints he received, 5. The
things wherein this Engine excels any that have yet been made use of, 6 etc.
The description of the Engine and its parts, 8 etc. The way of preparing and
using it, 15 etc. The division of the Experiments tryable thereby into two
sorts, and the difficulty of excluding the Air. 18 etc. The first Experiment,
touching the manner of pumping out the Air, and by what degrees the Receiver is
emptyed, ^0, etc. A digression touching the Spring or Elastical power of the
Air, with an attempt for a Mechanical Explication thereof, necessary to be
premised for the explanation of the Phenomenon, exhibited in this and the
subsequent Experiments. 22 etc. The second Experiment, touching the pressure of
the Air against the sides of the Bodies it invirons, 37 etc. with a digressive
Explication of the pressure of the Air included within an ambient Body. 39 etc.
The third Experiment, touching the force requisite to draw down the Sucker, 42
etc. The Opinion of an eminent Modern Naturalist examined. 44 etc. The fourth
Experiment, touching the swelling of a Bladder; with the degrees by which it
increases, 45 etc. Another Opinion of a Learned Author examined. 48 etc. The
fifth Experiment, touching the breaking of a Bladder in the Receiver, 49 etc.
And of another by heat. 52 The sixth Experiment, of diverse ways by which the
elastical expansion of the Air was measured. 52 etc The seventh Experiment,
touching what Figure does best resist the pressure of the Air. 62 etc. The
eighth Experiment, tending to a further Demonstration of the former, from the
breaking of glass a Helmet inward. 64 etc. The ninth Experiment, contains a
further confirmation from the breaking of a Glass outward, 66 etc. with an
Experiment to prove, that these Phenomenon proceed not from an invincible Fuga
vacui 69. A description of other small Receivers, and their Conveniences, 70
etc. A Receipt for the making of a Composition to Cement cracked Glasses. 73 The
tenth Experiment, touching the flaming of Candles enclosed in the Receiver. 74
etc. The eleventh Experiment, touching the burning of Coals, 78. And the
lasting of the excandescence of an included piece of Iron. 80. The twelfth
Experiment concerning the burning of Match. 82 The thirteenth Experiment,
concerning the further prosecution of the preceding, tending to prove the
extinction of the Fire in the former Experiments, not to have proceeded from
the pressure of the Fire by the Fumes, 84. Some remarkable Circumstances of it,
86. The Experiment of Match tried in a small Receiver. 87 The fourteenth
Experiment, touching the striking Fire, and kindling of Powder with the Lock of
a Pistol in the evacuated Receiver. 88 etc. The fifteenth Experiment, touching
the unsuccessfulness of kindling included Bodies with a burning Glass, and the
Authors intention to prosecute it further. 102 The sixteenth Experiment,
concerning the operation of the Loadstone. 105, etc. The seventeenth
Experiment, touching the gradual descent of the Quicksilver in the
Torricellian Experiment, 106 etc. Some observable Circumstances concerning it,
112 etc. The same Experiment tried in one of the small Receivers, 115. How this
Experiment may be made use of to know the strength of the pressure of the Air
for every degree of Rarefaction, 1^6 etc. The trial of the same Experiment in a
Tube not two foot long, 118. The raising of the Mercurial Cylinder, by the
forcing of more Air into the Receiver, 119. Some Allegations for and against a
Vacuum considered, 1^0 etc. Some Advertisements concerning the inconveniences
that may arise from the diversity of measures made use of for the defining the
Altitute of the Mercurial Cylinder; and from the neglect of little parcels of
Air apt to remain between the Mercury and the concave surface of the Tube, 123
etc. Some Expedients for the more exact filling the Tube, 127. The height the
Author once found of the Mercurial Cylinder, according to English measure. 128.
The eighteenth Experiment, containing a new Observation touching the variation
of the height of the Mercurial Cylinder in the same Tube, with an offer at the
reason thereof. 129 etc. The 19th Experiment, touching the subsiding of a
Cylinder of Water, 140 etc. The same tried in a small Receiver. 143 The 20th
Experiment, touching the Elater of Water, with a digressive Experiment to the
same purpose 144 etc. The 21 Experiment, being a prosecution of the former
Enquiry, by Experimenting the Generation of Bubbles under Water, a recital of
some notable Circumstances, with some observable Corollary's deduced therefrom.
147 etc. The 22d Experiment, tending to a determination of the Enquiry propos^d
in the former Experiment, by proving the matter of these Bubbles from their
permanency to be Air: The Experiments tried in the great and small Receivers,
evincing the same thing, 155 etc. An Experiment wherein there appeared Bubbles
in Quicksilver, 160. The Authors Inference, 162. A digressive Enquiry, whether
or no Air may be generated anew; with several Histories and Experiments,
tending to the resolving and clearing thereof, 162 etc. The Authors excuse for
so long a Digression. 181 The 23d Experiment, containing a further Enquiry
touching Bubbles made with common and distilled Water. 182 The 24th Experiment,
wherein the inquiry is prosecuted with other Liquors, as with Sallet Oil, Oil
of Turpentine, a Solution of Tartar, Spirit of Vinegar, Red-wine, Milk, Hen's
Eggs, Spirit of Urine, Spirit of Wine and Water, Spirit of Wine. 187 etc. The
wonderful expansion of the Spirit of Wine. 194 The 25th Experiment, touching
the expansion and gravity of the Air under water. 195 etc. The 26th Experiment,
touching the Vibrations of a Pendulum. 202 etc. The 27th Experiment, touching
the propagation of sound: And the Authors intention of trying some other
Experiments, for the further elucidation thereof. 210 etc. The 28 Experiment,
touching the sudden ^ruption of Bubbles from the water, when the airs pressure
was speedily removed. 214 The 29 Experiment, touching the cause of the ascent
of Fumes and Vapors, wherein it is proved (from the several motions, which the
Fumes of a strange smoking Liquor, of the Authors, were observed to have in
the Receiver, upon the exsuction of the Air) that the reason of their ascent
proceeds from the gravity of the ambient air, and not from any positive levity
of their own. 217 etc. The 30 Experiment, concerning the nature of a fluid
Body, illustrated by the example of smoke which in several circumstances seems
very much to resemble the property of a fluid Body, 224 etc. A conjecture of
the cause of the Suns undulation. 228 The 31 Experiment, concerning the
Phenomenon of two flat Marbles exactly plained and wrought together, and the
true reason thereof, 229. The Authors intention for the further prosecution
thereof, and what hindered him; the reason why the under Marble did not fall from
the upper (being only conjoynd with Spirit of Wine) when the Receiver was
evacuated. And a notable relation concerning the cohesion of flat Bodies. 231
etc. The 32 Experiment, touching the forcible pressure of the Air against the
outward superficies of a Valve, fastened upon the stopcock of the Receiver. The
Diameter of it, and the weight it sustained. 233 etc. The 33 experiment,
touching the great pressure of the Air against the under superficies of the
Sucker, 236 etc. what weight was requisite to depress it, and what weight it
would lift and carry up with it, 239 etc. what improvement and use there may be
made of this experiment, 242. A Discourse touching the nature of Suction,
proving that fuga vacui is not the adequate cause thereof. 243 etc. The 34th
Experiment, containing several attempts for the weighing of light Bodies in the
exhausted Receiver. 258 etc. The 35th Experiment, touching the cause of
^iltration, and the rising of Water in Siphons, 262 etc. A relation of a new
kind of Siphon, of the Authors, upon the occasion of trying the Experiment
lately observed by some Frenchmen, and further improved by himself; and some
conjectures touching the cause of the exhibited Phenomenon. 267 etc. The 36th
Experiment, touching the weighing of a parcel of Air in the exhausted Vessel;
and some other Observations for the explication thereof, 272 etc. An accidental
Experiment, tending to the further confirmation of the Authors Reflections upon
the first Experiment; with a digressive Observation, noting the subtle
penetrancy of some Spirits, to exceed by far that of the Air, 275 etc. And some
other Experiments to show the difficulty of the ingress of the Air into the
pores or holes of some bodies into which Water will readily insinuate it self,
279 etc. with a conjecture at the cause thereof, 282. The Author returns to the
prosecution of the inquiry after the gravity of the Air: But first, (upon the
occasion of the tenacity of a thin Bubble of Glass) sets down his thoughts
concerning the strange exuperancy of strength in Air, agitated by heat, above
what the same has unagitated, 283 etc. And then proceeds to the examination of
the weight of the Air by an Aeolipile, and compares the result thereof, with
that of Mersennus, 286. The Opinions and Experiments of diverse Authors, and
some of his own, touching the proportion of weight betwixt Water and Air, are
compared and examined by the Author, 288. The result thereof, 290. Mersennus
his observation reconciled, with that of the Author; and the proportion between
the gravity of Water and Air about London, 291 etc. After the recital of the
Opinions of several Writers, touching the proportion of gravity between Water
and Quick silver, the Author sets down his own trials, made several ways,
together with his conclusion therefrom, 293 etc. The use he makes of this
inquiry for the ghessing at the height of the Atmosphere, 297. What other
Experiments are requisite to the determination thereof. 299 etc. The 37th
Experiment, touching the strange and odd Phenomenon, of the sudden flashes of
light in the cavity of the Receiver; the several circumstances and difficulties
of it, with some attempts toward the rendering at reason thereof, 301, etc.
The Difficulty of so doing further shown from the consideration of the various
changes of Air which do not immediately fall under our senses, 315. this last
proposition proved by several observations. 316. The 38. Experiment, touching
the freezing of water, 319. etc. A problem, (concerning the great force
wherewith a freezing Liquor extends its self,) proposed upon the Consideration
of diverse admirable effects wrought th^reby. 320 etc. The 39. Experiment,
containing an inquisition after the temperature of the substance that remained
in the cavity of the Receiver, after the Air was well exhausted. The relation
of a Phenomenon, seeming to proceed from the sw^lling of the Glass. With an
advertisement concerning the pliableness of Glass in small prices. 322. etc.
The 40. Experiment, touching the difficulty that occurred in making trial
whether rarefied Air were able to sustain flying insects. 326. etc The 41.
Experiment, Exhibiting several trials touching the respiration of diverse
sorts of animalls included in the Receiver, 328, etc. With a digression
containing some doubts touching respiration wherein are delivere^ several
Experiments relating thereunto. 335 etc. The 42. Experiment, touching the
differing operation* of corrosive Liquors in the emptied Receiver and in the
open Air. 384 The 43. Experiment, touching the spontaneous Ebullition of warm
Liquors in the exhausted Receiver. 388 The Conclusion. 394
TO THE LORD OF DVNGARVAN, My Honored and Dear NEPHEW.
My Dear Lord,
REceiving in your last from Paris, a desire that I would add some more
Experiments to those I formerly sent You over: I could not be so much your
Servant as I am, without looking upon that Desire as a Command; and
consequently, without thinking my self obliged to consider by what sort of
Experiments it might the most acceptably be obeyed. And at the same time,
perceiving by Letters from some other Ingenious Persons at Paris, that several
of the Virtuosi there, were very intent upon the examination of the Interest of
the Air, in hindering the descent of the Quicksilver, in the famous Experiment
touching a Vacuum: I thought I could not comply with your Desires in a more fit
and seasonable manner, then by prosecuting and endeavoring to promote that
noble Experiment of Torricellius: and by presenting your Lordship an account of
my attempts to illustrate a subject, about which, it is being so much discoursed
of where you are, together with your inbred Curiosity, and love of Experimental
Learning, made me suppose you sufficiently inquisitive.

And though I pretend not to acquaint you, on this occasion, with any store of
new Discoveries, yet possibly I shall be so happy, as to assist you to know
somethings which you did formerly but suppose; and shall present you, if not
with new Theories, at least with new Proofs of such as are not yet become
unquestionable. And if what I shall deliver, have the good fortune to encourage
and assist you to prosecute the Hints it will afford, I shall account my self,
in paying of a duty to you, to have done a piece of Service to the Commonwealth
of Learning. Since it may highly conduce to the advancement of that
Experimental Philosophy, the effectual pursuit of which, requires as well a
Purse as a Brain, to endeere it to hopeful Persons of your Quality: who may
accomplish many things which others can but wish or, at most, but design, by
being able to employ the Presents of Fortune in the search of the Mysteries of
Nature.

And I am not faintly induced to make choice of this Subject, rather then any
of the expected Chemical ones, to entertain your Lordship upon, by these two
Considerations: The one, That the Air being so necessary to humane Life, that
not only the generality of Men, but most other Creatures that breath, cannot
live many minutes without it; any considerable discovery of its Nature, seems
likely to prove of moment to Mankind. And the other is, That the Ambient Air,
being that whereto both our own Bodies, and most of the others we deal with
here below, are almost perpetually contiguous; not only its alterations have a
notable and manifest share in those obvious effects, that men have already been
invited to ascribe thereunto such as are the various distempers incident to
humane Bodies, especially if crazy, in the Spring, the Autumn, and also on most
of the great and sudden changes of Weather) but likewise, that the further
discovery of the nature of the Air, will probably discover to us, that it
concurs more or less to the exhibiting of many Phenomenon, in which it has
hitherto scarce been suspected to have any interest. So that a True Account of
any Experiment that is New concerning a thing, wherewith we have such constant
and necessary intercourse, may not only prove of some advantage to humane
Life, but gratify Philosophers, by promoting their Speculations on a Subject
which has so much oppurtunity to solicit their Curiosity.

And I should immediately proceed to the mention of my Experiments, but that I
like too well that worthy saying of the Naturalist Pliny, Benignum est and
plenum ingenui pudoris, In Praesat. lib. 1.
fateri per quos profeceris, not to conform to it, by acquainting your
Lordship, in the first place, with the Hint I had of the Engine I am to
entertain you of. You may be pleased to remember, that a while before our
separation in England, I told you of a Book that I had heard of, but not
perused, published by the industrious Jesuit Schottus, wherein 'twas said, He
related how that ingenious Gentleman Otto Gericke, Consul of Magdeburg, had
lately practiced in Germany a way of emptying Glass Vessels, by sucking out the
Air at the mouth of the Vessel, plunged under water: And you may also perhaps
remember, that I expressed my self much delighted with this Experiment, since
thereby the great force of the external Air (either rushing in at the opened
Orifice of the emptied Vessel, or violently forcing up the Water into it) was
rendered more obvious and conspicuous, than in any Experiment that I had
formerly seen. And though it may appear by some of those Writings I sometimes
^hew'd your Lordship, that I had been sollicitous to try things upon the same
ground; yet in regard this Gentleman was beforehand with me in producing such
considerable effects, by means of the exsuction of Air, I think my self obliged
to acknowledge the Assistance, and Encouragement the Report of his performances
has afforded me.

But as few inventions happen to be at first so complete, as not to be either
blemishd with some deficiencies needful to be remedied, or otherwise capable of
improvement: so when the Engine we have been speaking of, comes to be more
attentively considered, there will appear two very considerable things to be
desired in it. For first, the Wind-Pump (as some body not improperly calls it)
is so contrived, that to evacuate the Vessel there is required the continual
labor of two strong men for diverse hours. And next (which is an imperfection of
much greater moment) the Receiver, or Glass to be emptied, consisting of one
entire and uninterrupted Globe and Neck of Glass; the whole Engine is so made,
that things cannot be conveyed into it, whereon to try Experiments: So that
there seems but little (if any thing) more to be expected from it, then those
very few Phenomenon that have been already observed by the Author, and Recorded
by Schottus. Wherefore to remedy these Inconveniences, I put both Mr. G. and R.
Hook (who has also the Honor to be known to your Lordship, and was with me
when I had these things under consideration) to contrive some Air Pump, that
might not, like the other, need to be kept under water (which on diverse
occasions is inconvenient) and might be more easily managed: And after an
unsuccessful trial or two of ways proposed by others, the last named Person
fitted me with a Pump, anon to be described. And thus the first Imperfection of
the German Engine, was in good measure, though not perfectly, remedied: And to
supply the second desect, it was considered that it would not perhaps prove
impossible to leave in the Glass to be emptied, a hole large enough to put in a
Man's Arm clothed; and consequently other Bodies, not bigger then it, or longer
then the inside of the Vessel. And this Design seemed the more hopeful,
because I remembered, that having several years before often made the Experiment
De Vacuo with my own hands; I had, to examine some conjectures that occurred to
me about it, caused Glasses to be made with a hole at that end, which uses to
be sealed up, and had nevertheless been able, as occasion required, to make use
of such Tubes, as if no such holes had been left in them; by devising stopples
for them, made of the common Plaster called Diachylon: which I rightly enough
ghess'd, would, by reason of the exquisite commixtion of its small parts, and
closeness of its texture, deny all access to the external Air. Wherefore,
supposing that by the help of such Plasters, carefully laid upon the
commissures of the stopple and hole to be made in the Receiver, the external
Air might be hindered from insinuating it self between them into the Vessel, we
caused several such Glasses, as you will find described a little lower, to be
blown at the Glass-house; and though we could not get the Workmen to blow any
of them so large, or of so convenient a shape as we would fain have had; yet
finding one to be tolerably fit, and less unfit then any of the rest, we were
content to make use of it in that Engine: Of which, I suppose, you by this time
expect the Description, in order to the Recital of the Phenomenon exhibited by
it.

To give your Lordship then, in the first place, some account of the Engine it
self: It consists of two principal parts, a glass Vessel, and a Pump to draw
the Air out of it.

The former of these (which we, with the Glass-men, shall often call a
Receiver, for its affinity to the large Vessels of that name, used by Chemists)
consists of a Glass with a wide hole at the top, of a cover to that hole, and
of a stop-cock fastened to the end of the neck, at the bottom.

The shape of the Glass, you will find expressed in the first Figure of the
annexed Scheme. And for the size of it, it contained about 30 Wine Quarts, each
of them containing near two pound (of 16 Ounces to the pound) of water: We
should have been better pleased with a more capacious Vessel, but the Glass-men
professed themselves unable to blow a larger, of such a thickness and shape as
was requisite to our purpose.

At the very top of the Vessel, (A) you may observe a round hole, whose
Diameter (BC) is of about four inches; and whereof, the Orifice is incircled
with a lip of Glass, almost an inch high: For the making of which lip, it was
requisite (to mention that upon the by, in case your Lordship should have such
another Engine made for you) to have a hollow and tapering Pipe of Glass drawn
out, whereof the Orifice above mentioned was the Basis, and then to have the
cone cut off with a hot Iron, within about an Inch of the Points (BC.)

The use of the lip, is to sustain the cover delineated in the second Figure;
where (DE) points out a brass Ring, so cast, as that it does within and without
cover the lip (BC) of the first Figure, and is cemented on upon it with a
strong and close Cement. To the inward tapering Orifice of this Ring (which is
about three Inches over) are exquisitely ground the sides of the Brass stopple
(FG;) so that the concave superficies of the one, and the unequal of the other,
may touch one another in so many places, as may leave as little access, as
possible, to the external Air: And in the midst of this cover is left a hole
(HI) of about half an inch over, environed also with a ring or socket of the
same metal, and fitted likewise with a brass stopple (K) made in the form of
the Key of a stop-cock, and exactly ground into the hole (HI) it is to fill; so
as that though it be turned round in the cavity it possesses, it will not let
in the Air, and yet may be put in or taken out at pleasure, for uses to be
hereafter mentioned. In order to some of which, it is perforated with a little
hole, (8) traversing the whole thickness of it at the lower end; through which,
and a little brass Ring (L) fastened to one side, (no matter which) of the
bottom of the stopple (FG) a string (8, 9, 10) might pass, to be employed to
move some things in the capacity of the emptied Vessel; without any where
unstopping it.

The last thing belonging to our Receiver, is the stop-cock designed in the
first Figure by (N.) for the better fastening of which to the neck, and exacter
exclusion of the Air, there was soder'd on to the shank of the Cock (X) a Plate
of Tin, (MTUW) long enough to cover the neck of the Receiver. But because the
cementing of this was a matter of some difficulty, it will not be amiss to
mention here the manner of it, which was, That the cavity of the tin Plate was
filled with a melted Cement, made of Pitch, Rosin, and Wood-ashes, well
incorporated; and to hinder this liquid Mixture from getting into the Orifice
(Z) of the shank, (X) that hole was stopped with a Cork, to which was fastened a
string, whereby it might be pulled out of the upper Orifice of the Receiver;
and then, the glass neck of the Receiver being well warmed, was thrust into
this Cement, and over the shank whereby it was effected, that all the space
betwixt the tin Plate and the Receiver, and betwixt the internal superficies of
the Receiver, and the shanck of the Cock, was filld with the Cement; and so we
have dispach'd the first and upper part of the Engine.

The undermost remaining part consists of a Frame, and of a sucking Pump, or as
we formerly called it, an Air Pump, supported by it: The Frame is of Wood,
small, but very strong, consisting of three legs, (111) so placed, that one
side of it may stand perpendicular, that the free motion of the hand may not be
hindered. In the midst of which frame, is transversly nailed a board, (222)
which may not improperly be called a Midriff, upon which rests, and to which is
strongly fastened, the main part of the Pump it self, which is the only thing
remaining to be described.

The Pump consists of four parts, a hollow Cylindre, a Sucker, a handle to move
that Sucker, and a valve.

The Cylindre was (by a pattern) cast of brass; it is in length about 14
inches, thick enough to be very strong, notwithstanding the Cylindrical cavity
left within it; this cavity is about three inches Diameter, and makes as exact
a Cylindre as the Artificer was able to bore. This hollow Cylindre is fitted
with a sucker, (4455) consisting of two parts, the one (44) somewhat less in
Diameter then the cavity of the Cylindre, upon which is nailed a good thick
piece of tan'd shoe Leather, which will go so close to the Cylindre, that it
will need to be very forcibly knocked and ram'd in, if at any time it be taken
out, which is therefore done, that it may the more exactly hinder the Air from
insinuating it self betwixt it and the sides of the Cylindre whereon it is to
move.

To the midst of this former part of the Sucker is strongly fastened the other,
namely a thick and narrow plate of Iron, (55) somewhat longer then the
Cylindre, one of whose edges is smooth, but at the other edge it is indented
(as I may so speak) with a row of teeth delineated in the Scheme, into whose
intervals are to be fitted, the teeth of a small Iron nut, ((...)) (as
Tradesmen call it) which is fastened by two staples (22) to the under side of
the formerly mentioned transverse board (222) on which the Cylindre rests, and
is turned to and fro by the third piece of this Pump, namely, the handle or
manubrium, (7) of which the Figure gives a sufficient description.

The fourth and last part of this Cylindre, is the Valve, (R) consisting of a
hole bored through at the top of the Cylindre, a little tapering toward the
cavity; into which hole is ground a tapering Peg of brass, to be thrust in, and
taken out at pleasure.

The Engine being thus described, it will be requisite to add, that something
is wont to be done before it be set on work, for the more easy moving of the
Sucker, and for the better exclusion of the outward Air: which when the Vessel
begins to be exhausted, is much more difficult to be kept out then one would
easily imagine.

There must then be first powered in at the top of the Receiver a little sallad
oil, partly to fill up any small intervalls that may happen to be betwixt the
contiguous surfaces of the internal parts of the Stop-cock: And partly that it
may be the more easy to turn the Key (S) backwards and forwards. Pretty store
of oil must also be poured into the Cylindre, both that the Sucker may slip up
and down in it the more smoothly and freely, and that the Air might be the
better hindered from getting in between them: And for the like reasons, a little
oil is to be used also about the Valve. Upon which occasion, it would not be
omitted (for it is strange) that oftentimes, when neither the pouring in of
water, nor even of oil alone, proved capable to make the Sucker move easily
enough in the Cylinder; a mixture of both those Liquors would readily
(sometimes even to admiration) perform the desired effect. And lastly, the
brass cover of the Receiver, being put into the brass ring formerly described,
that no Air may get between them, it will be very requisite to plaster over
very carefully the upper edges of both, with the plaster formerly mentioned,
or some other as close, which is to be spread upon the edges with a hot Iron;
that being melted, it may run into and fill up all the crannies, or other
little cavities, at which the Air might otherwise get entrance.

All things being thus fitted, and the lower shank (O) of the stop-cock being
put into the upper Orifice of the Cylinder (and), into which it was exactly
ground; the Experimenter is first, by turning the handle, to force the Sucker
to the top of the Cylinder, that there may be no Air left in the upper part of
it* Then shutting the Valve with the Plug, and turning the other way, he is to
draw down the Sucker to the bottom of the Cylinder; by which motion of the
Sucker, the Air that was formerly in the Cylinder being thrust out, and none
being permitted to succeed in its room, it is manifest that the cavity of the
Cylinder must be empty, in reference to the Air: So that if thereupon the Key
of the Stop-cock be so turned, as that through the perforation of it, a free
passage be opened betwixt the Cylinder and the Receiver, part of the Air
formerly contained in the Receiver, will nimbly descend into the Cylinder. And
this Air, being by the turning back of the Key hindered from the returning into
the Receiver, may, by the opening of the Valve, and forcing up of the Sucker to
the top of the Cylinder again, be driven out into the open Air. And thus by the
repetition of the motion of the Sucker upward and downward, and by opportunely
turning the Key, and stopping the Valve, as occasion requires, more or less Air
may be sucked out of the Receiver, according to the exigency of the Experiment,
and the intention of him that makes it.

Your Lordship will, perhaps, think that I have been unnecessarily prolix in
this first part of my Discourse: But if you had seen how many unexpected
difficulties we found to keep out the external Air, even for a little while,
when some considerable part of the internal had been sucked out; You would
peradventure allow that I might have set down more circumstances then I have,
without setting down any, whose knowledge, he that shall try the Experiment may
not have need of. Which is so true, that, before we proceed any further, I
cannot think it unseasonable to advertise Your Lordship, that there are two
chief sorts of Experiments, which we designed in our Engine to make trial of:
The one, such as may be quickly dispatched, and therefore may be tried in our
Engine, though it leak a little; because the Air may be faster drawn out, by
nimbly plying the Pump, then it can get in at undiscerned leaks; I say at
undiscerned leaks, because such as are big enough to be discovered can scarce
be uneasy to be stopped. The other sort of Experiments consists of those that
require not only that the internal Air be drawn out of the Receiver, but that
it be likewise for a long time kept out of it* Such are the preservation of
Animal and other Bodies therein, the germination and growth of Vegetables, and
other trials of several sorts, which it is apparent cannot be well made unless
the external Air can, for a competent while, be excluded: Since even at a very
small leak there may enough get in, to make the Vacuum soon loose that name; by
which I here declare once for all, that I understand not a space wherein there
is no body at all, but such as is either altogether, or almost totally void of
Air.

Now this distinction of Experiments I thought fit to premise to the ensuing
Narratives, because upon trial, we found it so exceeding (and scarce
imaginable) difficult a matter, to keep out the Air from getting at all in at
any imperceptible hole or flaw whatsoever, in a Vessel immediately surrounded
with the compressed Atmosphere, that in spite of all our care and diligence,
we never were able totally to exhaust the Receiver, or keep it when it was
almost empty, any considerable time, from leaking more or less: although (as we
have lately intimated) by unwearyed quickness in plying the Pump, the internal
Air can be much faster drawn out then the external can get in, till the
Receiver come to be almost quite empty. And that is enough to enable men to
discover hitherto unobserved Phenomenon of Nature.

The Experiments therefore of the first sort, will, I fear, prove the only
ones wherewith my Avocations will allow me to entertain Your Lordship in this
Letter. For till your further Commands shall engage me to undertake, by Gods
permission, such an Employment, and more leisure shall better fit me for it, I
know not whether I shall be in a condition to try what may be done, to enable
me to give you some account of the other sort of Experiments also.

Experiment 1.
TO proceed now to the Phenomenon, exhibited to us by the Engine above
described; I hold it not unfit to begin with what does constantly and regularly
offer it self to our observation, as depending upon the Fabric of the Engine
it self, and not upon the nature of this or that particular Experiment which
it is employed to try.

First, Then upon the drawing down of the Sucker, (the Valve being shut) the
Cylindrical space, deserted by the Sucker, is left devoid of Air; and
therefore, upon the turning of the Key, the Air contained in the Receiver
rushes into the emptyed Cylinder, till the Air in both those Vessels be brought
to about an equal measure of dilatation. And therefore, upon shutting the
Receiver by returning the Key, if you open the Valve, and force up the Sucker
again, you will find, that after this first exsuction you will drive out
almost a whole Cylinder full of Air: But at the following exsuctions, you will
draw less and less of Air out of the Receiver into the Cylinder, because that
there will still remain less and less Air in the Receiver it self; and
consequently, the Particles of the remaining Air, having more room to extend
themselves in, will less press out one another. This you will easily perceive,
by finding, that you still force less and less Air out of the Cylinder; so that
when the Receiver is almost exhausted, you may force up the Sucker almost to
the top of the Cylinder, before you will need to unstop the Valve to let out
any Air: And if at such time, the Valve being shut, you let go the handle of
the Pump, you will find the Sucker forcibly carried up to the top of the
Cylinder, by the protrusion of the external Air; which, being much less
rarefied then that within the Cylinder, must have a more forcible pressure upon
the Sucker, then the internal is able to resist: And by this means you may know
how far you have emptyed the Receiver. And to this we may add, on this
occasion, that constantly upon the turning of the Key to let out the Air from
the Receiver, into the emptied Cylinder, there is immediately produced a
considerably brisk noise, especially whilst there is any plenty of Air in the
Receiver.

For the more easy understanding of the Experiments tryable by our Engine, I
thought it not superfluous, nor unseasonable in the recital of this first of
them, to insinuate that notion by which it seems likely that most, if not all,
of them will prove explicable. Your Lordship will easily suppose, that the
Notion I speak of is, That there is a Spring, or Elastical power in the Air we
live in. By which (...) or Spring of the Air; that which I mean is this: That
our Air either consists of, or at least abounds with, parts of such a nature,
that in case they be bent or compressed by the weight of the incumbent part of
the Atmosphere, or by any other Body, they do endeavor, as much as in them
lies, to free themselves from that pressure, by bearing against the contiguous
Bodies that keep them bent; and, as soon as those Bodies are removed or reduced
to give them way, by presently unbending and stretching out themselves, either
quite, or so far forth as the contiguous Bodies that resist them will permit,
and thereby expanding the whole parcel of Air, these elastical Bodies compose.

This Notion may perhaps be somewhat further explained, by conceiving the Air
near the Earth to be such a heap of little Bodies, lying one upon another, as
may be resembled to a Fleece of Wool. For this (to omit other likenesses
betwixt them) consists of many slender and flexible Hairs; each of which, may
indeed, like a little Spring, be easily bent or rouled up; but will also, like
a Spring, be still endeavoring to stretch it self out again. For though both
these Hairs, and the Aerial Corpuscles to which we liken them, do easily yield
to external pressures; yet each of them (by virtue of its structure) is
endowed with a Power or Principle of self-Dilatation; by virtue whereof, though
the hairs may by a Man's hand be bent and crowded closer together, and into a
narrower room then suits best with the nature of the Body: Yet whilst the
compression lasts, there is in the fleece they compose an endeavor outward,
whereby it continually thrusts against the hand that opposes its Expansion. And
upon the removal of the external pressure, by opening the hand more or less,
the compressed Wool does, as it were, spontaneously expand or display it self
toward the recovery of its former more loose and free condition, till the
Fleece have either regained its former Dimensions, or at least, approached them
as near as the compressing hand (perchance not quite opened) will permit. This
Power of self-Dilatation, is somewhat more conspicuous in a dry Sponge
compressed, then in a Fleece of Wool. But yet we rather chose to employ the
latter, on this occasion, because it is not like a Sponge, an entire Body, but
a number of slender and flexible Bodies, loosely complicated, as the Air it
self seems to be.

There is yet another way to explicate the Spring of the Air, namely, by
supposing with that most ingenious Gentleman, Monsieur Des Carts, That the Air
is nothing but a Congeries or heap of small and (for the most part) of flexible
Particles; of several sizes, and of all kind of Figures which are raised by
heat (especially that of the Sun) into that fluid and subtle Etheriall Body
that surrounds the Earth; and by the restless agitation of that Celestial
Matter wherein those Particles swim, are so whirled round, that each Corpuscle
endeavors to beat off all others from coming within the little Sphere
requisite to its motion about its own Center; and (in case any, by intruding
into that Sphere shall oppose its free Rotation) to expel or drive it away: So
that according to this Doctrine, it imports very little, whether the particles
of the Air have the structure requisite to Springs, or be of any other form
(how irregular soever) since their Elastical power is not made to depend upon
their shape or structure, but upon the vehement agitation, and (as it were)
brandishing motion, which they receive from the fluid Either that swiftly flows
between them, and whirling about each of them (independently from the rest) not
only keeps those slender Aerial Bodies separated and stretched out (at least,
as far as the Neighboring ones will permit) which otherwise, by reason of
their flexibleness and weight, would flag or curl; but also makes them hit
against, and knock away each other, and consequently require more room, then
that which if they were compressed, they would take up.

By these two differing ways, my Lord, may the Spring of the Air be explicated.
But though the former of them be that, which by reason of its seeming somewhat
more easy, I shall for the most part make use of in the following Discourse:
yet am I not willing to declare peremptorily for either of them, against the
other. And indeed, though I have in another Treatise endeavored to make it
probable, that the returning of Elastical Bodies (if I may so call them)
forcibly bent, to their former position, may be Mechanically explicated: Yet I
must confess, that to determine whether the motion of Restitution in Bodies,
proceed from this, That the parts of a Body of a peculiar Structure are put
into motion by the bending of the spring, or from the endeavor of some subtle
ambient Body, whose passage may be opposed or obstructed, or else it is pressure
unequally resisted by reason of the new shape or magnitude, which the bending
of a Spring may give the Pores of it: To determine this, I say, seems to me a
matter of more difficulty, then at first sight one would easily imagine it.
Wherefore I shall decline meddling with a subject, which is much more hard to be
explicated, then necessary to be so, by him, whose business it is not, in this
Letter, to assign the adequate cause of the Spring of the Air, but only to
manifest, That the Air has a Spring, and to relate some of its effects.

I know not whether I need annex that, though either of the abovementioned
Hypotheses, and perhaps some others, may afford us an account plausible enough
of the Air-spring; yet I doubt, whether any of them gives us a sufficient
account of its Nature. And of this doubt, I might here mention some Reasons,
but that, peradventure, I may (God permitting) have a fitter occasion to say
something of it elsewhere. And therefore I should now proceed to the next
Experiment, but that I think it requisite, first, to suggest to your Lordship
what comes into my thoughts, by way of Answer to a plausible Objection, which I
foresee you may make against our proposed Doctrine, touching the Spring of the
Air. For it may be alleged, that though the Air were granted to consist of
Springy Particles (if I may so speak) yet thereby we could only give an
account of the Dilatation of the Air in Wine-Guns and other pneumatical Engines
wherein the Air has been compressed, and its Springs violently bent by an
apparent external force; upon the removal of which, it is no wonder that the
Air should, by the motion of restitution, expand it self till it have recovered
its more natural dimensions: whereas in our above mentioned first Experiment,
and in almost all others tryable in our Engine, it appears not that any
compression of the Air preceded its spontaneous Dilatation or Expansion of it
self. To remove this difficulty, I must desire Your Lordship to take notice,
that of whatever nature the Air, very remote from the Earth, may be, and
whatever the Schools may confidently teach to the contrary, yet we have diverse
Experiments to evince, that the Atmosphere we live in is not (otherwise then
comparatively to more ponderous Bodies) light, but heavy: And did not their
gravity hinder them, it appears not why the steams of the Terraqueous Globe, of
which our Air in great part consists, should not rise much higher then the
Refraction of the Sun, and other Stars give men ground to think, that the
Atmosphere, even in the judgment of those Recent Astronomers, who seem willing
to enlarge its bounds as much as they dare, does reach.

But lest you should expect my seconding this Reason by Experience; and lest
you should object, That most of the Experime^ts that have been proposed to
prove the gravity of the Air, have been either barely proposed, or perhaps not
accuratly tried; I am content, before I pass further, to mention here, That I
found a dry lambs-bladder containing near about two thirds of a pint, and
compressed by a packthred tied about it, to loose a grain and the eighth part
of a grain of its former weight, by the recess of the Air upon my having pricked
it: And this with a pair of Scales, which when the full Bladder and the
correspondent weight were in it, would manifestly turn either way with the 32
part of a grain. And if it be further objected, That the Air in the Bladder was
violently compressed by the Pack-thred and the sides of the Bladder, we might
probably (to wave prolix answers) be furnished with a Reply, by setting down
the differing weight of our Receiver, when emptied and when full of
uncompress'd Air, if we could here procure scales fit for so nice an
experiment; since we are informed, that in the German Experiment, commended at
the beginning of this Letter, the Ingenious Tryers of it found, That their
Glass Vessel, of the capacity of 32 measures, was lighter when the Air had been
drawn out of it, then before, by no less then one ounce and 1/10 that is, an
ounce and very near a third: But of the gravity of the Air, we may elsewhere
have occasion to make further mention.

Taking it then for granted that the Air is not devoid of weight, it will not
be uneasy to conceive, that that part of the Atmosphere wherein we live, being
the lower part of it, the Corpuscles that compose it, are very much compressed
by the weight of all those of the like nature that are directly over them, that
is, of all the Particles of Air, that being pil'd up upon them, reach to the
top of the Atmosphere. And though the height of this Atmosphere, according to
the famous Kepler, and some others, scarce exceeds eight common miles; yet
other eminent and later Astronomers, would promote the confines of the
Atmosphere, to exceed six or seven times that number of miles. And the diligent
and learned Riviolo makes it probable, that the Atmosphere may, at least in
diverse places, be at least 50 miles high. So that according to a moderate
estimate of the thickness of the Atmosphere, we may well suppose, that a Column
of Air, of many miles in height, leaning upon some springy Corpuscles of Air
here below, may have weight enough to bend their little springs, and keep them
bent: As, to resume our former comparison, if there were fleeces of Wool pil'd
up to a mountainous height upon one another, the Hairs that compose the
lowermost locks which support the rest, would, by the weight of all the Wool
above them, be as well strongly compressed, as if a man should squeeze them
together in his hands, or employ any such other moderate force to compress
them. So that we need not wonder, that upon the taking off the incumbent Air
from any parcel of the Atmosphere here below, the Corpuscles, whereof that
undermost Air consists, should display themselves, and take up more room then
before.

And if it be objected, That in Water, the weight of the upper and of the lower
part is the same: I answer, That besides that it may be well doubted whether
the observation, by reason of the great difficulty have been exactly made,
there is a manifest disparity betwixt the Air and Water: For I have not found,
that upon an Experiment purposely made, (and in another Treatise Recorded) that
Water will suffer any considerable compression; whereas we may observe in
Wind-Guns (to mention now no other Engines) that the Air will suffer it self to
be crowded into a comparatively very little room; in so much, that a very
diligent Examiner of the Phenomenon of Wind-Guns would have us believe, that in
one of them, by condensation, he reduced the Air into a space at least eight
times narrower then it before possessed. And to this, if we add a noble
Phenomenon of the Experiment De Vacuo; these things put together, may for the
present suffice to countenance our Doctrine. For that noble Experimenter,
Monsieur Pascal (the Son) had the commendable Curiosity to cause the
Torricellian Experiment to be tried at the foot, about the middle, and at the
top of that high Mountain (in Auvergne, if I mistake not) commonly called Le
Puy de Domme; whereby it was found, That the Mercury in the Tube fell down
lower, about three inches, at the top of the Mountain then at the bottom. And a
Learned Man a while since informed me, That a great Virtuoso, friend to us
both, has, with not unlike success, tried the same Experiment in the lower and
upper parts of a Mountain in the West of England: Of which, the reason seems
manifestly enough to be this, That upon the tops of high Mountains, the Air
which bears against the restagnant Quicksilver, is less pressed by the less
ponderous incumbent Air; and consequently is not able totally to hinder the
descent of so tall and heavy a Cylinder of Quicksilver, as at the bottom of
such Mountains did but maintain an Aequilibrium with the incumbent Atmosphere.

And if it be yet further Objected against what has been proposed touching the
compactness and pressure of the Inferior Air; That we find this very Air to
yield readily to the motion of little Flies, and even to that of Feathers, and
such other light and weak Bodies; which seems to argue, that the particles of
our Air are not so compressed as we have represented them, especially, since by
our former Experiment it appears, that the Air readily dilated it self
downward, from the Receiver into the Pump, when it is plain, that it is not the
incumbent Atmosphere, but only the subjacent Air in the brass Cylinder that
has been removed: If this, I say, be objected, we may reply, That when a man
squeezes a Fleece of Wool in his hand, he may feel that the Wool incessantly
bears against his hand, as that which hinders the hairs it consists of, to
recover their former and more natural extent. So each parcel of the Air about
the Earth, does constantly endeavor to thrust away all those contiguous
Bodies, whether Aerial or more gross, that keep them bent, and hinder the
expansion of its parts, which will dilate themselves or fly abroad toward
that part, whether upwards or downwards, where they find their attempted
Dilatation of themselves less resisted by the neihgboring Bodies. Thus the
Corpuscles of that Air we have been all this while speaking of, being unable,
by reason of their weight, to ascend above the Convexity of the Atmosphere, and
by reason of the resistance of the surface of the Earth and Water, to fall down
lower, they are forced, by their own gravity and this resistance, to expand and
diffuse themselves about the Terrestial Globe; whereby it comes to pass, that
they must as well press the contiguous Corpuscles of Air that on either side
oppose their Dilatation, as they must press upon the surface of the Earth, and,
as it were recoyling thence, endeavor to thrust away those upper particles of
Air that lean upon them.

And as for the easy yielding of the Air to the Bodies that move in it, if we
consider that the Corpuscles whereof it consists, though of a springy nature,
are yet so very small, as to make up (which it is manifest they do) a fluid
Body, it will not be difficult to conceive, that in the Air, as in other Bodies
that are fluid, the little Bodies it consists of are in an almost restless
motion, whereby they become (as we have more fully discoursed in another
Treatise) very much disposed to yield to other Bodies, In a Discourse touching
fluidity and firmness.
or easy to be displaced by them, and that the same Corpuscles are likewise so
variously moved, as they are entire Corpuscles, that if some strive to push a
Body placed among them toward the right hand (for instance) others, whose
motion has an opposite determination, as strongly thrust the same Body toward
the left; whereby neither of them proves able to move it out of its place, the
pressure on all hands being reduced as it were to an Aequilibrium: so that the
Corpuscles of the Air must be as well sometimes considered under the notion of
little Springs, which remaining bent, are in their entire bulk transported from
place to place; as under the notion of Springs displaying themselves, whose
parts fly abroad whilst as to their entire bulk they scarce change place: As
the two ends of a Bow, shot off, fly from one another, whereas the Bow it self
may be held fast in the Archers hand; and that it is the equal pressure of the
Air on all sides upon the Bodies that are in it, which causes the easy Cession
of its parts, may be argued from hence: That if by the help of our Engine the
Air be but in great part, though not totally drawn away from one side of a Body
without being drawn away from the other; he that shall think to move that Body
too and fro, as easily as before, will find himself much mistaken.

In verification of which we will, to divert your Lordship a little, mention
here a Phenomenon of our Engine, which even to diverse ingenious persons has at
first sight seemed very wonderful.

THe thing that is wont to be admired, Experiment 2.
and which may pass for our second Experiment is this, That if, when the
Receiver is almost empty, a By-stander be desired to lift up the brass Key
(formerly described as a stopple in the brass Cover) he will find it a very
difficult thing to do so, if the Vessel be well exhausted; and even when but a
moderate quantity of Air has been drawn out, he will, when he has lifted it up
a little, so that it is somewhat loose from the sides of the lip or socket,
which (with the help of a little oil) it exactly filled before, he will (I say)
find it so difficult to be lifted up, that he will imagine there is some great
weight fastened to the bottom of it. And if (as sometimes has been done for
merriment) only a Bladder be tied to it, it is pleasant to see how men will
marvail that so light a Body, filled at most but with Air, should so forcibly
draw down their hand as if it were filled with some very ponderous thing:
whereas the cause of this pretty Phenomenon seems plainly enough to be only
this, That the Air in the Receiver, being very much dilated, its Spring must be
very much weakn'd, and consequently it can but faintly press up the lower end
of the stopple, whereas the Spring of the external Air being no way
debilitated, he that a little lifts up the stopple must with his hand support a
pressure equal to the disproportion betwixt the force of the internal expanded
Air, and that of the Atmosphere incumbent upon the upper part of the same key
or stopple: And so men being unused to find any resistance, in lifting things
up, from the free Air above them, they are forward to conclude that that which
depresses their hands must needs be some weight, though they know not where
placed, drawing beneath it.

And that we have not mis-assign'd the cause of this Phenomenon seems evident
enough by this; That as Air is suffered by little and little to get into the
Receiver, the weight that a man fancies his hand supports is manifestly felt to
decrease more and more, the internal Air by this recruit approaching more to an
Aequilibrium with the external, till at length the Receiver growing again full
of Air, the stopple may be lifted up without any difficulty at all.

By several other of the Experiments afforded us by our Engine, the same notion
of the great and equal pressure of the free Air upon the Bodies it environs,
might be here manifested, but that we think it not so fit to anticipate such
Experiments: And therefore shall rather employ a few lines to clear up a
difficulty touching this matter, which we have observed to have troubled some
even of the Philosophical and Mathematical Spectators of our Engine, who have
wondered that we should talk of the Air exquisitely shut up in our Receiver, as
if it were all one with the pressure of the Atmosphere; whereas the thick and
close body of the Glass, wholly impervious to the Air, does manifestly keep the
incumbent Pillar of the Atmosphere from pressing in the least upon the Air
within the Glass, which it can no where come to touch. To elucidate a little
this matter, let us consider, That if a man should take a fleece of Wool, and
having first by compressing it in his hand reduced it into a narrower compass,
should nimbly convey and shut it close up into a Box just fit for it, though
the force of his hand would then no longer bend those numerous springy Body's
that compose the Fleece, yet they would continue as strongly bent as before,
because the Box they are enclosed in would as much resist their re-expanding of
themselves, as did the hand that put them in. For thus we may conceive, that
the Air being shut up, when its parts are bent by the whole weight of the
incumbent Atmosphere, though that weight can no longer lean upon it, by reason
it is kept off by the Glass, yet the Corpuscles of the Air within that Glass
continue as forcibly bent as they were before their inclusion, because the
sides of the Glass hinder them from displaying or stretching out themselves.
And if it be objected that this is unlikely, because even Glass bubles, such as
are wont to be blown at the flame of a Lamp, exceeding thin and Hermetically
sealed will not break; whereas it cannot be imagined that so thin a Prison of
Glass could resist the Elastical force of all the included Air, if that Air
were so compressed as we suppose. It may be easily replied, That the pressure
of the inward Air against the Glass, is countervail'd by the equal pressure of
the outward against the same Glass. And we see in bubles, that by reason of
this an exceeding thin film of Water is often able, for a good while, to hinder
the eruption of a pretty quantity of Air. And this may be also more conspicuous
in those great Spherical bubles that boys sometimes blow with Water, to which
Soap has given a Tenacity. But that, if the pressure of the ambient Air were
removed, the internal Air may be able to break thicker Glasses then those
lately mentioned, will appear by some of the following Experiments; to which we
shall therefore now hasten, having, I fear, been but too prolix in this
Excursion, though we thought it not amiss to annex to our first Experiments
some general Considerations touching the Spring of the Air, because (this
Doctrine being yet a stranger to the Schools) not only we find not the thing
it self to be much taken notice of; but of those few that have heard of it, the
greater part have been forward to reject it, upon a mistaken Persuasion, that
those Phenomenon are the effects of natures abhorrency of a Vacuum, which seem
to be more fitly ascribeable to the weight and Spring of the Air.

Experiment 3.
WE will now proceed to observe that though, by the help of the handle, the
Sucker be easily drawn down to the bottom of the Cylinder; yet, without the
help of that Leaver, there would be required to the same effect, a force or
weight great enough to surmount the pressure of the whole Atmosphere: Since
otherwise the Air would not be driven out of its place, when none is permitted
to succeed into the place deserted by the Sucker. This seems evident, from the
known Torricellian Experiment, in which, if the inverted Tube of Mercury be but
25 Digits high, or somewhat more, the Quicksilver will not fall but remain
suspended in the Tube; because it cannot press the subjacent Mercury with so
great a force, as does the incumbent Cylinder of the Air reaching thence to the
top of the Atmosphere: Whereas, if the Cylinder of Mercury were three or four
digits longer, it would overpower that of the external Air, and run out into
the Vessel'd Mercury, till the two Cylinders came to an Aequilibrium, and no
further. Hence we need not wonder, that though the Sucker move easily enough up
and down in the Cylinder by the help of the Manubrium; yet if the Manubrium be
taken off, it will require a considerable strength to move it either way. Nor
will it seem strange, that if, when the Valve and Stop-cock are well shut, you
draw down the Sucker, and then let go the Manubrium; the Sucker will, as it
were of it self, re-ascend to the top of the Cylinder, since the spring of the
external Air finds nothing to resist its pressing up the Sucker. And for the
same reason, when the Receiver is almost evacuated, though, having drawn down
the Sucker, you open the way from the Receiver to the Cylinder, and then
intercept that way again by returning the Key; the Sucker will, upon the
letting go the Manubrium, be forcibly carried up almost to the top of the
Cylinder: Because the Air within the Cylinder, being equally dilated and
weakened with that of the Glass, is unable to withstand the pressure of the
external Air, till it be driven into so little space, that there is an
Aequilibrium betwixt its force and that of the Air without. And congruously
hereunto we find, that in this case, the Sucker is drawn down with little less
difficulty, then if the Cylinder, being devoid of Air, the Stop-cock were
exactly shut: We might take notice of some other things, that depend upon the
Fabric of our Engine it self; but to shun prolixity, we will, in this place,
content our selves to mention one of them, which seems to be of greater moment
then the rest, and it is this; that when the Sucker has been impelled to the
top of the Cylinder, and the Valve is so carefully stopped, that there is no
Air left in the Cylinder above the Sucker: If then the Sucker be drawn to the
lower part of the Cylinder, he that manages the Pump finds not any sensibly
greater difficulty to depress the Sucker, when it is nearer the bottom of the
Cylinder, then when it is much further off. Which circumstance we therefore
think fit to take notice of, because an eminent Modern Naturalist has taught,
that, when the Air is sucked out of a Body, the violence wherewith it is wont
to rush into it again, as soon as it is allowed to re-enter, proceeds mainly
from this; That the pressure of the ambient Air is strengthened upon the
accession of the Air sucked out; which, to make it self room, forces the
neighboring Air to a violent-subingression of its parts: which, if it were
true, he that draws down the Sucker, would find the resistance of the external
Air increased as he draws it lower, more of the displaced Air being thrust into
it to compress it. But, by what has been discoursed upon the first Experiment,
it seems more probable, that without any such strengthening of the pressure of
the outward Air, the taking quite away or the debilitating of the resistance
from within, may suffice to produce the effects under consideration. But this
will perhaps be illustrated by some or other of our future Experiments, and
therefore shall be no longer insisted on here.

HAving thus taken notice of some of the constant Phenomenon of our Engine it
self, Experiment 4.
let us now proceed to the Experiments tryable in it.

We took then a Lambs Bladder large, well dried, and very limber, and leaving
in it about half as much Air as it could contain, we caused the neck of it to
be strongly tied, so that none of the included Air, though by pressure, could
get out. This Bladder being conveyed into the Receiver, and the Cover luted on,
the Pump was set awork, and after two or three exsuctions of the ambient Air
(whereby the Spring of that which remained in the Glass was weakened) the
Imprisoned Air began to swell in the Bladder, and as more and more of the Air
in the Receiver was, from time to time, drawn out; so did that in the Bladder
more and more expand it self, and display the folds of the formerly flaccid
Bladder: so that before we had exhausted the Receiver near so much as we could,
the Bladder appeared as full and stretched, as if it had been blown up with a
Quill.

And that it may appear that this plumpness of the Bladder proceeded from the
surmounting of the debilitated Spring of the ambient Air remaining in the
Vessel, by the stronger Spring of the Air remaining in the Bladder; we Returned
the Key of the Stop-cock, and by degrees allowed the external Air to return
into the Receiver: Whereupon it happened, as was expected, that as the Air came
in from without, the disturbed Air in the Bladder, was proportionably
compressed into a narrower room, and the sides of the Bladder grew flaccid,
till the Receiver having readmitted its wonted quantity of Air, the Bladder
appeared as full of wrinkles and cavities as before.

This Experiment is much of the same nature with that which was some years ago
said to be made by that eminent Geometrician Monsieur Roberval, with a Carps
Bladder emptied and conveyed into a Tube, wherein the Experiment De Vacuo was
afterward tried, which ingenious Experiment of his justly deserves the thanks
of those that have been, or shall be solicitous to discover the nature of the
Air.

But to return to our Experiment, we may take notice of this Circumstance in
it, That after the Receiver has been in some measure emptied, the Bladder does,
at each exsuction, swell much more conspicuously then it did at any of the
first Exsuctions; insomuch that toward the end of the pumping, not only a
great fold or cavity in the surface of the Bladder may be made, even by the
stretching of the inward self-expanding Air: But we have sometimes seen, upon
the turning of the Key to let the ambient Air pass out of the Receiver into the
Cylinder, we have seen (I say) the Air in the Bladder suddenly expand it self
so much and so briskly, that it manifestly lifted up some light Bodies that
leaned upon it, and seemed to lift up the Bladder it self.

Now because it has by very Learned Men been doubted whether the swelling of
the Bladder may not have proceeded from the Dilatation of the included Air, but
from the Texture of the Fibers, which, being wont to keep the Bladder extended
when the Animal to whom it belonged was alive, may be supposed in our
Experiment to have returned, like so many Springs to their wonted extent, upon
the removal of the Ambient Air that compressed and bent them: because this, I
say, has been doubted, we thought fit to make this further trial.

We let down into the Receiver with the forementioned Bladder two other much
smaller, and of the same kind of Animal; the one of these was not tied up at
the neck that there might be liberty left to the Air that was not squeezed out
(which might amount to about a fifth part of what the Bladder held before) to
pass out into the Receiver: The other had the sides of it stretched out and
pressed together, almost into the form of a Cup, that they might intercept the
less Air betwixt them, and then was strongly tied up at the neck: This done,
and the Air being in some measure sucked of the Pneumatical Glass (if I may so
call it) the Bladder, mentioned at the beginning of our Experiment, appeared
extended every way to its full Dimensions; whereas neither of the two others
did remarkably swell, and that whose neck was not tied seemed very little, if
at all less wrinkl'd then when it was put in.

We made likewise a strong Ligature about the middle of a long Bladder partly
emptied, and upon the drawing the Air out of the Receiver, could observe no
such swelling betwixt the Ligature and the Ne^k of the Bladder, which had been
purposely left open, as betwixt the same Ligature and the bottom of the
Bladder, whence the included Air could no way get out.

But a further and sufficient manifestation whence the intumes^ence of the
Bladder proceeds, may be deduced from the following Experiment.

TO try then at once both what it was that expanded the Bladder, Experiment 5.
and what a powerful Spring there is even in the Air we are wont to think
uncompress'd, we caused a Bladder dry, well tied and blown moderately full, to
be hung in the Receiver by one end of a string, whose other end was fastened to
the inside of the Cover: and upon drawing out the ambient Air, that pressed on
the Bladder; the internal Air not finding the wonted resistance, first swelled
and distended the Bladder, and then broke it, with so wide and crooked a rent,
as if it had been forcibly torn assunder with hands. After which a second
Bladder being conveyed in, the Experiment was repeated with like success: And I
suppose it will not be imagined that in this case the Bladder was broken by its
own Fibers, rather then by the Imprisoned Air.

And of this Experiment these two Phenomenon may be taken notice of: The one,
that the Bladder at its breaking gave a great report, almost like a Craker: And
the other, That the Air contained in the Bladder, had the power to break it
with the mentioned Impetuosity, long before the ambient Air was, all or near
all, drawn out of the Receiver.

But, to verify what we say in another Discourse, where we show, That even
true Experiments may, by reason of the easy mistake of some unheeded
Circumstance, be unsuccessfully tried; we will Advertise, on this occasion,
that we did oftentimes in vain try the breaking of Bladders, after the manner
abovementioned: Of which the cause appeared to be this, That the Bladders we
could not break, having been brought us ready blown from those that sold them,
were grown dry before they came to our hands: whence it came to pass, that, if
we afterward tied them very hard, they were apt to fret and so become
unserviceable; and if we tied them but moderately hard, their stiffness kept
them from being closed so exactly, but that when the included Air had in the
exhausted Receiver distended them as much as easily it could, it would in part
get out between the little wrinkles of the Sphincter of the Neck: Whence also
it usually happened, that, upon the letting in the Air from without, the
Bladders appeared more flaccid and empty then before they were put in; whereas
when the Bladders were brought us moist from the Butchers, we could, without
injuring them, tie their necks so close, that none of the Air once blown in,
could get out of them, but by violently breaking them.

It will not be amiss on this occasion to point at something which may deserve
a more deliberate Speculation then we can now afford it; namely that the
Elastical Power of the some Quantity of Air may be as well Increased by the
Agitation of the Aerial Particles (whether only moving them more swiftly and
scattering them, or also extending or stretching them out, I determine not)
within an every way enclosing and yet yielding Body; as Displayed by the
withdrawing of the Air that pressed it without. For we found that a Bladder,
but moderately filled with Air and strongly tied, being a while held near the
Fire, not only grew exceeding turgid and hard, but afterward, being
approached nearer to the Fire, suddenly broke with so loud and vehement a
noise, as stony'd those that were by, and made us, for a while after, almost
deaf.

Experiment 6.
HAving thus seen that the Air has an Elastical Power, we were next desirous to
know in some measure how far a parcel of Air might by this its own Spring be
dilated. And though we were not provided of Instruments fit to measure the
dilatation of the Air any thing accurately, yet because an imperfect measure of
it was more desirable then none at all, we devised the following Method as
very easily practicable.

We took a limber Lambs Bladder which was thoroughly wetted in fair Water, that
the sides of it being squeezed together, there might be no Air left in its
folds: (as indeed we could not afterward upon trial discern any) The neck of
this Bladder was strongly tied about that of a small Glass, (capable of holding
five full drachmes of Water) the Bladder being first so compressed, that all
the included Air was only in the Glass, without being pressed there; then the
Pump being set awork after a few exsuctions, the Air in the little Viol began
to dilate it self and produce a small Tumor in the Neck of the Bladder; and as
the ambient Air was more and more drawn away, so the included Air penetrated
further and further into the Bladder, and by degrees lifted up the sides and
displayed its folds, till at length it seemed to have blown it up to its full
extent: whereupon the external Air, being permitted to flow back into the
Reciver, repulsed the Air that had filled the Bladder into its former narrow
receptacle, and brought the Bladder to be again flaccid and wrinkled as before:
Then taking out the Bladder, but without severing it from the Glass, we did by
a hole made at the top of the Bladder fill the Vessel they both made up with
Water, whose weight was five Ounces five Drachmes and an half: Five Drachmes
whereof were abovementioned to be the contents of the Bottle. So that in this
Experiment, when the Air had most extended the Bladder, it possessed in all
above nine times as much room as it did when it was put into the Receiver. And
it would probably have much enlarged its bounds, but that the Bladder by its
weight and the sticking together of its sides did somewhat resist its
expansion: And which was more considerable, the Bladder appeared tumid enough,
whilst yet a pretty deal of Air was left in the Receiver, whose exsuction
would, according to our former Observation, probably have given way to a
further expansion of the Air, especially supposing the dilatation not to be
restrained by the Bladder.

SInce we wrote the other day the former Experiment, we have met with some
Glasses not very unfit for our purpose; by means of which we are now able, with
a little more trouble, to measure the expansion of the Air a great deal more
accurately then we could by the help of the abovementioned Bladder, which was
much to narrow to allow the Air its utmost distention.

We took then first a Cylindrical Pipe of Glass, whose bore was about a quarter
of an Inch in Diameter: this Pipe was so bent and doubled, that,
notwithstanding its being about two foot in length, it might have been shut up
into a small Receiver, not a Foot high: But by misfortune it cracked in the
cooling, whereby we were reduced to make use of one part which was straight and
entire, but exceeded not six or seven Inches. This little Tube was open at one
end; and at the other, where it was Hermetically sealed, had a small Glass
bubble to receive the Air whose dilatation was to be measured.

Along the side of this Tube was pasted a straight narrow piece of Parchment,
divided into twenty six equal parts, marked with black Lines and Figures, that
by them might be measured both the included Air and its dilatation. Afterward
we filled the Tube with Water almost to the top, and stopping the open end with
a Finger, and inverting the Tube, the Air was permitted to ascend to the
abovementioned Glass bubble. And by reason this ascent was very slow, it gave
us the opportunity to mark how much more or less then one of the twenty six
divisions this Air took up. By this means, after a trial or two, we were
enabled to convey to the top of the Glass a bubble of Air equal enough, as to
sight, to one of those Divisions: Then the open end of the Tube being put into
a small Viol, whose bottom was covered with Water about half an Inch high; we
included both Glasses into a small and slender Receiver, and caused the Pump to
be set awork. The event was, That at the first exsuction of the Air there
appeared not any expansion of the bubble, comparable to what appeared at the
second, and that upon a very few exsuctions the bubble reaching as low as the
surface of the subjacent Water, gave us cause to think that if our Pipe had not
been broken it would have expanded it self much further: Wherefore we took out
the little Tube, and found that besides the twenty six divisions formerly
mentioned, the Glass bubble and some part of the Pipe to which the divided
Parchment did not reach, amounted to six divisions more. Whereby it appears
that the air had taken up one and thirty times as much room as before, and yet
seemed capable of a much greater expansion, if the Glass would have permitted
it. Wherefore, after the former manner, we let in another bubble, that by our
guess was but half as big as the former, and found, that upon the exsuction of
the Air from the Receiver, this little bubble did not only fill up the whole
Tube, but (in part) break through the subjacent Water in the Viol, and thereby
manifest it self to have possessed sixty and odd times its former room.

These two Experiments are mentioned to make way for the more easy belief of
that which is now to follow. Finding then that our Tube was too short to serve
our turn, we took a slender Quill of Glass which happened to be at hand, though
it were no so fit for our purpose as we could have wished, in regard it was
three or four times as big at one end as the other. This Pipe which was thirty
Inches long, being Hermetically sealed at the slender end, was almost filled
with Water; and after the above-related manner a bubble was conveyed to the top
of it, and the open extreme was put into a Viol that had a little fair Water at
the bottom: Then the Cover, by means of a small hole purposely made in it for
the Glass Pipe to stand out at, was cemented on to the Receiver, and the Pump
being set awork, after some exsuctions, not only the Air manifestly appeared
extended below the surface of the subjacent Water; but one of the Bystanders
affirms, that he saw some bubbles come out at the bottom of the. Pipe and break
through the Water. This done, we left off Pumping, and observed how at the
unperceived leaks of the Receiver the Air got in so fast, that it very quickly
impelled up the Water to the top of the Tube, excepting a little space
whereinto that bubble was repulsed, which had so lately possessed the whole
Tube; this Air at the slender end appeared to be a Cylinder of parts of an Inch
in length; but when the Pipe was taken out and turned upside down, it appeared
at the other end inferior in bulk to a Pea.

These things being thus done we took (to make the Experiment the more exactly)
a small pair of Scales, such as Goldsmiths use to weigh Gold Coin in; and
weighing the Tube and Water in it, we found them to amount to one Ounce thirty
Grains and an half: Then we pour^d in as much Water as served to fill up the
Tube, wherein before we had left as much space unfill'd up as was possessed by
the bubble, and weighing again the Pipe and Water, we found the weight
increased only by one Grain. Lastly, pouring out the Water, and carefully
freeing the Pipe from it (which yet we could not perfectly do) we weighed the
Glass alone, and found it to want two Drachmes and thirty two Grains of its
former weight: So that the bubble of Air taking up the room but of one Grain in
weight of Water, it appeared that the Air by its own (...) was so ^arified, as
to take up one hundred fifty two times as much room as it did before: though it
were then compressed by nothing but the ordinary pressure of the contiguous
Air. I know not whether it be requisite to take notice, that this Experiment
was made indeed in a moist Night, but in a Room, in whose Chimney there was
burning a good Fire, which did perhaps somewhat rarifie the Air of which the
bubble consisted.

It has seemed almost incredible which is related by the Industrious Mersennus,
That the Air by the violence of heat, though as great as our Vessels can
support without fusion, can be so dilated as to take up seventy times as much
room as before: Wherefore because we were willing to have a confirmation of so
strange a Phenomenon; we once more conveyed into the Tube a bubble of the
bigness of the former, and prosecuting the Experiment as before with the same
Water, we observed that the Air did manifestly stretch it self so far, as to
appear several times a good way below the surface of the Water in the Viol, and
that too with a surface very unequal toward the bottom of the Pipe. Nay, the
Pump being plied a little longer, the Air did manifestly reach to that place
where the bottom of the Tube leaned upon the bottom of the Viol, and seemed to
knock upon it and rebound from it: Which Circumstances we add, partly that the
Phenomenon we have been relating may not be imputed to the bare subsiding of
the Water that filled the Tube, upon the taking off the pressure of the ambient
Air. And partly also that it may appear that if our Experiments have not been
as accurately made as with fitter Instruments might perhaps be possible; yet
the expansion of the Air is likely to be rather greater then lesser then we
have made it: Since the Air was able to press away the Water at the bottom of
the Pipe, though that were about two Inches below the surface of the Water that
was then in the Viol, and would have been at least as high in the Pipe, if the
Water had only subsided and not been depressed: So that it seems not unlikely
that if the Experiment could be so made, as that the expansion of the Air might
not be resisted by the Neighboring Bodies, it would yet enlarge its bounds, and
perhaps stretch it self to two hundred times its former bulk, if not more.
However, what we have now tried will, I hope, suffice to hinder diverse of the
Phenomenon of our Engine from being distrusted: Since in that part of the
Atmosphere we live in, that which we call the free Air (and presume to be so
uncompress'd) is crowded into so very small a part of that space, which if it
were not hindered it would possess. We would gladly have tried also whether the
Air at its greatest expansion could be further rarefied by heat; but do what we
could, our Receiver leak'd too fast to let us give our selves any satisfaction
in that particular.

Experiment 7.
TO discover likewise by the means of that pressure of the Air, both the
strength of Glass, and how much interest the Figure of a Body may have in its
greater or lesser Resistance to the pressure of other Bodies, we made these
further trials.

We causd to be blown with a Lamp ^ round Glass bubble, capable of containing,
by guess, about five Ounces of Water, with a slender neck about the bigness of
a Swans Quill, and it was purposely blown very thin, as Viols made with Lamps
are wont to be, that the thinness of the matter might keep the roundness of the
Figure from making the Vessel too strong. Then having moderately emptyed the
Receiver, and taken it out of the Pump, we speedily applied to the Orifice of
the bottom of it the Neck of the newly mentioned Glass, carefully stopping the
Crannys with melted Plaster, that no Air might get in at them: And after
turning the Key of the Stop-cock, we made a free passage for the Air to pass
out of the bubble into the Receiver: which it did with great celerity, leaving
the bubble as empty as the Receiver it self; as appeared to us by some
Circumstances not now to be insisted on. Notwithstanding all which, the Vessel,
continuing as entire as before, gave us cause to wonder that the bare Roundness
of the Figure should enable a Glass, almost as thin as Paper, to resist so
great a pressure as that of the whole incumbent Atmosphere. And having
reiterated the Experiment, we found again that the pressure of the ambient
Body, thrusting all the parts inwards, made them, by reason of their arched
Figure, so support one another, that the Glass remained as whole as at first.

Now that the Figure of the Glass is of great moment in this matter, may be
evinced by this other Experiment.

Experiment 8.
WE took a Glass Helmet or Alembick (delineated by the seventh Figure) such as
Chemists use in Distillations, and containing by conjecture between two and
three Pints: The Rostrum or Nose of it marked with ( c) was Hermetically
closed; and at the top of it was a hole, into which was fitted and cemented one
of the Shanks of a middle-siz'd Stop-cock; so that the Glass being turned
upside-down, the wide Orifice (which in common Glass-Helmets is the only one)
was upwards; and to that wide Orifice was fitted a cast Cover of Lead, which
was carefully cemented on to the Glass: Then the other Shank of the Stop-cock
being with Cement likewise fastened into the upper part of the Pump, the
exsuction of the Air was endeavored. But it was not long before, the remaining
Air being made much too weak to balance the pressure of the ambient Air, the
Glass was not without a great noise cracked almost half round, along that part
of it where it began to bend inwards: As if in the Figure the crack had been
made according to the Line (ab); and upon an endeavor to pump out more of the
Air, the crack once began, appeared to run on further; though the Glass where
it was broken seemed to be by conjecture above ten, some thought above twenty
times as thick as the bubble mentioned in the foregoing Experiment.

This will perhaps make it seem strange, that having taken another Glass bubble
blown at the same time, and like for ought we discerned for size, thickness and
Figure to that thin one formerly mentioned; and having sealed it up
Hermetically, and suspended it in the Receiver, the exsuction of the ambient
Air did not enable the imprisoned Air to break, or in the least to crack the
bubble; though the Experiment were laboriously tried, and that several times
with bubbles of other sizes: But that perhaps the heat of the Candle or Lamp
wherewith such Glasses are Hermetically sealed, (not to mention the warmth of
his hands that sealed it) might so rarifie the contained Air, as much to weaken
its Spring, may seem probable by the following Experiments.

Experiment 9.
WE took a Glass Viol able to hold three or four Ounces of Water, and of the
thickness usual in Glasses of that size; into the Neck of this was put a
moderately slender Pipe of Glass, which was carefully fastened with a mixture
of equal parts of Pitch and Rosin to the Neck of the Viol, and which reached
almost to the bottom of it, as the sixth Figure declares.

This Viol being upon a particular design filled with Water, till that came up
in it a pretty deal higher then the lower end of the Pipe, was put into one of
our small Receivers, (containing between a Pint and a Quart) in such manner as
that the Glass Pipe, passing through a hole made purposely for it in the
Leaden-Cover of the Receiver, was for the most part of it without the Vessel,
which being exactly closed, the Pump was set awork: But at the very first
exsuction, and before the Sucker was drawn to the bottom of the Cylinder, there
flew out of the Viol a piece of Glass half as broad as the Palm of a Man's Hand,
and it was thrown out with such violence, that hitting against the Neighboring
side of the Receiver, it not only dashed it self to pieces, but cracked the
very Receiver in many places, with a great noise that much surprised all that
were in the Room. But it seemed that in so little a Receiver, the Air about the
Viol being suddenly drawn out, the Air Imprisoned in the Vessel, having on it
the whole pressure of the Atmosphere (to which by the Pipe open at both ends,
It and the Water were exposed) and not having on the other side the wonted
pressure of the Ambient Air to balance that other pressure, the resistance of
the Glass was finally surmounted, and the Viol once beginning to break where it
was weakest, the external Air might rush in with violence enough to throw the
cracked parcel so forcibly against the Neighboring side of the Receiver, as to
break that too.

And this may be presumed sufficient to verify what we delivered in that part
of our Appendix to the first Experiment, where we mentioned the almost equal
pressure of the Air on either side of a thin Glass Vessel, as the cause of its
not being broken by the forcible Spring of the contained Air. But yet that it
be not suspected that chance had an interest in so odd an Experiment as we
have been Relating, we will add that for farther satisfaction we reiterated it
in a round Glass containing by guess about six ounces of water: this violl we
put into such a small Receiver as was lately mentioned, in such manner as that
the bottom of it rested upon the lower part of the Pneumaticall Glass, and
the Neck came out through the Leaden-Cover of the same at a hole made purposely
for it. But being made circumspect by the foregoing mischance, we had put the
violl into a Bladder, before we put it into the Receiver to hinder this last
named Glass from being endangered by the breaking of the other. Then the
Pneumaticall vessel being closed so that no way was left for the outward Air
to get into it, but by breaking through the Viol, into whose cavity it had free
access by the mouth of it, (which was purposely left open,) the Sucker being
nimbly drawn down, the external Air immediately pressed forcibly as well upon
the Leaden-Cover as the Violl; and the Cover happening to be in one place a
little narrower then the edge of the Pneumatical Glass, was depressed, and
thrust into it so violently by the incumbent Air, that getting a little within
the tapering Lip of the Glass, it did like a kind of Wedge, thrust out that
side where it was depressed, so as, though the Receiver was new, to split it.
This accident being thus mentioned upon the by to confirm what we formerly said
touching the fitness or unfitness of Glasses of some Figures to resist the
pressure of the Atmosphere; We will proceed to relate the remaining part of the
Experiment, namely, That having fitted on a wider Cover to the same Receiver,
and closed both that and the crack with Cement, we prosecuted the Experiment in
the manner above related, with this success: That upon the quick depressing of
the Sucker, the external Air burst the Body of the Viol in above a hundred
pieces, many of them exceeding small, and that with such violence that we found
a wide rent, besides many holes, made in the Bladder it self.

And to evince that these Phenomenon were the effects of a limited and even
moderate force, and not of such an abhorrency of a Vacuum as that to avoid it,
many have been pleased to think that Nature must, upon occasion, exercise an
almost boundless power; we afterward purposely tried this Experiment with
several Glasses somewhat thicker then those Viols, and found the event to
verify our conjecture, that it would not succeed: for the Glasses were taken
out as entire as they were put in.

And here, My Lord, I hold it not unfit, upon occasion of the mention that has
been made of our having employed small Receivers, and one of them,
notwithstanding its being cracked, to annex these two Advertisements.

First then, besides the great Pneumatical Glass so often mentioned, and the
proportionate Stop-cock, we thought fit to provide our selves of some small
Receivers blown of Crystalline Glass, of several Shapes, and furnished with
smaller Stop-cocks purposely made; and this we did upon hopes that when we had
surmounted the difficulties to be met with in Cementing the Glasses to the
Stop-cocks, and the Pneumatical Vessels to the Pump so exquisitely as is
requisite for our purpose, we should from the smalness of our Receivers receive
a fourfold Advantage. The first, that by reason of the slenderness of the
Vessels, and their being made of much purer and clearer metal, as the
Glass-men speak, then the great Receiver, we might have a more perfect view of
every thing happening within them. The next, that such small Vessels might be
emptied with less labor and in much less time. The third, that this nimble
exsuction of the ambient Air would make many changes in the Bodies shut up in
these glasses more sudden and conspicuous then otherwise they would prove. And
the last, that we should be able to draw and keep out the Air much more
perfectly from such small Vessels then from our large Receiver. But though we
were not much dis-appointed in the expectation of the three first advantages,
yet we were in our hopes of the fourth. For besides the great difficulty we
found in fitting together the Glasses, the Stop-cocks and the Covers; besides
this I say, we found our selves seldom able to draw, and keep out the Air so
far as to make the remaining Air in these Receivers weaker then the remaining
Air in our great Receiver. For though sometimes the Leaks of some of these
little Receivers may be much either fewer or smaller then those of the larger
Vessel; yet a little Air getting into one of these, wherein it had but little
room to expand and display it self, might press as much upon all parts of the
internal surface of the Vessel, and upon the included Bodies, as a greater
quantity of Air in a Vessel in whose capacity it might find more room to
expand it self.

The other thing that we were to advertise, is, That it is not every small crack
that can make such a Receiver as is of a roundish Figure altogether useless to
our Experiment, in regard that upon the exsuction of the internal Air, the
ambient Air on all sides pressing the Glass inwards or toward the middle, does
consequently thrust the Lips of the crack closer, and so rather close then
increase it.

This I mention partly because Receivers fit for our turn are more easily
cracked then procured, and therefore ought not to be unnecessarily thrown away
as unserviceable: And partly because I think it becomes one that professes
himself a faithful Relator of Experiments, not to conceal from Your Lordship,
that after a few of the foregoing Experiments were made, there happened in the
great Receiver a crack of about a Span long, beginning at the upper Orifice,
and occasioned, as it seemed, by the excessive heat of too large an Iron that
was employed to melt the Cement about that Orifice. But having laid upon this
crack a broad Plaster, which in one of our Essays written some years since to
your ingenious and hopeful Cousin Jones, we extol for the mending of cracked
Receivers, and other Chemical Glasses; and having afterward thickly over-laid
this Plaster with Diachylon, we neither could then, nor can yet perceive that
the Vessel leaks sensibly at that crack.

The Plaster was made of good quick Lime finely poudred, and nimbly ground
with a Pestle in a Mortar, with a quantity (I know not how much precisely, not
having those Essays in this place) of scrapings of Cheese and a little fair
Water, no more then is just necessary to bring the mixture to a somewhat soft
Paste, which when the Ingredients are exquisitely incorporated, will have a
strong and stinking smell: Then it must be immediately spread upon a Linen
Cloth three or four fingers breadth, and presently applied, lest it begin to
harden. But if Your Lordship had seen how we mended with it Receivers even for
the most subtle Chemical Spirits, You would scarce wonder at the service it has
done in our Pneumatical Glass.

Experiment 10.
WE took a Tallow-Candle of such a size that eight of them make about a pound,
and having in a very commodious Candlestick let it down into the Receiver, and
so suspended it that the Flame burnt almost in the middle of the Vessel, we did
in some two minutes exactly close it up: and, upon Pumping very nimbly, we
found that within little more then half a minute after the Flame went out,
though the Snuff had been purposely left of that length we judged the most
convenient for the lasting of the Flame.

But the second time having put in the same Candle into the Receiver, (after it
had by the blasts of a pair of Bellows been freed from Fumes) the Flame lasted
about two minutes from the time the Pumper began to draw out the Air; upon the
first exsuction whereof, the Flame seemed to contract it self in all its
Dimensions. And these things were further observable, that after the two or
three first exsuctions of the Air, the Flame (except at the very top) appeared
exceeding blew, and that the Flame still receded more and more from the Tallow,
till at length it appeared to possess only the very top of the Week, and there
it went out.

The same Candle being lighted again was shut into the Receiver, to try how it
would last there without drawing forth the Air, and we found that it lasted
much longer then formerly; and before it went out receded from the Tallow
toward the the top of the Week, but not near so much as in the former
Experiment.

And having an intention to observe particularly what the motion of the smoke
would be in these Experiments: We took notice that when the Air was not drawn
out, there did upon the extinction of the Flame a considerable part of the Week
remain kindled, which (probably by reason of the Circulation of the Air in the
Vessel, occasioned by the heat) emitted a Steam, which ascended swiftly and
directly upwards in a slender and uninterrupted Cylinder of smoke, till it came
to the top, whence it manifestly recoyl'd by the sides to the lower part of the
Vessel. Whereas when the Flame went out upon the exsuction of the Air one time
(when the Flame retired very leasurely to the top) we perceived it not to be
followed by any smoke at all. And at an other time the upper part of the Week
remaining kindled after the extinction of the Flame, the slender steam of Fumes
that did arise ascended but a very little way, and then after some uncertain
motions this and that way, did, for the most part, soon fall downwards.

Being desirous also to try whether there would be any difference as well in
our Receiver as there is wont to be elsewhere betwixt Candles made of Wax and
those made of Tallow, as to their duration; we took slender Tapers of white
Wax, (commonly called Virgins Wax) that being found to burn with much less
smoke then common yellow Wax: Six of these of like bigness, and each of them of
about the thickness of a Swans Quill, we pressed together into one Candle: And
having lighted all the Weeks, we let in the abovementioned Wax into the
Receiver, and made what haste we could to close it up with Cement. But though
in the mean while we left open the Valve of the Cylinder, the hole of the
Stop-cock and that in the Cover of the Receiver, that some Air might get in to
cherish the Flame and the smoke might have a vent; Yet for so great a Flame the
Air sufficed not so much as till the Cover could be perfectly luted on: So that
before we were quite ready to employ the Pump, the Candle was extinguished.
Wherefore we took but one of the above mentioned Tapers, and having lighted it,
closed it up in the Receiver, to try how long a small Flame with a
proportionable smoke would continue in such a quantity of Air: But we found
upon two several trials, that from the beginning of pumping, the flame went out
in about a minute of an hour. It appeared indeed to us that the swinging of the
Wier to and fro (in the Engine shaken by pumping) hastened the vanishing of the
Flame, which seemed by that motion to be cast sometimes on one side of the Week
and sometimes on the other: But though once we purposely refrained pumping
after a very few exsuctions of the Air, that the Flame might not be agitated,
yet it lasted not much longer then the newly mentioned time. And lastly,
closing up the same Taper, lighted again, to discover how long it would last
without drawing out of the Air, we found that it burned for a while vividly
enough, but afterward began to be lessened more and more in all its
Dimensions. And we observed that the Flame did not, as before, retire it self
by little and little toward the top, but toward the bottom of the Week (from
which yet it did a little withdraw upwards just before it went out) so that the
upper part of the Week appeared for a pretty while manifestly above the top of
the Flame, which having lasted about five minutes, was succeeded by a directly
ascending stream of Smoke.

Experiment 11.
THere was taken a Wier, which being bent almost in the form of a Screw,
constituted such an Instrument to contein Coals and leave them every way
accessible to the Air, as the tenth Figure declares; the breadth of this Vessel
was no less then that it might with ease be conveyed into the Receiver: And
having filld it to the height of about five Inches with thoroughly kindled
Wood-coals, we let it down into the Glass; and speedily closing it, we caused
the Pumper to ply his work, and observed that upon the very first exsuction of
the Air (though perhaps not because of that only) the Fire in the Coals began
to grow very dim, and though the agitation of the Vessel did make them swing up
and down (which in the free Air would have retarted the extinction of the Fire)
yet when we could no longer discern any redness at all in any of them, casting
our eyes upon a Minute-Watch we kept by us on this occasion, we found that from
the beginning of the Pumping (which might be about two minutes after the Coals
had been put in glowing) to the total dis-appearing of the Fire, there had
passed but three minutes.

Whereupon, to try the Experiment a little further, we presently took out the
Coals, in which it seems there had remained some little parcels of Fire, rather
covered then totally quenched: For in the open Air the Coals began to be
re-kindled in several places, wherefore having by swinging them about in the
Wier, thoroughly lighted them the second time, we let them down again into the
Receiver, and closed it speedily as before; and then waiting till the Fire
seemed totally extinct without meddling with the Pump, we found that from the
time the Vessel was closed till that no Fire at all could be perceived there
had passed about four minutes: Whereby it seemed to appear that the drawing
away of the ambient Air made the Fire go out sooner then otherwise it would
have done; though that part of the Air that we drew out left the more room for
the stifling steams of the Coals to be received into.

Lastly, Having taken out the Wier and put other Coals into it, we did, in the
same Room where the Engine stood, let it hang quietly by a string in the open
Air, to try how long the Fire would last without agitation when no Air was kept
from it. And we found that the Fire began to go out first at the top and
outsides of the Coals; but inwards and near the bottom the Fire continued
visible for above half an hour, a great part of the Coals, especially those
next the bottom, being burnt to ashes before the Fire went out.

We caused likewise a piece of Iron to be forged, of the bigness of a middle
sized Char-coal, and having made it red hot throughout* we caused it in the
lately mentioned Wier, to be speedily conveyed and shut up into the Receiver,
being desirous to try what would become of a glowing Body, by reason of its
texture more vehemently hot then a burning Coal of the same bigness, and yet
unlike to send forth such copious and stifling Fumes: But we could not observe
any manifest change upon the exsuction of the Air. The Iron began indeed to
lose its Fiery redness at the top, but that seemed to be because it was at the
upper end somewhat more slender then at the lower: The redness, though it were
in the day time, continued visible about four minutes; and then, before it did
quite dis-appear, we turned the Key of the Stop-cock but could not discern any
change of the Iron upon the rushing in of the Air. Yet some little remainders
of Wax that stuck to the Wier, and were turned into Fumes by the heat of the
neighboring Iron, seemed to afford a more plentiful, or at least a much more
free expanded smoke when the Air was sucked out, then afterward; though
allowance was made for the decreasing heat of the Iron. And lastly,
notwithstanding a considerable exsuction of the ambient Air, though not by far
so great a one as might have been made by the Engine; and notwithstanding the
inconsiderable dissipation of the parts of the Iron, the surrounding sides of
the Receiver were sensibly, and almost offensively heated by it; insomuch that
a pretty while after the Iron was taken out, the sides of the Glass manifestly
retained a warmth: which would not be unfit to be considered by a Person at
more leisure then I am now.

BEing willing to try after this something that would not cherish much Fire at
once, Experiment 12.
and would keep Fire much longer then a Coal. We took a piece of Match, such as
Soldiers use, of the thickness of a Man's little Finger, or somewhat thicker;
and this being well lighted at one end, was by a string suspended with that end
downwards in the cavity of the Receiver which was immediately closed: And yet
by that time it could well be so, the copious Fumes of the Match had near
filled and darkened the Receiver. Wherefore, lest the Vessel should be
endangered, the Pump was nimbly plied, and a great deal of Air and Smoke mixed
together was drawn out, whereby the Receiver growing more clear, we could
discern the Fire in the Match to burn more and more languidly: And
notwithstanding that by the diligence used in Pumping, it seemed to have room
enough allowed it to throw out Fumes; yet after no long time it ceased from
being discernable either by its Light or its Smoke. And though by that we were
invited to suppose it quite extinguished, yet we continued pumping a while, in
prosecution of another Experiment we were trying at the same time: And this we
did the more willingly because of a suspicion the Experiment about the Coals
might easily suggest, and which the event declared not to have been altogether
groundless. For upon the Admission of the external Air, the Fire, that seemed
to have gone out a pretty while before, did presently revive; and being as it
were refreshd by the new Air, and blown by the Wind made by that Air in rushing
in, it began again to shine and dissipate the neighboring Fuel into Smoke as
formerly.

Experiment 13.
A While after we let down into the Receiver together with a lighted piece of
Match, a great Bladder well tied at the Neck, but very lank, as not containing
actually much (if any thing) above a Pint of Air, but being capable of
containing ten or twelve times as much.

Our scope in this Experiment was partly to try whether or no the smoke of the
Match, replenishing the Receiver, would be able to hinder the Dilatation of the
inward Air, upon the exsuction of the Ambient. And partly to discover whether
the extinction of the Fire in the Match did proceed from want of Air, or barely
from the pressure of its own Fumes, which for want of room to expand themselves
in, might be supposed to Recoyl upon the Fire, and so to stifle it.

The event of our trial was, That at the beginning of our Pumping the Match
appeared well lighted, though it had almost filled the Receiver with its
plentiful Fumes: But by degrees it burnt more and more dimly, notwithstanding
that by the nimble drawing out the Air and Smoke, the Vessel were made less
opacous, and less full of compressing matter; as appeard by this, That the
longer we pumped, the lesser Air and Smoke came out of the Cylinder at the
opening the Valve, and consequently the less came into it before; yet the Fire
in the Match went but slowly out. And when afterward, to satisfy our selves
of its expiration, we had darkened the Room, and in vain endeavored to discover
any spark of Fire, as we could not for some time before by the help of Candles
discern the least rising of Smoke, we yet continued pumping six or seven times;
and after all that letting in the Air, the seemingly dead Fire quickly revived,
and man^f^sted its recovery by Light and store of Smoke, with the latter of
which it quickly began to replenish the Receiver. Then we fell to pumping
afresh, and continued that labor so long till the re-kindled Match went out
again: and thinking it then fit not to cease from Pumping so soon as before, we
found that in less then half a quarter of an hour the Fire was got out for good
and all, and past the possibility of being recovered by the readmitted Air.

Some Circumstances, besides those already mentioned, occurred in the making of
the Experiment, of which these are the principal.

First, when the Receiver was full of Smoke, if the Cylinder were emptied,
immediately upon the turning of the Stop-cock, the Receiver would appear
manifestly darkened to his eye that looked upon the light through it: and this
darkness was much less when the Receiver was much less filled with Fumes: It
was also instantaneous, and seemed to proceed from a sudden change of place and
situation in the exhalations, upon the vent suddenly afforded them and the Air
they were mixed with, out of the Receiver into the Cylinder.

The next thing we observed was, a kind of Halo that appeared a good while
about the Fire, and seemed to be produced by the surrounding Exhalations.

And lastly, it is remarkable, That even when the Fumes seemed most to
replenish the Receiver, they did not sensibly hinder the Air included in the
Bladder from dilating it self after the same manner (for ought we could
discern) as it would have otherwise done: So that before the Fire or the Match
was quite extinct, the Bladder appeared swelled at least to six or seven times
its former capacity.

Since the writing of these last Lines, we took a small Receiver, capable of
containing (by guess) about a pound and a half of Water; and in the midst of it
we suspended a lighted Match, but though within one minute of an hour (or
thereabouts) from the putting in of the Match, we had cemented on the Cover,
yet we could not make such haste, but that before we began to pump, the Smoke
had so filled that small Receiver, as for ought we discerned, to choke the
Fire. And having again and again reiterated the Experiment, it seemed still as
at first, that we could not close up the Vessel and pump out all the Fumes time
enough to rescue the Fire from Extinction; whereupon we made use of this
Expedient. As Soon as we had pumped once or twice, we suddenly turned the Key,
and thereby gave access to the excluded Air, which rushing violently in, as if
it had been forced through a pair of Bellows, did both drive away the ashes,
fill the Glass with fresh Air, and by blowing the almost extinguished Fire,
re-kindl'd it, as appeared by the Matches beginning again to smoke, which
before it had ceased to do; we having by this means obtained a lighted Match in
the Receiver, without being reduced to spend time to close it up, commanded the
Air to be immediately pumped out, and found that upon the exsuction of it, the
Match quickly left smokeing, as it seemed, by reason of the absence of the Air;
and yet if some urgent occasions had not hindered us, we would for greater
security have tried, whether or no the Match rekindled as formerly, would smoke
much longer, in case of no exsuction of the ambient Air.

Experiment 14.
TO try diverse things at once, and particularly whether Fire, though we found
it would not long last, might not yet be produced in our evacuated Receiver: We
took a Pistol of about a Foot in length, and having firmly tied it to a stick
almost as long as the Cavity of the Receiver, we very carefully prim'd it with
well dried Gunpowder, and then cocking it, we tied to the Tricker one end of a
string, whose other end was fastened to the Key formerly mentioned to belong to
the Cover of our Receiver. This done, we conveyed the Pistol, together with the
annexed Staff, into the Vessel: which being closed up, and emptied after the
usual manner, we began to turn the Key in the Cover; and thereby shortning the
string that reached from it to the Pistol, we pulled aside the Tricker, and
observed, that according to our expectation the force of the Spring of the Lock
was not sensibly abated by the absence of the Air. (from whose impetus yet some
Modern Naturalists would derive the cause of the motion of Restitution in solid
Bodies) For the Cock falling with its wonted violence upon the Steel, struck
out of it as many and as conspicuous parts of Fire, as, for ought we could
perceive, it would have done in the open Air. Repeating this Experiment diverse
times, we also observed whether or no there would appear any considerable
Diversity in the Motion of the shining Sparks in a place where the remaining
Air was so much rarefied, but could not perceive but that they moved some of
them upwards, as well as some of them downwards, and some of them side-ways, as
they are wont to do, when upon such collisions they fly out in the open Air.

We likewise caused a piece of Steel to be made of the form and bigness of the
Flint, in whose place we put it, and then the Pistol being cocked and conveyed
into the Receiver, the Trigger was pulled after the Air was drawn out: And
though the place were purposely somewhat darkened, yet there appeared not upon
the striking of the two Steels against each other the least spark of Fire: Nor
did we expect any (having before in vain attempted to strike Fire this way in
the open Air) though we thought fit to make the Experiment to undeceive those
who fancy in rarefied Air, I know not what strange disposition, to take Fire
upon a much slighter occasion then this Experiment afforded. We have indeed
found, that by the dextrous Collision of two hardened pieces of Steel, store of
sparks may be struck out: But that was done with such vehement percussion of
the edges of the two Steels, as could not well be compassed in our Receiver.

But the chief thing we designed to do with our Pistol, was, To observe whether
Gunpowder would take Fire in our emptied and closely stopped Glass? Whether the
expansion of the Flame would be considerably varied by the absence of so much
of the ambient Air as was drawn out of the Receiver? and whether the Flame
would diffuse it self upward, as it is wont, notwithstanding its not having
about it the usual proportion of Air to force it up? And though most of our
attempts to fire the Gunpowder in the Pan of the Pistol succeeded not, because
we were fain to let it hang almost perpendicular in the Receiver; whereby the
Powder was shaken down before the sparks could reach it; yet once the
Experiment succeeded, and the kindled Powder seemed to make a more expanded
Flame then it would have done in the open Air, but mounted upwards according to
its wont; whether by reason of that little portion of Air, which in spite of
our pumping remained in the Receiver, or for any other cause, we have not now
the leisure to consider. But we must not forget, that upon the extinction of
the Flame the Receiver appeared darkened with smoke, which seemed to move
freely up and down, and upon the letting in the Air at the Stop-cock began to
circulate much faster then before. We would have made more observations
concerning this Flame, but that of two or three attempts we afterward made to
repeat the kindling of Powder, not any one succeeded; and we have not the
leisure to dwell long upon one kind of Trials.

Experiment. 15.
TO these Experiments concerning Fire we added another, which, though it
succeeded not, may perhaps without impertinency be recorded: partly because that
(as we have in another Treatise amply declared) it is useful to recite what
Experiments miscarry as well as what succeed. And partly also because it is
very possible that what we endeavored in vain, may be performed by Your
Lordship, or some other Virtuoso that shall have slancker Vessels then we had,
and more Sunny days then the present Winter allows us.

We conveyed then into one of our small Receivers a piece of matter
combustible, dry and black (experience declaring things of that color to be
most easily kindled) and carefully closing the Vessel we brought it to a Window
at which the Sun, not very far from the Meridian, shone in very freely: then
drawing out the Air with speed united the Sunbeams with a burning Glass upon
the combustible matter which began immediately to send forth a Smoke that
quickly darkened the Receiver, but notwithstanding all our care and diligence
the external Air got in so fast that after diverse trials we were feign to
leave off the Experiment in that Glass and induced to make trial of it in our
great Receiver.

Having then after some difficulty lodged the combustible matter in the cavity
of this Vessel in such manner as that it was almost contiguous to that side
thereof that was next the Sun, we did endeavor with a pretty large burning
Glass to kindle it, but found, as we feared, That by reason of the thickness of
the Glass, (which was also of a less pure and less Diaphanous matter then the
other) the Sunbeams thrown in by the burning Glass, were in their passage so
Dislocated and Scattered (not now to mention those many that being reflected, I
could not pierce into the cavity of the Receiver) that we could not possibly
unite enough of them to kindle the matter, nor so much as to make it sensibly
smoke. Yet we hope that the seeing whether Bodies (other then Gunpowder) may
be kindled, and what would happen to them when set on fire, in a place in great
measure devoid of Air, may prove so Luciferous an Experiment, that when the
Season is more favorable we shall, God permitting, make further trial of it,
and acquaint Your Lordship with the Event, if it prove prosperous. In the mean
time we shall pass on to other Experiments, as soon as we have advertised Your
Lordship that we have forborne to make such Reflections upon the several
Experiments we have set down concerning Fire, as the matter* would have easily
enough afforded, and Your Lordship may perhaps have expected. But I made the
less scruple to forbear the annexing of Speculations to these Recitals, because
Carneades and Eleutherius have in some Dialogues concerning Heat and Flame,
which were last year seen by some Friends, and may be, when you please,
commanded by You, mentioned diver's of my Thoughts and Experiments concerning
Fire.

WE designed to try whether or no diverse Magnetical Experiments would exhibit
any unusual Phenomenon, Experiment 16.
being made in our Evacuated Receiver instead of the open Air: But for want of
leisure and convenience to prosecute such Trials, we were induced to reserve
the rest for an other time, and to content our selves with making that which
follows. We conveyed into the Receiver a little Pedestal of Wood, in the midst
of which was perpendicularly erected a slender Iron, upon whose sharp point an
excited Needle of Steel purposely made, and of about five Inches long, was so
placed that hanging in an Aequilibrium it could move freely toward either
hand. Then the Air being after the usual manner pumped out, we applied a
Lodestone moderately vigorous to the outside of of the Glass, and found that
it Attracted or Repelled the ends of the Needle, according to the Laws
Magnetical, without any remarkable difference from what the same Lodestone
would have done had none of the Air been drawn away from about the Needle,
which when the Lodestone was removed, after some tremulous Vibrations to and
fro, rested in a position wherein it looked North and South.

Experiment 17.
PRoceed we now to the mention of that Experiment, whereof the satisfactory
trial was the principal Fruit I promised my self from our Engine. It being then
sufficiently known, that, in the Experiment De Vacuo, the Quicksilver in the
Tube is wont to remain elevated, above the surface of that whereon it leans,
about 27 digits: I considered, that, if the true and only reason why the
Quicksilver falls no lower, be, that at that Altitude, the Mercurial Cylinder
in the Tube, is an Aequilibrium with the Cylinder of Air, supposed to reach
from the adjacent Mercury to the top of the Atmosphere: If this Experiment
could be tried out of the Atmosphere, the Quicksilver in the Tube would fall
down to a level with that in the Vessel, since then there would be no pressure
upon the Subjacent, to resist the weight of the Incumbent Mercury. Whence I
inferred (as easily I might) that, if the Experiment could be tried in our
Engine, the Quicksilver would subside below 27 Digits, in proportion to the
exsuction of Air, that should be made out of the Receiver. For, as when the Air
is shut into the Receiver, it does (according to what has above been taught)
continue there as strongly compressed, as it did whilst all the incumbent
Cylinder of the Atmosphere leaned immediately upon it; because the Glass,
wherein it is pent up, hinders it to deliver it self, by an expansion of its
parts, from the pressure wherewith it was shut up. So, if we could perfectly
draw the Air out of the Receiver* it would conduce as well to our purpose, as
if we were allowed to try the Experiment beyond the Atmosphere.

Wherefore (after having surmounted some little difficulties which occurred at
the beginning) the Experiment was made after this manner. We took a slender and
very curiously blown Cylinder of Glass, of near three Foot in length, and whose
bore had in Diameter a quarter of an Inch, wanting a hairs breadth: This Pipe
being Hermetically sealed at one end, was, at the other, filled with
Quicksilver, care being taken in the filling, that as few bubles as was
possible should be left in the Mercury: Then the Tube being stopped with the
Finger and inverted, was opened, according to the manner of the Experiment,
into a somewhat long and slender Cylindrical Box (instead of which we now are
wont to use a Glass of the same form) half filled with Quicksilver: And so,
the liquid metal being suffered to subside, and a piece of Paper being pasted
on level with its upper surface, the Box and Tube and all were by strings
carefully let down into the Receiver, and then, by means of the hole formerly
mentioned to be left in the Cover, the said Cover was slip't along as much of
the Tube as reached above the top of the Receiver; And the Interval, left
betwixt the sides of the Hole and those of the Tube, was very exquisitely
filled up with melted (but not over hot) Diachylon; and the round chink,
betwixt the Cover and the Receiver, was likewise very carefully closed up: Upon
which closure there appeared not any change in the height of the Mercurial
Cylinder; no more, then if the interposed Glass Receiver did not hinder the
immediate pressure of the ambient Atmosphere upon the enclosed Air; which
hereby appears to bear up on the Mercury, rather by virtue of its spring, then
of its weight: since its weight cannot be supposed to amount to above two or
three Ounces, which is inconsiderable in comparison of such a Cylinder of
Mercury as it would keep from subsiding.

All things being thus in a readiness, the Sucker was drawn down; and,
immediately upon the egress of a Cylinder of Air out of the Receiver; the
Quicksilver in the Tube did, according to expectation, subside: and notice
being carefully taken (by a mark fastened to the outside) of the place where it
stopped, we caused him that managed the Pump to pump again, and marked how low
the Quicksilver fell at the second exsuction; but continuing this work, we
were quickly hindered from accurately marking the Stages made by the Mercury in
its descent, because it soon sunk below the top of the Receiver; so that we
could thenceforward mark it no other ways then by the eye. And thus, continuing
the labor of pumping for about a quarter of an hour, we found our selves unable
to bring the Quicksilver in the Tube totally to subside; because, when the
Receiver was considerably emptied of its Air, and consequently that little that
remained grown unable to resist the Irruption of the external, that Air would
(in spite of whatever we could do) press in at some little Avenue or other;
and though much could not thereat get in, yet a little was sufficient to
counterballance the pressure of so small a Cylinder of Quicksilver, as then
remained in the Tube.

Now (to satisfy our selves further, that the falling of the Quicksilver in
the Tube to a determinate height, proceeds from the Aequilibrium, wherein it is
at that height with the external Air, the one gravitating, the other pressing
with equal force upon the subjacent Mercury) we Returned the Key and let in
some new Air; upon which the Mercury immediately began to ascend (or rather to
be impelled upwards) in the Tube, and continued ascending, till having Returned
the Key it immediately rested at the height which it had then attained: And so,
by Turning and Returning the Key, we did several times at pleasure impel it
upwards, and check its ascent. And lastly, having given a free egress at the
Stop-cock to as much of the external Air as would come in, the Quicksilver was
impelled up almost to its first height: I say almost, because it stopped near a
quarter of an Inch beneath the Paper mark formerly mentioned; which we ascribed
to this, That there was (as is usual in this Experiment) some little Particles
of Air engaged among those of the Quicksilver; which Particles, upon the
descent of the Quick silver, did manifestly rise up in Bubbles toward the top
of the Tube, and by their pressure, as well as by lessening the Cylinder by as
much room as they formerly took up in it, hindered the Quicksilver from
regaining its first height.

This Experiment was a few days after repeated in the presence of those
excellent and deservedly Famous Mathematick Professors, Dr. Wallis, Dr. Ward,
and Mr. Wren, who were pleased to Honor it with their Presence: And whom I
name, both as justly counting it an Honor to be known to them, and as being
glad of such Judicious and illustrious Witnesses of our Experiment; and 'twas
by their guess that the top of the Quicksilver in the Tube was defined to be
brought within an Inch of the surface of that in the Vessel.

And here, for the Illustration of the foregoing Experiment, it will not be
amiss to mention some other particulars relating to it.

First then, When we endeavored to make the Experiment with the Tube closed at
one end with Diachylon instead of an Hermetical Seal; we perceived, that upon
the drawing of some of the Air out of the Receiver, the Mercury did indeed
begin to fall, but continued afterward to subside, though we did not continue
pumping. Whence it appeared, that though the Diachylon that stopped the end of
the Tube were so thick and strong, that the external Air could not press it in
(as experience taught us that it would have done, if there had been but little
of it) yet the subt'ler parts of it were able (though slowly) to insinuate
themselves through the very body of the Plaster, which it seems was of so
close a Texture, as that which we mentioned our selves to have successfully
made use of in the Experiment De Vacuo some years ago. So that now we begin to
suspect, that perhaps one Reason, why we cannot perfectly pump out the Air, may
be, that when the Vessel is almost empty, some of the subtler parts of the
external Air may, by the pressure of the Atmosphere, be strained through the
very body of the Diachylon into the Receiver. But this is only conjecture.

Another Circumstance of our Experiment was this, That, if (when the
Quicksilver in the Tube was fallen low) too much ingress were, at the hole of
the Stop-cock, suddenly permitted to the external Air; it would rush in with
that violence, and bear so forcibly* upon the surface of the subjacent
Quicksilver, that it would impel it up into the Tube rudely enough to endanger
the breaking of the Glass.

We formerly mentioned, that the Quicksilver did not in its descent fall as
much at a time after the two or three first exsuctions of the Air, as at the
beginning: For, having marked its several Stages upon the Tube, we found, that
at the first suck it descended an Inch and ^/8, and at the second an Inch and;
and when the Vessel was almost emptied, it would scarce at one exsuction be
drawn down above the breadth of a Barly-corn. And indeed we found it very
difficult to measure in what proportion these decrements of the Mercurial
Cylinder did proceed: partly because (as we have already int^mated) the
Quicksilver was soon drawn below the top of the Receiver; and partly because,
upon its descent at each ex^uction, it would immediately reascend a little
upwards; either by reason of the leak^ng of the Vessel at some imperceptible
hole or other, or by reason of the motion of Restitution in the Air, which,
being somewhat comprest by the fall as well as we we^ght of the Quicksilver,
would repel it a little upwards, and make it vibrate a little up and down,
before they could reduce each other to such an Aequilibrium as both might rest
in. But though we could not hitherto make observations accurate enough
concerning the measures of the Quick-silver's descent, to reduce them into any
Hypothesis, yet would we not discourage any from attempting it; since, if it
could be reduced to a certainty, it is probable that the discovery would not be
unuseful.

And, to illustrate this matter a little more, we will add, That we made a
shift to try the Experiment in one of our above mentioned small Receivers, not
containing a Quart; but that (agreeably to what we formerly observed) we found
it as difficult to bring this to be quite empty as to evacuate the greater; the
least external Air that could get in (and we could not possibly keep it all
perfectly out) sufficing in so small a Vessel to display a considerable
pressure upon the surface of the Mercury, and thereby hinder that in the Tube
from falling to a level with it. But this is remarkable, that having two or
three times tried the Experiment in that small Vessel, upon the very first
Cylinder of Air that was drawn out of the Receiver, the Mercury fell in the
Tube 18 Inches and a half, and at another 19 Inches and a half.

But, on this occasion, I hold it not unfit to give Your Lordship notice that I
hoped, from the descent of the Quicksilver in the Tube upon the first suck, to
derive this advantage: that I should thence be enabled to give a near guess at
the proportion of force betwixt the pressure of the Air (according to its
various states, as to Density and Rarefaction) and the gravity of Quicksilver,
then hitherto has been done. For in our Experiment there are diverse things
given, that may be made use of toward such a discovery. For first we may know
the capacity of the Receiver wherein the Experiment is made, since, by filling
it with water, we may easily compute how many Quarts, or Measures of any other
denomination, it contains of Air; which Air, when shut up in the Vessel, may be
supposed to have a pressure equal to that of the Atmosphere; since it is able
to keep the Quicksilver in the Tube from falling any lower then it did in the
free and open Air. Next here is given us the capacity of the brass Cylinder
emptied by the drawing down of the Sucker (its bore and height being mentioned
in the description of our Pump) whereby we may come to know how much of the Air
contained in the Receiver is drawn out at the first suck. And we may also
easily define, either in weight or cubick measures the Cylinder of Quicksilver
that answers to the Cylinder of Air lately mentioned (that Mercuriall Cylinder
being in our Engine computable by deducting from the entire altitude of that
Cylinder of Quicksilver, the altitude at which it rests upon the first
exsuction.) But though, if this Experiment were very watchfully tried in
Vessels of several sizes, and the various descents of the Quicksilver compared
among themselves, it is not improbable that some such thing as we hoped for may
thereby be discovered. Yet because not only the solid contents of as much of
the Glass-tube as remains within the concave surface of the Receiver, and
(which is more difficult) the varying contents of the Vessel containing the
Mercury, and of as much of the Mercury it self as is not in the Tube, must be
deducted out of the capacity of the Receiver; but there must also an allowance
be made for this, that the Cylinder that is emptied by the drawing down of the
Sucker, and comes to be filled upon the letting of the Air out of the Receiver
into it, is not so replenished with Air as the Receiver it self at first was:
because there passes no more Air out of the Receiver into the Cylinder, then is
requisite to reduce the Air in the cavity of the Cylinder, and in that of the
Receiver to the same measure of dilatation: Because of these (I say) and some
other difficulties that require more skill in Mathematics then I pretend to,
and much more leisure then my present occasions would allow me, I was willing
to refer the nicer consideration of this matter to some of our Learned and
Acurate Mathematicians, thinking it enough for me to have given the Hint
already suggested.

For further confirmation of what has been delivered, we likewise tried the
Experiment in a Tube of less then two foot long: and, when there was so much
Air drawn out of the Vessel, that the remaining Air was not able to
counterballance the Mercurial Cylinder, the Quicksilver in the Tube subsided
so visibly, that (the Experiment being tried in the little Vessel lately
mentioned) at the first suck it fell above a span, and was afterward drawn
lower and lower for a little while; and the external Air being let in upon it,
impelled it up again almost to the top of the Tube: So little matters it how
heavy or light the Cylinder of Quick silver to subside is, provided its gravity
overpower the pressure of as much external Air as bears upon the surface of
that Mercury into which it is to fall.

Lastly we also observed, That if (when the Mercury in the Tube had been drawn
down, and by an Ingress permitted to the external Air, impelled up again to its
former height) there were some more Air thrust up by the help of the Pump into
the Receiver, the Quicksilver in the Tube would ascend much above the wonted
height of 27 digits, and immediately upon the letting out of that Air would fall
again to the height it rested at before.

Your Lordship will here perhaps expect, that as those who have treated of the
Torricellian Experiment, have for the most part maintaind the Affirmative, or
the Negative of that famous Question, Whether or no that Noble Experiment infer
a Vacuum? so I should on this occasion interpose my Opinion touching that
Controversy, or at least declare whether or no, in our Engine, the exsuction
of the Air do prove the place deserted by the Air sucked out, to be truly
empty, that is, devoid of all Corporeal Substance. But besides that, I have
neither the leisure, nor the ability, to enter into a solemn Debate of so nice
a Question; Your Lordship may, if you think it worth the trouble, in the
Dialogues not long since referred to, find the Difficulties on both sides
represented; which then made me yield but a very wavering assent to either of
the parties contending about the Question: Nor dare I yet take upon me to
determine so difficult a Controversy.

For on the one side it appears, that notwithstanding the exsuction of the Air,
our Receiver may not be destitute of all Bodies, since any thing placed in it,
may be seen there; which would not be, if it were not pervious to those Beams
of Light which rebounding from the seen Object to our eyes, affect us with the
sense of it: And that either these Beams are Corporeal Emanations from some
lucid body, or else at least the light they convey does result from the brisk
Motion of some subtle Matter, I could, if I mistake not, sufficiently manifest
out of the Dialogues abovementioned, if I thought your Lordship could
seriously imagine that Light could be conveyed without, at least, having (if I
may so speak) a Body for its Vehicle.

By the sixteenth Experiment, it also appears that the closeness of our
Receiver hinders it not from admitting the Effluvia of the Lodestone; which
makes it very probable that it also freely admits the Magnetical steams of the
Earth; concerning which, we have in another Treatise endeavored to manifest
that numbers of them do always permeate our Air.

But on the other side it may be said, That as for the subtle Matter which
makes the Objects enclosed in our evacuated Receiver, visible, and the
Magnetical Effluvia of the Earth that may be presumed to pass through it, though
we should grant our Vessel not to be quite devoyd of them, yet we cannot so
reasonably affirm it to be replenished with them, as we may suppose, that if
they were gathered together into one place without Intervals between them, they
would fill but a small part of the whole Receiver. As in the thirteenth
Experiment, a piece of Match was inconsiderable for its bulk, whilst its parts
lay close together, that afterward (when the Fire had scattered them into
smoke) seemed to replenish all the Vessel. For (as elsewhere our Experiments
have demonstrated) both Light and the Effluvia of the Lodestone, may be
readily admitted into a Glass, Hermetically sealed, though before their
Admission, as full of Air as hollow Bodies here below are wont to be, so that
upon the exsuction of the Air, the large space deserted by it, may remain
empty, notwithstanding the pretense of those subtle Corpuscles, by which Lucid
and Magnetical Bodies produce their effects.

And as for the Allegations above mentioned, they seem to prove but that the
Receiver devoy'd of Air, May be replenished with some such Etherial Matter, as
some Modern Naturalists write of; but not that it really is so. And indeed to
me it yet seems, that as to those spaces which the Vacuists would have to be
empty, because they are manifestly devoid of Air; and all grosser Bodies, the
Plenists (if I may so call them) do not prove that such spaces are replenished
with such a subtle Matter as they speak of, by any sensible effects, or
operations of it (of which diverse new Trials purposely made, have not yet shown
me any) but only conclude that there must be such a Body, because there cannot
be a Void. And the reason why there cannot be a Void, being by them taken, not
from any Experiments, or Phenomenon of Nature, that clearly and particularly
prove their Hypothesis, but from their notion of a Body, whose Nature,
according to them, consisting only in extension (which indeed seems the
property most essential to, because inseparable from a Body) to say a space
devoid of Body, is to speak in the School-mens Phrase, a Contradiction in
Adjecto: This reason, I say, being thus desum'd, seems to make the Controversy
about a Vacuum, rather a Metaphysical, then a Physiological Question; which
therefore we shall here no longer debate, finding it very difficult either to
satisfy Naturalists with this Cartesian Notion of a Body, or to manifest
wherein it is erroneous, and substitute a better in its stead.

But though we are unwilling to examine any further the Inferences wont to be
made from the Torricellian Experiment, yet we think it not impertinent to
present Your Lordship with a couple of Advertisements concerning it.

First, then if in trying the Experiment here or elsewhere, you make use of the
English measures that Mathematicians and Tradesmen are here wont to employ, You
will, unless you be forewarned of it, be apt to suspect that those that have
written of the Experiment have been mistaken. For whereas men are wont
generally to talk of the Quick-silver's remaining suspended at the height of
between six or seven and twenty Inches; we commonly observed, when diverse
years. since we first were sollicitous about this Experiment, that the
Quicksilver in the Tube rested at about 29 Inches and an half above the
surface of the Restagnant Quicksilver in the Vessel, which did at first both
amaze and perplex us, because though we held it not improbable that the
difference of the grosser English Air, and that of Italy and France, might keep
the Quicksilver from falling quite as low in this colder, as in those warmer
Climates; yet we could not believe that that difference in the Air should alone
be able to make so great a one in the heights of the Mercurial Cylinders; and
accordingly upon enquiry we found, that though the various density of the Air
be not to be overlooked in this Experiment, yet the main Reason why we found
the Cylinder of Mercury to consist of so many Inches, was this, That our
English Inches are somewhat inferior in length to the digits made use of in
Foreign Parts, by the Writers of the Experiment.

The next thing I desire Your Lordship to take notice of, is, That the height
of the Mercurial Cylinder is not wont to be found altogether so great as really
it might prove, by reason of the negligence or incogitancy of most that make
the Experiment. For of^^n times upon the opening of the inverted Tube into the
Vessell'd Mercury, you may observe a bubble of Air to ascend from the bottom of
the Tube through the subsiding Quicksilver to the top; and almost always you
may, if you look narrowly, take notice of a multitude of small bubbles all
along the inside of the Tube betwixt the Quicksilver and the glass: (not now
to mention the Particles of Air that lie concealed in the very Body of the
Mercury) Many of which, upon the Quick-silvers forsaking the upper part of the
Tube, do break into that deserted space where they find little or no
resistance to their expanding of themselves. Whether this be the reason that
upon the Application of warm Bodies to the emptyed part of the Tube, the
subjacent Mercury would be depressed somewhat lower, we shall not determine;
though it seem very probable, especially since we found that upon the
application of Linen clothes dipped in Water, to the same part of the Tube,
the Quicksilver would somewhat ascend, as if the cold had condensed the
Imprisoned Air, that pressed upon it, into a lesser room. But that the deserted
space is not wont to be totally devoid of Air, we were induced to think by
several Circumstances. For when an eminent Mathematician, and excellent
Experimenter, had taken great pains and spent much time in accuratly filling up
a Tube of Mercury, we found that yet there remained store of inconspicuous
bubbles, by inverting the Tube, letting the Quicksilver fall to its wonted
height; and by approaching (by degrees) a red hot Iron to the outside of the
Tube, over against the upper part of the Mercurial Cylinder, for hereby the
little unheeded bubbles, being mightily expanded, ascended in such numbers, and
so fast to the deserted space, that the upper part of the Quicksilver seemed,
to our wonder, to boil. We further observed, That in the trials of the
Torricellian Experiment we have seen made by others, and (one excepted) all our
own, we never found that upon the inclining of the Tube the Quicksilver would
fully reach to the very top of the sealed end: which argued, that there was
some Air retreated thither that kept the Mercury out of the unreplenish'd space.

If Your Lordship should now demand what are the best expedients to hinder the
intrusion of the Air in this Experiment; we must answer, That of those which
are easily intelligible without ocular demonstration, we can at present suggest
upon our own trials no better then these. First, at the open end of the Tube
the Glass must not only be made as even at the edges as you can, but it is
very convenient (especially if the Tube be large) that the bottom be every way
bent inwards, that so the Orifice, not much exceeding a quarter of an Inch in
Diameter, may be the more easily and exactly stopped by the Experimenter's
finger; between which and the Quicksilver, that there may be no Air
intercepted (as very often it happens that there is) it is requisite that the
Tube be filled as full as possibly it can be, that the finger which is to stop
it, pressing upon the accumulated and protuberant Mercury, may rather throw
down some, then not find enough exactly to keep out the Air. It is also an
useful and compendious way not to fill the Tube at first quite full of Mercury,
but to leave near the top about a quarter of an Inch empty; for if you then
stop the open end with your finger, and invert the Tube that quarter of an Inch
of Air will ascend in a great bubble to the top, and in its passage thither,
will gather up all the little bubbles, and unite them with it self into one
great one, so that if by reinverting the Tube you let that bubble return to the
open end of it, you will have a much closer Mercurial Cylinder then before, and
need but to add a very little Quicksilver more to fill up the Tube exactly.
And lastly, as for those lesser and inconspicuous parcels of Air which cannot
this way be gleaned up, You may endeavor before you invert the Tube, to free
the Quicksilver from them by shaking the Tube, and gently knocking on the
outside of it, after every little parcel of Quicksilver which you pour in;
and afterward, by forcing the small latitant bubbles of Air to disclose
themselves and break, by employing a hot Iron in such manner as we lately
mentioned. I remember that by carefully filling the Tube, though yet it were
not quite free from Air, we have made the Mercurial Cylinder reach to 30 Inches
and above an eighth, and this in a very short Tube: which we therefore mention,
because we have found, by experience, that in short Tubes a little Air is more
prejudicial to the Experiment then in long ones, where the Air having more room
to expand it self, does less potently press upon the subjacent Mercury.

And since we are fallen upon the consideration of the Altitude of the
Mercurial Cylinder, I must not conceal from Your Lordship an Experiment
relating thereunto, which perhaps will set both You and many of your Friends
the Virtuosi a thinking; and, by disclosing some things about the Air or
Atmosphere that have scarce hitherto been taken notice of, may afford you some
hints conducive to a further discovery of the subject of this Epistle.

WE took a Glass Tube, Experiment 18.
which, though it were not much above three Foot long, we made choice of
because it was of a more then ordinarily even thickness. This we filled with
Mercury, though not with as much care as we could, yet with somewhat more then
is wont to be used in making the Torricellian Experiment. Then, having
according to the manner inverted the Tube, and opened the mouth of it beneath
the surface of some other Quicksilver, that in the Tube fell down to the
wonted height, leaving, as is usual, some little Particles of Air in the space
it deserted, as we ghest by observing, that upon the Application of hot Bodies
to the upper part of the Tube, the Quicksilver would be a little depressed.
Lastly, having put both the Tube and the Vessel it leaned on into a convenient
Wooden Frame, to keep them from mischances: we placed that Frame in a Window
within my Bedchamber, that I might both keep the Mercury from being stirred,
and have opportunity to watch from time to time the Phenomenon it was to
exhibit. For the better discovery of which, when the Quicksilver both in the
Tube and subjacent Vessel was perfectly at rest, we took notice, by a mark made
on the outside of the Glass, how high the included Liquor then reached.

During several Weeks that the Tube was kept in that Window (which was very
rarely opened) I had the opportunity to observe, that the Quicksilver did
sometimes faintly imitate the Liquor of a Weather-glass, subsiding a little in
warm, and rising a little in cold Weather, which we ascribed to the greater or
lesser pressure of that little Air that remained at the top of the Tube,
expanded or condensed by the heat or cold that affected the ambient Air. But
that which I was chiefly careful to observe, was this, That oftentimes the
Quicksilver did rise and fall in the Tube, and that very notably, without
conforming it self to what is usual in Weather-glasses, whose Air is at the
top, nay quite contrary thereunto: for sometimes I observed it in very cold
weather (such as this Winter has already afforded us good store of) to fall
down much lower then at other times, when by reason of the absence of both
Frost, Snow, and sharp Winds, the Air was comparatively much warmer. And I
further observed, That sometimes the Quicksilver would for some days together
rest almost at the same height; and at other times again it would in the
compass of the same day considerably vary its altitude, though there appeared
no change either in the Air abroad, or in the temper of the Air within the Room
(wherein was constantly kept a good Fire) nor in any thing else, to which
either I, or some eminently Learned Men whom I then acquainted with the
Experiment, could reasonably impute such a change: Especially considering that
the space wherein the Mercury wandered up and down, within about five Weeks,
amounted to full two Inches, of which we found by our several marks whereby we
had taken notice of its several removes, that it had descended about ^/16 of an
Inch from the place where it first settled, and the other Inch and ^/16 it had
ascended. And it seems probable that the height of the Mercurial Cylinder would
have varied yet more, if the Experiment had been made in the open Air and in a
long Tube, where the Particles of the Imprisoned Air, by having more room to
display themselves in, might not have had so strong a Spring to work upon the
Quicksilver with. But for want both of time and of a competent quantity of
Mercury (which was not to be procured where we then happened to be) we were
unable to make any further trials: which therefore chiefly troubled us, because
we would gladly have tried an ingenious Experiment which was suggested unto us
by that excellent Mathematician Mr. Wren, who being invited to name any thing
he would have us try touching the pressure of the Air, desired us to observe
whether or no the Quicksilver in a long Tube would not a little vary its
height according to the Tides, especially about the New and Full Moon, about
which times Mariners observe those great Flowings and Ebbs of the Sea, that
they call the Spring-Tides. For he sagaciously and plausibly conjectured that
such observations accurately made, would discover the truth or erroneousness of
the Cartesian Hypothesis concerning the Ebbing and Flowing of the Sea: which
Des Carts ascribes to the greater pressure made upon the Air by the Moon, and
the Intercurrent Ethereal Substance at certain times (of the Day, and of the
Lunary Month) then at others. But in regard we found the Quicksilver in the
Tube to move up and down so uncertainly, by reason, as it seems, of accidental
mutation in the Air; I somewhat doubt whether we shall find the Altitude of
the Quicksilver to vary as regularly as the Experiment is ingeniously
proposed. The success we shall (God permitting us to make trial of it) acquaint
Your Lordship with; and in the mean time take notice, that when we had occasion
to take the Tube out of the Frame (after it had staid there part of November
and part of December) a good Fire being then in the room, because it was a
Snowy day, we found the Quicksilver in the Tube to be above the upper surface
of the subjacent Mercury 29 Inches three quarters.

If Your Lordship should now ask me what are the true causes of this varying
altitude of the Mercurial Cylinder; I should not undertake to answer so
difficult a question, and should venture to say no more, then that among diverse
possible causes to which it may be ascribed, it would not be, perhaps, absurd
to reckon these that follow.

First then we may consider, that the Air in the upper part of the Tube is much
more rarefied, and therefore more weak then the external Air, as may appear by
this among other things, That upon the inclining of the Tube the Quicksilver
will readily ascend almost to the very top of it, and so take up eight or nine
tenth parts, and perhaps more of that space which it deserted before: which
would not happen if that whole space had been full of unrarified Air, since
that (as trial may easily satisfy you) would not have suffered it self to be
thrust into so narrow a room by so weak a pressure. So that although in our
Tube when the included Air was heated, the Quicksilver was somewhat depressed:
Yet there is this difference betwixt such a Tube and common Weather-Glasses,
that in these the included and the ambient Air are in an Aequilibrium as to
pressure, and the weight of the Water that keeps them separate is scarce
considerable. Whereas in such a Tube as we are speaking of, the Air within is
very much more dilated then that without* and it is not so much the spring or
resistance of the included Air, as the weight of the Mercurial Cylinder it self
that hinders the Quicksilver from ascending higher; for if we should suppose
that deserted part of the Tube perfectly devoid of Air, yet would the
Quicksilver rise but a little higher in it, and be far from filling it, in
regard the outward Air would not be able to impel up such a weight much higher:
whereas it may, by our former Experiments appear, that if all the Air in the
upper part of a Weather-Glass were away, the Water would be impelled up to the
very top of it, though the Pipe were above thirty Foot long.

We may next consider, that this rarefied Air at the upper part of our Tube
being exactly shut up betwixt the Glass and the Quicksilver, it was scarce
subject to any discernable alterations, save those it received from heat and
cold.

And we may further consider that yet the external Air or Atmosphere is subject
to many alterations, besides them that proceed from either of those Qualities.

For the Experiment that occasioned this Discourse, seems to make it probable
enough that there may be strange Ebbings and Flowings, as it were, in the
Atmosphere; or at least, that it may admit great and sudden Mutations, either
as to its Altitude or its Density, from causes, as well unknown to us, as the
effects are unheeded by us. And that You may not think that there is nothing in
Nature but our Experiment that agrees with this our conjecture, we might put
Your Lordship in mind of the Pains and Aches that are often complained of by
those that have had great Wounds or Bruises, and that do presage great
Mutations in the Air oftentimes, whilst to strong and healthy Persons no sign
of any such thing appears. And that is also very memorable to this purpose,
which I remember I have somewhere read in a Book of the Ingenious Kircherus,
who giving a pertinent admonition concerning the various refractions that may
happen in the Air, relates, That during his stay in Malta, he often saw Mount
Aetna, though the next day, notwithstanding its being extremely clear, he could
not see it; adding, that Vintemillius, a very Learned Person, did oftentimes,
from a Hill he names, behold the whole Island he calls Luprica protuberant
above the Sea, though at other times, notwithstanding a clear Sky, he could not
see it. And though perhaps this may be in part ascribed to the various light
and position of the sun, or to the various disposition of the Spectators eye,
or peradventure to some other cause; yet the most probable cause seems to be
the differing Density of the Air, occasioned by Exhalations capable to increase
the refraction, and consequently bring Beams to the Eye, which otherwise would
not fall on it. We have likewise in another Treatise mentioned our having often
observed with Telescopes a plenty of Steams in the Air, which without such a
help would not be taken notice of; and which as they were not at all times to
be seen even through a Telescope, so they did sometimes, especially after a
shower of Rain, hastily disappear: and when we have visited those places that
abound with Mines, we have several times been told by the Diggers, that even
when the Sky seemed clear, there would not seldom suddenly arise, and sometimes
long continue, a certain Steam (which they usually call a damp) so gross and
thick, that it would oftentimes put out their very Candles, if they did not
seasonably prevent it. And I think it will easily be granted, that the
ascension of such Steams into this or that part of the Air, and their mixing
with it, are very like to thicken it; as on the other side either heat or the
sudden condensation of the Air in another part of the Atmosphere (to mention
now no other causes) are capable of rarifying it.

Nor will it very much import the main scope of our Discourse, whether it be
supposed that the copious Steams the earth sends into the air, thicken that
part of the Atmosphere that receives them, and make it more heavy: Or that
sometimes the Fumes may ascend with such celerity, that though the Air be
thickened yet they rather diminish then increase its gravitation, in regard
that the quickness of their ascent, not only keeps them from gravitating
themselves, but may hinder the pressing downwards of many Aerial Corpuscles
that they meet with in their way upwards. This, I say, is of no great
importance to our present Discourse, since either way the Terrestrial Steam may
here and there considerably alter the gravity or pressure of the Atmosphere.

Your Lordship may also be pleased to remember, That by our seventeenth
Experiment it appeared that as when the Air in the Receiver was expanded more
then ordinarily, the Quicksilver in the Tube did proportionably subside; so
when the Air in the same Receiver was a little more then ordinarily compressed,
it did impell up the Quicksilver in the Tube above the wonted height of
betwixt six and seven and twenty digits.

And if to these things we annex, that for ought we can find by trials
purposely made, the degree of rarity or density of the Air, shut up into our
Receiver, does not sensibly alter its temperature as to cold or heat. It will
not, I hope, appear absurd to conceive, That since the Air, included in the
Tube, could but very faintly hinder the ascent of the Quicksilver, or press it
downwards, since too that included Air could scarce immediately receive any
sensible alteration, save either by heat or cold. And since also that according
to the bare density or rarity of the Air incumbent on the subjacent
Quicksilver in the Vessel, that in the Tube was impelled more or less high;
such changes happening in the neighboring part of the outward Air, either by
the ascension of gross or copious exhalations, or by any other cause (of which
there may be diverse) as were capable to make considerable alterations in the
consistence of the Air, as to rarity and density, may be able proportionably to
alter the height of the Quicksilver: I rather say, that such alterations may
be, then that they are the causes of our Phenomenon, because I think it
sufficient, if I have proposed conjectures not altogether irrational about a
new Mystery of Nature, touching which, the chief thing I pretend to, is to give
occasion to the Curious to inquire further into it then I have been yet able to
do.

Experiment 19.
THe same Reason that moved us to conclude, that by the drawing of the Air out
of the Receiver, the Mercury would descend in a Tube shorter then six and
twenty digits, induced us also to expect, that by the same means Water might be
brought to subside in Glass Tubes of a moderate length, though by the noble
Experiment, said to have been accurately made in France by Monsieur Paschal, we
are informed that a Tube of no less then about two and thirty Foot, was found
requisite to make the Experiment De Vacuo succeed with Water instead of
Quicksilver: so tall a Cylinder of that lighter Liquor, being, it seems,
requisite to equal the weight of a Mercurial Cylinder of six or seven and
twenty digits, and surmount the pressure of the Atmosphere.

We took then a Tube of Glass, Hermetically sealed at one end, of about four
foot in length, and not very slender: This at the open end we filled with
common Water, and then stopped that end till we had inverted the Tube, and opened
it beneath the surface of a quantity of the like Water, contained in a somewhat
deep and slender Vessel. This Vessel, with the Tube in it, was let down into
the Receiver, and the Receiver being closed up after the accustomed manner, the
Pump was set awork.

As much of the event as concerns our present purpose, was this, That till a
considerable part of the Air was drawn out of the Receiver, the Tube continued
top-full of Water as when it was put in, it being requisite that a great part
of the Air formerly contained in the Receiver, should be drawn out, to bring
the remaining Air to an Aequilibrium with so short and light a Cylinder of
Water. But when once the Water began to fall in the Tube, then each exsuction
of Air made it descend a little lower, though nothing near so much as the
Quicksilver at the beginning did in the Experiment formerly mentioned. Nor did
there appear so much inequality in the spaces transmitted by the Water in its
descent, as there did in those observed in the ^all of the Quicksilver, of
which the cause will scarce seem abstruse to him that shall duly reflect upon
what has been already delivered. And whereas we drew down the Quicksilver in
the Tube so far as to bring it within an Inch of the surface of the other
Quicksilver into which it was to fall; the lowest we were able to draw down
the Water was, by our conjecture, to about a Foot or more above the surface of
that in the Vessel; of which I know not whether it will be needful to assign so
obvious a cause as that, though the little Air remaining in the Receiver could
not hinder a Cylinder of above an Inch high of Quicksilver from subsiding; yet
it might very well be able, by its pressure, to countervail the weight of a
Cylinder of a Foot long or more, of a Liquor so much less ponderous then
Quicksilver, as Water is. And in fine, to conclude our Experiment, when the
Water was drawn down thus low, we found, that by letting in the outward Air, it
might be immediately impelled up again to the higher parts of the Tube.

We will add no more concerning this Experiment, save that having tried it in
one of our small Receivers, we observed, That upon the first exsuction of the
Air the Water did usually subside dive^s Inches, and at the second (exsuction)
fall down much lower, subsiding sometimes near two Foot; as also that upon the
letting in of the Air from without, the Water was impelled up with very great
celerity.

THat the Air has a notable Elastical power (whencesoever that proceeds) we
have, Experiment 20.
I suppose, abundantly evinced, and it begins to be acknowledged by the
eminentest Modern Naturalists. But whether or no there be in Water so much as a
languid one, seems hitherto to have been scarce considered, nor has been yet,
for ought I know, determined either way by any Writer, which invited us to make
the following Experiment.

There was taken a great Glass-bubble, with a long neck; (such as Chemists are
wont to call a Philosophical Egg) which being filled with common Water till the
Liquor reached about a span above the bubble, and a piece of Paper being there
pasted on, was put unstop'd into the Receiver, and then the Air was sucked out
after the wonted manner. The event was this, That a considerable part of the
Air, pent up in the Receiver, was drawn out before we discerned any expansion
of the Water; but, continuing the labor of pumping, the Water manifestly began
to ascend in the stem of the Glass, and diverse bubbles loosening themselves
from the lower parts of the Vessel, made their way through the Body of the
Water, to the top of it, and there brake into the Receiver: And after the Water
once appeared to swell, then at each time the Stop-cock was turned to let out
the air from the Receiver into the Pump, the Water in the Neck of the Glass did
suddenly rise about the breadth of a Barly-corn in the Neck of the Glass, and
so attained, by degrees, to a considerable height above the mark formerly
mentioned. And at length (to make the expansion of the Water more evident) the
outward Air was suddenly let in, and the Water immediately subsided and
deserted all the space it had newly gained in the Glass.

And, on this occasion, it will not perhaps be amiss to acquaint Your Lordship
here (though we have already mentioned it in another Paper, to another purpose)
with another Expedient that we made use of two or three years ago, to try
whether or no Water had a Spring in it. About that time then, That Great and
Learned Promoter of Experimental Philosophy Dr. Wilkins, doing me the Honor to
come himself, and bring some of his inquisitive Friends to my Lodging, we there
had in readiness a round and hollow Vessel of Pewter, great enough to contain
two pounds of Water, and exactly close every where, but at one little hole
where it was to be filled; then partly by sucking out the Air, and partly by
injecting Water with a Syringe, it was (not without some difficulty) filled up
to the top; and that hole being placed directly upwards, there was a little
more Water leisurely forced in by the Syringe. Upon which, though the Vessel
were permitted to rest, and the hole kept in its former posture, yet the
compressed Water leisurely swelled above the Orifice of the hole, and diverse
drops ran over along the sides of the Vessel. After this, we caused a skilful
Pewterer (who had made the Globe) to close it up in our presence with Soder so
exquisitely, that none suspected there was any thing left in it besides Water.
And lastly, the Vessel thus soder'd up, was warily and often struck in diverse
places with a Wooden Mallet, and thereby was manifestly compressed, whereby the
enclosed Water was crowded into less room then it had before: And thereupon
when we took a Needle, and with it and the Mallet perforated the Vessel, and
drew out the Needle again; the Water (but in a very slender Stream) was
suddenly thrown after it into the Air, to the height of two or three Feet. As
for the other Phenomenon of this Experiment, since they belong not to our
present purpose, and are partly mentioned in another of our Papers, we shall,
instead of recording them here, give this Advertisement: That as evidently as
this Experiment, and that made in our Receiver, seem to prove a power in the
Water to expand and restore it self after compression; yet for a reason to be
met with ere long, I judged it not safe to infer that Conclusion from these
Premises, till I had made some of the following trials, to the mention of which
I will therefore hasten.

TO discover whether the Expansion of the Water really proceeded from an
Elastical power in the parts of the Water it self, Experiment 21.
we thought it requisite to try two things: The one, Whether or no the
Atmosphere gravitates upon Bodies under Water; and the other, Whether in case
it do gravitate, the Intumescence of the Water may not be ascribed to some
substance subtler then it self, residing in it. In order to the satisfying my
self about the first of these, I intended to let down into the Receiver a
Vessel of Water, wherein should be immersed a very small oiled Bladder, almost
devoid of Air, but strongly tied up at the Neck with a string, and detained a
little under Water by such a weight fastened to that string, as should just be
able to keep the Bladder from swimming, and no more. For I supposed, that if
when all things were thus ordered, the Receiver were emptied, in case there
were any such pressure of the Atmosphere upon Water, as I was inclined to
believe, the Air within the Bladder, being upon the exsuction of the Air within
the Receiver, freed from that pressure, and being pressed only by the small
weight of the incumbent Water, would considerably expand it self; but whilst
we were preparing Bladders for this Experiment, there occurd an easy way for
the making at once both the Discoveries I desired.

We took then a Glass Viol, containing by ghess a pound and some ounces of
Water, this we filled top full, and then we put into the Neck of it a Glass
Pipe a pretty deal bigger then a Goose Quill, open at both ends, and of diverse
Inches in length: One end of this Pipe was so put into the Neck of the Viol, as
to reach a little below it, and then was carefully cemented thereto that no Air
might get into the Viol, nor no Water get out of it, otherwise then through the
Pipe; and then the Pipe being warily filled, about half way up to the top, with
more Water, and a mark being pasted over against the upper surface of the
Liquor; the Viol thus fitted with the Pipe, was, by strings let down into the
Receiver, and according to the wonted manner exquisitely closed up in it.

This done, we began to Pump out the Air, and when a pretty quantity of it had
been drawn away, the Water in the Pipe began to rise higher in the Pipe, at the
sides of which some little bubbles discovered themselves. After a little while
longer, the Water still swelling, there appeared at the bottom of the Pipe a
bubble about the bigness of a small Pea, which ascending through the Pipe to
the top of the Water, staid there awhile and then broke; but the Pump being
nimbly plied, the expansion of the Water so increased, that quickly, getting up
to the top of the Pipe some drops of it began to run down along the outside of
it, which obliged us to forbear pumping awhile, and give the Water leave to
subside within less then two Inches of the bottom of the Pipe. After this the
Pump being again set at work, the bubbles began to ascend from the bottom of
the Pipe, being not all of a size, but yet so big, that estimating one with
another, they appeared to be of the size of the smaller sort of Peace; and of
these we reckoned about sixty which came up one after another, besides store of
smaller ones, of which we made no reckoning: And at length, growing weary of
reckoning and pumping too (because we found, that in spite of all our pains
and industry, some undiscerned Leak or other in the Receiver hindered us from
being able to empty it altogether) we thought fit to desist for that time.
After trial made of what operation the external Air, being let in upon the
expanded Water, would have; and accordingly turning the Key to let in the Air,
we saw, as we expected, that the Water in the Pipe in a moment fell down almost
to the bottom of it.

Now of this Experiment there are two or three Circumstances yet to be
mentioned, which are no less then those already recited, pertinent to our
present purpose.

In the first place then, when the greater part of the Air had been pumped out
of the Receiver, the rising bubbles ascended so very slowly in the Pipe, that
their Progress was scarce discernable; which seemed to proceed from this, That
their bigness was such, That they could not sufficiently extend themselves in
the cavity of the Glass, without pressing on both hands against the sides of
it, whereby they became of more difficult extrusion to the Water. And though it
may seem strange these bubbles should be of any considerable bulk, since it is
like they consisted of lesser parcels of the Air lurking in the Water, then
those that were vigorous enough to make their way through long before them: yet
they were commonly much larger then before, some of them being equal in
quantity to four or five Peace: Whether this their increase of bulk proceeded
from the greater decrement of the pressure of the Air, or from the Union of two
or three of those numerous bubbles which were then generated below the bottom
of the Pipe, where we could not see what was done among them.

Another thing we noted in our bubbles was, That whereas in ordinary ones the
Air, together with the thin film of Water that invests and detains, is wont to
swell above the surface of the Water it swims on, and commonly to constitute
Hemispherical Bodies with it, the little parcels of Air that came up after the
Receiver was pretty well emptied, did not make protuberant bubbles, but such
whose upper surface was either level with or beneath that of the Water, so that
the upper surface being usually somewhat unequal, the less protuberant parts of
it had a pretty quantity of Water remaining above them.

We also further observed, That whereas in the bubbles that first appeared in
the Pipe, the ascending Air did, as in other common bubbles, make its way
upwards, by dividing the Water through which it passed, in those bubbles that
appeared at the latter end of our Experiment, when the pressure of the little
external Air, remaining in the Receiver, was grown inconsiderable, the
ascending parcels of Air having now little more then the weight of the
incumbent Water to surmount, were able both so to expand themselves as to fill
up that part of the Pipe which they pervaded, and by pressing every way against
the sides of it, to lift upwards with them what Water they found above them,
without letting any considerable quantity glide down along the sides of the
Glass: So that sometimes we could see a bubble thrust on before it a whole
Cylinder of Water of perhaps an Inch high, and carry it up to the top of the
Pipe; though as we formerly noted, upon the letting in the external Air, these
tumid bubbles suddenly relapsed to their former inconspicuousness.

All these things laid together seemed sufficiently to confirm that, which the
consideration of the thing it self would easily enough persuade, namely, That
the Air, and such like Bodies being under Water, may be pressed upon as well by
the Atmosphere, as by the weight of the incumbent Water it self.

Hence likewise we may verify what we observed at the close of the foregoing
Experiment, namely, That from the sole swelling of Water there recorded, it
cannot be so safely concluded that Water, when freed from compression, is
endow^d with an Elastical power of expanding it self, since thereby it appears
that the Intumescence produced by that Experiment, may (at least in great part)
be ascribed to the numerous little bubbles which are wont to be produced in
Water, from which the pressure of the Atmosphere is in great measure taken off.
So apt are we to be misled, even by Experiments themselves, into Mistakes,
when either we consider not that most Effects may proceed from various Causes,
or mind only those Circumstances of our Experiment, which seem to comply with
our preconceiv'd Hypothesis or Conjectures.

And hence it seems also probable, that in the Pores or invisible little
recesses of Water it self there lie commonly interspersed many parcels of
either Air, or at least something Analogous thereunto, although so very small
that they have not been hitherto so much as suspected to lurk there. But if it
be demanded how it appears that there is interspersed through the Body of Water
any substance thinner then it self, and why that which produced the bubbles
above mentioned should not be resolutely said to be nothing else then a more
active and spirituous part of the Water, we shall, in order to the Elucidation
of this matter, subjoyn to what was formerly delivered the following Experiment.

WE recited in our nineteenth Experiment, Experiment 22.
how by drawing most of the Air out of the Receiver, we made the Water subside
by degrees in a Glass not four Foot long: We shall now add, that in the like
Experiment made in such a Tube, or a greater, it may be observed, That when the
Water begins to fall, there will appear store of bubbles fastened all along to
the sides of the Glass; of which bubbles, by the agitation of the Vessel
consequent upon pumping, there will arise good numbers to the top of the Water,
and there break; and as the Cylinder of Water is brought to be lower and lower,
so the bubbles will appear more numerous in that part of the Tube which the
Water yet fills; and the nearer the surface of the Water, in its descent,
approaches to these bubbles, the greater they will grow, because having the
less weight and pressure upon them, the Expansion of that Air which makes them,
can be the less resisted by the pressure of the incumbent Water and Air; as
seems probable from hence, that upon the letting in a little external Air,
those bubbles immediately shrink.

It may indeed, as we lately intimated, be conjectured, that these bubbles
proceed not so much from any Air pre-existent in the Water, and lurking in the
Pores of it, as from the more subtle parts of the Water it self; which by the
expansion allowed them upon the diminished pressure of the ambient Bodies may
generate such bubbles. And indeed, I am not yet so well satisfied that bubbles
may not (at least sometimes) have such an Origination: but that which makes me
suspect that those in our trials contained real Air formerly latitant in the
Pores of the Water, is this, That upon the inletting of the external Air, the
Water was not again impelled to the very top of the Tube whence it began to
fall, but was stopped in its ascent near an Inch beneath the top. And since, if
the upper part of the Tube had been devoyd of any other then such Ethereal
matter as was subtle enough freely to penetrate the pores of the Glass, the
external Air would have been able to impel the Water to the top of a Tube seven
or eight times as long as ours was; The Phenomenon under consideration seemed
manifestly to argue that the many bubbles that broke at the top of the Water
did contain a real Air, which, being collected into one place and hindered by
the top of the Glass from receding, was able to withstand the pressure of the
outward Air. As we see that if never so little Air remain in the Tube upon the
making the Experiment De Vacuo with Quicksilver, no inclining of the Tube,
though a long one, will enable a Man to impel the Mercury up to the very top,
by reason (as we formerly noted) of the resistance of the included Air, which
will not be compressed beyond a certain degree.

But in order to a further Discovery what our bubbles were, we will, on this
occasion, inform Your Lordship that we tried the XIXth Experiment in one of our
small Receivers, and found, that upon the drawing down of the Water, so many
bubbles disclosed themselves and broke into the upper part of the Tube, that
having afterward let in the external Air, the Water was not thereby impelled
to the top of the Tube (three Foot in length) within a little more then half an
Inch. And whether or no it were Air that possessed that space at the top of the
Tube which was not filled with Water, we took this course to examine. We drew
the second time the Air out of the Receiver, and found, that by reason of the
body that possessed the top of the Tube, we were able not only to make the
Water in the Tube fall to a level with the surface of the Water in the Vessel:
But also (by plying the Pump a little longer) a great way beneath it: which
since it could not well be ascribed to the bare subsiding of the Water by
reason of its own weight, argued that the Water was depressed by the Air: which
was confirmed by the Figure of the surface of the Water in the Tube, which was
much more concave then that of Water in Tubes of that bigness uses to be. And
this further trial (to add that upon the by) we made at the same time, That
when the Water in the Pipe was drawn down almost as low as the Water without
it, we observed, that (though we desisted from pumping) by the bare application
of a hand moderately warm to the deserted part of the Tube, the remaining Water
would be speedily and notably depressed. And having for a while held a kindled
Coal to the outside of the Tube, (the Pump being still unimploy'd, because the
Vessel chanced to hold extraordinarily well) the Air was by the heat so far
expanded, that it quickly drove the Water to the bottom of the Tube, which was
diverse Inches beneath the surface of the ambient Water. Whereby it appears (by
the same way by which we formerly measured the dilatation of the Air) that the
Air, even when it is expanded to between 90 and 100 times, its extent will yet
readily admit of a much further rarifaction by heat.

I considered also that in case the Bubbles we have been speaking of, were
produced by the parcels of Air latitant in the Water, that Air being now got
together to the top of the Tube, though the Air were again drawn out of the
Receiver, the taking off its pressure would not disclose bubbles as before; and
accordingly, the Air being again pumped out, the Water in the Tube descended as
formerly: but for a great while we scarce saw one bubble appear, only when the
Receiver had been very much exhausted, and the Water was fallen very low, there
appeared near the bottom of the Tube, certain little bubbles, which seemed to
consist of such parcels of Air as had not, by reason of their smalness, got up
to the top of the Water, with the more bulkie and vigorous ones. And that which
is not inconsiderable, is, That having, by letting in the Air, forced up the
Water into the Tube, we could not perceive that it ascended nearer the top,
though we permitted the Engine to remain unimploy'd for two or three Nights
together, and watched whether the Water would swell up and fill the Tube. And
on this occasion I remember, that having tried such an Experiment as this with
Quicksilver instead of Water, in a Tube of about a Foot and a half long,
wherein it might seem more hopeful to escape bubbles; yet upon the drawing down
the Quicksilver as low as we could, and letting in the external Air upon it,
we found that some lurking particles of Air were got up to the top of the Tube,
and hindered the Quicksilver from being forced up again so high. And though
the Quicksilver were by this means brought to appear a very close and lovely
Metalline Cylinder, not interrupted by interspersed bubbles as before; yet
having caused the Air to be again drawn out of the Receiver, I could perceive
several little bubbles to disclose themselves, fastened to the inside of the
Tube, near the bottom of it; and having purposely watched one or two of the
chiefest, I had the pleasure to observe, that though they grew bigger and
bigger as the surface of the Mercurial Cylinder fell nearer and nearer to them,
so as that at length they swelled into a conspicuous bulk; yet upon the wary
letting in the Air upon them, they did not break, but presently shrunk up into
a littleness that rendered them inconspicuous.

Whence it seems very probable, if not certain, that even in the closest and
most ponderous Liquors, and therefore much more in Water, there may lurk
undiscernable parcels of Air, capable, upon the removal of the pressure of the
ambient Air (though but in part) and that of the Liquor wherein it lurks, to
produce conspicuous bubbles. And consequently, if it seem inconvenient to admit
an Elastical power in the Water, it may be said that the swelling of the
compressed Water in the Pewter Vessel lately mention^d, and the springing up of
the Water at the hole made by the Needle, were not the effects of any internal
Elater of the Water, but of the spring of the many little particles of Air
dispersed through that Water, and acting upon it in their sudden recovering
themselves to a greater extent, then that to which a violent compression had
reduced them.

But though, from all these particulars, it seems manifest that the bubbles we
have been all this while treating of, were produced by such a substance as may
be properly enough called Air; yet till we shall have had the opportunity of
making some further trials concerning the nature of the Air, we shall not
resolutely determine whether or no Air be a Primogenial Body (if I may so
speak) that cannot now be generated or turned either into Water or any other
Body. Yet in the mean while (because it is an important Question, and if
rightly determined, may much conduce to the knowledge of the nature of the Air)
We think it not unfit to make a brief mention of some of the particulars which
at present occur to our thoughts in favor of either part of the Question.

First then, diverse Naturalists esteem the Air (as well as other Elements) to
be ingenerable and incorruptible. And reasons plausible enough may be drawn to
countenance this Opinion from the consideration of that permanency that ought
to belong to the corporeal Principles of other Bodies.

Next, Experience may be pleaded to the same purpose, for I have read of some
who have in vain attempted to turn Air into Water, or Water into Air.

The diligent Schottus tells us, Schottus Mech^^: hydrau^icopne^mat: Part 3.
Cla^^. 1.
That amongst the other rarities to be met with in that great Repository of
them, the Musaeum Kercherianum, there is a round Glass with a tapering Neck
near half full (as one may guess by the Scheme he annexes) of ordinary
Spring Water, which having been Hermetically shut up there by Clavius the
famous Geometrician, The included water is to this day preserved, not only
clear and pure, as if it were but newly put in: But (as it seems) without (in
the least) turning into Air, notwithstanding its having been kept there these
fifty years: For he tells us, That the Water has continued there all this
while without any diminution.

Nor does it appear in those Glasses, which for Chemical Experiments we usually
close with Hermes his Seal (as they call it) that the included Air does, during
its long Imprisonment, notwithstanding the alteration it receives from various
degrees of heat, discernably alter its nature. Whereas we plainly perceive in
our Digestions and Distillations, that though it may be rarefied into invisible
Vapors, yet it is not really changed into Air, but only divided by heat, and
scattered into very minute parts, which meeting together in the Alembick or in
the Receiver, do presently return into such Water as they constituted before.
And we also see, that even Spirit of Wine, and other subtle and fugitive
Spirits, though they easily fly into the Air, and mingle with it, do yet in the
Glasses of Chemists easily lay aside the disguise of Air, and resume the
divested form of Liquors. And so volatile Salts, as of Urine, Hartshorn, etc.
though they will readily disperse themselves through the Air, and play up and
down in the capacity of an Alembick or a Receiver: yet will they, after a
while, fasten themselves to the insides of such Glasses in the form of Salts.

Besides, since Air is confessedly endowed with an Elastical power that
probably proceeds from its Texture, it appears not what it is that in such
light alterations of Water, as are by many presumed capable of turning it into
Air, can be reasonably supposed so to contrive the Particles of Water, as to
give them, and that permanently, the structure requisite to a Spring. I add
the word, Permanently, because the newly mentioned observations seem to argue
the Corpuscles of Air to be irreducible into Water, whereas the Aqueous
Particles may perhaps for a while be so vehemently agitated, as to press almost
like Springs upon other Bodies; yet upon the ceasing of the agitation, they
quickly, by relapsing into Water, disclose themselves to have been nothing else
whilst they counterfeited the Air.

Lastly, The Experiment formerly made in our Engine with a piece of Match,
seems to evince, that even those light and subtle Fumes (for the most part not
aqueous neither) into which the Fire it self shatters dry Bodies, have no such
Spring in them as the Air, since they were unable to hinder or repress the
expansion of the Air included in the Bladder they surrounded.

Natural and Mo^al Hist. of the Indies, Lib. 3. C. 9.
I remember indeed that the Learned Josephus Acosta, in his History of the West
Indies, tells us, That he saw in those parts some Grates of Iron so rusted and
consumed by the Air, that the Metal being pressed between the Fingers,
dissolved (to use his words) to powder, as if it had been Hay or parched Straw.
And I remember too, Geogr. Gen^^al. Lib. 1. c. 19.
that the accurate Varenius tells us, That in the Islands commonly called
Azores, the Air (and Wind) is so sharp, that in a short time it frets not only
Iron Plates, but the very Tiles upon the Roofs of Houses, and reduces them to
dust. And I have elsewhere mentioned some recent Observations of this kind.
But it may be said, That the abovementioned Authors ascribe the recited
effects chiefly to the Winds, and that however the corrosion of the Iron and
the Tiles may proceed not from the Air it self, or any of its genuine parts,
but from some ^aline Corpuscles dispersed through the Air, and driven by the
Winds against the Bodies it is presumed to fret. And that such volatile Salts
may copiously ascend into the Air, and yet retain their Nature, as does the
more fixed Salt in the Sea Water, the sublimations of Sal-Armoniack may
sufficiently evince. Not to mention that I have shown some Friends a secret
kind of saline Substance incomparably subtler then Sal-Armoniack, which did
not only easily enough ascend it self, but carried up with it (and that in a
very great proportion) the solid and ponderous Body even of uncalcin'd Gold in
the form of subtle exhalations, which did afterward fasten themselves to the
upper parts of the Vessels, and yet manifest themselves to continue Gold. We
remember also, that to try whether Water could be turned into Air, we once took
an Aeolipile, into which we had before conveyed some Water, and placing it upon
kindled Coals when the heat forced out a vehement stream of aqueous Vapors; we
tied about the neck of it, that of a Bladder, which we had before emptied of
Air; and finding the Aeolipile after a while to blow up the Bladder, we
carefully tied it again that the included substance might not get away. Then
slipping it off from the Ae^lipile we conveyed it into our Receiver, to try
whether or no that which in part distended the Bladder would appear by its
Spring to be true Air: whereby we found that upon the exsuction of the ambient
Air, the included substance expanded it self and the Bladder to a very much
greater bulk then it was of before. And for further satisfaction, having again
taken out the Bladder, we suffered it to remain tied up till next morning, to
try whether time, and the coldness of the night, would make the contained
substance relapse into Water: But the next Morning we found it little less
tumid then before. I remember, I say, that I once made this Experiment; but I
might say in answer to it, that the chief reason of my mentioning it, is, To
let Your Lordship see how requisite it is to be circumspect and considerate,
when we are to make and to build upon nice Experiments. For though I may seem
to have used sufficient caution, yet afterward considering with my self that
the Aeolipile I had employed was a very large one, and that it required much
more care then one that has not tried it would imagine, to drive out all the
Air from a large Aeolipile, I easily suspected that the distension of the
Bladder in our pneumatical Vessel, might proceed not from the Watery steams
that came out at the narrow mouth of the Aeolipile, and had very much wetted
the Bladder, but from the rarefied Air which in that sort of Vessels is wont
for a good while together to come out with the rarefied Water: and accordingly
having reiterated the Experiment I found it very difficult (by reason of the
shrinking of the Bladders (upon their being heated) and of other impediments)
to make it so accurately as to deduce from it, that Water may be rarefied into
true Air.

Against the four other abovementioned Considerations, we cannot spend time to
frame Objections, but must forth with proceed to the mention of those things
that seem to argue that Air (at least such as produced our bubbles) maybe
generated of Water and other Bodies.

First then we have found by Experience that a vapid Air, or Water rarefied
into vapor, may at least for a while emulate the elastical power of that which
is generally acknowledged to be true Air. For if you take a good Aeolipile,
with a moderately strong and slender Neck, and filling it with Water, lay it
upon quick Coals, you may after a while observe so great a pressure by some of
the parts contained in the Aeolipile upon others, that the Water will sometimes
be thrown up into the Air above three or four Foot high; and if you then take
the Aeolipile almost red hot from off the Fire, you may perceive that the Water
will for a longer time then one would easily imagine continue to be spouted out
in a violent Stream. And if there remains but little Water in the Aeolipile
when it is taken very hot from the Fire, immersing the Neck of it into cold
Water, you will find, that after it begins to suck in some Water, there will
be made from time to time store of large bubbles in that Water whereinto the
neck was plunged. Which bubbles seem manifestly to proceed from hence, that for
a while the heat in the Aeolipile continues strong enough to rarifie part of
the Water that is sucked in, and expel it in the form of Vapors through the
Water incumbent on the Pipe. If also when the Aeolipile is almost full of
water, and therefore can contain but little Air; you hold a Coal or Brand in
that stream of Vapors that issues out of the narrow mouth of it, you will find
this vapid or rorid Air, (if I may so call it) to blow the Fire very strongly
and with a roaring noise. And that it be not said that it is by the external Air
which the aqueous steams drive before them, and not by the Steams themselves,
that the Blast is made and the Flame excited; it has been observed, that by
approaching the Coal or Brand almost to the mouth of the Aeolipile, the wind
appeared more vehement then if the Body to be kindled were held some Inches off.

But in regard the elastical power of the Stream, issuing out of an Aeolipile,
seems manifestly due to the heat that expands and agitates the aqueous
Particles whereof that Stream consists, and that such rapid winds seem to be
but water scattered into little parts and set a moving; since we find, that
holding a Knife, or any solid, smooth and close Body against the stream that
issues out of the Aeolipile, the vapors condensing upon it, will presently
cover it with water: It will be very pertinent to subjoyn a notable Experiment
that I remember I have met with in the description given us by the Industrious
Kircher, of several Musical Engines. And (though it may seem somewhat prolix)
we will recite what he delivers in his own words, which are these.

(...) and (...): lib. 9. p. 309.
Cum eodem tempore quo haec scripsi summi Pont: Innocentii Xmi mandato organi
hydraulici in horto Quirinali constituendi cur a mihi commendata esset; Aeoliam
cameram insigni sane successu construi jussimus, ea quae sequitur ratione.

Erat longitudo sive altitudo camerae AH 5 Pedum, Latitudine 3 fere ex
lateribus constructa; ^
in medio duo tenebat Diaphragmata CD and EJ in modum cribri pluribus for
aminibus pertusa. Paulo infra canalis G aquam advehens inserebatur in H eidem
epistomium parabat exitum. Aqua itaque per canalem G maximo impetu ruen^
vehementissimum ventum mox intus excitabat; qui ventus nimia humiditate
imbutus, ut purior exiret sicciorque, Diaphragmata illa in cribri modum
pertusa, ordinata sunt. Intra haec enim aquae vehemens agitatio rupta fractaque
aerem puriorem per A canalem subtilioremque emittebat: Verum cum postea
inventu^ sit acre^ plus aequo humidu^ interioribus Organi meatibus maximu^
detrimentum infer: Hinc ut aer aquosus siccissimam co^sistentiam acquireret,
ordinavimus canalem plumbeum QR in helicem contortum vasi S aliquantulum
capaciori in modum Urnae efformato, inser^um. Intra urnam enim plumbeam and
canalem tortuosum illisus aer humidus, ita ab omni aquositate defaecabatur, ut
ex furno in Organum derivatus dici potuerit. Urna S canalis tortuosus QR
ultimum orificium Q inseritur anemothecae organi. Et hunc modum organis
hydraulicis omniu^ aptissimu^ reperi.

Debet autem camera illa situari in loco quantum fieri potest sicciori ita ut
longo canali aqua intra eam derivetur ne locus humiditate sua Organis officiat.

Thus far the Ingenious Kircherus, whom I the rather cite, because although I
have been informed of diverse Ventiducts (as they call them) by very knowing
Travelers that have observed them: Yet this relation of our Author being very
punctual, and delivered upon his own particular Experience, has, I confess,
made me wish I had had the good fortune when I was at Rome, to take notice of
these Organs; or that I had now the opportunity of examining of such an
Experiment. For if upon a strict inquiry I should find that the breath that
blows the Organs does not really upon the ceasing of its unusual agitation by
little and little relapse into water, I should strongly suspect that it is
possible for Water to be easily turned into Air. I remember indeed, that we
have formerly taught that there lurks an interspersed Air in the pores of
ordinary Water, which may possibly be struck out by the breaking of the Water
in its fall into the Aeolian Chamber, (as he calls it.) But in regard the
Scheme seems to represent that Chamber as closely shut, and thereby forbids us
to suppose that any Air is carried into it. but what is latitant in the Water,
it will scarce seem probable to him who remembers how small a proportion of
Air, that appeared to be when its rarification seized, which was concealed in
the Water we freed from bubbles in our Receiver, that so little Air as is
commonly dispersed through Water, should be able, in so little Water as was
requisite for so small a room, to make so vehement a Wind as our Author here
tells us of. I have sometime therefore suspected, that in this case the Wind
may be produced by small particles of the water it self, forcibly expelled out
of the Chamber into the Organs. And to the Objection to which I foresaw this
ghess to be liable, namely, That, no heat intervening, there appeared nothing
that should raise the Water into exhalations and give them an impulse. I
thought it might be said that motion alone, if vehement enough, may, without
sensible heat, suffice to break Water into very minute parts, and make them
ascend upwards, if they can no where else more easily continue their agitation.
For I remember, that Traveling betwixt Lions and Geneva, I saw, not very far
out of the Way, a place where the River of Rhone coming suddenly to be
streighten'd betwixt two Rocks, so near each other, that a Man may (if my
Memory fail me not) stand astride upon both at once: that rapid Stream dashing
with great impetuosity against its Rocky Boundaries, does break part of its
Water into such minute Corpuscles, and put them into such a motion, that
Passengers observe at a good distance off, as it were a Mist arising from that
place, and ascending a good way up into the Air. Such, I say, was my suspicion
touching the Wind we have been considering, but it seems something odd that
aqueous Vapors should, like a dry Wind, pass through so long and tortuous a
Pipe of Lead, as that described by our Author, since we see in the Heads of
Stills, and the Necks of Aeolipiles, how quickly such vapors are even by a very
little cold recondensed into Water. But to this also something may be
speciously replied; wherefore contenting my self to have mentioned our Authors
Experiment as a plausible, though not demonstrative proof, that Water may be
transmuted into Air. We will pass on to mention in the third place another
Experiment, which we tried in order to the same enquiry.

We took a clear Glass bubble (capable of containing by ghess about three
Ounces of Water) with a Neck somewhat long and wide, of a Cylindrical form;
this we filled with Oil of Vitriol and fair water, of each almost a like
quantity, and casting in half a dozen small Iron Nails, we stopped the mouth of
the Glass (which was top-full of Liquor) with a flat piece of Diapalma provided
for the purpose, that accommodating it self to the surface of the water, the
Air might be exquisitely excluded: and speedily inverting the Viol, we put the
Neck of it into a small wide-mouthed Glass that stood ready with more of the
same Liquor in it, to receive it. As soon as the neck had reached the bottom of
the Liquor it was dipped into, there appeared at the upper part (which was
before the bottom) of the Viol a bubble, of about the bigness of a Pea, which
seemed rather to consist of small and recent bubbles, produced by the action of
the dissolving Liquor upon the Iron, then any parcel of the external Air that
might be suspected to have got in upon the inversion of the Glass, especially
since we gave time to those little Particles of Air which were carried down
with the Nails into the Liquor to fly up again. But whence this first bubble
was produced, is not so material to our Experiment, in regard it was so small:
For soon after we perceived the bubbles produced by the action of the
Menstruum, upon the Metal ascending copiously to the bubble already named, and
breaking into it, did soon exceedingly increase it, and by degrees depress the
water lower and lower, till at length the substance contained in these bubbles
possessed the whole cavity of the Glass Viol, and almost of its Neck too,
reaching much lower in the Neck then the surface of the ambient Liquor,
wherewith the open-mouthed Glass was by this means almost replenished. And
because it might be suspected that the depression of the Liquor might proceed
from the agitation whereinto the exhaling and imprisoned steams were put, by
that heat which is wont to result from that action of corrosive salts upon
Metals, we suffered both the Viol and the open-mouthed Glass to remain as they
were, in a Window, for three or four days and nights together; but looking upon
them several times during that while, as well as at the expiration of it, the
whole cavity of the Glass bubble, and most of its Neck, seemed to be possessed
by Air, since by its spring it was able for so long to hinder the expelled and
ambient Liquor from regaining its former place. And it was remarkable, that
just before we took the Glass bubble out of the other Glass, upon the
application of a warm hand to the unequal part of the bubble; the Imprisoned
substance readily dilated it self like Air, and broke through the Liquor in
diverse bubbles, succeeding one another.

Having also another time tried the like Experiment with a small Viol, and with
Nails dissolved in Aquafortis, we found nothing incongruous to what we have now
delivered. And this Circumstance we observed, that the newly generated steams
did not only possess almost all the whole cavity of the Glass, but diverse
times without the assistance of the heat of my hand, broke away in large
bubbles through the ambient Liquor into the open Air: So that these Experiments
with corrosive Liquors, seemed manifestly enough to prove, though not that Air
may be generated out of the Water, yet that in general air may be generated
anew.

Lastly, to the foregoing Arguments from Experience we might easily subjoyn the
Authority of Aristotle, and of (his followers) the Schools who are known to
have taught, that Air and Water being Symbolizing Elements (in the quality of
moisture) are easily transmutable into one another. But we shall rather to the
foregoing Argument add this, drawn from Reason, That if, as Leucippus,
Democritus, Epicurus and others, followed by diverse modern Naturalists, have
taught, the difference of Bodies proceeds but from the various Magnitudes,
Figures, Motions, and Textures of the small parts they consist of, (all the
qualities that make them differ, being deducible from thence) there appears no
reason why the minute parts of Water, and other Bodies, may not be so agitated
or connected as to deserve the name of Air. For if we allow the Cartesian
Hypothesis, according to which, as we noted at the beginning of this Letter,
the Air may consist of any terrene or aqueous Corpuscles, provided they be kept
swimming in the interfluent Celestial Matter; it is obvious that Air may be as
often generated, as Terrestrial Particles minute enough to be carried up and
down, by the Celestial Matter ascend into the Atmosphere. And if we will have
the Air to be a congeries of little slender Springs, it seems not impossible,
though it be difficult, that the small parts of diverse Bodies may by a lucky
concourse of causes be so connected as to constitute such little Springs, since
(as we note in another Treatise) Water in the Plants it nourishes is usually
contrived into Springy Bodies, and even the bare altered position and connection
of the parts of a Body may suffice to give it a Spring that it had not before,
as may be seen in a thin and flexible Plate of Silver; unto which, by some
strokes of a Hammer, you may give a Spring, and by only heating it red hot you
may make it again flexible as before.

These, My Lord, are some of the Considerations at present occurring to my
thoughts, by which it may be made probable that Air may be generated anew. And
though it be not impossible to propose Objections against these, as well as
against what has been represented in favor of the contrary Doctrine; yet having
already almost tired my self, and I fear more then almost tired Your Lordship
with so troublesome an Enquiry after the Nature of bubbles, I shall willingly
leave Your Lordship to judge of the Arguments alleged on either side, and I
should scarce have ventured to entertain You so long concerning such empty
things as the Bubbles, which have occasioned all this Discourse, but that I am
willing to invite You to take notice with me of the obscurity of things, or the
dimness of our created Intellects (which yet of late too many so far presume
upon, as either to Deny or Censure the Almighty and Omniscient Creator himself)
and to learn hence this Lesson, That there are very many Things in Nature that
we disdainfully overlook as obvious or despicable, each of which would
exercise our Understandings* if not pose them too, if we would but attentively
enough consider it, and not superficially contemplate, but attempt
satisfactorily to explicate the nature of it.

Experiment 23.
SInce the writing of the twenty one and twenty second Experiments (and
notwithstanding all that has been on their occasion delivered concerning
bubbles) we made some further trials in prosecution of the same inquiry whereto
they were designed.

We chose then, amongst those Glasses which Chemists are wont to call
Philosophical Eggs, one that containing about nine Ounces of Water, had a Neck
of half an Inch in Diameter at the top, and as we ghest, almost an Inch at the
bottom; which breadth we pitched upon for a reason that will by and by appear:
then filling it with common Water to the height of about a Foot and a half, so
that the upper part remained empty, we shut it into the Receiver, and watched
what would follow upon pumping, which proved that a great part of the Air being
drawn out, the bubbles began to discover themselves at the bottom and sides of
the Glass* and increasing, as the Air was more and more drawn away, they did
from time to time ascend copiously enough to the top of the Water, and there
quickly break: but by reason that the wideness of the Glass allowed them free
passage through the Water, they did not appear as in the former Experiments to
make it swell: The Water scarce ever rising at all above the mark affixt to its
upper surface when it was put in, and upon the return permitted to the outward
Air, and consequently the shrinking in of the remaining bubbles, the Water
seemed to have lost of its first extent, by the avolation of the formerly
interspersed Air.

Being willing likewise to try whether distilled Water were by having been
divided into minute parts, and then reunited, more or less disposed to expand
it self then Water not distilled: We took out of our Laboratory some carefully
distilled Rainwater, and put about two Ounces of it into a round Glass bubble
with a very small Neck (not exceeding the sixth part of an Inch in Diameter)
which we filled half way to the top, and then conveyed it into the Receiver;
the issue was, That though we drew out more then ordinary, yet there appeared
not the least intumescence of the Water, nor any ascending bubbles.

But suspecting that either the small quantity of the water or the Figure of
the Vessel might have an interest in this odd Phenomenon, we took the lately
mentioned Philosophical Egg, and another not much differing from it; the
former we filled up with distilled Rainwater to the old mark, and into the
latter we put a long Cylinder or Rod of solid Glass to streighten the cavity of
the Neck by almost filling it up; and then pouring some distilled Water into
that also, till it reached within some Fingers breadth of the top, the Eggs
were let down into the Receiver. In this Experiment the Air was so far drawn
forth before there appeared any bubble in either of the Glasses, that the
disparity betwixt this and common water was manifest enough. But at length,
when the Air was almost quite pumped out, the bubbles began to disclose
themselves, and to increase as the pressure of the Air in the Receiver
decreased. But whereas in the first mentioned Philosophical Egg the bubbles
were very small, and never able to swell the Water, that we took notice of, at
all above the mark: In the other, whose Neck, as we lately said, was
straightned, and their passage obstructed, great numbers of them, and bigger,
fastened themselves to the lower end of the Glass rammer (if we may so call it)
and gathered in such numbers between that and the sides of the Neck, that the
Water swelled about a Fingers breadth above the mark, though upon the admitting
of the external Air it relapsed to the former mark, or rather fell somewhat
below it. And although thereupon in the first named Vessel all the bubbles
presently dis-appear'd, yet in the other we observed, that diverse remained
fastened to the lower part of the Glass rammer, and continued there somewhat to
our wonder, for above an hour after, but contracted in their Dimensions.

Moreover, having suffered the Glasses to remain above twenty four hours in the
Receiver, we afterward repeated the Experiment, to try what change the
exsuction of the external Air would produce in the Water, after the internal
and latitant Air had (as is above recited) in great measure got away in
bubbles, and whether or no the Water would by standing re-admit any new
particles of Air in the room of those that had forsaken it. But though we
exhausted the Receiver very diligently, yet we scarce saw a bubble in either of
the Glasses; notwithstanding which, we perceived the Water to rise about the
breadth of a Barly-corn, or more, in the Neck of that Glass wherein the solid
Cylinder had been put; The Liquor in the other Glass not sensibly swelling.

And lastly, upon the letting in of the Air, the Water in the straightned Neck
soon subsided to the mark above which it had swollen, which whether it ought to
be ascribed to the same small expansion of the parts of the Water it self, or
to the rarifaction of some yet latitant Air broken into such small particles,
as to escape our observation, seems not easily determinable, without such
further trials, as would perhaps prove tedious to be recited as well as to be
made, though I was content to set down those already mentioned, that it might
appear how requisite it is in nice Experiments to consider variety of
Circumstances.

AFter having thus discovered what operation the exsuction of the ambient Air
had upon Water, Experiment 24.
we thought good to try also what changes would happen in other Liquors upon
the like taking off the pressure of the external Air. We took ^^en a Glass
Egg, somewhat bigger then a Turkey Egg, which had a long Neck or Stem of
about a part of an Inch in Diameter; and filling it up with Sallet Oil until it
reached above half way to the top of the Neck, we enclosed it in the Receiver
together with common Water in a resembling Vessel, that we might the better
compare together the operation of the exsuction of the Air upon those two
Liquors. The Pump being set awork there began to appear bubbles in the Oil much
sooner then in the Water, and afterward they also ascended much more copiously
in the former Liquor then the latter: Nay, and when by having quite tired the
Pumper, and almost our own patience, we gave over, the bubbles rise almost (if
not altogether) in as great numbers as ever, insomuch as none of the various
Liquors we tried either before or since, seemed to abound more with Aerial
Particles then did this Oil. In which it was further remarkable, that between
the time it was set into the Receiver, and that at which we could get ready to
Pump, it subsided notably (by ghess about half an Inch) below the mark it
reached before it was put in.

After this expressed Oil, we made try^^ of a distilled one, and for that
purpose made choice of the common Oil or Spirit (for in the Shops where it is
sold, the same Liquor is promiscuously called by either name) of Turpentine;
because 'twas only of that Chemical Oil, we had a sufficient quantity: which,
being put into a small Glass bubble with a slender Neck, so as to fill it to
about two Inches from the top, did, upon the evacuating of the Receiver,
present us with great store of bubbles; most of which rising from the bottom,
expanded themselves exceedingly in their ascent, and made the Liquor in the
Neck to swell so much by degrees, that at length it diverse times ran over at
the top: by which means, we were hindered from being able to discern upon the
letting in of the Air, how much the subsidence of the Oil below the first mark
was due to the recess of the bubbles.

Having likewise a mind to try whether as strong a solution of Salt of Tartar
in fair Water as could be made (we having then no Oil of Tartar per deliquium
at hand) though it be accounted, Quicksilver excepted, the heaviest of Liquors
would afford us any bubbles; we put in a Glass Egg full of it at the same
time, with other Liquors, and found that they did long yield store of bubbles
before any discovered themselves in the Liquor of Tartar; and having pursued
the Experiment, it appeared, That of all the Liquors we made trial of, this
afforded the fewest and the smallest Bubbles.

Spirit of Vinager being tried after the same manner, exhibited a moderate
number of bubbles, but scarce any thing else worth the mentioning.

Nor could we in red Wine, tried in a Glass Egg, take notice of any thing very
observable. For though upon the exsuction of the Air the bubbles ascended in
this Liquor, as it were in sholes, and shifted places among themselves in their
ascent; yet the Intumescence of the whole bulk of the Liquor was scarce at all
sensible, the bubbles most commonly breaking very soon after their arrival at
the top, where during their stay, they composed a kind of shallow froth, which
alone appeared higher in the Neck of the Glass, then was the Wine when it was
first let down. Neither yet did Milk, conveyed into our Pneumatical Vessel,
present us with any thing memorable, save that (as it seemed by reason of some
unctuousness of the Liquor) the bubbles not easily breaking at the top, and
thrusting up one another made the intumescence appear much greater then that of
common Water.

We likewise conveyed Hens Eggs into the Receiver, but, after the exsuction of
the Air, took them out whole again. That which invited us to put them in, was,
That (as perhaps we mention in other Papers) we had among other Experiments of
cold, made Eggs burst, by freezing them within doors with Snow and Salt: The
Ice, into which the aqueous parts of the Egg were turned by the cold, so
distending (probably by reason of the numerous bubbles wont to be observable in
Ice) the outward parts of the Egg, that it usually cracked the shell, though
the inner Membrane that involved the several Liquors of the Egg, because it
would stretch and yield, remained unbroken. And hereupon we imagined that in
our Engine it might appear whether or no there were any considerable Spring,
either in any of the Liquors, or in any other more spirituous substance
included in the Egg.

We took also some Spirit of Urine, carelessly enough deflegmed, and put it into
the same Glass (first carefully scowr'd and cleans'd) wherein we had put the
Oyl-olive above mentioned: We took also another Glass, differing from a Glass
Egg, only in that its bottom was flat, and filled it up to about 2/5 of the
Neck (which was wider then that of the Egg) with rectified Spirit of Wine.

We took also another Glass Egg, and having filled it with common Water till
it reached to the middle of the Neck, we poured to it of the same Spirit of
Wine, till it reached about an Inch higher.

These three Glasses having marks set on them, over against the edges of the
contained Liquors were put into the Receiver, and that beginning to be
evacuated, the bubbles in all the three Liquors began to appear. The mixture of
the Spirit of Wine and Water disclosed a great store of bubbles, especially
toward the top; but scarce afforded us any thing worth remembering. The Spirit
of Urine appeared to swell near an Inch and an half above the mark; and besides
that, sent forth store of bubbles, which made a kind of froth at the upper
part of it. And above that spume there appeared eight or ten great bubbles one
above another, in a very decent order, each of them constituting, as it were, a
Cylinder of about half an Inch high, and as broad as the internal cavity of the
Neck: So that all the upper part of the Neck (for these bubbles reached to the
top) seemed to be divided into almost equal parts, by certain Diaphragmes,
consisting of the coats of the bubbles, whose edges appeared like so many Rings
suspended one above another.

In the Spirit of Wine there did arise a great multitude of bubbles, even till
weariness did make us give over the Experiment. And in these bubbles two or
three things were remarkable; as first, That they ascended with a very notable
celerity: Next, That being arrived at the top, they made no stay there, and
yet, notwithstanding the great thinness and spirituousness of the Liquor, did,
before they broke, lift up the upper surface of it, and for a moment or two
form thereof a thin film or skin which appeared protuberant above the rest of
the superficies like a small Hemisphere. Thirdly, That they ascended straight
up, whereas those produced at the lower part of the Vessel, containing the
mixture of the Water and Spirit of Wine, ascended with a wavering or wrigling
motion, whereby they described an indented Line. Lastly, It was observable in
the Spirit of Wine (and we took notice of the like in the Oil of Turpentine
lately mentioned) that not only the bubbles seemed to rise from certain
determinate places at the bottom of the Glass, but that in their ascension they
kept an almost equal distance from each other, and followed one another in a
certain order, whereby they seemed part of small Bracelets, consisting of
equally little incontiguous Beads: the lower end of each Bracelet, being as it
were, fastened to a certain po^nt at the bottom of the Glass.

The Air being sparingly let into the Receiver, the great bubbles formerly
mentioned as incumbent upon one another, in that Glass that contained the
Spirit of Urine, were by orderly degrees lessened, till at length they wholly
subsided, notwithstanding the recess of so many bubbles as broke on the top of
the Spirit of Urine, during all the time of the Experiment; yet it scarcely
appeared at all to be sunk below the mark: Nor did the mixture of Spirit of
Wine and Water considerably subside. But that is nothing to what we observed in
the Spirit of Wine, for not only it conspicuously expanded it self in the Neck
of the Vessel that contained it, notwithstanding the largeness of it; and that
the bubbles were about to break at the top of it almost as soon as they arrived
there: but upon the readmission of the external Air, the Spirit of Wine
retained its newly acquired expansion. And though we let it alone for near an
hour together, in expectation that it might subside; yet when we took it out,
we found it still swelled between a quarter and half an Inch above the mark;
and although it was not easily imaginable how this Phenomenon could proceed
from any mistake in trying the Experiment, yet the strangeness of it invited
me to repeat it with fresh Spirit of Wine; which, swelling in the Neck as
formerly, I left all Night in the Receiver, allowing free access to the
external Air at the Stop-cock, and the next day found it still expanded as
before, save that it seemed a little lower: which decrement perhaps proceeded
from the avolation of some of the fugitive parts of so volatile a Liquor. And
for better satisfaction having taken out the Glass, and considered it in the
open Air, and at a Window, I could not find that there was any remaining
Bubbles that could occasion the persevering and admired expansion.

BEing desirous to discover what difference there might be as to gravity and
levity, Experiment 25.
between Air expanded under Water, and it self before such expansion; we took
two very small Viols, such as Chemical Essences (as they call them) are wont to
be kept in, and of the size and shape expressed by the 8th Figure: into one of
these we put so much of a certain ponderous Mercurial mixture (happening to be
then at hand) that the mouth being stopped with a little soft Wax, the Glass
would just sink in Water and no more; this we let fall to the bottom of a
wide-mouthed Crystal Jar, filled with about half a pint of common Water, and
into the same Vessel we sunk the other Essence Glass unstopp'd, with as much
Water in it as was more then sufficient to make it subside. Both these sunk
with their mouths downward, the former being about three quarters full of Air,
the latter containing in it a bubble of Air that was ghess'd to be of the
bigness of half a Pea: This done, the wide-mouthed Glass was let down into the
Receiver, and the way of employing the Engine was carefully made use of.

The success was, That having drawn out a pretty quantity of Air, the bubbles
began to disclose themselves in the Water, as in the former Experiments; and
though for a good while after the bubbles ascended in swarms from the lower
parts of the Water, and hastily broke at the top; yet we prosecuted the
Experiment so long without seeing any effect wrought upon the Essence Bottles,
that we began to despair of seeing either of them rise, but continuing to ply
the Pump, that little Glass, whose mouth was opened, came to the top of the
Water, being, as it were, boy'd up thither by a great number of bubbles that
had fastened themselves to the sides of it; swimming thus with the mouth
downward, we could easily perceive that the internal Air above mentioned had
much delated it self, and thereby seemed to have contributed to the emerging of
the Glass, which remained floating, notwithstanding the breaking and vanishing
of most of the contiguous bubbles: being hereby encouraged to persist in
pumping, we observed with some pleasure, that at each time we turned the Key,
the Air in the little Glass did manifestly expand it self and thrust out the
water, generally retaining a very protuberant surface where it was contiguous
to the remaining Water. And when after diverse exsuctions of the Air in the
Receiver, that in the little Viol so dilated it self as to expel almost all the
Water, it turned up its mouth toward the surface of the Water in the Jar, and
there delivered a large bubble, and then relapsed into its former floating
posture: And this Experiment taught us, among other things, that it was a work
of more time and labor then we imagined, to exhaust our Engine as much as it
may be exhausted: for although before the emerging of the small Viol, we did
(as has been* touched already) think we had very considerably emptyed the
Receiver, because there seemed to come out but very little or almost no
sensible Air at each exsuction into and out of the Cylinder; yet afterward, at
each drawing down the Sucker, the Air included in the Viol did manifestly
dilate it self, so long, that it did no less then nine times turn its mouth
upwards, and discharge a bubble by conjecture about the bigness of a Pea, after
the manner newly recited. But as for that Violl which had the weight in it, it
rose not at all. So that being not able by quick pumping to gain another bubble
from the Air in the swimming Glass, which proceeded from some small leak in the
Vessel, though it held in this Experiment more stanch then was usual, we
thought fit to let in leasurely the Air from without, upon whose admission that
within the Viol shrinking into a very narrow compass, the Glass did, as we
expected, fall down to the bottom of the Jar.

But being desirous before we proceeded to any new Experiment, to try once more
whether the little Glass that had the weight in it might not also be raised.
After we had suffered the Engine to remain closed as it was, for five or six
hours, the Pump was again plied with so much obstinacy, that not only about
the upper part of the Jar there appeared a good number of bubbles (but very
much smaller then those we saw the first time) but afterward there came from
the bottom of the Jar, bubbles about the bigness of small Peace: which the Pump
being still kept going, followed one another, to the number of forty, coming
from the stopped Violl; whose mouth, it seems, had not been shut so strongly
and closely, but that the included Air, dilating it self by its own spring,
made it self some little passage betwixt the Wall and the Glass, and got away
in these bubbles; after which, the unstopp'd Glass began to float again, the
Air shut up in it being manifestly so dilated as to expel a good part of the
Water, but not so much as to break quite through. And at length, when our
expectation of it was almost tired out, the heavier of the two Viols began to
come aloft, and immediately to subside again, which appeared to be occasioned
by the Air within it, whose bulk and spring being weakened by the recess of the
forty bubbles beforementioned, it was no longer able, as formerly, to break
forcibly through the incumbent Water; but forming a bubble at the mouth of the
Glass, boyed it up toward the top, and there getting away, left it to sink
again till the pressure of the Air in the Receiver being further taken off, the
Air in the Viol was permitted to expand it self further, and to create another
bubble, by which it was again for a while carried up. And it was remarkable,
that though after having emptyed the Receiver as far as well we could, we
ceased from pumping; yet the Vessel continuing more stanch then it was wont,
this ascent and fall of the Viol was repeated to the ninth time; the included
Air, by reason of the smalness of the vent at which it must pass out, being not
able to get away otherwise then little by little; and consequently, in diverse
such parcels as were able to constitute bubbles, each of them big enough to
raise the Viol and keep it aloft until the avolation of that bubble. Whereby it
may appear, that the grand rule in Hydrostaticks, That a Body will swim in the
Water, in case it be lighter then as much of that Water that equals it in bulk,
will hold likewise when the pressure of the Atmosphere is in very great
measure, if not when it is totally taken off from the Liquor and the Body:
though it were worth inquiring what it is that so plentifully concurs to fill
the bubbles made in our Experiment by the so much expanded Air, for to say with
the old Peripatetick Schools, That the Air, in Rarefaction, may acquire a new
extent, without the admission of any new substance, would be an account of the
Phenomenon very much out of date, and which, I suppose, our Modern Naturalists
would neither give, nor acquiess in.

I know not whether it may be requisite to add, that in this Experiment, as in
the former, the outward Air being let in did soon precipitate the floating
Viol. But I think it will not be amiss to note, that (congruously to what has
been above recorded of the vast expansion of the Air) the Water which in the
heavier Viol succeeded in the room of those forty odd, if not fifty great
bubbles of Air, which at several times got out of it, amounted but to a very
inconsiderable bigness.

Experiment 26.
IT having been observed by those that have considered what belongs to Pendulums
(a Speculation that may, in my poor judgment, be highly useful to the
Naturalists) that their Vibrations are more slowly made, and that their motion
lasts less in a thicker, then in a thinner Medium: We thought it not amiss to
try if a Pendulum would swing faster, or continue swinging longer in our
Receiver, in case of the exsuction of the Air, then otherwise. Wherefore we
took a couple of round and polished Pendulums of Iron or Steel, of equal
bigness, as near as we could get the Artificer to make them, and weighing each
of them twenty Dragmes, wanting as many Grains. One of these we suspended in
the cavity of the Receiver by a very slender silken string, of about seven
Inches and a half in length from the cover of the Receiver to which it was
fastened. Then (by inclining the Engine) we made the Pendulum swing too and ^ro
in it, and described as long Arches as in the capacity of so brittle a Vessel
we thought safe and convenient. And one of the Assistants telling the
recursions of the other Pendulum hanging in the free Air, by a string of about
the same length, we shortened and lengthened this other Pendulum, till it
appeared to keep the same pace in its Vibrations, with that shut up in the
Receiver. Then having carefully drawn away the Air, we did again set the
Pendulum in the Receiver a vibrating; and giving the other Pendulum such a
motion as made it describe an Arch, according to ones ghess, equal to that of
the included Pendulum; we reckoned, one of us, the Recursions of that Pendulum
which was swinging within the Receiver; and another of us that which was moving
in (that which one would think a much more resisting medium) the Air. But once,
one of us reckoned near two and twenty Recursions of the included Pendulum,
whilst the other reckoned but twenty of the Pendulum that vibrated without. And
another time also, the former of these Pendula was reckoned to have made one
and twenty Recursions, wherein the other made but twenty: Yet this Experiment
seemed to teach us little, save that the difference betwixt the motion of such
a Pendulum in the common Air, and in one exceedingly rarefied, is scarce
sensible in Vessels no bigger then our Receiver; especially since though during
this Experiment it held very well, yet we could not suppose it to be altogether
devoid of Air. We observed also, that when the Receiver was full of Air, the
included Pendulum continued its Recursions about fifteen minutes (or a quarter
of an hour) before it left off swinging; and that after the exsuction of the
Air, the Vibration of the same Pendulum (being fresh put into motion) appeared
not (by a minutes Watch) to last sensibly longer. So that the event of this
Experiment being other then we expected, scarce afforded us any other
satisfaction, then that of our not having omitted to try it. And whether in
case the trial be made with a Pendulum much less disproportionate to the Air
then Steel is, the event will much better answer expectation, experience may be
consulted.

THat the Air is the medium whereby sounds are conveyed to the Ear, Experiment
27.
has been for many Ages, and is yet the common Doctrine of the Schools. But
this Received Opinion has been of late opposed by some Philosophers upon the
account of an Experiment made by the Industrious Kircher, and other Learned
Men, who have (as they assure us) observed, That if a Bell, with a Steel
Clapper, be so fastened to the inside of a Tube, that upon the making the
Experiment De Vacuo with that Tube, the Bell remained suspended in the deserted
space at the upper end of the Tube: And if also a vigorous Lodestone be
applied on the outside of the Tube to the Bell, it will attract the Clapper,
which upon the Removal of the Lodestone falling back, will strike against the
opposite side of the Bell, and thereby produce a very audible sound, whence
diverse have concluded, That it is not the Air, but some more subtle Body that is
the medium of sounds. But because we conceived that, to invalidate such a
consequence from this ingenious Experiment (though the most luciferous, that
could well be made without some such Engine as ours) some things might be
speciously enough alleged; we thought fit to make a trial or two, in order to
the Discovery of what the Air does in conveying of sounds, reserving diverse
other Experiments tryable in our Engine concerning sounds, till we can obtain
more leisure to prosecute them. Conceiving it then the best way to make our
trial with such a noise as might not be loud enough to make it difficult to
discern slighter variations in it, but rather might be, both lasting, that we
might take notice by what degrees it decreased; and so small, that it could not
grow much weaker without becoming imperceptible. We took a Watch, whose Case we
opened, that the contained Air might have free egress into that of the
Receiver. And this Watch was suspended in the cavity of the Vessel only by a
Pack-thred, as the unlikeliest thing to convey a sound to the top of the
Receiver: And then closing up the Vessel with melted Plaster, we listen*d near
the sides of it, and plainly enough heard the noise made by the balance. Those
also of us, that watched for that Circumstance, observed, that the noise seemed
to come directly in a straight Line from the Watch unto the Ear. And it was
observable to this purpose, that we found a manifest disparity of noise, by
holding our Ears near the sides of the Receiver, and near the Cover of it:
which difference seemed to proceed from that of the Texture of the Glass, from
the structure of the cover (and of the Cement) through which the sound was
propagated from the Watch to the Ear. But let us prosecute our Experiment. The
Pump after this being imployd, it seemd that from time to time the sound grew
fainter and fainter; so that when the Rec^iver was emptied as much as it used
to be for the foregoing Experiments, neither we, nor some strangers that
chanced to be then in the room, could, by applying our Ears to the very sides,
hear any noise from within; though we could easily perceive that by the moving
of the hand which marked the second minutes, and by that of the balance, that
the Watch neither stood still, nor remarkably varied from its wonted motion. And
to satisfy our selves further that it was indeed the absence of the Air about
the Watch that hindered us from hearing it, we let the external Air at the
Stop-cock, and then though we turned the Key and stopped the Valve, yet we could
plainly hear the noise made by the balance, though we held our Ears sometimes
at two Foot distance from the outside of the Receiver. And this Experiment
being reiterated in another place, succeeded after the like manner. Which seems
to prove, that whether or no the Air be the only, it is at least, the
principal medium of Sounds. And by the way it is very well worth noting, that
in a Vessel so well closed as our Receiver, so weak a pulse as that of the
balance of a Watch should propagate a motion to the Ear in a Phisically
straight Line, notwithstanding the interposition of so close a Body as Glass,
especially Glass of such thickness as that of our Receiver; since by this it
seems that the air imprisoned in the Glass, must, by the motion of the
balance, be made to beat against the concave part of the Receiver, strongly
enough to make its unequal part beat upon the contiguous Air, and so propagate
the motion to the Listners ears. I know this cannot but seem strange to those,
who, with an eminent Modern Philosopher, will not allow that a Sound, made in
the cavity of a Room, or other place so closed, that there is no intercourse
betwixt the external and internal Air, can be heard by those without, unless
the sounding Body do immediately strike against some part of the enclosing
Body. But not having now time to handle Controversies, we shall only annex,
That after the foregoing Experiment, we took a Bell of about two Inches in
Diameter at the bottom, which was supported in the midst of the cavity of the
Receiver by a bent stick, which by reason of its Spring pressed with its two
ends against the opposite parts of the inside of the Vessel: in which, when it
was closed up, we observed that the Bell seemed to sound more dead then it did
when just before it sounded in the open Air. And yet, when afterward we had as
formerly emptyed the Receiver, we could not discern any considerable change
(for some said they observ*d a small one) in the loudness of the sound, whereby
it seemed that though the Air be the principal medium of sound, yet either a
more subtle matter may be also a medium of it, or else an ambient Body that
contains but very few particles of Air, in comparison of those it is easily
capable of, is sufficient for that purpose. And this, among other things,
invited us to consider, whether in the abovementioned Experiment made with the
Bell and the Lodestone, there might not in the deserted part of the Tube
remain Air enough to produce a sound: since the Tubes for the Experiment De
Vacuo (not to mention the usual thinness of the Glass) being seldom made
greater then is requisite, a little Air might bear a not inconsiderable
proportion to the deserted space. And that also, in the Experiment De Vacuo, as
it is wont to be made, there is generally some little Air that gets in from
without, or at least store of bubbles that arise from the Body of the
Quicksilver, or other Liquor it self, Observations heedfully made have
frequently informed us: And it may also appear, by what has been formerly
delivered concerning the Torricellian Experiment.

On the occasion of this Experiment concerning sounds, we may add in this
place, That when we tried the Experiment formerly mentioned, of firing Gun
powder with a Pistol in our evacuated Receiver, the noise made by the striking
of the Flint against the Steel, was exceeding languid in comparison of what it
would have been in the open Air. And on diverse other occasions it appeared that
the sounds created within our exhausted Glass, if they were not lost before
they reached the Ear, seemed at least to arrive there very much weakened. We
intended to try whether or no the Wire-string of an Instrument shut up into our
Receiver, would, when the ambient Air was sucked out, at all tremble, if in
another Instrument held close to it, but without the Receiver a string tuned
(as Musicians speak, how properly I now examine not) to an Unison with it, were
briskly touched, and set a Vibrating. This, I say, we purposed to try to see how
the motion made in the Air without, would be propagated through the cavity of
our evacuated Receiver. But when the Instrument wherewith the trial was to be
made came to be employed, it proved too big to go into the Pneumatical Vessel,
and we have not now the convenience to have a fitter made.

We thought likewise to convey into the Receiver a long and slender pair of
Bellows, made after the fashion of those usually employed to blow Organs, and
furnished with a small Musical instead of an ordinary Pipe. For we hoped, that
by means of a string fastened to the upper part of the Bellows, and to the
moveable stopple that makes a part of the Cover of our Receiver, we should, by
frequently turning round that stopple, and the annexed string, after the manner
already often recited, be able to lift up and distend the Bellows; and by the
help of a competent weight fastened to the same upper part of the Bellows, we
should likewise be able, at pleasure, to compress them: and by consequence, try
whether that subtler matter then Air (which, according to those that deny a
Vacuum, must be supposed to fill the exhausted Receiver) would be able to
produce a sound in the Musical Pipe; or in a Pipe like that of ordinary
Bellows, to beget a Wind capable to turn or set a moving some very light
matter, either shaped like the Sails of a Windmill, or of some other
convenient form, and exposed to its Orifice. This Experiment, I say, we thought
to make, but have not yet actually made it for want of an Artificer to make us
such a pair of Bellows as it requires.

We had thoughts also of trying whether or no, as Sounds made by Bodies in our
Receiver become much more languid then ordinary, by reason of the want of Air,
so they would grow stronger, in case there were an unusual quantity of Air
crowded and shut up in the same Vessel, which may be done (though not without
some difficulty) by the help of the Pump, provided the Cover and Stopple be so
firmly fastened (by binding and Cement, or otherwise) to the Glass; and to each
other, that there be no danger of the condensed Airs blowing of either of them
away, or its breaking through the junctures. These thoughts, My Lord, as I was
saying, we entertained; but for want of leisure, as, of as good Receivers as
ours, to substitute in its place, in case we should break it before we learned
the skill of condencing the Air in it, we durst not put them in practice: Yet,
on this occasion, give me leave to advertise Your Lordship once for all, That
though for the reasons newly intimated, we have, Only in the seventeenth
Experiment, taken notice, that by the help of our Engine the Air may be
condensed as well as rarefied; yet there are diverse other of our Experiments,
whose Phenomenon it were worth while to try to vary, by means of the
compression of the Air.

Experiment 28.
WE taught, among diverse other things, when we discoursed of our first
Experiment, That the Air shut up in our Receiver, presses as strongly upon the
Bodies shut up with it, as if they were exposed to the pressure of the whole
Atmosphere. That this was not inconsiderately propounded, we hope Your Lordship
has gathered from diverse of the things already recited: But yet perhaps it will
not be amiss to subjoyn, by way of further confirmation of the same truth, the
following Experiment, which should have accompanied the 20th, but the Paper
where in the one was written chanc*d not to be at hand, when the other was sent
away.

We conveyed into the Receiver a new Glass Viol, capable of holding about 6 or
7 ounces of Water, into which we had before put 2 or 3 Spoon-fulls of that
Liquor, and stopped it close with a fit Cork. The Pneumatical Vessel being
emptied, there appeared not any change in the enclosed Water, the Air
imprisoned with it, not having the force to blow out the stopple, which event,
though it were no other then we expected, was differing from what we desired.
For we would gladly have seen what change would have appeared in the Water upon
the Bottles being suddenly unstopp'd, in a place where the ambient Body was so
differing from our common Air. Wherefore we did again put in the Viol, but less
strongly closed then formerly, though as strongly stopped as seemed requisite on
ordinary occasions: But when the Air was pumped out of the Receiver, that
within the Viol did quickly, as we expected, find or make it self little
passages to get out at: as we argued, from this, That whereas when the Viol was
put in the time before, the Water remained all the while perfectly free from
bubbles; at this time the bottom of the Glass appeared all covered with them,
and they, upon the regress of the excluded Air into the Receiver, did presently
flag and shrink up.

From these trials it seemed deducible enough, that whilst the Viol continued
to be well stopped, the included Water did, from the Air, shut up with it,
sustain a pressure equal to that of the Atmosphere; since till the Air could
get out of the Glass, there appeared no bubbles in the Water, notwithstanding
the want of pressure in the ambient Body.

But to be sure to reach the chief end of our Experiment, we made use of this
other expedient: We caused a convenient quantity of Water to be put, and
Hermetically shut up into a Glass Egg, to whose long Neck (which was purposely
made of an unequal thickness) was fastened to one end of a string, whose other
end was tied to the Cover of our Receiver, after the manner elsewhere mentioned
already: Then the Egg being conveyed into the Pneumatical Vessel, and that
being evacuated, we did, by turning the brass Stopple formerly described
amongst the parts of our Engine, so shorten the string as to break the Glass;
whereby liberty being given to the Air imprisoned in the Egg, to pass into the
capacity of the Receiver, the sudden recess of the Air made the bubbles in a
trice appear so numerous, and ascend so swiftly in the Water, that their motion
looked like that of a violent shower of Rain; save that the bubbles did not,
like the drops of Rain, tend downwards, but upwards, which made me resemble
this Phenomenon to what I have seen happen in the dissolution of Seed-Pearl in
some acid Menstruum, in which, if a good quantity of the little Pearls be cast
whole, they will at first, if the Menstruum be sharp enough, be carried in
swarms from the bottom to the top of the Liquor. We will add, that without
sealing up the Glass, this Experiment may be tried in one of our smallest
Receivers, for there the exsuction of the ambient Air may be performed so
nimbly, that immediately the bubbles lurking in the Water are allowed to
display themselves, and ascend in throngs; insomuch, as having in such a
Receiver tried the Experiment with Wine (as a more spirituous Liquor) instead
of Water, the Red-Wine appeared all covered, with a copious, but vanishing
white Froth, almost as if a Vessel full of bottl'd drink had been unwarily
opened.

IT may not a little conduce to the clearer explication of diverse Points in the
Doctrine of Meteors, Experiment 29.
and perhaps of some other Physiological difficulties, to discover what the Air
does to the motion of those Steams or Exhalations that ascend into it, namely,
Whether they mount upwards by virtue of any such positive levity (as some
Peripateticks speak) acquired together with their Aerial nature, as inables
them to pierce through part of the Atmosphere, and overcome its resistance. Or
else, whether these steams being once raised above the Earth by their
agitation, have their ascent and sustentation aloft, rather promoted then
hindered by the Air: as the inferior parts of that, being thicker and heavier
then the superior, the steams can more easily continue for a while their
agitation upwards then downwards; And afterward are by the same fluidity and
thickness of the Air, carried to and fro in it, and kept from relapsing to the
Earth, as in the Sea water the saline parts are kept from subsiding by those
aqueous ones wherewith they are associated.

We hoped to illustrate this matter, by observing the motion of the smoke,
proceeding from kindled or flaming Bodies in our exhausted Receiver. But as we
formerly noted, upon the exsuction of the Air, the smoking of those Bodies
presently ceased. We had thoughts also of conveying into our Pneumatical Glass
a ^ot Iron, with some Body easy to be dissipated into smoke set upon it, but
considered, that neither was that way free from inconveniences; especially
this, that the hot Body would make the Imprisoned Air circulate within the
Receiver, and consequently make it questionable whether the ascent of the
steams would not be due to the new and acquired motion of the Air.

Wherefore I bethought my self of another way to satisfy in some measure my
curiosity, to wit, by means of a certain Liquor, which I called to mind that
some years ago I had (for a design that belongs not to our present purpose)
prepared; which, I suppose, I showed Your Lordship, and which had the luck to
be taken notice of by diverse very Ingenious and Famous Men. For this Liquor,
though most of its Ingredients be Metals, and all of them ponderous enough, is
yet of that nature, that whilst the Viol wherein it is kept is stopped (how
slight a Cover soever) both the Liquor and the Glass are transparent; and so is
that upper half of the Glass to which the Liquor reaches not. But as soon as
ever the stopple is taken out, and full access is given to the external Air,
both the inward part of the Cork, and the Liquor it self, do presently send
upwards, and scatter abroad a fume as thick and white, as if there were a
quantity of Alablaster-dust thrown up into the Air: And this smoking of the
Liquor lasts till my unwillingness to waste it, invites me stop it again, and
then the ascension of the fumes suddenly ceases, till the Viol be again
unstop'd.

This fuming Liquor then I thought would much conduce to the discovery I
desired to make, since it saved me the need of conveying any hot Body with it
into the Receiver, and would not darken it with fumes before the time.
Wherefore having tied to the Viol a great weight o^ Lead, to keep it from being
lifted up by the drawing out of the Cork; and having tied to the stopple one
end of a string, of which the other end was made fast to the Cover of the
Pneumatical Glass, the Liquor was carefully closed up after the wonted manner,
then the Air being diligently pumped out, the Viol was unstopt in the emptied
Receiver: and though immediately, upon the drawing out of the Cork, there
appeared to be as it were thrown up some white fumes, which seemed to proceed
from the Air before imprisoned in the Viol, and diffusing it self suddenly into
the capicity of the Receiver. Yet we afterward observed, as we expected, That
the fumes did not mount and disperse themselves as they use to do in the open
Air, but that, when by reason of the agitation of the Corpuscles of the Liquor,
which could not continue their motion in so narrow a space as the Viol afforded
them, and were therefore reduced to thrust one another out of it; when, I say,
by these assistances the fumes were ascended to the lip of the Viol, they
mounted no higher, but ran down along the outside of the Viol to the bottom of
it; and thence along, a long and inclining piece of Lead, on which the Viol
rested, like a little Stream (not very much bigger then a Swans Quill) whose
nature it seemd to emulate so well, that it quitted not the Viol till it was
come to the bottom of it, and then forsook it in such a manner as a stream of
Water of the same bigness would have done. And this stream lasted a pretty
while, and would probably have lasted longer, but that being loath to waste my
Liquor, I let in at the Stop-cock a pretty deal of the external Air;
notwithstanding which, finding after a while the stream did run afresh, though,
as it seemed, not altogether so copious as before: I let as much more Air, as
would, come in, and found (somewhat to my wonder) that though the stream
formerly mentioned dis-appear'd, yet there appeared not any white fumes to
arise, either from the Cork, or out of the Viol it self, no not when the Cover
was removed from the Receiver; though not only after a while there ascended
white Fumes from the Receiver: but having forthwith taken out the Viol into the
open Air, it emitted white exhalations as before; and having presently after
unstop'd it in an open Window, we found both it and the Cork immediately to send
forth a yet much more plentiful smoke. Though it be now diverse years since this
Numerical Liquor was prepared, after the manner mentioned either by Carneiades
or Eleutherius (for I do not well remember which) in those Dialogues concerning
Heat and Flame that have above been mentioned.

More Circumstances concerning these Fumes we might have observed, had we not
been deterred by an Indisposition in point of health, from having much to do
with steams of so dangerous a nature, as by that of the Ingredients of this
Liquor these seem likely to be of.

The Reflections that may be made upon this Experiment, we have not now the
leisure to prosecute, and therefore shall content our selves to recommend the
several Circumstances of it to Your Lordships serious consideration; and to
take notice (en passant) that steams in an ambient Body, or a medium thinner
then themselves, may both tend downwards, and otherwise emulate the nature of a
Liquor; which I therefore point at, that it may appear the less strange, if we
sometimes speak of the Atmosphere as of a kind of Liquor, in comparison of
that more thin and subtle Celestial Matter that surrounds it.

And though it might perchance suffice to have on this occasion intimated thus
much; yet, lest this way of speaking of the Atmosphere should be thought too
bold and extravagant, I am content to borrow an Experiment of the Discourse
formerly mentioned (touching fluidity and firmness) and subjoyn it here with
alterations suitable to the contrivance of our Engine; and this the rather,
because I hope it may conduce to the discovery of the nature of the Atmosphere:
for which reason it might have been annexed to what has been noted either upon
the first, or eighteenth Experiment, but that when they were written and sent
away, it came not into my mind. The Experiment then as we tried in our Engine,
was as follows.

Experiment 30.
WE took one of the small Receivers, often mentioned already, and into it we
conveyed a piece of well lighted Match; and letting it remain there till it had
filled the Receiver with smoke, we took it out and hastily closed again the
Receiver, that the smoke might not get away. Then staying awhile to let these
fumes leisurely subside, we found, as we expected, that after some time they
settled themselves in the lower half of the Receiver, in a darkish Body, leaving
the upper half of the Receiver transparent, and as to sight, full of naught but
clear Air. Now to manifest that this smoke thus settled emulated a Liquor, we
inclined the Engine that contained it, sometimes to one side, and sometimes to
the other; and observed the smoke to keep its surface almost Horizontal,
notwithstanding the stooping of the Vessel that held it, as Water or another
Liquor would in the like case have done. And if by a quicker rocking of the
Engine the smoke were more swiftly shaken, it would, like Water, either Vibrate
to and fro from one side to the other of the Glass, or else have its surface
manifestly curll'd with Waves, but preserve its self in an entire and distinct
Body from the incumbent Air; and being permitted to rest awhile, would soon
recover its former smooth and level superficies: If also the Key were turned
and the Valve unstopp'd, so that there was a free, though but a narrow passage
opened betwixt the external Air and the cavity of the Receiver, then would some
of this smoke fall down, as it were, in a stream into the subjacent Cylinder,
and a proportionate quantity of the outward Air, would manifestly ascend
through it into the incumbent Air, much after the same manner as if you invert
a Viol with a long Neck, and well filled with Red-Wine, into a Glass full of
fair water, you shall see the Water and Wine by degrees mingle with one
another; the one falling down as it were in little colored streams, and the
other ascending into its room in the like curled streams, sometimes preceded
by round parcels of water, which, by reason of their transparency, look almost
like bubbles. The other circumstances of this Experiment, belonging not all of
them to our present purpose, we shall content our selves with taking notice of
one which seems the most important, and may illustrate and confirm some
things formerly delivered. And it was, That if, when the superficies of our
Smoke lay smooth and horizontal, a hot iron were held near the outside of the
Receiver, the Neighboring part of the included fumes (for the rest did not
very much alter their former superficies) being rarefied by the heat, would
readily ascend in a large Pillar of smoke to the very top of the Receiver, yet
without seeming to loose a distinct superficies, or to be confounded with Air;
below which, upon the recess of the adventitious heat that by agitating it
impelled it upward, it would again subside.

All which being added to the late Experiment of the smoking Liquor, and to
what may be from that which has been elsewhere said, gathered to the same
purpose, will, I hope, keep it at least from appearing absurd: If since we see
that there is so great an inequality in the density and weight of Liquors, that
water is near 14 times thinner or lighter than Quicksilver of the same bulk,
and well dephlegm'd; Spirit of Wine yet much lighter than water; we venture to
speak sometimes of the Atmosphere, as if it were a peculiar kind of thin and
halituous Liquor (if I may so call it) much lighter than Spirit of Wine.

To these things I know not whether it will be requisite to add, that as we
lately took notice of conspicuous waves that appeared upon the superficies of
our agitated smoke. So some such thing may not absurdly be conjectured to
happen on the superficies of the Atmosphere, by those strange ruggednesses that
appear (especially in the Spring and Fall, when exhalations and vapors are
wont to ascend most plentifully) upon the Limb or Edge of the Rising and
Setting Sun. I speak thus diffidently upon this occasion because I know that
by the Fluctuation or Boiling of the Sun's own superficies diverse eminent
Mathematicians have plausibly enough (but how truly I leave your Lordship to
Judge) endeavored to give an Account of it. But if we will join with those
that have ascribed of late this Phenomenon to the Refraction the Sunbeams
suffer in our vapid Air; we may, as has been intimated, promote their Doctrine
by deducing from it, that probably the surface Atmosphere is oftentimes (if not
always) exceedingly curled or waved. And certainly it is somewhat wonderful
as well as very pleasant to behold, how, to him that looks upon the setting Sun
through a long and excellent Telescope, there will not only appear strange
inequalities in the edge of it (insomuch that I have often seen it more
indented than a Saw) but those inequalities will vanish in one place and
presently appear in another, and seem perfectly to move like waves succeeding
and destroying one another; save that their Motion oftentimes seems to be
quickest as if in that vast sea they were carried on by a current, or at least
by a tide. And this (as we else where note) appears to the eye not only when
it looks directly through the ^elescope upon the sun; but also when a large
and well defined image of the sun is by the same telescope brought into a
room and cast upon a sheet of white paper. But to insist on this were to
digress: and therefore I will proceed to experiments of another kind.

IT has been admired by very ingenious Men, Experiment 31.
that if the exquisitly polished surfaces of two flat pieces of marble be so
congruous to each other that from their mutual application there will result
an immediate contact, they will stick so fast together, that he that lifts up
the uppermost, shall, if the undermost be not exceeding heavy, lift up that
too, and sustain it aloft in the free air. A probable cause of this so close
adhesion we have elsewhere endeavored to deduce from the unequal pressure of
the Air upon the undermost stone; For the lower superficies of that stone being
freely exposed to the Air is pressed upon by it, whereas the uppermost surface,
being contiguous to the superior stone, is thereby defended from the pressure
of the Air which consequently pressing the lower stone against the upper,
hinders it from falling, as we have elsewhere more fully declared. Upon these
grounds we conjectured that in case we could procure two marbles exactly ground
to one another; and in case we could also sufficiently evacuate our Receiver,
the lower stone would, for want of the wonted and sustaining pressure of the
Air, fall from the upper. But the further trial of this Experiment we must,
unless your Lordship think it worth Your making at Paris, put off till a fitter
opportunity. For where we now are, we cannot procure marbles so exactly ground,
that they will sustain one another in the Air, above a minute or two, which is
a ^uch shorter time than the emptying of our Receiver requires. We did indeed
try to make our marbles stick close together by moistening their pollished
surfaces with rectified spirit of Wine, in regard that Liquor by its sudden
avolation from marble, if powered thereon, without leaving it moist or less
smooth, seemed unable to sustain them together after the manner of a glutinous
body, and yet seemed sufficient to exclude and keep out the Air. But this we
tried to little purpose, for having conveyed into the Receiver two black square
marbles (the one of two inches and a third in length or breadth, and somewhat
more than half an inch in thickness: The other of the same extent, but not
much above half so thick) fastened together by the intervention of pure Spirit
of Wine; and having suspended the thicker by a string from the cover, we found
not that the exsuction of the ambient Air would separate them, though a weight
amounting to four ounces were fastened to the lowermost marble to facilitate
it is falling off.

I would gladly have the Experiment tried with marble so well pollish't as to
need no Liquor whatsoever to make them cohere, and in a Vessel out of which the
Air may be more perfectly drawn than it was out of ours. But in the mean time
though we will not determine whether the Spirit of wine did contribute to the
strong cohesion of these stones, otherwise than by keeping even the subtl'st
parts of the Air from getting in between them, yet it seemed that the not
falling down of the lowermost marble might without improbability be ascribed
to the pressure of the Air remaining in the Receiver; which as we formerly
noted having been able to keep a Cylinder of water of above a Foot in height
from falling to the bottom of the Tube, may well enough be supposed capable of
keeping so broad a flat Marble from descending. And though this may seem a
strange proof of the strength of the spring of Air, even when rarefied, yet it
will scarce seem incredible to him that has observed how exceeding strong a
cohesion may be made betwixt broad Bodies, only by their immediate touching
one another. A notable instance of which, I have met with in this short
Narrative of the Learned Zucchius. P. Nic. Zucchius apud Schot: part 1. M^^:
Hydraulopne^^m.
Iuveni (says: he) lacertorum suorum robur: jactanti proposita semel est lamina
aerea, per ansam in medio extantem apprehensam elevanda e tabula marmorea, cui
optime congruebat: qui primo tanquam rem ludicram puero committendam
contempsit: tum instantibus amicis manum utramque admovens, cum luctatus diu
haerentem non removisset, excusavit impotentiam, objecta perigrini and
potentissimi glutinis interpositione, quo fortissime copulante nequiret
divelli; donec vidit ab alio per tabulam facilime laminam deduci, and ad
extrema productam, and actam in transversum inde deportari. But that we may
learn from our own Engine, that two Bodies, though they touch each other but in
a small part of their surfaces, may be made to cohere very strongly, only by
this, That the Air presses much more forcibly upon the inferior superficies of
the lowermost Body, then upon the upper surface of the same: We will hereunto
annex the following Experiment, though out of the order wherein they were made.

I remember I have, Experiment 32.
in a Discourse concerning Fluidity and Firmness, made mention of my having, by
the exsuction of the Air out of a Glass Vessel, made that Vessel take up, or
suck up (to speak in the common Language) a Body weighing diverse Ounces* but
our Engine affording us the opportunity of making considerabler Experiments of
that kind, We thought fit to make a further trial of the force of the
Atmosphere's pressure upwards, a^^er the following manner.

The Receiver having been exquisitely closed, as we have often taught already,
and the Air being in a good measure drawn out of it, it was removed from off
the Pump: and to the lower Branch of the Stop-cock, there was speedily applied
a tapering Valve of brass, such as is described in the 9th fig: made fit to go
with its narrower end into the cavity of the branch, and to fill the orifice of
that cavity with its broader part. And that the Air might not get in at the
little intervals, left here and there between the unequal surface of the stopple
and the internal edge of the branch, those intervals were stopped with a little
Diachylon. And to the door, or, (if you please) that part of the Valve which
was to move to and fro, and in this Experiment hung perpendicular to the
Horizon, there was, at a button of brass belonging to the Valve fastened a
broad scale wherein weights were to be put. This done the key of the Stop-cock
was turned, and the external Air beating like a forcible stream upon the
Valve to get in there, it did suddenly both shut the Valve and keep it shut so
strongly, that we had time to cast in diverse weights one after another into
the Scale; till at length the weight overpowering the pressure of the
Atmosphere, drew down the Valve by the stringes that tied the Scale to it, and
gave liberty to the outward Air to rush into the Receiver. Though another time,
when the Valve had but little weight hanging at it, being, by I know not what
accident, drawn down beneath its former place, it was by the impetuous current
of the outward Air suddenly impelled up into it again, and kept there. But in
the former Experiment it is remarkable, That though the Receiver were not well
exhausted, and though it leak'd whilst the rest of the Experiment was in
prosecution, and though the Valve whereon the Cylinder of the Atmosphere could
press, were not above an Inch and ^ half in Diameter, yet the weight kept up by
suction, or rather supported by the Air, namely the Valve, the Seal and what
was cast into it, being sent to be weighed, amounted to about ten of our common
Pounds, consisting of sixteen Ounces apiece: So that we doubted not but that,
had the Experiment been made with favorable Circumstances, the Air endeavoring
to press in at the Orifice of the Stop-cock, would have kept a very much
greater weight from falling out of it; I say the Air, because we found, by
trial purposely made, that neither the imperfect contact of the Valve and the
Stop-cock, nor the Diachylon that was employed to fill up the little Crannies
left betwixt them, were considerable in this Experiment; by which may among
other things appear, that I did not without cause in the above-named Discourse
touching Fluidity and Firmness, ascribe a great force, even to such Pillars of
Air as may be supposed to begin at the top of the Atmosphere, and recoyling
from the ground to terminate on the Bodies on which they press: since in the
present Experiment such a weight was supported by so slender a Cylinder of Air,
rebounding from the Earth to the Valve whereon ^t did bear.

Experiment 33.
BUt in regard we have not yet been able to empty so great a Vessel as our
Receiver, so well as we can the Cylinder it self; our Pump alone may afford us
a nobler instance of the force of the Air we live in, insomuch, that by help of
this part of our Engine, we may give a pretty near ghess at the strength of the
Atmosphere, computed as a weight. And the way may be this; First, the Sucker
being brought to move easily up and down the Cylinder, is to be impelled to the
top of it: Then the Receiver must be taken off from the Pump, that the upper
Orifice of the Cylinder remaining open, the Air may freely succeed the Sucker,
and therefore readily yield to its motion downward. This done, there must be
fastened to one of the Iron Teeth of the Sucker, such a weight as may just
suffice to draw it to the bottom of the Cylinder. And having thus examined what
weight is necess^ry to draw down the Sucker, when the Atmosphere makes no other
then the ordinary resistance of the Air against its descent; the Sucker must be
again forced to the top of the Cylinder, whose upper Orifice must now be
exactly closed; and then (the first weight remaining) we easily may, by hanging
a Scale to the above-metion'd Iron (that makes part of the Sucker) cast in
known weights so long, till in spite of the reluctance of the Atmostphere the
Sucker be drawn down. For to these weights in the Scale, that of the Scale it
self being added, the sum will give us the weight of a Column of Air, equal in
Diameter to the Sucker, or to the cavity of the Cylinder; and in length to the
height of the Atmosphere.

According to this method we did, since the writing of the last Experiment,
attempt to measure the pressure of the Atmosphere, but found it more difficult
then we expected, to perform it with any accurateness; for though by the help
of the Manubrium the Sucker moved up and down with so much ease, that one would
have thought that both its unequal surface, and the concave one of the Cylinder
were exquisitely smooth, and as it were slippery; yet when the Sucker came to
be moved only with a dead weight or pressure (that was not (like the force of
him that pumped) intended as occasion required) we found that the little
rufnesses, or other inequalities, and perhaps too, the unequal pressure of the
Leather against the cavity of the Cylinder, were able now and then to put a
stop to the descent or ascent of the Sucker, though a very little external help
would easily surmount that impedi^ment; and then the Sucker would, for a while,
continue its formerly interrupted motion, though that assistance were
withdrawn. But this discouragement did not deter us from prosecuting our
Experiment, and endeavoring, by a careful trial, to make it as instructive as
we could. We found then that a Leaden Weight, of 28 pounds (each consisting of
sixteen Ounces) being fastened to one of the teeth of the Sucker, drew it down
slowly enough; when the upper Orifice of the Cylinder was left open, though by
the help of Oil and Water, and by the frequent moving the Sucker up and down
with the Manubrium, its motion in the Cylinder had been before purposely
facilitated. This done, the upper Orifice of the Cylinder was very carefully
and closely stopped, the Valve being likewise shut with its wonted Stopple well
oiled, after the Sucker had been again impelled up to the top of the Cylinder.
Then to the precedent twenty eight pound, we added a hundred and twelve pounds
more; which forcing down the Sucker, though but leisurely, we took off the
twenty eight pound weight; and being unable to procure just such weights as we
would have had, we hung on, instead of it, one of fourteen pound, but found
that, with the rest, unable to carry down the Sucker. And to satisfy our
selves, and the Spectators, that it was the resistance of the ambient Air that
hindered the descent of so great a weight, after that we had tried that upon
unstopping the Valve, and thereby opening an access to the external Air, the
Sucker would be immediately drawn down: After this, I say, we made this further
Experiment, That having by a Man's strength forcibly depressed the Sucker to
the bottom of the Cylinder, and then fastened weights to the abovenamed Iron
that makes part of that Sucker, the pressure of the external Air finding little
or nothing in the cavity of the evacuated Cylinder to resist it, did presently
begin to impell the Sucker, with the weights that clogged it, toward the upper
part of the Cylinder, till some such accidental Impediment as we formerly
mentioned, checked its course; and when that rub, which easily might be, was
taken out of the way, it would continue its ascent to the top, to the no small
wonder of those Bystanders, that could not comprehend how such a weight could
ascend, as it were, of it self; that is, without any visible force, or so much
as Suction to lift it up. And indeed it is very considerable, that though
possibly there might remain some particles of Air in the Cylinder, after the
drawing down of the Sucker; yet the pressure of a Cylinder of the Atmosphere,
somewhat less then three Inches in Diameter (for, as it was said in the
description of our Engine, the cavity of the Cylinder was no broader) was able,
uncompress'd, not only to sustain, but even to drive up a weight of an hundred
and odd pounds: for besides the weight of the whole Sucker it self, which
amounts to some pounds, the weights annexed to it made up a hundred and three
pounds, besides an Iron Bar, that by conjecture weighed two pounds more; and
yet all these together fall somewhat short of the weight which we lately
mentioned, the resistance of the Air to have held suspended in the cavity of
the Cylinder.

And though (as has been already acknowledged) we cannot, peradventure, obtain
by the recited means so exact an account as were to be wished, of what we would
discover: Yet, if it serve us to ground Conjectures more approaching to the
Truth, then we have hitherto met with, I hope it will be considered (which a
famous Poet judiciously says) Est quodd^m prodire tenus, si non datur ultra.

Peradventure it will not be impertinent to annex to the other Circumstances
that have been already set down concerning this Experiment, That it was made in
Winter, in Weather neither Frosty nor Rainy, about the change of the Moon, and
at a place whose latitude is near about 51d and a half: For perhaps the force
or pressure of the Air may vary, according to the Seasons of the Year, the
temperature of the Weather, the elevation of ^he Pole, or the phases of the
Moon; (...), or even any of them seeming capable to alter either the height or
consistence of the incumbent Atmosphere: And therefore it would not be amiss if
this Experiment were carefully tried at several times and places, with variety
of Circumstances. It might also be tried with Cylin^ers of several Diameters,
exquisitely fitted with Suckers, that we might know what proportion several
Pillars of the Atmosphere bear, to the Weights they are able to sustain or lift
up; and consequently, whether the increase or decrement of the resistance of
the ambient Air, can be reduced to any regular proportion to the Diameters of
the Suckers: These, and diverse other such things which may be tried with this
Cylinder, might most of them be more exactly tried by the Torricellian
Experiment, if we could get Tubes so accurately blown and drawn, that the
Cavity were perfectly Cylindrical.

To dwell upon all the several Reflections, that a speculative Wit might make
upon this and the foregoing Experiment, (I mean the thirty third and thirty
second) would require almost a Volume; whereas our occasions will scarce allow
us time to touch upon three or four of the chief Inferences that seem deducible
from them, and therefore we shall content our selves to point at those few.

And first, as many other Phenomenon of our Engine, so especially, the two
lately mentioned Experiments, seem very much to call in question the received
Opinion of the Nature or Cause of Suction. For it is true indeed, that when men
suck, they commonly use some manifest endeavor by a peculiar motion of their
Mouths, Chests, and some other conspiring parts, to convey to them the body to
be sucked in. And hence perhaps they have taken occasion, to think that in all
Suction there must be some Endeavor or motion in the sucking to attract the
sucked Body. But in our last Experiment it appears not at (...)how the upper
part of the emptied Cylin^er that remains moveless all the (...), or any part
of it, does at all en^eavour to draw to it the depressed Sucker and the annexed
weights. And yet those that behold the ascension of the Sucker, without
seriously considering the cause of it, do readily conclude it to be raised by
something that powerfully Sucks or attracts it, though they see not what that
may be or where it lurks. So that it seems not absolutely necessary to
Suction, that there (...)Body, which is said to suck, an (...)or motion in
order thereunto, but rather that Suction may be at least for the most part
reduced to Pulsion, and its effects ascribed to such a pressure of the
neighboring air upon those Bodies (whther aerial, or of other Natures) that are
contiguous to the Body that is said to attract them, as is stronger than that
Substance which possesses the cavity of that sucking Body is able to resist. To
object here, that it was some particles of Air remaining in the emptied
Cylinder that attracted this weight to obviate a Vacuum, will scarce be
satisfactory; unless it can be clearly made out by what little hooks, or other
grappling Instruments, the internal Air could take hold of the Sucker; how so
little of it obtained the force to lift up so great a weight; and why also, upon
the letting in of a little more Air into one of our evacuated Vessels, the
attraction is, instead of being strengthened, much weakened, though, if there
were danger of a Vacuum before, it would remain, notwithstanding this ingress
of a little Air. For that still there remained in the capacity of the exhausted
Cylinder store of little rooms, or spaces empty or devoid of Air, may appear by
the great violence wherewith the air rushes in, if any way be opened to it. And
that it is not so much the decrement of the Vacuum within the cavity of the
vessel that debilitates the attraction, as the spring of the included air
(whose presence makes the decrement) that does it by resisting the pressure of
the external Air, seems probable, partly from the Disability of vacuities,
whether greater or lesser, to resist the pressure of the Air; and partly by
some of the Phenomenon of our Experiments, and particularly by this
Circumstance of the three and Thirtieth, that the Sucker was by the pressure of
the Ambient Air impell^d upwards, with its weight hanging at it, not only when
it was at the bottom of the Cylinder, and consequently left a great Vacuum in
the cavity of it; but when the Sucker had been already impel'd almost to the
top of the Cylinder, and consequently, when the Vacuum that remained was become
very little in comparison of that which preceded the beginning of the Sucker's
ascension.

In the next place, these Experiments may teach us, what to judge of the vulgar
Axiom received for so many Ages as an undoubted Truth in the Peripatetick
Schools; That Nature abhorres and flys a Vacuum, and that to such a degree,
that no humane power (to go no higher) is able to make one in the Universe;
wherein Heaven and Earth would change places, and all its other Bodies rather
act contrary to their own Nature, than suffer it. For, if by a Vacuum we will
understand a place perfectly devoid of all corporeal Substance, it may be
indeed then, as we formerly noted, be plausibly enough maintained, that there
is no such thing in the world; but that the generality of the Plenists,
(especially till of late years some of them grew more wary) did not take a
Vacuum in so strict ^ Sense, may appear by the Experiments formerly, and even
to this Day employed by the Deniers of a Vacuum, to prove it impossible that
there can be any made. For when they allege (for Instance) that when a man
sucks Water through a long Pipe, that heavy Liquor, contrary to its Nature,
ascends into the Sucker's mouth, only, to fill up that room made by the
Dilatation of his Breast and Lungs, which otherwise will in part be empty. And
when they tell us, that the reason why if a long Pipe exactly closed at one end
be filled top-ful of Water, and then inverted, no Liquor will fall out of the
open Orifice; Or, to use a more familiar Example, when they teach, that the
cause why in a Gardiner's watering Pot shaped conically, or like a Sugar Loaf
filled with Water, no Liquor falls down through the numerous holes at the
bottom, whilst the Gardener keeps his Thumb upon the Orifice of the little hole
at the top; and no longer, must be that if in the case proposed the Water
should descend, the Air being unable to succeed it, there would be left at the
upper and deserted part of the Vessel a Vacuum, that would be avoided if the
hole at the top were opened. When (I say) they allege such Experiments, the
Tendency of them seems plainly to import, that they mean, by a Vacuum, any
space here below that is not filled with a visible body, or at least with Air,
though it be not quite devoy'd of all Body whatsoever. For why should Nature,
out of her detestation of a Vacuum, make Bodies act contrary to their own
Tendency, that a place may be filled with Air, if its being so were not
necessary to the avoiding of a Vacuum.

Taking then a Vacuum in this vulgar and obvious sense, the common opinion
about it seems liable to several Exceptions, whereof some of the chief are
suggested to us by our Engine.

It will not easily then be intelligibly made out, how hatred or aversation,
which is a passion of the Soul, can either for a Vacuum, or any other object,
be supposed to be in Water, or such like inanimate Body, which cannot be
presumed to know when a Vacuum would ensue; if they did not bestirre themselves
to prevent it, nor to be so generous as to act contrary to what is most
conducive to their own particular preservation for the public good of the
Universe. As much then of intelligible and probable Truth, as is contained in
this Metaphorical Expression, seems to amount but to this; That by the Wise
Author of Nature (who is justly said to have made all things in number, weight,
and measure,) the Universe, and the parts of it, are so contrived, that it is
as hard to make a Vacuum in it, as if they studiously conspired to prevent it.
And how far this it self may be granted, deserves to be further considered.

For in the next place, our Experiments seem to teach, that the supposed
Aversation of Nature to a Vacuum is but accidental, or in consequence partly of
the Weight and Fluidity, or, at least, Fluxility of the Bodies here below; and
partly, and perhaps principally, of the Spring of the air, whose restless
endeavor to expand it self every way, makes it either rush in it self, or
compel the interposed bodies into all spaces, where it finds no greater
resistance than it can furmount. And that in those motions which are made ob
fugam Vacui (as the common phrase is) Bodies act without such generosity and
Consideration, as is wont to be ascribed to them, is apparent enough in our 32d
Experiment, where the torrent of Air, that seemed to strive to get into the
Emptied Receiver, did plainly prevent its own Design, by so impelling the
Valve, as to make it shut the only Orifice the Air was to get in at. And if
afterward either Nature, or the internal Air, had a design the external Air
should be attracted, they seemed to prosecute very unwisely by continuing to
suck the Valve so strongly, when they found that by that Suction the Valve it
self could not be drawn in: Whereas by forbearing to suck, the Valve would by
it is own weight have fallen down, and suffered the excluded Air to return
freely, and to fill again the exhausted Vessel.

And this minds me to take notice of another deficiency, pointed at by our
Experiments in the common Doctrine of those Plen^sts we reason with; for many
of those unusual motions in Bodies, that are said to be made to escape a
Vacuum, seem rather made to fill it. For why, to instance in our newly
mentioned Experiment, as soon as the Valve was depressed by the weight we hung
at it, should the Air so impetuously and copiously rush into the cavity of the
Receiver; it there were before no vacant room there to receive it? and if there
were, then all the while the Valve kept out the Air, those l^tle spaces in the
Receiver, which the corpuscles of that Air afterward filled, may be concluded
to have remained empty. So that the seeming violence, employed by Nature on the
occasion of the evacuating of the Vessel, seems to have come too late to hinder
the making of Vacuities in the Receiver, and only to have, as soon as we
permitted, filled up with Air those that were already made.

And as for the Care of the Public Good of the Universe ascribed to dead and
stupid Bodies, we shall only demand, why in our 19th Experiment, upon the
Exsuction of the ambient Air, the Water deserted the upper half of the
Glass-Tube; and did not ascend to fill it up, till the external Air was let in
upon it: whereas by its easy and sudden regaining that upper part of the Tube,
it appeared both that there was there much space devoid of Air, and that the
Water might with small or no resistance have ascended into it, if it could have
done so without the impulsion of the readmitted Air; which, it seems, was
necessary to mind the Water of its formerly neglected Duty to the Universe.

Nay, for ought appears, even when the excluded Air, as soon as 'twas
permitted, rusht violently into our exhausted Receiver, that flowing in of the
Air proceeded rather from the determinate Force of the Spring of the
neighboring Air, then from any endeavor to fill up, much less to prevent
vacuity's. For though when as much Air as will, is gotten into our Receiver our
present Opponents take it for granted that it is full of Air; yet if it be
remembered that when we made our 17th Experiment we crowded in more Air to our
Rece^^er than it usually holds; and if we also consider (which is much more)
the Air of the same consistence with that in our Receiver may in wind-guns, as
is known, and as we have tried, be compressed at least into half its wonted
room (I say at least, because some affirm, that the Air may be thrust into an
8th, or a yet smaller part of its ordinary extent) it seems necessary to admit
either a notion of condensation and rarefaction that is not intelligible, or
that in the capacity of our Receiver when presumed to be full of Air, there yet
remained as much of space as was taken up by all the aerial corpuscles
unpossessed by the Air. Which seems plainly, to infer that the Air that rushed
into our emptied vessel did not do it precisely to fill up the Vacuities of
it, since it left so many unfill'd, but rather was thrust in by the pressure of
the contiguous Air; which as it could not, but be always ready to expand it
self, where it found least resistance, so was it unable to fill the Receiver
any more, then until the Air within was reduced to the same measure of
Compactness with that without.

We may also from our two already often mentioned Experiments further deduce,
that, (since Natures hatred of a Vacuum is but Metaphorical and Accidental,
being but a consequence or result of the pressure of the Air and of the
Gravity, and partly also of the Fluxility of some other bodies) The power she
makes use of to hinder a Vacuum, is not (as we have elsewhere also noted) any
such boundless thing as men have been pleased to imagine. And the reason, why
in the former Experiments, mentioned in favor of the Plenists, Bodies seem to
forget their own Natures to shun a Vacuum, seems to be but this; That in the
alleged cases the weight of that Water that was either kept from falling or
impelled up, was not great enough to surmount the pressure of the contiguous
Air; which, if it had been, the Water would have subsided, though no Air could
have succeeded. For not to repeat that Experiment of Monsieur Paschal (formerly
mentioned to have been tried in a Glass exceeding 32 Foot) wherein the inverted
Pipe being long enough to contain a competent weight of Water, that Liquor
freely ran out at the lower Orifice: Not to mention this (I say) we saw in our
nineteenth Experiment, that when the pressure of the ambient Air was
sufficiently weakened, the Water would ^all out apace at the Orifice even of a
short Pipe, though the Air could not succeed into the room deserted by it. And
it were not amiss if trial were made on the tops of very high Mountains, to
discover with what ease a Vacuum could be made near the confines of the
Atmosphere, where the Air is probably but light in comparison of what it is
here below. But our present (three and thirtieth) Experiment seems to manifest,
not only that the power, exercised by Nature, to shun or replen^sh a Vacuum,
is limited, but that it may be determined even to Pounds and Ounces: Insomuch
that we might say, such a weight Nature will sustain or will lift up to resist
a Vacuum in our Engine; but if an Ounce more be added to that weight, it will
surmount Her so much magnified detestation of Vacuities. And thus, My Lord, our
Experiments may not only answer those of the Plenists, but enable us to retort
their Arguments against themselves: since, if that be true which they allege,
that, when Water falls not down according to its nature, in a Body wherein no
Air can succeed to fill up the place it must leave, the suspension of the
Liquor is made Ne detur Vacuum, (as they speak) it will follow, that if the
Water can be brought to subside in such a case, that deserted space may be
deemed empty, according to their own Doctrine; especially, since Nature (as
they would persuade us) bestirs her self so mightily to keep it from being
deserted.

I hope I shall not need to reminde Your Lordship, that I have all this while
been speaking of a Vacuum, not in the strict and Philosophical sense, but in
that more obvious and familiar one that has been formerly declared.

And therefore I shall now proceed to observe in the last place, that our 33d
Experiment affords us a notable proof of the unheeded strength of that pressure
which is sustained by the Corpuscles of what we call the free Air, and presume
to be uncompress'd. For, as fluid and yielding a Body as it is, our Experiment
teaches us, That even in our Climate, and without any other compression then
what is (at least here below) Natural, or (to speak more properly) ordinary to
it, it bears so strongly upon the Bodies whereunto it is contiguous, that a
Cylinder of this free Air, not exceeding three Inches in Diameter is able to
raise and carry up a weight, amounting to between sixteen and seventeen hundred
Ounces. I said, even in our Climate, Aere frigido existente ta^dius moventur
Automata qua^ (...)ca^ido, adeo quidem ut Automaton quod Bel^^e i^ No^a Zembla
agent^s in aedibus (...), omnino (...). Varenius Geo: Genevat lib. 111. Propo:
7. page 648.
because that is temperate enough; and as far as my observations assist me to
conjecture, the Air in many other more Northern Countries may be much thicker,
and able to support a greater weight: which is not to be doubted of, if there
be no mistake in what is Recorded concerning the Hollan^ers, that were forced
by the Ice to Winter in Nova Zembla, namely, That they found there so condensed
an Air, that they could not make their Clock go, even by a very great addition
to the weights that were wont to move it.

I suppose Your Lordship will readily take notice, that I might very easily
have discoursed much more fully and accuratly then I have done, against the
common opinion touching Suction, and touching natures hatred of a Vacuum. But I
was willing to keep my self to those considerations touching these matters,
that might be verified by our Engine it self, especially, since, as I said at
first, it would take up too much time to insist particularly upon all the
Reflections that may be made even upon our two last Experiments. And therefore,
passing to the next, I shall leave it to your Lordship to consider how far
these trials of ours will either confirm or disfavor the new Doctrine of
several eminent Naturalists, who teach, That in all motion there is necessarily
a Circle of Bodies, as they speak, moving together; and whether the Circles in
such motion be an Accidental or Consequential thing or no.

Experiment 34.
It Is a known thing to those that are convesant in the Hydrostaticks, That two
Bodies which in the Air are of equal weight, but of unequal bulk, as Gold, for
instance and Iron, being afterward weighed in Water, will lose their
Aequilibrium upon the change of the ambient Body, so that the Gold will sink
lower then the Iron; which, by reason of its greater bulk, has more Water to
lift or displace, that it may sink. By Analogy to this Experiment, it seemed
probable, that if two weights did in our Engine balance each other, when the
Glass was full of Air; upon the exsuction of a great part of that Air, so
notable a change in the consistence of the ambient Body, would make them lose
their Aequilibrium.

But being desirous at the same time to make a trial, for a certain Design that
needs not here be mentioned, we took for one of our weights a dry Bladder,
strongly tied at the Neck, and about half filled with Air (that being a weight
both flight, and that would expand it self in the evacuated Glass) and fastening
that to one part of our formerly mentioned exact balance (which turns with the
32d part of a Grain) we put a Metalline counterpoise into the opposite Scale;
and so the two weights being brought to an Aequilibrium, the balance was
conveyed into the Receiver, and suspended from the Cover of it.

But before we proceed further, we must note, That presently after the laying
on of the Cover, the Bladder appeared to preponderate, whereupon the Scales
being taken out, and reduced very near to an Aequilibrium, yet so, that a
little advantage remained on that side to which the Metalline weight belonged;
they were again let down into the Receiver, which was presently made fast with
Plaster, and a hot Iron: Soon after which, before the Pump was employed, the
Bladder seemed again a little to pre^onderate. Afterward the Air in the Glass
being begun to be drawn out, the Bladder began (according to the formerly
mentioned Observations) to expand it self, and manifestly to outweigh the
opposite weight, drawing down the Scale to which it was fastened very much
beneath the other, especially when the Air had swelled it to its full extent.

This done, we very leisurely let in the external Air; and observed, that upon
the flagging of the Bladder, the Scale whereto it was fastened, not only by
degrees returned to an Aequilibrium with the other, but at length was a little
outweighed by it.

But because we suspected there might have intervened some unheeded
Circumstance in this last part of the Experiment, we would not presently take
out the Scales, nor meddle with the Cover, but leaving things as they were, we
perceived, that after a little while the Bladder began again to preponderate,
and by degrees to sink lower and lower for diverse hours; wherefore, leaving the
Vessel closed up all night, we repaired to it next Morning, and found the
Bladder fallen yet lower. As if the very substance of it, had imbibed some of
the moisture wherewith the Air (the Season being very rainy) did then abound:
As Lutestrings, which are made likewise of the Membranous parts of Guts,
strongly wreathed, are known to swell so much, oftentimes as to break in rainy
and wet weather. Which conjecture is the more to be regarded, because
congruously unto it one of the company having a little warmed the Bladder,
found it then lighter then the opposite weight. But this must be looked upon as
a bare conjecture, till we can gain time to make further trials about it. In
the mean while we shall add, that without removing the Scales or the Cover of
the Receiver, we again caused the A^r to be drawn out (the weather contiing
very moist) but found not any manifest alteration in the balance; whether
because the Aequilibrium was too far lost to let a small change appear, we
determine not.

But to make the Experiment with a Body less apt to be altered by the
temperature of the Air, then was the Bladder; we brought the Scales again to an
Aequilibrium with two weights, whereof the one was of Lead, the other of Cork.
And having evacuated the Receiver, we observed, that both upon the exsuction,
and after the return of the Air, the Cork did manifestly preponderate, and much
more a while after the Air had been let in again, then whilst it was kept out.
Wherefore, in the room of the Cork, we substituted a piece of Char-coal, as
less likely to imbibe any moisture from the Air, but the event proved much the
same with that newly related: So that this Experiment seems more liable to
Casualties then any, excepting one we have made in our Engine. And as it is
difficult to prevent them, so it seems not very easy to discover the causes of
them, whereof we shall therefore at present forbear mentioning our Conjectures.

Experiment 35.
SOme Learned Mathematicians have of late ingeniously endeavored to reduce
Filters to Siphons; but still the true cause of the ascension of Water, and
other Liquors, both in Siphons and in Filtration, needing (for ought we have
yet found) a clearer Discovery and Explication, we were desirous to try whether
or no the pressure of the Air might reasonably be supposed to have either the
principal, or at least a considerable Interest in the raising of those Liquors.
But because we found that we could not yet so evacuate our Receiver, but that
the remaining Air, though but little in comparison of the exhausted, would be
able to impell the the Water to a greater height then is usual in ordinary
Filtrations: we resolved, instead of a List of Cotton, or the like Filtre, to
make use of a Siphon of Glass, delineated in the third Figure, consisting of
three pieces, two straight, and the third crooked to join them together; whose
Junctures were diligently closed, that no Air might find entrance at them. One
of the Legs of this Siphon was (as it should be) somewhat longer then the
other, and was pervious at the bottom of it only, by a hole almost as slender
as a hair, that the Water might but very leasurely drop out of it, lest it
should all run out before the Experiment were completed. The other and shorter
Leg of the Siphon was quite open at the end, and of the same wideness with the
rest of the Pipe, whose bore was about ^/4 of an Inch. The whole Siphon made up
of these several pieces put together, was designed to be about a Foot and a
half long; that the remaining Air, when the Vessel was exhausted after the
wonted manner, might not be able to impell the Water to the top of the Siphon;
which being inverted, was filled with Water, and of which the Shorter leg being
let down two or three Inches deep into a Glass Vessel full of Water, and the
upper parts of it being fastened to the inside of the Cover of the Receiver, we
proceeded to close first, and then to empty the Vessel.

The effect of the trial was this, that till a pretty quantity of Air had been
drawn out, the Water dropped freely out at the lower end of the lower leg of
the Siphon, as if the Experiment had been performed in the free Air. But
afterward, the Bubbles (as had been apprehended) began to disclose themselves
in the Water, and ascending to the top of the Siphon, imbodyed themselves there
into one, which was augmented little by little by the rising of other bubbles
that from time to time broke into it, but much more by its own dilatation,
which increased proportionably to the exsuction that was made of the Air out of
the Receiver. So that at length the Water in the shorter Leg of the Siphon was
reduced partly by the extraction of the ambient Air, and partly by the
expansion of the great Bubble at the upper part of the Siphon, to be but about
a Foot high, if so much; whereby it came to pass, that the course of the Water
in the Siphon was interrupted, and that which remained in the longer Leg of it,
continued suspended there without dropping any longer. But upon the turning of
the Stop-cock, the outward Air (being let into the Receiver) got into the
Siphon by the little hole at which the Water formerly dropped out; and traversing
all the incumbent Cylinder of Water, in the form of Bubbles, joined it self
with that Air that before possessed the top of the Siphon.

To prevent the inconveniences arising from these Bubbles, two Glass Pipes,
like the former, were so placed, as to terminate together in the midst of the
Belly of a Glass Viol, into whose Neck they were carefully fastened with Cement;
and then both the Viols and the Pipes being (which was not done without
difficulty) totally filled with Water, the Siphon described in the fifth
Figure, was placed with its shorter Leg in the Glass of Water, as formerly; and
the Experiment being prosecuted after the same manner, much more Air then
formerly was drawn out, before the Bubbles disclosing themselves in the Water
were able to disturb the Experiment; because that in the capacity of the Viol
there was room enough for them to stretch themselves, without depressing the
Water below the ends of the Pipes; and, during this time, the Water continued
to drop out of the propending Leg of the Siphon. But at length the Receiver
being very much empty^d, the passage of the Water through the Siphon ceased,
the upper ends of the Pipes beginning to appear a little above the remaining
Water in the Viol, whose dilated Air appeared likewise to press down the Water
in the Pipes, and fill the upper part of them. And hereby the continuity of the
Water, and so the Experiment it self being interrupted, we were invited to let
in the Air again, which, according to its various proportions of pressure to
that of the Air in the Viol and the Pipes, did for a good while exhibit a
pleasing variety of Phenomenon, which we have not now the leisure to rec^te.
And though upon the whole matter there seemed little or no cause to doubt, but
that, if the Bubbles had not disturbed the Experiment, it would manifestly
enough have appeared that the course of Water through Siphons depends upon the
pressure of the Air: yet we resolved, at our next leisure and convenience, to
try the Experiment again, with a quantity of Water before freed from Bubbles by
the help of the same Engine.

This occasion I have had to take notice of Siphons, puts me in mind of an
odd kind of Siphon that I caused to be made a pretty while ago, and which has
been since, by an Ingenious Man of Your acquaintance, communicated to diverse
others. The occasion was this, An eminent Mathematician told me one day, that
some inquisitive French Men (whose Names I know not) had observed, That, in
case one end of a slender and perforated Pipe of Glass be dipped in Water, the
Liquor will ascend to some height in the Pipe, though held perpendicular to the
plain of the Water. And, to satisfy me that he mis related not the Experiment,
he soon after brought two or three small Pipes of Glass, which gave me the
opportunity of trying it: though I had the less reason to distrust it, because
I remember I had often in the long and slender Pipes of some Weather Glasses,
which I had caused to be made after a somewhat peculiar fashion, taken notice
of the like ascension of the Liquor, though (presuming it might be casual) I
had made but little reflection upon it. But after this trial, beginning to
suppose, that though the Water in these Pipes that were brought me, rise not
above a quarter of an Inch, (if near so high) yet, i^ the Pipes were made
slender enough, the Water might rise to a very much greater height; I caused
several of them to be, by a dexterous Hand, drawn out at the flame of a Lamp,
in one of which that was almost incredibly slender, we found that the Water
ascended (as it were of it self) five Inches by measure, to the no small wonder
of some famous Mathematicians, who were Spectators of some of these
Experiments. And this height the Water reached to, though the Pipe were held in
as erected a posture as we could: For if it were inclined, the Water would fill
a greater part of it, though not rise higher in it. And we also found, that
when the inside of the Pipe was wetted beforehand, the Water would rise much
better then otherways: But we caused not all our slender Pipes to be made
straight, but some of them crooked, like Siphons: And having immersed the
shorter Leg of one of these into a Glass that held some fair Water, we found,
as we expected, that the Water arising to the top of the Siphon, though that
were high enough, did of it self run down the longer Leg, and continue running
like an ordinary Siphon. The cause of this ascension of the Water, appeared to
all that were present so difficult, that I must not stay to enumerate the
various Conjectures that were made at it, much less to examine them;
especially, having nothing but bare Conjectures to substitute in the room of
those I do not approve. We tried indeed, by conveying a very slender Pipe and a
small Vessel of Water into our Engine, whether or no the Exsuction of the
ambient Air would assist us to find the cause of the ascension we have been
speaking of: But though we employed red Wine instead of Water, yet we could
scarce certainly perceive through so much Glass, as was interposed betwixt our
Eyes and the Liquor, what happened in a Pipe so slender, that the redness of
the Wine was scarce sensible in it. But as far as we could discern, there
happened no great alteration to the Liquor* which seemed the less strange,
because the Spring of that Air that might depress the Water in the Pipe, was
equally debilitated with that which remained to press upon the surface of the
Water in the little Glass. Wherefore, in favor of his Ingenious Conjecture who
ascribed the Phenomenon, under consideration to the greater pressure made upon
the Water by the Air without the Pipe, then by that within it, (where so much
of the Water (consisting perhaps of Corpuscles more pliant to the internal
surfaces of the Air) was contiguous to the sides) it was shown, that in case
the little Glass Vessel that held the Water, of which a part ascended into the
slender Pipe, were so closed, that a Man might with his mouth suck the Air out
of it, the Water would immediately subside in the small Pipe. And this would
indeed infer, that it ascended before only by the pressure of the incumbent
Air: But that it may (how justly I know not) be objected, that peradventure
this would not happen, in case the upper end of the Pipe were in a Vacuum: And
that it is very probable the Water may subside, not because the pressure of the
internal Air is taken off by Exsuction, but by reason of the Spring of the
external Air, which impels the Water it finds in its way to the Cavity
deserted by the other Air, and would as well impell the same Water upwards, as
make it subside, if it were not for the accidental posture of the Glasses.
However, having not now leisure to examine any further this Matter, I shall
only mind Your Lordship, that if You will prosecute this Speculation, it will
be pertinent to find out likewise, Why the surface of Water (as is manifest in
Pipes) uses to be concave, being depressed in the middle, and higher on every
side? and Why in Quicksilver on the contrary, not only the surface is wont to
be very unequal, or swelling, in the middle; but if you dip the end of a slender
Pipe in it, the surface of the Liquor (as it is called) will be lower within the
Pipe, then without* Which Phenomenon, whether, and how far, they may be deduced
from the Figure of the Mercurial Corpuscles, and the Shape of the Springy
Particles of the Air, I willingly leave to be considered.

Experiment 36.
SEveral ways we have met with proposed, partly by the excellent Galileo, and
partly by other ingenious Writers, to manifest that the Air is not devoid of
weight; some of these, require the previous absence of the Air to be weighed;
and others, the violent condensation of it. But if we could lift a pair of
Scales above the Atmosphere, or place them in a Vacuum, we might there weigh a
parcel of Air it self, as here we do other Bodies in the Air, because it would
there be heavier then that which surrounds it, as are grosser Bodies we
commonly weigh, then the medium or ambient Air. Wherefore, though we have above
declined to affirm, that our Receiver, when emptyed, deserves the name of a
true Vacuum, and though we cannot yet perfectly free it from Air it self, yet
we thought fit to try how far the Air would manifest its gravity in so thin a
medium, as we could make in our Receiver, by evacuating it. We caused then to
be blown at the Flame of a Lamp, a Glass-bubble of about the bigness of a small
Hen-egge, and of an Oval form, save that at one end there was drawn out an
exceeding slender Pipe, that the Bubble might be sealed up, with as little
rarifaction as might be, of the Air included in the great or ovall Cavity of
it. This Glass being sealed, was fastened to one of the Scales of the exact
pair of Balances formerly mentioned; and being counterpois'd with a weight of
Lead, was conveyed into the Receiver, and closed up in it. The Beam appearing
to continue Horizontal, the Pump was set awork, and there scarce past above two
or three Exsuctions of the Air, before the Balance lost its Aequilibrium, and
began to incline to that side on which the Bubble was; which, as the Air was
further and further drawn out, did manifestly more and more preponderate, till
he that pumped began to grow weary of his Employment: after which the air
being leasurely let in again, the scales by degrees returned to their former
Aequilibrium. After that we took them out, and casting into that scale to
which the lead belonged three quarters of a grain, we conveyed the balance
into the Receiver, which being closed up, and exhausted as before, we observed,
that as the air was drawn out more and more, so the glass bubble came nearer
and nearer to an Aequilibrium with the other weight, till at length the beam
was drawn to hang horizontall; which (as we had found by another trial) we
could not bring it to do, when a quarter of a Grain more was added to the
scale, to which the lead belonged: though it seemed questionless, that if we
could have perfectly emptied the Receiver of the contained air, that included
in the bubble would have weighed above a grain, notwithstanding its having been
probably somewhat Rarified by the flame by the help of which, the bubble was
sealed up. Let us add, that on the regresse of the excluded air, the Lead, and
the weight cast into the same scale, did again very much preponderate.

We likewise conveyed into the Receiver, the same bubble, opened at the end of
the slender pipe above mentioned, but having drawn out the air, after the
accustomed manner, we found not as before, the bubble to outweigh the opposite
lead, so that by the help of our Engine, we can weigh the Air, as we weigh
other Bodies, in its natural or ordinary consistence, without at all
condensing it: Nay, which is remarkable, having conveyed a Lamb's bladder about
half full of Air into the Receiver, we observed, that though upon the
drawing out of the ambient air the imprisoned Air so expanded it self, as to
distend the Bladder so, as to seem ready to break it; yet this rarefied Air did
manifestly depress the Scale whereunto it was annexed.

Another thing, we must not forget to mention, that happend to us, whilst we
were making trials concerning the weight of the Air; namely, That having once
caused the Pump to be somewhat obstinately plied, to discover the better what
may be expected from the thinness of the medium in this Experiment; the
Imprisoned Air broke its brittle Prison, and throwing the greatest part of it
against the side of the Receiver, dash^d it against that th^ck Glass into a
multitude of pieces. Which Accident I mention, partly that it may confirm what
we delivered in our Reflections, upon the first Experiment, where we considered
what would probably be done by the Spring of the Air Imprisoned in such
Glasses, in case the ballancing pressure of the ambient Air were withdrawn; and
partly, that we may thence discern of how close a Texture Glass is, since so
very thin a film of Glass (if I may so call it) proved so impervious to the
Air, that it could not get away through the Pores, but was forced to break the
glass in pieces to free it self; and this, notwithstanding the time and
advantage it had to try to get out at the Pores. And this I mention, that
neither our Experiments, nor those of diverse Learned Men, might receive any
prejudice from an Experiment which I happened to make diverse years ago, and,
which having been so much taken notice of by curious Men, may be drawn to
countenance their erroneous Opinion, who would fain persuade us, That Glass is
penetrable by Air properly so called. Our Experiment was briefly this: We were
distilling a certain substance, that much abounded with subtle Spirits and
volatile Salt, in a strong Earthen-vessel of an unusual shape, to which was
luted a large Receiver, made of the courser sort of Glass, (which the
Tradesmen are wont to call Green-glass) but in our absence, the Fire, though
it were to be very strong, was by the negligence or mistake of those we
appointed to attend it, so excessively increased, that when we came back to the
Furnace we found the Spirituous and Saline Corpuscles poured out (if I may so
call it) so hot, and so copiously into the Receiver, that they made it all
opacous, and more likely to fly in pieces, then fit to be touched. Yet, being
curious to observe the effects of a Distillation, prosecuted with so intense
and unusual degree of heat, we ventured to come near, and observed, among other
things, that on the outside of the Receiver, at a great distance from the
juncture, there was settled a round whitish Spot or two, which at first we
thought might be some stain upon the Glass; but after, finding it to be in
diverse Qualities like the Oil, and Salt of the Concrete we were Distilling, we
began to suspect that the most subtle and fugitive parts of the impetuously
ascending Steams, had penetrated the substance (as they speak) of the Glass,
and by the cold of the ambient Air were condensed on the surface of it. And
though we were very backward to credit this suspicion, and therefore called in
an Ingenious Person or two, both to assist us in the Observation, and have
Witness of its event, we continued a while longer to watch the escape of such
unctuous Fumes, and upon the whole matter unanimously concluded, That all
things considered, the subtle parts of the distilled matter being violently
agitated, by the excessive heat had passed through the Pores of the Glass,
widen'd by the same heat. But this having never happened but once in any of the
Distillations we have either made or seen, though these be not a few, it is
much more reasonable to suppose, that the perviousness of our Receiver to a
Body much more subtle then Air, proceeded partly from the looser Texture of
that particular parcel of Glass the Receiver was made of (for Experience has
taught us, that all Glass is not of the same compactness and solidity) and
partly from the enormous heat, which, together with the vehement agitation of
the penetrant Spirits, opened the Pores of the Glass; then to imagine that such
a substance as Air, should be able to permeate the Body of Glass contrary to
the testimony of a thousand Chemical and Mechanical Experiments, and of many of
those made in our Engine, especially that newly recited: Nay, by our fifth
Experiment it appears, that a thin Bladder will not at its Pores give passage
even to rarefied Air. And on this occasion we will annex an Experiment, which
has made some of those we have acquainted with it, doubt, whether the
Corpuscles of the Air be not less subtle then those of Water.

But without examining here the reasonableness of that doubt, we will proceed
to recite the Experiment it self, which seems to teach, That though Air, when
sufficiently compressed, may perchance get entrance into narrower holes and
crannies then Water; yet unless the Air be forced in at such very little holes,
it will not get in at them, though they may be big enough to let Water pass
through them.

The Experiment then was this: I took a fair Glass Siphon, the lower end o^
whose longest Leg was drawn by degrees to such a slenderness, that the Orifice,
at which the Water was to fall out, would hardly admit a very small Pin: This
Siphon being inverted, the matter was so ordered that a little Bubble of Air
was intercepted in the slenderest part of the Siphon, betwixt the little hole
newly mentioned, and the incumbent Water, upon which, it came to pass, that the
Air being not to be forced through so narrow a passage, by so light a Cylinder
of Water, though amounting to the length of diverse Inches, as leaned upon it,
hindered the further Efflux of the Water, as long as I pleased to let it stay
in that narrow place: whereas, when by blowing a little at the wider end of the
Siphon, that little parcel of Air was forced out with some Water, the remaining
Water, that before continued suspended, began freely to drop down again as
formerly. And if you take a Glass Pipe, whether it be in the form of a Siphon,
or no, that being for the most part of the thickness of a Man's Finger, is yet
toward one end so slender, as to terminate in a hole almost as small as a
Horse-hair; and if you fill this Pipe with Water, you will find that Liquor to
drop down freely enough through the slender Extreme: But if you then invert the
Pipe, you will find that the Air will not easily get in at the same hole
through which the Water passed. For in the sharp end of the Pipe, some Inches
of Water will remain suspended, which it is probable would not happen, if the
Air could get in to succeed it, since if the hole were a little wider, the
Water would immediately subside. And though it be true, that if the Pipe be of
the length of many Inches, a great part of the Water will run down at the wider
Orifice, yet that seems to happen for some other reason, then because the Air
succeeds it at the upper and narrow Orifice, since all the slender part of the
Pipe, and perhaps some Inches more, will continue full of Water.

And on this occasion I remember, that whereas it appears by our fifth
Experiment, That the Aerial Corpuscles (except perhaps some that are
extraordinarily fine) will not pass through the Pores of a Lambs Bladder, yet
Particles of Water will, as we have long since observed, and as may be easily
tried, by very closely tying a little Alcalizate Salt (we used the Calx of
Tartar, made with Nitre) in a fine Bladder, and dipping the lower end of the
Bladder in Water; for if you hold it there for a competent while, you will
find that there will strain through the Pores of the Bladder Water enough to
dissolve the Salt into a Liquor.

But I see I am slipped into a Digression, wherefore I will not examine, whether,
the Experiment I have related, proceeded from hence, That the springy Texture
of the Corpuscles of the Air, makes them less apt to yield and accommodate
themselves easily to the narrow Pores o^ Bodies, then the more flexible
Particles of Water; or whether it may more probabiy be ascribed to some other
Cause. Nor will I stay to consider how far we may hence be assisted to ghess at
the cause of the ascension of Water in the slender Pipes and Siphons formerly
mentioned, but will return to our Bubble; and take notice, That we thought fit
also to endeavor to measure the capacity of the Bubble we had made use of, by
filling it with Water, that we might the better know how much Water answered in
weight to of a Grain of Air, but notwithstanding all the diligence that was
used to preserve so brittle a Vessel, it broke before we could perfect what we
were about, and we were not then provided of another Bubble fit for our turn.

The haste I was in, My Lord, when I sent away the last Sheet, made me forget
to take notice to you of a Problem that occurred to my thoughts, upon the
occasion of the slow breaking of the Glass Bubble in our evacuated Receiver.
For it may seem strange, since by our sixth Experiment it appears, that the
Air, when permitted, will by its own internal Spring expand it self twice as
much as Mersennus was able to expand it, by the heat even of a candent
Aeolipile: Yet the Elater of the Air was scarce able to break a very thin Glass
Bubble, and utterly unable to break one somewhat thicker, within whose cavity
it was imprisoned; whereas Air pent up and agitated by heat is able to perform
so much more considerable effects, that (not to mention those of Rarefaction
that are more obvious) the Learned Jesuit Cabaeus (he that writ of the
Lodestone) relates, P: Nicol: Cab: lib: 4. Met^o^* Aristot:
That he saw a Marble Pillar (so vast, that three men together with displayed
arms could not embrace it, and that 1000 Yoke of Oxen drawing it several ways
with all their strength, could not have torn it assunder) quite broken off in
the midst, by reason of some Wood, which happening to be burnt just by the
Pillar, the heat proceeding from the neighboring Fire, so rarefied some Air or
Spirituous Matter which was shut up in the cavities of the Marble, that it
broke through the solid Body of the Stone to obtain room to expand it self.

I remember I have taken notice that probably the reason why the included Air
did not break the hermetically sealed Bubbles that remained entire in our
emptyed Receiver, was, That the Air, being somewhat rarefied by the Flame
employed to close the Glass, its Spring, upon the recess of the heat, grew
weaker then before. But though we reject not that ghess, yet it will not in the
present case serve the turn, because that much smaller Glass bubbles exactly
closed, will, by the included Air (though agitated but by the heat of a very
moderate Fire) be made to fly in pieces. Whether we may be assisted to salve
this Problem, by considering that the heat does from within vehemently agitate
the Corpuscles of the Air, and add its assistance to the Spring they had
before, I shall not now examine: since I here but propose a Problem, and that
chiefly that by this memorable Story of Cabaeus, notice may be taken of the
prodigious power of Rarefaction, which hereby appears capable of performing
stranger things then any of our Experiments have hitherto ascribed to it.

We should hence, My Lord, immediately proceed to the next Experiment, but that
we think it fit, on this occasion, to acquaint You with what some former trials
(though not made in our Engine) have taught us, concerning what we would have
discovered by the newly mentioned Bubble that broke. And this the rather,
because (a great part of this letter supposing the gravity of the Air) it will
not be impertinent to determine more particularly then hitherto we have done,
what gravity we ascribe to it.

We took then an Aeolipile made of copper, weighing six ounces, five drachms,
and eight and forty grains: this being made as hot as we durst make it, (for
fear of melting the mettle, or at least the Sodar) was removed from the fire
and immediately stopped with hard wax that no Air at all might get in at the
little hole wont to be left in Aeolipiles for the fumes to issue out at: Then
the Aeolipile being suffered leasurely to cool was again weighed together with
the wax that stopped it, and was found to weigh (by reason of the additionall
weight of the wax) six ounces, six drachmes, and 39 grains. Lastly, the wax
being perforated without taking any of it out of the Scale, the external Air
was suffered to rush in (which it did with some noise) and then the Aeolipile
and wax, being again weighed amounted to six ounces, six drachmes, and 50.
grains. So that the Aeolipile freed as far as our fire could free it, from
it is Air, weighed less then it self when replenished with Air, full eleven
grains. That is, the Air containable within the cavity of the Aeolipile
amounted to eleven grains and somewhat more; I say somewhat more, because of
the particles of the Air, that were not driven by the fire out of the
Aeolipile. And by the way (if there be no mistake in the observations of the
diligent Mersennus) it may seem strange that it should so much differ from 2.
or 3. of ours; in none of which we could rarifie the Air in our Aeolipile
(though made red hot almost all over, and so immediately plunged into cold
water) to half that degree which he mentions, namely to 70. times it is
natural extent, unless it were that the Aeolipile he employed was able to
sustain a more vehement heat then ours (which yet we kept in so great an one,
that once the soder melting, it fell asunder into the two Hemispheres it
consists of.)

The forementioned way of weighing the Air by the help of an Aeolipile, seems
somewhat more exact then that which Mersennus used, In that in ours the
Aeolipile was not weighed, till it was cold; whereas in his, being weighed red
hot, it is subject to loose of it is substance in the cooling, for (as we have
elsewhere noted on another occasion) Copper heated red hot is wont in the
cooling to throw off little thin scales in such plenty, that having purposely
watched a Copper Aeolipile during its refrigeration, we have seen the place
round about it almost covered with those little scales it had every way
scattered: which, however they amount not to much, ought not to be over-looked,
when it is so light a body as Air, that is to be weighed. We will not examine,
whether the Aeolipile in cooling may not receive some little increment of
weight, either from the vapid or faline Steames that wander up and down in the
Air: But we will rather mention, that (for the greater exactness) we employed
to weigh our Aeolipile, both when filled only with Air and when replenisht
with Water, a pair of scales that would turn (as they speak) with the fourth
part of a grain.

As to the proportion of weight betwixt Air and Water, some learned men have
attempted it by ways so unaccurate that they seem to have much mistaken it.
For (not to mention the improbable accounts of Kepler and others.) The learned
and diligent Ricciolus, having purposely endeavored to investigate this
proportion by means of a thin bladder, estimates the weight of the Air to that
of the Water to be as one to ten thousand, or thereabouts. And indeed I
remember that having formerly, on a certain occasion, weighed a large bladder
full of Air, and found it when the Air was all squeesed out, to have contained
fourteen grains of Air. I found the same bladder afterward filled with water
to contain very near 14. pound of that liquor: according to which account, the
proportion of Air to Water was almost as a grain to a pound, that is, as one
to above 7600. To this we may add, that on the other side, Galileo himself
using another, but an unaccurate way too, defined the Air to be in weight to
Water, but as one to 4. hundred. But the way formerly proposed of weighing the
Air by an Aeolipile, seems by great odds more exact; and (as far as we
could guess) seemed to agree well enough with the experiment made in our
Receiver. Wherefore it will be best to trust our Aeolipile in the enquiry we
are about, and according to our observations the water it contained amounting
to one and twenty ounces and an half, and as much Air as was requisite to fill
it weighing eleven grains, the proportion in gravity of Air to Water of the
same bulk will be as one to 938. And though we could not fill the Aeolipile
with water, so exactly as we would, yet in regard we could not either as
perfectly as we would, drive the Air out of it by heat; we think the proportion
may well enough hold: but those that are delighted with round numbers (as the
phrase is) will not be much mistaken if they reckon water to be near a
thousand times heavier than Air. And (for further proof that we have made the
proportion betwixt these two bodies rather greater then lesser then indeed it
is; and also to confirm our former observation of the weight of the Air) we
will add, That, having another time put some Water into the Aeolipile before
we set it on the fire, that the copious vapors of the rarefied liquor might
the better drive out the Air, we found, upon trial carefully made, that when
the Aeolipile was refrigerated, and the included vapors were by the cold
turned again into water (which could not have happened to the Air, that the
preceding Steams expelled) the Air, when it was let in, increased the weight
of the Aeolipile as much as before, namely, Eleven Grains; though there were
already in it twelve Drachmes and a half, besides a couple of Grains of Water,
which remained of that we had formerly put into it to drive out the Air.

Mersennus indeed tells us, that by his account Air is in weight to Water, as 1
to 1356. And adds, that we may, without any danger, believe that the gravity of
Water to that of Air of a like bulk, is not less then of 1300 to 1. And
consequently, that the quantity of Air to a quantity of Water equiponderant
thereto, is as 1300 to 1. But why we should relinquish our own carefully
repeated trials, I see not. Yet I am unwilling to reject those of so accurate
and useful a Writer: And therefore shall propose a way of reconciling our
differing Observations, by presenting, that the discrepance between them may
probably arise from the differing consistence of the Air at London and at
Paris: For our Air being more cold and moist, then that which Your Lordship now
breaths, may be supposed also to be a fourth or fifth part more heavy. I leave
it to be considered, whether it be of any moment that our Observations were
made in the midst of Winter, whereas his were perhaps made in some warmer time
of the Year. But I think it were not amiss that, by the method formerly
proposed, the gravity of the Air were observed both in several Countries, and
in the same Country, in the several Seasons of the Year and differing
Temperatures of the Weather. And I would give something of value to know the
weight of such an Aeolipile as ours full of air in the midst of Winter in Nova
Zembla, if that be true which we formerly took notice of, namely, That the
Hollanders, who Wintered there, found that Air so thick that their Clock would
not go.

If Your Lordship should now ask me, if I could not by the help of these, and
our other Observations, decide the Controversies of our Modern Mathematicians
about the height of the Air or Atmosphere, by determining how high it does
indeed reach: I should answer, That though it seems easy enough to show that
diverse Famous and Applauded Writers have been mistaken in assigning the height
of the Atmosphere: Yet it seems very difficult precisely to define of what
height it is. And because we have hitherto but lightly touched upon a matter of
such importance, we presume it will not be thought impertinent, upon this
occasion, to annex something toward the Elucidation of it.

What we have already tried and newly set down, allows us to take it for
granted, that (at least about London) the proportion of gravity betwixt Water
and Air, of equal bulk, is as of a thousand to one.

The next thing therefore that we are to enquire after, in order to our present
design, is the difference in weight betwixt Water and Quicksilver: And though
this has been defined already by the Illustrious Verulam, and some other
inquisitive Persons, that have compared the weight of several Bodies, and cast
their Observations into Tables, yet we shall not scruple to annex our own
trials about it: Partly, because we find Authors considerably to dis-agree;
partly, because we used exacter Scales, and a somewhat more wary method then
others seem to have done: And partly also, because having prosecuted our
inquiry by two or three several ways; the small difference between the events
may assure us that we were not much mistaken.

We took then a Glass Pipe, of the form of an inverted Siphon, whose shape is
delineated in the sixteenth Figure: And pouring into it a quantity of Quick
silver, we held it so, that the superficies of the Liquor, both in the longer
and shorter leg, lay in a Horizontal Line, denoted in the Scheme by the pricked
Line OF; then pouring Water into the longer Leg of the Siphon, till that was
almost filled, we observed the surface of the Quicksilver in that leg to be,
by the weight of the Water, depressed, as from E to B; and in the shorter leg,
to be as much impelled upward as from F to G: Whereupon having formerly stuck
marks, as well at the point B, as at the opposite point D, we measur^d both the
distance DC to have the height of the Cylinder of Quicksilver, which was
rais^d above the Point D (level with the surface of the Quicksilver in the
other leg) by the weight of the Water, and the distance BA which gave us the
height of the Cylinder of Water. So that the distance D C amounting to 2 ^^/^^
Inches, and the height of the Water amounting 30 45/5^ Inches; and the whole
numbers on both sides, which the annexed Fractions being reduced to improper
Fractions of the same denomination, the proportion appeared to be (the
denominators beng left out as equal on both sides) as 121 to 1665; or by
reduction, as one to 13 ^^/^^.

Besides this unusual way of determining the gravity of some things, we
measured the proportion betwixt Quicksilver and Water, by the help of so exact
a balance, as looses its Aequilibrium by the hundredth part of a Grain. But
because there is wont to be committed an oversight in weighing Quicksilver and
Water, especially if the Orifice of the Vessel wherein they are put be any
thing wide, in regard that men heed not that the surface of Water in Vessels
will be concave, but that of Quicksilver, notably unequal or protuberant: To
avoid this usual oversight (I say) we made use of a glass bubble, blown very
thin at the Flame of a Lamp, that it might not be too heavy for the Balance,
and terminating in a very slender neck, wherein the concavity or convexity of a
Liquor could not be considerable: This Glass weighing 23 1/^ Grains, we filled
almost with Quicksilver, and fastening a mark over against the middle of the
protuberant Superficies as near as our Eyes could judge, we found that the
Quicksilver alone weighed 299 ^/3^ Grains: Then the Quicksilver being poured
out, and the same Glass being filled as full of common Water, we found the
Liquor to weigh 21 7/8 Grains. Whereby it appeared that the weight of Water to
Quicksilver, is as one to 13 ^9/2^: Though our Illustrious Verulam
(questionless not for want of Judgment or Care, but of exact Instruments)
makes the proportion betwixt those two Liquors to be greater then of 1 to 17.
And to add, that upon the by, since Quicksilver and well rectified Spirit of
Wine, are (how justly I say not) accounted, the one the heaviest, and the other
the lightest of Liquors; we thought to fill in the same Glass, and with the
same Scales to observe the difference betwixt them, which we found to be as of
1 to 16 64^/^0^4; whereby it appeared, That the difference betwixt Spirit of
Wine, that may be made to burn all away, (such as was ours) and common Water,
is as betwixt 1 and 1 ^^/^^^

We might here take occasion to admire, that though Water (as appeared by the
Experiment formerly mentioned of the Pewter Vessel) seems not capable of any
considerable condensation, and seems not to have interspersed in it any store
of Air; yet Quicksilver, of no greater bulk then Water, should weigh near
fourteen times as much. But having only pointed at this as a thing worthy of
consideration, we will proceed in our inquiry after the height of the
Atmosphere: And to avoid the trouble of Fractions, we will assume that
Quicksilver is fourteen times as heavy as Water, since it wants so little of
being so.

Wherefore having now given us the proportion of Air to Water, and Water to
Quicksilver, it will be very easy to find the proportion betwixt Air and
Quicksilver, in case we will suppose the Atmosphere to be uniformly of such a
consistence as the Air we weighed here below. For since our Engine has
sufficiently manifested that it is the Aequilibrium with the external Air, that
in the Torricellian Experiment keeps the Quicksilver from subsiding; And
since, by our accurate Experiment formerly mentioned, it appears that a
Cylinder of Mercury, able to balance a Cylinder of the whole Atmosphere,
amounted to near about thirty Inches; and since, consequently we may assume the
proportion of Quicksilver to Air to be as fourteen thousand to one; it will
follow, that a Cylinder of Air, capable to maintain an Aequilibrium, with a
Mercurial Cylinder of two Foot and an half in height, must amount to 35000 Feet
of our English Measure; and consequently (reckoning five Foot to a Geometrical
Pace, and one thousand such Paces to a Mile) to seven full Miles.

But this (as we lately intimated) proceeds upon the supposition, that the Air
is every where of the same consistence that we found it near the surface of the
Earth; but that cannot with any safety be concluded, not only for the reason I
find to have been taken notice of by the Ancients, and thus expressed in Seneca:
Omnis Aer (says he) quo propior est terris hoc crassior; Senec: Not: quest:
lib. 4. cap. 10.
quemadmodum in aqua and in omni humore faex ima est, ita in Aere spississima
quaeque desidunt; but much more, because the springy Texture of the Aerial
Corpuscles, makes them capable of a very great compression, which the weight of
the incumbent part of the Atmosphere is very sufficient to give those that be
undermost and near the surface of the Earth. And if we recall to mind those
former Experiments, whereby we have manifested, That Air, much rarefied without
heat, may easily admit a further rarefaction from heat; and that the Air, even
without being expanded by heat, is capable of being rarefied to above one
hundred and fifty times the extent it usually possesses here below; How can it
be demonstrated that the Atmosphere may not, for ought we know, or at least for
ought can be determined by our Statical and Mechanical Experiments, rise to the
height of Five and twenty German Leagues, if not of some hundred of common
Miles?

And this conjecture it self may appear very injurious to the height whereunto
Exhalations may ascend, Ricciol: Alma: Nov: Tom: 2. lib. 10 sect. 6. prop. 50.
Ex magnan: lib. 1. Perspective horarie prop: 38.
if we will allow that there was no mistake in that strange Observation made at
Tolous in a clear Night in August, by the diligent Mathematician Emanuel
Magnan, and thus Recorded by Ricciolus, (for I have not at hand the Authors own
Book) Vidit (says he) ab hor a undecima post meridiem usque ad mediam noctem
Luna infra horizontem posit a, nubeculam quandam lucidam prope Meridianum fere
usque ad Zenith diffusam quae consideratis omnibus non poterat nisi a sole
illuminari; ideoque altior esse debuit tota umbra terrae. Addit (continues
Ricciolus) simile quid evenisse Michaeli Angelo Riccio apud Sabinos versanti
nempe viro in Mathesi eruditissimo.

Various Observations made at the feet, tops, and interjacent parts of high
Mountains, might perchance somewhat assist us to make an estimate in what
proportion, if in any certain one, the higher Air is thicker then the lower,
and ghess at the dis-form consistence, as to laxity and compactness of the Air
at several distances from us. And if the difficulties about the refractions of
the Celestial Lights, were satisfactorily determined, that might also much
conduce to the placing due limits to the Atmosphere (whose Dimensions those
Observations about Refractions seem hitherto much to contract.) But for the
present we dare not pronounce any thing peremptorily con^cerning the height of
it, but leave it to further inquiry: contenting our selves to have manifested
the mistake of diverse eminent Modern Writers, who will not allow the Atmosphere
to exceed above two or three Miles in height (as the Famous Kepler will not the
Aer refractivus) and to have rendered a reason why in the mention we made in the
Notes upon the first Experiment, touching the height of the Atmosphere, we
scrupled not to speak of it, as if it might be many Miles high.

WE will now proceed to recite a Phenomenon, Experiment 37.
which, though made amongst the first, we thought fit not to mention till after
many others, that we might have the opportunity to observe as many
Circumstances of it as we could, and so present Your Lordship at once, most of
what we at several times have taken notice of concerning so odd a Phenomenon.

Our Engine had not been long finished, when, at the first leisure we could
steal from our occasions to make trial of it, we caused the Air to be pumped
out of the Receiver; and whilst I was busied in entertaining a Learned Friend
that just then came to visit me, an Ingenious Bystander, thought he perceived
some new kind of Light in the Receiver, of which giving me hastily notice, my
Friend and I presently observed, that when the Sucker was drawn down,
immediately upon the turning of the Key, there appeared a kind of Light in the
Receiver, almost like a faint flash of Lightening in the Daytime, and almost
as suddenly did it appear and vanish. Having, not without some amazement,
observed diverse of these Apparitions of Light, we took notice that the Day was
clear, the hour about ten in the Morning, that the only Window in the Room
faced the North; and also, that by interposing a Cloak, or any opacous Body
between the Receiver and the Window, though the rest of the Room were
sufficiently enlightened, yet the flashes did not appear as before, unless the
opacous Body were removed. But not being able on all these Circumstances to
ground any firm Conjecture at the cause of this surprising Phenomenon, as soon
as Night was come, we made the Room very dark; and plying the Pump as in the
Morning, we could not, though we often tried, find, upon the turning of the
Key, so much as the least glimmering of Light; whence we inferred, that the
flash appearing in the Receiver, did not proceed from any new Light generated
there, but from some reflections of the light of the Sun, or other Luminous
Bodies placed without it; though whence that Reflection should proceed, it
posed us to conjecture.

Wherefore the next Morning, hoping to inform our selves better, we went about
to repeat the Experiment, but though we could as well as formerly exhaust the
Receiver, though the place wherein we made the trial was the very same; and
though other Circumstances were resembling, yet we could not discover the least
appearance of Light all that Day, nor on diverse others on which trial was again
fruitlesly made; nor can we to this very time be sure a Day before hand that
these Flashes will be to be seen in our great Receiver. Nay, having once found
the Engine in a good humor (if I may so speak) to show this trick, and sent
notice of it to our Learned Friend Doctor Wallis, who expressed a great desire
to see this Phenomenon, though he were not then above a Bow-shoot off, and
made haste to satisfy his Curiosity; yet by that time he was come, the thing
he came for was no longer to be seen; so that having vainly endeavored to
exhibit again the Phenomenon in his presence, I began to apprehend what he
might think of me, when unexpectedly the Engine presented us a flash, and after
that a second, and as many more, as sufficed to satisfy him that we might very
well confidently relate, that we have our selves seen this Phenomenon, though
not confidently promise to show it others.

And this unsuccessfulness whereto our Experiment is liable, being such, that
by all our watchfulness and trials, we could never reduce it to any certain
Rules or Observations; since in all constitutions of the Weather, times of the
Day, etc. it will sometimes answer, and sometimes dis-appoint our Expectations;
We are much discouraged from venturing to frame an Hypothesis to give an
account of it: which if the Experiment did constantly succeed, might the more
hopefully be attempted; by the help of the following Phenomenon laid together:
some of them produced upon trials purposely made to examine the validity of the
conjectures, other trials had suggested.

First then we observed, that the Apparition of Light may be made as well by
Candlelight, as by Daylight; and in whatever position the Candle be held, in
reference to the Receiver, as on this or that hand of it, above it, beneath it,
or any other way, provided the Beams of Light be not hindered from falling upon
the Vessel.

Next, we noted that the flash appears immediately upon the turning of the Key,
to let the Air out of the Receiver into the emptied Cylinder, in so much that I
remember not that when at any time in our great Receiver, the Stop-cock was
opened before the Cylinder was exhausted (whereby it came to pass that the Air
did rather descend, then rush into the Cylinder) the often mentioned flash
appeared to our eyes.

Yet, we further observed, that when instead of the great Receiver we made use
of a small Glass, not containing above a pound and a half of Water, the
Phenomenon might be exhibited though the Stop-cock were open, provided the
Sucker were drawn nimbly down.

We noted too, that when we began to empty the Receiver, the appearances of
Light were much more conspicuous then toward the latter end, when little Air
at a time could pass out of the Receiver.

We observed also, that when the Sucker had not been long before well Oiled,
and instead of the great Receiver, the smaller Vessel abovementioned was
employed; We observed, I say, that then, upon the opening of the Stop-cock, as
the Air descended out of the Glass into the emptied Cylinder, so at the same
time there ascended out of the Cylinder into the Vessel a certain Steam, which
seemed to consist of very little Bubbles, or other minute Corpuscles thrown up
from the Oil, rarefied by the attrition it suffered in the Cylinder. For at the
same time that these Steams ascended into the Glass, some of the same kind
manifestly issued out like a little Pillar of Smoke at the Orifice of the
Valve, when that was occasionally opened. And these Steams frequently enough
presenting themselves to our view, we found, by exposing the Glass to a clear
Light, that they were wont to play up and down ^n it, and so by their
whiteishness, to emulate in some measure the apparition of Light.

For we likewise sometimes found, by watchful observation, that when the Flash
was great, not only at the very instant the Receiver lost of its transparency,
by appearing full of some kind of whitish substance; but that for some short
time after the sides of the Glass continued somewhat opacous, and seemed to be
darkened, as if some whitish Steam adhered to the inside of them.

He that would render a Reason of the Phenomenon, whereof all these are not
all the Circumstances, must do two things; whereof the one is difficult, and
the other little less then impossible: For he must give an Account not only
whence the appearing whiteness proceeds, but wherefore that whiteness does
sometimes appear and sometimes not.

For our part, we freely confess our selves at a loss about rendering a
Reason of the less difficult part of the Problem: And though Your Lordship
should even press us to declare what Conjecture it was, that the above-recited
Circumstances suggested to us, we should propose the thoughts we then had, no
otherwise then as bare Conjectures.

In case then our Phenomenon had constantly and uniformly appeared, we should
have suspected it to have been produced after some such manner as follows.

First, we observed that, though that which we saw in our Receiver seemed to be
some kind of Light, yet it was indeed but a whiteness which did (as has
already been noted) opacate (as some speak) the inside of the Glass.

Next we considered, that our common Air abounds with Particles or little
Bodies, capable to reflect the Beams of Light. Of this we might easily give
diverse proofs, but we shall name but two: The one, that vulgar observation of
the Motes that appear in Multitudes swimming up and down in the Air, when the
Sunbeams shooting into a Room, or any other shady Place discover them, though
otherwise the eye cannot distinguish them from the rest of the Air: The other
proof we will take from what we (and no doubt very many others) have observed,
touching the Illumination of the Air in the Night. And we particularly
remember, that, being at some distance from London one Night, that the People,
upon a very well-come Occasion, testified their Joy by numerous Bon-fires;
though, by reason of the Interposition of the Houses, we could not see the
Fires themselves, yet we could plainly see the Air all enlightened over and
near the City; which argued, that the lucid Beams shot upwards from the Fires,
met in the Air with Corpuscles opacous enough to reflect them to our Eyes.

A third thing that we considered, was, That white may be produced (without
excluding other ways, or denying invisible Pores in the solidest Bodies) when
the continuity of a Diaphanous Body happens to be interrupted by a great number
of Surfaces, which, like so many little Looking-glasses, do confusedly
represent a multitude of little and ^eemingly contiguous Images of the elucid
Body. We shall not insist on the explanation of this, but refer You for it to
what we have said in another Paper (touching Colors.) But the Instances that
seem to prove it are obvious: For Water or whites of Eggs beaten to froth, do
lose their transparency and appear white. And having out of one of our lesser
Receivers carefully drawn out the Air, and so ordered it, that the hole by
which the Water was to get in, was exceeding small, that the Liquor might be
the more broken in its passage through it, we observed with pleasure, That, the
Neck being held under Water, and the little hole newly mentioned being opened,
the Water that rushed in was so broken, and acquired such a multitude of new
Surfaces, that the Receiver seemed to be full rather of Milk then Water. We
have likewise found out, That by heating a lump of Crystal to a certa^n degree,
and quenching it in fair Water, it would be discontinu'd by such a multitude of
Cracks, (which created new Surfaces within it) that though it would not fall
asunder, but retain its former shape, yet it would lose its transparency, and
appear white.

Upon these Considerations, My Lord, and some others, it seemed not absurd to
imagine, That upon the rushing of the Air out of the Receiver into the emptied
Cylinder, the Air in the Receiver being suddenly and vehemently expanded, the
Texture of it was as suddenly altered, and the parts made so to shift places
(and perhaps some of them to change postures) as during their new and vehement
Motion and their varied Situation, to disturb the wonted continuity and so the
Diaphaneity of the Air; which (as we have already noted) upon its ceasing to be
a transparent Body, without the interposition of colored things, must easily
degenerate into white.

Several things there were that made this Conjecture seem the less improbable.
As first, That the whiteness always appeared greater when the Exsuction began
to be made, whilst there was store of Air in the Receiver, then when the Air
was in great part drawn out. And next, That, having exhausted the Receiver, and
applied to the hole in the Stop-cock a large bubble of clear Glass, in such a
manner, that we could at pleasure let the Air pass out at the small Glass into
the great one, and easily fill the small one with Air again, We observed with
pleasure, That upon the opening the passage betwixt the two Glasses, the Air in
the smaller having so much room in the greater to receive it, the Dissilition
of that Air was so great, that the small Viol seemed to be full of Milk; and
this Experiment we repeated several times. To which we may add, That, having
provided a small Receiver, whose upper Orifice was so narrow that I could stop
it with my Thumb, I observed, that when upon the Exsuction of the Air the
capacity of the Glass appeared white, if by a sudden removal of my Thumb I let
in the outward Air, that whiteness would immediately vanish. And whereas it may
be objected, That in the Instance formerly mentioned, Water turning from
perspicuous to white, there intervenes the Air, which is a Body of a
Heterogeneous nature, and must turn it into Bubbles to make it lose its
transparency. We may borrow an Answer from an Experiment we deliver in another
Treatise, where we teach how to make two very volatile Liquors, which being
gently put together are clear as Rock-water, and yet will almost in a moment,
without the sub-ingression of Air to turn them into Bubbles, so alter the
disposition of their insensible parts, as to become a white and consistent
Body. And this happens not as in the precipitation of Benjamin, and some other
Resinous Bodies, which being dissolved in Spirit of Wine, may, by the effusion
of fair Water, be turned into a seemingly Milky substance. For this whiteness
belongs not to the whole Liquor, but to the Corpuscles of the dissolved Gum,
which after a while sub^iding leave the Liquor transparent, themselves only
remaining white: Whereas in our case, it is from the varied texture of the whole
formerly transparent fluid Body, and not from this or that part that this
whiteness results: For the Body is white thorowout, and will long continue so;
and yet may, in process of time, without any addition, be totally reduced into
a transparent Body as before.

But besides the Conjecture insisted on all this while, we grounded another
upon the following Observation, which was, That having conveyed some smoke into
our Receiver placed against a Window, we observed, that upon the exsuction of
the Air, the Corpuscles that were swimming ^n it, did manifestly enough make
the Receiver seem more opacous at the very moment of the rushing out of the
Air: For considering that the whiteness, whose cause we enquire of, did but
sometimes appear, it seemed not impossible but that at such times the Air in
the Receiver might abound with Particles, capable of reflecting the Light in
the manner requisite to exhibit a white color, by their being put into a
certain unusual Motion. As may be in some measure illustrated by this, That the
new motion of the freshly mentioned Fumes, made the inside of the Receiver
appear somewhat darker then before: And partly by the nature of our formerly
mentioned smoking Liquor, whose parts though they seemed transparent whilst
they composed a Liquor, yet when the same Corpuscles, upon the unstopping of
the Glass, were put into a new motion, and disposed after a new manner, they
did opacate that part of the Air they moved in, and exhibited a greater
whiteness then that which sometimes appears in our Pneumatical Vessel. Nor
should we content our selves with this single Instance, to manifest, That
little Bodies, which being ranged after one manner, are Diaphanous and
Colorless, may, by being barely agitated, dispersed, and consequently
otherways ranged, exhibit a color, if we were not unwilling to rob our
Collection of Experiments concerning Colors.

But, My Lord, I foresee You may make some Objections against our proposed
ghess, which perhaps I shall scarce be able to answer, especially, if You
insist upon having me render a Reason why our Phenomenon appears not
constantly.

I might indeed answer, that probably it would do so, if instead of our great
Receiver we use such a small Viol as we have lately mentioned, wherein the
Dissilition of the Air being much greater, is like to be the more conspicuous:
Since I remember not that we ever made our trial with such small Vessels,
without finding the expected whiteness to appear. But it would remain to be
explicated, why in our great Receiver the Phenomenon should sometimes be seen,
and oftentimes not appear. And though that Conjecture which we last made should
not be rejected, yet if we were further pressed to assign a reason why the Air
should abound with such Particles, as we there suppose, more at one time then
another, we are not yet provided of any better Answer, then this general one,
That the Air about us, and much more that within the Receiver, may be much
altered by such causes as few are aware of: For, not to repeat those probable
Arguments of this Assertion which we have occasionally mentioned here and there
in the former part of this Epistle, we will here set down two or three
Instances to verify the same Proposition. First, I find that the Learned
Josephus Acosta, Joseph: Acosta: ^at: and Mo^: Hyst: of the Indles, l^b. 3.
cap. 9.
among other Judicious Observations he made in America, has this concerning
the Effects of some Winds; There are (says he) Winds which naturally trouble
the Water of the Sea, and make it green, and black; others, clear as Crystal.
Next, we have observed, That though we conveyed into the Receiver our Scales,
and the Pendula formerly mentioned, clean and bright; yet after the Receiver
had been emptied, and the Air let in again, the gloss or luster both of the
one, and of the other, appeared tarnish'd by a beginning rust. And in the last
place, we will subjoyn an Observation we made some Years ago, which has been
heard of by diverse Ingenious Men, and seen by some of them: We had, with pure
Spirit of Wine, drawn a Tincture out of a certain Concrete which uses to be
reckoned among Mineral Bodies; And this Tincture being very pure and
transparent, we did, because we put a great value upon it, put into a Crystal
Viol which we carefully stopped, and locked up in a Press among some other
things that we specially prized. This Liquor being a Chemical Rarity, and
besides, very defecate and of a pleasing Golden Color; we had often occasion
to look upon it, and so to take notice, that one time it seemed to be very much
troubled, and not clear as it was wont to be: Whereupon we imagined, that
though it would be something strange, yet it was not impossible that some
Precipitation of the Mineral Corpuscles was then happening, and that thence the
Liquor was opacated; but, finding after some days that though the expected
Precipitation had not been made, yet the Liquor, retaining its former vivid
Color, was grown clear again as before; we somewhat wondered at it, and
locking it up again in the same Press, we resolved to observe, both whether the
like changes would again appear in our Tincture; and whether in case they
should appear, they would be ascribable to the alterations of the Weather. But
though, during the greatest part of a Winter and a Spring, we took pleasure to
observe, how the Liquor would often grow turbid, and after a while clear again:
Yet we could not find that these Mutations depended upon any that were
manifest in the Air, which would be often dark and clouded, when the Tincture
was clear and transparent; as on the other side, in clear Weather the Liquor
would appear sometimes troubled, and more opacous. So that being unable to give
an account of these odd changes in our Tincture (which we suppose we have not
yet lost, though we know not whether it have lost its fickle Nature) either by
those of the Air, or any thing else that occurred to our thoughts; we could not
but suspect that there may be in diverse Bodies, as it were Spontaneous
Mutations, that is, such changes as depend not upon manifest Causes. But, My
Lord, what has been all this while said concerning our Phenomenon, is offered
to You, not as containing a satisfactory Account of it, but to assist You to
give Your self one.

WE took a Glass Vessel, Experiment 38.
open at the top, and into it we put a mixture of Snow and common Salt (such a
mixture as we have in another Treatise largely discoursed of) and into the
midst of this mixture we set a Glass, of a Cylindrical form, closely stopped
at the lower end with Plaster, and open at the upper, at which we filled it
with common Water. These things being let down into the Receiver, and the Pump
being set awork, the Snow began to melt somewhat faster then we expected;
whether upon the account of the Exsuction of the Air, or because there was but
little of the Snow, or whether for any other Reason, it appeared doubtful. But
however, by that time the Receiver had been considerably exhausted, which was
done in less then of an hour, we perceived the Water near the bottom of the
Glass Cylinder to Freeze, and the Ice by a little longer stay, seemed to
increase, and to rise somewhat higher then the surface of the surrounding
Liquor, whereinto almost all the Snow and Salt were resolved. The Glass being
taken out, it appeared that the Ice was as thick as the inside of the Glass it
filled, though into that I could put my Thumb. The upper surface of the Ice was
very concave, which whether it were due to any unheeded accident, or to the
exsuction of the Air, we leave to be determined by further trial. And lastly,
the Ice held against the Light, appeared not destitute of Bubbles, though some
Bystanders thought they were fewer then would have been found if the Water had
been frozen in the open Air. The like Experiment we tried also another time in
one of our small Receivers, with not unlike success.

And on this occasion, My Lord, give me leave to propose a Problem, which shall
be this: Whence proceeds that strange force that we may sometimes observe in
frozen Water, to break the Bodies that Imprison it; though hard and solid? That
there is such a force in Water exposed to Congelation, may be gathered not
only from what may be often observed in Winter, of the bursting of Glasses too
close stopped; filled with Water or aqueous Liquors, but by Instances as much
more considerable as less obvious. For I remember, that an Ingenious
Stone-cutter not long since complained to me, That sometimes, through the
negligence of Servants, the Rain being suffered to soak into Marble Stones, the
supervening violent Frosts would burst the Stones, to the Professors no small
damage. And I remember another Tradesman, in whose House I had Lodgings, was
last Winter complaining, that even Implements made of Bell-metal, being
carelessly exposed to the wet, have been broken and spoiled by the Water, which,
having gotten into the little Cavities and Crannies of the Metal, was there
afterward frozen and expanded into Ice. And to these Relations, In l^b. 4.
(...).
we can add one of the formerly mentioned Cabaeus's, whereby they not only
may be confirmed, but are surpassed: For he tells us, That he saw a huge Vessel
of exceeding hard Marble, split asunder by congel'd Water, whose Rarefaction,
says our Author, proved so vehement, that the hardness of the Stone yielded to
it; and so a Vessel was broken, which would not have been so by 100 Yoke of
Oxen drawing it several ways. I know, My Lord, that to solve this Problem, it
will be said, That Congelation does not (as is commonly, but erroneously
presumed) reduce water into less room then it possessed before, but rather
makes it take up more. And I have elsewhere proved by particular Experiments,
That whether or no Ice may be truly said to be Water rarefi'd (for that seems
questionable) it may be said to take up more room then the Water did before
Glaciation. But though we grant that freezing makes Water swell, yet, how Cold
(which in Weather-Glasses manifestly condences the Air) should expand either
the Water, or the intercepted Air so forcibly, as to perform such things as we
have newly related, will yet remain a Problem.

Experiment 39.
WE took an Oval Glass, clear and (least it should break) pretty strong, with a
short Neck at the obtuser end; through this Neck, we thrust almost to the
bottom, a Pipe of Glass, which was closely Cemented to the newly mentioned
Neck, the upper part of which Pipe, was drawn in some places more slender then
a Crows Quill, that the changes of the Air in that Glass Egg might be the more
conspicuous; Then there was conveyed into the Glass five or six Spoonfulls of
Water, part of which, by blowing Air into the Egg, was raised into the
abovementioned slender part of the Pipe, so that the Water was interposed
between the external Air, and that included in the Egg. This Weather-glass
(delineated in the fourteenth Figure) was so placed, and closed up in the
cavity of one of our small Receivers, that only the slender part of the Pipe,
to the height of four or five Inches, passing through a hole in the Cover,
remained exposed to the open Air.

The Pump being set a work, upon the Exsuction of the Air, the Water in the
Pipe descended about a quarter of an Inch, and this upon two or three
reiterated trials; which seemed sufficiently to argue that there was no heat
produced in the Receiver upon the Exsuction of the Air: For even a little heat
would probably have been discovered by that Weather-glass, since upon the bare
application of my hand to the outside of the Receiver, the warmth having after
some time been communicated or propagated through both the Glasses, and the
interval betwixt them to the Imprisoned Air, did so rarifie that, as to enable
it, by pressing upon the subjacent Water, to impel that in the Pipe very many
times as far as it had fallen downwards upon the Exsuction of the Air.

Yet shall not we conclude, that in the cavity of the Receiver the cold was
greater after the Exsuction of the Air then before.

For if it be demanded what then could cause the forementioned subsiding of
the Water? it may be answered, That probably it was the reaching of the Glass
Egg, which, upon the Exsuction of the ambient Air, was unable to resist
altogether as much as formerly the pressure of the included Air, and of the
Atmosphere, which* by the intervension of the Water, pressed upon its concave
surface: Which seemed probable, as well by what was above delivered, in the
Experiment about the breaking of the Glass by the force of the Atmosphere; as
by this notable. Circumstance (which we diverse times observed) That when by
drawing the Air out of the Receiver, the Water in the Pipe was subsided, upon
the readmission of the external Air to press against the unequal surface of the
Egg, the Water was presently re-impell'd to its former height: Which would
perhaps appear less strange to Your Lordship, if You had yet seen what we have
heretofore taught in another Treatise concerning the Spring that may be
discovered in Glass, as rigid and ^^^lexible a Body as it is generally
esteemed. And in the mean while it may se^ve the turn to cause a Glass Egg to
be blown exceeding thin, and then, having broken it, try how far you can by
degrees bend some narrow parts of it; and how readily, upon the removal of what
kept it bent, it will restore it self to its former state or posture. But to
return to our Experiment, From thence it seems probable, either that there
succeeds no Body in the room of the Air drawn out of our Receiver, or that it
is not every Matter that is subtle enough readily to pass through the Pores of
Glass, that is always agitated enough to produce Heat where ever it is
plentifully found. So that if no Vacuum be to be admitted, this Experiment
seems to invite us to allow a great disparity, either as to bulk, or as to
agitation, or as to both, betwixt some parts of the Etherial Substance, and
those that are wont here below to produce Heat and Fire.

We tried also what Operation the drawing out of the Air would have upon
Camphire, that being a Body, which, though not a Liquor, consists of such
Volatile or Fugitive parts, that without any greater agitation then that of the
open Air it self, they will copiously fly away. But we found not that even
this loose Body was sensibly altered by the Exsuction of the ambient Air.

Experiment 40.
IT may seem well worth trying, whether or no in our exhausted Glass the want of
an ambient Body, of the wonted thicness of Air, would disable even light and
little Animals, as Bees, and other winged Insects, to fly. But though we
easily foresaw how difficult it would be to make such an Experiment; yet not to
omit our endeavors, we procured a large Flesh-fly, which we conveyed into a
small Receiver. We also another time shut into a great Receiver a Humming Be,
that appeared strong and lively, though we had rather have made the trial with
a Butter-fly, if the cold Season would have permitted us to find any. Since
the writing of this XLth Experiment, we procured a white Butter-Fly, and
enclosed it in one of our smaller Receivers, where, though at first he
fluttered up and down, yet presently, upon the exsuction of the Air, he fell
down as in a ^woo^, retaining no other mot^on then some little trembling of the
wings.
The Fly, after some Exsuctions of the Air, dropped down from the side of the
Glass whereon she was walking: But, that the Experiment with the Be might be
the more instructive, we conveyed in with her a bun^^e of Flowers, which
remained suspended by a string near the upper part of the Receiver: And having
provoked the Be, we excited her to fly up and down the capacity of the
Vessel, till at length, as we desired, she lighted upon the Flowers; whereupon
we presently began to draw out the Air, and observed, That though for some time
the Be seemed to take no notice of it, yet within awhile after she did not
fly, but fall down from the Flowers, without appearing to make any use of her
Wings to help her self* But whether this fall of the Be, and the other Insect,
proceeded from the mediums being too thin for them to fl^e in, or barely from
the weakness, and as it were swooning of the Animals themselves* you will
easily gather from the following Experiment.

Experiment 41.
TO satisfy our selves in some measure, about the account upon which
Respiration is so necessary to the Animals, that Nature has furnished with
Lungs, we took (being then unable to procure any other lively Bird, small
enough to be put into the Receiver) a Lark, one of whose Wings had been broken
by a shot, of a Man that we had sent to provide us some Birds for our
Experiment; but nothwithstanding this hurt, the Lark was very lively, and did,
being put into the Receiver, diverse times spring up in it to a good height. The
Vessel being hastily, but carefully closed, the Pump was diligently plied, and
the Bird for a while appeared lively enough; but upon a greater Exsuction of
the Air, she began manifestly to droop and appear sick, and very soon after was
taken with as violent and irregular Convulsions, as are wont to be observed in
Poultry, when their heads are wrung off: For the Bird threw her self over and
over two or three times, and dyed with her Breast upward, her Head downwards,
and her Neck awry. And though upon the appearing of these Convulsions, we
turned the Stop-cock, and let in the Air upon her, yet it came too late;
whereupon, casting our eyes upon one of those accurate Dyals that go with a
Pendulum, and were of late ingeniously invented by the Noble and Learned
Hugenius, we found that the whole Tragedy had been concluded within ten Minutes
of an hour, part of which time had been employed in cementing the Cover to the
Receiver. Soon after we got a Hen-sparrow, which being caught with Bird-lime
was not at all hurt; when we put her into the Receiver, almost to the top of
which she would briskly raise her self, the Experiment being tried with this
Bird, as it was with the former, she seemed to be dead within seven minutes,
one of which were employed in cementing on the Cover: But upon the speedy
turning of the Key, the fresh Air flowing in, began slowly to revive her, so
that after some pantings she opened her eyes, and regained her feet, and in
about a of an hour, after threatened to make an escape at the top of the Glass,
which had been unstopp'd to let in the fresh Air upon her: But the Receiver
being closed the second time, she was killed with violent Convulsions, within
five Minutes from the beginning of the Pumping.

A while after we put in a Mouse, newly taken, in such a Trap as had rather
affrighted then hurt him; whilst he was leaping up very high in the
Receiver, we fastened the Cover to it, expecting that an Animal used to live
in narrow holes with very little fresh Air, would endure the want of it
better then the lately mentioned Birds: But though, for a while after the Pump
was set avvork, he continued leaping up as before; yet 'tvvas not long ere he
began to appear sick and giddy, and to stagger, after which he fell down as
dead, but without such violent Convulsions as the Birds died with. Whereupon,
hastily turning the Key, we let in some fresh Air upon him, by which he
recovered, after a while, his senses and his feet, but seemed to continue weak
and sick: But at length, growing able to skip as formerly, the Pump was plied
again for eight minutes, about the middle of which space, if not before, a
very little Air by a mischance got in at the Stop-cock; and about two minutes
after that, the Mouse diverse times leaped up lively enough, though after about
two minutes more he fell down quite dead, yet with Convulsions far milder then
those wherewith the two Birds expired. This alacrity so little before his
death, and his not dying sooner then at the end of the eighth minute, seemed
ascribable to the Air (how little soever) that slipped into the Receiver. For the
first time, those Convulsions (that, if they had not been suddenly remedied,
had immediately dispatched him) seized on him in six minutes after the Pump
began to be set awork. These Experiments seemed the more strange, in regard,
that during a great part of those few minutes the Engine could but considerably
rarefie the Air (and that too, but by degrees) and at the end of them there
remained in the Receiver no inconsiderable quantity; as may appear by what we
have formerly said of our not being able to draw down Water in a Tube, within
much less then a Foot of the bottom: with which we likewise considered, that by
the exsuction of the Air and interspersed Vapors, there was left in the
Receiver a space some* hundreds of times exceeding the bigness of the Animal,
to receive the fuliginous Steams, from which, expiration discharges the Lungs;
and, which in the other cases hitherto known, may be suspected, for want of
room, to stifle those Animals that are closely pent up in too narrow
Receptacles.

I forgot to mention, that having caused these three Creatures to be opened, I
could, in such small Bodies, discover little of what we sought for, and what we
might possibly have found in larger Animals; for though the Lungs of the Birds
appeared very red, and as it were inflamed, yet that color being usual enough
in the Lungs of such winged Creatures, deserves not so much our notice, as it
does, That in almost all the destructive Experiments made in our Engine, the
Animals appeared to die with violently Convulsive Motions: From which, whether
Physicians can gather any thing toward the Discovery of the Nature of
Convulsive Distempers, I leave to them to consider.

Having proceeded thus far, though (as we have partly intimated already) there
appeared not much cause to doubt, but that the death of the forementioned
Animals proceeded rather from the want of Air, then that the Air was
over-clogg'd by the steams of their Bodies, exquisitely pent up in the Glass;
yet I, that love not to believe any thing upon Conjectures, when by a not
over-difficult Experiment I can try whether it be True or no, thought it the
safest way to obviate Objections, and remove Scruples, by shutting up another
Mouse as close as I could in the Receiver, wherein it lived above three
quarters of an hour; and might probably have done so much longer, had not a
Virtuoso of quality, who in the mean while chanced to make me a Visit, desired
to see whether or no the Mouse could be killed by the exsuction of the ambient
Air, whereupon we thought fit to open, for a little while, an intercourse
betwixt the Air in the Receiver, and that without it, that the Mouse might
thereby (if it were needful for him) be refresh^d, and yet we did this without
uncementing the Cover at the top, that it might not be objected, that perhaps
the Vessel was more closely stopped for the exsuction of the Air then before.

The Experiment had this event, that after the Mouse had lived ten Minutes,
(which we ascribed to this, that the Pump, for want of having been lately
Oiled, could move but slowly, and could not by him that managed it, be made to
work as nimbly as it was wont) at the end of that time he died with Convulsive
Fits, wherein he made two or three bounds into the Air, before he fell down
dead.

Nor was I content with this, but for Your Lordships further satisfaction, and
my own, I caused a Mouse, that was very hungry, to be shut in all Night, with a
Bed of Paper for him to rest upon: And to be sure that the Receiver was well
closed, I caused some Air to be drawn out of it, whereby, perceiving that there
was no sensible leak, I presently readmitted the Air at the Stop-cock, left
the want of it should harm the little Animal; and then I caused the Engine to
be kept all Night by the Fire side, to keep him from being destroyed by the
immoderate cold of the Frosty Night. And this care succeeded so well, that the
next Morning I found that the Mouse not only was alive, but had devoured a
good part of the Cheese that had been put in with him. And having thus kept him
alive full twelve hours, or better, we did, by sucking out part of the Air,
bring him to droop, and to appear swelled; and by letting in the Air again, we
soon reduced him to his former liveliness.

A Digression containing some Doubts touching Respiration.
I Fear Your Lordship will now expect, that to these Experiments I should add
my Reflections on them, and attempt, by their assistance, to resolve the
Difficulties that occur about Respiration; since at the beginning I
acknowledged a further Enquiry into the Nature of that, to have been my Design
in the related Trials. But I have yet, because of the inconvenient Season of
the Year, made so few Experiments, and have been so little satisfied by those I
have been able to make, that they have hitherto made Respiration appear to me
rather a more, then a less Mysterious thing, then it did before. But yet, since
they have furnished me with some such new Considerations, concerning the use of
the Air, as confirms me in my Diffidence of the Truth of what is commonly
believed touching that matter; That I may not appear sullen or lazy, I am
content not to decline employing a few hours in setting down my Doubts, i^
presenting Your Lordship some Hints, and in considering whether the Trials made
in our Engine, will at least assist us to discover wherein the Deficiency lies
that needs to be supplied.

And this, My Lord, being all my present Design, I suppose You will not expect
that (as if You knew not, or had forgotten what Anatomists are wont to teach) I
should entertain You with a needless Discourse of the Organs of Respiration,
and the variety of their Structure in several Animals; though if it were
necessary, and had not been performed by others, I should think, Gale^us de
usu, Part: lib: 3.
with Galen, that by treating of the Fabrics of living Bodies, I might compose
Hymns to the wise Author of Nature, who, in the excellent contrivance of the
Lungs, and other parts of (those admirable Engines) Animals, manifests himself
to be indeed what the Eloquent Prophet most justly speaks him, Wonderful in
Council, Isa. 28.29.
and excellent in working.

Nor shall we any further meddle with those Controversies so much agitated
among the Moderns, namely, Whether the motion of the Lungs in Respiration be
their own, or but consequent to the motion of the Thorax, Diaphragme, and (as
some Learned Men would have it) the Abdomen; And, Whence it is that the Air
swells the Lungs in Inspiration, any further then they may receive light from
our Engine: But that it may appear what kind of service it is that may be
expected from it on this occasion, we must premise a few Words to show wherein
the strength of the Objection we are to answer, lies: In favor then of those
that would have the Lungs rather passive then active in the business of
Respiration, it may against the common opinion be alleged, That as the Lungs
being destitute of Muscles and of Fibers, are unfit to dilate themselves, so it
appears, that without the motion of the Thorax they would not be filled with
Air. Since as our Learned Friend Dr. Highmore has well (and congruously, to
what our selves have purposely tried) observed, if a live Dog have a great
wound made in his Chest, the Lobes of the Lungs on that side of the Mediasti^um
will subside and lie still; the Thorax and the Lobes on the other side of the
Mediastinum, continuing their former motion. And if suddenly at once the
Muscles of the Chest be on both sides dissected, upon the Ingress of the Air,
the whole Lungs, though untouched, will remain moveless, at least, as to any
expansion or contraction of their substance.

To which we may add the Observation of the diligent Bartholinus, who affirms
the like of the Diaphragme also, namely, That it being wounded, the Lungs will
fall together, and the Respiration cease, which my Experiments oppose not,
provided the Wound be any thing great. And indeed the Diaphragme seems the
principal Instrument of ordinary and gentle Respiration, although to restrained
Respiration (if I may so call it) the intercostal Muscles, and perhaps some
others may be allowed eminently to concur. But the chief of the Controversies
formerly pointed at, is not yet decided, namely, what it is that conveys the
Air into the Lungs. For when, to counterballance all that has been alleged,
those that plead for the Lungs, demand what it is that should bring the Air
into the Lungs, if themselves do not attract it, their Antagonists disagree
about the Reply. For when to this question some of the best Modern Philosophers
answer, that by the dilatation of the Chest the contiguous Air is thrust away,
and that pressing upon the next Air to it, and so onwards, the Propulsion is
continued till the Air be driven into the Lungs, and so dilate them: When this
(I say) is answered, it is Objected even by Bartholine himself, as a convincing
Reply, that, according to this Doctrine, a Man could not fetch his Breath from
a great Vessel full of Air, with a slender Neck, because, that when his Mouth
covers the Orifice of the Neck, the dilatation of his Thorax could not propell
the Air in the Vessel into his Lungs, by reason of its being separated by the
enclosing Vessel from the ^mbient Air; and yet, say they, Experience witnesses
that out of such a Vessel a Man may suck Air. But of this difficulty our Engine
furnishes us with an easy Solution, since many of the former Experiments have
manifested, That in the case proposed, there needs not be made any (though it is
true that in ordinary Respiration there is wont to be made some) propulsion of
the Air by the swelling Thorax or Abdomen into the Lungs; since upon the bare
Dilatation of the Thorax, the Spring of that internal Air, or halituous
substance that is wont to possess as much of the Cavity of the Chest as the
Lungs fill not up, being much weakened, the external and contiguous Air must
necessarily press in at the open Winde-Pipe into the Lungs, as finding there
less resistance then any where else about it.

And hence (by the way) we may derive a new assistance to judge of that famous
Controversy disputed among Naturalists and Physicians, ever since Galens time,
some maintaining that the Chest, with the contained Lungs, may be resembled to
a pair of Bellows, which comes therefore to be filled because it was dilated:
And others pleading to have the comparison made to a Bladder, which is
therefore dilated because it is filled. For as to the Thorax, it seems evident
from what has been lately said, that it, like a pair of Bellows, happens to be
partly filled with Air, but because it was dilated: But as for the Lungs
themselves, who want Fibers to distend them, they may fitly enough be compared
to a Bladder; since they are dilated by being filled namely, by that Air which
rushes into them upon the dilatation of the Chest, in whose increased Cavity it
finds (as we freshly noted) less resistance to its Spring then elsewhere. And
this brings into my mind that strange Observation of Nicolaus Fontanus, a
Physician at Amsterdam, Fontanus apud Bartholin: lib. 2. cap. 9.
who testifies, That in a Boy of the same Town, four years old, there was
found, instead of Lungs, a certain Membranous Bladder; which being filled with
Wind, and furnished with little Veins, had its origination from the Windpipe
it self; which being supposed true, how well it will agree with most of the
Opinions touching Respiration, I leave to be considered.

And thus may the grand Objection of Bartholine, and others, be answered: But I
leave to Anatomists to consider what is to be said to some Observations that
seem to contradict those Anatomical Experiments already mentioned: Such was
particularly that which I remember I have read in Sennertus (from the
observation of his Farther-in-law Schato) of a Melancholy Student, who having
stabbed himself, and pierced the Diaphragme in the thinner or tendonous part
(called by many the Nervous Circle) lived seven Months after he had so wounded
himself, though after his death (preceded by violent Vomitings) the Wound
(perchance dilated by those strainings) appeared so great, that the whole
Stomach was found to have got in by it into the left side of the Thorax. And
such also was the accident that happened to a Noble Man, whom I remember I have
seen, and who is yet alive, in whose Chest there has, for these many years,
remained a hole so great, that the motion of his Heart may be perceived by it.
These (I say) and some other Observations, I shall now forbear to insist on,
because I hold it not unfit, before we come to consider the use of Respiration,
that we acquaint Your Lordship with an Ingenious Conjecture, that was made at
the cause of the hasty death of the Animals our Engine killed: namely, That it
was not the want of Air that destroyed them, but the Pressure of the innate Air
in the cavity of the Chest; as if the Spring of this Air being no longer
counterballanc'd by the ambient Air, was thereby become so strong, that it kept
the Thorax forcibly distended, and hindered its wonted contraction; and so
compressed the Lungs and their Vessels, as to obstruct the Circulation of the
Blood. And this Conjecture, as it is specious enough, so I might have admitted
it for true, but that I considered, that (not to mention that one, especially
of the Animals killed in our Engine, seemed manifestly for a pretty while, and
not long before he died, to move his Thorax, as if he exercised Respiration)
the diligent Wallaeus relates, That he diverse times observed, in the Dissection
of live Bodies, that the Membrane that invests the Lungs, had Pores in it as
big as the larger sort of Peace, which agrees with the Observations of
Chyrurgions and Physicians, viz. That matter collected in the Thorax, has
penetrated into the Lungs, and been discharged by coughing. And I remember too,
that most of the Animals we killed in our Engine were Birds, of whose Lungs
Harvey somewhere informs us, That he observed them very manifestly to open at
their Extremities into the Abdomen. And by such Perforations we may well
suppose the passage free betwixt the external Air and that in the Abdomen: But
(...)Conjecture may be further (...)Besides, to show that the Anim^^^ (...)died
in our Glasses, need not be (...) to have been killed by the want of Air, we
foresee another Argument that we must deal so ingeniously with Your Lordship,
as not to conceal. You very well know, that besides the generality of the
Schools, there are many new Philosophers who, though they dissent from the old
Peripateticks in other things, do, as they, deny the possibility of a Vacuum;
and hold, that those spaces which are devoid of Air, and other grosser Bodies,
are all of them exactly replenished with a certain Etherial Matter, so thin and
subtle, that it can freely permeate the Pores of the compactedst and closest
Bodies, and even of Glass it self. Now some of those Naturalists that are of
this persuasion may object, That the Animals that died in our Receivers, did
so, not so much for lack of Air, as by reason that the Air that was pumped out
was necessarily succeeded by an Etherial Substance; which consisting of parts
vehemently agitated, and so very small, as without resistance to pass in and
out through the very Pores of Glass; it may well be supposed, that a
considerable quantity of this restless and subtle Matter, meeting together in
the Receiver, with the excessive heat of it, may be quickly able to destroy a
little Animal, or at least, make the Air too intemperately hot to be fit for
Respiration.

But though this be a Difficulty not so easily to be resolved without the
assistance of our Engine, yet I suppose we have already answered the Objection
by our 38th and 39th Experiments; which though we made partly for other
purposes, yet we premised them only to clear up the difficulty proposed.

Another suspicion we should have entertained concerning the death of our
Animals, namely, That upon the sudden removal of the wonted pressure of the
ambient Air, the warm Blood of those Animals was brought to an Effervescence or
Ebullition, or at least so vehemently expanded, as to disturb the Circulation
of the Blood, and so disorder the whole Economy of the Body. (This (I say) I
should have had some suspicion of) but that Animals of a hot Constitution are
not the sole ones that cannot in our exhausted Engine exercise the Function of
Life. But I must not now dwell upon matters of this nature, because I think it
high time to proceed to the consideration of the principal subject of our
Engine, namely, The use of Respiration; or rather, The use of the Air in
Respiration. For whereas of the diverse uses of it mentioned by Anatomists the
most, such as the Production and Modulation of the Voice by the Elision of the
Air, the Larynx etc. the expulsion of Excrements by Coughing, the conveying in
of Odours by Inspiration, and some others, rather convenient for the well being
of an Animal, then absolutely necessary to his Life: Whereas (I say) the other
uses are such as we have said, The great Hippocrates himself gives this notable
Testimony to the use of the Air, as to Animals endowed with Lungs, Mortalibus
(says he) hic (spiritus) tum vitae, tum morborum aegrotis causa est. Tantaque
corporibus omnibus spiritus inest necessitas, ut siquidem aliis omnibus and
cibis and potionibus, quis abstineat, duos tame^ aut tres, vel plures dies
possit vitam ducere: At si quis spiritus in corpus vias intercipiat, vel exigua
diei part, homini pereundum sit; Ad^o necessarius est usus spiritus in
corpore. Ad haec quoque, quum omnibus aliis actionibus homines qu^escant, quod
mutationibus innumeris vita sit exposita, ab hac tamen sola action nunquam
desistant animantia, quin aut spiritum adducant, aut reddant.

But touching the account upon which the Inspiration and Exspiration of Air
(both which are comprehended in (...) Respiration) is so necessary to Life,
both Naturalists and Physicians do so disagree, that it will be very difficult
either to reconcile their Opinions, or determine their Controversies.

For first, Many there are who think the chief (if not sole) use of Respiration
to be the Cooling and tempering of that Heat in the Heart and Blood, which
otherwise would be immoderate: And this Opinion, not only seems to be most
received amongst Scholastic Writers, but diverse of the new Philosophers,
Cartesians, and others, admitted with some variation; teaching, That the Air is
necessary, by its coldness, to condense the Blood that passes out of the right
Ventricle of the Heart into the Lungs, that thereby it may obtain such a
consistence, as is requisite to make it fit Fuel for the vital Fire or Flame,
in the left Ventricle of the heart. And this Opinion seems favored by this,
That Fishes, and other cold Creatures, whose Hearts have but one cavity, are
also unprovided of Lungs, and by some other considerations. But though it need
not be denied, that the inspired Air may sometimes be of use by refrigerating
the Heart; yet (against the Opinion that makes this Refrigeration, the most
genuine and constant use of the Air) it may be Objected, That diverse cold
Creatures (some of which, as particularly Frogs, live in the Water) have yet
need of Respiration, which seems not likely to be needed for Refrigeration by
them that are destitute of any sensible heat, and besides, live in the cold
Water: That even decrepid old Men, whose natural heat is made very languid, and
almost extinguished by reason of age, have yet a necessity of frequent
Respiration: That a temperate Air is fittest for the generality of breathing
Creatures; and as an Air too hot, so also an Air too cold, may be inconvenient
for them (especially, if they be troubled with an immoderate degree of the same
Quality which is predominant in the Air:) That in some Diseases the natural
heat is so weakened, that in case the use of Respiration were to cool, it would
be more hurtful then beneficial to breath; and the suspending of the
Respiration, may supply the place of those very hot Medicines that are wont to
be employed in such Distempers: That Nature might much better have given the
Heart but a moderate heat, then such an excessive one, as needs to be
perpetually cooled, to keep it from growing destructive; which the gentle, and
not the burning heat of an Animals Heart, seems not intense enough so
indispensably to require. These, and other Objections, might be opposed, and
pressed against the recited Opinion: But we shall not insist on them, but only
add to them, That it appears not by our foregoing Experiments (I mean the 38th
and 39th) that in our exhausted Receiver, where yet Animals die so suddenly for
want of Respiration, the ambient Body is sensibly hotter then the common Air.

Other Learned Men there are, who will have the very substance of the Air to
get in by the Vessels of the Lungs, to the left Ventricle of the Heart, not
only to temper its heat, but to provide for the generation of Spirits. And
these allege for themselves the Authority of the Ancients, among whom
Hippocrates seems manifestly to favor their Opinion; and both Aristotle and
Galen do sometimes (for methinks they speak doubtfully enough) appear
inclinable to it. But for ought ever I could see in Dissections, it is very
difficult to make out, how the Air is conveyed into the left Ventricle of the
Heart, especially the Systole and Diastole of the Heart and Lungs, being very
far from being Synchronical: Besides, that the Spirits seeming to be but the
most subtle and unctuous Particles of the Blood, appear to be of a very
differing Nature from that of the lean and incombustible Corpuscles of Air.
Other Objections against this Opinion have been proposed, and pressed by that
excellent Anatomist, and my Industrious Friend, Dr. Highmore, to whom I shall
therefore refer you.

Another Opinion there is touching Respiration, which makes the genuine use of
it to be Ventilation (not of the Heart, but) of the Blood, in its passage
through the Lungs; in which passage, it is disburthened of those Excrementitious
Steams, proceeding, for the most part, from the superfluous Serosities of the
Blood, (we may add) and of the Chyle too, which (by those new Conduits of late
very happily detected by the famous Pecquet) has been newly mixed with it in
the Heart.) And this Opinion is that of the Industrious Moebius, and is said to
have been that of that excellent Philosopher Gassendus; and has been in part
an Opinion almost vulgar: But this Hypothesis may be explicated two ways: For
first, The necessity of the Air in Respiration, may be supposed to proceed from
hence; That as a Flame cannot long burn in a narrow and close place, because
the Fuliginous Steams it uncessantly throws out, cannot be long received into
the ambient Body; which after a while growing too full of them, to admit any
more, stifles the flame, so that the vital Fire in the Heart requires an
ambient Body, of a yielding nature, to receive into it the superfluous
Serosities and other Recrements of the Blood, whose seasonable Expulsion is
requisite to depurate the Mass of Blood, and make it fit both to Circulate, and
to maintain the vital heat residing in the Heart. The other way of explicating
the above mentioned Hypothesis, is, by supposing, that the Air does not only,
as a Receptacle, admit into its Pores the Excrementitious vapors of the Blood,
when they are expelled through the Windpipe, but does also convey them out of
the Lungs, in regard that the inspired Air, reaching to all the ends of the
Aspera Arteria, does there associate it self with the Exhalations of the
circulating Blood, and when it is exploded, carrys them away with it self, as we
see that winds speedily dry up the surfaces of wet Bodies, not to say any thing
of what we formerly observd touching our Liquor, whose fumes were strangely
elevated upon the Ingress of the Air.

Now of these two ways of explicating the use of Respiration, our Engine
affords us this Objection against the first; That upon the Exsuction of the
Air, the Animals die a great deal sooner then if it were left in the Vessel;
though by that Exsuction the ambient space is left much more free to receive
the steams that are either breathed out of the Lungs of the Animal, or
discharged by insensible Transpiration through the Pores of his Skin.

But if the Hypothesis proposed, be taken in the other sense, it seems
congruous enough to that grand observation, which partly the Phenomenon of our
Engine, and partly the relations of Travelers, have suggested to us, namely,
That there is a certain consistence of Air requisite to Respiration; so that if
it be too thick, and already overcharged with vapors, it will be unfit to
unite with, and carry off those of the Blood, as Water will dissolve, and
associate to it self but a certain proportion of saline Corpuscles; and if it
be too thin or rarefied, the number or size of the Aerial Particles is too
small to be able to assume and carry off the halituous Excrements of the Blood,
in such plenty as is requisite.

Now that Air too much thickened (and as it were clogged) with Steams, is unfit
for Respiration, may appear by what is wont to happen in the Lead-Mines of
Devonshire, (and, for ought I know, in those too of other Countries, though I
have seen Mines where no such thing was complained of) for I have been informed
by more then one credible Person (and particularly by an Ingenious Man, that
has often, for curiosity, dug in those Mines, and been employed about them)
that there often rises Damps, as retaining the Germane Word by which they call
them) which does so thicken the Air, that unless the Workmen speedily make
signs to them that are above, they would (which also sometimes happens) be
presently stifled for want of Breath; and though their Companions do make haste
to draw them up, yet frequently, by that time they come to the free Air, they
are, as it were, in a swoon, and are a good while before they come to
themselves again. And that this swooning seems not to proceed from any
Arsenical or Poisonous Exhalation contained in the Damp; as from its overmuch
condensing the Air, seems probable from hence; That the same Damps oftentimes
leisurely extinguish the flames of their Candles or Lamps; and from hence also
that it appears (by many Relations of Authentical Authors) that in those
Cellars where great store of new Wine is set to work, men have been suffocated
by the too great plenty of the steams exhaling from the Must, and too much
thickning the Air: as may be gathered from the custom that is now used in some
hot Countries, where those that have occasion to go into such Cellars, carry
with them a quantity of well kindled Coals, which they hold near their Faces;
whereby it comes to pass, that the Fire discussing the Fumes, and rarefying the
Air reduces the ambient Body to a consistence fit for Respiration.

We will add (by way of confirmation) the following Experiment: In such a
small Receiver, as those wherein we killed diverse Birds, we carefully closed up
one, who, though for a quarter of an hour he seemed not much prejudiced by the
closeness of his Prison, afterward began first to pant very vehemently, and
keep his Bill very open, and then to appear very sick; and last of all, after
some long and violent strainings, to cast up some little matter out of his
Stomach: which he did several times, till growing so sick, that he staggered
and gasp'd, as being just ready to die; we perceived, that within about three
quarters of an hour from the time that he was put in, he had so thickened and
tainted the Air with the Steams of his Body, that it was become altogether
unfit for the use of Respiration: Which he will not much wonder at, who has
taken notice in Sanctorius his Statica Medicina, how much that part of our
Aliments, which goes off by insensible Transpiration, exceeds in weight all the
visible and grosser Excrements both solid and liquid.

That (on the other side) an Air too much dilated is not serviceable for the
ends of Respiration, the hasty death of the Animal we killed in our exhausted
Receiver, seems sufficiently to manifest. And it may not irrationally be
doubted, whether or no, if a Man were raised to the very top of the Atmosphere,
he would be able to live many minutes, and would not quickly dye for want of
such Air as we are wont to breath here below. And that this Conjecture may not
appear extravagant, I shall on this occasion subjoyn a memorable Relation that
I have met with in the Learned Josephus Acosta, who tells us, That when he
himself past the high Mountains of Peru, (which they call Pariaecaca) to which,
he says, That the Alps themselves seemed to them but as ordinary Houses, in
regard of high Towers, he and his Companions were surprised with such extreme
Pangs of Straining and Vomiting, (not without casting up Blood too) and with so
violent a Distemper, that he concludes he should undoubtedly have dyed, but
that this lasted not above three or four hours, before they came into a more
convenient and natural temperature of Air: To which our Learned Author adds an
Inference, which being the principal thing I designed in mentioning, the
Narrative I shall set down in his own Words: I therefore (says he) persuade
myself, That the Element of the Air is there so subtle and delicate, as it is
not proportionable with the breathing of Man, which requires a more gross and
temperate Air; and I believe it is the cause that does so much alter the
Stomach, and trouble all the Disposition. Thus far our Author, whose Words I
mention, that we may ghess by what happens somewhat near the Confines of the
Atmosphere (though propably far from the surface of it) what would happen
beyond the Atmosphere. That which some of those that treat of the height of
Mountains, relate out of Aristotle, namely, That those that ascend to the top
of the Mountain Olympus, could not keep themselves alive, without carrying with
them wet Spunges, by whose assistance they could respire in that Air, otherwise
too thin for Respiration: (That Relation (I say) concerning this Mountain)
would much confirm what has been newly recited out of Acosta, if we had
sufficient reason to believe it: But, I confess, I am very diffident of the
truth of it; partly because when I passed the Alps, I took notice of no notible
change betwixt the consistence of the Air at the top and at the bottom of the
Mountain; partly because of a very punctual relation made by an English
Gentleman, of his ascension on to the top of the Pike of Tenariff (which is by
great odds higher then Olympus) I find no mention of any such difficulty of
breathing; and partly also because the same Author tells us out of Aristotle,
That upon the top of Olympus there is no motion of the Air, insomuch, that
Letters traced upon the dust, have been, after many years, found legible, and
not discomposed; whereas that Inquisitive Busbequius (who was Ambassador from
the German to the Turkish Emperor) in one of his Eloquent Epistles, Epist. 3.
tells us, upon his own knowledge, That Olympus may be seen from
Constantinople, blanched with perpetual Snow; which seems to argue, That the
top of that, as well as of diverse other tall Hills, is not above that Region of
the Air wherein Meteors are formed. Though otherwise, in that memorable
Narrative which David Fraelichius, Fraelichius apud Varen: Geogra: Gener: lib.
1. cap. 19.
made of his ascent to the top of the prodigiously high Hungarian Mountain
Carpathus: he tells us, That when, having passed through very thick Clouds, he
came to the very top of the Hill, he found the Air so calm and subtle, that not
a hair of his head moved, whereas in the Lower Stages of the Mountain he felt a
vehement Wind. But this might well be casual, as was his, having a clear Air
where he was, though there were Clouds, not only beneath him, but above him.

But (though what has been hitherto discoursed, incline us to look upon the
Ventilation and Depuration of the Blood, as one of the principal and constant
uses of Respiration; yet) methinks it may be suspected that the Air does
something more then barely help to carry off what is thrown out of the Blood in
its passage through the Lungs, from the right Ventricle of the Heart to the
left. For we see, in Phlegmatic Constitutions and Diseases, that the Blood
will circulate tolerably well, notwithstanding its being excessively serous:
And in Asthmatical Persons, we often see, that though the Lungs be very much
stuffed with tough Phlegm, yet the Patient may live some Months, if not some
Years. So that it seems scarce probable, that either the want of throwing out
the superfluous Serum of the Blood for a few Moments, or the detaining it,
during so short a while, in the Lungs, should be able to kill a perfectly sound
and lively Animal: I say, for a few moments, because, that having diverse times
tried the Experiment of killing Birds in a small Receiver, we commonly found,
that within half a minute of an hour, or thereabouts, the Bird would be
surprised by mortal Convulsions, and within about a minute more would be stark
dead, beyond the Recovery of the Air, though never so hastily let in. Which
sort of Experiments seem so strange, that we were obliged to make it several
times, which gained it the Advantage of having Persons of differing Qualities,
Professions and Sexes, (as not only Ladies and Lords, but Doctors and
Mathematicians) to witness it. And to satisfy Your Lordship, that it was not
the narrowness of the Vessel, but the sudden Exsuction of the Air that
dispatched these Creatures so soon; we will add, That we once enclosed one of
these Birds in one of these small Receivers, where, for a while, he was so
little sensible of his Imprisonment, that he eat very cheerfully certain Seeds
that we conveyed in with him, and not only lived ten minutes, but had probably
lived much longer, had not a great Person, that was Spectator of some of these
Experiments, rescued him from the prosecution of the Trial. Another Bird being
within about half a minute, cast into violent Convulsions, and reduced into a
sprawling condition, upon the Exsuction of the Air, by the pity of some Fair
Lady's (related to Your Lordship) who made me hastily let in some Air at the
Stop-cock, the gasping Animal was presently recovered, and in a condition to
enjoy the benefit of the Lady's Compassion. And another time also, being
resolved not to be interrupted in our Experiment, we did, at night, shut up a
Bird in one of our small Receivers, and observed, that for a good while he so
little felt the alteration of the Air, that he fell asleep with his head under
his wing; and though he afterward awaked sick, yet he continued upon his legs
between forty minutes and three quarters of an hour; after which, seeming ready
to expire, we took him out, and soon found him able to make use of the liberty
we gave him for a compensation of his sufferings.

If to the foregoing Instances of the sudden destruction of Animals, by the
removal of the ambient Air, we should now annex some, that we think fitter to
reserve till anon; perhaps Your Lordship would suspect, with me, that there is
some use of the Air, which we do not yet so well understand, that makes it so
continually needful to the Life of Animals. Paracelsus indeed tells us, That as
the Stomach concocts Meat, and makes part of it useful to the Body, rejecting
the other part, so the Lungs consume part of the Air, and proscribes the rest.
So that according to our Hermetick Philosopher (as his followers would have him
styled) it seems we may suppose, that there is in the Air a little vital
Quintessence (if I may so call it) which serves to the refreshment and
restoration of our vital Spirits, for which use the grosser and incomparably
greater part of the Air being unserviceable, it need not seem strange that an
Animal stands in need of almost incessantly drawing in fresh Air. But though
this Opinion is not (as of some of the same Author) absurd, yet besides that,
it should not be barely asserted, but explicated and proved; and besides that,
some Objections may be framed against it, out of what has been already argued
against the Transmutation of Air into vital Spirits: Besides these things, it
seems not probable, that the bare want of the Generation of the wonted quantity
of vital Spirits, for less then one minute, should within that time be able to
kill a lively Animal, without the help of any external violence at all.

But yet, on occasion of this Opinion of Paracelsus, perhaps it will not be
impertinent, if before I proceed, I acquaint Your Lordship with a Conceit of
that deservedly Famous Mechanician and Chemist, Cornelius Drebell, who among
other strange things that he performed, is affirmed (by more then a few
credible Persons) to have contrived for the late Learned King James, a Vessel
to go under Water; of which, trial was made in the Thames, with admired
success, the Vessel carrying twelve Rowers, besides Passengers; one of which is
yet alive, and related it to an excellent Mathematician that informed me of it.
Now that for which I mention this Story, is, That having had the curiosity and
opportunity to make particular Enquiries among the Relations of Drebell, and
especially of an Ingenious Physician that married his daughter, concerning the
grounds upon which he conceived it feasible to make men unaccustomed to
continue so long under water without suffocation, or (as the lastly mentioned
Person that went in the vessel affirms) without inconvenience. I was
answered, that Drebell conceived, that it is not the whole body of the Air, but
a certain Quintessence (as Chemists speak) or spirituous part of it, that
makes it fit for respiration, which being spent, the remaining grosser body, or
carcass (if I may so call it) of the Air, is unable to cherish the vital flame
residing in the heart: So that (for ought I could gather) besides the
Mechanical contrivance of his vessel he had a Chymicall liquor, which he
accounted the chief Secret of his submarine Navigation. For when from time to
time he perceived, that the finer and purer part of the Air was consumed, or
over clogged by the respiration, and steames of those that went in his ship, he
would, by unstopping a vessel full of this liquor, speedily restore to the
troubled Air such a proportion of Vital parts, as would make it again, for a
good while, fit for Respiration, whether by dissipating, or precipitating the
grosser Exhalations, or by some other intelligible way, I must not now stay to
examine. Contenting my self to add, that having had the opportunity to do some
service to those of his Relations, that were most Intimate with him, and having
made it my business to learn what this strange Liquor might be, they
constantly affirmed that Drebell would never disclose the Liquor unto any, nor
so much as tell the matter whereof he made it, to above one Person, who
himself assured me that it was.

This account of Drebell's performance, I mention, not that I any further
assent to his opinion then I have already intimated, but because the man, and
the Invention being extraordinary, I suppose Your Lordship will not be
displeased to know the utmost I could learn about it; especially not having
found it mentioned by any Writer. Wherefore I have been sometimes inclined to
favorable thoughts of their opinion, who would have the Air necessary to
ventilate, and cherish the vital flame, which they do suppose to be
continually burning in the heart. For we see, that in our Engine the flame of a
Lamp will last almost as little after the Exsuction on of the Air, as the life
of an Animal: Nay I remember, that though I devised a more promising way, to
make a fire last in our exhausted Receiver, yet it would not succeed: We took
a hard body made in the form of a Clove, but twice as long, and proportionably
thick, this body being made of such a Composition, that if it be kindled at the
upper end, it will most certainly burn away to the very bottom, much better
then a Match; we conveyed it diverse times kindled at the upper end, into one
of our small Receivers, but still found, that though presently upon the
Exsuction of the Air, it would leave smoking, and seem quite gone out, and
again begin to smoke as soon as the Air was let in upon it; yet if the Air
were kept out but four or five minutes, the fire would be totally, and
irrevocably extinguished. To which we will add, that though we conveyed into
a great Receiver, a small lamp with rectified spirit of Wine, that being so
pure as not to smut the Cotton week, or so much as a piece of white Paper held
over it; yet we could not by diverse trials make the flame last a couple of
minutes after the Air was begun to be drawn out. But though our Engine thus
shows us a new kind of resemblance betwixt fire and life: yet the opinion we
have last mentioned is not free from Difficulties. For though in the hearts of
many Animall's Blood be a warm liquor, and in some even a hot one; yet it is
not easy to conceive either how the Air (in substance) can get thither, or
how, in case it could, it were able to increase the heat. Since, however, the
Air may increase the heat of a coal by blowing off the ashes, and making the
active Corpuscles pierce further into the kindled body, and shatter it the
more, yet we see hot liquors have their heat allayed, and not augmented, by
having Air blown on them. And whereas some Eminent Naturalists think it not
inconvenient, to make the heat residing in the heart to be a true flame,
provided they add, that it is such a temperate, and almost insensible fire, as
the flame of spirit of Wine, which will long burn upon fine white Linen or
Paper without consuming either: give me leave to wish that they had been more
curious to make differing trials with that liquor. For (as we observe in
another Treatise) the reason why a Linen cloth, dipped in common Spirit of
Wine, is not burnt by the flame of it, is because the Phlegm of the Liquor
defends the Cloth. And the Flame of Spirit of Wine is so far from being too
weak to burn a piece of Paper, or of Linen, that I have used it in Lamps to
distill Liquors out of tall Cucurbits, and found that the Spirit burned away
indeed much faster then Sallet Oil, but gave at least as great a heat: Nay, I
have, for curiosity sake, melted crude Gold, and that readily enough, with the
bare Flame of pure Spirit of Wine.

But not to press this any further, we will, on this occasion, venture to
subjoyn an odd Observation, which may perhaps invite to a further Enquiry into
the Opinion we have for Discourse sake opposed. Our English Democritus, Dr.
Harvey, proposes this difficult and noble Problem to Anatomists, Why a faetus,
even out of the Womb, if involved in the secundines, may live a good while
without a Respiration; but in case after having once begun to breath, its
respiration be stopp^d, it will presently die. We are far from pretending to
solve so hard a Problem, but this we tried in relation to it; We took a Bitch
that was said to be almost ready to whelp, and having caused her to be hanged,
we presently opened her Abdomen, and found four Puppeys in her Womb; one of
these we took out, and having freed him from the Teguments th^^ involved him,
and from the Liquor he swam in, we observed that he quickly opened his Mouth
very wide, moved his Tongue, and exercised Respiration; then we opened both his
Abdomen and his Chest, and cut assunder the Diaphragme, notwithstanding which,
he seem^d often to endeavor Respiring, and moved in a notable manner, both the
Intercostal Muscles, part of the Diaphragme, the Mouth and the Tongue: But that
which we mention this Puppy for, was this, That being desirous to try whether
the other young ones that had not yet breathed at all, would long survive this
or no; we took them also out of the Womb, and having opened them, found none of
them so much alive, as to have any perceptible motion in his heart, whereas the
heart of that Puppy which had once enjoyed the benefit of Respiration,
continued beating so long, that we our selves observed the Auricle to beat,
after five or six hours; and a Servant that staid up and watched it after we
were gone to Bed, affirmed, That he saw the Pulsation continue about two hours
longer. I shall leave it to others to make Reflections upon this Observation,
compared with Dr. Harvey's Problem.

It is much doubted, whether Fishes breath under Water, and we shall not take
upon us, as yet, to determine the Question either way, because we have not yet
been able to procure little Fishes alive to make Experiments upon: That such as
are not Setaceous (for such manifestly breath) have not Respiration, properly
so called, such as is exercised by four footed Beasts, and Birds, may be argued
from their having but one cavity in their Hearts, and from their want of Lungs,
whence they are observed to be Mute; unless we say, what is not altogether
absurd, That their Gills seem somewhat Analogous (as to their use) to Lungs.
But that on the other side, Air is necessary to the Lives even of Fishes, and
that therefore it is probable they have some obscure kind of Respiration, seems
manifest by two or three Observations and Experiments, mentioned by diverse
Authors, who tell us, That Fishes soon die in Ponds and Glasses quite filled
with Water; if the one be so frozen over, and the other so closely stopped,
that the Fishes cannot enjoy the benefit of the Air, if we allow them to be
true. But because these Relations are not wont to be delivered by Writers upon
their own Knowledge; as I shall not reject them, so I dare not build upon them,
till I have opportunity to examine them by experience. In the mean time, we
will add, That our Engine has taught us two things that may illustrate the
matter in hand: The one, That there is wont to lurk in Water, many little
parcels of interspersed Air, whereof it seems not impossible that Fishes may
make some use, either by separating it when they strain the Water through their
Gills, or by some other way: The other, what may be collected from the
following Experiment.

We took a large Eele (being able to procure no other Fish alive) and removing
it out of the Vessel of Water, wherein it was brought us, into our great
Receiver, we caused the Air to be pumped out; and observed, That the Eele,
after some motion to and fro in the Glass, seemed somewhat dis-compos'd; and
that when we had prosecuted the Exsuction of the Air somewhat obstinately, she
turned up her Belly, as dying Fishes are wont to do, and from thence-forward
lay altogether moveless, just as if she were stark dead; and though I did not
think her so, yet the continuing in that Posture, even after the Cover of the
Receiver was taken off (whereby the Air was let in) I should have been of the
Opinion of the By standers, if the Diffidence I am wont to exercise in trying
Experiments (especially such as are not usual) had not invited me to take the
Fish out of the Receiver, upon which she showed her self, by her vivid motions,
as much alive as before.

But that is most strange which we observed of a great, g^ay, House Snail (as
they call it) which being clos^d up in one of our small Receivers, did not
only, not fall down from the side of the Glass, upon the drawing-out of the
Air (For that may be ascribed to the tenacity of the Liquor wherewith S^^il,
use to stick themselves, even to the smoothest Bodies) but was not so much as
deprived of progressive motion by the recess of the Air: Though except this
Snail, we never put any living Creature into our Receiver, whom it did not
either kill, or at least reduce to seem ready to dye. But as we shall not here
examine what interest the glutinous, and uneasily dissipable Nature of the
Juices of Snails, may have on this event; so whether this escape of our Eele be
to be ascribed to the particular and vivacious Nature of this sort of Fishes;
or to this, That the Air is not indeed necessary to the life of Fishes; or
finally to this, That though these Animals need some Air, yet they need so
little, that that which could not be drawn out of the Receiver, might (at least
for a while) suffice them, we will not now determine.

Nor are we at leisure to examine that Paradox of Hippocrates, which some
Learned Physicians have of late revived, namely, That the Foetus respires in
the Womb: For on the one side it seems very difficult to conceive, how Air
should traverse the Body of the Mother, and the Teguments of the Child: And
since Nature has, in newborn Babes, contrived peculiar and temporary Vessels,
that the Blood may circulate through other Passages, then it is wont to do in
the same Individuals when they come to have the free use of their Lungs, it
seems unlikely, that Infants in the Womb do properly respire. But then since
our Experiments have manifested, That almost all kind of Liquors do, as well
as Water, abound with interspersed Corpuscles of Air, it seems not altogether
absurd to say; That when the Foetus is grown big, he may (especially the upper
part of the involving Amnios, being destitute of Liquor, and filled only with
an halituous Substance) exercise some obscure Respiration, especially, since
it is not (as many wise Men think it) a Fable, That Children have been heard to
cry in the Mothers Womb. For though it happens exceeding rarely, yet sometimes
it has been observed. And I know a young Lady, whose Friends, when she was some
Years since with Child, complained to me, That she was several times much
frighted with the Cries of her Infant, which, till I disabus'd Her, She and Her
Friends looked upon as Portentous. And such Observations are the more credible,
because not only Houswives, but more judicious Persons, mention it, as no very
unfrequent thing to hear the Chick Pip or Cry in the Egg, before the Shell be
broken. But this I mention but as a probable, not a cogent Argument, till I can
discover whether an Elision of an halituous Substance, though noe true Air, may
not at the top of the Larynx produce a Sound, since I find that the Blade of a
Knife, held in several postures in the stream of Vapors (or rarefied Water)
that issu's out of an Aeolipile, will afford various and very audible Sounds.

I had thoughts of conveying into our Receiver young ones, ripped out of the
womb of their Dammes, with their involving Coats entire, but could not
procure them. And I have also had thoughts of trying whether it be not
practicable, to make a Receiver, though not all of glass, yet with little
glass windows, so placed, that one may freely look into it, capacious enough
to hold a Man, who may observe several things, both touching Respiration, and
diverse other matters; and, who in case of fainting, may, by giving a sign of
his weakness, be immediately relieved by having air let in upon him. And it
seems not impossible, but that by accustomance, some Men may bring themselves
to support the want of Air a pretty while, since we see that diverse will live
so much longer then other Men under Water: that those that dive for Pearls in
the West Indies are said to be able to stay a whole hour under water. And
Cardan tells us of one Colanus a Diver in Sicily, who was able to continue (if
Cardan neither mistake, Cardan. de Subtilitat. lib. 11.
nor impose upon us) three or four times as long. Not to mind Your Lordship,
that You have Your self often seen in England, a corpulent Man, who is wont to
descend to the bottom of the Thames, and bring out of the deep holes at the
bottom of the banks, large fishes alive in his hands. lib 3. c. 15.
And Acosta tells us, he saw in Peru the like manner of fishing, but more
difficult, practiced by the Indians.

I made mention of some Men, and of Accustomance: because there are but very
few, who, though they use themselves to it by degrees, are fit to support, for
many Minutes, the want of Air. Insomuch that an ingenious Man of my
acquaintance, who is very famous for the useful skill of drawing Goods, and
even Ordnance out of sunk Ships, being asked by me, how long he was able to
continue at the depth of 50. or 60. feet under water, without the use of
Respiration, confessed to me, that he cannot continue above two minutes of an
hour, without resorting to the Air, which he carries down with him in a
certain Engine (whereof I can show your Lordship a Description.) Another thing
I also learned of him by enquiry, that was not despicable: For asking him,
whether he found any use of chawing little sponges dipped in oil in his Mouth,
when he was perfectly under water, and at a distance from his Engine, he told
me, that by the help of these sponges he could much longer support the want of
his wonted Respiration, then he was able to do without them. The true cause of
which would perhaps, if discovered, teach us some thing pertinent to the
Problem touching the Respiration of Fishes

But the necessity of Air to the most part of Animals unaccustomed to the want
of it, may best be judged of by the following Experiments, which we tried in
our Engine, to discover whether Insects themselves have not, either
Respiration, or some other use of the Air equivalent thereunto.

We took then an humble-bee, one of those common flies that are called flesh
flies, and one of those hairy worms that resemble caterpillars, and are wont
to be called Palmer-wormes: These three we conveyed into one of our small
Receivers, and observed to the great wonder of the Beholders, that not only
the Be, and the Fly fell down, and lay with their bellies upwards; but the
worm it self seemed to be suddenly struck dead: all of them being reduced to
lie without motion, or any other discernable sign of life, within somewhat
less (if we mistake not) then one minute of an hour. And this,
notwithstanding the smalnesse of the Animals in proportion to the capacity of
the vessels: which circumstance we the rather mention, because we found that
the vessel was not free from leaks. And to satisfy the Spectators, that 'twas
the absence of the Air that caused this great and sudden change: we had no
sooner readmitted the Air at the stopcock, than all the three Insects began to
show signs of life, and little by little to recover. But when we had again
drawn out the Air, their motions presently ceased, and they fell down seemingly
dead as before, continuing moveless, as long as, by continuing to pump, the
vessel was kept exhausted. This invited us thankfully to reflect upon the wise
goodness of the Creator, who by giving the Air a spring, has made it so very
difficult, as men find it, to exclude a thing so necessary to Animals: and it
gave us also occasion to suspect that if Insects have no lungs, nor any part
analogous thereunto, the ambient Air affects them, and relieves them at the
Pores of their Skin, it not being irrational to extend to these Creatures that
of Hippocrates; who says, That a Living Body is throughout perspirable; or to
use his expression, (...), disposed to admit and part with what is Spirituous:
Which may be somewhat Illustrated by what we have elsewhere noted* That the
moister parts of the Air readily insinuate themselves into, and recede from the
pores of the Beards of wild Oats, and those of diverse other wild Plants;
which almost continually wreath and unwreath themselves according to, even, the
light variations of the temperature of the ambient Air.

This Circumstance of our Experiment we particularly took notice of, that when
at any time, upon the Ingress of the Air, the Be began to recover, the first
sign of Life she gave, was a vehement panting, which appeared near the Ta^l:
Which we therefore mention, because we have observed the like in Bees drowned
in Water, when they first come to be revived by a convenient heat: As if the
Air were in the one case as proper to set the Spirits and Alimental Juice a
moving, as heat is in the other; and this may perchance deserve a further
consideration.

We may add, That we scarce ever saw any thing that seemed so much as this
Experiment, to manifest, That even living Creatures (Man always excepted) are a
kind of curious Engines, framed and contrived by nature (or rather the Author
of it) much more skilfully then our gross Tools and unperfect Wits can reach
to. For in our present Instance we see Animals, vivid and perfectly sound,
deprived immediately of motion, and any discernable signs of life, and reduced
to a condition that differs from death, but in that it is not absolutely
irrecoverable. This (I say) we see performed without any, so much as the least
external violence offered to the Engine; unless it be such as is offered to a
Windmill, when the Wind ceasing to blow on the Sayls, all the several parts
remain moveless and useless, till a new Breath put them into motion again.

And this was further very notable in this Experiment; That whereas it is known,
that Bees and Flies will not only walk, but fly for a great while, after
their heads are off; and sometimes one half of the Body will, for diverse hours,
walk up and down, when it is severed from the other: Yet, upon the Exsuction of
the Air, not only the progressive motion of the whole Body, but the very
motions of the Limbs do forthwith cease; as if the presence of the Air were
more necessary to these Animals, then the presence of their own Heads.

But it seems, that in these Insects, that fluid Body (whether it bea Juice or
Flame) wherein Life chiefly resides, is nothing near so easily dissipable, as
in perfect Animals. For where, as we have above recited, that the Birds we
conveyed into our small Receiver were within two minutes brought to be past
Recovery, we were unable (though by tyring him that pumped) to kill our Insects
by the exsuction of the Air: For though, as long as the Pump was kept moving,
they continued immovable, yet when we desisted from pumping, the Air that
pressed in at the unperceived Leaks, did (though slowly) restore them to the
free exercise of the functions of Life.

But, My Lord, I grow troublesome, and therefore shall pass on to other
Experiments: Yet without dispairing of your pardon for having entertained you
so long about the use of Respiration, because it is a subject of that
difficulty to be explained, and yet of that importance to humane Life, that I
shall not regret the trouble my Experiments have cost me, if they be found in
any degree serviceable to the purposes to which they were designed. And though
I despair not but that hereafter our Engine may furnish us with diverse
Phenomenon useful to Illustrate the Doctrine of Respiration; yet having not, as
yet, had the opportunity to make the other trials, of various kinds, that I
judge requisite for my Information: I must confess to Your Lordship, that in
what I have hitherto said, I pretend not so much to establish, or overthrow
this or that Hypothesis, as to lay together diverse of the Particulars that
occurred to me, in order to a future inquiry. I say, diverse of the Particulars,
because I could add many others, but that I want time, and fear that I shall
need Your Lordships pardon, for having been so prolix in Writing; and that of
Physicians (which perhaps I shall more easily obtain) for having invaded
Anatomy, a Discipline which they challenge to themselves, and indeed have been
the almost sole Improvers of. Without denying then that the inspired and
exspir'd Air may be sometimes very useful, by condensing and cooling the Blood
that passes through the Lungs; I hold that the depuration of the Blood in that
passage, is not only one of the ordinary, but one of the principal uses of
Respiration. But I am apt also to suspect, that the Air does something else in
Respiration, which has not yet been sufficiently explained; and therefore, till
I have examined the matter more deliberately, I shall not scruple to answer the
Questions that may be asked me touching the genuine use of Respiration, in the
excellent Words employed by the acute St. Austin, to one that asked him hard
Questions: Mallem quidem (says he) little que a me quaesivisti, habere scientiam
quam ignorantiam: sed quia id nondum potui, magis eligo cautam ignorantiam
confiteri, quam falsam scientiam profiteri.

HAving (partly upon the consideration of some of the foregoing Experiments,
Experiment 42.
and partly upon grounds not now to be insisted on) entertained a suspicion,
that the action of Corrosive Liquors in the dissolving of Bodies, may be
considerably varied by the gravitation or pressure of the incumbent Air, and
the removal of it; I thought fit to examine my Conjecture by the following
Experiment.

I took whole pieces of red Coral, and cast them into as much Spirit of
Vinager, as sufficed to swim above an Inch over them: These substances I made
choice of, that the Ebullition upon the Solution might not be too great, and
that the operation might last the longer.

Having then put about half-a-score Sprigs of Coral, together with the
Menstruum, into a somewhat long neck'd Viol, whereof they seemed scarce to fill
a third part, we conveyed that Viol into one of our small Pneumatical Glasses,
containing by ghess about a Quart of Water; and having fastened on the Cover,
after the accustomed manner, we suffered the Liquor to remain unmoved awhile,
to observe whether the Menstruum would work upon the Coral otherwise then
before. But finding there did only arise, as formerly, a pretty number of
small Bubbles, that made no sensible froth upon the surface of the distilled
Vinager, there were made two or three Exsuctions of the Air; upon which, there
emerg'd from the Coral such a multitude of Bubbles, as made the whole Body of
the Menstruum appear white; and soon after, a Froth, as big as all the rest of
the Liquor, was seen to swim upon it: And the Menstruum plainly appeared to
boil in the Glass, like a seething Pot. And though, if we desisted but one
minute from pumping, the decrement of the Froth and Ebullition, upon the
getting in of a little Air at some leak or other, seemed to argue, that the
removal of the the pressure of the external Air was the cause, or, at least,
the occasion of this effervescence: Yet to evince this the more clearly, we
turned the Key, and let in the external Air at the Stop-cock; immediately upon
whose entrance the Froth vanished, and so many of the Bubbles within the body
of the Liquor disappeared, that it lost its whiteness, and grew transparent
again: The Menstruum also working as languidly upon the coral, as it did before
they were put into the Receiver: But when we had again drawn out the Air, first
the whiteness re-appear'd, then the ebulition was renewd, which, the pumping
being a while longer and nimbly pursued, grew so great, that for 3 or 4 times
one after another, when ever the Air was let out of the Receiver into the
emptyed Cylinder; the frothy liquor over-flow'd the glass, and ran down by the
sides of it: And yet, upon the readmitting of the excluded air, the boiling
Liquor grew immediately as calm and as transparent as at first: as if indeed the
operation of it, upon the Coral, had been facilitated by the exsuction of the
incumbent air, which on its recess, left it more easy for the more active parts
of the liquor to show themselves such, then it was whilst the wonted pressure
of the Air continued unremoved. It may indeed be suspected, that those vast and
numerous Bubbles proceeded, not from the action of the Menstruum upon the
Coral, but from the sudden emersion of those many little parcels of air that
(as we formerly observd) are wont to be dispersed in liquors, without excluding
Spirit of Vinegar; but having had this suspicion before we tried the Experiment,
we conveyed our distilled Vinager alone into the Receiver, and kept it awhile
there, to free it from its Bubbles (which were but very small) before ever we
put the Coral into it. It may be suspected likewise, that the agitation of the
Liqour, necessary following upon the shaking of the Glass, by pumping, might
occasion the recited Ebullition, but upon trial made, there appeared not any
notable change in the liquor, or its operation, though the containing Vessel
were shaken, provided no Air were sucked out of it. The former Experiment was
another time tried in another small Receiver, with Coral grossly poudred, and the
success was very much alike, scarce differing in any thing, but that the Coral
being reduced to smaller parts, upon the ebullition of the liquor, so many
little lumps of Coral would be carried and Boy'd up by the emerging Bubbles, as
sometimes to darken the Viol; though the same Coralline Corpuscles would be let
fall again upon the letting in of the Air.

Something also we tried in our great Receiver, concerning the solution of
Metals in Aqua fortis, and other Corrosive Liquors; but partly the stink, and
partly some accidents, kept us from observing any thing peculiar and remarkable
about those Solutions.

One thing we must not omit, that when the Spirit of Vinager was boiling upon
the Coral, we took off the Cover of the Receiver, and took out the Viol, but
could not find, that notwithstanding so very late an Ebullition, the Liquor
had any heat great enough to be at all sensible to our hands.

Experiment 43.
WE will now subjoyn an Experiment, which, if the former did not lessen, the
wonder of it would probably appear very strange to Your Lordship, as it did to
the first Spectators of it.

The Experiment was this: We caused Water to be boiled a pretty while, that by
the heat it might be freed from the latitant Air, so often already taken notice
of in common Water: Then almost filling with it a Glass Viol, capable of
containing near four Ounces of that Liquor; we conveyed it, whilst the Water
was yet hot, into one of our small Receivers (big enough to hold about a pound
of Water) and having luted on the Cover, we caused the Air to be drawn out:
Upon the two first Exsuctions, there scarce appeared any change in the Liquor,
nor was there any notable alteration made by the third; but at the fourth, and
afterward, the Water appeared to boil in the Viol, as if it had stood over a
very quick Fire; for the Bubbles were much greater then are usually found upon
the Ebullition of very much more Water then was contained in our Viol. And this
Effervescence was so great in the upper part of the Water, that the Liquor
boiling over the top of the Neck a pretty deal of it ran down into the
Receiver, and sometimes continued (though more languidly) boiling there.
Prosecuting this Experiment, we observed, that sometimes, after the first
Ebullition, we were reduced to make diverse Exsuctions of the Air, before the
Liquor would be brought to boil again. But at other times, as often as the Key
was turned to let the Air pass from the Receiver into the Pump, the
Effervescence would begin afresh, though the Pump were plied for a pretty while
together; which seemed to argue, that the boiling of the Water proceeded from
hence, That upon the withdrawing the pressure of the incumbent Air, either the
Fiery Corpuscles, or rather the Vapors agitated by the heat in the Water (which
last, what we have formerly noted touching the rarefied Water of an Aeolipile,
manifest to be capable of an Elastical Power) were permitted to expand
themselves mightily in the evacuated Receiver; and did, in their tumultuous
Dilatio, lift up (as the Air is wont to do) the uppermost part of the Water,
and turning it into Bubbles, made the Water appear boiling. This conjecture was
further confirmed by these additional Circumstances: First, The Effervescence
was confined to the upper part of the Water, the lower remaining quiet, unless
the Liquor were but shallow. Next, although sometimes (as is already noted) the
Ebullition began again, after it had ceased a pretty while, which seemed to
infer, That some concurrent cause (whatever that were) did a little Modifie the
operation of heat; yet, when the water in the Viol could by no pumping be
brought to boil any more, the self-same Water, being in the very same Viol
warmed again, and reconvey'd into the Pneumatical Glass, was quickly brought to
boil afresh, and that vehemently and long enough; not to mention, that a new
parcel, taken out of the same parcel of the boiled Water with the former, and
put in cold, could by no pumping be brought to the least show of Effervescence.
Besides, having tried this Experiment in hot Sallet Oil, being a much more
tenacious Liquor, and requiring a stronger heat to make it boil, could not be
brought to an Effervescence in our Reciver; whereas the Chemical Oil of
Turpentine, being thinner and more volatile, was presently made to boil up,
till it reached four or five times its former height in the Viol, in whose
bottom it lay, and continu^d boiling till it was almost reduced to be but
lukewarm. Wine also being a more thin and spirituous Liquor then Water, being
conveyed in hot instead of the Oil, did, as I remember, at the very first
Exsuction begin to boil so vehemently, that, in a short time that the Pump was
kept moving, four parts of five, by our ghess, boiled over out of the Viol,
though it had a pretty long Neck. On which occasion we will add, that even the
Water it self, near one half, would sometimes boil over into the Receiver
before it became lukewarm. And it was also remarkable, that once, when the Air
had been drawn out, the Liquor did, upon a single Exsuction, boil so long with
prodigiously vast Bubbles, that the Effervescence lasted almost as long as was
requisite for the rehearsing of a Pater Noster. Now the Experiment having been
tried more then once, and found to succeed as to the main, seems much to
countenance the conjecture we made at the beginning of this Letter, where we
told your Lordship, That perhaps the pressure of the Air might have an interest
in more Phenomenon then men have hitherto thought. For as we had not then made
this Experiment, so now we have made it, it seems to teach, That the Air, by
its stronger or weaker pressure, may very much Modifie (as the Schoolmen
speak) diverse of the Operations of that vehement and tumultuous Agitation of
the small parts of Bodies, wherein the nature of heat seems chiefly, if not
solely, to consist. Insomuch that if a heated Body were conveyed above the
Atmosphere, it is probable that the heat may have a differing operation, as to
the power of dissipating the parts of it, from what it has here below.

To conclude, This Experiment might have been further prosecuted, but our want
of leisure makes us content our selves to add at present; That perhaps it
would not be lost labor if this were tried, not only with other Liquors, but
with variety of heated, and especially soft or melted Bodies: But in such cases
the Receiver ought to be so shaped, as is most proper to preserve the Cement
wherewith the Cover must be fastened on, from being melted by the heat of the
included Matter; the inconvenience to be hereby avoided, having befallen us in
the use of a Receiver too shallow, though otherwise capacious enough.

The Conclusion.
BEing come thus far, My Dear Lord, not without thoughts of proceeding further:
The unwelcome Importunity of my Occasions becomes so prevalent, that it quite
hinders, for the present, my designed Progress; and reduces me, not only to
reserve for another opportunity that kind of Experiments, which, at some
distance from the beginning of this Letter, I called (as Your Lordship may
remember) Experiments of the second sort; but to leave unessay'd some of the
first sort, which I might try in the Engine, as it now is, were it not that my
Avocations are grown so urgent, for my remove from the place where the Engine
was set up, that I am put to write Your Lordship this Excuse, Weary, and in an
Inn which I take in my way to my Dearrest Brother Cork: Who being at length
arrived in England, after I h^ve for diverse Years been deprived of His
Company, and wished for it as long; what ever my other occasions may be, my
first Business must be to wait on Him and Your Excellent Mother; in whose
grateful Company I may hope to forget a while those public calamities that
distress this too deservedly unhappy Nation. Since that is indear'd to me,
both by their personal Merit; by the near Relation which Nature gives me to
Him, Affinity to Her, and Friendship to both; and also by their many Favors,
especially that of my owing them My Lord of Dungarvan. But I suffer my self to
be transported too far with these delightful thoughts; To return therefore
to our Engine. Though I find this Letter is beyond my expectation swelled, not
only into a Book, but almost into a Volume; yet the Experiments already
mentioned in it, are so far from comprising all those that may be tried by
the help of our Engine, that I have not yet been able to try all those, which,
presently occurring to my thoughts, upon my first seeing the working of it, I
Caused to be set down in a Catalogue within less then half an hour. But I
doubt I have but too much cause to apprehend that the Affairs, and other
things I complain of, have made it needful for me to Apologize, as well for
the things I have set down, as for those I am necessitated to omit. For as
partial as men use to be to the children of their own Brains, as well as to
those of their Loins, I must not deny that the foregoing Trials are not
altogether free from such unaccuratenesses, nor the recital of them from such
imperfections, as I my self can now discern, and could perhaps partly mend,
if I had the leisure to repeat the Experiments, with the Circumstances that
have since offered themselves to my thoughts, as things that might have been
worth Observation or Enquiry. But the truth is, that I was reduced to make
these Experiments, when my Thoughts had things that more concernd me to employ
them, and the same avocations made me set them down, for the most part, as soon
as I had made them, and in the same order, and that so fast that I had not
over-frequently the opportunity to mind any more then the bare Truth of what I
set down; without allowing it any of those Advantages that Method, Style, and
decent Embellishments, are wont to confe^^e on the Composures they are employed
do adorn.

But, my Lord, though to invite and encourage You and your learned Friends at
Paris, to make a further use of this Engine than I have yet been able to do, I
am thus free to acknowledge the imperfections of the foregoing Letter: yet if
some Intelligent Persons mistake not, by what has been done, such as it is,
there is a way opened, whereby Sagacious Wits will be assisted to make such
further Discoveries in some points of Natural Philosophy, as are yet scarce
dreamed of. And I am the more desirous to engage You to that Employment,
because I am apt to think, that if the Making and Writing of such Experiments
shall cost You as much trouble as they have me, You will be inclined to Excuse
me; and if the Discoveries give You as much pleasure as they gave me, You will
(perhaps) be invited to thank me. However, I think (my Lord) I may justly
pretend, that the things I have set down have been faithfully Recorded, though
not elaborately Written; and I suppose my former Papers may have long since
satisfied You, that though many devise Experiments better that Your Servant,
none perh^ps has related them more carefully and more truly: And particularly
of These; sometimes one, sometimes another has been performed in the p^esence
of Persons, diverse of them eminent for their Writings, and all for their
Learning. Wherefore hav^ng in the foregoing Narratives made it my business to
enoble them with the chief Requisites of H^storicall Composures, Candor, and
Truth, I cannot despair that You will either Excuse their Imperfections, or at
least Forgive them: Especially considering, that this unpolished Letter is as
well a Production of Your Lordship's Commands and my Obedience, as a Testimony
of my Desire to make others beholden to my Lord of Dungarvan, by the same way
by which I endeavor to express my self

Bec^n's-fi^ld this 20^h. of December, 1659. His Lordships Most obedient
Servant, and Most affectionate Uncle, ROBERT BOIL.

ERRATA.
Page 4. line. 8. dele that. 10.11. d. within and without. 12.3. out at the.
18.25. devoid. 18. (...) 27.11. ai^'s spring. 28.27. refraction^. 31.1. (...)
32.5. de that. 34.16. it bent. 46.22. (...) 4^.21. made even, by. 48.6. not
from. 69.19. (...) 73.26. cloth of. 76.26. wax candle. 102.23 (...) 10^.6. we
united. 104.1. d. l. 106.21. in an. 106.24. (...)i^. 115.16. an other tryll.
150.22. time, after. 152.9. it, is. 116.26., how ever, 172.15. OF. 173.9.
(...)S --. Canalis tortuosi (QR) vltimum orificium Z. 174.18. raresaction.
182.9. twenty first. 184 6. (...) 194.19. wo^t to. 128:11. of the Atmosphere.
235 16. (...) 246.27. d. be. 247.19. admit it. 257. in margin. (...)general.
270.24. the glass. 277.24. a degree. 290.8. (...)neither as. 294.27. F to C.
294. vlt. 30 45/54 299.24. Tolouse. 1300.15. difforme. 309.27. Lucid. 321.10.
possessor's. 356.16. Pariacaca. 358.3. (...) ^^8.26. Froelichius. 362.14.
proscribe. 362.26. as some of


