MR Boyles HISTORY OF PARTICULAR QUALITIES.

THREE TRACTS WRITTEN By the Honorable ROBERT BOIL.

Of the Temperature of the Subterraneall Regions. Temperature of the Submarine
Regions. Bottom of the Sea.


OXFORD, Printed by W.H. for Ric. Davis.

1671.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THe two following Tracts were designed to have been accompanied by three or
four Others, whereof the First, Treated about the Temperature of the Regions of
the Air, as to Heat and Cold, and had been premised to the Two that now come
forth, had it not been judged more proper to reserve them to accompany some
other Papers concerning the Air. To the following Tract about the Submarine
Regions, it is thought fit to adjoyne some Relations about the Bottom of the
Sea, to which was to have been added some Observations, concerning the Saltness
of the Sea; but in that Treatise, some Blanks having been left for Particulars,
which the Author could not seasonably find among his Loos Papers to fill them
up with, these that now appear, having no dependence on them, it was not
thought sit they should stay any longer for them.

But about these several Tracts, this General advertisement is to be here
given, That being Historical Pieces, consisting chiefly, (though not only,) of
such Particulars, as the Author must owe to the Informations of Others, he
would not stake his Reputation for the Truth of every one of them; contenting
himself, to have performed what can be reasonably expected of him; which is,
that he should carefully make his Inquiries from credible Persons, who for the
most part, deliver their Answer upon their own knowledge, and that he should
faithfully set down the accounts he procured from such Relators.

Of the TEMPERATURE Of the SUBTERRANEAL REGIONS, As to HEAT and COLD.
OF THE TEMPERATURE, Of the SUBTERRANEALL REGIONS. As to Heat and Cold. CHAP. I.
IF when I used to visit mines, I had thought of writing on the subject I am
now about to treat of, and had designed to satisfy my self about the
Temperature of the Subterraneall Air, as much as I did about the other Subjects
I was then concerned to be informed of, I think I should have enabled my self
to deliver much more upon my own observation, then I shall now pretend to do.
But though for the reason newly intimated, and because of my being particularly
subject to be offended by any thing that hinders a full freedom of Respiration,
I was not solicitous to go down into the deep mines; yet after having
discoursed of the Temperature of the Air above Ground, I presume it may not be
improper or unwellcome to say something of the Temperature of the Subterraneall
Regions and of the Air reaching thither. For deep mines being places which very
few have had the opportunity, and fewer have had the curiosity to visit, and of
which I have scarce found any thing at all observable by Classick Authors, and
by other writers, but very little, especially that I think probable enough to
make use of, I presume it will not be unacceptable to you, if of Regions so
little frequented, and less known, I report what I have been able to learn (by
diligent enquiry purposely made) from the credible Relations of several
Eyewitnesses differing in nation, and for the most part unacquainted with each
other.

Though I do not think it absurd to suspect that in some places of the Earth,
the peculiar constitution of the Soil, and other circumstances, may make it
reasonable to assign those places fewer or more Regions then three; yet
speaking in the General, the Ternary number seems not inconvenient to be
assigned to the Subterraneall Regions, not so much upon the score of the
Analogy, that by this Division will be established between the Regions of the
Earth and of the Air, as because there seems to be a reason of the Division
included in the Division itself. And indeed Experience appears to favor it in
the Subterraneall Cavity, that I have hitherto been able to procure an account
of, from any Ocular witness, and (very few excepted) one of the deepest that we
yet know of, in the world. And since it has been received for a Rule among
Philosophers, that which is perfectest or compleatest in its kind, ought to be
the Standard whereby the rest are to be measured, or estimated, I shall begin
the remaining part of this Essay by a Relation that I obtained from a Chemist,
that had purposely traveled into Hungary, and other places to visit the mines
those parts are justly famous for, and who bringing me the honor of a
Complement from a Prince, to whom he belonged gave me the opportunity of asking
him diverse Questions, his Answers whereunto (which I presently after put into
writing,) afforded me the ensuing account.

CHAP. II.
THat very near the Orifice of the Groove, he felt the Air yet warm; but
afterward descending toward the lower parts of the Groove, he felt it cold,
till he came to such a depth, as he had scarce attained by a quarter of an
hours descent, and that the Cold he felt during this time seemed to him
considerable, especially when in descending he had reached to a good depth.

That after he had passed that Cold Region, he began by degrees to come into a
warmer one which increased in heat, as he went deeper and deeper. So that in
the deeper veins he found the Workmen digging with only a slight garment over
them; and the Subterraneal heat was much greater, then that of the free Air on
the top of the Groove, though it were then Summer.

[What is here mentioned of a cold region in the Earth, has been since
confirmed to me by an ingenious Physician, upon an observation made in another
Hungarian mine (near a Town whose name I remember not) that was not of Gold,
but Copper; and of much lesser deepnesse then that newly spoken of. For this
Relator answered me that in going down, he felt a considerable degree of Cold.
And when I asked whether he found the like in his Return upwards, he told me,
he observd it then too. And when I further inquired after the extent of this
cold Region, he replied, that not expecting to be asked about such
Circumstances, he had not taken particular notice of them: but thus much
Information my Questions procured me, that he began to feel the above mentioned
coldness when he could receive no more light at all by the mouth of the
Groove, and that this cold Region lasted till he came somewhat near the bottom,
which was estimated to be about an 100 fathom or more distant (in a strait
Line) from the Top.]

This Relation agrees well enough for the main, with that short, but
considerable one of Morinus, (which I elsewhere cite) who above forty five
years ago, visited the deep Hungarian-mines in the month of July, and takes
notice, that when he came down to the burrows, as he calls them, he did not
find any heat, as at the mouth of the Well; but the beginning of a very Cold,
as well as considerably thick Region: though I easily believe him, when he
confesses, that he felt it much the Colder, because he had left of his own
Clothes, and put on the slight Garments used there by the Diggers. He further
informs his Reader, that when they had descended about 80 fathoms beneath the
surface of the Earth, he began to feel a breath of an almost lukewarm air;
which warmth increased upon him, as he descended lower, pleasing him not a
little, because it freed him from the troublesome scents of his former
coldness. Adding that the Overseer of the mine who conducted him, affirmed to
him, as also the Officers of other Hungarian mines unanimously did, that in all
their mines, at least all the deep ones, after a thick tract of Cold Earth,
there succeeds a Lower Region, that is always hot. And that after they arrived
at such a depth, they felt not any more Cold, but always Heat, how deep soever
they digg. And to add upon the by, though this Learned Man lay much weight upon
Antiperistasis; yet in the next page to those that contain what I have been
just now relating, he either very heartily or inconsiderately takes notice,
that they informed him, that their mines, whether more or less deep, they
observed that at some times in the year, a somewhat intenser heat was felt, and
the two Times that he expressly names, are those oppositely qualified Seasons of
Summer and Winter.

Having laid down these general narratives, I now proceed to consider the
Earths Regions in particular, about which the Sum of what I yet have to
propound, may be conveniently enough comprised in the 4 following Propositions.

CHAP. III. Proposition the 1.
THe First Region of the Earth is very variable, both as to Bounds, and as to
Temperature.

The former part of this observation will not be difficult to prove, since
'twill be easily granted, that the manifest operation of the Sunbeams is
(caeteris paribus) greater, and reaches further in hot Climates then in Cold
ones; in the midst of Summer, then in the depth of Winter.

The Second part of the Observation may be proved by the same Arguments as the
First; to which may be added, as to some places, the Solidity or porousness of
the Earth, as also the nature of some Salts, Marchasites, and other Bodies
contained in it, which by their natural Temperature may dispose the Soil to
Coldness or Heat. As I shall have occasion to show, when I come to speak of the
second Region.

In the mean time I have this to observe further, That in this First Region,
the Air is usually more temperate, as to Cold and Heat, then that above the
surface of the Earth, and that this Region is not wont to be considerably deep:
Both parts of which Observation are capable of being made good by the same
Reasons, and therefore I shall endeavor to prove them jointly.

That in the uppermost Region of the Earth, it should be less cold then above
the surface, seems reasonable to be allowed upon this Consideration, That the
Subterraneall Cavities of the Earth are sheltered by the thickness of the
sides, from the direct action of the Sunbeams, the Winds, etc. and is also
kept from an immediate, or at least from so full a contact of the external
Air, when that is vehemently, either heated or refrigerated.

And first as to the heat of the Sun, that That does much less powerfully
affect such places as are sheltered from its action by solid Bodies, may appear
by the Conservatories of Ice and Snow, wherein frozen water is kept in that
State during all the Heat of Summer, and that oftentimes in Cavities that are
at no considerable depth beneath the Superficies of the Earth. Nay I remember
that having had occasion, (for the perfecting of some Conclusions I was trying)
to keep Ice many weeks after the frosty Weather was gone, and a milder Season
was come in, I was able to do it, (contrary to the expectation of some Curious
men,) without either digging to a notable depth in the ground, or building any
substantial Structure over the Cavity. For wanting conveniences, I contented
my self (though 'twere in a champain place) with a pit somewhat broad at the
bottom, of about four foot deep or less, whose mouth was sheltered only by a
little low thatched hovell, that was wide open to the North, and only skreen'd
the mouth or vent of the little pit from the direct Beams of the Sun. And
though I will not deny, that in deep Conservatories of Snow, the natural
Coldness of the Earth, especially in some places, may contribute to the
effect; yet I remember, that discoursing once with a Traveller and Scholar
that was born in hot Countries, of a conjecture of mine that in an arched
building, whose walls were sufficiently thick, and whose Air were carefully
kept from all avoidable intercourse with the external Air, one may without
digging so much as a man's depth into the Ground, make a sufficient Conservatory
for Ice in very open and unshelter'd places, and even such as Salisbury plain
it self; discoursing (as I began to say) with this Traveller about this
Conjecture, he told me, that at a place he named to me, in the Southern part of
France, whose heat seemed to me to exceed that of diverse parts of Italy, some
Curious persons that were resolved at any rate, to have Ice in Summer, though
the Soil were such, that they could not dig 4 foot without meeting with water,
were yet able to make use of Conservatories by covering the Brick-Building they
made over their pits, with Clay and Sand to a very considerable thickness, and
taking care that the only place that should permit access to the outward Air,
should be a small Northern Door to go in and out at, fitted to shut exactly
close, and fenced with a little porch furnished with another Door. And by this
means he affirms these Gentlemen to reserve the included Ice not only all the
Summer long, but sometimes for two or three years together, the heat of that
Region making many of their Winters too mild to recruit them with Ice.

To all these things I shall add, that even where the intercourse is not quite
debarred, but left free enough betwixt the Subterraneall and the superior Air,
the operation of the Sunbeams may be very much less in a Cavity though but
shallow, beneath the Surface of the Ground then above it. For besides that
Trials have informed me, that Liquors that differ in little else then in
consistence, will not so easily pervade each other, as a man would surmise;
unless some external motion hasten their intimate mingling with one another.
I remember that one morning pretty late, having had the Curiosity to descend
into a pit where they were digging out Iron Oar; though this Cavity had no very
narrow Orifice, and was dugg directly downwards, and exceeded not ten or twelve
foot in depth: yet I found not the heat at all troublesome whilst I staid
there, Though the pit were in an open field unshaded by Trees, and though the
Air abroad were much heated at that time of the year, which was in that season
(or at least very near it) that is wont to be called the Dogg-Daies.

CHAP. IIII.
ANd as we have shown, that the Subterraneal Air, even in the first Region is
usually much less heated, then the Superterrestriall Air; so we may also easily
observe, that That Inferior Air is (Caeteris paribus) wont to be much less
refrigerated by the grand Efficients of intense Cold, then the Superior Air.

I will not urge on this occasion what I have observed by a surer way, then for
ought I know has been before practiced, about the smoking of some Springs in
Frosty Weather; because I do not know but that those Springs may have come
from, or passed a good way through, some place very deep beneath the Surface of
the directly incumbent ground, and perhaps from a Soil peculiarly fitted to
warm them: whence the water may have derived a warmth considerable enough not
to be quite lost, till it began to spring out of the ground, where it needed
only not to be quite Cold to appear to smoke; the intense Coldness of the Air
making those exhalations visible in Frosty Weather, which would not be so in
milder: As is evident in a man's Breath, which appears like a smoke in such
weather, though it be not visible in Summer.

That therefore, which I shall propose in favor of our observation, is first
taken from the nature of the thing, which may persuade us, that the
Subterraneall Air being though comparatively cool, yet indeed moderately warm
in Summer, ought not to be affected with Winters Cold, so much as that
contiguous to the Surface of the Earth, from whose immediate Contact, it is by
a thick arch of Earth (if I may so call it) defended; and that the Cold reigns
most in the free Air; and the Superficial parts of the Terrestrial Globe, may
appear by Waters beginning to freeze at the Top, not at the Bottom. To which
Reason from the nature of the thing, I shall add only this from experience,
that we see that in Cellars that are arched and carefully kept close from the
Communication of the outward Air, Beer, and other Liquors may be kept from
freezing in frosty, and snowy Weather. As I have observed in a cellar that was
but shallow, but well arched in a Winter that was sharp to a wonder, and froze
stronger Liquors then Beer in another Cellar very near it, that differed not
much from it in depth, but had not so thick and solid a roof. And that not only
here in England, where the Cold is less violent, but even in Russia it self,
where it is wont to be so extreme, it reaches not near so deep as one would
think, I learned by Inquiry purposely made of an ingenious Physician that lived
at Mosco, who answered me, that others and he himself, did in that City keep
all the Winter long, not only their Wine but their Beer from freezing in
Cellars that were not above 12 or 14 foot deep, but well covered above, and
carefully Lined with plankes of Firr, without any entrance, but a small
trap-Door (commonly at the top,) which was fitted so exactly to the Orifice it
was to close, as to exclude (as much as was possible) all communication between
the internal and external Air, that the latter might not affect the former
with it is Coldness.

I have indeed suspected that in some Cellars, the comparative warmth we find
there, may be partly due to Subterraneall Exhalations that are pent up in them:
and perhaps too in some measure from the Steams of the fermenting, or fermented
Liquors lodged in those places. And I was somewhat confirmed in this Suspicion,
by an Information my Inquiries obtained from the newly mentioned Doctor, who
told me upon his own observation, that in one of the Cellars he made use of at
Mosco, having occasion to open the above mentioned trap-door, after the Cellar
had for a good while been kept very close shut, there came out at the vent that
was thereby given, a copious Steam in the form of smoke, which to them, who
had their Bodies affected with the external Air, was very sensibly warm, and
was almost unfit for Respiration. Which Circumstance increased my suspicion
that there might be among these steames, some of the nature of those, that have
been observed to come from fermenting Liquors, especially Wine, and so abound
in some Cellars, as almost to stiffle those that ventured into those Vaults,
And to kill some of them outright. Which effects the long abode of
Subterraneall Steams in stagnating Air, even in many places, where no metalline
Oars at all, not other noxious mineralls have been found, has enabled that Air
to produce. Of which diverse sad Instances have been given within less then a
mile of this place, upon men's first going down into pitts or Wells, that had
not in a long time been opened or made use of: (but this is here mentioned only
upon the By) nor have we any necessity to fly to Subterraneall Exhalations, for
the Comparative warmth that good Cellars in general afford in frosty weather;
since that Phenomenon may be accounted for, by the reason formerly given, That
the closeness of the Cavity, and the thickness of the sides and Roof, keep
it from being vehemently affected with the Cold of the Ambient Air.

I know it is pretended that the warmth we speak of, proceeds from an
Antiperistasis, but not now to engage in a controversy that would take up too
much time, it may here suffice to represent, that in our case there appears no
necessity of recurring to it, the Phenomenon being solvable by the Region
newly cited, which may be confirmed by this Experiment, that in the Vaulted
Cellar above mentioned, wherein Beer was kept from freezing, in an almost
prodigiously sharp Winter, the included Air, though sensibly warm, to those
that came out of the free Air, had not so intended its native heat, as the
Assertors of An^iperistasis would have expected; being Colder then the free Air
commonly is in that place, not only in the heat of Summer, but in other
seasons, when the weather is Temperate; As I was assured by comparing my own
observations made at other times, with the account brought me by a skillfull
person, whom I employed into that Cellar at late hours, in one or two of the
sharpest nights of the forementioned cruel winter with the same excellent
sealed weather-glass that I had long kept suspended within a stones cast of
that place.

CHAP. V.
HAving said thus much about the Earths uppermost Region, I now proceed to that
which lies next beneath it; whose Temperature I cannot so conveniently give an
account of, in less then two Propositions, whereof the First is this;

Proposition the first.
The Second Region of the Earth seems to be for the most part cold in
comparison of the other two.

This proposition may be confirmed partly by Reason, and partly by experience.

And first it seems consonant to Reason, that since the Earth is naturally a
Body consisting of gross and heavy parts, that are usually much less
agitated, then those of our Organs of Feeling, it should as to sense be cold;
and that therefore that quality may be justly ascribed to it, in that Region
where by virtue of its situation, it is kept from being considerably affected,
either by the heat of the Superior Air, or by that of the deep parts of the
Earth: which upper, and lower heat are the two Agents, that seem of all others
the most likely to put its parts into an unusual motion, and thereby change
its natural Temper.

That our proposition is also confirmable by Experience, may be gathered from
the Relations set down in the former part of this discourse,

And here it will be proper to take notice of the Advertisement intimated in
the close of our above delivered proposition, That this Coldness ascribed to
the second Region of the Earth, is to be understood comparatively to the other
two. For otherwise that even this Earth is not (as many naturallists would have
it) the Summum Frigidum I gather from this, That I could never hear of any Ice
met with there, at any time of the year though Snow or Hail may be produced in
the middle Region at differing, and sometimes quite opposite seasons of the
year; nay, I have not found by the Answers that were made me by those that have
descended far enough into this Region, that they found the cold any where very
great, or that in some places they have found it at all considerable. As we
shall see in the explication of the next proposition. I know not whether it
will much strengthen what has been said, if I add, that I learned by inquiry of
such persons as I lately mentioned, that at the mouth of deep Grooves, in
mines, the steams that ascend, do often feel warm; though the outward Air where
the Observation is made, be affected with the heat of Summer. But though this
probably argue, that if the middle Region of the Earth, through which these
Steams must ascend, were very intensely cold, they would be so refrigerated in
their passage, as to feel rather Cold then hot at their appearing above ground,
especially in Summer: yet I shall not lay much weight (for some may perhaps be
allowed it) upon this Argument; because I have not yet tried, how far a warm
Steam may be altered in its passage, through a Cold Conduit: not to mention that
in the Earth, the passage by being directly upwards may be much the nimblier
traversed.

CHAP. 6.
THe second proposition relating to the Temperature of the second Region of the
Earth, may be delivered in these Terms.

Proposition the 3
In several places, which by reason of their distance from the surface of the
Earth, one would refer to the middle Region of it, The Temperature of the Air
is very differing at the same times of the year

I chose to express my self thus, to prevent some ambiguities and objections
which I foresaw, that shorter, but less dear and full expressions, might give
occasion to.

In the proof of our proposition, both Experience and Reason may distinctly be
employed. And to begin with experience,

Whereas in the above recited descent into the Hungarian-Mines, there was
observed a notably Cold Region of a considerable thickness, I have purposely
procured accounts from diverse persons that have here in England had occasion,
some of them frequently to descend into deep pits or Grooves of differing
mineralls, without finding by the narratives they made me, that they took
notice of any notably cold part that they passed through; unless I particularly
asked a question about such a thing. But for ought I could gather from their
Spontaneous Relations, they felt in Summertime a remission of the heat of the
external Air, as soon as ever they began to descend; which warmth did not so
far decrease, as to terminate in any notable Coldness, before they came into a
deeper part of the Earth, where they are never troubled with that quality. And
some of these Relations I had from professed Miners, and was curious that the
Relations I procured shoud be of Subterraneall parts seated in very differing
parts of England, as well as of places not all, or most of them having Veins of
one and the same mineral. And I learned by particlar inquiry from a practical
Mathematician that was often employed about Lead-mines that at such depths as,
(according to Morinus) the second Region of the Earth reaches to, he himself
observed it to be sensibly warm at all seasons of the year (for about that
Circumstance I was peculiarly solicitous to be satisfied.)

Nor is it unconsonant to Reason, that the middle Region of the Earth, in the
sense meant in the proposition, should not be of the same temperature in all
places; not only because of the differences, which the Climate may produce, by
reason of its being very much hotter, or very much colder in one place then in
another: but from the peculiar constitution of the Soil; to the Consideration
whereof I shall here confine my self.

Now this Temperament of the Soil it self may be divertified, not only by its
greater or lesser compactnesse (upon which account some Soils are Rocky or
stony and others Light and spongy) but from the nature of the springs or
Subterraneous Liquors, that may abound in it, or strain through it into the
Groove or pit, we suppose the Observer to be in; and that especially by the
mineralls, particularly Salts, and Marchasites that grow near the sides of the
Well, or are brought thither by the waters.

To illustrate this, give me leave to consider, that nature dos not regulate
her self under ground by our imaginary Divisions: but, without taking notice
of them, produces marchasites, Salts, and other mineralls, most frequently
(perhaps) in what we call the lower Region of the Earth; but yet sometimes to,
in our upper Region and oftentimes in our middlemost Region. Let us then
suppose, that in some places of this last named Region, there be a mine of that
Earth that naturally abounds with embryonated nitre, or with some other salt
that is apt, especially being dissolved or moistened with water, (a thing very
familiarly to be met within in mines; to send out a refrigerating Effluvium, or
by its contact to cool the Air. Let us also suppose that by the sides of
another Well of the same depth, there are store of unripe mineralls that are in
the process of generation, or rather a great quantity of marchasiticall Earth,
if I may so call it, that is such a substance, as I have met with, in more then
one place, copiously impregnated and as it were blended with mineralls of a
marchasiticall nature; and yet of so open and loose a Texture, as not only
water would in a few hours, but Air also would in not very many, evidently
work upon it. And since during the time that marchasites are slowly
dissolving, it has been observed according to what we have elsewhere delivered
The Tract here pointed at is a Discourse of Subterraneall Fires and Heats.
that many of them will conceive a very considerable degree of heat, will it
not be very probable, that the Temperature of the Earth in the place that
abounds with these Marchasiticall mineralls will be very warm in comparison of
the Temperature of the other place, where the Soil dos plentifully produce
nitrous, and other refrigerating Bodies; though both the places be supposed to
be at the same distance from the surface of the Earth, and consequently in the
same Subterraneous Region.

Upon the like grounds, it may also be suspected, that in the same places the
Temperature may not be always the same, even upon the account of the Soil. For
I elsewhere show, that some Saline Earths, especially nitrous, and some
mineralls that partake of the nature of marchasites, admit a kind of graduall
maturation, and perhaps other Changes that seem to be spontaneous. And that
such changes happen the more notably in those parts of such Bodies that are
exposed to the Air, as those are that chance to be placed at the sides of the
deep Wells we are talking of. Which things being presupposed, 'twill not be
absurd to conceive, that the mineral, to which either heat or cold is to be
referred, may be more copious, ripe, and operative at one time, then at
another; or that at length, all the Earth capable of being, as it were
Assimilated by the mineral rudiments harbored in it, may be consumed, or the
mineral it self may arrive at a perfection of maturity, which will make its
texture so close as to be unfit to be penetrated, and wrought upon, as before,
by the water or other Liquor that occasioned its incalescence.

CHAP VII
I Omit to speak of the transient changes that may be occasioned in the
temperature of the second Region of the Earth by several Accidents, and
especially by the Subterraneall Exhalations, that in some places and times
copiously ascend out of the lower Regions of the Earth. Nor shall I insist upon
any of the other causes of a more durable difference of temper in some parts of
the second Region, such as may be the Vicinity of Subterraneall Fires in the
third Region that heat the incumbent Soil; because I would hasten to the Third
and last part of this Discourse: which yet I must not do without premising this
advertisement, that I think my self obliged to speak the more hesitantly and
diffidently about the Temperature of Subterraneall Air; because mineralists
have not had the Curiosity to examine it by Weather-glasses, which would give
us much more trusty Informations then our sense of feeling powerfully
preaffected by the cold or heat of the external Air. I did indeed send fit
Instruments to some days journey from this place, to examine the Air at the
bottom of some of our deep mines: but through some unlucky casualties upon the
place, the attempt miscarried. But when I shall (God assisting) recover an
opportunity that I have since wanted, I hope an accurate sealed Weather-glasse,
joined with a portable Baroscope will give me better Information then
mineralists have yet done. I say a sealed Weather-glasse because though common
Thermoscopes had been employed by miners, I durst not rely upon them; being
persuaded by trials purposely made, as well as by the Reason of the thing, of
the Fallaciousnesse of such Thermoscopes: for in them the included Air is
liable to be wrought upon, not only by the Heat and coldness, but by the
weight or Pressure of the external Air. So that if a Thermoscope be let down
from a very considerable height, at the top of which the station of the
pendulous Liquor be well marked, that Liquor will be found to have risen, when
the Instrument rests at the bottom, as if the included Air were manifestly
refrigerated: though the temper of the external Air may be in both places
alike, the cause of the pendulous Liquors rising being indeed that the Aereall
pillar incumbent on the stagnant Liquor, is higher and heavier at the bottom,
where the Instrument rests, then that which leaned upon it, at its first or
upper station nearer the top of the Atmospher. From whence 'twill be easy to
conclude that at the bottom of a deep Groove, where the Atmosphericall pillar
that presses the stagnant water will be much longer and heavier then at the
top, the Air may appear by the Instrument to be colder in places, where it is
really much hotter, the increased weight of the incumbent Air being more
forcible to impell up the pendulous Liquor then the endeavor of expansion
procured in the included Air by the warmth of the place is to depresse it.

CHAP. VIII.
THat which challenges the third and last part of my discourse, is the
lowermost Region of the Earth, about whose temperature I shall comprize, what I
have to say in the following Proposition.

Proposition the 4.
The third Region of the Earth has been observed to be constantly and sensibly
warm, but not uniformly so; being in some places considerably hot

I mention that the recited temperature has been observed in the Lower Region,
because I would intimate, that I would have the proposition understood with
this Limitation, as far as has been yet (that I know of,) observed. For almost
all the deep Grooves that mineralists have given us accounts of, and wherein
men have wrought long enough to take sufficient notice of the Temperature of
the Air, have been made in Soils furnished with metalline Oars, or other
mineralls, without which, men would not be invited to be at so great a charge,
as that of sinking so very deep pits, and maintaining workmen in them. So that
experience has yet but slenderly, or at least not sufficiently informed us of
the Temperature of those parts of the third Region of the Earth, that are not
furnished with ponderous mineralls, and consequently has not informed us of the
Temperature of the Lowermost Region in general; as will better appear by what
I shall ere long represent.

Having premised this Advertisement about our proposition, we may proceed to
the distinct proof of the two parts or members it consists of.

And to begin with the first, whatever the Peripateticks teach of the innate
Coldness of the Earth, especially where it is remotest from the mixture of the
other Elements; yet having purposely inquired of several persons that visited
and also frequented the Third Region in differing Countries, Soils, and at
differing depths under ground, and Seasons of the year, I did not perceive that
any of them, had ever found it sensibly and troublesome cold in the Third
Region of the Earth. And on this occasion I remember I had some light
suspicion, that (at least in some Cases) the narrowness of the Cavities wherein
the Diggers were in diverse places reduced to work, might make the warmth they
felt, proceed in great part from the Steams of their own Bodies, and perhaps of
the mineralls, and from the Difficulty of cooling or ventilating the Blood in
an Air clogged with steams. And I was the rather induced to think this
possible, because I had (even in metalline mines that were but shallow and very
freely accessible to the Air) observed a strong smell of the metal abounding
there.

I have likewise found by several trials, that the exhalations that proceed
from the Bodies of Animalls, do so vitiate the Air they abound in, as to make
it much less fit for their Respiration, and to be apt to make them sick and
faint. Wherefore I thought it not altogether unfit to inquire, whether the heat
of the Subterraneall air, in such places as have been newly mentioned, might
not be referred to these Causes? But I was answered in the negative; especially
by an inquisitive person that had been in the deepest and hottest mines that
have been visited by any Acquaintances of mine.

This way of accounting for the Subterraneall Warmth being laid aside, it
seemed I confess somewhat difficult to conceive how it should be produced; yet
two principal Causes there are to which I think we may probably refer the
Temperature of those places, where the air is but moderately warm. To which a
Third is to be added; when we come to give an account, why some places are
troublesomly hot.

And first, why the Coldness of Winter should not be felt in the Lowermost
Region of the Earth may be, that the air there, is too remote from the
Superterrestriall air, to be much affected with those adventitious Causes of
Cold, that make that Quality intense in the air above ground. But because this
Reason shows rather, why it should not be in the Earths Lower Region much
Colder in Winter then in Summer; but not why it should be in all seasons warm
there, I shall add as a Conjecture, that the positive cause of the actual
warmth may proceed from those deeper parts of the Subterraneall Region, which
ly beneath those places which men have yet had occasion and ability to dig. For
it seems probable to me, that in these yet inpenetrated Bowels of the Earth,
there are great storehouses of either actual Fires, or places considerably
Hot, or, (in some Regions) of both; from which Reconditories (if I may so call
them) or magazines of hypogeall heat, that quality is communicated, especially
by Subterraneall Channells, Clefts, Fibers, or other Conveyances, to the less
deep parts of the Earth, either by a propagation of heat through the substance
of the interposed part of the Soil. (as when the upper part of an Oven is
remissly heated by the same Agents that produce an intense heat in the Cavity,)
or by a more easy diffusion of the Fire or heat through the above mentioned
Conveyances as may be exemplified by the pipes that convey heat in some
Chymicall structures:) Or else, (which is perhaps the most usual way,) by
sending upwards hot mineral Exhalations and Steams, which by reason of the
comparatively heavy materials they consist of, and by reason of their being
less dispersed nearer the places whence they proceed, are usually more
plentiful in the deeper parts of the Earth, and somewhat affect them with the
Quality that they brought from the workhouses where they were formed and that
they retain for some time after.

CHAP. IX.
THat manifest Steams oftentimes are found in Grooves, especially in deep ones
is evident, by the damps that infest most of them, and that in distant Regions,
as in several provinces of Germany, Bohemia, Hungary, etc. as also in several
parts of England in Grooves, some of which I have received Relations from the
mine-men themselves. By which it appears, that several of these Exhalations
ascending from the entralls of the Earth are sulphurous and Bituminous in
smell and in some Grooves (one whereof I elsewhere mention my self to have
visited) these Steams are apt, actually to take fire.

The warmth of many Subterraneall Exhations I think may be made further
probable by some other Observations. For though these newly mentioned are not
to be rejected, and may be employed for want of better; yet I have several
times questioned, whether I ought to acquiesce in them alone. For I do not
think the easy inflammableness of Bodies to be always a sure proof of the
actual sensible warmth of the minute parts it consists of, or may be reduced
into. For though Saltpeter be very inflammable, yet being by a solution in
fair water reduced to invisible Corpuscles, it highly refrigerates that Liquor.
Nor have I observed its fumes, (when far from the Fire,) to have any heat
sensible to our Touch. And the like may be said of the Exhalations of highly
rectified spirit of Wine; which yet we know is itself totally inflammable. Nay
I know not whether, (for a Reason elsewhere declared) copious Exhalations may
not ascend from the lower parts of the Earth, and yet be rather Cold then Hot.
For (in another Paper) I mention a way by which I made a mixture that
plentifully enough enitted Steams, of whose being rather of a Cold, then hot
nature, there was this probability, that the mixture whence they ascended even
whilsts its component Ingredients were briskly acting upon one another, was not
only sensibly, but considerably Cold.

One main thing therefore that induces me to assent to the Opinion, whereto the
former Instances do but incline me, is, That having purposely inquired of an
observing man that frequented deep mines, (wherein he had a considerable
share,) he answered me, that he plainly observed the fumes that came out of the
mouths of the deep pits, to be actually and sensibly warm, and that in a warm
season of the year. And Morinus (above cited) speaking of the deep
Hungarianmines, makes it the first Epithet of the copious Exhalation that
ascended from the bottom, that it was hot. And a few pages after he says, that
at the mouth of the Well, the ascending Fumes were sensibly hot in Summer it
self. And the same Arguments that I have elsewhere given to show that there
are very hot places, and as it were Aestuary in the Bowels of the Earth, may
serve to make it probable that the steams ascending thence may be actually warm.

That also in many places of the Earth, where no Grooves are dugg, and no
visible Exhalations are taken notice of, they may yet pervade the Soil, and
exercise some operations of warmth, may be probable by this, that the
experienced Agricola himself reckons it among the signs of a latent mineral
vein, that the hoar-frost does not ly upon that tract of the Surface of the
Earth, under which a vein (though perhaps very deep) runs. The like Directions
I have known given by the skillfull in England, for the Discovery of places
that contain Coal-mines. And I remember a near relation of mine showed me a
great scope of Land of his, which (though in an outward appearance, likely to
be as cold as any place thereabouts,) he affirmed would not suffer Snow to ly
upon it above a day or two in the midst of Winter.

The probability of which Relation was confirmed to me by the answer I received
from a very ingenious Gentleman who lives among mines, and is not a little
concerned in some of them. For having inquired of him, What he had observed
about the lying, or not lying of the Snow on the mineral Soils near the place
of his Residence; he replied, that in some of them, he did not take notice of
any peculiar Indisposition to let the Ice and Snow continue on them; which I
conceive may proceed, either from the want of such mineralls in the Subjacent
parts, as were then in the state of Incalescence; or else from this that,
(according to what we have elsewhere observed about the Snows on Aetna) the
direct ascension of the hot Steams was hindered by some Layers of Rocks or
other Stone, through which the Steams could not penetrate, or could do it but
so slowly, as to loose their actual warmth by the way. But this Gentleman
added that in other places, near that of his abode, and such as he knew to have
minerall-Veins beneath them, he observed that the Snow, (nor the Ice) would
scarce continue at all upon the Surface of the Ground, even in an
extraordinarily cold winter.

It will be a considerable Instance to our purpose if it be indeed true which
some learned men have written that near the Gold-mines in Hungary the leaves of
the trees, (especially those that respct the Ground) are oftentimes found
ennobled with a golden-colour from the metalline Exhalations of the Gold-mines;
which one would think must by reason of their ponderousness need a
considerable heat to elevate them, especially into the open Air. But though
doubting of this Relation, as not made by mineralists or accurate Observers, I
inquired about it of a person, whose Curiosity carried him purposely to visit
those mines, I was answered that he could not be a witness to the truth of the
Observation; yet he told me, an observation (which I else where mention) that
does not discountenance that Tradition.

If it be objected that what has hitherto been said about Latent Fires and
heats in the Bowels of the Earth will give an account of the warmth only of
those places that are within teach of the action of such Magazines of heat,
which probably may be wanting in many places of the Earth, I shall readily
confess, that as I first made this Objection to my self, so I do not yet
discern it to be unreasonable, and that for ought I know if men had occasion to
digg as deep and be as far conversant in many other low places of the Earth,
where there are no signs of Mineralls, as they have done where the hopes of
actual discovery of veins of metalls, and other mineralls worth working, have
invited them, diverse places in the Third Region of the Earth would be met with,
that would bedestitute of the warmth that has hitherto been generally found in
places of the same Region that either abound with mineralls themselves, or are
near some of the deep and latent Aestuaries abovementioned.

And as for those parts of the Third Region of the Earth, which men feel not
only warm, but troublesomly hot, that incommodious degree of heat seems not,
(at least in some places) to be derivable from the two above mentioned causes;
which must, (to produce so considerable an effect) be assisted by a third cause
more potent then themselves: which seems to be the incalescence there is
produced in many mines, and other Places, by the mutual action of the
component parts promoted by water of immature and more loosely contexted
mineralls, especially such as are of a Marchasiticall nature. That such an
Incalescence may by such a way be produced in the Bowels of the Earth, I have
elsewhere shown (in my discourse of Subterraneall Fires and heats) by the
examples of such incalescences producible in mineral Bodies here above ground.
That Marchasites which for the most part abound in Vitrioll, are bodies very
fit to procure this Subterraneall heat, may be consirm'd not only by the
Sulphurous and Saline parts they abound with, and by this, that many of them
may be wrought on, as we have tried, both by simple water, and even by moist
Air, which argues the resolublenesse of their Constitution: but also by this,
that having purposely inquired of a Gentleman that went out of Curiosity to
visit one of the deeper Hungarian mines, he confirmed to me what I had
otherwise been informed of, by answering me, that in the lower parts of the
m^ne, he had gathered Vitrioll that app^ared above ground to be of a golden
nature; and that in a Cave that is on one side of the Groove, in the deep
Gold-mine near Cremnitzo, the corrosive smell is so strong and noxious, that
men have not dared to dig out the native Gold it richly abounds with, being
deterred by the ill fate of livers that ventured to work in it. Adding that
though he passed by it, in great have; yet he could not avoid the being
offended by the noisome Exhalations. And on this occasion, 'twill not be (I
presume) disliked, if I illustrate what I was saving of Immature mineralls, by
subjoining, That having, asked this Chemist whether the Vitrioll he found very
deep underground were all solid, or some of it soft? he affirmed that as he
gathered it, he found some of it soft. And to satisfy my curiosity to know
whether it continued that yiedling consistence? he further told me, that it was
soft in the deeper part of the mine, but when he had brought it into the
Superterrestriall Air, it hardened there and appeared to have 9 diverse golden
streakes in it.

CHAP. X.
ONe thing there is, which must not be here omitted, though it will probably be
great news to those that philosophize only in their studies, and have not
received information from any that visited the deeper parts of the Earth: The
Phenomenon is this, That the Diggers in mines having found by unwelcom
experience that in deep Grooves, the Air (unless ventilated and renewed) dos in
a short time become unfit for respiration, have been put upon this expedient,
to sink at some convenient distance from the Groove where the miners work,
another pit (by some called a vent pit) that usually tends directly downwards
(though sometimes it make Angels) to which our English-minemen do in several
parts of this Kingdom give differing names; whereof the most signisicant seems
to be that given it in the Leadmines of Darbyshire, where they call it an
Air-shaft, and are wont to make it 40, 50, and sometimes 80 or 100 paces off,
and, (as one of the chief and skillfull Miners there informed me) as deep as
the Groove or Well; (Though I find that the best German and some English Miners
think a less depth will often suffice) From this Air-shaft to the Groove the
men work in, there passes a Channel or if I may so call it, Ventiduct to
convey the Air from the former to the latter; which is that, that Agricola
sometimes (for he employs not the Term always in the same sense) denotes by
his Cuniculu; Lib. V. (...) VI. De re metal.
and which though differingly named by our Miners in several parts of England
is in the above mentioned Lead-mines called a Drift, because the Air dos
usually in the form of Wind drive through it: and thereby enables the Workmen to
breath freely and conveniently enogh at the very bottom of the Well. On this
occasion I remember that a very observingrman who much frequented these Mines
told me, that at the depth of no less then about 200 yards, be found that by
the help of the Air-shaft, the Air was not only very commodious for
Respiration, but temperate as to heat and Cold. And when I further asked, what
time of the year it then was? he told me 'twas about the latter end of August
and the beginning of September.

Now that which seems to me to deserve a farther and accurate observation about
the motion and Temperature of the Air in these Artificial under ground
Cavities, is a Relation of Agricolas which, (though he be the most Classick
Author we have about m^nes,) has not (that I know of) been taken notice of, in
him. For this experienced VVritter, though in his Treatise Idcirco f^robes,
putei cuniculi eff^ssi complentur exteriore Aere. Atque ipsum in cos influere
imprimis hyema li tempore evidens est in duobus puteis, ad quorum utrumque ex
modico intervalh cuniculus aliquis pertinet. Nam Aer in unum continuo influit
rectaque per cunicul^m permeat and transit ad alterum; atque ex eo rursus
evolat for as.
de Ortu and causis Subterraneorum, he only says indefinitely, that by means
of the Cuniculus or Drist, which connects the Air-shaft and the well, that Air
which comes in at one of those two, passes out at the other; yet in his Fifth
Book de re metallica he gives a more particular and odd account of the course
of the Air in these not over clear Terms, Aer autem exterior se sua sponte
sundit in cava terra, atque cum per ea penetrare potest, rursus evolat soras.
Sed diversa ratione hoc sieri solet; etenim vernis and aestivis diebus in
altiorem puteum influit, and per cuniculum vel fossam latentem permeat, ac ex
humiliori effluit similiter iisdem diebus in altiorem cuniculum infunditur, and
interjecto puteo defluit in humiliorem cuniculum atque ex eo emanat. Autumnali
vero and hyberno tempore, contra in cuniculum vel puteum humiliorem intrat, and
ex altiori exit: verum ea fluxionum Aeris mutatio in temperatis Regionibus fit
in initio veris, and in fine Antumni: in frigidis autem, in fine veris and in
in initio Autumni. To which he adds that which is more remarkable; That the Air
in both the mentioned times, Sed Aer utroque tempore anteaquam cursum suum
illum cons^etum co^st (...) teneat plerum (...) dierum spacio (...) habet
mutationes, (...) ^ltiorem (...) ^^el cuniculum ins^aens, modo in humiliorem.
before its wonted course come to be durably settled, uses to be for the space
of a fortnight liable to frequent changes, sometimes flowing into the upper or
higher groove or Drift, and sometimes into the lower, (and passing out at the
other.) If this Observation constantly hold, though but in some deep Mines, it
may hint some odd inquiries, about considerable and (...) changes in the
Subterraneall parts of the Earth, or in the Air, or in Both, which though they
have not yet been considered, deserve be so. I have endeavored to learn
whether any such thing has been observed in some deep Lead-mines, whence I have
procured diverse informations about other particulars. But a very observing
Person, that had the chief hand in contriving the Subterraneall structures
there, assured me that both VVinter and Summer, the current of Air, went
constantly the same way: the Air entering in at the Mouth of the Air-shaft, and
coming out at the Perpendicular Groove, which takes its denomination from a
Cave, (or Casa Pu^ealas) usually built over the Orifice of it, to shelter the
Workmen from rain, and other inconveniences.

And since the writing of this, I found in Morinus (his Relation already
mentioned) a passage that may somewhat illustrate the darkly expressed
Observation of Agricola. For the lately mentioned Author writes, that in the
deep Hungarian-Mines he visited, the outward Air passed (first) through the
Burrows, and so through By ways, (if I may so call them) that tended not
directly downwards, reached at length to the bottom of the Well, or
perpendicular Groove, whence, together with the Steams proceeding from the
Mine) is ascended strait upwards. But Morinus taking no notice at all of
Agricola's Observation about the differing course of the Subterraneall Air at
differing Seasons of the year: though (as I find by what he writes elsewhere,)
'twas Summer when he visited the Mines, and so what he reports, agrees well
with one part of what Agricola seems to say; yet, as to the other, and
principal part of his Observation, he says not any thing. And the sensible
heat he ascribes to the steams ascending out of the perpendicular Well, leaves
it somewhat dubious, what interest the Rarefaction of the Air, by the
Subterraneous Heat may have in the Phenomenon we have been discoursing of.

But to return to what I was saying before I had occasion to mention Morinus.
Which perhaps it will not be impertinent to add, that I loarn'd by inquiry,
that the Air-shafts, and the Wells, were in these Mines much of a depth. But I
hope ere long to have accounts of what happens in other mines, in other parts
of England, as to the course of the Subterraneall Air especially when its
issuing out of the Well, or the Air-shaft depend not on the changes of the
Winds that blow above ground: And I wish the curious would employ the like
endeavors in other Countries.

For indeed what I have hitherto discoursed in this Treatise, is accommodated
but to the scant Information I have hitherto received; and therefore ought to
be rectified or Confirmed by farther Informations if they can be procured.

In the mean time, I think I may probably enough, gather from the pas't
Discourse, that though in some Mines, three Subterraneall Regions, and their
distinguishing Attributes, may be not inconveniently assigned; yet generally
speaking of the whole Body of the Terrestrial Globe (as far as we know it)
both the Bounds and the Temperature of the Regions of the Earth, as well as
those of the Air, are various and uncertain enough.

And much less have we any certain knowledge of the Temperature of the more
inward, and (if I may so speak) the more Centrall parts of the Earth; in which,
whether there be not a continued solidity, or great Tracts of Fluid matter, and
whether or no, differing Regions are to be distinguished, and what their
number, Order, thickness, and qualifications may be, we are as yet ignorant,
and shall I fear long continue so, For it is to be noted (with which
observation I shall conclude) that what has been hitherto discoursed, belongs
only to the Temper of those Subterraneall parts, to which men have been enabled
to reach by Diging. It Is true indeed that some Mines especially in Germany, and
Hungary are of a Stupendous depth, in comparison of the generality of ours,
and of the more obvious Cavities of the Earth; yet I find it boasted in a
Discourse written purposely of the Various Mines, in the World, that the rich
Mine at Sueberg is 400 yards deep: And they are scarce believed, that relate
one Hungarian-Mine which they visited to be 400 sathom; which though double the
depth of the former, reaches not to half a mile. But the deepest of all the
mines that I have as yet read or heard of, from any credible Relator, is that
which the experienced Agricola in the Tract he calls Bermannus, Cap. 12.
mentions to be at Cotteberg. But this it self though it reach to above 500
fathom, that is, 3000 foot, yet this prodigious depth dos not much exceed half
a mile and falls short of three quarters, Licet variae de ambitu tervae
opiniones sint, nobis tamen propemodum constet, esse ipsam milliarum Italiarum
26255, quod in maximo ad Terrae superficiem circulo respondeant uni gradui
milliaria proxime 73. etc. Gassend. Instit. Astronom. Lib: 2. Cap. 13.
and how small a part is that of the whole depth of the Terrestrial Globe?
whose semidiameter, if we admit the recent account of the Learned Gassendus,
reckoned at 4177. Italian miles: in comparison of which, (as I was saying), how
small a thing is a depth that falls very short of a single mile?

FINIS.
Of the TEMPERATURE Of the SUBMARINE REGIONS As to HEAT and COLD.
OF THE TEMPERATURE, Of the SUBMARINE REGIONS. As to Heat and Cold. CHAP. I.
THough the Aristotelians who believe water and Air to be reciprocally
transmutable, do thereby fancy an Affinity between them, that I am not yet
convinced of: yet I readily allow of so much Affinity betwixt those two fluid
Bodies, as invites me (after having treated of the Temperature of the Aeriall
Regions) to say something of that of the Submarine Regions: which name of
Submarine, though I know it may seem Improper, I therefore Scruple not to make
use of, because even among the Generality of Learned Men use has Authorized the
name of Subterraneous Places. For as these are not by this name, and indeed
cannot in Reason be supposed to be beneath the whole Body of the Earth, but
only the Superficial parts of it: so by the Appellation of Submarine Regions
it is not to be supposed that the places so called are below the Bottom of the
Sea, but only below the surface of it.

But to come from words to things, I presume it will not be expected that I
that never pretended to be a Diver should give of the Regions I am to treat of,
an Account build on my own Observations; and I hope it may gratify a
Reasonable Curiosity about a subject, of which Classick Authors are so very
silent, and about which Philosophers seem not so much as to have attempted any
Experiments (for want of Opportunities and mean to make them.) I offer the best
Information I could supply my self what by purposely conversing with Persons
that have dived some without, and some by the help of Engines. To which I have
added some reports that I judge fit to be allowed, made me by Persons that had
conversed with the Diverse upon those Affrican and Indian-Coasts, where the most
famous and expert are thought to be found.

And I the rather report the Answers and Relationsmy Inquiries procured because
the Informations they give us concern a subject considerable as well as vast,
about which nevertheless I among many others am not in a condition to satissie
at all my Curiosity by Trials of my own making, and because also what I shall
say will probably spoil the credit of the Vulgar Error that in all deep water
of which the Sea is the Chiefest, the lowermost are still the warmest parts,
unless in case that in some very hot Climates or seasons, the superficial
ones happen to be a little warmed by the Extraordinary or Violent heat of the
Sun.

CHAP. II
THough the Air and the Earth have been discriminated as to Temperature into
three Regions; yet the Informations I have hitherto met with, invite me not to
assign to the Sea any more then two. The former of which may be supposed to
reach from the superficies of it, as far downwards as the manifest operation of
the variously reflected and refracted Beams of the Sun, or other Causes of
warmth penetrates: from which to the Bottom of the Sea, the other Region may be
supposed to extend.

According to this Division the Limits of this upper Region will not be always
constant; for in the Torrid Zone and other hotter Climates, it will, Caeteris
paribus, be greater then in the Frigid Zone or in the Temperate Zones: and so
it will be in Summer then in Winter: and in hot weather then in Cold; supposing
in these Cases the Heat to come from the Sun and Air; and not, as sometimes it
may do, from the Subterraneall Exhalations.

The same causes are likewise proper as it is manifest to alter the Temperature
as well as the Bounds of this Region, But this Temperature may also be changed
in some few places by at least two other Causes; The one is the differing
constitution of the Soil that composes the Shore, which may affect the
neighboring water if it do extraordinarily abound with Nitre, loosely
contexed marchasites, or other substances capable considerably to increase or
lessen the Coldness of the water. Another though unfrequent Cause, may be the
figure and situation of the less deep parts of the Shore, which may in some
sort reverberate the Heat that proceeds from the Sun; and upon such an account
may either add to the warmth, or allay the Coldness that would else be found
in the neighboring water. For whatever the Schools are wont to teach about the
Interest of the Attrition of Air in the heat produced by the Sun Beams, I have
elsewhere shown by Experiments, that those Beams may considerably operate upon
Bodies placed quite under water.

Besides these two Cases that may occasion Exceptions to the general
Observation; I intimated by the words, at least, that there might be others.
Because, to mention now but one Example, though it seem probable from what I
have elsewhere delivered concerning the Subterraneall Fires and Heats, that may
in some places be met with, even beneath the bottom of the Sea, that the
Phenomenon I am going to recite may be reduced to the causes newly intimated;
yet I am not absolutely certain but that in this case, whereto some others may
perhaps be found resebling, some other cause, then those hitherto mentioned,
may produce or concur to the effect. The Relation here meant is afforded us
by the following Passage, taken out of the Voyage of Monsieur de Monts into
New-France, (whereof he went to be Governor) where the Relator thus recites his
observation. About the eighteenth day of June we found the Seawater during
three days space very warm, and by the same warmth, our wine also was warm in
the bottom of our ship; yet the Air was no hotter then before. And the 21 of
the said month, quite contrary, we were 2 or 3 days so much compassed with
mists and cold, that we thought our selves to be in the month of January, and
the water of the Sea was extreme cold: which continued with us until we came
upon the Bank by reason of the said mists, which outwardly did procure this
cold unto us. This effect he attributes to a kind of Antiperistasis in the
following part of his narrative; which I shall not now either transcribe or
examine.

CHAP. 3
And thus much being breifely noted touching the upper Region of the Sea, and
the requisite Cautions (that may perhaps extend further then it) being
premised; it remains that I take notice of the Temperature of the Lower Region,
which, in one word, is Cold (unless in some few places to be presently
mentioned.) For water being in it is natural or most ordinary state, a liquor
whose parts are more slowly agitated then those of men's Organs of Feeling, must
be upon that account Cold as to sense: and consequently it need not be strange
that those parts of the Sea, which are too remote to be sensibly agitated by
the Sunbeams, or wrought upon by the warmth which the Air and upper parts of
the Earth may from other Causes receive, should be felt Cold by those that
descend into it; unless in those few places where the Coldness may be either
expelled or allayed by hot Springs or Subterrestriall Exhalations, flowing or
ascending from the subjacent Earth, or the lower parts of the shore into the
incumbent or adjacent parts of the water.

To justify my ascribing of this Coldness to the second, or lower Region of
the Sea, I shall now subjoin some Relations I procured from persons that had
occasion to go down into it, or otherways take notice of its Temperature in
very differing Regions of the World, and at very unequal depths.

And first as to the Temperature of the lower Region in the Northern Sea, I
had the opportunity to converse often, and sometimes to oblige a man bold and
curious enough, who for some years got the best part of his subsistence by
descending to the bottom of the Sea in an Engine, whose structure I elsewhere
describe, to seek for, and recover Goods lost in Shipwrackt Vessels. This
person I diligently examined about diverse Submarine Phenomenon, about which his
answers may be elsewhere met with. And as to the Temperature of the lower parts
of the Sea (the knowledge of which is that alone that concerns us in this
place) he several times complained to me of the Coldness of the deep water,
which kept him from being able to stay in it so long as he might have been put
into a condition of doing by the goodness of his Engine; for I remember that he
related to me that he staid once betwixt an hour or two, at a depth that was no
greater then 14 foot and a half upon the coast of Sweden, in a place that was
near the shore; and I afterward learnd that he staid much longer in a deeper
place; (use having probably made the Cold more supportable to him) He told me
then, that about two years before he was engaged by a good reward to go down
with his Engine to the bottom of the Sea to fetch up some Goods of value out of
a Ship that had been cast away there within about a miles distance from a very
little Island, and if I mistake not about 6 miles from the Shore. He farther
answered me that though he felt it not at all Cold on the Surface of the Water
(his attempt being made in June) yet about the depth of the Ship, it was so
very Cold, that he felt it not so Cold in England Winter and Frosty VVeather.
And he told me that an excessive Cold was there felt not only by him but by
very sturdy men, who invited by his example, would needs also go down
themselves to participate and promote the hoped for Discovery. He told me also,
that the upper water did but cool and refresh him; but the deeper he went the
Colder he felt it, which is the more considerable, because he had some times
occasion to stay at 10 fathoms or even 80 foot under water. And I since found
that he informed diverse Virtuosi, that purposely consulted him, that he found
the Coldness of the Water increase with its depth: and gave that for the
reason why he could not stay so many hours as otherwise he might, at the bottom
of the Sea. Adding that before his Engine was well fitted, he was once so
covered over with it, that he was forced to touch the ground with his hands and
feet, and the neighboring parts, to which he found a Coldness communicated by
the Fundus he leaned upon; though the closeness of his disordered Engine made
the other, and (whilst he was in that posture) upper parts of his Body, of a
very differing Temper.

An inquisitive person of my acquaintance that made a long stay in the
Northern America (at about two or three and forty degrees of Latitude) and
diverted himself often with swimming under water, answered me, that though he
scarce remembered himself to have dived above two fathoms beneath the surface
of the Sea; yet even at that small depth, he observed the water to increase in
coldness, the lower he descended into it. Which argues, that though the
Sunbeams do often penetrate plentifully enough to carry light to a great depth
under water; yet they do not always carry with them a sensible heat: and that
at least in some places, the upper Region of the Sea reaches but a little way.

The coldness of the Climate in these western parts of Europe, and the want of
considerable inducements to invite men to dive often to any great depth into
our Seas, has kept me from being able to procure many observations about the
temperature of their lower Region, but upon the hotter Coasts of Africa, and
the East Indies, the frequent Invitations men have to dive for Coral, pearls,
and other Submarine Productions, has made it possible for me to get more
numerous observations: some of which I shall now annex.

CHAP. 4.
MEeting with a Person of Quality who had been present at the sishing of Coral
upon the shore of Africa, and Who was himself practiced in diving, I inquired
of him whether he found the Sea upon the African Coast to be much colder at a
good depth, then nearer the surface; whereto he answered me, that though he had
seldom dived above three or four fathoms deep, yet at that depth he found it
so much colder then nearer the Top of the water, that he could not well endure
the coldness of it.

And when I farther asked him whether when he was let down to the bottom of the
Sea in a great diving Bell (as he told me he had been) he felt it very cold,
though the water could not come immediately to touch him, he replied that when
the bell came first to the ground, he found the Air in it very cold, though
after he had staid a while there, his breath and the steams of his Body made
him very hot.

That also at a greater depth in those hotter Climates the Seawater is
sensibly Cold may be thus made probable, Inquiring of a famous Sea-Commander
who had been upon the Affrican Coast, to what depth he was wont to sinck his
Bottles to preserve his Wine any thing cool in that excessive hot Climate, he
Answered me that in the day time he kept it in a tolerable temper so as to be
drinkable, by keeping it in the Bottom of the ship, and in sand, but in the
morning he had it cool enough by sincking his Bottles over night into the Sea,
and letting them hang all night at 20 or 30 fathom deep under water.

Inquiring also of an intelligent Gentleman that was employed to the river of
Gambra, and sailed up 700 miles in it, in a small frigot, whether he had
observed that in the Sea, even of those hot climats, wine may be preserved
cool, he told me that it might, and that by the means I hinted to him, which
was to let down when the ship came to an Anchor in the Evening several Bottles
full of wine (they used that of Madera) exactly stoped to ten, 12, or 14
fathoms deep, whence being the next morning drawn up, they found the wine cool
and fresh (as if the vessels had been in these parts drawn up out of a well)
provided it were presently drink, for if that Circumstance were omitted, the
heat of the Air on the upper part of the water would quickly warm the Liquor.

I remember too, that having met with a man of Letters that sailed to the
East Indies in a Portugal-Caraet, I learnt by enquiry of him, that 'twas the
practice in that great Vessel for the Captain and other Persons of note,
whilst they pass through the Torrid Zone, to keep their Drink, whether Wine or
Water, cool, by letting it down in bottles to the depth of 80, 90, anc
sometimes an hundred Fathom or better, and letting it stay there a competent
time; after which he told me he found it to be exceeding cool and refreshing.

Lastly, to satisfy my self as far as I could, to how great a depth the
Coldness of the Sea reached; meeting an observing Traveller whose affairs or
Curiosity had carried him to diverse parts both of the East and West Indies, I
enquired of him whether he had taken notice of any extraordinary deep soundings
in the vaster seas, To which being answered, that some years ago sailing to
the East Indies in a very great ship, over a place on the other side the Line
that was suspected to be very deep, they had the Curiosity to let down 400
Fathom of Line, and found they needed no less. Whereupon I enquired of him,
whether he had taken notice of the Temperature of the sounding Lead as soon as
'twas drawn up: To which he told me, that he, and some others did; and that the
Lead which was of the weight of about 30, or 35 l, had received so intense a
degree of coldness as was very remarkable; insomuch that he thought that if it
had been a mass of Ice, it could not have more vehemently refrigerated his
hands: and when I asked in what Climate this observation was made, he told me
'twas in the Antarctick Hemisphere, but at a great distance from the Line. As
indeed I concluded by some Circumstances he mentioned to me, that 'twas about
the 35th degree of Southern Latitude.

CHAP. 5.
These are the chief Relations I have hitherto been able to procure about the
Temperature of the Sea; which if they be so confirmed by others, as that we may
conclude they will generally hold; it will not be irrational to conceive that in
reference to Temperature, those two Fluids, Air and Water, may have this in
common, that where their Surfaces are contiguous, and in the neighboring
parts, they happen to be sometimes cold, and sometimes hot, as the particles
they consist of, chance to be more or less agitated by the variously reflected
Sunbeams, or more or less affected by ^ther causes of Heat. But that part of
the Air which they call the second, and is superior to the first, as also the
lower Region of the Sea, being more remote from the operation of those causes,
do retain their natural or more undisturbed Temperature, which, as to us men,
is a considerable degree of coldness, the Agitation of their small parts being
usually in those Regions much inferior to that of the Spirits, Blood, and other
parts of our Organs of Feeling. So that the Regions of the water and Air seem
to answer one another; but in an inverted order of situation, and the Analogy
might perhaps be carried further, if I had time and opportunity to do it in
this place. And here I shall not dissemble that I was somewhat perplexed by
meeting with a traveller that had visited the East- Indian Coast, near the
famous Cape of Comory: for asking him some questions touching the neighboring
Sea, I gathered from his discourse, that he concluded from that of some Diverse,
that the Sea near Ceylom was warmer at the bottom then at the top. And when I
thereupon asked him whether this happened not in their Winter, he replied that
it was indeed Winter, though not with us, yet with them; it occurred indeed to
my thoughts on this occasion, that perhaps in a part of the Torrid Zone so near
the Line as about 80 degrees, if the Sea were not of a considerable depth, the
heat of the two not far distant shores of Coromandell and Ceylom might have no
small influence upon the Tempetature of the water. I considered also (which did
not a little weigh with me) that in diverse parts of the East Indies, and even
in a Region bordering upon Coromandell, where an ingenious Acquaintance of mine
lived some years, it has been observed, that Winter and Summer are not so much
discriminated by Cold weather and Hot, as by very Rainy weather and very dry.
Nay in some places the sultry heat of the Climate is more complained of, in
what they call their Winter then their Summer. So that there will be no
necessity to recur to an Antiperistasis occasioned by the coldness of the
Winter. I thought too, that it may perhaps be without absurdity suspected, that
as the bottom of the Sea in this place had a peculiar Constitution that fitted
it more then others for the copious production of pearls: so there might be
some peculiarity in the nature of the subjacent Soil, or there may be some
Subterraneali Fire or heat beneath it, which may occasion an unusual warmth in
that part of the Sea, by which cherishing warmth, perhaps such abundance of shell
Fishes teeming with pearls, may be invited to settle there rather then in any
of the neighboring places. But with all these conjectures, I should not have
been so well satisfied, as with the answer I afterward obtained by a Gentleman
whose Curiosity had carried him to be an assiduous Spectator of the famous
pearl-fishing near the Island of Manar; between that and the Coast of
Coromandell, which reaches near, if not fully to the Cape of Comoris. For this
Person having had much Conversation with the Diverse for Pearls, not only
learned from them, that they found the water very sensibly Cold at the bottom
which in some places he estimated to be 80 or 100 fathom deep; but observd
diverse of them at their return to the Boats, to be ready to shake with Cold,
and hasten to the fires that were kept ready for them in little Cabines upon
the shore: Which Relation being accompanied with diverse Circumstances of
credibility and arguing the person that made it to have been acquainted with
the report above mentioned, and had met with some that had dived in the place
whereto it had relation, made me conclude that as to that report hither
something extraordinary had happened in that place, or that there was some
mistake of him to whom 'twas made, or that diverse did not descend to a
sufficiently considerable Depth

If I had been furnished with opportunity, I would have engaged some ingenious
Navigators to examine the Temperature of the Submarine-Regions, both of
differing seasons of the year (especially the hottest part of Summer and
Coldness of Winter, and with Hermetically sealed Weatherglasses in order to the
Discovery of such Particulars as these, Whether there be in some Seas any such
varying Differences of Temperature, as may invite us at least in some places,
to make more then two Submarine Regions. Whether the Submarine Coldness do at
the bottom of the Sea, or elsewhere either Equal or surpass that degree which
we here find sufficient to freez^ common water. Whether the parts of the
Seawater are still the Colder, as they are the deeper, And Whether or no this
increase of Coldness be regular enough to be reducible to any settled
proportion. But for the resolving of these and the like Questions, I did not
causelessely intimate that a sealed Weather-glass was to be employed; for I
take a common one to be altogether unfit for such purposes, not only because
the Seawater would mingle with such Liquors as are wont to be employed in it,
for that Inconveniency I could easily remedy, by substituting, as I have
several times don in other cases, Mercury instead of ordinary Liquors: but
cheifely because the incumbent Seawater would gravitate upon the restagnant
Liquor of the Weatherglass, and thereby render its Informations false or
uncertain. According to what I have had occasion to observe in another Tract.

Whereto, that there may not in this place be any need to recur, I shall add a
slight experiment that I made for the satisfaction of some Ingenious men not
w^ll acquainted with Hydrostaticks, or not rightly principled in them. And this
Trial I shall the rather mention, because many will not allow Water to press
upon Me^cury immersd therein, t^^s being a far more ponderous Liquor then that;
and others will expect, that the included Air, having no place to escape out
at, should resist the ascension of the subjacent Mercury, more than indeed it
will. We made then a small Weather-glasse differing from common ones, (besides
the bigness,) in that it was turnished with Mercury instead of Water; and in
that we employed to contain the stagnant Mercury, a Glass Vial with a narrow
neck, wherein (by a piece of Cork or two) the Stem of the Glass ball was well
fastened that this globula put of the Instrument might not be lifted up when it
was under water. Then having by applying cold water to the outside of the Ball
endeavored to reduce the Air to the same Temper with the Water, or at least to
an approaching degree of Coldness; and having taken notice of the Station of
the Mercury in the shanck or stem above mentioned; we did, (by strings tied
about the neck of the small Vial) let the Instrument gently down into a large
tall glass Body filled with fair water that the Liquor and Vessel being both
transparent, we might easily perceive the motions of the Mercury in the slender
pipe. By which means it appeared, that as the Thermometer descended deeper and
deeper into the Water, the Mercury was pressed up higher and higher in the
Stem. And that it may not be suspected, that this ascension proceeded only, or
cheifely, from the refrigeration of the Air by the Water, I shall add to what I
have just now noted, that though the Coldness of the Water may well be
supposed uniform as at least to sense; yet the whole instrument being leasurely
removed sometimes to the upper surface of the Water. (The like Experiment we
might have tried with a Thermoscope furnished with Water and let into Oil; or
with deliquated Salt of Tartar and pure Spirit of Wine instead of Mercury and
Water: if we had been furnished with sufficient quantities of those Liquors and
had judged it to be requisite.) But this Circumstance, I thought fit to
admonish the spectators of, that it is not to be expected, that the Mercury
should rise as much in proportion when it is (for example) a foot under water,
as when it is but two or three Inches; because according as the Instrument is
let down deeper and the Air crowded into a less room, the Spring of that
compressed Air becomes the stronger and makes the more resistance. Which
Advertisement agreed well with the Experiment, whose other Phenomenon I pas
over as not pertine^t to this place, where I would only justify what I said of
the unfitness of Weather-glasses made (though with other Liquors) after the
Common ways for making the Submarine Trials I proposed.

But till such Artificial Observations can be obtaind we may from what has
been above delivered, probably gather that though the lowermost of the
Submarine Regions be very sensibly Cold, yet Water, at least that of the Sea,
does not by these Phenomenon appear to be the Summum Frigidum. Though I have
been several times able to produce Ice in Saltwater, yet I find not by any
Observation, that there has been Ice met with and generated at the bottom of
the Sea, under which the Earth has been found unfrozen by our Diverse; and
appears to be soft at depths exceedingly surpassing the greatest they have
reached; as is evident by the Mudd, Gravel, etc. fetched from the bottom of the
Sea by sounding plummets, let down to 80 or 100 fathom, or even a depth,
whereof examples may be met with in the Journalls of Navigators; n^y, my
curiosity procured me this account, from the sober Commander of a ship, that
came this year from the remoter parts of the great Ocean, that at about 35
degrees of Southern Latitude, the tallow with which his sounding Lead was
anointed brought him up gray Sand from the immense depth of no less then two
hundred and twenty Fathom. But to this Observation it is just to annex this
Caution, That we cannot safely conclude from men's finding no Ice at the bottom
of the Sea, that the Cold there cannot be very intense; for as I have found by
more then one Relation ( Notes aboat the Saltness of the Sea.
elsewhere recited) that, whatever the Schools surmise, the Sea is at least as
Salt at the bottom, as at the top: so I have more then once tried, that Salt
water will without freezing admit a much greater degree of Cold, then is
necessary to turn fresh Water into Ice.

FINIS.
RELATIONS About the BOTTOM OF THE SEA.
RELATIONS about the Bottom of the Sea.
The First SECTION.
I Do not pretend to have visited the Bottom of the Sea, but since none of the
Naturalists whose writings I have yet met with, have been there any more then
I, and it is great rarity in these cold parts of Europe to meet with any men at
all that have had at once the Boldness, the occasion, the Opportunity and the
Skill to penetrate into those concealed and dangerous Recesses of Nature, much
less to make any stay there, I presume it will not be unpleasant, if about a
subject, of which, though none of those very few Naturalists that write any
thing at all, write otherwise then by hearsay, I recite in this place, what I
have learned by Enquity from those Persons that among the many Navigators and
Travellors I have had opportunity to converse with, were the likeliest to give
me good Information about these Matters.

It would be needless here to take notice, that the Sea is usually Cold and
Salt at the bottom, nor to repeat those other Things that I have already
delivered in other Discourses. I shall therefore begin what I have to say in
this, by relating that one of the chief things that I was solicitous to enquire
after about the Bottom of the Sea, was, the inequality I supposed to (...) in
the Soil. For though the surface of the Sea when it is not agitated by the
winds, appears very plain and level, and though it be indeed, at least i^ this
or that particular Sea, Sphaericall and (Physically speaking) concentricall to
the earth; yet I could not think it probable, for Reasons not necessary to be
here discoursed of, that the Bottom, the Superficies of the Ground, or of the
Vess ll that contained it, should be either flat or level, or regularly
concave.

To satisfy my self about this matter, I enquired of a Person that had visited
the famous Pearl fishing at the little Island of Manar (near the rich Isle of
Ceylon) in the East Indies, and had by his stay there much opportunity to see
Diverse at their Work and converse with them. By the Answers of this man who was
a Scholar, I learnt, that the Diverse had assured him, That they found the
Floor of the Sea, if I may so call it, in diverse places exceedingly unequal,
in some places being flat, in others asperated with crabby Rocks a considerable
height, and elsewhere sinking into precipitous depths in which they found it
very cold.

Besides the recited Testimonies of the Diverse, I enquired of several Pilates
and other Navigators, that had made long Voyages, what graduall or abrupt
inequality they had observed at their Soundings in very neighboring places; it
being easy to be gat^ered from thence, whether the Sea were there uniformly
deep, or did at least with some regularity alter its depth by degrees, or
whether as I suspected, there were not at the bottom of the Se^, ^illy places,
and steep Praecipices, and perhaps deep Valleys or Wells, as we observe in the
discovered part of the Terrestrial Globe.

By these inquiries I obtained several Observations, whereof the most
material are those that follow.

First, An ancient Sea-Commander, that had many years frequented Africa and the
Indies, told me as others had don before, that when they sailed in the Ocean
very far from sight of Land, they did not often put themselves to the trouble
of Sounding, but that as far as they had Sounded, he had usually found the
depth of the Sea, to increase or decrease gradually, without very great
irregularities, excepting some places, instancing particularly in the
Excavation that makes the Bottom of the Sea, within sight of the Cape of good
Hope, where though for the most part, he found the water to deepen more and
more as he sailed farther from the shore, yet in one place, he and others had
met with a Bank (as he conceived it to be) at a considerable distance from the
surface of the Water. So that though when they were as they imagined near the
edge of that bank, they found but a moderate number of fathoms, yet when
sailing a very little way farther, they had gone beyond it, they found the Sea
of an immense depth. In short, I gathered from his Answers, that in the greater
Seas, he had found for the most part, the ground at the bottom, to fall away by
degrees; but nearer the shores, that is, within a moderate number of Leagues,
he observed in diverse places that the Submarine Ground was very unequal, and
had as it were, Hills and Praecipices.

A man of Letters, that had sailed both to the East and West Indies, and in
diverse other Regions besides, and had made some of his Voyages in ships of such
great burden, as obliged the Mariners to be very frequent and careful in
sounding, informed me, that some times at considerable distances from shore, he
had observed the Sea to be 20, 30, or perhaps 40 fathom deeper when they cast
the sounding Lead from one side of the ship, then it had been just before, when
they had sounded from the other, and from other Things that he told me, I found
my self much confirmed in the above proposed Opinion.

Hearing of a Sea-Captain of extraordinary skill in Maritine Affairs, that was
come home this year from East India, his reputation made me endeavor to have a
little conference with him, about the subject of this discourse; but his
occasions hastening him to another place before I could send to him, I procured
from the chief Persons that employed him, a sight of some Notes, touching his
last Voyage, which he had left with them; hoping to sind there something at
least, about the Soundings of so accurate a Seaman, and accordingly I met with
a Passage, very pertinent to my purpose, and worthy to be here transcribed.

Febr. 12. After our Observation, (he means a former one very agreeable to
this) seeing the ground under us, we heaved the Lead, and had but 19 fathom
rocky ground, then haled by N.N. Et. the Wind at N.W. and found our water to
shoale from 19 to 10 and 8 Fathom hard Coral Ground, then suddenly deepned
again from 8 to 20 and 22 fathom Sandy Ground, and then suddenly saw Rocks
under us, where we had but 7 fathom, and the next cast 14 fathom again. And so
having run N. N. Et. from 6 in the morning till 12 at noon about 19 mile, we
deepen'd our Water, from 16 to 25, and the next cast, no ground with 35 fathom
of Line.

Lastly, having opportunely met with an Ancient Navigator, who passes for the
most experienced Pilate in our Nation for an East Indian voyage; I asked him
about his own Observations concerning these unequal Soundings, I was answered,
that he had not only met with them elsewhere, but that not far from the mouth
of out Channel, he had sometimes found the bottom of the Sea so abrupt, that
in sailing twice the Length of the ship, he had found the Water deepen from 30
fathom to a hundred, if not also much more.

Since I received these Relations, having the honor to discourse with a Noble
Person, who has diverse times deservedly had the command of English Fleets, and
is no less curious then intelligent in Maritine affairs, I took the opportunity
to inquire of his Lordship, whether he had not observed the bottom of the Sea
to be very unequal in neighboring places? To which he replied, that he had
found it exceedingly so. And to satisfy me that he spoke not upon mere
co^jecture, he told me that sailing once with his Fleet even in our Channel,
he perceived the Water to make a rippling noise (as the Seamen call it) as
the Thames does under London Bridge. So that he was afraid they were falling
upon some shoale, the Water being 12 or 14 fathom deep, and going on a little
farther, he cast out the Plummet again, and found it about 30 fathom. He added
that he made diverse such Observations, but took notice of such rippling Waters
only when the Tide was ebbing: and yet in a deep Sea meeting with the like
appearance in the upper part of the water, and thinking it improbable that
there should be any shoale there, he ordered the depth to be sounded, and found
it to exceed 30 fathoms; and after he had passed on a very little farther, he
found the Sea so deep, that he could not fathom it with his ordinary Line.

The Second SECTION.
ANother thing observed at the Bottom of the Sea, is the great pressure of the
water there against other Bodies. For what ever men may Philosophize in their
studies, and may conclude from the Principles that are generally received about
the Non-gravitation of Water in its proper place, yet experience seems very
little to favor that General Doctrine.

For first, I remember that having caused a pretty large Cylinder of Glass,
that was open only at one end, to be so depressed into a large Glass vessel
full of water with a conveniently applied weight of Lead, that none of the air
could get out, I could easily discern through the Liquor and Vessels, which
were all transparent, that as the inverted Cylinder descended deeper and
deeper, the external Water compressed the imprisoned air, and ascended higher
and higher in the Cavity of the Cylinder, against whose side we had before hand
placed a row of Marks, whereby to take notice of the graduall ascent and
descent of the Internal Water.

Secondly having inquired of two several observing Persons, whereof one had
with a Diving Engine visited the bottom of the Sea in a Cold Northern Region;
and the other had done the like in an Engine much of the same sort, upon the
coast of Africa, I found their Relations to agree in this, that the deeper they
descended into the Sea, the more the air they carried down with them was
compassed, and the higher the Water ascended above the Lip, or Brim of the
Engine into the Cavity of it.

But I shall now add a more considerable experiment or two, to the same
purpose. For discoursing one day with an Engineer of my Acquaintance, that had
been often at Sea, and loved to try Conclusions, of a way I had thought of, to
make some estimate of the pressure of the water at a considerable depth beneath
the surface, and show that the pressure is great there, he told me he could
save me the labor of some Trials, by those he had made already, and assured
me that having diverse times opportunity to sail near the Straights Mouth, over
a place where the Sea was observed to be of a notable depth, he had found, that
if he had let down with a weight into the Sea, not a strong round Glass-bottle,
but a Violl, such as the Seamen use to carry their Brandy and strong waters in,
such a Vessel which might contain a Pint or a Quart of water, would when it
came to be sunk 40 fathom under water, if not sooner, be so oppressed, by the
Pressure of the incumbent, and laterall Water, as to be thereby broken to
pieces.

He also averred to me, that having exactly closed an Aeolipille of Metal, and
with a competent weight, sunk it to a great depth in the Sea, as to forty,
fifty, or sixty fathom deep, when he pulled it up again, he found to his
wonder, that the great pressure of the water, had in diverse places crushed it
inwards. And though I had some suspicion, that the coldness of the Sea at such
a depth, might by weakening the spring of the included Air, something contribute
to the effect, yet I did not admire the event, having diverse years before had a
thin Aeolipile of Copper crushed inwards by the pressure of a much lighter Fluid
then Seawater.

The Third SECTION.
ANother thing observed in the Bottom of the Sea is, the Tranquillity of the
Water there, if it be considerably distant from the surface. For though the
Winds have power to produce vast waves in that upper part of the Sea that is
exposed to their violence, yet the vehement agitation diminishes by degrees, as
the Parts of the Sea, by being deeper and deeper, lie more and more remote from
the superficies of the water. So that the Calm being less and less disturbed
toward the Bottom of the water, if that lie considerably deep, the water is
there either calm, or scarce sensibly disturbed.

But that is for the most part to be understood, of places at some distance
from the shore; for oftentimes in those that are too near it, the progress of
the waters being rudely checked, and other circumstances concurring, the
Commotion of the water is so great, that it reaches to the very bottom, as may
appear by the heaps of Sand, the Amber, and in some places, the stones that are
wont to be thrown up by the Sea, in, and after storms.

The above mentioned Calmness of the Sea at the Bottom (will I doubt not)
appear strange to many, who admiring the force of stormy Winds, and the
vastness of the Waves they raise, do not at the same time, consider the almost
incomparably greater Quantity, and weight of Water that must be moved, to make
any great commotion at the bottom of the Sea, upon which so great a Mass of
Salt Water, which is heavier then fresh, is constantly incumbent. Wherefore
for the Proof of the proposed Paradox, I will here set down a memorable
Relation, which my inquiries got me from the Diver elsewhere mentioned, who by
the help of an Engine could stay some hours under Water.

This Person then being asked, whether he observed any operation of the Winds
at the bottom of the Sea, where it was of any considerable depth? Answered me
to this purpose, That the VVind being stiff, so that the waves were manifestly
six or seven foot high above the surface of the Water, he found no sign of it
at 15 fathom deep; but if the Blasts continued long, then it moved the Mudd at
the Bottom, and made the water thick and dark. And I remember he told me, which
was the Circumstance I chiefly designed, that staying once at the bottom of the
Sea very long, where it was considerably deep, he was amazed at his return to
the upper parts of the water, to find a Storm there which he dreamt not of, and
which was raised in his absence, having taken no notice of it below, and having
left the Sea calm enough when he descended into it.

For farther Confirmation, I shall add, that having inquired of a great
Traveller, who had assisted at a rich Pearl-fishing in East Indies, whether he
had not learnt by his Conversation with the Diverse, that storms reach not to
the bottom of the Sea, if it be of any considerable depth, he answered, that he
had seen the Diverse take the Water, when the Sea was so very rough, that scarce
any Vessels, would hazard themselves out of Ports, that those returning Diverse
told him, that at the Bottom, they had found no disturbance of the Water at
all. Which is the more considerable, because of the situation of that place
where they dive for Pearls; for this is near the shore of Manar, and that it
self is sealed between the great Island of Ceylon, and the vast Cape of Comori:
and though it may be much nearer the former, is not yet far distant from the
latter. Which situation and the Neighborhood of the vast Indian Ocean, on the
one side of Ceylon, and the great Gulf of Bengala, (anciently Sinus
Gangeticus) on the other, makes the place where the Pearls are fished for,
exceeding likely to be subject to very troubled Seas.

It will perhaps be thought no slight addition to the foregoing Arguments, if
I here add, that meeting one day with an ancient and expert Seaman, whom his
merit had advanced to considerable Employments in his Profession, I was
confirmed by the Inquiries I made of him, not only in the Opinion I had about
the Calmness of the Bottom of the Sea, but also that the operation of good
Gales of VVind, does oftentimes not reach to near so considerable depths into
the Sea, as has been hitherto supposed, even by Navigators themselves. For he
assured me, that having sometimes sailed in great Ships that drew much water,
as about 12 or 15 foot, he had Dived to the Keel of the ships, when they are
under Sail, and observed the Agitations of the Water, to be exceedingly
diminished, and grown very languid, even at that small distance, from the upper
part of the Waves. And he farther answered, that when in America he learned to
Dive of the Indians, they taught him by their Examples, to creep along by the
Rocks and great stones, that lay near the shore at the Bottom of the Water, to
shelter themselves from the strokes, and other ill effects of the Billows,
which near the shore, and where the Sea was so shallow, as it was there, did
oftenhurt and endanger Swimmers and unskillfull Diverse. But when they were by
this means got further from Shore and into deeper Water, they would securely
leave the shelter they had till then made use of, and swim within a few yards
of the Surface of the Sea, as fearing there no danger from the To sings and
Commotions of the upper parts of the Water.

But lastly, for further satisfaction, I had the opportunity to make inquiry
about this matter of a great Sea Commander who has both an extraordinary
curiosity to make marine Observations, and an unusual Care in making of them
accurately, I found the Opinion countenanced by his Answer, which was in short;
That he had lately been at a place where the Sea was often tempestuous enough,
and that they found by a sure mark that the Storm did not reach with any
efficacy four fathom beneath the Surface of the Water.

About the Tranquillity of the Lower Parts of very deep waters I had a
suspicion, which though I fear it might seem somewhat extravagant, because I
have not met with it in Authors; yet I thought it worth examining for the use
it might be of, if resolved in reference to the Ebbing and Flowing of the Sea.

I made therefore a Solicitous Inquiry whether the Tides did reach to, or near
the Bottom of the deeper Seas, but found it exceeding difficult by reason of
men's want of Curiosity to obtain any satissaction about a Problem that most
Navigators I have conversed with did not seem to have so much as dreamd of. But
thus much I found indeed by inquiring of an Engineer who was curious of Marine
Observations, that a famous Sea Commander of his Acquaintance being also a
great Mathematician, had affirmed to this Relator, that he had diverse times
observed, that when he let down his Plummer to a great depth but yet not to
reach ground, it would be quickly carried by a motion quite contrary to that of
the Shallop whence they sounded and very much qu^cker then it; but I had this
only at second hand. Also, if I mis-remember not, I was informed by a skillfull
Observer that commanded many of our English men of War, that he had near the
sound observed the upper and Lower parts of the Water to move with a
considerable swiftness quite different wais; but not having committed this
Relation to writing, I dare not build much upon it. And among the Answers I had
received and written down concerning those matters, all that I can yet find
among my Adversaria, is a Relation which though single, will not be unworthy to
be transcribed in this Place, because the Person who gave it me, is one of the
ancientst and most experien'st Pilots of our Nation.

This Person therefore assured me, that sailing beyond the Cape of Good Hope
into the South Seas, made Trials of the motion of the upper part of the Water
above the lower, where sometimes casting out a large and heavy Plummet, he let
it down to several depths short of 50 fathom, without any sensible Operation
upon the motion of the Boat, or Shallop he stood in to make the Trial; but
when he let down the Plummet lower, to about an hundred fathom or more, then he
found that though the Plummet reached not to the Bottom of the Water, yet upon
the score of the standing water beneath, the Superior Water would make the
Bo^t turn toward the Tide or Current, as if it lay at Anchor, and the water
would run by the side of the Boat at the rate of about three mile an hour, Thus
far this diligent Observer. But how far the inequality of the Soil at the
bottom of the Sea, and how far the various depth of the Water, and some other
circumstances, may alter the case, and make it hard to determine, what ought to
be ascribed to Tides and what to Currents, and are things which I will by no
means be positive in; till I can meet with further Information.

[Since the writing of this, happening to meet with one that spent some time at a
famous Eastern Pearle-fishing, and asked him whether he had inquired of the
Diverse about the Problem lately proposed, and whether the Sea were there deep
enough to make observations of that kind: To the latter part of which Question
he replied, that in some places it was of a very considerable depth, and fit to
make the observation in; And to the former he answered, That he had inquired of
the Diverse, who affirmed to him that sometimes at the Bottom of the Deep waters
there seemed to be a stagnation of the Sea for a great depth, so that till such
a height they could rise directly upwards, but that at other heights they would
be carried away by the less deep-waters; so as to be found when they came to
emerge a great way off from that point of the surface which was perpendicular
to that place at the Bottom, whence they began to ascend.]

FINIS.

