A VINDICATION Of the Reverend Mr. Alexander Osborn, In reference to the
Affairs Of the North of IRELAND: In which Some Mistakes concerning him (in the
Printed Account of the Siege of DERRY; The Observations on it, and Mr. Walker's
Vindication of it) are rectified.

And a brief Relation of those Affairs is given so far as Mr. Osborn, and other
N. C. Ministers in the North, were concerned in 'em.

Written at Mr. Osborn's Request by his Friend Mr. J. Boyse.

Licensed Nov. 22. 1689. And Entered according to Order.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst, Tho. Cockerill, John Lawrence, and John
Dunton, in Cheapside and the Poultry. 1690.

A VINDICATION Of the Reverend Mr. Alexander Osborn, etc.
THE Design of this Paper is to rescue the Reputation of a very worthy and
pious Divine from one of the blackest Aspersions that could have been cast upon
him. And though the regard which is due to the deserved esteem of every good man,
much more one of that Sacred Profession, set so just and so charitable an
Undertaking above the need of any Apology for it, yet our present Circumstances
oblige me to premise something for obviating any ill constructions that may be
made of it. As it was a great surprise to Mr. Osborn to find himself so
strangely misrepresented in Papers Printed at London, where so many Persons of
Quality then resided, who not only knew his Innocence, but had been pleased to
acknowledge his good Service: So it was no less trouble to him that some of
those Papers wherein he was chiefly wronged, bore the venerable Name of a
Person whom he so highly esteemed on the account of his being active in the
same Excellent Cause wherein he had Embarqu't himself. He is extremely sorry
that his own defense lays such an unhappy necessity upon him, to expose any
mistake concerning him in the Printed Account of the Siege of DERRY, or those
added to it in the Vindication of that Account. But he hopes none that would
not themselves be thought partial and unrighteous Judges of things, will
interpret his care of his own good Name as any envious design to lessen the
Reputation of the Reverend Mr. George Walker. For that deserving Gentleman may
still enjoy all the Honor due to his Eminent Service, to the Interest of Their
Majesty's and the Protestant Religion; though the world be undeceived in that ill
Opinion of Mr. Osborn, which he has unhappily led 'em into, as if he had done
his utmost to undermine it. The asserting Mr. Osborn's Integrity and Prudence
in managing those Affairs which the Advice of his Friends, and his Zeal for the
public good had involved him in, will be no Impeachment to Mr. W -- 's care
and fidelity in overseeing the Stores, and distributing the Provisions of
DERRY. Nay, he hopes this Vindication cannot be displeasing to Mr. W --
himself, who at length has ingenuously professed his readiness to give him all
opportunity of justifying himself, and to make him all imaginable satisfaction
if he has done him wrong. He owns this offer to be very fair and candid; only
he could have wished that Mr. W -- (when he was by a private Letter admonisht of
his mistake, and had so much leisure and opportunity to inform himself better)
had before this time excused him from this unwelcom Task by that ingenuous
Retractation, which he was with all modesty and respect solicited to. The
Plaster would have been acceptable from that hand that first gave the wound;
and therefore he can scarce forbear taking it a little unkindly to receive from
the same hand a second (...) without the least provocation. He is sorry Mr. W
-- should think himself so far interested in his first Error, as to run into
new ones to support the Credit of it, and yet deliver 'em with such an Air of
Assurance, as must needs rivet his Readers in the belief of 'em, if they be not
undeceived. For after so kind a profession, as that forementioned, he is yet
pleased to conclude that part of his Vindication, which concerns Mr. Osb. with
these words [Though he (i. e. Mr. W --) thinks it advisable they should not
put him on justifying himself any farther in that particular.] And besides him,
that Credulous Gentleman, that Writes the Observations on Mr. W -- 's
Narrative, intends (it seems) to affright Mr. Osb. from any Attempt to wipe off
this dirt, by more he has yet in reserve to throw upon him. For he talks of no
less than more Demonstrative Proofs, that may possibly be ready to be produced,
if Mr. Osb. complain of any injury done to him. This were almost enough to
persuade a Man out of the belief of his own Innocence, if a good Conscience
were not Armor of Proof against the most confident mistakes. But sure all this
is sufficient to show the reasonableness and necessity of Mr. Osb's appearing
at last to clear himself. For to have continued silent any longer under a
charge as perfectly groundless as it is extremely odious, and this so often
renewed, would justly be thought Stupidity rather than Patience; and he would
not deserve that good Reputation he has formerly had, should he now so wilfully
throw it away.

I shall therefore in order to the clearer Vindication of Mr. Osb. First,
Consider the Charge brought against him in the Account of the Seige of Derry,
and what is said to Establish the Credibility of it, both in the Observations
on it, and Mr. W -- 's own Vindication of it; and then give so satisfactory an
Account of Mr. Osb's Proceedings in those Affairs, as is sufficient to convince
these Gentlemen themselves, how injurious a Character they have given of him.

For the Charge brought against him in the Account of the Seige of Derry; it is
this, That he was a Spy upon the whole North of Ireland employed by the Lord
Tyrconnel. A Crime so much the more detestable in him if true; not only as it
would argue him persidious to the Protestant Interest in general, but
particularly to that great Trust which his Friends in the North had reposed in
him: So that by this Character all Men must account him one of the worst of
Villains. One would think then there were some clear Evidence of his keeping up
some secret Correspondence with the Lord Tyrconnel, some Letters Intercepted or
Discovered, in which he had given him dangerous Intelligence and Advices, how
he might most effectually ruin those Designs that were forming in the North.
But it is strange, that neither in the Account it self, nor in the Vindication
of it, is there one Syllable produced to this purpose. But least I should be
thought to misrepresent these two Gentlemen, as they have done Mr. Osb. I shall
give the Reader their own Words. In the Observation on Mr. W -- 's Narrative,
Page 7. The Author thus speaks.

I desire every Man who is not biased by prejudice and pre-possession quietly
to consider, Whether Mr. W -- (penned up within the Walls of Derry, deprived of
all Information and Intelligence both of public Affairs and the Actions of
private Men, seeing a Letter from a Person generally known, and an Eminent
Leader of a Party, discovering an Admission into the presence of the Popish
Lord Deputy, (the great Engine and Operator in the ruin of Ireland) an
Intimacy with him, and a Trust and Commission derived from him, whereby he was
directed to cajole the poor distracted and disanimated Protestants with the
Terror of Conquest and Military Execution on the one side in case of
Opposition; and the delusion of hope to be secure under a Protection, in case
of submission, and a tame surrender of their Arms and Horses; I say whether Mr.
W -- perusing this ambiguous Letter, and observing the pernicious Effects of
it, upon the generality of the People in Ulster, especially those of the
Writers persuasion, whereby they were influenced to a fatal and stupid
Compliance, (As if the Doctrine of Non-resistance and Passive Obedience may be
taught on fit Occasions, even by such as dissent from the Church of England)
had not reason to suspect his candor, and become very apprehensive too, and
jealous of his integrity.

A Paragraph unmercifully long, but very easily pardonable if that were the
worst fault of it.

To the same purpose Mr. W -- in his Vindic. p. 16.

For Mr. Osb. Mr. W -- is concerned he had occasion to name any to their
disadvantage, but he did it with that notion he had of him in the Garrison, and
those of his own Profession there, and thought it would on that account give
the less offense, but he could not easily forget the effects of his Letter
which Mr. W -- had shared in to his sorrow -- And Mr. W -- adds further, he has
heard of the Gentleman's good Intentions in his Proceedings; Mr. W -- is sorry
they were no better understood, that he might clear him from the imputation of
those mischiefs which his Management and Advices brought on that part of the
Kingdom. But it is hard to serve two such Masters, the British and the Irish. If
he was not more industrious and serious, Mr. W -- is too sure he was more
successful in his service to the latter by his Impression, not only on the
meaner sort, but on some of the best Quality.

In which words here is something said to render the Character Mr. W -- had
received by report concerning Mr. Osb. highly probable, and something to
apologize for Mr. W -- 's Publishing it on the Account of its Probability.

What is said to render this Character, Mr. W -- had received by report
concerning Mr. Osb. probable, does partly depend on what is contained in the
Letter it self, partly on the Effects which this Letter is said to have
produced, and partly on the Impression which Mr. Osb's Advices, as well as
Letter are supposed to have made, not only on the People, but on some of the
best Quality in the North.

Now if there be nothing in the Letter it self to countenance this Charge of
his being the Lord Tyrconnel's Spy; If no such Effects as those mentioned can
with any Truth or Justice be imputed to the Letter; If Mr. Osb. gave no Advices
that any way served the Interest of the Irish, nor ever persuaded either the
People or any Persons of Quality to a compliance with the Lord Tyrconnel's
Offers, but the quite contrary; then all the grounds hitherto alleged to
favor this report, are but like it self, new mistakes superadded to the first.

There is nothing in the Letter it self to justify this Charge. Mr. Osb's
being once introduced into my Lord Tyrconnel's presence, is no Evidence of any
such intimacy with him (as the Author of the Observations vainly imagines) that
he should merely on that score be thought one of his great Confidents. For as
he never spoke with him but once about that affair, so he never before nor
after either spoke with, or received any Message from him, or any employed by
him. And I wonder where that Gentlemen's eyes were, when he says the Letter
discovers a Trust and Commission which Mr. Osb. derived from him, when the
contrary is suggested in the beginning of the Letter it self; and indeed the
Lord Tyrconnel disowned with some contempt the sending any Commissioner to 'em.
And sure Mr. Osb's acquainting those Gentlemen in the North with what he had
heard from the Lord Tyrconnel's own mouth, and had his Permission to relate
concerning his resolutions of sending an Army thither, can by no Man of sense
be thought a proof of his keeping up a treacherous Correspondence with him in
order to there ruin.

To give this the force of so much as a probable Argument: It must be made
appear also that Mr. Osb. made use of that message he brought to move those of
the North to accept of the terms offered 'em by the Lord Tyrconnel; which if
these Gentlemen can prove, Mr. Osb. is content they shall call him what they
please. But as he never promised any such thing to the Lord Tyrconnel himself,
so much less did he ever go about it. How earnestly he endeavored the
contrary, will afterward appear.

And as the Letter alone has nothing in it to prove this Charge, so the dismal
effects mentioned can with no Truth or Justice be imputed to it, or the Writer
of it; Such as the fatal and stupid compliance of the People of Ulster, as the
Observator speaks; or the mischiefs which befell that part of the Kingdom, as
Mr. W. expresses it. As the Letter barely relates the Lord Tyrconnel's
discourse to the Writer, without the least mention of his own Judgment or
Advice; so it was written to none, but such as were Members of the Consult, and
with no other design than to draw 'em together to take such speedy and
effectual measures, as the sense of their imminent danger, and the
consideration of their common Interest should suggest to 'em. And it is certain,
that Letter cannot be said to influence those to whom it was written, to any
such stupid compliance with the Lord Tyrconnel's offers; when not only upon
their meeting, the Writer dissuaded 'em from it, but the Consult accordingly
rejected those very offers in the Answer, which they ordered him to send back.
And the Consult were so far from apprehending any such tendency in that Letter,
to discourage the People from their own defense, that they ordered Copies of it
to be spread on purpose to incite 'em to it. For what could more effectually do
so, than a certain Account of the March of the Lord Tyrconnel's Army, and
consequently the necessity of speedy and vigorous Preparations to oppose it? If
any were so weak as to make any other use of it (as I believe none ever did) it
was owing to their own Fears and Cowardice; not to the Letter it self, much
less the design of the Writer, or those that ordered the dispersion of it. It
was their advantage not to be perfectly surpised (as otherwise they had been)
for want of Intelligence; and the People had too just apprehensions of Irish
Promises of Protection, to be then deluded by 'em. And therefore whereas the
Author of the Observe. talks of the pernicious effects of that Letter upon the
generality of the people in Ulster, especially those of Mr. Osb's persuasion,
whereby they were influenced to a stupid and fatal compliance, (as if the
Doctrine of Non-resistance and Passive Obedience might be taught on fit
occasions, even by such as Dissent from the Church of England.) It Is a wonder
what ill Genius could hurry that Gentleman to such palpable mistakes, as none
on the place could well be ignorant of the falsehood of. As for the generality
of the people in Ulster, (and since he has given this occasion, I must in
justice add) particularly those of Mr. Osb's persuasion; They were so far from
being inclined to a compliance, that they were most free and resolute for
Self-defence, and could scarce forbear very passionate Resentments, when they
found that some of their Leaders thought their circumstances and surprise could
not admit of it, and accordingly began to consult their own safety. And it is
very hard to add this to all their other miseries, the upbraiding 'em so
unjustly with bringing 'em upon themselves. And for Mr. Osb. and his Brethren,
they were so far from what this Gentleman would insinuate, viz. Preaching the
Doctrine of Non-resistance and Passive Obedience in this juncture, that they
undertook, with the approbation of the Consult, to exhort all their people that
could bear Arms to appear with 'em at the appointed place of Rendevouz. (Of
which more in the following Relation.) Their Confession of Faith does indeed
entirely agree with the Articles of the Church of England, in the Doctrine of
Subjection to Lawful Magistrates: But for the notion of Non-resistance (so far
as it had been strained beyond all bounds by those who to secure their own
Interest at Court had, made it the distinguishing Character of a Party both in
Church and State) as it had been an entire stranger to their Pulpits before; so
it would have been wonderful indeed if they had preached it up now, when the
dismal consequences of it were actually in their view. What they did in this
juncture to the contrary, was consonant to those very Sentiments concerning the
just measures of Government and Subjection, which many of those had upbraided
'em with as Seditious, who were themselves forced to take Sanctuary in 'em for
the defense of their own truly generous Actions in this great and happy
Revolution. And whatever occasion this Gentleman has given, I shall not now
take it to retort so foolish and so groundless an Accusation, though I might do
it with all possible advantage.

And as those dismal effects cannot be justly imputed to Mr. Osb's Letter, so
much less (as Mr. W -- now further suggests) to his Management and Advice.
Though if Mr. Osb. had from a real persuasion of the inability of the North, to
resist the Irish Army, advised 'em rather to accept the Ofsers he brought, I
can by no means think this would justify his being called the Lord Tyrconnel's
Spy, or accounted a Friend to the Irish. For I think he would do the greatest
wrong to the reputation of that great Ornament of his profession, the Reverend
Bishop of Derry, who should Brand him as one of the Lord Tyrconnel's Agents, or
a Well-wisher to the Irish and Papal Interest, because he advised the
Inhabitants of that City to open their Gates after the first shutting of 'em;
chiefly, I doubt not, out of a real dread of those dismal consequences he
apprehended would ensue on so desperate an undertaking. But Mr. Osb. is very
far from needing this Apology for himself: For that he no otherwise served the
Irish, than by discovering their designs, and suggesting the most proper
methods to defeat 'em; nor made any other Impression on either the People, or
the Nobility and Gentry, than to encourage and animate 'em to oppose their
Enemies; will be so undeniable evident by the following Account, that I hope
Mr. W. -- himself will pass a severer Censure on his own Expressions in the
Vindication it self, than Mr. Osb. is willing to do, and at length begin to
entertain a better Opinion of him.

For what is said in the forementioned Passages by way of Apology for Mr. W --
's Publishing this report on those presumptions of its truth, which we have
here examined, Mr. Osb. is the less solicitous about it. Only he hopes it is
capable of a much better Apology than that very weak and miserable one that the
Observator makes, and Mr. W -- himself is pleased to insist on. For sure those
worthy Gentlemen, do not intend to make the World believe, that Mr. W --
published this mistake, When penned up within the Walls of Derry, and deprived
of all Information there. And if Mr. W -- had received this notion of Mr. Osb.
in the Garrison, he might have been informed better, if he had pleased, to
Consult those Persons of Quality in London, who were on the place, and knew the
whole affair. Nay, he might have been undeceived by Mr. Osb. himself, if he had
inquired of him the truth of that report, when he waited on him in Edinburgh,
where he was as industrious to raise Mr. W -- 's just Reputation, as Mr. W --
seems to have been in blasting his. He thinks Mr. Walker's hurry in Publishing
his Account a much better excuse; but that will scarce extend to his
Vindication of it.

Hitherto then we are far from seeing any demonstrative Proofs of this heavy
Charge, whatever hidden ones are kept in store: But to put even those out of
Countenance, I need do no more than give a plain Relation of Matters of Fact,
that have too many Witnesses ready to attest 'em, to be outfac'd by slender
Reports, or the greatest Air of Assurance used to bear up the credit of 'em.

About the end of November last, 1688. a little after the happy Tidings of the
Prince of Orange's Landing had reached our Ears in Ireland, Mr. Osborn was
entrusted by his Brethren the Nonconformist Ministers, and other Gentlemen of
Note and Interest in the Province of Ulster, to get some Gentleman or other
sent over from Dublin to the Prince with these following Instructions, signed
by those two whose Names are subscribed in the Name of the rest.

1. That in our Name you Congratulate the Arrival of the Prince of Orange into
England, and his Success hitherto in so glorious an Undertaking to deliver
these Nations from Popery and Slavery.

2. That you represent the Dangers and Fears of the Protestants in Ireland, and
particularly in the Province of Ulster, and humbly beseech him to take some
speedy and effectual Care for their preservation and relief.

3. That you represent our readiness to serve him and his Interest in
prosecution of so glorious a design, as far as we have access.

Subscribed,

Archibald Hamilton. Alexander Osborn.
Accordingly on December the 8th. they sent over a Gentleman, now in Town, who
in pursuance of these Instructions delivered in a Memorial, enlarging on these
Heads (for they begged no particular Favor for a Party) to the then Prince of
Orange. The Originals of both which Papers are in my Hands.

But besides this piece of Service which Mr. Osborn undertook, he was further
desired by his Brethren, and by other Gentlemen in the North upon his return to
Dublin, to send 'em an Account from time to time, by the most prudent Methods
he could contrive, not only of the Success of their Message to England, but of
the Designs of the Lord Tyrconnel in that Kingdom, especially what concerned
the Province of Ulster: Nor was this concealed from such of the Conforming
Nobility, Gentry and Clergy as it was fit, and there was opportunity to
communicate such an Affair to: And if Mr. Walker was unacquainted with it, the
Reason is too obvious to be mentioned. Accordingly Mr. Osborn wrote many
Letters, giving 'em the best Intelligence he could learn; several of 'em I have
seen in Dublin, most written in a kind of Character, but two (if I misremember
not) of his, written in plain English, are inserted already in a Paper, called,
An Apology for the Protestants in Ireland, etc. one Dated Feb. 22. (88.) the
other Feb. 25.

This Trust he so faithfully discharged, that several of the most discerning
Protestants in the North have often regretted that those Letters of his were no
better improved, which gave 'em so fair warning to expedite their Measures, and
provide against the shock they might expect, as soon as the Lord Tyrconnel was
in a Capacity to attacque 'em. And this is so well known, that had not Mr.
Walker in this Passage opposed Mr. Osborn's Carriage to that of his Brethren in
Derry, I should have imagined there had been some mistake of the Printer, and
Mr. Walker had intended to say, That Mr. Osborn was a Spy for the whole North
upon the Lord Tyrconnel; for that had come much nearer the Truth.

The Noise of the Preparations made in the North, by raising of Regiments, etc.
as well as of the Revolutions in England, extremely alarmed the Government in
Ireland: And though the Lord Tyrconnel went on vigorously with the completing
of his New Levies, yet he was so apprehehensive of the strength of the Northern
Forces, that he deferred the sending down his Army twenty days after it had
been first resolved on in Council. But when Friar O Haggerty (who was unhappily
suffered to bring up the Capitulation betwixt those of the North and the
Garrison of Carrick-fergus) gave him a full Account from his own Observations
of the Posture of the British in the North: [Viz. That they were untrain'd,
and had few experienced Officers; that the most part were without Arms, and
such as had 'em, their Arms were unfix'd, and unfit for service; that they were
very much scattered, and their number not near what had been written, and was
confidently reported in Dublin; that they wanted all Ammunition and necessary
Provisions for appearing in the field.] He resolved immediately to dispatch the
most considerable and best-train'd part of his Army, under the Command of
Lieutenant General Hamilton. I am here obliged to omit some material Passages,
for a reason too obvious to be named; but as to Mr. Osborn shall add, That as
he perceived by his Letters from the North, that their too great confidence of
their own Strength, of Aids from England, and of Tyrconnel's fears, made 'em so
secure, that they looked on all the Threatenings of an Irish Army as only bigg
words; so he begun to fear they would be perfectly ruined for want of such
timely notice of their danger, as might enable 'em to put themselves into any
good Posture for their own defense: He found all way of communicating
Intelligence to 'em by Sea or Land entirely stopped. He had been, without his
knowledge, mentioned to the Lord Tyrconnel, as a Person very fit to communicate
any Message he pleased to send to 'em: And his deep concern to prevent their
threatened ruin, brought him at last (though with great reluctance) to yield to
the urgent Advice given him, not to refuse so fair an opportunity of conveying
to his Friends in the North the best Information and Advice that could be given
'em. And that this Wisdom of the Serpent may appear fully consistent with the
Innocence of the Dove, I shall transcribe all the Discourse that passed betweem
'em, besides what is referred to in the Letter it self, as transmitted to me in
his own Letter.

Lord Tyrconnel. I am informed you are well acquainted in Ulster with several
of the Nobility, Gentry and Ministry living therein, having had your Residence
there for many years, to which parts I am a great Stranger, and cannot but
admire at the rebellious Carriage and Actions of some hot and rash-spirited
men, who have incited the People to leave their labor and run out into
Rebellion, yet I pity the poor People, and am willing to Pardon 'em, upon the
delivery of their serviceable Horses and Arms, and giving up six of their chief
Leaders.

To this Mr. Osborn replied, He knew the Protestant Nobility and Gentry in the
North in former times to have carried it loyally and soberly, but having had
his Residence chiefly in Dublin for twelve Months bypast, he could not
undertake to give a distinct account of present Irregularities among 'em.

The Lord Tyrconnel upon mention of Irregularities grew hot, and said, What
Sir, do you call 'em but Irregularities? they are guilty of the very height of
Rebellion. To this Mr. Osb. considering his circumstances, thought not fit to
make any Answer, but proceeded to put this Quest. to him, What if the People in
the North should incline to deliver up six of their chief Leaders, and these
six discovering their Inclinations, should withdraw, or transport themselves to
England or Scotland, whether he would send down his Army to destroy the poor
People, whom he judged to be drawn to take up Arms by their persuasion? To
which he answered, If they did withdraw and leave the Kingdom, he had done with
'em; and added, That to show his Lenity, he would be content with three of
their chief Leaders. Mr. Osborn Proposed again, If those three would not be
clear to accept what offers were made to 'em in his Excellency's Discourse to
him, but should rather incline to come and Discourse with himself, he granting
'em safe Conduct for coming to him; and if they agreed not, for returning
again, to be in the same circumstances as before: To which he condescended,
with a solemn Attestation; adding, That tho the Earl of Mount-Alexander and Sir
Arthur Rawdon should come to him, whom he judged the most active in that
Affair, he would grant what was demanded. The third Person Mr. Osborn could not
learn from him. Mr. Osborn Proposed again to the Lord Tyrconnel's
consideration, (with a design to gain time for the Assistance expected from
England, and procrastinate the March of the Irish Army,) That Ulster was a
large Province, consisting of Nine Counties, and therefore begged his
Excellency would allow him a considerable and convenient time for traveling
through those Counties, that he might discourse what he had heard from his
Excellency's own month, with the Nobility, Gentry and Ministry scattered in
'em, and chiefly concerned in the Ulster- Association. To which he replied,
That he would not stop the March of his Army for one day or hour, but would
give Directions to Lieutenant General Hamilton, to treat with any that should
be sent to him from the Protestants in Arms there. And then he showed him a
Paper, which he said was a Copy of the Declaration he would send along with
Lieut. Genesis Hamilton, and publish before he entered into War, as containing the
best terms they might expect if they accepted not those proposed to 'em by Mr.
Osborn; and he added here that Passage concerning the Irish Rabble mentioned in
Mr. Osborn's Letter, and added further, That had he been sooner ready with his
Army, he would sooner have resented their rebellions Actions, and the Indignity
offered to his Proclamation of Clemency; and being now ready, would delay no
longer, and would not be afraid to go through all Ulster with 5000 Men, and would
be at Newry against the 11th. of March, and go on (as in the Letter) being
consident he would meet with no resistance till he came to the Walls of Derry,
That he knew well the Case they were in, and that their expectations from
England made 'em so violent; but they would find themselves disappointed, for
no help would come so soon as they expected.

This is (as near as Mr. Osborn can remember) the whole of that Discourse that
passed between them, which the Reader had not been troubled with at this
length, were it not requisite to obviate their Reproaches, who rather than fail
of something to criminate Mr. Osborn with, are pleased to argue, That if Mr.
Osborn was true to the Interest of the North, he must be false to his Promises
to the Lord Tyrconnel: For he made him none, nor gave him ground to expect any
more from him, than that he would relate what he heard, which accordingly he
did in the printed Letter. So unexceptionably clean and Innocent was this
Negotiation of his. And indeed the Lord Tyrconnel was as much overseen in
permitting Mr. Osborn to go down to the North, as they were in suffering Friar
O Haggerty to come up to Dublin. And that the success was so different, was not
(as will now appear) Mr. Osborn's fault.

Mr. Osborn having obtained the Lord Tyrconnel's Pass, left Dublin, March the
7th, came to Newry March the 8th, and the next day he and his two Guards were
pursued by the Rapperies, but got safe to Loch-bricklan. Here he wrote the
forementioned Letter to my Lord Massareen; and going on to Hillsbrough, he
wrote the same Letter to Sir Arthur Rawdon, not finding him there as he
expected. In which Letter it was as needless as 'twas unadvisable, to give his
own opinion of the Lord Tyrconnels Proposals, since the design of it was to
draw the Nobility and Gentry to meet and consult their common Safety; and he
knew not what necessity there might be of his going back with any Message from
them, or about his own affairs, to Dublin. But to those of the Nobility and
Gentry that were there on the 9th and 10th, he delivered in a Paper containing
many particulars, by way of Information and Advice, of which these that follow
were a part.

1. That for the Irish Army, tho their Horses were good, yet their Riders were
but contemptible Fellows, many of them having been lately Cow-herds, etc.

2. That their Provisions of Ammunition were not plentiful.

3. That should those of the North comply with the Offers made to them, they
had no reason to expect any true performance; the Lord Tyrconnel having broken
all such Capitulations as he had lately made in the like case with the
Protestants in the South and West of Ireland, and thereby reduced them to
Poverty and Slavery.

4. That the Eyes of all Protestants were upon them. A great Interest depended
on their carriage: And 'twere better to die honorably, than live miserably
under Popery and Slavery: That their self-defence might be of great consequence
to Britain as well as Ireland, either to their advantage or disadvantage, as
their part should be well or ill acted.

5. It was advised that they should instantly gather all the Forces they could
from all parts, and choose out of them a Party of their best armed and trained
men, to engage the Enemy, and have the rest ready to fall on their wings and
out-skirts.

6. 'Twas advised also that the Conduct of their Military Affairs should be
committed to their best known and experienced Officers.

7. That they should debate with 'em from Pass to Pass, and so weary out their
Men, Horses and Provisions, in expectation of Relief from England.

These with many other things he suggested.

The Irish Army being come to Newry on the 11th. he was on the 12th. called for
by such as were in the Consult, and his own Advice desired: He insisted on the
Advice forementioned, and with all modest importunity urged 'em to defend
themselves, and not to trust any Irish Promises. And accordingly he was Ordered
by 'em to send back the following Answer to the Message he brought:

We Declare the utter abhorrence of the effusion of Blood, and that we will use
all proper means to avoid it, but cannot consent to lay down our Arms, which we
were forced to take up for our own Defense, nor to part with our Goods by any
other than legal means; and that we are ready to appoint Persons to treat on
such heads as are consistent with the safety of our Religion, Lives and
Liberties.

On the 13th. Mr. Osborn and several other Ministers being sent for from
Bellfast to Hillsbrough, there were Nine of 'em met on the 14th. viz. Mr.
Archibald Hamilton, Mr. Alexander Osborn, Mr. Henry Leviston, Mr. William
Legate, Mr. Alexander Gordon, Mr. Alexander Glass, Mr. George Lang, Mr.
Alexander Macracken and Mr. -- Adair; and before they presented themselves
before such of the Consult as were then met, they debated among themselves what
they should Answer to the Question, Shall we resist or make peace? They found
only one of their number inclinable to a Treaty, on the account of their bad
circumstances; but all the rest were against it, and especially Mr. Osborn, who
insisted particularly on these three Reasons against it.

1. That nothing was to be expected but what was contained in the Proclamation
that came down to the North with the Army on the 11th. and was spread through
the Country on the 12th.

2. That no true performance even of these Terms was to be expected, which he
confirmed by several Instances of the manner of Tyrconnel's keeping his word
with the Protestanrs in other parts of the Kingdom.

3. That the safety and peace of Britain depended more on the Resistance which
the North of Ireland might make than they were aware of. For he acquainted 'em,
That there was a design laid for transporting an Irish Army into Scotland as
soon as the North of Ireland were subdued.

Accordingly what the Ministers forementioned proposed to the Consult, will
appear in the following Memoir drawn up by one of the Members of it then
present.

MEmorand. On the 14th. March last, (168 8/9.) about Nine Presbyterian
Ministers came to such of the Consult as were then present at Hillsbrough: They
apologiz'd for their offering their Advice in such Affairs, which nothing but a
deep sense of the common danger and distress of that great Body of Protestants
(whereof they were Members) could have put 'em upon. The Consult received 'em
very kindly, and desired 'em to proceed. They then acquainted 'em that there
were in their several Parishes many able Men, fit for Military Service, who had
Arms, and were not yet listed in the Army, and yet were very willing to venture
their Lives for K. William and Q. Mary and the Protestaat Religion: They
therefore Proposed, if the Consult approved it, that they would presently
repair to their several Parishes, and admonish all Men in their limits between
sixteen and sixty, that could bear Arms, to meet and rendezvous on such day and
place as the Consult should think fit, with such Arms as they could procure,
and Ten days Provision with 'em. For they found by the Information of their
Brother Mr. Osb. (one of their number) that the Lord Tyrconnels Army would
certainly attacque 'em on the refusal of his Proposals; which Proposals they
could by no means advise 'em to comply with, but rather advised 'em to make a
Vigorous and Resolute Defense.

To this Advice, those of the Consult then present, readily assented, and
presently employed Clerks to write Orders for Summoning the Country to meet at
Blaris-More, on the Tuesday following, being the 19th. Upon which the said
Ministers resolved to repair to their several Parishes, to encourage and excite
the People to meet at the day appointed; declaring their purpose also to come
to the Field with 'em. They also further advised, that the next Monday, being
the 18th, should be appointed as a public day of Prayer and Fasting, to
implore the Assistance and Blessing of God on their Undertaking; which was
accordingly agreed to: And the said Ministers (with whom (I am informed) that
very Ingenious Divine of the Church of England, Mr. Charles Lesley concurred)
drew up reasons to be read in their several Congregations for that purpose.

But these measures came too late. For the Irish Army pressing on 'em with
unexpected haste, and their Leaders neither agreeing about entrenching
themselves, nor about the choice of any Post in those parts which they thought
defensible, and some of them leaving the Kingdom: This uncertainty in their
Counsels joined with the discouragement, which the delay of expected succors
from England gave 'em, (with other things not fit for me to insist on,)
prevented their appointed Rendezvous, and obliged them to retire in great
confusion toward Colerain and Derry.

But this should not be forgotten, that though th^se Northern Forces so
unhappily failed in their design of Defending those parts; yet many of those
Regiments raised there, made up the chief Strength of Derry: Mr. W's own
Regiment was raised for the Lord Charlemount, Capt. Chichester being the
designed Lieut. Colonel, but afterward made Colonel of it; and the behavior
of such of them as* stayed in that Garrison, has (as Mr. W. justly observes in
his Narrative) set 'em above Apologies for any miscarriage.

This being a true Relation of matters of fact, (of which undeniable evidence
will be produced if desired,) every one that reflects on 'em, must needs think
this worthy Gent. deserved some other character then that of Tyrconnel's Spy;
nor can there be a greater wrong done to him, then to impute those mischiefs
and calamities, which befell that part of the Kingdom of Ireland, to his
management and advices, by which he did all that was possible to prevent them.
These reproaches are but a sorry requital of those Services, which wanted
nothing but that success, which is not in human disposal, to render 'em as
considerable as any of his Prosession was capable of, and were not a little
expensive as well as hazardous to himself. How different the apprehensions,
which the Consult in the North had of Mr. Osb. were from these Mr. W. had
received from idle reports, will appear in the following Testimonial,
subscribed by several, of whom all but one were Members of it, and two of them
are the very Persons, to whom the Letter so much talked of was directed.

We whose names are hereunto subscribed, do at the request of Mr. Alexander
Osborn, a Presbyterian Minister, late of Dublin, hereby certify, That the said
Mr. Osborn, was to the certain knowledge of some of us, and as others of us
have credibly heard and believe, for diverse months before his coming down to
the North of Ireland in March last, entrusted and employed by diverse
Protestants of credit in the North, as a Person of known Integrity and Zeal to
the Protestant Interest, under a private method to correspond by Letter, and
give Intelligence from time to time of affairs in Dublin, especially of the
Lord Tyrconnel's Proceedings there, in reference to the Army, and his designs
upon the North of Ireland, which with other matters of no mean Importance to
the Protestant Interest, he (as we have ground to believe) transacted with
great care and fidelity. And that about the beginning of March last, when all
correspondence between Protestants, from Dublin to the North, was cut off, the
said Mr. Osborn, perceiving the Lord Tyrconnel immediately about to march down
his Army to the North against the Protestants there, whereof they could in all
likelihood have no notice, but were in manifest danger of being surpised and
destroyed thereby; He then (as we have credibly heard and believe) in order to
prevent the same so far as in him lay, by timely Information, found means of
procuring the Lord Tyrconnels Pass for himself to the North, where he had his
former abode, the Lord Tyrconnel first telling him, that he might acquaint the
Protestants there, especially some of the Chief, with what his Lordship then
expressed: Whereupon he came down to the North, running a considerable hazard
of his life by the way, being notwithstanding his Pass pursued by some of the
Irish on that Road, (as we were credibly informed, and believe) Being come to
the North, he by his Letters acquainted some of us, and others, with the
purport of the Lord Tyrconnel's discourse to him, as he left Dublin; but in the
same Letters desired if we thought fit some personal conference, that he might
have opportunity of discoursing more fully with us touching the matters therein
contained, as by those his Letters of March 9th (8 8/9) may appear; whereupon
diverse of us and other Protestants meeting with him at Hillsbrough, received
from him a more particular and fall account thereof: He the said Mr. Osborn, at
the same time advising us as his own private judgment, and as we valued our
lives and interests, not to put confidence in the Lord Tyrconnel or any of his
promises, but if we possibly could to defend our selves to the utmost, or words
to that effect. And as for his Letters containing the substance of Tyrconnels
discourses and threats against the Protestants; Some of us ordered by common
consent, Copies of the same to be sent and dispersed through the Country, that
they might the better prepare themselves against the dangers that threatened
them. We likewise directed what Answer the said Mr. Osborn should make, and
committed the same to his discretion and care. Now in regard some of late,
unacquainted (as we presume) with the proceedings then in that part of the
Country, or at least with what past on that occasion, have represented the said
Mr. Osborn in a public manner, in respect of his being so concerned, as an
ill man, and Spy upon the whole North, employed by the Lord Tyrconnel, and as
serving two Masters, the British and the Irish, and the like, to his great
disadvantage: We cannot but own, that we (who had as we suppose good reason to
understand him herein) had and still have better thoughts of him, and are so
far from looking on him as guilty of any such matters, that we are well assured
of his having intended, and done therein the best service he could to the
Protestant Interest there; and that he was very faithful to the same to his
utmost. All which at his desire by Letter, in order to his just vindication, We
do hereby certify this 19th day of November, 1689.

Massareen. Ar. Rawdon. Arthur Upton, Esquire Will. Conyngham, Esquire Hugh Macgill,
Esquire Will. Schaw, Esquire



This Testimonial is so full, that had I received it sooner, it had spared me a
great part of my labor. And I hope Mr. W. himself will pay too great deference
to the Testimonies of persons who knew these affairs, and whose Reputation is
above all exception, to persist in those mistakes concerning Mr. Osborn, which
the little stories of some ignorant people* had imposed on him. And the very
same Character of his Integrity and Zeal, has been given, both by the Earl of
Mount Alexander, and by other Gentlemen of the North, who have left this Town,
as James Hamilton of Tillimore, and James Hamilton of Bangor, Esquires, John
Hawkins, Esquire. The principal Members of the Consult, were so well satisfied
with his Services, that they judged 'em worthy of a public reward, as indeed
they must be thought by all that take their estimate of worthy Actions from the
sincerity and prudence of the Actor, rather than the success, which was not in
his own power. For my part, tho Mr. Osborn cannot but think this usage very
hard, yet I think him not a little obliged to Mr. W. for laying on him such an
absolute necessity of exposing his own, as well as his Brethren's Exemplary
Zeal for the Protestant Interest, to public view; which their modesty would
else have suppressed the notice of; and doubt not but the Government will in
due time take it into consideration.

For Mr. Hewson, whom Mr. W. joins with Mr. Osborn; I suppose he is not
ignorant, that he was some years before publicly discarded by the N. C.
Ministers in the North, for his scandalous and turbulent carriage; and
therefore they do no more then right to themselves in disowning him. His narrow
Zeal that would suffer none to fight for the Protestant Religion, but such as
would take the Covenant, was certainly very unseasonable as well as foolish
Bigottrie; And I hope as Mr. W. spied this Mote in Mr. Hewson's Eye, he will
not overlook the Beam in theirs, who are as zealous to exclude all from
fighting for the same cause, who comply not with their Sacrament-Test. For they
equally sacrifice the common Interest of the Protestant Religion to that of a
party; and deprive their Majesty's of the service of one part of their
Subjects, as firm and steady to the Protestant Religion, and the present
Government, as any whatsoever.

Having done this right to Mr. Osb. I think my self concerned also to do the
same Justice to the Dissenters in Derry. I confess, I think it would become
both Parties more, to join in their thankful Acknowledgments to God for such a
Series of Wonders in their Deliverance, then to quarrel about their share in
being only the Instruments of it. But as Mr. W. gave the first public
occasion to these Debates, by that passage in his Preface, which (as explained
by himself) ascribes the chief, not to say the sole glory of it, to the Church
of England; so he is chiefly accountable for the ill consequences of 'em. And
what I* shall here suggest, is only to rectify, what (if I mistake not) Mr. W.
has misrepresented. As the Dissenters of Derry do not dispute with Mr. W. most
of the Principal and Experienced Officers in the Garrison being Conformists
(for it could not be otherwise, while none else but such had access to Military
Employments, till some raised Regiments in this juncture) So on the other hand,
Mr. W. should as little Dispute with them, their Numbers in Derry being more
considerable. By the modestest Account of such Officers in the Garrison as were
Conformists, The Dissenters in the Garrison it self, as well as those that
stayed in Town, were near five to one; nay many of 'em make the disproportion
much greater. Nor are the Arguments implied in Mr. W's Q's Vindication, p. 15.
of any force to prove the contrary. For a Governor, Coll. Baker had those
advantages to recommend him, that would easily set him above any Competitor in
their choice. And he had too great an Interest in the Hearts of Dissenters on
the account of his known Affection to 'em, to be excepted against by 'em. All
that can be inferred from his being a Conformist, on supposition of the
Dissenters being more numerous, is only this, That they were too Zealous for
their common Interest, to prefer their Affection to a party, before the safety
of it, and regarded more in that excellent Person the Qualities that fitted him
for that Station, then the distinguishing Name he bore. Nor had any other been
chosen, if Col. Baker had not desired an Assistant to be joined with him, on
the Civil part, to take care of the Stores. And it was on his Recommendation
that the Garrison assented to the Reverend Mr. W's being his Assistant; which
may still consist with the supposition forementioned, if we do but allow the
Dissenters the good temper which Mr. W. himself elsewhere attributes to 'em.
And they paid too great respect to the Laws, to desire such a share in the
Church as they then had, on any other occasion; and were too Modest to go about
to engross it. But I would humbly offer to Mr. W's Memory, a much surer way of
computing their Numbers then this that he has offered. In the Cathedral in the
forenoon when the Conformists Preached, there was but comparatively a thin
Auditory; in the Afternoon it was very full, and there were four or five
Meetings of Dissenters in the Town besides. And how any man will reconcile this
with the Number of Conformists being more considerable, or indeed near equal to
that of their Brethren, I cannot well imagine. And for the Nonconformists
Ministers (and the same may be justly said of the Conformists) they not only
kept their people Quiet and Obedient, but by their Exhortations constantly
animated their Courage in their many bold and resolute Sallies. And therefore
so very slender a Commendation of 'em as the former, needed not have been
allayed, by adding the misbehaviours of their Brother Mr. Osb. which are but
feigned, and the real ones of Mr. Hewsons, wherein they are not concerned. Nor
are Mr. W's Reflections on their Brethren here in England (to whom he supposes
the temper of their Brethren in Derry a reproach) any better grounded then
those on Mr. Osb. but being only General, no Man is concerned to go about to
disprove 'em. I must also add, as to those Ministers in Derry, That there was
some real ground to suspect the Ingenuity of Mr. W -- s Amanuensis in the
omission of their Names. (All being willing to excuse Mr. W. himself from so
mean a thing) For not to insist on other things, a Minister here received a
Letter from two of his Brethren in Scotland, bearing Date Edinb. Aug. 15. (89)
wherein are these words, This Account we have confirmed by Mr. Walker, etc. on
whom we waited yesterday at the Abbey, in D. Hamiltons Lodgings, etc. to Enquire
concerning the Condition of our Brethren there. The Account be gave us of our
Brethren is indeed afflicting; There being three besides Mr. Gilkrist removed
(by Death) viz. Mr. William Crook, Mr. Robert Willson, and (as we took it) Mr.
John Rowatt. The rest of 'em, viz. Mr. Tho. Boyd, Mr. John Hamilton, Mr. John
Mackenzy, and another whose Name he could not remember, were in Health, etc.
This general hint is all we judged needful for the present, but you may have a
more full Account from Mr. Walker, who has taken his Journey this day for
London. I allege this passage only to clear those from any imputation of
ill will to Mr. W. who were ready to blame this Omission as partial, for I am
still so Charitable as to believe it possible, either that he might forget the
Names here mentioned in such a hurry of Visits and Business since, or he might
intend no more by that passage, then that he could not learn all their Names,
and might be unwilling to publish an imperfect List of 'em. I am almost ashamed
to mention these Tristes, did not the clearing these matters of Fact tend to
extinguish these foolish Heats about 'em: And I am persuaded these slips of Mr.
W -- s excellent Pen had not been taken notice of, if they had not looked too
like a Design to diminish the just Credit of a Party, which above all things,
an Impartial Historian should avoid all appearance of.

There is but one thing more I would trouble the Reader with, A Relation of Mr.
W's has done me the honor to report me the Author of a Paper called, An
Apology for the Failures, etc. I must be so just to the real Author (whom I do
not certainly know) and to my self, as to profess I neither Wrote it, nor knew
any thing of the Writing of it; but yet I think this sharp Advertisement at the
End of Mr. W's Vindication, has done the Bookseller the kindness of helping
off the Impression the sooner. It Is true that Gent. has run into some mistakes,
by taking things upon slight Reports. As he has been less kind to Mr. Cairns
then he intended, in intimating that as a Public Declaration, which was only
Private Discourse and Resolution, and ascribing that to him as single, which he
always owned was done by joint consent with others. Ard he has done the
Archbishop of Dublin wrong, by suggesting a common, but (I suppose) groundless
story of his having received a 1000l. out of the Fund of Charity for Irish
Protestants. But as Mr. W's Pen is no more Infallible than that Gent's, so he
should in kindness to himself, have treated these mistakes with softer Names
than those of Lies, Malice, Impudence, etc. For I suppose that Gent. will not
persist in em. Mr. W. might also, if he had pleased, forborne so Ungrateful a
Reproach, as that of Dullness, and a Vulgar way of Writing.

And however he had despised that Paper 'twas not so decent to consign it into
the hands of the Executioner, nor was it so Civil a Complement to the
Magistrate to concern him in all the little squabbles of quarrelsom Writers.
For the Reflections which he pretends that Paper casts on the Government, he
must have very good eyes that can see 'em. I am indeed much troubled to find so
many severe ones on some of the Bishops and Clergy, but think Mr. W. had the
least right to reprove that Gentleman for it, who in this Paper has so
perfectly copied his example in those he casts on the Dissenters, which are as
ill-timed, and as little excusable as the others. But I foresee so little good
from, and take so little delight in these ill-natured Subjects, that I shall
give no occasion for new heats by descending into any particular examination of
their Truth or Justice on the one hand or the other. I could rather wish these
two Gentlemen would make the Public this reparation for the harm they have
done by their unseasonable Reflections, to write each of 'em a Panegyric on
the others Party. This argument would show more good humor, and the carriage
of the moderate and sober Clergy and Laity on both sides, both in the late
Reign, and in this happy Revolution, will furnish 'em with materials enough.
And methinks, of all things, the account of the Seige of Derry should never
have raised these warm Contests. It Is pity that distinction of Parties, which
was so generously laid aside during the Seige it self, should be soon resumed
in these Discourses it has unhappily occasioned. There is no Reflection which
the Account of it can more naturally suggest, than the necessity of all Their
Majesty's Subjects, being united by their affection to the present Government,
and to one another. For how certainly had that important place been lost, and
thereby the whole Kingdom of Ireland, (and perhaps the Peace of Britain
endangered) if the factious Spirit of a Party on either side had prevailed
either to divide their Counsels, or weaken their Strength! With what admirable
vigor did so small a Garrison, struggling under all possible discouragements,
defend those Walls against a numerous Army, when the sense of common danger had
cemented their affections! By what a series of astonishing successes did Heaven
seem to smile on their united Zeal in so just a Cause! How little then can it
befriend the common Interest of the Protestant Religion to set it on the narrow
Pedestal of any Party; especially when the mighty opposition it must yet
encounter, both in these Kingdoms and abroad, require all the hands that can be
used in the defense of it! And how soon might the honor of our Nation revive,
and our Arms become a Terror to our Enemies abroad by the easy Conquest of
those at home, if abilities for service and a steady zeal for the Protestant
Religion and the present Government, were the only Standard of such as are
admitted to Civil and Military Employments! For that excellent Maxim of His
Majesty carries it is own convincing evidence with it, That the employing all
his Protestant Subjects in his Service will lay the best foundation of Union
among themselves; And all other narrow Politics will but hazard our Ruin,
because they will certainly divide, and so weaken us.

FINIS.

